 
 
title:
The Handbook of Pediatric Audiology
author:
Gerber, Sanford E.
publisher:
Gallaudet University Press
isbn10 | asin:
print isbn13:
9781563680373
ebook isbn13:
9780585123783
language:
English
subject 
Hearing disorders in children.
publication date:
1996
lcc:
RF291.5.C45H26 1996eb
ddc:
618.92/0978
subject:
Hearing disorders in children.

Page iii
The Handbook of Pediatric Audiology
Sanford E. Gerber, Editor
With a Foreword by Aram Glorig, M.D.
Gallaudet University Press
Washington, D.C.

Page iv
Gallaudet University Press 
Washington, DC 20002
© 1996 by Gallaudet University. 
All rights reserved. Published 1996 
Printed in the United States of America
Book design by Dennis Anderson
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
The handbook of pediatric audiology / Sanford E. Gerber, editor: 
with a foreword by Aram Glorig. 
p.    cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 1-56368-037-8 (alk. paper) 
1. Hearing disorders in children.   I. Gerber, Sanford E. 
RF291.5.C45H26    1995 
618.92'0978-dc20   95-44871 
                                CIP 
 The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements
of American National Standard for Information SciencesPermanence
of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
 

Page v
Many things can wait, the child cannot. Now is the time his bones
are being formed, his blood is being made, his mind is being developed.
To him we cannot say tomorrow, his name is today
Gabriela Mistral
Chilean Poet

Page vi
About the Editor
Sanford E. Gerber is emeritus professor of audiology in the
department of Speech and Hearing Sciences at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Since retiring from the University of
California, he has been serving as chair and visiting professor of the
department of Communication Disorders at Eastern Washington
University and as adjunct professor of Speech and Hearing Sciences at
Washington State University. Dr. Gerber is a Fellow of the American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association, a Fellow and past president of
the Society for Ear, Nose, and Throat Advances in Children, and an
Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery. He is president of the Pan American Society of
Audiology and a former member of the executive committee of the
International Society of Audiology. Dr. Gerber served for five years as
chair of the national Joint Committee on Infant Hearing and was
president of the International Congress of Audiology in 1984. He has
been a Fulbright scholar at Southampton University in England and a
visiting professor at the University of Nebraska and Dalhousie
University in Halifax, Nova Scotia. He is the author or coauthor of ten
books, most of them in pediatric audiology, and of more than one
hundred journal articles.
 

Page vii
Contents
Foreword
ix
Preface
xi
Contributors
xvii
1 Epidemiology of Childhood Hearing Loss
Yash Pal Kapur
3
2 Pediatrics
Franklin A. Katz
15
3 The Pediatric Otolaryngic Assessment of the Child with
a Suspected Hearing Loss
Robert J. Ruben
35
4 Behavioral Observation and Visual Reinforcement
Audiometry
Allan O. Diefendorf And Judith S. Gravel
55
5 Speech Audiometry for Children
Jane R. Madell
84
6 Acoustic Immittance
Shlomo Silman And Carol A. Silverman
104
7 Auditory Evoked Responses
Herbert Jay Gould And Maurice I. Mendel
145
8 Testing Otoacoustic Emissions in Newborns, Infants,
Toddlers, and Children
Brenda L. Lonsbury-Martin, Glen K. Martin, Margaret J.
Mccoy, And Martin L. Whitehead
173

 

Page viii
9 Central Testing
Gail D. Chermak
206
10 Amplification
Dale O. Robinson And Frances Eldis
254
11 Cochlear Implants
Judith A. Brimacombe And Anne L. Beiter
277
12 Audiology and Education
E. Harris Nober
314
13 Counseling Families of Hearing-Impaired Children:
Suggestions for the Audiologist
George T. Mencher
343
14 Pediatric Audiology Service Delivery Models: Systems
in Flux
Evelyn Cherow
352
Bibliography
369
Author Index
419
Subject Index
433
 

Page ix
Foreword
Pediatric audiology, in which I have always had a keen interest, is a
relatively new addition to audiology as a profession. Having qualified
for the pediatric boards in 1941, I became probably the first pediatric
audiologist in the United States and practiced for a year before joining
the army in 1942. I am also board qualified in otolaryngology, have
practiced only otology since 1947, and was certified by ASHA in
audiology in 1948.
It gives me much pleasure to prepare a foreword for this book. Dr.
Gerber is especially competent to edit such a needed volume. It will
surely eliminate the large gap that now exists in this extremely
important specialty. Dr. Gerber should be commended for taking on
the dual task of selecting these highly qualified authors to summarize
the present knowledge and of coordinating the material into a well-
organized volume. The list of specialists is quite impressive, and I can
think of no one better to present their contributions.
I am indeed delighted to read this volume.
ARAM GLORIG, M.D.
 

Page xi
Preface
In 1965, when I moved to Santa Barbara, a local otolaryngologist
introduced me to a group of people who conducted a monthly infant
hearing screening program in the community. This was my
introduction to pediatric audiology. Until that time, I had no more
experience with children than producing a few of my own. Since then,
I have done little else professionally than pediatric audiology. My
entire career (now thirty years long) has been devoted to the youngest
among us. The newborn nursery and well-baby clinic have been my
main laboratories. The babies have been my teachers, and good
teachers they are indeed. I continue to be amazed at the things they do
and to be instructed by their behavioral capacities. Human infants are
truly precocious.
However, not all of us are able to be quite so precocious so early in
life. Endogenous and exogenous factors sometimes get in the way;
social and economic events occasionally intrude. Nevertheless, as
humans and as professionals, we assume an obligation to remove
these and other barriers to full development.
Every child has a right to be the best, and it behooves us to help. Over
the years, I have learned many ways to help, and science continues to
find more.
As professionals, we are driven by two forces in pediatric
audiologygenuine caring for the children and technology. Back in
1965, we knew nothing about the auditory brainstem response and
rather little about the other auditory evoked potentials. Only recently
have we learned about the otoacoustic emissions. Cochlear implants
did not exist in 1965. However, we were able to identify hearing loss
in infants. How did we do it? We made noises at babies and

endeavored to learn what noises served as stimuli and how babies
demonstrated that fact.
Moreover, we learned that it is all right to put hearing aids on babies,
if we do it wisely. The youngest child who was fitted with aids in our
clinic was seven weeks old at the time. I mention this not because it is
remarkable but because it is not; I have known still younger children
with hearing aids. I have tried to teach all my students that no infant is
too young to be diagnosed and that it is never too soon to start
treatment. The time to begin treatment is immediately.
My dear friend and colleague, Jeff Danhauer, gets the credit for
conceptualizing this handbook. He observed that our respected
colleague, Jack Katz, has
 

Page xii
made a brilliant contribution to the profession with his Handbook of
Clinical Audiology but that there is no handbook of pediatric
audiology. Because I am an old-timer in the baby hearing business,
Jeff thought I was the one to do it. So I contacted my favorite editor,
Ivey Pittle Wallace at Gallaudet University Press, and solicited her
opinion. Ivey and her colleagues liked the idea, and here we are.
There is an African proverb that says it takes a whole village to raise a
child. All our thanks should go to the "villagers" who have
contributed to this volume. They are people who I believe are experts.
Among them are dear old friends: Aram Glorig, a genuine patriarch in
pediatric audiology; George Mencher; Maurice Mendel; Harris Nober;
and Bob Ruben. They are here because they truly are authorities in
pediatric audiology. I also sought out newer friends because of their
expertise. I even had the pleasure of inviting a former student, Judy
Brimacombe, to join the group because of her knowledge and
experience. This is a teacher's reward. Still, I am the editor and hope
that I have not harmed anyone's prose.
This volume is intended to be a handbooknot a textbookand is written
for the professional and the advanced student. It offers advice to
practitioners in the hope that babies will benefit from what we have
done here.
The organization of the book allows readers to work through or across
the content. Every chapter (where appropriate) is organized according
to the age of the child. Thus, one might look up information about
infants (for example, five to twelve months of age) in each chapter. Or
one might choose to read an entire chapter on immittance or cochlear
implants, for example.
As professionals, we must remind ourselves that most people who
have a hearing loss are not deaf and that most people who are deaf
were not born that way. Their audiological, habilitative, rehabilitative,

and educational needs differ. It is our responsibility to recognize and
address these differences.
The first three chapters of this book define the condition of hearing
loss for us in terms of pathology. In an attempt to explain the origins
of hearing loss, we begin with a chapter about epidemiology. What are
the causes? How widespread are they? How many people are
affected? At what ages? Y.P. Kapur, the current president of Hearing
International, answers these questions for us with considerable
expertise.
Frank Katz is one of those pediatricians who recognizes that children,
even very little ones, may have communicative problems and
understands that some of them have hearing losses. He also
acknowledges that the hearing loss is only one part of the child.
Concomitant problems may exist, but may not be related to the
hearing loss. In the second chapter, Dr. Katz addresses the concerns of
the practicing pediatrician when communicative development or
function is questioned. Fortunately for these babies, Dr. Katz is not of
the "let's wait and see what happens" school of pediatrics.
 

Page xiii
Otorhinolaryngology is an integral part of audiological care. Robert
Ruben is arguably the most erudite scientist among the world's
otolaryngologists. I know no otolaryngologist who cares more about
children's communication capabilities or is more skillful in dealing
with them. Bob Ruben is at once clinician, teacher, scholar, and writer
of premier ability, as chapter 3 attests.
Chapters 4 through 9 address matters of diagnosis. The ultimate issue
that concerns us is infants' communicative behavior. Allan Diefendorf,
chair of the national Joint Committee on Infant Hearing, and Judy
Gravel are the authorities on what it is that babies should naturally
doand on what it means when they don't (chapter 4).
As humans, our ability to hear speech is vital to the development of
normal communicative behavior. Jane Madell tells us in chapter 5
how to assess this ability in children. Dr. Madell has published
extensively (and wisely) on this topic.
Beginning with chapter 6, we see how technology is being used to
assess middle ear and other pathologies. Otitis media is the most
common disease of childhood. This and other pathologies of the
acoustic conduction system are far more common in children than are
sensory hearing impairments.* We have a variety of procedures to
assess middle ear function; cumulatively they are called immittance
(chapter 6). Shlomo Silman and his colleague Carol Silverman are
among the acknowledged specialists in these methods. Their recent
joint book on diagnosis and Silman's older book on the acoustic reflex
are evidence of their experience.
Pathology is not limited to the middle ear; it may be cochlear,
retrocochlear, or a combination of these. At about the time of my
birth, Davis and Derbyshire demonstrated that the electrical activity of
the living brain is modified by acoustic events and that these

modifications are measurable. The evaluation of these events is called
electric response audiometry (ERA). The electric responses that
emanate from the brainstem are now known as the auditory brainstem
response (ABR). Today, the ABR is the most powerful tool in the
armamentarium of the pediatric audiologist. Chapter 7 covers the use
of ABR to evaluate the electric responses of the auditory system from
the cochlea through the cortex. Herb Gould and Maurice Mendel are
among the leading students of this phenomenon and its applications
among the very young.
Less than two decades ago, David Kemp explicated the fact that the
cochlea makes sound. The cochlea's otoacoustic emissions have
become the topic of extensive research and clinical application
(chapter 8). One of my new friends, Brenda Lonsbury-Martin, is a
leader among those engaged in the understanding and application of
this phenomenon, and that is why I asked her to contribute.
*The reader should be aware that the terms OME (otitis media with
effusion) and MEE (middle ear effusion) are used interchangeably
throughout this volume.
 

Page xiv
Ultimately, the ear is not the organ of hearing. The ear is a
sophisticated transducer to pass acoustical information to the brain,
where we may make sense of it. We call this central auditory
processing, and we now know that many people (including many
children) have central auditory processing difficulties. I am reminded
of Isabel Rapin's description of children who should be educated as
though they are deaf. Gail Chermak's work has been devoted to
understanding this process and its occasional disruption. In chapter 9,
she explains how to assess it.
When all the assessment has been done, we must constructively use
the knowledge gained. More accurately, we must assist the children
whose hearing we have measured. Chapters 10 and 11 focus on the
use of technology for treatment. We can indeed put hearing aids on
children at any age. Doing this well, correctly, and early requires great
care, skill, and experience. Dale Robinson and Francis Eldis have the
skill and experience, and they share them with us in chapter 10.
As I have mentioned, cochlear implants didn't exist when I started in
the baby business. The first implants were the single-channel House
implantsso named because they were developed at the House Ear
Institute in Los Angeles. These were implanted in adults with various
degrees of success. Then came the multiple-channel implants, which
raised the question of using them in childrena highly controversial
issue. The Deaf community (those people who use American Sign
Language as their primary means of communication) argues that
providing cochlear implants to the very young denies these children
their identity, and they have a point. Many questions remain, however:
How do we determine which children are good candidates for
cochlear implants? What is the best age? Do the implants work? How
do we know? To address these difficult questions (chapter 11), I
turned to two people who deal with them every day, Judy
Brimacombe and Anne Beiter.

Whether parents choose sign language, oral communication, hearing
aids, cochlear implants, or any combination of these, deaf and hard of
hearing children must still go to school. Harris Nober has walked the
line between clinical audiology and the education of deaf children for
a long time. He walks it again for us in chapter 12 to explain how
audiologists can best advise the teachers of deaf and hard of hearing
children. He also offers suggestions for how audiologists can assist
these teachers in helping the children.
In addition to our knowledge, efforts, scholarship, and clinical skill,
deaf and hard of hearing children and their families need our counsel.
Counsel, in this sense, means more than the giving of information,
important as that is. No hearing parents expect to have a deaf child.
George Mencher confronts this matter in chapter 13 and provides
insights regarding what we can tell parents when the unexpected
happens.
Finally, all the knowledge contained in this volume is quite
meaningless unless we can deliver the services to the children. Our
British colleagues, Adrian
 

Page xv
Davis and Jane Sancho, have pointed out that it is useless to have
screening (diagnostic) and habilitation programs without the means of
putting children in touch with them. Chapter 14, by Evelyn Cherow,
deals with how to do just this. Ms. Cherow, who has been with ASHA
since 1981, is responsible for national policy development affecting
the delivery of audiology services.
The purpose of this book is to provide the collected expertise to
clinicians for their practical use. In this sense, we are consultants to
the practitioners. Acknowledging that our readers already know how
to do the procedures described, we intend to advise on when, under
what circumstances, and for whom they should be applied. If we
succeed, all of us will have become better practitioners.
I would like to acknowledge my gratitude to a trio of undergraduates
who labored with me on this book. Kerry McGinnis arranged, edited,
rearranged, and listed all the tables and figures. Lisa Gutierrez and
Alicia Mariscal assembled the extensive bibliography. Without them,
this book would be nowhere finished by this writing.
SANFORD E. GERBER SPOKANE, 1995
 

Page xvi
References
Davis, A., and J. Sancho. 1988. Screening for hearing impairment in
children: A review of current practice in the United Kingdom. In
International perspectives on communication disorders, ed. S.E.
Gerber and G.T. Mencher. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University
Press.
Katz, J., ed. 1994. Handbook of clinical audiology. 4th ed. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Kemp, D. 1978. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the human
auditory system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
64:1386-1391.
Rapin, 1. 1983. The child neurologist's contribution to the care of
children with hearing loss. In The multiply handicapped hearing
impaired child, ed. G.T. Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune
and Stratton.
 

Page xvii
Contributors
Judith A. Brimacombe, M.A. 
Vice President of Clinical and Regulatory 
Affairs 
Cochlear Corporation
Anne L. Beiter, M.S. 
Clinical Services Manager 
Cochlear Corporation
Gail D. Chermak, Ph.D. 
Professor and Chair 
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences 
Washington State University
Evelyn Cherow, M.A. 
Director, Audiology Division 
Professional Practices Department 
American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association
Allan O. Diefendorf, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor and Director 
Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology 
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery 
James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children 
Indiana University
Frances Eldis, Ph.D. 
Communications Disorders 
Children's Hospital of Michigan

Sanford E. Gerber, Ph.D. 
Emeritus Professor of Audiology 
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
and 
Chair and Visiting Professor 
Department of Communication Disorders 
Eastern Washington University
Aram Glorig, M.D. 
House Ear Clinic, Inc.
Herbert J. Gould, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor 
School of Audiology and Speech Pathology 
University of Memphis 
Memphis Speech and Hearing Center
Judith S. Gravel, Ph.D. 
Director of Audiology 
Associate Professor of Otolaryngology 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Yash Pal Kapur, M.D. 
Professor Emeritus 
Department of Surgery 
Michigan State University
Franklin R. Katz, M.D. 
Children's Medical Group 
Thousand Oaks, CA
 

Page xviii
Brenda L. Lonsbury-Martin, Ph.D.
Professor and Director of Research 
University of Miami Ear Institute 
University of Miami School of Medicine
Jane R. Madell, Ph.D. 
Director of Communicative Disorders 
Long Island College Hospital 
and 
Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology 
State University of New York Medical Center
Glen K. Martin, Ph.D. 
Co-director of Research 
University of Miami Ear Institute 
and 
Professor, Departments of Otolaryngology, 
Cell Biology, and Anatomy 
University of Miami School of Medicine
Margaret J. McCoy, M.A., CCC-A 
Chief Research Audiologist 
University of Miami Ear Institute 
University of Miami School of Medicine
George T. Mencher, Ph.D.
Director, Nova Scotia Hearing and Speech
Clinic
and
Professor of Audiology
School of Human Communication Disorders
Dalhousie University
Maurice I. Mendel, Ph.D. 

Professor and Dean 
School of Audiology and Speech Pathology 
University of Memphis 
Memphis Speech and Hearing Center
E. Harris Nober, Ph.D. 
Professor of Audiology 
Department of Communicative Disorders 
University of Massachusetts
Dale Robinson, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Audiology 
Department of Audiology 
School of Medicine 
Wayne State University
Robert J. Ruben, M.D. 
Professor and Chair 
Department of Otolaryngology 
and 
Professor of Pediatrics 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Yeshiva University, and 
Montefiore Medical Center
Shlomo Silman, Ph.D. 
Professor of Audiology 
Brooklyn College, CUNY 
and 
Professor of Speech and Hearing Sciences 
Doctoral Program 
Graduate School and University Center, 
CUNY
Carol A. Silverman, Ph.D. 

Professor of Communication Sciences 
Hunter College, CUNY 
and 
Professor, Speech and Hearing Sciences Doc- 
toral Program 
Graduate School and University Center, 
CUNY
Martin L. Whitehead, Ph.D. 
Assistant Professor 
University of Miami Ear Institute 
Department of Otolaryngology 
University of Miami School of Medicine
 

Page 3
1
Epidemiology of Childhood Hearing Loss
Yash Pal Kapur
Epidemiology is the study of the distribution and determinants of
human disease in populations. The primary objective of epidemiology
is to use this information to prevent human disease. A review of the
literature shows severe lack of epidemiologically representative data
on hearing impairment and deafness in various settings. We remain
largely ignorant of the epidemiological patterns of childhood hearing
loss. Available epidemiological studies, with few exceptions, show
inconsistencies of method and classification of hearing loss.
Deficiencies include (a) definition of the disease; (b) agreement on
terminology; (c) validity of the diagnosis; and (d) comparability of the
data.
This lack of information became clear when the World Health
Organization (WHO) in Geneva was being persuaded to become
involved in the problem of hearing impairment and deafness. In 1985,
a resolution (WHA39-19) was prepared by the General Assembly of
the WHO, requesting the Director-General of the WHO to investigate
and submit a report. This report was to assess the extent, causes, and
consequences of deafness and hearing impairment worldwide and to
make proposals for strengthening services for their prevention and
treatment. The Director-Generalin his report to the 39th WHO
General Assembly, Seventy Ninth Session EB 79/10 (WHO
1986)outlined two major deficiencies that accounted for the lack of
action in this area. These were (1) a lack of public awareness of the
problems of deafness and hearing impairment and (2) a lack of
appropriate and reliable information regarding most of their

epidemiological aspects.
A Division for the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment
was established at the WHO headquarters in Geneva in June of 1991.
One of its first activities was to stress the need for epidemiological
data on the magnitude and causes of hearing loss. The Division
emphasized the need for conducting such studies using comparable
methods and standard examination forms (WHO
 

Page 4
PDH 91.1 June 1991). Protocols conforming to these criteria have
been developed by the World Health Organization and are now
available. As a result, epidemiological studies are currently underway
in many different countries.
Congenital Hearing Loss
The definition of congenital hearing loss is not well delineated.
Usually, hearing loss in the first two years of life is accepted as
congenital hearing loss. The problem of identification and evaluation
of hearing loss at this age, due to the difficulty in ascribing the
etiology of hearing loss in individual cases, has resulted in a lack of
exact prevalence data of congenital hearing loss. It is estimated that an
average of 40% of cases with childhood sensorineural hearing loss are
undiagnosed with respect to etiology; most of those with unknown
etiology are congenital (Parving 1992). Many studies have shown that
children with congenital or early acquired hearing loss are identified
only after a delay (Kankkunen 1982; Newton 1985; Parving 1991).
Parving (1984) has pointed out that, in the industrialized world, only
between 50 and 63% of children with hearing loss were identified by
the age of three. Early detection of congenital or early acquired
hearing loss remains a serious and unsolved problem, and auditory
screening methods have largely failed to perceive them. In the
developing countries, the average age of assessment of congenital or
early acquired hearing loss can be between six and eight years of age.
A review (Davidson, Hyde, and Alberti 1989) of studies on prevalence
estimates of sensorineural hearing loss in children is given in Table
1.1. The table shows the author, the country in which the study took
place, age of children, methods of testing, hearing levels, and
prevalence per 1000.
Schein and Delk's (1974) estimate included the incidence of

prelingual deafness (before the age of three years) to be one per 1000
live births. Below nine years, the rate was 2.3 per 1000 live births.
Several other studies evaluating children ranging from birth through
six years of age give prevalence rates between 0.9 per 1000 and 1.7
per 1000 (Feinmesser, Tell, and Levi 1982; Kankkunen 1982; Martin
1982; Thringer et al. 1984). Studies from West Africa indicate that 2.2
per 1000 children under ten years of age displayed profound hearing
loss (McPherson and Holborow 1985). In India, studies in urban areas
showed the rate to be two per 1000 under five years of age and 4.2 per
1000 in children under fifteen years (Pal et al. 1974). A study on the
prevalence and etiology of hearing impairment was conducted by the
Indian Council of Medical Research in New Delhi in 1983. It
encompassed four centers in different parts of India and was
conducted in both rural and urban populations. It demonstrated that
0.8% of hearing impairment was due to congenital sensorineural
hearing impairment.
From 10 to 26% of hearing loss in children is congenital (i.e., at birth
or early childhood). Congenital hearing loss can be due to acquired
(nongenetic) or
 

Page 5
Table 1.1. Prevalence of Hearing Loss in Childhood
Age of
Method of
HearingPrevalence
First authorDate
Country
subjects
testing
level
per 1000
Schein
1974USA
£ 3 years
questionnaire
'deaf'
1.0
£ 19 years
'deaf'
2.3
Pal
1974India
£ 5 years
distraction or
60 dB
2.0
£ 15 years pure tone
60 dB
4.2
Feinmesser1982Israel
5 years
modified Ewing 55 dB
1.7
Stycar test
or play
70 dB
1.3
Kankkunen1982Finland
6 years
VRA = visual
50 dB
1.3
reinforcement,
respiration,
or play
Martin
1982UK
8 years
questionnaire
50 dB
1.0
Belgium
and review of
0.74
Denmark
medical records
1.48
France
0.56
Ireland
0.92
Italy
0.92
Netherlands
0.91
0.93
Upfold
1982Australia
7 - 17 yearspure tone
60 dB
1.1
90 dB
0.48
Parving
1983Denmark
2 - 12 yearspure tone,
35 dB
1.4
ERA or ECoG
55 dB
0.92
75 dB
0.60
Thringer
1984Sweden
£ 5 years
play
40 dB
1.4
60 dB
0.9
McPherson1985West Africa£ 10 years distraction,
70 dB
2.7
play or pure
95 dB
2.2

tone
Source: from Davidson, Hyde, and Alberti 1989.
to genetic causes; it can be attributed to prenatal, perinatal, or
postnatal causes. The major causes are tabulated in Table 1.2.
Infectious Causes
Maternal rubella has decreased dramatically in the western world,
thanks to widespread immunization. This infection continues to be a
problem in the developing countries, however. Hearing loss is the
single most common abnormality resulting from congenital rubella.
When sensorineural hearing loss is the sole manifestation, a link to
rubella is difficult to confirm and depends upon maternal history and
laboratory tests (Ruben and Rapin 1988). Rubella infection can be
subclinical, and defects may not develop until later in life.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a member of the herpes group of viruses.
It may affect a child by intrauterine infection, at birth, or postnatally
via infected breast
 

Page 6
Table 1.2. Major Causes of Congenital Hearing Loss
Nongenetic Congenital
1. Prenatal
Infections of mother *
Viral
Protozoal
Spirochital
Ototoxic Toxicity
Metabolic Disorders
2. Perinatal
Traumatic Delivery
Anoxia
Hyperbilirubinemia
Prematurity
Infection
3. Postnatal Causes of Early Childhood Hearing Loss
Infection
Ototoxic medications
Trauma
Others
Genetic Congenital
1. Hearing Loss Alone
2. Hearing Loss as part of a syndrome
3. Delayed Hearing Loss
Hearing Loss Alone (e.g., otosclerosis)
Hearing Loss as part of a syndrome (e.g., Usher or Alport)
* Incidence of the following TORCH infections in the mother can lead to
congenital hearing loss:
1. Viral infection
Rubella
Cytomegalovirus
2. Protozoal infection
Toxoplasmosis

3. Spirochital Infection
Syphilis
milk or saliva. Natal and postnatal infections are usually
asymptomatic. Intrauterine infection is asymptomatic at birth in 95%
of cases; nevertheless, 10 to 20% of these develop progressive hearing
impairment (Alford, Stagno, and Pass 1980). It is estimated that
congenital CMV infection occurs in 0.5 to 2.7% of births in the United
States, so it may be responsible for 0.5 to five cases of hearing defect
per 1000 births (Catlin 1985). It appears from at least one study
(Johnson et al. 1986) that postnatal CMV after the age of three weeks
does not result in hearing impairment. The extent of the problem in the
developing world is probably higher than in industrialized countries,
but, because the disease is usually asymptomatic in adults, assessment
of the prevalence rate is difficult.
Toxoplasmosis Gondi is a protozoan parasite common in animals. The
infection is prevalent worldwide. In the United States, it occurs in one
per 1000 to 3000 births. About 90% of the cases are asymptomatic at
birth. Sensorineural hearing loss occurs in 15% of the cases. The onset
of the loss is delayed and is progressive (Wilson et al. 1980).
Congenital syphilis occurs in one in 10,000 live births in the United
States. A resurgence of the disease may be occurring (Hoekelman et
al. 1992). Accord-
 

Page 7
ing to the Centers for Disease Control of the U.S. Public Health
Service, the number of reported congenital syphilis cases jumped from
160 in 1981 to 2,867 in 1990 (Shimizu 1992). The sensorineural
hearing loss that results from congenital syphilis has delayed
expression, occurs in 30 to 40% of cases, and occurs at eight to nine
years of age. It is usually bilateral and profound (Sando, Suehiro, and
Wood 1983). Auditory impairment may not be present at birth.
Ototoxicity
Ototoxicity has long been recognized as an undesirable side effect of
medical treatment; as new and more potent therapeutic agents are
developed, the list of ototoxic drugs continues to grow. In the United
States, the national Joint Committee on Infant Hearing has added
ototoxicity to its list of high-risk conditions (1994). Ototoxic
drugsparticularly the new generation of aminoglycosides, potent
diuretics, and cis-platinum (an anticancer drug)are responsible for
many cases of congenital hearing loss. In previous years, the effects of
ototoxic agents on the ear were known only after the hearing loss had
occurred. Now studies have shown that knowledge of the early signs
and symptoms can lead to modification of the disease or withdrawal
of the drug. Audiometric monitoring in susceptible patients
contributes to the prevention of hearing loss. The damage is mainly
dose related. High fever, kidney disease, advanced age, and
concomitant use of other aminoglycosides and loop diuretics are
additional risk factors. Hearing loss may be delayed and detected
weeks or even months after cessation of therapy. In most prospective
studies, the incidence of aminoglycoside ototoxicity is about 10%. It
is still higher when cis-platinum is used (Rybak and Matz 1988).
Although the use of ototoxic drugs is not a serious problem in
developed countries, information on the occurrence of ototoxic
hearing loss in developing countries is alarming. A 1992 report from
the Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology in China reveals that

deafness caused by ototoxic drugs rose from 0.1% in 1954 to 0.78%
in 1960, 28.4% in 1979, to 30, 50, or even 70% in some regions of
China in more recent years. Isolated reports from India also indicate a
shocking increase in hearing loss from indiscriminate use of ototoxic
drugs during the prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal phases. Better
physician education and public information are needed.
Metabolic Causes
Hypothyroid hearing loss is seen in cretinism and is usually a mixed
sensorineural loss that occurs in 50 to 60% of affected persons. The
loss may be stable or progressive. Endemic cretinism is due to severe
iodine deficiency over several generations and is accompanied by
goiter and mental retardation. Changes have been identified in the
middle and inner ears (Meyerhoff and Liston 1991). Pendred
syndrome, of course, is an example of a genetic deafness accompanied
by goiter.
 

Page 8
Perinatal Conditions
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
Erythroblastosis fetalis is a haemolytic disease caused by Rh-
incompatibility between mother and fetus. Jaundice due to
hyperbilirubinemia is the clinical symptom. Bilirubin is toxic to
cochlear nuclei and the central auditory pathways (deVries, Lary, and
Dubowitz 1985). The prophylactic use of Rh-immunoglobulin has
almost eliminated the problem in the western world. Phototherapy and
exchange transfusions have decreased the number of hearing-impaired
children worldwide.
Prematurity
Sensorineural hearing loss occurs in approximately 10% of infants
with a low birth weight, which is defined as birth weight less than
1.50 kilograms (3.3 pounds) (Ruben and Rozycki 1970). The chance
of being deaf is twenty times greater for a premature child than for a
child with normal weight.
Other Conditions
Several other conditions can cause sensorineural hearing loss during
the perinatal phase. These include birth trauma and anoxia. A variety
of sequelae have been associated with anoxia (hypoxia and asphyxia,
for example), including those affecting language, cognitive
development, neuromotor ability, and vision (Gerber 1990).
Postnatal Infection and Early Childhood Hearing Loss
Meningitis
Bacterial meningitis is a leading cause of acquired sensorineural
hearing loss. In the western world, it accounts for between 3 and 10%
of severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss (Newton 1985;

Parving 1991). Among the cases of deafness attributed to acquired
postnatal causes, the incidence of bacterial meningitis is even higher.
The incidence of hearing impairment as a sequela of bacterial
meningitis ranges from 5 to 30% of survivors (Nadol 1980; Newton
1985).
In West Africain a ''meningitis belt'' that extends into the northern part
(Nigeria)meningococcal, pneumonococcal, and viral meningitis were
considered responsible for 18% of the cases of postnatal acquired
deafness (McPherson and Holborow 1985). The incidence of
meningococcal meningitis has increased worldwide over the last ten
years and continues to be responsible for many cases of deafness.
 

Page 9
Most meningitic hearing losses are bilateral and produce a severe
irreversible loss. Many patients suffer a temporary or partial hearing
loss that may not be detected unless they undergo a hearing
evaluation. The three major bacteria responsible for meningitis in
children are Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, and
Diplococcus pneumoniae. Viral infections such as meningitis and
measles are also present worldwide.
Measles
Measles is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in young children
in the developing world. Immunization against measles is an integral
part of the Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI). Morbidity and
mortality can be even higher in children suffering from malnutrition
(Henderson 1981).
Otitis media is a common complication of measles infection. Otitis
media was once considered to be a result of secondary bacterial
infection, but Bordley and Kapur (1977) showed that otitis media is
due to a primary viral invasion of the middle ear. Sensorineural
hearing loss can occur due to damage to the cochlear and vestibular
system (Lindsay and Hemenway 1954).
The hearing loss in measles is usually symmetrical and bilateral, and
higher frequencies are affected more than lower ones. Since the
introduction of the measles vaccine in the United States, the incidence
of hearing loss associated with the virus has been reduced
dramatically.
Mumps
Hearing loss associated with the mumps virus infection has been
reported in 5 to 25% of all infections. Half of these were transient
losses. Persistent defects occur in 5% of cases (Baloh 1982). Hearing
loss usually occurs at the end of parotitis but can occur without any

evidence of a parotidal swelling (Everberg 1957). In 80% of cases,
hearing loss is unilateral. Temporal bone studies by Smith and Gussen
(1976) showed severe atrophy of the cochlea and stria vascularis.
Others
There are many other causes of sensorineural hearing loss in children.
The most common are those related to the use of ototoxic drugs, head
injury, and noise trauma.
Ototoxic medications (described under prenatal causes) continue to be
a problem for all human beings, including young children. These
medications include the aminoglycoside group of antibiotics. Many of
these medications are life-saving and have to be administered, but use
of several audiometric and, where possible, vestibular studies to
monitor the effect of these drugs will be
 

Page 10
useful in evaluation of therapy. Monitoring of blood levels of the
aminoglycoside and of renal function can reduce the ototoxicity.
Shimizu (1992) pointed out that there has been an upsurge in the
numbers of young children with sensorineural hearing loss due to
ototoxic chemotherapy for malignancies such as leukemia and
neuroblastoma.
Genetic Congenital Hearing Loss
In several etiological studies of congenital deafness, it was estimated
that 52% of cases were genetically caused (Fraser 1976). Estimates of
the incidence of genetic hearing loss in Great Britain, Germany, and
the United States are in the range of one in twenty to one in 6000 live
births (Steele 1981). Such a wide range of estimated frequency depicts
the difficulty in making an accurate diagnosis of the condition at birth
or in early infancy. Also, the differences among various statistical
surveys stem from the variation in populations studied and methods
used. Reviewing these estimates, Gerber (1990) determined that they
range around 43% of the total prevalence of congenital deafness.
Genetic hearing loss may be expressed at birth or be delayed to
childhood or even adulthood. It may occur alone or be part of a
syndrome manifesting hearing loss. Konigsmark (1969) identified
more than seventy different types of hearing loss, many of them part
of a syndrome. Grundfast and Lalwani (1992) list at least 200
different syndromes known to include hearing loss.
The patterns of inheritance in isolated hearing loss are: (1) autosomal
recessive genes (70 to 80%); (2) autosomal dominant genes (20 to
30%); and (3) X-linked genes (1 to 3%).
In recessive inherited hearing loss, other family members are unlikely
to be affected, especially in a small sibship family. The presence of
consanguinity supports this type of inheritance. A study of the causes

of hearing loss in South India showed that 24% of the 1,250 cases
studied were suspected to have recessive hereditary hearing loss
(Indian Council of Medical Research 1983). Among parents of
children with hereditary deafness in a school for the deaf, the
consanguinity rate was 56%. This was attributed to consanguineous
marriages in South India and was higher than the general rate of 33%
found in the state of Madras, South India (Kapur 1983).
Consanguineous marriages are widely practiced in Muslim countries
worldwide and in Africa.
Delayed Expression of Nonsyndromic Genetic Hearing Loss
Autosomal Dominant
Otosclerosis. With 40% expression, otosclerosis is a common
progressive disease of the otic capsule. Histologically, there is
spongiosis followed by sclerosis of the temporal bone. It can be
manifested as low frequency conductive loss,
 

Page 11
mixed hearing loss, or sensorineural hearing loss. Fixation of the
stapes results in a conductive loss; advanced otosclerosis results in
mixed loss or sensorineural hearing loss. The cause for the
sensorineural hearing loss is not clear. Asymptomatic patients with
histological evidence of otosclerosis represent nonpenetrant cases.
Delayed Expression of Syndromic Hearing Loss
The two most common syndromes in which hearing loss becomes
manifest in later life are Usher syndrome and Alport syndrome.
Usher syndrome is generally an autosomal recessive disorder. In some
families, it is noticed to be X-linked dominant. Usher syndrome is
characterized by retinitis pigmentosa and moderate to severe
sensorineural hearing loss. It is estimated to cause 6 to 10% of
congenital sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing loss precedes the visual
symptoms (Fraser 1976).
Alport syndrome generally occurs via an autosomal dominant
transmission. The syndrome is characterized by sensorineural hearing
loss accompanied by progressive renal disease and eye abnormalities.
Hearing loss is bilateral and occurs in 40 to 60% of cases. Males are
affected more often than females. The hearing loss begins by ten years
of age and is progressive (Preus and Fraser 1971). If untreated,
affected males frequently die by the third decade of life (Ruben 1983).
Summary
Because sensorineural hearing loss is often inherited, the relative
importance of this condition is bound to increase, especially as defects
due to other diseases decrease with advancement of medical care.
With new developments in genetics and gene mapping, identification
of genetic hearing loss is becoming more critical. Genes that cause
several types of hereditary sensorineural hearing loss have already

been identified (Grundfast and Lalwani 1992); these include, inter
alia, Usher syndrome and Waardenburg syndrome.
Early identification of genetic hearing impairment will improve
management of the child's hearing loss andparticularly in syndromic
hearing lossmake genetic counseling available to the family of the
affected child and other family members who are at risk of producing
offspring with hearing loss. Prevention remains the primary means of
reducing the high incidence of genetic hearing loss. This can be done
only through counseling of high risk individuals.
References
Alford, C.A., S. Stagno, and R.F. Pass. 1980. Natural history of
perinatal cytomegaloviral infection. In Perinatal infections, ed. K.
Elliot, M. O'Connor, and J. Whelan. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica.
 

Page 12
Baloh, R.W. 1982. Hearing loss. In Cecil textbook of medicine 16th
ed., Ed. by J.B. Wyngarden and L.H. Smith. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders Co.
Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology 1992. Statistics of ototoxic
drugs in China. A report submitted to the World Health Organization.
Beijing: Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology.
Bordley, J., and Y.P. Kapur. 1977. Histopathologic changes in the
temporal bone resulting from measles infection. Archives of
Otolaryngology 103:162-168.
Catlin, F.I. 1985. Prevention of hearing impairment from infection and
ototoxic drugs. Archives of Otolaryngology 111:377-384.
Davidson, J., M.L. Hyde, and P.W. Alberti. 1989. Epidemiologic
patterns in childhood hearing loss: A review. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 17: 239-266.
deVries, L.S., S. Lary, and L.M.S. Dubowitz. 1985. Relationship of
serum bilirubin levels to ototoxicity and deafness in high risk low
birth weight infants. Pediatrics 76:351-354.
Everberg, G. 1957. Deafness in mumps. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
48:397-403.
Feinmesser, M., L. Tell, and H. Levi. 1982. Follow-up of 40,000
infants screened for hearing defect. Audiology 21:197-203.
Fraser, G.R. 1976. The causes of profound deafness in childhood.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gerber, S.E. 1990. Review of a high risk register for congenital or
early-onset deafness. British Journal of Audiology 24:347-356.
Grundfast, K.M., and A.K. Lalwani. 1992. Practical approach to
diagnosis and management of hereditary hearing impairment (HHI).

ENTJournal 71:479-493.
Henderson, R.H. 1981. Vaccine-preventable diseases: The role of the
immunization services. In Disability prevention: The global
challenge, ed. Sir John Wilson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hoekelman, R., S.B. Friedman, N.M. Nelson, and H.M. Seidel. 1992.
Primary pediatric care. 2d ed. St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
Indian Council of Medical Research. 1983. Collaborative study on
prevalence and etiology of hearing impairment. New Delhi: Indian
Council of Medical Research.
Johnson, S.J., H. Hosford-Dunn, S. Paryani, A. Yeager, and N.
Malachowski. 1986. Prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss in
premature and sick term infants with perinatally acquired
cytomegalovirus infection. Ear and Hearing 7:325-327.
Kankkunen, A. 1982. Preschool children with impaired hearing in
Göteborg. 1964-1980. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 391) 14:1-
124.
Kapur, Y.P. 1983. The principal causes of acute conditions: Deafness.
In Disability prevention: The global challenge, ed. Sir John Wilson.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Konigsmark, B.W. 1969. Hereditary deafness in man. New England
Journal of Medicine 281:713-720, 774-778, 827-832.
Lindsay, J.R., and W.G. Hemenway. 1954. Inner ear pathology due to
measles. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology 263:754-
771.
Martin, J.A.M. 1982. Aetiological factors relating to childhood
deafness in the European community. Audiology 21:149-158.
McPherson, B., and C.A. Holborow. 1985. A study of deafness in
West Africa: The Gambian hearing health project. International

Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 10: 115-135.
 

Page 13
Meyerhoff, W.L., and S.L. Liston. 1991. Metabolic hearing loss. In
Otolaryngology, 3d ed., ed. M.M. Paparella et al. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders Co.
Nadol, J.B. 1980. Hearing loss as a sequela of meningitis.
Laryngoscope 88:739-755.
Newton, V.E. 1985. Etiology of sensorineural hearing loss in young
children. Journal of Otology and Laryngology (Suppl. 10): 1-57.
Pal, J., H.L. Bhatia, B.G. Prasad, D. Dyal, and P.C. Jain. 1974.
Deafness among the urban community: An epidemiological study at
Lucknow UP, India. Indian Journal of Medical Research 62:857-868.
Parving, A. 1983. Epidemiology of hearing loss and aetiological
diagnosis of hearing impairment in childhood. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 5:151-165.
1984. Early detection and identification of congenital/early acquired
disability. Who takes the initiative? International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 7: 107-117.
1991. Detection of infants with congenitally acquired hearing
disability. Acta OtoLaryngologica (Suppl. 482):111-116.
1992. Pediatric audiologic medicine: A strategy for a regular
department. Journal of Audiological Medicine 1:99-111.
Preus, M., and G.C. Fraser. 1971. Genetics of hereditary nephropathy
with deafness: Alport's syndrome. Clinical Genetics 2:331-333.
Ruben, R.J. 1983. Diseases of the inner ear and sensorineural
deafness. In Pediatric otolaryngology, Vol. 1, ed. by C.D. Bluestone
and S.E. Stool. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Ruben, R.J., and I. Rapin. 1988. Management of the hearing-impaired
deaf infant and child. In Otologic medicine and surgery, ed. by P.W.

Alberti and R.J. Ruben. New York: Churchill Livingstone, Inc.
Ruben, R.J., and D.L. Rozycki. 1970. Clinical aspects of genetic
deafness. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology 80:255-263.
Rybak, L.P., and G.J. Matz. 1988. Ototoxicity. In Otologic medicine
and surgery, ed. P.W. Alberti and R.J. Ruben. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, Inc.
Sando, I., S. Suehiro, and R.P. Wood. 1983. Congenital anomalies of
the external and middle ear. In Pediatric otolaryngology, ed. C.D.
Bluestone and S.E. Stool. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Schein, J.D., and M.T. Delk. 1974. The deaf population of the United
States. Washington, D.C.: National Association of the Deaf.
Shimizu, H. 1992. Carhart Memorial Lecture: 1991. Childhood
hearing impairment: Issues and thoughts on diagnostic approaches.
American Auditory Society Bulletin 17: 15-37.
Smith, G.A., and R.A. Gussen. 1976. Inner ear pathology following
mump infection: Report of a case in an adult. Archives of
Otolaryngology 102:108-111.
Steele, M.W. 1981. Genetics of congenital deafness. Pediatric Clinics
of North America 28: 973-980.
Thringer, K., A. Kankkunen, G. Lidén, and A. Niklasson. 1984.
Perinatal risk factors in the etiology of hearing loss in preschool
children. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 26:799-807.
Upfold, L.J., and J. Isepy. 1982. Childhood deafness in Australia.
Medical Journal of Australia 2:323-326.
Wilson, C.B., J.S. Remington, S. Stagno, and D.W. Reynolds. 1980.
Development of adverse
 


Page 14
sequelae in children born with subclinical congenital toxoplasma
infection. Pediatrics 66:767-774.
World Health Organization. 1985. WHA39-19.
1986. Prevention of deafness and hearing impairment. Report by the
Director General of the 79th Session, EB 79/10. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
1991. Report of the informal working group on prevention of deafness
and hearing impairment programme planning. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
 

Page 15
2
Pediatrics
Franklin A. Katz
Stop, Look, And Listen
Stop
Medicine in the United States is changing radically. All referrals will
eventually come through gatekeepers: a family practitioner, general
pediatrician, or general internist. They are called gatekeepers because
they control the flow of health services to patients. In order to become
gatekeepers, medical subspecialists are enrolling in courses offered by
their specialty organizations. About 10% of medical services offered
today use a managed care structure. Every newly proposed medical
model employs the gatekeeper concept (Kutnik 1993). All healthcare
providersincluding audiologists, speech-language pathologists, and
physician specialistswill one day be dependent on primary care
referral. As health professionals who work with children, we must
expand our role if we are to prosper or survive. Referrals from
nongatekeepers will not be authorized, and we will not be paid by the
new health system.
Look
Evaluate your gatekeepers' interest in and experience and knowledge
of your field as well as theirs. Experience with developmentally
disadvantaged and disabled children varies greatly from physician to
physician. The more you know about your associates' backgrounds,
the more you can understand their biases. Stress your own
professional skills, interests, and strengths. Stress the cost
effectiveness as well as the importance of your early evaluations and

interventions. You must foster an atmosphere that allows professional
dialog. The pediatrician is typically receptive to this process of
education and cross-proselytizing. Your value to any generalist
dealing with children will greatly increase if you develop skills that
allow you to cross comfortably into areas of screening and early
diagnosis as well as prescribed treatment.
 

Page 16
Listen
Pediatric literature and training have remained constant on only one
point through the decades. The pediatrician is a child advocate in both
medical and nonmedical issues. We are taught to think about our
patient as an individual, a member of a family and of a large
community of children. This community may be as small as the local
school yard or school district or as large as the entire world. During
the twentieth century, pediatricians have led the medical community
in establishing successful public health programs for the prevention
and treatment of infectious, genetic, and oncologic diseases. Most of
the diseases rampant during the first fifty years of this century are now
significant only in a historical context. Office visits and hospital
admissions to pediatric facilities have decreased dramatically during
the last few years. New trainees are spending more time in perinatal,
neonatal, intensive care, adolescent, and developmental medicine and
counseling. We are defining new curricula and new ways to help a
child reach full adult potential.
Your professional energy is needed now. Generalists at all levels need
to be made aware of your skills, intellect, personal interests, and your
sincere passion and concern for the welfare of children. It will be well
worth your effort to promote such an awareness.
Exchanging Insights With The Gatekeepers
Approximately two of every 1000 to 1500 children under six years of
age are said to have permanent bilateral hearing loss of at least 50 dB.
Walking in your "gatekeeper's shoes" may provide insight into the
reason for the outrageous delay in many referrals for audiologic
diagnosis. Most identified children clearly needed earlier diagnoses
and intervention, but it is difficult to be the first to tell parents that
their child may not hear or see perfectly. The younger the child, the

more difficult the clinical determination, and the less forgiving the
family will be for any anxiety suffered from your possible miscall.
However, parental concern frequently precedes formal identification
by a full year (Matkin 1984). Pediatricians are said to have difficulty
recognizing even profound deafness because they so rarely see it and
because they have not been taught the importance of early
intervention. It is a shame that most physicians never deal with
chronically disabled children or meet audiologists, speech-language
pathologists, or other clinicians during or after their training.
Physicians have to be educated about what can be done and why early
identification is important. They have to overcome the attitude that
saying a child will outgrow something is cost effective. Sometimes it
is, but sometimes it is not.
We have been taught techniques that are considered cost effective. Yet
we have no measure of the true cost to the individual or to society.
Are we asking the right questions? How can we measure the effect on
a family of an irritable or
 

Page 17
poorly developing child? How can we justify classifying partial
deafness as "minimal" or fluctuating hearing impairment as not
significant? We have information that strongly suggests just the
opposite. The term "minimal" subtly decreases our need to remediate.
Furthermore, why are we still using primarily adult terminology of
dysfunction in pediatric audiology? Our young patients are not just
small adults. We use different standards for children in everything
from blood values to blood pressure and vision screening. Screening
techniques suggested by all our major professional organizations are
frequently done improperly and have cut-off points that are insensitive
to subtle changes. We are afraid to include too many children who
may not develop obvious problems from their auditory dysfunction.
We have taken a giant step backward to homeopathic practices, which
treat a symptom, not the cause of a problem. For instance, "It is
probably incorrect to consider asymptomatic middle ear effusion as a
disease. The diseases associated with asymptomatic otitis media, such
as hearing loss and impaired language development, seem to be
correct targets of screening" (Bluestone et al. 1986). The attitude of
the gatekeepers, the healthcare insurance industry, schools, and the
public regarding the true cost of dysfunction needs to be reevaluated.
The public needs to be educated about the potential risks to their
children.
Clues To Diagnosis And Risk Assessment
Interview
The interview can be an extremely sensitive tool for identifying
problems in all age-groups. It is an art form that is cost effective and
uniquely yours. "No two people can be interviewed in exactly the
same way; no two patients with the same disorder present the same
history" (Green and Richmond 1992), and no two skillful

professionals conduct an interview in the same way. Listen to the
family history and carefully observe the caregivers as well as their
reactions to your questions. I find questionnaires helpful when I take
the time to go over the questions with the caregiver or patient.
The physician uses primarily three types of interview: the traditional
history and physical that are typical for hospitalized patients, the
expanded one, and your own unique one. Your expanding interest
should guide you to question areas that you may not have considered
otherwise. Over time, your own personalized multidimensional
interview will evolve.
The clues to early, accurate, and subtle diagnoses are usually
encountered in the history. The normal range of the nature of these
clues is very wide and extremely subjective, especially in our
youngest patients. Listen carefully to the information given to you by
the child, the child's parents, and other caregivers. Observe their
responses to each other as well as their actual words. In addition,
teenagers have special needs and are best interviewed without a parent
present.
 

Page 18
Initially, the teenager may not tell you anything significant and may
even feed you misinformation. Leave extra time after the interview
(and after you have established a rapport) to obtain the most
significant history from them.
The usual interview begins with a sensitive, probing, general
evaluation of the child's family and caregivers. What is their general
attitude? In what terms is the child described? What were their early
concerns and problems? What are their concerns now? Do they
suspect hearing impairment? Do the adults support each other and the
child? Can they openly discuss family characteristics? Any
characteristic found on both sides of the familyespecially family
history of childhood hearing impairmentmay be significant to a child's
general development and to the parents' hopes and fears about their
offspring. This can be true even if the characteristic is within the range
of usual normal. For instance, ''funny-looking children'' from funny-
looking parents might not be abnormal or the whole family might be
abnormal. You must decide. In any event, unattractive children are not
given as much positive attention in school from their teachers or their
peers. They are prone to function significantly below their potential.
They are "at risk" children.
The interview is a time to trade information and assess attitudes. Let
the parents share your experiences so that they can better understand
your concern and your eventual conclusions. The history they relate to
you must be evaluated carefully. Why are they focused on certain
areas and not on others? What secondary family games are being
played? What do they expect from you? Your assessment of the
temperament of the involved parties can be exceptionally rewarding.
What of the infant's temperament and why should you care (Carey
1982)? Your assessment of the children and their ability to adapt to
the environment can be crucial to them and to your evaluation. A

parent can be an under-or an over-responder for the infant. Most
parents respond normally and concordantly with their infant's needs.
Your perception of their infant's need for stimulation can help them
modify their behavior and better understand their baby.
Parents are always pleased to find out that their offspring has inborn
behavioral characteristics. This is especially true if they have a
difficult infant. Nonconcordance between caretaker and child could
place the child at risk for later social or emotional problems. This idea
of goodness of fit between parent and child is important. You must
assess your relationship with the parents and the referring physician
before tendering any advice. It will influence your decision when to
suggest a diagnostic or treatment program and to whom. The
physicians may want all advice filtering through them. This is
especially important if several professionals are in contact with the
caregivers. Parents listen to the professional whom they choose to
hear. Outrageous distortions and denial are frequent in emotionally-
loaded situations involving a sick or disabled infant or child. An over-
responding parent or grandparent who distorts or amplifies your
advice or your input can emotionally injure the child, one of the other
family
 

Page 19
members, or your reputation. Even positive and well-considered
advice can have negative side effects. I frequently act as a funnel for
information from different health professionals. It's a difficult job. The
same diagnosis or word in one discipline may mean something
different in another discipline.
Family History
The child's family history and parents' medical history and knowledge
of their environmental exposure to infections or mutagenic agents are
helpful nonspecific screening tools. Of course, a family history of
deafness from any cause should alert you. Genetic hearing loss does
not need to be expressed at birth. Otosclerosis, presbycusis, Cockayne
and Alport syndromesalthough not congenital (present at birth)remain
genetic in origin (Davidson, Hyde, and Alberti 1989). Waardenburg
and Leopard syndromes, which can involve pigment changes of the
hair or skin, are the most common integumentary-system-related
deafness. Retinitis pigmentosa involves progressive eye, vestibular,
and sensorineural changes. Pendred syndrome and endocrinopathies
primarily involving the thyroid are well described (Fraser 1976).
Children with mucopolysaccharide diseases (MPS) can develop
intracellular storage of acid mucopolysaccharides and develop a
progressive conductive loss due to ossicular dysfunction (Wallace,
Prutting, and Gerber 1990). Neurodegenerative diseases (such as Tay-
Sachs) and metabolic diseases (such as Wilson disease) have
associated hearing loss. Benign hematuria as well as progressive renal
insufficiency (Alport syndrome) have associated sensorineural hearing
loss in the middle and high frequencies in later years.
Biologists are predicting that they will be able to obtain "flaws that
are prediagnostic of disease ... in fifteen or twenty years when DNA
can be extracted from every newborn infant's blood sample" (Jaroff
1992). Today, intrauterine diagnosis using fetal tissue, chorionic villus

samples, or amniotic fluid samples are widely used. There are
screening methods for various metabolic diseases that may affect
hearing (PKU, aminoacidopathies), endocrine disorders (thyroid), and
blood diseases (sickle cell, thallasemia). These few tests are very
specific but very narrow. Specific preclinical, early diagnosis from a
few spots of newborn blood has become the standard in most states. It
costs less to screen than to treat or institutionalize later.
What do we do with the information, and can we keep the results
privileged? A Pandora's box of ethical questions regarding everything
from termination of pregnancy to invasion of privacy has been
opened. The immunobiologists and geneticists of this and the next
century need accurate clinical information and need to know what we
believe is important. Clinicians will have to help codify the many
subtle differences found in groups and individuals. We have orphan
genes and microorganisms looking for defined conditions. Yes, it's
like "pin the tail on the donkey," and we have to supply the donkey!
The history can be a nonspecific, cost effective, reliable screening tool
in the hands of a trained
 

Page 20
sensitive observer: your hands. It's available to you now and most
certainly will define the direction of future inquiry.
Rethinking The High-Risk Label
I Would like to relabel the high risk infants and call them the highest
risk infants. The highest risk infant is the one who is most likely to
develop brain damage in general and sensorineural hearing loss in
particular. The criteria for this group usually include familial deafness;
prematurity (<1500 grams); severe newborn depression; use of
ototoxic drugs for more than five days; severe hyperbilirubinemia;
congenital anomalies of the ear, head, and neck; bacterial meningitis;
congenital infections (e.g., CMV, toxoplasmosis, herpes, rubella);
mechanical ventilation for ten days or more; or known stigmata
associated with specific syndromes (Joint Committee on Infant
Hearing 1994). Unfortunately, the usual criteria for highest risk do not
include the vast majority of "high risk" or the not quite as definable
"at risk" group. We must synthesize a great deal of information and
soft data from the interview, the family history, and the personal
history of the parents and a developing child. It is our job to find and
help these potentially vulnerable children. Keep an open mind and
reasonable records so that you can cross-validate your observations
over a period of time. You don't want to miss an opportunity to
intervene early and help the child, nor do you want to cause undue
alarm. Do the best you can, andmost of alldo no harm.
In the Beginning
Maternal Factors
Both parents are important, but the maternal condition is obviously
more related to the infant's intrauterine development. Maternal factors
specific to the pregnancy or an unrelated illness, infection, exposure to
toxins, past health, morbid habits, or even age (<17 years or >38

years) can influence the outcome of the infant. A history of previous
dysmature infants, genetic problems, interrupted pregnancy, or
newborn catastrophes resulting in asphyxia or trauma can be
significant. Previous infertility problems or a previous seriously ill
child may cause difficulty for the parents in properly relating to their
new infant. Maternal health problems specific to the pregnancy
include hypertension for any reason, vaginal bleeding, premature
rupture of the membranes, or large fibroids that might interfere with
the blood supply to the infant. These can interfere with the child's
growth and development no matter what the genetic potential.
Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) should alert you to possible
problems later. Intrauterine growth retardation for any reasonincluding
multiple gestation, postterm pregnancy, poly-or oligohydramnios (too
much or too little
 

Page 21
amniotic fluid), and problems with the umbilical cord (prolapsed)-is
always significant. But the effect may not be obvious. Chronic
medical diseases (e.g., diabetes, renal disease, asthma with
hypoxemia, collagen disorders, malabsorption syndromes) can be
problems for the infant. Many of these problems can be prevented by
good prenatal identification and care of the parent.
Malnutrition is a significant problem today and will increase over the
decades. Because protein-calorie-deprived mothers have poor
placentas, intrauterine growth retardation is common. Direct studies of
brain DNA show both fewer brain cells and impaired brain cell
growth in the malnourished infant. Defects of number or size can
cause distortion of normal relationships. This may result in subtle and
gross anatomical defects that arise after the period of undernutrition.
Dendritic networks are 28% less extensive in rats that recovered from
undernutrition in early life (McConnell and Berry 1981). There are
large populations of vulnerable microneurons in the cerebellum,
hippocampus, and olfactory areas that proliferate relatively late in
development (Rodier 1980). The brain cells cited in the 1960s as
being reduced in number by early undernutrition would include such
microneuronal cell populations. The central auditory system, of
course, is affected.
Proper diet will increase both the number and size of brain cells in
subsequent generations. The present Women-Infants-Children (WIC)
program in this country offers free food to pregnant women and free
milk to all children. How easy it is to change once we refuse to accept
suboptimal as a norm. Parabiosis, or transfusion of one twin to
another, can cause significant differences in organ size. The smaller
anemic twin should be considered a small-for-date infant. These twin-
to-twin intrauterine transfusions tend to cause small and immature, as
well as anemic, babies. Both children are high risk infants. Yet, in one
study of very low birth weight infants (Hack et al. 1991), many

sophisticated observations were made, but hearing was not mentioned.
Low birth weight (<1500 g) is a well-established cause of early onset
hearing impairment.
Perinatal Infections
Perinatal infections can be important. Parasitic (toxoplasmosis), viral
(cytomegalic inclusion, rubella), spirochetal (syphilis), and bacterial
infections raise the chance of significant morbidity, especially
auditory morbidity. Toxoplasmosis may result in low birthweight
infants who are either small (SGA) or appropriate (AGA) for
gestational age. Virus diseases, such as cytomegalic inclusion or
rubella, can cause IUGR. Syphilis is a cause of prematurity but not of
IUGR. Perinatal bacterial infections in the mother or infant can be
significant but have widely variable outcomes. I believe that any
nervous system infection in an infant, whether from meningitis or an
infected myelomeningocele, should be considered significant for later
development.
 

Page 22
Genetic Factors
Genetic factors, including inadequate sex chromosomes such as
female Turner syndrome (X/0 or 45X) and autosomal trisomies, are
well known to produce SGA babies. Trisomy 21 infants weigh about
15% less than normal at birth; half weigh less than 2700 grams.
Similarly small are infants with trisomies 16/18 and 13/15. Inherited
disorders without chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., achondroplastic
dwarfs) often produce small-for-date infants who do not have an
increased morbidity. These children frequently have hearing
impairments. Women who have produced one SGA infant are likely to
produce another. Specific screening is imperative if any first-degree
relative has a significant screenable problem. Neural tube defects
(e.g., spina bifida cystica), Tay-Sachs syndrome, and others demand
an early screening. A family history of congenital or delayed onset
sensorineural auditory impairment, even in a distant relative, should
be considered relevant and significant since 70 to 80% are autosomal
recessive problems.
Other Factors
Mothers who are moderate smokers have double the incidence of SGA
infants that nonsmokers have; heavy smokers have three times the
incidence. High altitude, x-radiation, certain drugs (aminopterin and
antimetabolites), alcohol (fetal alcohol syndrome), hot tubs, and
certain illegal drugs can result in SGA infants. Maternal use of
narcotics (e.g., cocaine) can result in withdrawal symptoms in the
nursery, whereas LSD can cause certain chromosomal and skeletal
problems. Legal drugs such as Dilantin (cleft palate), barbiturates
(withdrawal), cortisone (clefts, adrenal suppression), estrogen, thyroid
suppressants, reserpine, insulin, and so on may cause or contribute to
problems. It is my opinion that parents who knowingly, repeatedly
expose their child to unnecessary risk are criminals.

Obstetrical Factors
Problems near the time of delivery can be significant. The child has to
make remarkable changes to extrauterine life, and not all systems may
be ready to adjust during the last transitions of labor. Severe variable
decelerations of the fetal monitor strip are caused by hypoxemia (low
O2 in the blood stream); fetal metabolic acidemia (pH <7.20) is a sign
of anaerobic metabolism and tissue hypoxia. The latter suggests a
much more profound insult to the infant, with known consequences
for audition. This child is in the highest risk group. The normal fetal
heart rate fluctuates around a base line rate with a rapid return to the
baseline after a period of bradycardia or tachycardia. If the infant's
heart
 

Page 23
rate doesn't promptly return to the baseline, then we have a stressed
infant with an autonomic imbalance. This is a high risk infant.
Even a baby's position in utero is associated with increased risk.
Breech babies have a higher frequency of neurologic abnormalities
and motor retardation at one year of age. Many specific syndromes
(trisomy, Prader-Willi) have a high incidence of breech deliveries.
Even breech babies born via cesarean section are high risk. The
opinions regarding the outcome of different cephalic presentations
vary. A hard labor for the child may be an easy labor for the mother
and vice-versa. Collect your data carefully. Use your senses. Look at
the infant and listen to the nursery nurse, the parents, and the
delivering physician. Avoid any hint of being judgmental or critical of
anybody if you want to get accurate information. In addition, the type
of anesthesia and its effect on the infant can be important. A sleepy
infant is less likely to bond than a vigorous one. Human
companionship during the mother's labor has a direct bearing on
maternal behavior. Benefits include a shortened labor, reduced
perinatal problems, and heightened aspects of maternal care in the
first hours of life. I prefer both regional anesthesia for the mother
(epidural) and the presence of helpers in the labor and delivery suite
unless the infant is ill.
Newborn
For the last century, the textbooks of pediatrics taught that an infant
was perceptually incompetent. The infant was considered deaf at birth
and deficient in other areas, including olfaction, taste, touch, and
vision. In contrast, research done after 1950 reveals the newborn as a
perceptually competent organism. This may also partially explain the
abysmal record of delayed audiologic referral by physicians. The
average delay between birth and confirmation of significant hearing
loss in children in the United States is two and one-half years or more

(Bess and Hall 1992). This is clearly unacceptable. The pediatrician
carefully follows the orderly acquisition of skills (language, adaptive,
personal, motor) as well as the orderly loss of primitive reflexes. A
template of expectations is derived from the history as discussed
above. The child's genetic and social background are superimposed on
other data as a further gauge of expectations. Questionnaires, physical
examination, and the parent's feelings guide the pediatrician to early,
and sometimes subtle, diagnoses. The standards are subjective, prone
to error, and insensitive in certain areas. Any information that we
receive from any of our colleagues is greatly appreciated.
All infants should be screened for hearing impairment using
otoacoustic emissions, according to a 1993 NIH Consensus
Development Panel. It is likely that this will become public law. This
may provide you with the opportunity to serve a new part of the
hospital and a new medical community. Developmental and other
screening might also be mandated. New no-fault malpractice laws are
 

Page 24
being proposed. More research into subtle problems will undoubtedly
be encouraged by their passage.
If the newborn hears a sound by stopping his activity to listen, then,
presumably, he hears. Please remember that it is abnormal for a
newborn to continue to respond. A neonate should stop responding
after repeated stimuliauditory or visual. A lack of habituation suggests
a neurologically-impaired infant. In practice, you will find that the
child's temperament and wakefulness will influence your decision as
to which child may be abnormal or need further observation. An "at
risk" score needs to be developed for all of those "maybe" cases who
just aren't quite right. We might judge a child's development potential
by using multiple, narrow criteria, such as family history and risk
potential. A useful four dimensional scale, the Neonatal Behavioral
Assessment Scale (NBAS), used by Brazelton (1973) and others, is an
excellent start. It measures motor tone and maturity, interactive
processes (consolability, alertness), response to stress (tremulousness,
startle), and control of physiologic states (habituation).
You must fully understand the importance of gestational age and
newborn maturity. Scales to weigh infants are found everywhere. The
risk tables based on weight criteria have been supplemented in most
western countries. Criteria for scoring maturity and gestational age
should be available in every nursery (Dubowitz, Dubowitz, and
Goldberg 1970). Birthweight and gestational age tables show that
mortality and morbidity vary with gestation groups among infants
with the same birthweight; it also varies with birthweight among those
of the same gestation. What does that mean? It means that the genetic
predisposition of the infant can be influenced by environmental
factors found in the uterus. An infant who is appropriate for
gestational age (AGA) is at less risk than the small for gestational age
(SGA) or small for date infant or large for gestational age (LGA)
infant. Prematurity, when defined simply by weight or by gestation of

less than thirty-seven weeks, is not very helpful. In fact, SGA infants
with the longest gestation have the highest percentage of severe
malformations. The frequency of congenital malformations increases
as smallness for gestational age increases.
The most important determinant of a newborn's chances of well-being
in later childhood is the degree of immaturity at birth as well as the
socioeconomic and educational levels of the parents (Hardy, Drage,
and Jackson 1979). The younger, more impoverished, unhealthy,
minimally-educated mother consistently had the worst outcomes.
Birth control, sex education, and family service programs should
therefore be encouraged. The highest incidence of anomalies is found
in the low birthweight infant of an older (>35 years) mother. In
contrast, the younger group (<18 years) has the highest postneonatal
period mortality and morbidity.
Ask the nursery nurse about the baby's Apgar risk scores (Table 2.1),
feeding problems, activity, temperature instability, general condition,
and attitude of the parents and visitors. Low Apgar scores are clearly
associated with impaired
 

Page 25
Table 2.1. Apgar Scoring Method in Evaluation of Condition of Newborn Infants
Note: The Apgar evaluation is done 60 seconds after complete birth of infant
(disregarding
the cord and placenta) and again four minutes later.
aScore of 10 indicates infant is in the best possible condition.
hearing. Be alert. Any nonroutine test ordered by the physician or
nurse could mean an infant at higher risk.
The Apgar risk score is designed to alert nurses so that more intense
care can be started immediately on certain infants. It is not a grade of
the infant's worth, the parents, or the delivering physician. It is
generally more accurate when scored by the nurse than the physician.
A low five-minute Apgar or problems at ten minutes correlate with a
greater chance of later demonstrable damage to the infant. Be aware
that the parents and grandparents frequently misinterpret the
significance of this highly publicized number. We should be very
cautious in our discussion of the Apgar score. Bonding and long-term
maternal anxiety may follow any infant, especially one needing
special nursery care or labeled as having an early real, or potential,
problem. This long-term maternal anxiety sometimes leads to the
"vulnerable child syndrome." The child typically fails to thrive despite
an adequate diet and doting parents. Fathers show the same patterns of
bonding as do mothers (Parke 1974). The predominant emotion when

holding the infant for the first time is indifference. Forty percent feel
affection, and this emotion increases over the first week. A malformed
infant can result in major family stress, anger, sadness, and anxiety
(see chapter 14). Most parents reach a point where they are able to
care adequately for their children and cope effectively with feelings of
grief, sadness, and anger (Solnit 1961).
Temperature adjustment to the extrauterine environment is carefully
followed in most nurseries. Transient temperature instability is
frequent. Persistence of abnormal temperature in a normal thermal
environment indicates a problem. Follow that infant carefully.
Hyperthermia may be seen with drug
 

Page 26
withdrawal and intracranial or adrenal hemorrhage. Hypothermia may
be caused by hypoglycemia, hypoxia, early sepsis, or hypothyroid
disease.
Normal term infants can be very active for about the first hour. After
that, only 20% of their time is spent awake in active, inactive, or
crying states. The infant's cry should be lusty. A feeble, high-pitched,
or soft cry suggests a neurologic problem. A hoarse cry might be due
to trauma to the hypopharynx or vocal cord paralysis (Gerber, Lynch,
and Gibson 1987). Hypothyroid disease is rarely seen in this age-
group if the mother is euthyroid. Infants can and do focus on visual
and auditory stimuli.
The infant's general muscle tone and posture change dramatically
during the first several days. Positions of comfort approximate those
assumed in utero. Many deformities are due to constraint and not to
congenital abnormalities. Malformations due to morphogenesis can be
differentiated from deformities from constraint more easily when you
fold the child back into his intrauterine position of comfort. For
instance, an abnormal pinna may be due to pressure from an arm, a
twin, a fibroid, or other mechanical forces causing deformations.
Usually they return spontaneously to normal. About 2% of infants
have significant deformities caused by mechanical forces that acted in
utero to restrict motion or to create pressure on limbs, spine, thorax, or
skull (Smith 1981). The effect of pressure applied to an otherwise
normal structure clearly has a different implication from diagnosing a
child born with a genetic or dysmorphic problem (Smith 1981). A
videotape or picture of the newborn can be very helpful when you are
trying to put together the pieces of the diagnostic puzzle years later.
Unusual thyroid problems that are associated with deafness (e.g.,
endemic goiters and Pendred disease) can be diagnosed at birth but
are extremely rare.

Gestational age can be assessed from the maternal history, ultrasound
measurements of the uterus, x-rays of bone development, and the
physical exam of the newborn. Look at the gestation charts in your
nursery so that you can better assess which infants you think may be
more at risk.
The First 28 Days (The Neonatal Period)
This period in childhood is associated with the highest mortality. The
morbidity is more difficult to measure. Morbidity statistics can vary
depending upon what is measured and by whom. A significant
proportion of central nervous system (CNS) injury resulting in later
manifestations of mental retardation, neurologic handicaps, and
deafness occur in this period of life. Regionalized neonatal intensive
care units are primarily responsible for the reduction of mortality in
the past twenty years. Improvement of the survival rate in specific low
birthweight gestational age-groups accounts for 85% of this increase.
Survival rate is clearly easier to measure than definite or possible
morbidity. Thirty percent of infants under 1000 gm and needing
ventilator support survive. Severe neurological handicaps (45%),
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (75%), and retrolental fibropla-
 

Page 27
sia (20%) occur in these survivors. A 94% follow-up rate on low birth
weight (SGA) infants over six years revealed that 9% of 111 infants
had hearing loss and 4% were seriously impaired by their
sensorineural loss (Abramovich et al. 1979). We measure only major
deviations from general, normative data. We are not able to predict
which preterm child with transient neurological findings is at risk to
develop cognitive delays (D'Eugenio et al. 1993). Our job is to
maximize the individual's potential. Since true potential is too subtle
for us to measure, we should always aim high. Every professional I
know is periodically astounded by a child's unexpected progress.
The Early Years
Many children are said not to hear or pay attention; to talk too loud or
too soft; to have chronic otitis, allergies, and school problems. They
don't listen, they daydream or fantasize; they play the TV too loud,
and on and on. Eighty-five percent of pediatric visits concern middle
ear problems (Koch and Dennison 1974). Transient, fluctuating
hearing loss that accompanies middle ear disease and variations in
normal development have made us all numb. Serous otitis media is the
most common cause of hearing loss in children, affecting up to two-
thirds of preschool children (Davidson, Hyde, and Alberti 1989). It
may be significant to those growing up in linguistically impoverished
environments (Allen, Rapin, and Wiznitzer 1988) or with other
potential risk factors such as social, emotional, or physical problems.
We know that children with prolonged middle-ear effusion (MEE) in
infancy may have lower scores on language skill tests later (Northern
and Downs 1991). Children of higher socioeconomic status showed
the greatest risk for poor performance in later years (Teele et al.
1984). Many physicians and other health professionals have chosen to
ignore the obvious. Because we have not intervened, many children
have become at risk for language and cognition problems. Auditory
confusion, decreased auditory discrimination, attention problems, and

appreciation of syntax, receptive vocabulary, processing, and so forth
have all been cited. Professionals interested in children have an
opportunity to prevent problems. Visual problems of the same
magnitude are treated much more aggressively. It's time to educate the
professional community and the public about so-called minor
problems of hearing.
Prevention
Infants
Prevention can start early. Infants younger than several months of age
are a challenge. The physician's pneumatic otoscope alone is not
reliable in early infancy, and we need all the help we can get. A family
history can be very useful. Tympanometry is not reliable for screening
before six months of age
 

Page 28
because false normals are frequent (Northern and Downs 1991). The
compliance of the ear canal is high. However, an abnormal, flat
tympanogram is a significant indicator of middle ear disease.
Tympanometry can be very useful in questionable cases in almost any
child. Parents should be instructed to look for symptoms of possible
ear problems: persistent or extreme irritability, posterior head batting,
or head rolling. Remind them that teething is not usually a problem
before three months of age.
Infants having early acute, recurrent, or chronic middle ear problems
are extremely common. I believe that we can decrease later morbidity
by early intervention. Morbidity used to mean mastoiditis, meningitis,
and chronic significant infections frequently leading to death or brain
damage. These now occur much less frequently and are less
significant because we have better treatments than in previous
decades. Common secondary problems were ignored. These
presumably less significant problems include speech, auditory
processing dysfunction, sensory-motor problems, and balance
problems, as well as physical and emotional development.
Twenty percent of children seen at well-baby exams have fluid in their
ears (Teele et al. 1980). This should not be accepted as normal even
though it is common. No child should miss the important windows of
speech acquisition at about one year of age or have fluctuating hearing
loss. The resultant deficits in expressive language and other skills may
not be remediable. Children with uncomfortable middle ears, no
matter what the cause, are irritable. Unhappy infants are difficult to
live with. They tend to invoke feelings of inadequacy and guilt in
today's working parents. I believe that early prevention, identification,
and treatment of middle ear disease are crucial if we aim to maximize
the child's potential. It is irrational to apply group data to an
individual's treatment plan in any except the most general way. I do
not know if the otitis is the specific cause of the many problems

described or merely associated with them. Pediatric office-based
screening of two-to four-year-old children is becoming more common.
Some authors report that tympanometry and reflex testing will
identify 90 to 95% of significant ear pathology in two-to four-year-old
children; pure tone audiometric testing will identify 80%. We must
reevaluate the term significant (Bluestone et al. 1986).
Which child should be followed, treated, or ignored? Who has
increased risk of frequent, severe, or resultant dysfunction from
middle ear problems? Besides the factors mentioned before, all
children with cranial, renal, or multiple dysmorphic abnormalities and
all developmentally disabled children are at increased risk. Native
Americans, Alaskan Eskimos, and other groups also have an increased
incidence of middle ear disease. The infection and effusion are
apparently more difficult to treat in these groups. Otitis media with
effusion (MEE) may cause more functional damage and yet seem less
significant in a developmentally disabled child. A minor auditory
dysfunction, especially if persistent or recurrent, can be catastrophic
and nonremediable in a disabled child. Children
 

Page 29
with Down syndrome and many other syndromes deserve early
intervention including infant stimulation, hearing and speech
guidance, antibiotics, and P.E. tubes. Their speech and general
development improve remarkably and can be normal. The consensus
seems to be that conductive hearing impairment is the most prevalent
type, with an incidence that ranges from 2.6% to as much as 60%
(Buchanan, Harding, and Hudner 1991). I remember being taught that
a child with Down syndrome was dull, poorly responsive, placid,
inattentive, and talked funny. That is not what we see after we
intervene.
I also suggest that all children at increased statistical risk who have
had a history of early and recurrent middle ear effusion start school in
the summer. The seasonal incidence of middle ear effusions is well
known. These children should have the fall quarter off. This will
decrease their exposure to rhinoviruses and to the school problems
that result from hay fever and allergies. Antihistamines and
decongestants may help the nose, probably do not help the ear, and
certainly interfere with concentration, attention, and other subtle
functionsno matter what the drug companies tell you.
About one-third of our population suffers from simple allergies. That
is a lot of people. Severe, disabling allergies are much less frequent.
The infant must be considered at risk if close family members have
had ENT surgery for otitis, sinusitis, rhinitis, or allergy
hyposensitization. Immediate effective intervention must include
prevention. I encourage breast feeding (40% fewer ear infections).
Solids should not be added to most infants' diets until after four
months of age. Have the mother feed the child in a sitting-up position.
Caregiversincluding parents, grandparents, and healthcare workersare
strongly advised to avoid exposing the infant to cigarette smoke and
respiratory irritants. For instance, they should be advised not to hold
the baby on their shoulder if they use shaving lotion, perfume, or hair

spray that may remain in their hair or on their neck. Tell them not to
expose their infant to feathers or animal hair. Keep the animals away
from the air intake of the heating system and away from the infants'
sleeping quarters. Grandma's goose down pillow or comforter is off
limits especially if it is old. These general rules apply in the child's
home and wherever that child is taken for daycare. Advise the parents
to put the infant into a homecare situation with six or fewer infants
because the incidence of otitis media is much lower.
I advise parents not to use the nasal aspirators they receive from most
newborn nurseries. The volume of the aspirator bulb compared to an
infant's nose is huge. Most parents cannot gently suck outside their
infant's nose. Our primal nose-fiddling, hole-poking instinct overrides
common sense. The nostrils get smaller and smaller as they are
violently sucked, and the mucosa become edematous.
Regression in speech and motor skills is common in toddlers with
chronic or subacute middle ear disease. This regression is obvious to
parents if they are taught to observe the child. This type of loss may
be reversible, and it is gratifying
 

Page 30
to see an infant's speech skills accelerate under treatment. Children
with chronic otitis sometimes have expressive language skill and other
deficits that cannot be remediated by later speech therapy. It is clearly
important to protect the infant and small child during periods of
language acquisition. Irritability is the presenting symptom in a large
majority of infants with significant acute otitis media. That sounds
suspiciously like what has been called colic, teething, personality
problems, and growing pains of infancy. Many infants develop loose
stools as a sign of otitis before being given antibiotics. Some have rare
subtle immune deficiency states (IGG1), lazy cilia, or food
intolerance. Most do not have a single definable causative problem.
Both an increased awareness of the problem by the parents and better
toolssuch as the halogen light, pneumatic otoscope, and the office
tympanometerin recent decades have allowed earlier and more
accurate diagnoses.
Preschool and School Age
Always ask how the child is doing in school and preschool. Does she
stand out in any way to a trained, experienced, objective teacher?
Does the child have behavior or learning skills problems? A positive
history should intensify your focus on this youngster. This child is at
risk and has parents who are increasingly motivated to find out why.
Any sensory loss is significant to a developing child. The child's
acquisition of reality has been modified and distorted. You know
instinctively that children with profound or subtle losses are somehow
different. All children, no matter what the I.Q. score, develop coping
skills and strategies to help themselves.
Children with hearing loss may be sensed by you before you test
them. Notice how they relate to their surroundings. Increased visual
alertness, touching, behavioral deviations, face watching, and
excessive head movement are common. Please don't limit your focus

to hearing. Believe it or not, you may be one of the only authorized
healthcare professionals to screen a child. It behooves you to know
that eye and vision problems abound.
If children have a history of lazy eye or squint, have them tested for
vision. You can prevent an all-too-common form of blindness
(amblyopia). The eye may look perfectly fine to you during the early
advanced stages. Sight is recoverable if the condition is picked up
early.
Myopia (nearsightedness) is discovered typically in the preteen and
early teen years; yet, some medical plans pay for only preschool
screening. School districts are dropping their early childhood
screening and rarely screen older children. If both parents are
nearsighted, the child should be tested yearly and at the first
symptoms of a problem. If one parent is nearsighted, then less
frequent screening is acceptable. Many simple eye charts are available
for home or office use. You may want to use an illiterate E test,
Snellen eye charts, or more elegant
 

Page 31
equipment. We all have to prepare for coming changes and continually
develop new skills.
Specialist physicians are being retrained by their societies and others
to do comfortably more general work as a gatekeeper. They will need
medically trained professionals who can provide information to
streamline their decisions.
The New Epidemic
We know that fluctuating hearing losses can cause deficits in the
acquisition of vocabulary, articulation skills, and the ability to receive
and express ideas through spoken language (Gottlieb, Zinkus, and
Thompson 1979). There are critical periods of language development
and, unfortunately, these periods coincide with the time of highest
frequency of ear infections. Studies have concluded that deprivation
of sound can cause various deficits and that negative middle ear
pressure, even with normal hearing for pure tones, can be significant
(Cook and Teel 1979). There is a paucity of audiologic data regarding
how this occurs. Vision studies seem to indicate that various chemical
modifiers may either enhance or impair the formation of memory (and
learning) by influencing cerebral metabolism. These modifiers may be
present for a finite length of timeperhaps never to return.
Children with learning, attentional, or speech problems appear to have
a history of more frequent ear infections. Their verbal scores are
depressed and tend to correlate with the number of episodes of otitis
media (Kaplan et al. 1973). Reading skills appear to be compromised
among children with histories of recurrent middle ear disease (Levine,
Carey, and Crocker 1992). This has sparked an upsurge of interest in
ear disease by parent groups. Parents of children with learning
disabilities or unusual learning patterns have frequently had the same
problems and are highly motivated to decrease their child's
difficulties.

Forty percent of children with attention deficit disorders (ADD) have
a family history of attentional problems. Attentional deficit disorder
has been said to occur in about 5% of the population and has been
called the hyperkinetic syndrome or minimal brain dysfunction. This
diagnosis is now being used generically on increasing numbers of
students. Has intolerance of children who are intellectually or socially
different increased? Questionnaires that strongly suggest that normal
characteristics are deviant are being circulated by parent groups and
interested professionals. My own school district now reports that over
15% of students have attentional problems. No lead, toxin, or specific
medical reason for this increase has been found.
I was overwhelmed with sadness to hear the almost universal
problems that members of the Mensa Society (IQ in the top 2
percentiles of the general population) have had in school. Be aware
that the facile misapplication of a diagnosis of ADD or its variants
with hyperactivity (ADHD) or oppositional behavior
 

Page 32
(ADDO) frequently buries the gifted child or children with sensory or
social deficits. We must look beyond the child's immediate behavior
and understand why he is acting out. These children develop strategies
that grandparents, school teachers, and others may find intolerable. I
believe that all children with school problems should be tested for
hearing, vision, and psychointellectual abnormalities before any
therapy is prescribed.
Children with conductive losses have the most difficulty with
selective auditory attention. Surely, strategies can be developed to
identify that child at risk and offer aid. Classrooms and teachers need
to be evaluated. They are part of the solution, and they may also be
part of the problem. We can help by increasing the teacher's awareness
of the child's disabilities and explaining why he gets worse when he
has a cold or allergy attack. The child's reaction to decongestant
medicines, poor sleep, congested ears, or poorly heated classrooms
can be discussed. Some children benefit from smaller, quieter classes
with fewer visual stimuli. Some may need drug therapy. Others may
need corrective lenses, hearing aids, a speech-language pathologist's
or an educational therapist's intervention. Many need multiple
therapies. Psychopharmacologic drugs are very commonly used.
Drugs that affect the inner ear in attempts to solve the problem are
rarely used today.
I believe that all identified children and their families develop
emotional overlays. They need support and sometimes protection
from the system attempting to homogenize their children. This would
have included the families of Thomas Edison, Albert Einstein,
Winston Churchill, Samuel Clemens, Steven Spielberg, and many
others.
We are all child advocates doing the best job we can. I believe that an
increasing social awareness about ear disease and its sequelae will

inspire a renaissance of research in our fields of interest. I hope that
we will collaboratively develop the knowledge and skills to do a
better job.
References
Abramovich, S.J., S. Gregory, M. Slemick, and A. Stewart. 1979.
Hearing loss in very low birth weight infants treated with neonatal
intensive care. Archives of Disorders of Children 54:421-426.
Allen, D., I. Rapin, and M. Wiznitzer. 1988. Communication disorders
of preschool children: The physician's responsibility. Developmental
and Behavioral Pediatrics 9:164-170.
Bess, F.H., and J.W. Hall III. 1992. Screening children for auditory
dysfunction. Nashville: The Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Bluestone, C., et al. 1986. Controversies in screening for middle ear
disease and hearing loss in children. Pediatrics 77:57-70.
Brazelton, T.B. 1973. Neonatal behavioral assessment scale. London:
W. Heinemann.
Buchanan, L.H., K.M. Harding, and C.M. Hudner. 1991. Hearing
disorder management in Down's syndrome. Hearing Instruments 42:
12-15.
 

Page 33
Carey, W.B. 1982. Validity of parental assessments of development
and behavior. American Journal of Diseases of Children 136:97-99.
Cook, R.A., and R.W. Teel, Jr. 1979. Negative middle ear pressure
and language development. Clinical Pediatrics 18:296-297.
D'Eugenio, D.B., T.A. Slagle, B.B. Mettelman, and S.J. Gross. 1993.
Developmental outcome of preterm infants with transient neuromotor
abnormalities. American Journal of Diseases of Children 147:570-
574.
Davidson, J., M.L. Hyde, and P.W. Alberti. 1989. Epidemiologic
patterns in childhood hearing loss: A review. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 17: 239-266.
Dubowitz, L.M., V. Dubowitz, and C. Goldberg. 1970. Clinical
assessment of gestational age in the newborn infant. Journal of
Pediatrics 77:1 -10.
Fraser, G.R. 1976. The causes of profound deafness in childhood.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gerber, S.E., C.J. Lynch, and W.S. Gibson, Jr. 1987. The acoustic
characteristics of an infant with unilateral vocal fold paralysis.
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 13:1-9.
Gottlieb, M.I., P. Zinkus, and A. Thompson. 1979. Chronic middle ear
disease and auditory perceptual deficits. Clinical Pediatrics 18:725-
732.
Green, M., and J.B. Richmond. 1992. Pediatric diagnosis:
Interpretation of signs and symptoms in different age periods. 5th ed.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Hack, M., J.D. Horbar, M.H. Malloy, J.E. Tyson, E. Wright, and L.
Wright. 1991. Very low birth weight outcomes of the National

Institute of Child Health and Human Development neonatal network.
Pediatrics 87:587-597.
Hardy, J.B., J.F. Drage, and E.C. Jackson. 1979. The first year of life:
The collaborative perinatal project of the National Institute of
Neurological and Communication Disorders and Stroke. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jaroff, L. 1992. The new genetics. Knoxville, TN: Whittle
Communications.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 1994 position statement.
Audiology Today 6:6-9.
Kaplan, G.J., J.K. Fleshman, T.R. Bender, C. Baum, and P.S. Clark.
1973. Long term effects of otitis media: A ten-year cohort study of
Alaskan Eskimo children. Pediatrics 52: 577-585.
Koch, H., and N.J. Dennison. 1974. Office visits to pediatricians.
Washington, D.C.: National Center for Health Statistics.
Kutnik, L. 1993. Surviving the '90s: A primer. AAP conference, La
Jolla, CA.
Levine, M.D., W.B. Carey, and A.C. Crocker. 1992. Developmental-
behavioral pediatrics. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co.
Matkin, N.D. 1984. Early recognition and referral of hearing impaired
children. Pediatrics in Review 6:151-156.
McConnell, P., and M. Berry. 1981. The effect of refeeding after
neonatal starvation on Purkinje cell dendritic growth in the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 178:759-772.
National Institutes of Health 1993. Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11:1 -24. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health.
Northern, J.L., and M.P. Downs. 1991. Hearing in children. 4th ed.

Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
 

Page 34
Parke, R. 1974. Father-infant interaction in maternal attachment and
mothering disorders: A roundtable. Sausalito, CA: Johnson and
Johnson Co.
Rodier, P.M. 1980. Chronology of neuron development: Animal
studies and their clinical implications. Developmental Medicine and
Child Neurology 22:525-545.
Smith, D.W. 1981. Recognizable patterns of human deformation.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Solnit, S. 1961. Mourning and the birth of a defective child.
Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, Monograph #16.
Teele, D.W., J.O. Klein, B.A. Rosner, et al. 1980. Epidemiology of
otitis media in children. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology (Suppl. 68) 89:5-6.
1984. Otitis media with effusion during the first three years of life and
development of speech and language. Pediatrics 74:282-287.
Wallace, S.P., C.A. Prutting, and S.E. Gerber. 1990. Degeneration of
speech, language, and hearing in a patient with
mucopolysaccharidosis VII. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 19:97-107.
 

Page 35
3
The Pediatric Otolaryngic Assessment of the Child with a
Suspected Hearing Loss
Robert J. Ruben
Purpose
The purposes of the pediatric otolaryngic assessment of a child
suspected of having a hearing loss or other communicative disorder(s)
are many. They include:
1. Determining the cause of the loss;
2. Carrying out indicated intervention(s);
3. Determining which other organ system(s) may be involved;
4. Monitoring the progression of the disorder(s); and
5. Evaluating the effects of the intervention(s).
Methods of carrying out the assessments, except physical
examination, are similar for neonates, infants, toddlers, and preschool
age children.
The pediatric otolaryngic assessment begins with a detailed history
structured to maximize information about communicative disorders in
general and hearing function in particular. It is preferable to have
objective audiologic data about the child's hearing before the history
is obtained.
A behavioral screening audiogram accompanied by a tympanogram
(when possible)including middle ear pressure, the presence or absence
of middle ear reflexes, and the volume of the ear canalis required for

patients under six months of age. For those developmentally older
than six months of age, it is necessary to have available both an
audiometric evaluation of each ear with bone and air conduction and
the tympanometric study before the history is taken.
There are instances when the child is unable to complete the initial
audiometric evaluation. This in itself is valuable information, for it
can reflect the
 

Page 36
child's development or other social and psychological aspects that
may not be readily apparent otherwise.
Observe the child's state of activity as the history is being taken.
Spontaneous utterances, the use of language, and the way the child
relates to caregivers are all noted. The first questionwhich is
criticalasked by the otolaryngologist is, ''Why have you brought the
child to be seen?'' If the caregiver answers that the child may have a
hearing loss, that there may be a delay in speech or language
development, or that the child's speech does not seem correct to the
caregiver, then we assume that the child has a hearing defect or
another communicative disorderuntil proven otherwise. The
remainder of the evaluation is structured to elicit information
concerning such disorders. Normal history and physical examination
are compatible with a hearing loss or other communicative
disorder(s), and the child must be evaluated by the appropriate
objective assessment tools discussed in the other chapters of this
handbook.
Initial History
The history interview is structured to obtain first background and then
general information concerning the child, the family, and the
environment. The process of deriving this background information
allows the otolaryngologist to become familiar with the caregiver and
to interpret better the responses to questions. These responses allow
the otolaryngologist to interpret accurately what is reported. Some
caregivers may enumerate every upper respiratory infection and each
temperature elevation, whereas others may mention only casually that
the child had meningitis. The details of the present illness are drawn
out after the otolaryngologist has recorded the background
information and, by spending the necessary time, has achieved an
understanding of and empathy with the child and family.

The background history begins with an inventory of diseases in the
child's family including cancer, heart disease, diabetes, alcoholism,
renal disease, and neurological and infectious diseases. Where
appropriate, information is obtained about sickle cell disease and other
genetically determined hematological disorders.
The caregiver is then asked about infectious diseases the child has
had. Several episodes of pneumonia or other infectious disease may
indicate an immunological deficiency. These deficiencies can be
diagnosed, and knowledge of them will enable the otolaryngologist to
provide proper care. A child with ciliary dyskinesia (Kartagener
syndrome), for example, will suffer from continual ear infections and
require a hearing aid for the restoration of normal hearing in order to
enable spoken language development. Tympanostomy tubes are not
effective in such cases and, in some instances, may be contraindicated.
Children with HIV infections are cared for differently with regard to
their hearing problems from those who do not have increased
susceptibility to infection.
 

Page 37
Injuryespecially head traumais the next category assessed. There are
infants who have had "minor" head trauma resulting in bilateral
stapedial footplate subluxation associated with progressive
sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). This portion of the history will
note whether the child has sustained a major skull fracture that could
be associated with temporal bone fracture or labyrinthine concussion.
The child's operative history is next and includes the age at which
procedures were performed and any associated anesthetic
complications. The child's hospitalization history is determined: Was
the child hospitalized at birth, or has it had other hospitalization? If
the child was hospitalized, then the diagnosis, the length of stay, and
the name of the hospital are recorded. Hospital records are obtained if
there is any suspicion that the child may have been treated with
ototoxic medications. These recordsespecially medication orders and
signoff sheetsare reviewed to ascertain whether the child received no
more than the appropriate amounts of ototoxic antibiotics. We also
want to know if there was any renal dysfunction; if so, was this
compensated for by a reduction of the ototoxic medication? Were
blood levels of the ototoxic medication(s) obtained? Were the correct
dosages ordered and given as directed? In addition, the nursing notes
in a chart will often provide information concerning the child's
hearing and language.
Review Of Systems
The next portion of the history is the review of the biological systems
(Table 3.1). For a child with a suspected hearing loss or other
communication disorder, the relevant questions here concern the head,
eyes, larynx, pharynx, chest, heart, genitourinary, hemopoietic
(formation of blood cells), endocrine, immune, musculoskeletal, and
nervous systems. Information concerning the ears is obtained when
the present illness information is elicited.

Personal And Social History
The personal and social history is next. The birthplace of the patient is
determined. You may obtain a surprising answer from parents who
were in a different and unexpected environment at the time of the
child's birth that may have exposed the child to diseases endemic in
that part of the world and thus may be related to the suspected hearing
loss or communicative disorder.
The caregivers' occupations, which give an indication of their
socioeconomic and educational status (SES), are noted. The SES is
related to the expected language performance of a child. Children
from an average family would be expected to have average linguistic
development; children from a family in which the caregivers both
have advanced academic degrees should be expected to have
linguistic performance above average for their age. Average language
 

Page 38
Table 3.1. Review of Systems
Areas of Emphasis for Children with Suspected Hearing Loss
or Other Communication Disorder
System
Information to Be Elicited
Head
History of head trauma to include temporal
bone fracture.
Eyes
Whether there are any external or internal
abnormalities. The child must have a complete
ophthalmological examination to determine if
there are any changes in the retina that may be
compatible with congenital rubella, Usher
disease, and so on. Additionally, if the child
has a hearing loss or other communication
disorder, he or she will be more dependent on
vision than others and accordingly must be
provided with optimal visual acuity.
Ears
To be ascertained in taking the present illness.
Nose and
paranasal
sinuses
Breathing patterns and whether there is a
history of infections. If so, the possibility of
either a structural or humoral defect should be
considered. Hyper-or hyponasality is
determined. Some hearing-impaired children
will be hypernasal.
Mouth and
pharynx
Whether there are any congenital
abnormalities such as cleft palate. The
presence of drooling and the status of the
child's chewing and swallowing are noted. If
there are abnormalities in this area, these may
indicate central nervous system disorder,
which may be manifested as abnormalities in
speech and articulation. Oral pharyngeal

infection may give an indication of immune
system abnormality.
larynx
The presence of hoarseness and whether there
has been any history of upper airway
obstruction. The quality of the child's voice
should be noted.
Chest
The incidence of chest infections is
determined.
Cardiac
The presence of congenital malformations is
determined. Some of these are associated with
specific hearing impairment syndromes such
as congenital rubella. There is the rare case of
Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome, which is
characterized by a history of cardiac
irregularities and noted by prolonged q-t
interval.
Genitourinary
All children who have any malformation of the
pinnae and/or the external auditory canal
should be screened by ultrasound for urinary
tract abnormalities. The history should
determine if this has been done. If not, then an
ultrasound examination of the urinary tract is
obtained. Children with enuresis may have
underlying urinary tract disorders. Whether
there has been any hematuria should be noted,
and if so, a full evaluation should be obtained.
Endocrine
Questions concerning thyroid function will
occasionally elicit a family history of goiter or
other thyroid abnormality. There will be some
children with growth hormone deficiencies,
which can be associated with various forms of
hearing loss.
Immune system Specific information as to antibiotics or other

medications the child is allergic to must be
determined. If the child is said to be allergic,
then the form that the allergy takes should be
noted. Additionally, the child's allergy history
concerning foods and other substances is
noted. This information is necessary so that
medications can be prescribed. The presence
or absence of asthma is noted.
MusculoskeletalInformation concerning the presence of any
congenital malformations is sought, especially
of the mouth, palate, and limbs.
Central nervous
system
The history of epilepsy, including febrile
convulsions, is sought. The child's overall
development is assessed in this portion of the
history. Has the child achieved the proper
motor and social development? As age
appropriate, does the child feed itself, is it
toilet trained, and does it dress itself?
 

Page 39
performance in a child who would be expected by reason of the
caretakers' SES to be superior may be evidence of a deficit, whether
from a hearing loss or other communicative disorder.
Present Illness
The otolaryngologist, having learned about the child and the family,
now obtains information about the present illness (Table 3.2). Its form
and content are thus understood in the context of the information
already obtained and from the new data that are now acquired.
First, the family history for suspected hearing loss and communicative
disorders is determined, since genetics is a major factor in these
diseases (see chapter 1). The genetic history is obtained even if there
is a presumptive etiological diagnosis, such as meningitis, for one
cannot be sure that the presumptive diagnosis is correct; too, there
may be more than one problem involved. Thus, a genetic history is
taken for all patients. This genetic history begins by noting the
number, sex, ages, and health status of siblings, and whether they are
affected by a condition similar to the patient's.
Table 3.2. Items for Emphasis in the Present Illness
Area
Emphasis
Family history Other family members affected with communication
disorders
History of consanguinity
Geographic origin of the families
Prenatal
Congenital infections
Abnormalities of pregnancy
Perinatal
Congenital infections
Birth weight
NICU

Ototoxic medications
Kernicterus
Head trauma
Hearing status at birth
DevelopmentalChanges in hearing: Progressive loss
Perilymphatic fistula
Congenital/Acquired
Genetic/Traumatic
Autoimmune disease
Changes in language: Regression
Hearing loss
Language disorder
Motor development: Regression
Perilymphatic fistula
Other
ELM
Benchmark for language development
Final question "What have I not known to ask?"
 

Page 40
Figure 3.1.
A family pedigree
As the genetic history comes to light, a family tree is drawn with the
usual symbols: squares for males and circles for females. The parents
are asked if they themselves have a similar problem. The family tree
is constructed for three generations (as far back as the grandparents)
and includes first and second cousins and all children whom the
parents may have had by another union (Figure 3.1).
The final question is whether the mother and father are related.
Initially, consanguinity is usually denied. Further questioning is
directed as to the place of origin of the grandparents or great-
grandparents. You may discover that there were common ancestors
from a small village from which the patient's forebears emigrated
some generations ago, or that there are identical or similar last names
in the families of the mother and father-names that originated from the
same region, island, district, town, or village. The possibility of
cosanguinity is pursued by consultation with older members of the
family and family records. If consanguinity is established, then there
is greater likelihood of the diagnosis of autosomal recessive disease
(Figure 3.2).
Next is child's prenatal history. Specific information concerning
maternal infection at the time of pregnancy is recorded as there are

still cases of congenital infection including CMV and rubella.
Occasionally the mother may have taken a rubella antibody titer at the
beginning of the pregnancy; this may have changed from negative to
positive during the pregnancy and the information may not have been
given to the mother. Congenital rubella is also seen in patients coming
from poorer areas of the world.
The perinatal events are noted. These include birth weight, length of
labor, complications of delivery, presence of perinatal distress,
occurrence of cesarean section (if the last, what were the indications
for the cesarean section?). If the child was placed in a Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit (NICU), then the details concerning the placement
and the course in the NICU are determined. In the NICU,
 

Page 41
Figure 3.2. 
Consanguinity
there may have been a sepsis evaluation and treatment with ototoxic
antibiotics. If so, or if there is no clear information concerning this,
then the records of the NICU hospitalization are obtained and
reviewed.
Another perinatal problem is kernicterus, which now rarely results in
hearing loss; however, the rarity of the occurrence makes it all the
more important for kernicterus to be considered as an etiology of the
child's suspected hearing loss or other communicative disorder.
Auditory brainstem responses are obtained to determine the
physiological integrity of the brainstem's response to sound (see
chapter 7). Children with hearing loss as a result of kernicterus may
have abnormalities in the interwave latencies of the brain stem
response.

Human cytomegalovirus infection (HCMV) may be apparent at birth
and manifest itself by low birth weight, petechiae,
hepatosplenomegaly, microcephaly, failure to thrive, and positive
HCMV cultures. Some children may be congenitally infected but
exhibit no symptoms. The diagnosis of asymptomatic congenital
HCMV children is made by obtaining an HCMV culture of the child's
urine within the first two weeks of life. The asymptomatic congenital
HCMV
 

Page 42
patients often have progressive SNHL (Gerber, Mendel, and Goller
1979). All children with congenital HCMV are at risk for progressive
hearing loss and other communicative disorders.
Next we obtain a qualitative description of the receptive and
expressive communicative development of the child; a quantitative
screen will then constitute the last part of the assessment of the
present illness. The initial assessment of the child's expressive and
receptive repertory can establish the possibility of progressive disease.
The otolaryngologist must try to determine if the child has had
hearing and, if so, whether it deteriorated, when this happened, and
whether the worsening was associated with otitis media with effusion
(OME). Did the hearing return to the pre-OME level? All previous
evaluations of the child's hearing or middle ear function
(tympanometry) and speech and language development should be
reviewed. Often, objective information will be available that can lead
to or substantiate a diagnosis of progressive hearing loss.
This information is obtained for all patients as a child with meningitis
may have had a hearing loss before the meningitis or a delayed loss
following the meningitis; some children with HCMV have progressive
losses (Gerber, Mendel, and Goller 1979).
There are two forms of progressive losses in which the hearing loss
may sometimes be arrested or, rarely, the hearing partially restored.
These occur in cases of children with perilymphatic fistula(e) (PLF) or
autoimmune disorders. Perilymphatic fistulae may be genetic (there
are twins and brothers and sisters with PLFs), congenital, or acquired
(by mild head trauma in an infant or by temporal bone fracture). They
may be unilateral or bilateral. The ability to diagnose a PLF in the
neonate and the infant depends primarily upon the caregiver's history
of an infant who responded to sound for the first few months of life
and then responded less or not at all.

In addition, there can be a history of slowing or regression of motor
development, which can be a sequela of the abnormal vestibular
dysfunction associated with PLF. Older children may graphically
describe the vestibular dysfunction as vertigo. Some may also have
episodes of severe vomiting that may require hospitalization for fluid
replacement. Otitis media with effusion will mask the effects of PLF
as the hearing loss from the PLF is mistakenly assumed to be from the
OME (Ruben and Yankelowitz 1989). The PLF loss, when measured,
is greater than would be expected from OME (>40 dB HL PTA). The
OME can be an aid in bringing the child to the point of correct
diagnosis.
Besides the worsening of the hearing loss, there may be acute
episodes of vestibular symptoms to alert the physician to the problem.
These include severe and protracted vomiting with dehydration.
Patients have been hospitalized because of the emesis and dehydration
when there was no consideration that this was the result of a
perilymphatic fistula with an associated OME. These PLFs may
present initially as unilateral SNHL. Not until the second ear is
affected is the child considered to have a hearing problem; at this
point the child undergoes evaluation.
 

Page 43
Patients with suspected PLFs are evaluated with a fistula test, and, if
results are positive, the PLFs are surgically explored. A negative
fistula test does not rule out a PLF. If the fistula test is negative, then a
computerized axial tomogram (CAT) is obtained in the sagittal and
axial plates to evaluate the osseous structure of the temporal bone.
There is some association of an abnormal bony anatomy of the
temporal bone, either middle or inner ear, and PLF. If the CAT is
abnormal and there is the clinical suggestion of a PLF, then it is
reasonable to suspect a PLF; exploration of the more severely affected
ear is then indicated.
There are patients with a progressive loss in whom both the fistula test
and the temporal bone CAT are normal. If these children do not have
HCMV infection or other infections or autoimmune diseases, it is
possible that they have a PLF. Any child with an initial history of
reasonable hearing development, head trauma, and a subsequent
history of hearing loss, defined by audiometric or evoked potential
studies, is a child with a probable PLF. It may be associated with
major disruption of the oval window and stapedial foot plate and
should be surgically explored.
A second treatable cause of progressive sensorineural hearing loss is
autoimmune disease(s). This is a group of disorders that is still being
defined. Autoimmune disease should be considered if the history is
suggestive or if there is documentation of progressive SNHL not
associated with PLF or infection. Information concerning the child's
allergic history is obtained. Specifically, the otolaryngologist
determines whether there are any manifestations of generalized
autoimmune disorders such as conjunctivitis, retinitis, arthritis, skin
rashes, or gastrointestinal disorders. An occasional child will have one
or more of these associated symptoms, but most children do not. The
diagnosis depends upon the establishment of an increased titer to inner
ear antibodies. The increased inner ear antibody titer is consistent

with, but not definitive of, an autoimmune disorder. If the child has a
borderline or positive titer, then immunosuppressive therapy is
initiated. This therapy has major associated morbidities and should be
administered and monitored by a pediatrician who has skills and
experience in immune suppression. The otolaryngologist and the
audiologist will monitor the hearing of the child so that the
pediatrician can be advised as to the effect of the intervention, if any,
upon the child's hearing.
Language Examination
The child's pattern of language development is used to determine what
the mode of expressive and receptive communication has been, since
some congenitally deaf infants, especially those born into hearing-
impaired families, will develop excellent visual communication signs.
Children who appear to have adequate hearing and who have not
developed language or whose language at first developed but then
regressed, must be considered to have intrinsic language disorder(s).
The history of some language development to the first or second
 

Page 44
year of life followed by regression or loss of language is a critical
symptom that can be caused by hearing loss or may be associated with
autism or other central nervous system dysfunction. These patients
need accurate and precise evaluation of their hearing capability.
If the hearing is normal or minimally depressed, then the diagnosis
lies in the linguistic domain, and the children are evaluated by the
language pathologist and the pediatric neurologist. The language of
language-impaired children is more affected by modest hearing losses
than that of children who are without language deficiencies. These
language-impaired children require close monitoring of their hearing.
If there are hearing losses associated with OME or other diseases, then
the loss must be corrected to afford the child optimal hearing.
While you are obtaining the present illness data, other items of
information will become apparent; the form of the present illness data
is therefore structured to take advantage of all the information that is
available. Questions are repeated in various ways to confirm what has
been said and to elicit more information. Often the two parents or a
grandparent may report a different scenario; each version is recorded
and evaluated. No one is wrong, for they have all observed the child
in their own ways and have their own internal measures about what is
expected and what has happened. Some of the most difficult
interviews can occur with couples who are becoming or who have
been divorced. The otolaryngologist is the patient's advocate and must
record and evaluate all the information nonjudgmentally. This may
require two separate histories and separate telephone conversations
with each parent.
When all the information concerning the present illness has been
elicited, an objective and quantitative language screen of expressive
and receptive language and speech is administered. There are several
tests available, and experience with the Early Language Milestone

Scale (ELM) (Coplan 1993; Coplan and Gleason 1982) has shown its
utility in an otological setting. The test has good sensitivity and
specificity as a screen for patients from birth to 36 months of age and
requires only a few minutes to conduct. In our clinics, an ELM is
completed for every patient who is seen from newborn to 36 months
of age. It gives an objective measure of the child's language and
speech development. If the test resuits indicate delays in receptive or
expressive language or in speech development, then further definitive
evaluation is carried out by the speech-language pathologist.
The ELM profile obtained at the initial visit serves as a benchmark for
all further visits, enabling the effect of interventions to be measured
by the outcome of language and speech development. The object of
the restoration of hearing in a neonate, infant, toddler, or preschooler
is the optimal development of language. The outcome of any
intervention is the effect upon the language. As children are treated
and cared for, their progress will be assessed with the ELM. If a child
is not progressing in language development, then we must consider
whether the interventions are effective or whether the diagnosis is
correct. The ELM is
 

Page 45
obtained for oral language as there is no standard for sign language in
the ELM. The use of signs can be indicated on the ELM form, and the
development of sign language as noted by expressive and receptive
signs can be followed.
The final question asked at the end of the present illness examination
is: "What have I not known to ask about?" The caregivers have known
their children for their entire lives, and the otolaryngologist has
known this complex human being for only a few minutes. Often there
is a relevant chunk of information that the caregivers have that has not
been elucidated by the history. This is to be expected because the
history uses a vocabulary that is not familiar to all even though we
make every attempt to use terms that will be understood clearly. The
final question is also critical when the history is taken through a
translator since much of the otolaryngologist's meaning may be lost or
changed in translation to another language, including sign language.
Physical Examination
The strategy underlying the physical examination is to obtain as much
information as possible from the patient. Crying by an infant may
reveal a functioning larynx but does not give much information about
the tympanic membrane, tongue control, or ability to communicate.
The examination is necessary so that essential information can be
obtained from a cooperative child.
There are different techniques for each age. Neonates and infants may
sleep. All neonates, infants, and most toddlers should be examined in
their caregiver's lap as this is a familiar and calming environment, and
the child is not separated from the caregiver.
If the ears are critical to the examination, then the otoscopic
examination is carried out first. If the child awakens and begins to cry,
the tympanic membranes will become erythematous and will not

appear normal. Infants and toddlers who are awake often like to
follow the light of the otoscope. Once they have played with the
otoscope and perhaps examined their doll (or the examiner) with it,
the otoscope becomes a familiar and safe object that is tolerated, and
the examination can be completed.
Great care is taken not to hurt the child. This is especially important if
there is cerumen in the external canal. Unless it is essential to do so, it
should not be removed. Most often a small, normal segment of the
tympanic membrane can be seen. If there is no indication of middle
ear pathology from the tympanogram, audiogram, or the patient's
history, it is usually best to leave the cerumen in place. If the entire
external canal or the tympanic membrane needs to be visualized, the
cerumen must be removed. The least traumatic method for doing so is
usually with a 1:1 water and hydrogen peroxide solution at body
temperature so as not to stimulate the vestibular system. Even this will
be threatening and disruptive for the infant, toddler, or child.
Sometimes the cerumen may have to be removed to complete the
audiometric examination, and at other times the
 

Page 46
Figure 3.3. 
Normal landmarks of the normal 
ear drum as seen when viewing anterior,
medially, and posterior. The tympanic mem-
brane is translucent; structures illustrated
should be seen.
Figure 3.3a. 
Anterior view
cerumen may account for a conductive loss. In the latter instance, the
correction of the conductive loss should be verified by repeating the
appropriate portion of the audiogram.
Examination of the ears begins with a visualization of the pinnae and
the surrounding area. Are there abnormalities of the pinnae such as
brachial cleft sinuses (preauricular pits) or other malformations?
These may be associated with congenital middle ear, ossicular
malformations, and congenital or progressive conductive loss. They
are also associated with urinary tract malformations; thus, if they are
observed, ultrasound examination of the urinary tract should be
performed. The diameter of the external auditory canal should be

noted and the presence of any abnormalities such as fistulae, masses,
or dehiscences should be determined.
The tympanic membrane is examined for its normalcy. The normal
tympanic membrane is semitransparent, and most of the following
structures can be seen through the normal tympanic membrane
(Figure 3.3):
1. Cephalad and ventral: the shadow of the eustachian tube orifice;
2. Cephalad two-thirds and in the middle of the tympanic membrane:
the Limbo of the malleus;
3. Cephalad, dorsal, and almost parallel to the malleus: the long
process of the incus;
4. Lateral to the long process of the incus and medial to the umbo of
the malleus; perpendicular to both is the chorda tympani;
5. Medial to the long process of the incus are the crurae of the stapes;
and
 

Page 47
Figure 3.3b. 
Medial view
Figure 3.3c. 
Posterior view
6. Caudal and slightly ventral to the long process of the incus and the
head of the stapes is the shadow of the round window niche.

An observer who has practiced looking for these landmarks will be
able to identify many of them in children with normal middle ears. A
child who has been crying will usually have an erythematous
tympanic membrane that will not be translucent. The change in the
tympanic membrane will decrease the otolaryngologist's ability to
observe the normal landmarks, making diagnosis more difficult. The
lack of, or malpositioning of, one or more of these landmarks may be
associated with a congenital malformation or an acquired condition
such as necrosis of the long process of the incus. The presence of
middle ear effusion is seen as distortion in the position of the
tympanic membrane and as changes in the color or the translucency of
the tympanic membrane.
Pneumatic otoscopy has a limited use. If there is a suspicion of middle
ear fluid, the gentle movement of the tympanic membrane with the
pneumatic otoscope may help to support this diagnosis. Younger
children poorly tolerate the use of the pneumatic otoscope, and its use
may prejudice further examinations.
The remainder of the head and neck is examined (Table 3.3),
including the head, hair, external eyes, face, nose, mouth, pharynx,
neck, and when indicated, the nasopharynx and larynx. The
nasopharynx and larynx are examined with the flexible pediatric
laryngoscope. This can be done at any age. Children older than 42
months of age will usually be cooperative if properly anesthetized.
This
 

Page 48
Table 3.3. Physical Examination
Structure
Technique
Comment
The Child Sit in
caretaker's lap
Relate to child and do not hurt the child as
crying will change the
examination and make subsequent examinations
more difficult.
Pinnae
Direct
observation
Abnormalities may be associated with urinary
tract malformations.
External
Direct
observation
Abnormalities may be associated with urinary
tract malformations.
Auditory or otoscopy
Canal
Cerumen Direct
observation
Removed only if the tympanic membrane is
totally occluded and/
or otoscopy
or there is a need for more information about the
tympanic mem-
brane or if the cerumen is thought to be a cause
or a contributing
factor of the hearing loss. Avoid instruments and
use irrigation.
Tympanic Otoscope or
Make a drawing of the findings and note how
many normal struc-
membranemicroscope
tures can be seen. The microscope is useful in
looking for mass
medial to the tympanic membranes, such as
congenital cholestea-
toma, and for confirming ossicular
abnormalities. The microscope
can be used in children over 12 months and in
sleeping neonates
and infants.

Pneumotoscopy can be used to further support
the diagnosis of
OME, tympanic membrane retraction, and
ossicular disruption
and is confirmatory of tympanometric findings.
Head
Direct
observation,
Observe for proper closure of the fontanelle,
head size, and gen-
palpation, and
a
eral shape.
measuring
tape
Hair
Direct
observation
Observe for white forelock, which is associated
with Waardenburg
syndrome, and other hair abnormalities that
have a genetic associ-
ation.
Face
Direct
observation
Symmetry for facial nerve function. Note other
abnormalities that
may indicate a syndrome such as partial paresis,
found in Golden-
har or Mobius syndrome. Facial dysmorphology
can also suggest
such syndromes as Treacher Collins sequence
and others.
Eyes
Direct
observation
Note the color of the iris, which may suggest
Waardenburg syn-
drome. A conjunctivitis would be compatible
with autoimmune
disorders. Spontaneous nystagmus may be
found with an active
perilymphatic fistula. Strabismus should be
noted so that it may
be corrected. Cataracts associated with
congenital rubella can

usually be seen by direct inspection.
Nose
Direct
inspection of
The use of nasal sounds such as ''catch a fish'' or
"Susie's slippers"
the nares with
and
in the toddler or preschool child will give
information on the pos-
without
closure of
sibility of velopharyngeal insufficiency. If the
child has hyponasal-
the nostrils
and a
ity with these expressions, velopharyngeal
insufficiency can be sus-
laryngeal
mirror
pected. The child should also be asked to say the
letter "m." The
child is asked again, this time with his nares
gently closed. If there
is no change in the sound of the "m," this is
consistent with hy-
ponasality. Whether or not the nose and/or the
choanae are open
is tested with a laryngeal mirror. The mirror is
placed about 3 mm
below each nostril. On exhalation, the mirror
will fog if there is
air going through that nostril. If it does not, the
nostril may be
clogged by mass in the nose, choanae, and/or
nasopharynx.
 

Page 49
is done with the use of Pontocaine sprayed in the mouth and pharynx
and with Pontocaine-impregnated cotinoid strips placed in each nares
for five to ten minutes. The examination should be carried out with
the endoscope attached to a television recording camera because this
will provide a permanent record; an additional advantage is to enable
the child to follow and participate in the examination.
Observation of the pharyngeal opening of the eustachian tube, the soft
palate, the movements of the pharynx and the larynx are important in
children with hearing loss and other communicative disorders.
Children with possible articulation defects may also have associated
swallowing disorders; the action of the larynx and the
cricopharyngeus can also be observed with the flexible laryngoscope.
The larynx is observed for its anatomical and physiological integrity.
Further Studies: The "Work Up"
Completion of the history and physical examination can allow the
otolaryngologist to make a differential diagnosis of the cause of the
hearing loss or other communication disorder. The need for and
sequencing of additional information is predicated upon what is
considered in the differential diagnosis. The studies required and their
sequencing are individualized for each child. The sequencing of
studies is carried out to eliminate the more probable or treatable
conditions that may need immediate attention.
Children with progressive or suspected progressive losses are those
for whom therapy, surgical (PLF) or medical (autoimmune), may be
able to arrest the loss and occasionally to restore hearing. These
patients must have the etiology promptly defined. The fistula test is
one of the most important for children with progressive loss or those
who are suspected of having a PLF. The test should be done in a
matter of days; if the fistula test is positive, there is a high likelihood

of finding a perilymphatic fistula that must be repaired. The repair of
the fistula may stop progression of the loss and, in a few children,
restore hearing sensitivity and improve speech discrimination.
Because of the critical time factor in working with a fistula, the fistula
test is done before many of the other necessary studies.
A second treatable cause of progressive SNHL is autoimmune disease.
Antibody titers to inner ear tissue are obtained from children with a
suggestive history of autoimmune disease. All of these children will
also undergo fistula testing. Almost all children with progressive loss,
in whom the fistula test is negative, will have autoimmune antibody
studies and a CAT scan of their ears to determine whether there are
abnormalities of the bony structure of the middle or inner ear.
All the children with hearing loss or the suggestion of hearing loss as
determined from auditory screening will have a complete evaluation
of their auditory systems (Gravel 1989). This will include assessment
of the external and middle
 

Page 50
ear by immitance, which includes a tympanogram, measurement of
the middle ear pressure, middle ear muscle reflex, external canal and
middle ear volume, and, where possible, some measure of eustachian
tube function (see chapter 6). Outer hair cell function is assessed with
evoked otoacoustic emissions (chapter 8); eighth nerve and brainstem
with the use of auditory evoked brainstem potentials (chapter 7); and
the cerebral cortex using the cortical evoked potentials. The cortical
evoked potentials may be further utilized to assess the efficacy of
hearing aids.
The evaluation of the language of infants, toddlers, and preschoolers
is essential to the care of children with hearing loss or other
communication disorders. The most important outcome measure of
the care of hearing loss or other communicative disorders in the
neonate, infant, toddler, and preschooler is the child's language. The
precise and accurate evaluation of the child's language provides the
basis for care of the child. This evaluation provides an initial measure
so that the otolaryngologist and all others caring for the child can tell
whether the interventions have been useful in achieving language
proficiency. Although the hearing may be improved, the language
may not be improved and must be monitored periodically.
Language evaluation will also provide additional information
necessary for the care of the child. It may determine the diagnosis,
especially in those children who are found to have normal peripheral
hearing. It will also determine which areas of language are deficient
and will dictate the language intervention with the appropriate
therapies available for the different types of language disorders.
Speech evaluations are carried out in all age-appropriate cases.
Abnormal speech is more noticeable to caregivers than is abnormal
language. Speech development is of critical importance, yet language
development is the more fundamental issue. There may be instances

in which resources will not permit both speech and language
interventions; at such times, it is preferable to emphasize language.
Once this is secured, then speech can be attended to.
Table 3.4 presents the strategies and tactics used in obtaining
additional information that will aid in the care of the child's hearing
loss or other communication disorders. The individuality of patients
requires that the evaluation be specifically developed in each case.
There is no one recipe that can be unilaterally applied.
Otolaryngologists must use their clinical knowledge to shape an
effective and efficient scenario, so that the possibilities for restoration
or maintenance of function, primarily language communication, are
optimized for each patient.
Conclusion
The information that has been obtained about each patient must be
documented and shared with the caregivers of the child. This can be
accomplished through a structured informational conference. The
primary caregivers and other interested parties such as grandparents
discuss the findings with the
 

Page 51
Table 3.4. "The Work-Up": Assessments
Who
When and Why
Hearing Assessments
Tympanometry
All
At first visit and at all hearing
evaluations; need
to know the status of the middle ear
Behavioral
Those greater than
At first visit and at all hearing
evaluations; es-
audiogram
6 months of age
tablish baseline to monitor for changes
Evoked and/or
Those with or
suspected
During the course of the evaluations;
will allow
spontaneous
of having
sensorineural
for differential of outer hair cell loss
cochlear
emissions
hearing losses
Auditory
Those with suspected As soon as possible for cases in which
there is
Brain Stem
sensorineural hearing
loss
not an accurate behavioral assessment
and for
Evoked
and all who do not
have
others during the course of the work-up.
The
Potentials
reliable behavioral testexception is any child with a suspected
cerebral
data. Also those with
angle tumor, such as involved in von
Reckling-
language disorders.
hausen II. Gives an air and bone
conduction
threshold in children who cannot be
tested be-
haviorally; supplies information that is
con-

firmatory of the behavioral studies;
supplies in-
formation concerning the neural
integrity of the
statoacoustic nerve and the brainstem.
Auditory Cortical Those with suspected During the course of the work-up or
after the
Evoked
Potentials:
sensorineural hearing hearing aids or other habilitative
devices have
responses to
losses; with
conductive or
been used for several months; this will
give in-
phonemes
mixed losses that may formation on the cortical response to
phonemes
require hearing aids
(e.g.,
and the efficacy of the hearing aids or
other
congenital
malformations)
device.
and language impaired
children
Audiological
assess-
All those suspected of During the course of the work-up; to
identify
ment of family
genetic disease
other affected family members,
especially
members
younger siblings, and to detect carriers
to secure
a diagnosis
Vestibular Assessments
Fistula test
All with suspected or
docu-
As soon as possible; will be critical in
deter-
mented progressive
sensori-
mining whether surgical intervention is
to be
neural hearing loss
carried out
Electronystagmo-All with suspected
If not progressive, then during the

sensory
period of data
graphic analysis
of
or neural hearing loss gathering. Occasionally a positive
fistula will be
vestibular
function
detected. This assessment includes
optokinetic,
calorics, and rotary chair response;
information
will be obtained about brainstem
integrity and
the function of each vestibular
labyrinth. Chil-
dren who have little or abnormal
labyrinth func-
tion may have delayed motoric
development that
could be mistaken for mental
retardation.
Other Medical Assessments
OphthalmologicalAll with permanent
During the course of the work-up; to
determine
or probable permanent the visual status and note any
ophthalmological
hearing loss
stigmata that would be diagnosed (e.g.,
retinitis
pigmentosa)
(continued)
(table continued on next page.)
 

Page 52
(table continued from previous page.)
Table 3.4. "The Work-Up": Assessments, continued
Assessment
Who
When and Why
Other Medical Assessments, Continued
Pediatric
neurology
Children with
suspected
During the course of the work-up; those
chil-
primary language or
cog-
dren with normal peripheral hearing
should be
nitive disorders; those
with
seen promptly so that a definitive
diagnosis can
other neurological
signs
be supported and intervention
undertaken.
or symptoms (e.g.,
seizures)
Genetics
All those with definite During the course of the work-up; to
provide
genetic history, all who
are
a confirmation of the genetic disease;
provide
syndromic, and all for
whom
detailed genetic information and genetic
an etiology cannot be
counselling
determined
Pediatric urologyThose with proven or
After there is information concerning
the exis-
suspected urological
tence or the probable existence of a
urological
abnormalities
abnormality; to provide urological
diagnosis
and care
Speech And Language Assessments
Speech and
All those with hearing Those with known hearing loss during

Speech and
language
All those with hearing Those with known hearing loss during
the
pathology
losses and/or
communica-
course of the evaluations. Those who
have prob-
tion disorders
able normal peripheral hearing should
be seen
as soon as possible; this evaluation
provides a
baseline for language and speech;
definition of
the types of language and speech
abnormalities
that will determine the type of
intervention
needed
Imaging
Computerized
Suspected or known
middle
During the course of the work-up.
Those with
Axial
Tomography
or inner ear
malformations,
progressive losses may have a CAT
after a nega-
(CAT) scan
candidates for cochleartive fistula test but before the report of
auto-
implants,
postmeningitis,
immune antibody is returned. This is
especially
progressive losses withso in ears that show rapid progressive
loss. The
negative fistula test,
and/or
children who have had meningitis
should he ex-
negative autoimmune amined within several months after the
meningi-
antibodies
tis for ossification of the labyrinth. All
children
who are cochlear implant candidates
have a
CAT before implantation;
malformations of the
middle ear may not be examined until

middle ear may not be examined until
surgery is
considered, which is not until at least 5
or 6 years
of age as there is little that can be done
with
the information in the early years; as
time
progresses, there will be improvements
in
the quality of the images (e.g., 3-d
virtual
images of the bony integrity of the
inner and
middle ear)
Magnetic
Resonance
Children suspected of After the diagnosis of probable neural
involve-
Imaging (MRI)
having neural
pathology,
ment from a family history and/or an
abnormal
such as those with
evoked auditory brainstem response or
as indi-
von Recklinghausen II cared from a behavioral audiogram-
integrity
of the central nervous system including
the
eighth nerve (acoustic and vestibular
portions)
(continued)
(table continued on next page.)
 

Page 53
(table continued from previous page.)
Table 3.4. "The Work-Up": Assessments, continued
Assessment
Who
When and Why
Imaging, continued
Ultrasound Of
The
Children With
Malforma-
During the course of the work-up-
integrity of
genitourinary tracttions of the pinnae,
external
the genitourinary system
auditory canals, and/or
the
middle ear
Blood And Serum Studies
Autoimmune
Patients with
progressive
As soon as possible; probability or
possibility of
antibodies
losses when the fistula
test
autoimmune disease
is negative or there is a
suspicion of
autoimmune
disease
TORCH Titers
As indicated from the During the course of the work-up;
enable a
(Toxoplasmosis,
history and/or the
physical
diagnosis and give the precise
prognosis and
rubella, syphilis,
examination
information, especially in congenital
rubella
cytomegalovirus,
herpes)
Renal function
Patients suspected of
During the course of the work-up;
confirm diag-
parenchymal renal
di
nosis and allow for referral and
i t
ti

disease
intervention
from history (e.g.,
Alport
syndrome)
Immune profile
Children suspected of During work-up; define the immune
status of
(IgG, IgE, IgA,
and
immunological
defects, as
the child
white blood cells evidenced by
increased
studies,
sedimenta-
number of infections,
tion rate,
differential,
including meningitis.
and white blood
cell
count)
Cultures
Urine for
Children with
progressive
During the course of the work-up; to
define the
cytomegalovirus sensory neural loss
sus-
possible cause of the progressive loss
and pos-
pected of CMV
infection
sible intervention
Other
Urine analysis
Children suspected of During the course of the work-up;
enable a
having parenchymal
renal
diagnosis
disease from history
(e.g.,
Alport syndrome)
ElectrocardiogramThose suspected of
cardiac
During the course of the work-up; to
detect

cardiac
detect
abnormality
treatable conduction defects
Medical records
Patients suspected of
having
During the course of the work-up; to
determine
received ototoxic
if proper dosage was given
medication
Mouth, palate,
and
Direct observation and The presence of drooling can indicate
neuro-
tongue
digital palpation
logical abnormality, which may
account for an
articulation defect. The mouth is
inspected for
any masses, clefts of the palate, and
bifid uvula,
which is associated with the
submucosal cleft of
(continued)
(table continued on next page.)
 

Page 54
(table continued from previous page.)
Table 3.4. "The Work-Up": Assessments, continued
Assessment
Who
When and Why
Other, continued
the palate. The size of the tonsils is noted to
see
if they are occluding the airway. The palate
is
palpated to note if there is dehiscence in the
dorsal portion of the bony palate, which
would
also indicate a submucosal cleft of the
palate.
The tongue is watched to note if there are
any
fasciculations, which may be associated
with
articulatory and other speech deficits.
Larynx
Listening to the
vocaliza-
The quality of the vocalizations is noted. An
tions, auscultation with
a
observer can hear hoarseness or
inappropriate
stethoscope, and
examina-
pitches that are indications of intrinsic
laryngeal
tion with a flexible
abnormality. A small stethoscope is used to
laryngoscope
auscultate the larynx. Ordinarily, almost no
sounds are heard on inspiration or
expiration. A
child with intrinsic laryngeal abnormality
may
have readily aparent inspiratory and/or
expira-

tory sounds on auscultation. The use of the
flex-
ible laryngoscope is discussed in the text.
Neck
Direct observation
Branchial clefts and sinus that can occur
with
middle ear malformation are noted.
people who evaluated the child: the audiologists, speech-language
pathologists, otolaryngologists, and other healthcare providers. The
conference centers around the findings of the healthcare team, the
prescribed therapy for the child, and the possible consequences for the
child and the family.
The conference will take time and cannot be rushed. A method that
has proven satisfactory is to hold the conference in the evening. At
this time the healthcare providers have fewer other duties, all the
caregivers may be able to come, and there is little constraint on the
time spent in transferring and explaining all the information and
responding to questions. A written record of the conference is placed
in the child's chart with a copy sent to the caregivers.
References
Coplan, J. 1993. Early language milestone scale. 2d ed. Austin: Pro-
Ed.
Coplan J., and J. Gleason. 1982. Validation of early language
milestone scale in high-risk population. Pediatrics 70:677.
Gerber, S.E., M.I. Mendel, and M. Goller. 1979. Progressive hearing
loss subsequent to congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Human
Communication 4:231-234.
Gravel, J.S., ed. 1989. Assessing auditory system integrity in high-
risk infants and young children. Seminars in Hearing 10:213-292.

Ruben, R.J. 1991. Language screening as a factor in the management
of the pediatric otolaryngic patient. Archives of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery 1 17: 1021 -1025.
Ruben, R.J., and S.M. Yankelowitz. 1989. Spontaneous perilymphatic
fistula in children. American Journal of Otology 10: 198-207.
 

Page 55
4
Behavioral Observation and Visual Reinforcement
Audiometry
Allan O. Diefendorf and Judith S. Gravel
Introduction
The early detection of hearing loss has been emphasized for more than
four decades. As a result, the screening of auditory function in infants
and young children has received considerable attention during the past
thirty years. Test procedures have been investigated in clinical and
laboratory settings in an attempt to identify and specify the procedure
that could detect hearing loss at the earliest possible age.
In the early 1960s, clinicians were actively pursuing behavioral and
electrophysiologic test procedures for identifying hearing loss in
infants. Marion Downs and her associates (e.g., Downs and Sterritt
1964, 1967) in Denver were attempting neonatal screening using a
method of behavioral observation audiometry called the arousal test.
Due to the large number of false positive identifications and the
unnecessary parental anxiety that resulted, behavioral screening
during the newborn period was not supported. Hallowell Davis and
his group (Davis and Onishi 1969; Davis and Zerlin 1966) at the
Central Institute for the Deaf were working on a physiologic measure
called the late cortical, or V, potential as a vehicle for "objective
audiometry." However, for predicting hearing levels in infants, the late
V potential was limited because it was so state dependent.
In 1969, the national Joint Committee on Newborn Hearing Screening
(now the Joint Committee on Infant Hearing) was formed. It had
representatives from the American Academy of Ophthalmology and

Otolaryngology, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the
American Speech and Hearing Association. From available clinical
reports and laboratory data, the Joint Committee issued the following
statement (1972): "In light of the urgent need to detect hearing
impairment as early as possible, the Joint Committee urges further
investigation of
 

Page 56
screening methods but discourages routine hearing screening which is
not research oriented." Thus, a focus on the importance of early
identification of hearing loss was maintained by the Joint Committee;
however, the lack of an appropriate test procedure for identifying
hearing loss in infants was clearly recognized.
Subsequently, attempts were made to develop, refine, and improve
behavioral and electrophysiologic screening procedures. In the
behavioral domain, this led to detailed procedures for calibrating the
signal precisely (Thompson and Thompson 1972), attempting to
calibrate the observer precisely (Mencher et al. 1977; Weber 1969),
and attempting to define the state of the neonate (Downs 1976;
Eisenberg 1969) as rigorously as possible. More pervasive clinical
concerns, however, still centered on the excessive false positive and
false negative outcomes from behavioral screening. Concomitantly,
the search for more objective methods resulted in attempts to define
auditory function based on cardiotachometry (Schulman 1973) and
respiration audiometry (Bradford 1975). These physiologic methods,
as well as auditory evoked potentials (middle, late, and slow cortical
responses), however, were not embraced by clinicians for use with the
pediatric population.
An important milestone occurred in 1974 when Hecox and Galambos
showed the value of the auditory brainstem response (ABR) for
screening auditory sensitivity in newborns. This, of course, set off the
modern era of auditory evoked potentials that ultimately
revolutionized both hearing screening and assessment in the newborn
period and early infancy (see chapter 7).
Advances in behavioral hearing assessment paralleled this progress in
auditory electrophysiology. Before about 1974, it was generally
believed that only gross behavioral hearing tests could be obtained on
infants two years of age and younger. Refinements in methodology

began to emerge that capitalized on the interests and abilities of
infants. A new view of infants was advanced that recognized infants
as active receptors of auditory information who, if given the chance,
interact with their acoustic environment. In turn, it became possible to
obtain a rather complete behavioral assessment of auditory function in
infants six months through two years of age.
Despite advances in behavioral and electrophysiologic evaluation of
auditory function throughout the 1970s, the decade of the '80s
revealed an alarming statistic. Despite a focus on improved
assessment procedures, the average age of identification for severe
hearing loss in the United States remained constant at about 2½ years
of age (Bergstrom 1984; Stein, Clark, and Kraus 1983; Stein et al.
1990). Lesser degrees of impairment were going undetected even
longer. The result was that, for many infants and young children with
hearing loss, much of the crucial period for speech and oral language
learning was lost.
Consequently, our focus for the 1990s is two-fold. First, our goal is to
develop comprehensive early identification programs that are
accessible to all newborns, committed to providing appropriate
follow-up for all failures, and to the provision of family-centered
intervention services in accordance with Part H of the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). Much of this focused
 

Page 57
energy on early identification will be fostered by the national
initiative, "Healthy People 2000," that has established a goal of
reducing the average age of identification of hearing loss in children
from 21/2 years to 12 months (1990). Our second area of focus is to
provide in-depth, timely audiologic assessments of infants and young
children delineating the type, degree, and pattern of any hearing loss
for each ear. Such comprehensive assessment allows appropriate
intervention services to be initiated, be they communicative, medical,
prosthetic, or educational.
The purpose of this chapter is to focus on behavioral test procedures
and provide a framework for their appropriate application. Clearly, for
newborns and very young infants (four months and under), the
auditory screening procedure of choice will be selected from one or
both of two electrophysiologic procedures. These are auditory
brainstem response audiometry (see chapter 7) or evoked otoacoustic
emissions (see chapter 8). However, both procedures have some
inherent limitations for use in assessment. For example, neither
procedure easily allows specific frequency-by-intensity threshold
information necessary for a complete description of hearing loss. In
addition, many problems of these procedures as screening tools (e.g.,
activity level, length of test, expense) are compounded for older
infants. For example, the need for sedation, prolonged test time, and
cost associated with the ABR in a followup clinic are likely to be
questioned in today's healthcare environment. Evoked otoacoustic
emissions (EOAEs), while present with normal hearing to mild
hearing loss, are obliterated by more severe degrees of sensory
impairments. Their value in hearing screening is obvious; however,
they may not offer the specificity necessary for delineating many
forms of hearing loss.
Fortunately, infants who are at risk for hearing loss and who require
followup or infants for whom an assessment of hearing is

recommended can be tested efficiently and effectively with behavioral
test methods. Refinements in behavioral methods coupled with a
better understanding of auditory abilities in infants elevates behavioral
testing to "first alternative" status for most diagnostic assessments.
Indeed, many early identification programs may also incorporate
behavioral screening, for example, those that identify acquired
permanent or transient hearing loss. Beyond the time, cost, and ease of
administration, the most important advantage of behavioral test
methods is that they allow infants and young children to demonstrate
actively what they perceive. This allows a valid description of their
functional hearing abilities. Visual Reinforcement Audiometry (VRA)
and Behavioral Observation Audiometry (BOA) are two procedures
available to clinicians for use with infants and children of various ages
and developmental levels for whom definition of thresholds and
auditory responsiveness are necessary for educational (habilitational)
planning.
Underlying this chapter is also the authors' belief that testing auditory
function in infants and young children is a process driven by
professional setting, program goals, and population characteristics. As
such, choices in service delivery for screening, assessment, followup,
and intervention are individually based and family focused. Once our
goals, objectives, and supporting rationale
 

Page 58
are clearly formulated, then the selection of appropriate procedures is
greatly simplified.
Visual Reinforcement Audiometry
Normally developing infants make head turns toward a sound source
in the first few months of life. This localization response represents a
behavioral ''window'' through which many aspects of auditory
behavior can be studied. Although there is an obvious tendency for
infants to turn initially toward interesting or novel auditory stimuli,
there is a limit to the number of times head turns will occur to
repeated stimuli (Moore, Thompson, and Thompson 1975; Moore,
Wilson, and Thompson 1977). From a hearing assessment standpoint,
habituation of response to repeated stimulus presentations is
undesirable because it reduces the number of stimulus trials available
for threshold determination.
To overcome the restrictions imposed by habituation, it is possible to
approach the behavioral assessment of hearing in infants and young
children through an operant conditioning paradigm, specifically,
through use of an operant discrimination procedure. In an operant
discrimination procedure, the stimulus cues the child that a response
will result in reinforcement. Operant behavior is increased by the
application of positive reinforcement. Thus, it is possible to increase
the rate of response if a positive reinforcer can be identified and used.
Since audible signals of the type used in assessing auditory function
are known to have little reinforcing value in children (Moore,
Thompson, and Thompson 1975; Moore, Wilson, and Thompson
1977), it is best to use a test procedure in which the signal and
reinforcer are separate and the signal serves only to cue the youngster
that a correct response will result in reinforcement.
The foundation for work on VRA was laid by Suzuki and Ogiba in

1960, and the label was coined in 1969 by Lidén and Kankkunen. The
technique was studied and refined at the University of Washington
(Moore, Wilson, and Thompson 1977; Wilson 1978; Wilson and
Thompson 1984) and has become widely used in clinical practice.
Visual reinforcement audiometry has emerged as a valid and reliable
procedure for infants and young children, 5½ months through two
years of age. In VRA, conditioned head turns (localization of a sound
source in a sound field and a conditioned behavior under earphones)
are reinforced by an attractive three-dimensional animated toy. The
success of VRA is certainly related to the fact that the response (head
turn) and reinforcer (animated toy) are well suited to the
developmental level of children between these ages.
Operant Behavior
Operant behavior is frequently spoken of as willful or purposeful
behavior. A behavioral response elicited by a stimulus is controlled by
the consequence of
 

Page 59
Table 4.1. Influence of Reinforcement on Operant Behavior
PRESENT
WITHDRAW
POSITIVE
Increases
Decreases
REINFORCEMENT
response
response
probability
probability
NEGATIVE
Decreases
Increases
REINFORCEMENT
response
response
probability
probability
the behavior. Operant behavior is increased or decreased in frequency
by the changes it brings about in the organism's environment. The
events in an environment may be classified as positive reinforcers,
negative reinforcers, and neutral events. Neutral events have little or
no specific effect on behavior. Depending on the application of
negative or positive reinforcement, the response probability effect can
be either increased or decreased (Table 4.1).
In VRA, the frequency of head turn responses is increased because the
behavior of head turning results in a pleasurable visual event (positive
reinforcement). Visual reinforcement audiometry employs an operant
discrimination paradigm in which the auditory test signal serves as a
discriminative stimulus. This cues the child that a response (head turn)
will produce reinforcement or a desirable event (in this case, the
lighting and activation of the toy). Conditioning refers to the process
of training or shaping the desired behavior.
Personnel and Equipment
Accurate VRA assessment depends in large part on the ability of an
examiner to keep an infant appropriately attentive during the stages of
operant conditioning and response acquisition (i.e., audiometry).
Program choices and budgetary considerations relating to personnel

and equipment determine whether testing can be done by one
examiner or whether two examiners will be required.
Figures 4.1, 4.2a, and 4.2b show a room arrangement incorporating
two examiners. The examiner in the control room has full view of the
testing situation and activates the auditory stimulus and visual
reinforcer. A second examiner, seated at the infant's side, maintains
the infant's head in a midline position by encouraging the child to
observe passively or play with colorful, non-noisy toys. The use of
two examiners, however, reduces the efficiency of VRA. When
limitations exist regarding personnel or when cost considerations
preclude the use of two examiners, a remote audiometer switching
apparatus or a personal computer puts control of the equipment into
the hands of one audiologist who can be in direct contact with the
child (see Figure 4.3).
Whether one examiner or two, response behavior is enhanced by an
examiner's direct interaction with an infant for maintaining the infant's
head in a
 

Page 60
S = Speaker
E1 and E2 =
Examiners
P = Parent
I = Infant
Figure 4.1. 
VRA procedure:
 Test room arrangement with two examiners.
midline position. That is, if the youngster under test shows too much
interest in the colorful, non-noisy toys, the potential exists for no
response during a signal trial or for elevated response levels due to
decreased attention. On the other hand, if the youngster under test
shows no interest or is bored with the colorful, non-noisy toys, false
responses may occur regularly. When in the test room, an examiner

can choose from a variety of toys available and judge when a toy
change in either direction (more entertaining or less entertaining) may
be necessary to maintain the child's midline position and optimum
response state. A single examiner in the control room can use a
"centering toy" positioned at midline in the test room for maintaining
a child's midline position. However, this
 

Page 61
Figure 4.2a. 
VRA procedure: Assistant maintains the infant's attention at midline.
Figure 4.2b. 
VRA procedure: Head turn response.

Page 62
S = Speaker
E1 and E2 =
Examiners
P = Parent
I = Infant
Figure 4.3. 
VRA procedure:
Test room arrangement with 
one examiner.
approach removes the examiner from the test room, creates noisy
competition with both the test signal and the novelty of the reinforcer,
and eliminates the examiner's ability to control the infant's interest
level.
Transducers

Conventionally, estimates of auditory thresholds are obtained using
standard earphones (TDH-49 or TDH-50) and bone oscillators
(Radioear B-70A) to obtain ear-specific information about hearing
loss type, degree, and pattern. The
 

Page 63
use of a standard earphone and cushion assembly is recommended in
pediatric assessment; however, for small heads, soft support padding
between the headband and the top of the head is highly desirable. This
allows the assembly to fit comfortably and aligns the earphone
diaphragm with the baby's ear canal opening. An infant headband or
similar padding is used for bone oscillator placement. The availability
of insert receivers coupled to an appropriately-sized ear tip can also be
used with infants. These same transducers are also used during ABR
assessment, allowing comparisons of test results. The term threshold
can be used to describe the responses obtained from infants whenever
a psychophysical procedure, a predetermined step-size, and a
specified number of response reversals are utilized. Infants' thresholds
may improve slightly with age, primarily due to changes in attention
and motivation. Thresholds may also be influenced by size changes in
the external auditory canal and pinnae and inadequate transducer-
coupling effects. The term minimum auditory response level (MRL) is
used when no prespecified psychophysical procedure is utilized in
assessment. Minimum auditory response level represents the lowest or
"best" response obtained from the infant for a given stimulus.
Most often, it is the older infant or toddler who may be resistant to the
placement of the headset. However, activation of the visual reinforcer
or toys in the infant's hands can distract the toddler, and, after several
shaping trials, the child forgets about the assembly. When maintaining
placement of the assembly is impossible, a drop-back posture includes
insert phones or sound field assessment. Most infants (more than
80%) and young children, however, can be assessed successfully
using standard earphones and bone oscillators (Gravel and Traquina
1992). When switching between transducers (for example, from
shaping in sound field to earphone assessment), a very brief reshaping
period is frequently necessary. This serves to demonstrate to the baby
that, although certain signal properties may have changed, the

behavioral response that receives reinforcement (the head turn) is still
the same.
Conditioning in VRA
The first phase of VRA is the conditioning process. Response shaping
is critical to the success of the operant procedure. This phase of
testing is completely under the examiner's control. Thus, the examiner
must be skilled in response training and sensitive to the various stages
of response acquisition. Two different approaches that can be
attempted in the first phase of VRA are (1) pairing the stimulus with
the reinforcer and (2) observing a spontaneous response from the
infant followed by reinforcement. Following several training trials, a
criterion of several consecutive head turn responses must be met
before moving to the second phase of actual test trials (refer to Figure
4.4). Successful completion of training occurs when the infant is
making contingent responses and random head turning
 

Page 64
Figure 4.4. 
Adaptive test procedure with 10 dB step size;threshold 
(minimum response level) based on the mean of four reversals. 
In this patient, the MRL was approximately 20 dB H..
is at a minimum. If criterion is not reached, phase one retraining must
occur until criterion is met. The number of training trials needed
before phase two trials begin differs among infants. However, the
training phase is usually brief.
A spontaneous head turn will not be elicited from children who,
because of earphone testing, hearing impairment, or central auditory
problems, do not have or have not yet developed auditory localization
skills. When training children under earphones or children suspected
of hearing loss or other developmental problems in phase one, it is
preferable to administer several paired conditioning trials at
suprathreshold levels. This strategy will probably be required to teach
the head turn response before stage two threshold exploration. Failure
to condition rapidly should alert the examiner to a potential calibration
or auditory problem or other important factors (physical, cognitive,

social) that may affect the child's behavior.
Primus and Thompson (1985) investigated three stimulus conditions
(complex noise presented at 50 dB nHL and at 25 dB nHL, and a
1500-Hz warble tone presented at 50 dB nHL) on the conditioning
rate in VRA with one-year-old children. These authors concluded that
variation in stimulus properties (stimulus type and starting intensity)
had no effect on the rate of conditioning in their sample of children.
Thirty-two of thirty-six infants satisfied the conditioning criteria
(three consecutive correct responses) immediately following two
training trials. The remaining four subjects required four training trials
(paired
 

Page 65
presentations of stimulus and reinforcement) before reaching the
conditioning criteria. These findings provide evidence that examiners
need not compromise signal parameters in the assessment of infants as
long as the children condition well to the VRA task.
Thompson and Folsom (1984) compared the effects of two
conditioning procedures in VRA with one-and two-year-old children.
One conditioning procedure used an initial stimulus presentation of
30-dB HL and only two conditioning trials before threshold
exploration. The second procedure used a 60-dB HL initial
presentation level and five conditioning trials before threshold
exploration. The stimulus was complex noise, filtered to pass
frequencies primarily between the 500-and 2000-Hz range. This study
revealed no differences between the two conditioning procedures with
regard to minimum response levels (discounting conditioning trials).
Results from the Primus and Thompson study and the Thompson and
Folsom study lead to the inference that signal type or starting intensity
has minimal effect on conditioning success or response consistency.
More recent reports by Eilers and colleagues (1991a, b, 1993), Tharpe
and Ashmeade (1993), and Widen (1993), however, suggest that
starting level does influence the false-alarm rate. The higher the start
level, the greater the possibility that false-positive responses may
occur as rewarded head turns are first made at higher-than-necessary
levels. Widen (1993) has suggested a protocol for assessment that
initiates testing at 30-dB HL, increasing the intensity in 20-dB steps
until a spontaneous head turn toward the sound source occurs. The
spontaneous localization is reinforced, and the threshold search is
initiated at this starting level.
A further clinical variation of this basic procedure is used for
situations where the infant's hearing status is unknown. If infants do
not localize (or show awareness of) the stimulus (usually a 500-Hz

narrowband noise) at the highest soundfield presentation level (70-80
dB HL) after two presentations, this mode of stimulus delivery is
discontinued. The bone oscillator is placed on the infant's mastoid
closer to the reinforcer. The traditional conditioning procedure is
initiated, that is, pairing the stimulus with the availability of
reinforcement. The stimulus usually selected for bone-conducted
conditioning is a 500-Hz narrowband noise presented at 45 dB HL.
Thus, the clinician is assured that the discriminative stimulus is
salient, although vibrotactilely. If the infant does not ultimately
condition, then other developmental problems are suspected.
As always, individual circumstances in hearing assessment may
dictate the use of various starting intensities. Given that most infants
can be expected to have normal hearing, the most efficient test is one
that uses a low starting level. Another test situation that warrants a
low starting level (i.e., 30-40 dB HL), however, is when children
cannot ultimately be conditioned to respond satisfactorily to the VRA
procedure and show only a few spontaneous responses before
habituation. In this situation, it is clinically more productive to obtain
MRLs to signals of lower intensity levels as opposed to higher
intensity levels.
 

Page 66
Developmental Considerations
Several studies (Greenberg et al. 1978; Thompson, Wilson, and
Moore 1979) have reported the use of VRA on children with Down
syndrome and other developmental disabilities, suggesting that
developmental age may be a determining factor in VRA success.
Widen (1990) evaluated VRA as a function of developmental age in
high-risk babies. Clearly, the developmentally mature babies were
more often tested successfully. Visual reinforcement audiometry was
successful for most infants by five to six months corrected age.
Infants' ability to participate in the VRA task was also compared with
their mental age score on the Bayley Scales of Infant Development
(BSID). When test outcome in VRA was compared to developmental
age in a subset of infants, success was achieved approximately 90% of
the time in infants with a developmental age of 51/2 to 61/2 months of
age. Therefore, applications of VRA in clinical protocols must
consider (a) corrected age adjusted for prematurity rather than
chronological age or (b) developmental age when disparities exist
between corrected age and the child's developmental status.
Reinforcement
A critical feature of the VRA procedure is that the reward for correct
responding must be highly appealing. Maintaining response behavior
over repeated trials depends on the child's continued interest in
viewing the reinforcement.
Moore, Thompson, and Thompson (1975) investigated the auditory
localization behavior of infants 12 to 18 months of age as a function
of reinforcement type. They used four conditions: (1) no
reinforcement; (2) social reinforcement; (3) simple visual
reinforcement (a blinking light); and (4) complex visual reinforcement
(a lighted three-dimensional animated toy). The results showed that
the complex visual reinforcement resulted in significantly more

localization responses than the simple visual reinforcement. The light
resulted in significantly more responses than social reinforcement,
which in turn resulted in significantly more responses than the
nonreinforcement condition. The inference from these data is that
visual stimuli do in fact reinforce head turn response behavior, thus
reducing the habituation effect to repeated stimulus presentations. In
addition, it appears that the type of visual stimulus employed is an
important determiner of response behavior. Visual stimuli containing
movement, color, and contour appear to be more effective reinforcers
than less complex visual stimuli. The strength of the complex visual
reinforcer was subsequently shown with normally developing five-
month-old infants.
Figure 4.5 shows a reinforcement unit. The plywood tri-cornered
display fits into one corner of the test booth and is five feet high.
Three separate compartments house three different mechanical toy
reinforcers. The toys are brightly colored, highly animated, and most
produce noise (such as drumming, barking,
 

Page 67
Figure 4.5. 
A reinforcement unit for visually reinforced audiometry.
cymbal clapping) when activated. Each of the three compartment
doors is made of dark, smoked Plexiglas, and the compartment
interiors are painted black. A light bulb strip affixed to the ceiling of
each compartment brightly illuminates the toy during activation of
reinforcement. Thus, when not illuminated, the toys are completely
out of the infant's view.
Effects of Novelty
The use of novelty in a reinforcement protocol is an effective
technique for improving responses. Besides slowing the decline in

response rate, novelty can renew an infant's interest in the clinical task
and revive response behavior (Bond 1972; Lipsitt and Werner 1981;
Primus and Thompson 1985). Evidence shows
 

Page 68
that infants and young children attend more to novel versus familiar
stimuli and are more willing to respond appropriately to elicit novel
stimuli (Caron and Caron 1968, 1969; Lewis and Goldberg 1969;
Lipsitt and Werner 1981). The availability of multiple visual
reinforcers in VRA enhances novelty and, therefore, the impact of
reinforcement. Switching among toy reinforcers enhances
reinforcement by increasing novelty and uncertainty. The primary
benefit of novel reinforcement in VRA is an increased amount of
information about hearing in a single test session. This is an especially
valuable advantage when children may be unable to return for
multiple visits.
Effects of Reinforcement Schedules
In general, a 100-percent reinforcement schedule (reinforcement for
every correct response) results in more rapid conditioning, yet more
rapid habituation. Conversely, an intermittent reinforcement schedule
produces slower conditioning but also a slower rate of habituation.
Consequently, most clinicians recommend a protocol that begins with
a 100-percent reinforcement schedule and then gradually shifts to an
intermittent reinforcement schedule.
To investigate the influence of reinforcement schedules on the VRA
procedure, Primus and Thompson (1985) compared a 100-percent
reinforcement schedule to an intermittent reinforcement schedule with
two-year-old children. The two reinforcement schedules revealed no
differences in the infants' rate of habituation or the number of infant
responses during stimulus trials. These findings provide an excellent
guideline for reinforcing questionable infant responses. That is,
reinforcement should be withheld when clinicians are uncertain about
reinforcing delayed or ambiguous head turn responses. The risk of
reinforcing a false response is that it may lead to confusion for a child
under stimulus control. Moreover, it is important that the reinforcer

not be activated during random head turning. These errors in
reinforcement must be avoided. Failure to reinforce a correct
response, however, does not degrade performance. In this situation,
withholding reinforcement is viewed as intermittent reinforcement,
which will not interfere with subsequent infant responses.
Threshold Acquisition
During threshold estimation, the examiner brings the infant to the
midline position preceding and following a test trial. Throughout
testing, two types of trials are presented: Signal trials contain a
stimulus; control trials do not. Reinforcement is provided only for
correct responding during signal trials.
Following a training procedure, the test phase of VRA begins.
Depending on response outcome during the test phase, signal intensity
is either attenuated after every ''yes'' response or increased after every
"no" response. An adaptive threshold search is initiated until a
stopping criterion is met. For example, stimulus
 

Page 69
intensity is attenuated in 10-dB steps until the infant makes the first
"miss" (no response to a signal trial). A miss is followed by an
increase of signal intensity. Two correct responses are followed by a
decrease in signal level. After a specific number of reversals, the
threshold search is ended. Threshold is then defined as the mean of
the reversal points (refer to Figure 4.4).
STOPPING RULES: How many reversals should be required before
stopping a threshold search? Too few may sacrifice response accuracy.
However, too many may reduce efficiency as well as the number of
trials that can be spent obtaining thresholds to other stimuli before an
infant tires of testing. Eilers et al. (1991a, b), using computer
simulation and infant subjects, suggest that from three to six reversals
has little impact on test accuracy. That is, less than a 3-dB difference
in threshold was demonstrated across the range of stopping rule
conditions (three, four, five, and six reversals for computer simulation
and three and six reversals for infant subjects). Thus, beyond three to
four reversals, little accuracy is gained. However, these authors
demonstrated that stopping rules do have a significant effect on test
length. Tests with a three-reversal stopping rule were significantly
shorter than those with six reversals. As stopping rules are increased
from three to six, there is about a 50% increase in the number of test
trials with no improvement in response accuracy. Thus, these results
suggest that, by using relatively few reversals to estimate threshold, a
staircase algorithm may be shortened without sacrificing accuracy.
CONTROL TRIALS: False positive responses must be monitored by
control trials when assessing infant hearing. As mentioned earlier,
signal trials (signal presented) and control trials (no signal presented)
occur during threshold estimation. Either trial initiates an observation
interval of approximately four seconds during which responses are
judged. If a head turn response occurs during a signal trial, it is
considered a correct detection, and reinforcement is activated. A

response occurring during a control trial, however, is considered a
false response. Control trials are interspersed with signal trials to
examine systematically the infant's false-alarm rate. The assumption is
that infants produce a comparable number of incorrect head turns
during both signal and control trials. Therefore, it is possible to
estimate chance responding (false responses during signal trials)
during test trials by monitoring false response rate during control
trials.
The purpose of the control trial is to assess the reliability of responses.
Test results on any infant who reaches an unacceptable false response
rate should be excluded or interpreted with extreme caution. In
clinical and research protocols, test results are frequently discounted if
false responses during control trials exceed an arbitrary criterion of 20
to 25%. Eilers and coworkers suggest that a 30% false response rate
may not be excessive for clinical purposes. However, when a
specified criterion is exceeded, clinicians should focus on two factors
to
 

Page 70
rectify clinical outcomes: (1) reconditioning the desired behavior and
(2) reexamining the difficulty of keeping the child entertained at a
midline position before starting a test trial. Occasionally, overactive
parents can bias their children to respond, thereby resulting in
excessive false responses. Therefore, parents may need to wear
headphones through which music or noise is delivered. Masking the
parent is intended to remove observer bias during test sessions.
ASSESSMENT OUTCOMES: Clinical outcomes need not be
compromised by using one examiner in VRA. Under these
circumstances, the audiologist engages the infant's attention at
midline, selects and presents a test signal, varies its presentation
intensity as appropriate, judges the infant's behavioral response, and
directly activates the reinforcement for correct head turning. We have
found that a careful and thoughtful clinician guarding against the same
hazards of single-examiner assessment in traditional audiologic
assessment (observer bias, response cuing) may obtain reliable and
accurate audiograms from infants.
Clinical reports shared among clinicians as well as reports in the
literature reveal highly consistent findings from different settings.
That is, for normal-hearing infants, thresholds are consistently
obtained within a conservative definition of normal hearing (<15 dB
HL) and only slightly elevated from adult comparisons. These reports
support the accuracy of the VRA procedure in correctly identifying
normal hearing, thereby resulting in an impressive test operating
characteristic for specificity. More important, however, is the
indication that, because the range of normal is tightly grouped, the
range of abnormal is appropriately wide. The advantage of a wide
range of abnormal is the ability to differentiate various degrees of
hearing loss from mild to profound.
Figure 4.6 presents audiograms representative of those that may be

obtained from infants on one test day using the visually reinforced
head turn procedure. Note that the audiograms resemble those that
might be obtained from older children or adults. They provide
audiometric information that is specific to frequency, ear, type,
degree, symmetry, and configuration of hearing loss. Displayed are
the results from infants younger than ten months of age with normal
hearing, asymmetric conductive hearing loss secondary to otitis
media, and sensorineural hearing loss of various degrees and
configurations. Of particular interest with regard to the examples of
sensorineural hearing loss is the fact that all audiograms were repeated
and VRA accuracy confirmed by play audiometry as these children
were seen over the years. Thus, as with specificity, the test-operating
characteristic for sensitivity is also impressive. Provided that the child
is under stimulus control, VRA provides (with a high degree of
confidence) audiometric information necessary for making diagnostic,
medical, and management decisions.
Thus, the VRA procedure may be applied successfully to both
screening and assessment programs. Indeed, Eilers and colleagues
(1991a, b, 1993) and Widen (1990) have shown the efficiency of the
VRA procedure in a large, hospital-
 

Page 71
based infant hearing screening program. The application of VRA for
the comprehensive audiologic assessment of infants and young
children has been stressed by us and others. The technique is likely
the single most important tool available to today's pediatric
audiologist.
Behavioral Observation Audiometry (Boa)
In developing a protocol for the early identification of hearing loss, it
is important to recognize that the demographics of sensorineural
hearing loss may be shifting toward an increase in the prevalence of
milder losses and sloping, high frequency losses. Moreover, more
infants with congenital or acquired losses have other
neurodevelopmental disabilities in addition to hearing impairment. To
respond appropriately to this trend, our auditory test procedures must

Figure 4.6. 
Sample audiograms from VRA assessment.
 

Page 72
provide the precision necessary to quantify the degree, type, and
configuration of any existing hearing impairment. This places
limitations on the use of behavioral observation audiometry for
determining sensitivity. However, another important goal of the
audiologic evaluation is to examine auditory function. Although
electrophysiologic procedures can quantify auditory sensitivity in
infants with compromised neuromotor function, BOA can provide
very useful insight into the quality of the child's auditory
responsiveness.
BOA is no longer recommended for assessing frequency-specific
threshold sensitivity in newborns, young infants (<5 months), or those
children whose developmental disabilities preclude them learning the
operant VRA procedure. However, BOA can provide an estimate of
functional capabilities useful in planning intervention. Secondly,
behavioral observation of orienting responses may be useful for
examining neuromotor development in high-risk newborns. There is
some evidence that very low birthweight infants demonstrate poorer
auditory orienting abilities than full-term babies even when ages for
both groups are corrected for prematurity (Kurtzburg et al. 1979).
They also demonstrate later impaired cognitive and linguistic function
(Wallace et al. 1982).
Limitations of Behavioral Observation Audiometry
A major, probably uncontrollable, limitation of BOA is that it is a test
of responsiveness and not absolute sensitivity. Infants under five
months of age developmentally generally display reflexive and
orienting responses to external stimuli. Reflexive responses in BOA
include head or limb reflex, whole body startle, nonnutritive sucking,
and eye-blink or flutter. Orienting or attentive-type behaviors include
increased and decreased motion, eye widening, searching, and
localization. Test parameters of BOA are generally discussed in terms

of the factors that influence response behavior. For example, the
probability of a response occurring is dependent on the state of the
infant, the nature of the auditory stimulus, the ambient noise levels,
and agreement among observers that a response occurred. Together,
these factors lead to high false-positive and false-negative rates when
BOA is utilized as a screening test of sensitivity in conventional
audiologic applications. As a result, there are serious concerns about
the effectiveness of BOA for newborn hearing screening.
For example, using BOA in a screening application, Plotnick and
Leppler (1986) identified only two severely hearing-impaired infants
among 356 newborns in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).
Assuming a very conservative 2-percent prevalence of significant
sensorineural hearing loss in an NICU, at least three times as many
hearing-impaired infants should have been identified in the group
tested. Because of the high stimulus intensity required to elicit
reflexive response behaviors, BOA is likely to miss an infant with a
mild-to-moderate bilateral hearing loss as well as one with unilateral
impairment. False negative
 

Page 73
Behavioral Observation and Visual Reinforcement Audiometry 73
rates of 40 to 86% have been reported for BOA (Alberti et al. 1983;
Durieux-Smith et al. 1985; Jacobson and Morehouse 1984), meaning
that many infants with significant hearing impairments pass
behavioral screening and are thus lost to immediate follow-up.
Babies cared for in an NICU may show generally decreased
responsiveness to external stimuli due to immature or compromised
neurodevelopmental processes or poor health. Thus, they may
demonstrate absent or unorganized responses to sensory stimuli.
Reflexive responses or auditory orienting may be absent in infants
with normal hearing sensitivity. Thus, behavioral observations of
responses to auditory stimuli have been of limited value in screening
for neonatal hearing loss in neurodevelopmentally at-risk infants.
Although BOA is no longer viewed as an effective screening
procedure, there are still some proponents of the technique as
evidenced by a small handheld screener now being marketed as a
convenient and inexpensive alternative to more elaborate and costly
instrumentation. Because of its poor sensitivity and specificity, BOA
cannot be recommended for neonatal hearing screening.
Application to Special Populations
Audiologists are challenged to interpret the auditory behavior of
children with special needs: those who have severely compromised
cognitive function and those who are challenged with multiple
neuromotor disabilities. Electrophysiologic techniques (e.g.,
frequency-specific air-and bone-conducted ABR, EOAEs, acoustic
immittance) are critical for delineating hearing sensitivity in this
population. Once hearing sensitivity has been established, an
examination of the auditory responsiveness or function of these
youngsters is important for maximizing individual developmental
potential through habilitational strategies, for determining realistic

goals for educational intervention, for providing assistance for family
dynamics, and in helping to predict areas of potential difficulty with
various forms of auditory input. In this regard, audiologists should
always include behavioral observation audiometry in their assessment
of these populations.
With respect to children who are low functioning, retarded, or
multiplyimpaired, Gans and Flexer (1983) found that level of
responsiveness is closely related to the general developmental level of
a child. As expected, responsiveness to low-intensity sounds is less for
children at lower developmental ages. These investigators showed
that, with a systematic approach to testing, BOA could separate
normal hearing and mild hearing loss from moderate, severe, and
profound hearing loss in this population. However, concerning past
criticisms of BOA, test methodology must be approached with a clear
understanding of the limitations of BOA.
 

Page 74
BOA Test Methodology
The restrictions imposed by stimulus factors, the state of the child,
and examiner bias on the outcome of BOA procedures with
youngsters must be considered in developing BOA protocols.
Moreover, judgments should not be elevated to a level of precision
beyond that defined by the resolving power of the instrument.
Because BOA does not involve conditioning, it is inherently a test of
responsiveness and not of sensitivity.
Stimulus Factors
Bandwidth appears to be a factor that affects responsivity for both
normal infants (Gerber and Dobkin 1984) and for children with
multiple disabilities (Flexer and Gans 1985). Figure 4.7 (Thompson
and Thompson 1972) shows the percentage of responses to five
different stimuli across four different intensity levels in normally
developing infants seven to twelve months of age. These data show
clearly the interaction of stimuli with different bandwidths at different
presentation levels on responses observed from a BOA procedure.
Flexer and Gans (1985) investigated four stimuli (broadband noise,
2000-Hz narrowband noise, speech, and bandpass filtered speech
centered at 2000 Hz) with young infants and children with multiple
and severe developmental disabilities. Their results agreed with
Thompson and Thompson (1972), showing that narrow bandwidth

Figure 4.7. 
Percent response to five stimuli as a function of 
hearing level. Infants 7 to 12 months of age 
(from Thompson and Thompson 1972).
 

Page 75
stimuli, regardless of meaningfulness, are simply not as effective as
broader bandwidth stimuli in eliciting responses from infants and
youngsters who are developmentally compromised. The same is true
for normal, well newborns (Gerber and Mencher 1979). Moreover,
Gerber and Dobkin (1984) showed that elimination of low frequencies
diminishes responsiveness of full-term well newborns. The results
from Flexer and Gans also revealed that there were no group
differences for responsivity. That is, auditory responsiveness of
normal infants can be extrapolated to youngsters who are multiply-
handicapped and of similar developmental ages.
Test Considerations
Behavioral observation audiometry procedures usually require several
examiners. The use of multiple examiners allows one examiner to
present auditory stimuli, one examiner to monitor state changes and to
cue signal presentations when the child's state is appropriate, and an
optional additional examiner to be responsible for videorecording
responses. Besides specific responsibilities for testing, multiple
examiners are necessary to judge response behavior. Multiple judges
are designed to reduce two forms of error associated with
observational judgments: (1) judging that a response occurred when in
reality there was no response and (2) judging that no response
occurred when in reality a response did occur.
Because a variety of response behaviors is monitored (e.g., head or
limb reflex, increased motion, decreased motion, whole body startle,
eye widening, nonnutritive sucking, searching, eyeblink or flutter,
localization, smiling, laughing, pointing), another source of concern
that must be minimized in judging responses is preinformation bias-
that is, the examiner's expectations of the outcome of the test. The
expectation of the examiner is different if prior knowledge exists
regarding developmental status, previous test results, or medical

status. Therefore, examiners should have minimal information about
each patient before testing.
Another form of bias may occur in the test situation. When the
examiner is aware of the sound stimuli presentations (test trials), he or
she adopts a different criterion in defining responses than in test
protocols in which the examiner is naive as to trial type and in which
control trials (no sound) are included. Children who are
developmentally disabled often are active during testing and
frequently change attentional states. The purpose of the control trial is
to identify this random behavior. Response behavior during control
trials is documented and serves as the basis for scoring response
behavior. The occurrence of test trials and control trials initiates an
observation interval during which responses are judged. If a response
occurs during a test trial (signal present), it is considered a correct
detection. If, however, a response occurs during a control trial (that is,
when no acoustic stimulus is presented), it is considered a false-
positive response. Control trials are interspersed among test trials on a
random schedule.
 

Page 76
The presence or absence of false-positive responses during control
trials allows the examiner to calculate the percentage of false-positive
responses.
It should be stressed that the presence of multiple examiners does not
overcome the problem of observer bias. A single examiner, if naive to
trial type, is a more reliable observer than two or more observers who
are aware of the presence of test signals.
Scoring
Gans (1987) recommends the use of a six-point certainty scale for
judging response behavior. In addition, it is important to list the
elicited response behaviors. The scale recommended is as follows: 1 =
real sure, no; 2 = pretty sure, no; 3 = not sure, no; 4 = not sure, yes; 5
= pretty sure, yes; 6 = real sure, yes. Following a 4, 5, or 6 rating,
judges should list the specific response behavior. Judging responses
can be done "live" or from subsequent review of a videorecording.
The relationship between responsiveness during a test trial and a
control trial is examined in each judge's scoring by subtracting the
nearest adjacent control trial rating from that for the test trial. The
resultant value is called a difference score. The difference score can
range from -5 (1 = test trial; 6 = control trial) to +5 (6 = test trial; 1 =
control trial). A positive difference score is an indication that a
youngster exhibited a greater change in background behavior during a
test trial (signal presented) than during a control trial interval. A zero
or negative difference score is interpreted as indicating that no
differential change of behavior occurred for the "test" versus "catch''
trial condition.
Test State
The state of an infant or youngster under test affects responsiveness
and thus the ability to judge responses accurately. For example, in

rating sleep in stages from deep sleep to fully awake, it has been
shown that the middle states allow the highest response ratios (Downs
and Sterritt 1964; Eisenberg et al. 1964). It has become clear that the
quiet awake condition is best for eliciting robust organized orienting
responses from newborns. Thus, for the qualitative clinical application
of BOA, the youngster under test should be encouraged to observe
passively or play quietly with colorful, non-noisy toys. The auditory
stimulus should not be presented if the youngster is vocalizing,
sleeping, fretting, crying, or moving excessively.
Assessment Outcomes
Results from BOA do not indicate a true auditory threshold but
instead reflect a level of responsiveness. Yet, under ideal test
conditions, responses from youngsters may reflect a minimum
response level. Developmental age level can have a
 

Page 77
strong effect on response level. Gans (1987) suggests that, for children
(normally developing or disabled) with developmental ages above five
months, minimum response levels equal to or better than 50 dB HL
can be achieved with BOA. For children with developmental ages of
less than two months, however, minimum response levels from BOA
are usually greater than 80 dB HL. It is important to consider the data
of Thompson and Weber (1974), who showed the wide ranges of
intra-and intersubject variability in infants and young children up to
six years of age. Nevertheless, Gans (1987) provides detailed
information showing that a 50 dB cut-off can be applied with
confidence in BOA applications to children who have severe
developmental disabilities. That is, when minimum response levels of
50 dB or better are obtained, moderate, severe, and profound hearing
losses can be ruled out.
Response behaviors seen during BOA can be separated into those that
are attentive-type (increased and decreased motion, eye widening,
searching, localization, smiling, laughing, pointing) and those
considered reflexive (head or limb reflex, whole body startle, sucking,
eye-blink or flutter). Analyzing response behaviors may provide
useful information in determining how youngsters attach meaning to
sound. If response behavior is reflexive from a child known to have
near normal hearing, it may indicate a child unlikely to use auditory
input as a primary input mechanism or one who does not attach much
meaning to sound. On the other hand, children who show orienting
responses to sound are perhaps demonstrating a higher level of
cortical functioning.
Application of BOA in Neurobehavioral Assessment
The cognitive difficulties encountered by children born at very low
birthweight (VLBW <1500 grams) have been well documented
(DeHirsch, Jansky, and Langford 1966; Drillien, Thompson, and

Burgoyne 1980; Wallace et al. 1982). For example, children born at
VLBW have a greater prevalence of impaired intellectual functioning.
Moreover, when compared to their full-term counterparts, children
born at VLBW frequently display perceptual-motor, language, and
cognitive disabilities. Frequently, these deficits are recognized only
when the child enters school and is faced with the challenge of
learning to read, write, and manipulate numbers. Since early
therapeutic intervention appears beneficial in minimizing later
disabilities, neonatal identification of infants who manifest
compromised neuromotor function would foster timely intervention.
There has been evidence that some aspects of neonatal
neurobehavioral performance are predictive of later cognitive abilities.
For example, Scarr and Williams (1971), using Brazelton's Neonatal
Behavioral Assessment Scale, and Grellong et al. (1981), using the
Einstein Neonatal Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale (ENNBAS),
have found that assessments that include basic orienting (visual
following, auditory orienting) with assessments of motoric functions
were related to later cognitive status.
 

Page 78
Wallace et al. (1982) investigated the relationship between results of
the ENNBAS and six-year cognitive outcome (i.e., verbal IQ,
performance IQ, visual-motor integration, reading, and sentence
repetition). The results of this study provide evidence that some
aspects of neonatal neurobehavioral performance predicted cognitive
abilities at six years of age. A high correlation was found between the
three summary scores of the ENNBAS (auditory orienting, visual
following, and motility) and five cognitive outcome measures. Yet,
among the ENNBAS components, only the items testing orientation to
acoustic stimuli accounted for the predictive power of the neonatal
instrument. Moreover, among the highly intercorrelated outcome
measures, the measures that involved verbal and language processes
were most highly related to the neonatal neurobehavioral
performance. These findings are significant regarding an application
of BOA to newborns. That is, these results suggest that even simple
indices of acoustic processing in the newborn can index later
language-related abilities. Furthermore, it is possible that since
language acquisition, which underlies verbal intelligence, depends on
auditory processes, audition may play a key role in cognitive
development.
TEST CONSIDERATIONS: Three factors must be considered in the
application of BOA as a neurobehavioral assessment tool. The
behavior, the method to monitor the behavior, and the eliciting
stimulus must be chosen to yield a sensitive and specific indicator of
auditory orienting behavior.
The behavior to be monitored is an orienting behavior. Orienting
behavior is shown by quieting, eyes widening with searching
behavior, and finally, head turning to the side of sound (Gerber 1969).
Concerning the issue of development of localization, Muir and Field
and associates (Field et al. 1979, 1980; Muir et al. 1979; Muir and
Field 1979) have presented a series of studies showing that neonates

will consistently turn their heads toward a sound source. Their
experimental procedure involved the use of videoscoring and other
controls for potential observer bias. In most cases, the latency of the
neonates' responses was long: 2.5 seconds to the beginning of the
head-turn response and 5.5 seconds to the end of the response.
Comparing these collective findings of Muir and Field and associates
to the literature in pediatric audiology, it becomes clear that our ideas
about the development of localization responses may have seriously
underestimated the actual abilities of infants.
Testing must be performed in a well-controlled environment. One
such environment, dubbed the NEST (an acronym for Neonatal
Environment for Sensitivity Testing), has been proposed (Bernstein
and Gravel 1992). The NEST is an enclosure designed to provide a
controlled auditory and visual environment. In addition, the NEST is
lined with three inches of acoustic foam to minimize echoes.
Loudspeakers are mounted on two walls of the NEST at the level of
the baby. Provisions have been made to support the infant on a
slightly inclined mattress and to image the infant's head with a closed-
circuit television.
 

Page 79
When monitoring orienting behavior in newborns, it is absolutely
necessary to incorporate signal and control trials. Although the
response is defined, the actual determination of response behavior is
made when signal trials are compared with control intervals. Newborn
infants tend to perform certain behaviors because of sound being
presented (orienting) and have less of a tendency to perform the same
behaviors in the absence of an eliciting stimulus. Based on the baby's
behaviors, the examiner decides whether a response occurred. The
examiner receives immediate feedback regardless of whether a signal
was presented. Subsequently, comparisons between response behavior
and trial type lead to the performance characteristics of the test (i.e.,
response present or absent during signal trials; response present or
absent during control trials). The outcome of these comparisons
indicates the robustness of response behavior.
When a trial is initiated, one of three events occurs: (1) the stimulus is
presented from the right; (2) the stimulus is presented from the left;
and (3) no stimulus is presented. Observers are required to decide, on
each trial, whether the eliciting stimulus was presented. The examiner
is blind to trial type; and, therefore, decisions on response behavior
are based solely on the observation of infants' behaviors.
For years, clinicians agonized over selecting a signal for BOA that
achieved an appropriate compromise between the frequency-restricted
stimulus we would like to use to determine configuration of a hearing
loss and a signal that was sufficiently complex to maximize auditory
responses in infants. When the focus changes from sensitivity to
responsivity in BOA, stimulus characteristics are not a limiting factor.
That is, wideband stimuli as well as band-limited stimuli can be used.
Yet, clinicians should define signal characteristics in terms of
intensity, bandwidth, rise time, and duration. Signal characteristics
may be relevant in the analysis of response behavior with different
population groups. Speech, filtered speech, white and complex noise,

as well as band-limited noise can be used in this application because
the acoustic characteristics can be specified. Noisemakers have also
been used in this application of BOA; however, it may be impossible
to attribute precise intensity and frequency measurements to most
noisemakers (Gerber 1982).
Clinical Application
A principal objective of neonatal neurobehavioral assessment is the
identification of deviant infants and the characterization of their
aberrant performance. Perhaps more so with this type of assessment
than with others, a detailed battery of measures must be evaluated to
obtain a relevant picture of an infant's neurobehavioral status.
Information on both the neurologic integrity of the newborn and the
behavioral characteristics that influence the newborn's interaction with
the environment are necessary in evaluating the infant's
developmental potential and possible problem areas. It is clear from
early evidence that auditory orienting
 

Page 80
behavior is an excellent tool for separating full term from low
birthweight infants and that auditory orienting may play a key role in
cognitive development. To the extent that impairment of specific
sensory and motor systems can be detected, it may be possible to
make some prediction about areas of potential handicap. Perhaps more
importantly, the identification of deviant neurobehavioral
performance, employing a sensitive and comprehensive assessment
battery, pinpoints a given infant as a candidate for more detailed
neurological evaluation and close developmental observation.
Moreover, establishing goals for intervention emphasizes auditory
activities that are developmentally based.
Summary
Clearly, conditioned behavioral procedures can be valid and reliable
for both assessment and screening purposes. Observational
techniques, on the other hand, are useful in examining global auditory
function. Current behavioral and electrophysiologic procedures have
provided the pediatric audiologist with a powerful test
armamentarium. The clinician is cautioned, however, that, although
auditory evoked potentials and EOAE procedures can make
substantial contributions to our knowledge of a child's auditory
sensitivity, only behavioral procedures offer the unique ability to
examine functional use of hearing. Behavioral methods offer insight
into audition that is beyond the level of the cochlea and brainstem;
higher-order abilities that are essential for informed and productive
habilitation, parent counseling, and follow-up.
References
Alberti, P.W., M.L. Hyde, K. Riko, H. Corgin, and S. Ambramovich.
1983. An equivalent of BERA for hearing screening in high-risk
neonates. Laryngoscope 93:1115-1121.

Bergstrom, L. 1984. Congenital hearing loss. In Hearing disorders, 2d
ed., ed. by J.L. Northern. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Bernstein, R.S., and J.S. Gravel. 1992. Orienting as a means of
assessing hearing in newly born infants. In Screening children for
auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill
Wilkerson Center Press.
Bond, E.K. 1972. Perception of form by the human infant.
Psychological Bulletin 77: 225-245.
Bradford, L.J. 1975. Respiration audiometry. In Physiological
measures of the audiovestibular system, ed. L.J. Bradford. New York:
Academic Press.
Caron, R.F., and A.J. Caron. 1968. The effects of repeated exposure
and stimulus complexity on visual fixation in infants. Psychonomic
Science 10:207-208.
.1969. Degree of stimulus complexity on visual fixation in infants.
Psychonomic Science 14:78-79.
Davis, H., and S. Onishi. 1969. Maturation of auditory evoked
potentials. International Audiology 8:24-33.
 

Page 81
Davis, H., and S. Zerlin. 1966. Acoustic relations of the human vertex
potential. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 39:109-116.
DeHirsch K., J. Jansky, and W.S. Langford. 1966. Comparisons
between prematurely and maturely born children at three age levels.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 36: 610-628.
Downs, M.P. 1976. Early identification of hearing loss: Where are
we? Where do we go from here? In Early identification of hearing
loss, ed. G.T. Mencher. Basel: S. Karger.
Downs, M.P., and G.M. Sterritt. 1964. Identification audiometry for
neonates: A preliminary report. Journal of Auditory Research 4:69-80.
.1967. A guide to newborn and infant hearing screening. Archives of
Otolaryngology 85:15-22.
Drillien, C.M., A.M. Thompson, and K. Burgoyne. 1980. Low
birthweight children at early school age: A longitudinal study.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 22: 26-47.
Durieux-Smith, A., T. Picton, C. Edwards, J.T. Goodman, and B.
MacMurray. 1985. The crib-o-gram in the NICU: An evaluation based
on brain stem electric response audiometry. Ear and Hearing 6:20-24.
Eilers, R.E., E. Miskiel, O. Ozdamar, R. Urbano, and J.E. Widen.
1991a. Optimization of automated hearing test algorithms:
Simulations using an infant response model. Ear and Hearing 12:191-
198.
Eilers, R.E., O. Ozdamar, and M.L. Steffens. 1993. Classification of
audiograms by sequential testing: Reliability and validity of an
automated behavioral hearing screening algorithm. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology 4:172-181.
Eilers, R.E., J.E. Widen, R. Urbano, T.M. Hudson, and L. Gonzales.

1991 b. Optimization of automated hearing test algorithms: A
comparison of data from simulations and young children. Ear and
Hearing 12:199-214.
Eisenberg, R.B. 1969. Auditory behavior in the human neonate:
Functional properties of sound and their ontogenetic implications.
International Audiology 8:34-45.
Eisenberg, R.B., E.J. Griffen, D.B. Coursin, and M.A. Hunter. 1964.
Auditory behavior in the human neonate: A preliminary report.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 7: 245-269.
Field, J., D. DiFranco, P. Dodwell, and D. Muir. 1979. Auditory-
visual coordination in two and one-half-month-old infants. Infant
Behavior and Development 2: 113-122.
Field, J., D. Muir, R. Pilon, M. Sinclair, and P. Dodwell. 1980. Infants'
orientation to lateral sounds from birth to three months. Child
Development 51:295-298.
Flexer, C., and D.P. Gans. 1985. Comparative evaluation of the
auditory responsiveness of normal infants and profoundly
multihandicapped children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
28:163-168.
Gans, D.P. 1987. Improving behavior observation audiometry testing
and scoring procedures. Ear and Hearing 8:92-100.
Gans, D.P., and C. Flexer. 1983. Auditory response behavior of
severely handicapped children. Journal of Auditory Research 23:137-
148.
Gerber, S.E. 1969. Auditory behavioral responses of some hearing
infants. Volta Review 71:340-346.
.1982. The use of noise-making toys as audiometric devices.
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 4:309-315.

 

Page 82
Gerber, S.E., and M.S. Dobkin. 1984. The effect of noise bandwidth
on the auditory arousal response of neonates. Ear and Hearing 5:195-
198.
Gerber, S.E., and G.T. Mencher. 1979. Arousal responses of neonates
to wide band and narrow band noise. Paper presented at the annual
convention of the American SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association.
Gravel, J.S., and D.N. Traquina. 1992. Experience with the audiologic
assessment of infants and toddlers. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 23:59-71.
Greenberg, D.B., W.R. Wilson, J.M. Moore, and G. Thompson. 1978.
Visual reinforcement audiometry VRA with young Down's syndrome
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 43:8-458.
Grellong, B., H.G. Vaughan, Jr., L. Rotkin, et al. 1981. Neonatal
performance, cognitive and neurologic outcome to 40 months among
low birthweight infants. Presented at Biennial Meeting, Society for
Research in Child Development, Boston.
Hecox, K., and R. Galambos. 1974. Brainstem auditory evoked
responses in human infants and adults. Archives of Otolaryngology
99:30-33.
Jacobson, J.T., and C.R. Morehouse. 1984. A comparison of auditory
brainstem response and behavioral screening in high risk and normal
newborn infants. Ear and Hearing 5: 247-253.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 1972. Supplementary statement
on infant hearing screening. Asha 16: 160.
Kurtzberg, D., H.G. Vaughan, Jr., C.M. McCarton-Daum, B.A.
Grellong, S. Albin, and L. Rotkin. 1979. Neurobehavioral
performance of low birth weight infants at 40 weeks conceptional age:
Comparison with normal full-term infants. Developmental Medicine

and Child Neurology 21:590-607.
Lewis, M., and S. Goldberg. 1969. The acquisition and violation of
expectancy: An experimental paradigm. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 1 : 75-86.
Lidén, G., and A. Kankkunen. 1969. Visual reinforcement
audiometry. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 67:28 1-292.
Lipsitt, L.P., and J.S. Werner. 1981. The infancy of human learning
processes. In Developmental plasticity: Behavioral and biological
aspects of variations in development, ed. E.S. Gollin. New York:
Academic Press.
Mencher, G.T., B. McCullouch, A.J. Derbyshire, and R. Dethlefs.
1977. Observer bias as a factor in neonatal hearing screening. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 20:27-34.
Moore, J.M., G. Thompson, and M.Thompson. 1975. Auditory
localization of infants as a function of reinforcement conditions.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 40: 29-34.
Moore, J.M., W.R. Wilson, and G. Thompson. 1977. Visual
reinforcement of head-turn responses in infants under 12 months of
age. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 42:328-334.
Muir, D., W. Abraham, B. Forbes, and L. Harris. 1979. The
ontogenesis of an auditory localization response from birth to four
months of age. Canadian Journal of Psychology 33:320-333.
Muir, D., and J. Field. 1979. Newborn infants orient to sounds. Child
Development 50:431-436.
Plotnick, C.H., and J.G. Leppler. 1986. Infant hearing assessment: A
program for identification and habilitation within four months of age.
The Hearing Journal 39:23-25.
 


Page 83
Primus, M.A., and G. Thompson. 1985. Response strength of young
children in operant audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 28:539-547.
Scarr, S., and M.L.Williams. 1971. The assessment of neonatal and
later status of low birthweight infants. Presented at meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development, Minneapolis.
Schulman, C.A. 1973. Heart rate audiometry. Part I. An evaluation of
heart rate response to auditory stimuli in newborn hearing screening.
Neuropaediatrie 4:362-374.
Stein, L., S. Clark, and N. Kraus. 1983. The hearing-impaired infant:
Patterns of identification and habilitation. Ear and Hearing 4:232-
236.
Stein, L., T. Jabaley, R. Spitz, D. Stoakley, and T. McGee. 1990. The
hearing-impaired infant: Patterns of identification and habilitation
revisited. Ear and Hearing 11:128-133.
Suzuki, T., and Y. Ogiba. 1960. A technique of pure-tone audiometry
for children under three years of age: Conditioned orientation reflex
(COR) audiometry. Revue de Laryngologie, Otologie, Rhinologie
81:33-45.
Tharpe, A.M., and D.H. Ashmeade. 1993. Computer simulation
technique for assessing pediatric auditory test protocols. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 4:80-90.
Thompson, G., and R.C. Folsom. 1984. A comparison of two
conditioning procedures in the use of visual reinforcement audiometry
(VRA). Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 49:241-245.
Thompson, G., and B.A. Weber. 1974. Responses of infants and
young children to behavior observation audiometry (BOA). Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 39: 140-147.

Thompson, G., W.R. Wilson, and J.M. Moore. 1979. Application of
visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA) to low-functioning children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 44:80-90.
Thompson, M., and G. Thompson. 1972. Response of infants and
young children as a function of auditory stimuli and test method.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 15: 699-707.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service. 1990. Healthy People 2000: National Health Promotion and
Disease Prevention Objectives. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Wallace, I.F., S.K. Escalona, C.M. McCarton-Daum, and H.G.
Vaughan. 1982. Neonatal precursors of cognitive development in low
birth weight children. Seminars in Perinatology 6:327-333.
Weber, B.A. 1969. Validation of observer judgements in behavioral
observation audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
34:350-355.
Widen, J.E. 1990. Behavioral screening of high-risk infants using
visual reinforcement audiometry. Seminars in Hearing 11:342-356.
1993. Adding objectivity to infant behavioral audiometry. Ear and
Hearing 14: 49-57.
Wilson, W.R. 1978. Behavioral assessment of auditory function in
infants. In Communicative and cognitive abilities: Early behavioral
assessment, ed. F.D. Minifie and L.L. Lloyd. Baltimore: University
Park Press.
Wilson, W.R., and G. Thompson. 1984. Behavioral audiometry. In
Pediatric audiology: Current trends, ed. J. Jerger. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
 


Page 84
5
Speech Audiometry for Children
Jane R. Madell
Purposes Of Speech Audiometry
Speech audiometry, appropriately used, can be an exceptionally
valuable part of the clinical audiologic test battery, particularly in
evaluating and monitoring auditory function in children. Pure tone
testing provides information about degree and type of hearing loss but
tells us nothing about function: how a person uses hearing for
perception of speech. Speech perception is critical for the
development of spoken language and for accurate speech production.
Speech perception testing is the only method available at present for
assessing how a child hears speech. Unfortunately, it is frequently
overlooked or used only in a limited fashion, thereby failing to
maximize its potential usefulness.
Assessing speech perception can be very helpful in determining what
difficulties a child may be having, if any, and in planning remediation.
Word recognition scores that are poorer than expected when compared
to pure tone thresholds at normal and soft conversational levels can be
strong indicators for aggressive treatment: medical, audiological, or a
combination of the two. Testing at soft conversational levels and in
the presence of competing noise can effectively demonstrate the need
for hearing aids, an FM system in the classroom, or auditory training.
Information from evaluation of large numbers of adults indicates that
word recognition ability decreases as the degree of hearing loss
increases. This is also true for children (Boothroyd 1984). However,
the effect of hearing loss on children is much more significant than on

adults because of the negative impact that even a mild hearing loss
can have on the development of speech and language (Friel-Patti et al.
1982; Ross and Giolas 1978; Wallace et al. 1988). Word recognition
testing is an important technique for evaluating the extent to which a
child's hearing loss has adversely affected speech perception, putting
development of speech and language at risk.
For children with identified hearing losses or auditory processing
disorders, word recognition testing can monitor progress during
treatment. Almost everyone agrees that, despite the mode of
communication that families choose in edu-
 

Page 85
cating their hearing-impaired children, all children should be given the
opportunity to maximize their auditory skills. Providing appropriate
amplification is a necessary but incomplete step toward this goal.
Even young children with profound hearing loss can be taught to use
audition for the reception of language. The use of audition will
positively affect language growth and accurate speech production.
The audiologist who evaluates a child annually, semiannually, or
quarterly may be in a better position to evaluate auditory progress
than the therapist who sees the child several times a week. If a therapy
program is successful, the child's word recognition should continue to
improve, and, over time, the child should be able to perform more
difficult auditory tasks. The audiologist can monitor the child's
progress and assist the therapist in modifying treatment goals to
improve the child's auditory functioning. This, to my mind, is a most
exciting aspect of pediatric audiology.
Evaluating Auditory Perception
The goal of speech audiometry is to obtain as much information as
possible about a child's speech perception abilities. There are several
ways to evaluate speech perception, and each procedure provides
different information. Erber and Alencewicz (1976) and Erber (1979)
described an auditory skills matrix that is useful when thinking about
the different components of speech perception testing and auditory
training.
There are four different response tasks that can be used to assess
perception. Detection is the ability to tell when a stimulus is present.
Discrimination is the ability to determine whether two stimuli are the
same or different. Identification is the ability to recognize the stimulus
being presented and to identify it by repeating, pointing, or writing.
Comprehension is the ability to understand what the stimulus means.

Each response task can be assessed using several different stimuli,
from phonemes, syllables, words, phrases, and sentences to connected
discourse. Phoneme testing is the most difficult task in the stimulus
hierarchy because it is the least redundant and provides the fewest
cues. However, it yields valuable information. It can be presented in
either a closed or open set format, produces specific information about
which sounds are not correctly perceived, and can test many stimuli in
a short period. Connected discourse, on the other hand, is easier to
understand but will afford very little information about which specific
phonemes are causing perceptual difficulties because the listener may
correctly extrapolate words not correctly perceived from contextual
cues.
Erber (1979) suggests that, to assess fully a person's speech perception
abilities, it is necessary to utilize all the different stimuli using each
response task. The resultant complex evaluation will supply the kind
of comprehensive information that is necessary to understand fully
each child's auditory functioning. It is invaluable for planning an
auditory training program for a hearing-impaired
 

Page 86
child or for a child with an auditory processing disorder. Fortunately,
because of the time it requires, it is not a necessary part of every
audiological evaluation. It is useful, however, for the audiologist to
keep the auditory skills matrix in mind when selecting tests for
evaluating a particular child and for determining which tests and how
many are needed to measure fully that child's auditory functioning.
Factors To Consider In Selecting Speech Perception Tests
Closed Set vs. Open Set Testing
Word recognition tests may be divided into two categories: closed set
tests and open set tests. In closed set testing, the number of possible
items is restricted. The child being tested understands what all the
possible test stimuli are and will select a response from that limited
number of potential items. Items might be numbers, body parts,
alphabet letters, or pictures placed in front of the child. Open set
testing provides no clues. The child may know that the stimulus will
be a one-or two-syllable word but will know nothing else about it.
Any word in the vocabulary is a possibility. Sometimes children may
be asked to repeat what they hear even if it isn't a word so that the
audiologist can determine exactly what perceptual errors the child is
making. Open set testing is much more difficult than closed set testing
and will frequently result in lower scores, but it may furnish a more
realistic picture of speech perception abilities in conversation than
closed set testing does.
Vocabulary Level
It is essential that the tester know the child's vocabulary level in order
to select the appropriate test. If possible, determine the child's
vocabulary age by using a standardized vocabulary test, by obtaining
information from tests done at another evaluation, or from reporting
by parents or teachers. When these alternatives are not available, use

information obtained from observation and conversation with the
child. Test materials that contain vocabulary not in the child's lexicon
will result in a score that is not a true reflection of speech perception
abilities.
Degree of Hearing Loss
Degree of hearing loss should not be a factor in selecting tests of
speech perception. Tests should be selected based on the individual
child's abilities. It is unfair to the child to make assumptions about
performance based on the pure tone audiogram alone. Many children
with profound hearing losses are capable of using residual hearing for
reception of auditory information. However, it is undoubtedly true that
profound hearing loss makes it more difficult to receive information
using the auditory channel. For children who have not had the
opportunity for early intervention, who have not been trained in a
program that emphasizes the
 

Page 87
use of audition, or who do not have the ability to use audition, special
tests have been developed that make word recognition testing
possible. (See Tests for Severe and Profound Hearing Loss in this
chapter and Cochlear Implants, chapter 1).
Phoneme Scoring vs. Whole Word Scoring
Most of the tests we use to evaluate speech perception are scored
according to whether the person correctly identifies the whole word. If
the person makes an error on one phoneme, the entire word is scored
as wrong. This method of scoring may be depriving us of useful
information. Arthur Boothroyd has written extensively about phoneme
scoring and its advantages and has developed a test that uses phoneme
scoring (1968, 1984, 1988). But phoneme scoring can be used with
any test. By recording the phoneme errors that a child makes during
any speech perception test, we can learn what parts of the spectrum
are not being appropriately perceived. Vowel errors indicate
insufficient low frequency information; inability to perceive sibilants
correctly indicates insufficient high frequency information or possible
upward spread of masking caused by too much low frequency
amplification. Knowing the specific frequencies of the misperceived
sibilants will yield even more specific information. Such knowledge
may permit us to make changes in the frequency response of the
child's amplification system and to make suggestions about auditory
training goals.
Half List vs. Full List
The issue of half list vs. full list has been debated in the field of
audiology for some time. Obviously, using a full fifty-word list
reduces the chance of error in scoring. However, when working with
young children, many factors need to be considered. With young
children, time is essential. It is necessary to obtain a great deal of
information in a short period of time, and it may not be possible to

obtain all the necessary test results if too much time is spent on any
one test. However, the necessity for speed does not permit using fewer
than the required number of stimuli. Short lists should be used only
when that protocol has been validated. The number of words used
must be sufficient to acquire all the data necessary to assess the child's
speech perception abilities. This evaluation can usually be done with
twenty-five words on most tests but not with ten. Except in rare
casessuch as the Isophonemic Word Lists (Boothroyd 1968) that have
been standardized on ten-word liststen words will not provide a
sufficient number and variety of stimuli to obtain an accurate score.
Use of a Carrier Phrase
Most word recognition tasks were designed for use with a carrier
phrase, which alerts the child to attend and places the word in a
sentence context that more accurately represents its use in normal
conversation. The carrier phrase should end
 

Page 88
with a vowel so that the phrase does not influence the word. Common
carrier phrases are ''show me the . . .'' or "tell me ...."
Recorded vs. Monitored Live Voice
Recorded testing has the advantage of being easier to compare from
test session to test session. It also avoids the possibility of the tester's
voice being modified either intentionally or unintentionally to assist
the child in obtaining a higher score. On the other hand, recorded
testing is more time consuming and prevents the audiologist from
making adaptations that are sometimes needed when testing children.
Children may need more off time between stimuli to be able to attend
than the recording permits. If they get distracted and begin to talk to
the tester, they may need to have an item repeated; they may also
require time out for encouragement. It is certainly possible to stop the
tape or CD player and rewind, but this is often difficult to do
efficiently. My experience has indicated that, if the tester is aware of
the pitfalls of monitored live voice testing, then it is possible to obtain
accurate results using live voice.
Is One Test Enough?
With both children and adults, optimal information will be acquired
by using more than one test during an evaluation. Figure 5.1 presents
test results of a child with a profound hearing loss. Word recognition
testing with a four-item forced-choice closed set test (NU-CHIPS)
indicated that he had excellent word recognition skills. Because this
was a closed set test, the results may not be a realistic assessment of
how he will do in conversation. A repetition of the test in an open set
format (no pictures) indicated that he had much poorer skills than the
closed set test had indicated. Both tests provided important
information and, taken together, give an accurate picture of this child's
auditory skills.

Figure 5.2 contains the test results for a child who appeared to have
very poor word recognition abilities when using open set testing.
When closed set testing was performed, it became clear that he indeed
had some word recognition abilities. The additional use of phoneme
scoring can also tell us which sounds the child can perceive correctly
and which he cannot. Armed with this information, we can provide
more amplification in the frequency areas where perception is poor,
and we can stress these phonemes in auditory training.
Using Visual Clues
Most speech perception testing is performed using audition alone.
However, when children have very poor word recognition skills or
very little confidence in their auditory abilities, it may be useful to test
using vision alone, audition alone, and both vision and audition
together. When the examiner uses vision and audition together, the
child is permitted to watch the face of the examiner and listen at the
same time. This permits a combined approach to listening that
 

Page 89
is more similar to what is actually experienced in daily activities. At
the same time, it is critical to obtain information using only audition,
since that alone will provide the necessary data for setting
amplification and planning auditory training. By testing using vision
alone, audition alone, and comparing these scores to the combined
vision-audition test, we can ascertain how much each sense
contributes to reception.
Threshold Speech Tests
Audiologists frequently begin evaluations with adults using pure tone
stimuli, but many pediatric audiologists begin with speech stimuli.
Any audiologist who works with children is aware that speech,
probably because of

Figure 5.1. 
Word recognition test results for a child with a profound hearing 
loss, comparing an open set test, a closed set test, and phoneme 
scoring (from Madell 1992 with permission).
 

its familiarity and interest, can more easily attract the attention of a you
child than pure tone or noise band stimuli. The choice of stimulus will 
determined by the child's speech and language skills. Speech awarenes
reception thresholds furnish some basic auditory data that can help dete
the level at which to begin when presenting pure tone or noise band stim
for threshold testing and to confirm the pure tone thresholds.
Speech Awareness or Speech Detection Thresholds
The speech awareness (SAT) or speech detection (SDT) threshold is a t
uses speech stimuli to determine threshold: the lowest intensity level at
a
Figure 5.2. 

Word recognition test results for another child with a profound hearing loss, comp
open set test, a closed set test, and phoneme scoring (from Madell 1992 with perm
 

Page 91
person can detect the presence of the stimulus 50% of the time.
Speech awareness thresholds are generally used only when more
complex speech stimuli cannot be used. Such situations might occur
when testing a very young child without the vocabulary for other
speech testing or when testing a person with extremely poor or no
word recognition ability.
A variety of different stimuli can be used. The most common stimulus
is conversational voice. The audiologist may call the child's name or
use music either by singing or playing recorded children's songs.
However, the information obtained will be limited, since both music
and conversation are broadband stimuli, and the threshold obtained
will be close to that obtained at the frequency the child hears at the
lowest levels.
More worthwhile information is derived by employing the Ling Five
Sound Test (Ling 1978). The test items-/a/, i, u, sh, and sare selected
to provide frequency-specific information. The vowels assess
perception of low-frequency stimuli, sh measures perception of mid-
high-frequency stimuli, and s gauges perception of high-frequency
stimuli. An adapted version (Madell 1990) uses ba or bu for assessing
low-frequency stimuli, sh for measuring mid-high frequency stimuli,
and s for gauging high-frequency stimuli. Although it takes slightly
longer to obtain three thresholds than it does to obtain one, the
information elicited is much more valuable than that obtained using a
single broad-frequency stimulus. It is frequency specific and tells us
how a person can be expected to perceive speech stimuli across the
frequency range needed for speech. In addition, since the test is
frequency specific, it can be compared more directly to pure tone
thresholds.
Speech Reception Thresholds
The speech reception threshold (SRT) determines the lowest level at

which a person can identify speech stimuli 50% of the time. It differs
from detection tasks that require only that the person be aware of the
presence of speech, not identify it. The test materials selected will
depend on the individual being tested. When possible, it is desirable to
use test materials and procedures that are standardized on adults so
that results are comparable. This will obviously not be possible with
all children, but that does not mean you cannot obtain useful
information. Older children with good language skills will be able to
perform well on standard tests that were developed for adults. Young
children may not have the vocabulary or may be too shy to repeat
what the tester has said. For these children, a picture-pointing task or a
task requiring pointing to body parts will be easier and will tender
useful results.
The test procedure for SRTs requires that the examiner be familiar
with the material being presented. Familiarity makes testing easier and
results in a threshold at a lower level than that obtained with open set
testing, in which any
 

Page 92
vocabulary word might be used. Standard testing uses spondee words
(two-syllable words with equal stress on both syllables.) With children
who can perform this task, the audiologist reads the list of words at a
comfortably loud level, permitting speechreading if necessary, with
the child repeating the word to verify that it is understood. Once the
child is familiar with the words, the audiologist begins testing using
audition alone and reduces the intensity until the child begins making
errors. The audiologist then increases and decreases intensity
establishing the level at which the child can correctly repeat the words
50% of the time. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
guidelines for speech reception threshold testing (1988) describe a
complex procedure that, while resulting in an accurate threshold, may
be time consuming. Cramer and Erber (1974) found that best results
were obtained by asking the child to say the word and point at the
same time. This combined task may increase the child's attention to
the task and, therefore, result in improved scores.
For children who cannot perform using standard techniques, the
audiologist can use pictures or objects representing the spondee
words. The presence of the items will make the task easier. If the
child's vocabulary is not sufficient for the use of standard spondees,
similar information can be obtained using familiar objects, pictures, or
body parts. Even very young children (younger than two years of age)
are likely to be able to point to eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hair, shoes,
and so on. For children whose speech perception is very poor, it may
be possible to obtain an SRT using numbers from one to ten, since
number recognition requires only vowel perception.
Siegenthaler and Haspiel (1966) developed a threshold test called
Threshold by the Identification of Pictures (TIP). This is a picture
identification test that uses monosyllabic words rather than the
standard bisyllabic words. Monosyllabic words are less redundant
than bisyllabic wordsmaking the task more difficultand may affect test

results adversely.
Word Recognition Testing
Word recognition tests evaluate a child's ability to understand speech
under different listening conditions. Unlike threshold testing, word
recognition testing is performed at suprathreshold levels. Testing may
be conducted at different intensities and under various conditions of
competing noise. The selection of test materials and conditions will
depend on the child's vocabulary level and ability to cooperate.
Scoring requires accurate perception of all the phonemes in any word
to obtain a correct score. By modifying the response task and types of
reinforcement, it is possible to learn a great deal about a child's speech
perception skills, without which information an audiological
evaluation is incomplete.
 

Page 93
Word Recognition Tests
Closed Set Tests
NUMBERS: Identification of numbers may be the easiest word
recognition task since the vocabulary is familiar to most children and
requires only vowel recognition. Erber (1980) developed a test called
the Auditory Numbers Test (ANT), which used pictures of one, two,
three, four or five ants on cards that also had the numbers from one to
five. This is simply a more formalized way of testing number
recognition, but the pictures may hold more interest for young
children than simply repeating numbers.
BODY PARTS OR OTHER FAMILIAR OBJECTS: Pointing to body
parts is an easy task even for very young children. This can usually be
made into an interesting game. This same task can also be done using
pictures or objects with which the child is familiar. Because only a
limited number of stimuli is being used, the results must be interpreted
with care.
ALPHABET TEST (APAL): The APAL test was designed to
overcome the difficulties caused by reduced vocabulary in many
children with impaired hearing and to evaluate the type of errors they
make (Ross and Randolph 1990). The test requires that the child be
able to identify spoken letters of the alphabet. Responses may be
made orally, using finger spelling, or by pointing to a response board.
A recorded version of the test is available. The tester uses the carrier
phrase "the letters are . . ." and then says two letters, which the child
must identify in sequence.
The scoring sheet provides three weighted categories developed to
analyze errors based on their perceptual distance from the stimulus.
For example, if the stimulus is p and the child identifies b, the
response is off by only one distinctive feature (voicing); this is a

Category I error. If the response is off by two features, it is a Category
II error, and all other errors are Category III errors. The test form
permits easy scoring.
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY CHILDREN'S PERCEPTION OF
SPEECH (NUCHIPS): The NUCHIPS, created by Elliott and Katz
(1980), is a four-item, forced-choice picture identification test. It has
fifty stimulus pages and can be used in whole-or half-list format. Two
versions are available, providing a total of four fifty-word lists or
eight twenty-five word lists. The vocabulary is at the three-year level
and can frequently be used with two-year-olds. A recorded version is
available with a choice of either male or female speakers.
WORD INTELLIGIBILITY BY PICTURE IDENTIFICATION
(WIPI): The WIPI, developed by Ross and Lerman (1970), is a six-
item, forced-choice picture
 

Page 94
identification test with twenty-five items and four test forms. This test
requires the vocabulary of a three-and-a-half-year-old and is available
in recorded format. A good alternative for slightly older children, the
test is somewhat more difficult than the NU-CHIPS because it is a six-
item test and because the vocabulary is more difficult.
DISCRIMINATION IN PICTURES (DIP): Siegenthaler and Haspiel
(1966) devised the DIP, a two-item, forced-choice picture
identification test. It contains forty-eight pairs of monosyllabic words.
Because there are only two choices for each item, there is a 50%
chance of getting the item correct randomly, which makes interpreting
the test results difficult.
PEDIATRIC SPEECH INTELLIGIBILITY TEST (PSI): The
Pediatric Speech Intelligibility Test (Jerger and Jerger 1982) is a
picture-pointing test designed to provide both central and peripheral
auditory processing information. It is intended to assist in locating the
site of a lesion. The test uses both monosyllabic words and sentence
materials and tests performance-intensity functions and message-to-
competition functions. Sentences form the competing message. The
test comes in a five-and a three-tape screening version and is intended
for use in a recorded format only. The focus group of the test is
children three years of age and up.
SPEECH PATTERNS CONTRAST TEST (SPAC): The SPAC
(Boothroyd 1984, 1987) is a four-alternative, forced choice test of
speech perception. It was originally designed as a research tool to
measure the perception of speech contrasts by hearing-impaired
children with different degrees of hearing loss. The test measures four
suprasegmental and eight segmental contrasts. These include location
of stress, sex of speaker, presence or absence of pitch variation,
direction of pitch change, vowel height and place, presence or absence
of voicing of initial and final consonants, continuance vs. stop plosion

of initial and final consonants, and place of articulation of initial and
final consonants. It requires that the child be able to read the response
alternatives, so it is useful only for older children.
Boothroyd concluded that, as a group, children with less hearing loss
had better speech perception skills than children with greater hearing
loss. However, it was not possible to predict an individual child's
speech perception based on the pure tone audiogram alone. Many
different factors influence speech perception abilities, and each child
must be evaluated individually. Tests such as the SPAC can provide
much more specific data than the more global tests commonly used.
The SPAC thus enables us to determine the specific auditory skills an
individual possesses and to design a therapy program that will
promote them.
Open Set Tests
NU-CHIPS OR WIPI WORDS WITHOUT PICTURES: The
vocabulary used in the NU-CHIPS is at the three-year level, while that
in the WIPI is at the three-and-
 

Page 95
one-half-year level. Both of these word lists are excellent for testing
young children who can perform using an open set format. The
vocabulary level makes the words good choices for open set testing of
very young children. Recorded versions of these tests are available.
PHONETICALLY BALANCED KINDERGARTEN LIST (PBK):
The PBKs (Haskins 1949) are fifty-item, phonemically balanced,
monosyllabic word lists selected from the spoken vocabulary of
normal-hearing kindergarten children. Research by Sanderson-Leepa
and Rintelman (1976) has demonstrated that the test should not be
used for children younger than kindergarten age because the
vocabulary will be too difficult, resulting in depressed scores. There is
no recorded version of this test.
ISOPHONEMIC WORD LISTS (AB LISTS): The Isophonemic Word
lists (Boothroyd 1968, 1984) consist of fifteen word lists, each
containing ten CVC words. Each list uses the same thirty phonemes,
of which ten are vowels and twenty are consonants. The test, which
does not use a carrier phrase, may be presented in a recorded or
monitored live voice format. Subjects are asked to repeat what they
hear and are scored on the number of phonemes repeated correctly. As
previously discussed, phoneme scoring is an excellent way to
determine exactly what perception errors the child is making. Because
only ten words are used, the test can be administered quickly, and the
thirty items provide sufficient information to make comparisons
between different amplification or competing message conditions.
CONNECTED DISCOURSE OR SENTENCE TESTING: Using a
nonstandardized procedure, we are able to formulate some impression
of a child's ability to understand conversational speech using
connected discourse. We must interpret these results with caution,
however, since context will provide a great deal of information to the
child. Connected discourse tracking, developed by De Filippo and

Scott (1978), scores the child's ability to repeat correctly phrases and
sentences read by the examiner in a five-minute period. A
standardized open set sentence test is included as part of the Minimal
Auditory Capabilities Battery (MAC) (Owens et al. 1985).
Tests for Severe and Profound Hearing Loss
Auditory Numbers Test (ANT)
This test (Erber 1980) was discussed previously as both an SRT and a
word recognition test. It is a closed set test that assesses vowel
perception (see Word Recognition: Numbers.)
 

Page 96
Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee Test (MTS)
The MTS (Erber and Alencewicz 1976) consists of twelve words: four
monosyllables, four trochees (two-syllable words with stress on the
first syllable), and four spondees. All twelve pictures are placed in
front of the child, who is asked to point to the picture identified by the
examiner. The test is scored in two ways: percentage of words correct
and percentage of words categorized correctly by stress pattern. For
example, if the word presented is a trochee, and the child chooses the
wrong trochee, it will be scored wrong for the word but correct for
stress pattern. The test was designed for children over the age of five
years but can be used for younger children who have the necessary
vocabulary.
Glendonald Auditory Screening Procedure (GASP)
The GASP (Erber 1982) was designed as a closed set test, one portion
of which uses the concept of the MTS. It contains twelve words: three
monosyllables, three trochees, three spondees, and three polysyllables.
In addition, it contains ten everyday sentences and a phoneme
detection task. Berliner and Eisenberg (1985) report using it in an
open set format for evaluating children with cochlear implants.
Discrimination after Training Test (DAT)
The DAT (Thielemeir 1982) is intended for use with children and
adults who are prelingually deaf. The stimulus items are taken from
the MTS and proceed through twelve levels of difficulty, beginning
with speechreading, to determine whether the child understands the
stimulus. Testing evaluates speech detection, gross duration and
timing cues, and discrimination of speech pattern perception. The test
is administered live voice.
Early Speech Perception Test (ESP)

The ESP (Geers and Moog 1989; Moog and Geers 1990) was
originated to meet the needs of very young profoundly hearing-
impaired children with limited vocabulary and language skills. The
vocabulary is familiar to hearing-impaired children by the age of six
years, the words used are easily depicted with pictures, and the test
takes less than an hour to complete. It is administered using monitored
live voice, first using a combination of vision and audition to be
certain that the child has the vocabulary, and then using audition
alone.
The test contains a pattern perception subtest and two word
identification subtests. The pattern perception subtest is adapted from
the GASP and presents the same twelve pictures and four stress
categories. Part two is a twelve-item spondee identification test with
each item having a different vowel. Part three is
 

Page 97
a twelve-item monosyllabic word identification test containing similar
words. All words begin with b, and most end with a plosive. Children
who do very well are then tested with the WIPI or the PBK. There is a
"low-verbal" version for children who do not have sufficient
vocabulary for the standard version. It uses real objects instead of
pictures and small sets consisting of two or three objects.
Minimal Auditory Capabilities Battery (MAC)
The MAC (Owens et al. 1985) is a recorded test battery that
comprises thirteen auditory tests and one speechreading test. These
tests examine phonemic discrimination, sentence identification,
suprasegmental features, identification of environmental sounds, and
visual enhancement with and without amplification. Because the test
is complex, it yields a great deal of information, although it is not
applicable for young children.
Test of Auditory Comprehension (TAC)
The TAC (Los Angeles County 1980) is a closed set recorded test that
evaluates perception of both environmental sounds and speech. It has
ten subtests, beginning with the ability to perceive the difference
between linguistic and nonlinguistic sounds (speech vs. cough), and
proceeds to the comprehension of speech in the presence of competing
messages. The child responds by pointing to pictures.
Speech Patterns Contrast Test (SPAC)
The SPAC, previously discussed, is a suitable test for assessing a
variety of speech contrasts in children. (See Closed Set Tests.)
Evaluation of Speech Perception in Infants
Several researchers have demonstrated that infants can discriminate
among different sounds very early in life (Eilers 1977; Eimas 1974;
Kuhl and Miller 1975; Morse 1972). Eilers, Wilson, and Moore

(1977) developed the Visually Reinforced Infant Speech
Discrimination paradigm (VRISD). This recorded test requires
presentation of two phonemes during a four-second interval; the child
is reinforced using a three-dimensional toy for a head turn when the
sound is changed. Initially, the second stimulus is presented at a
higher intensity than the first. Once the child has learned the task, the
intensities are equated. Although this has been used primarily as a
research tool, the potential for clinical use is genuinely exciting. It
would be especially effective in assessing amplification benefits for
infants who cannot yet perform other speech perception tasks.
 

Page 98
Test Conditions for Assessing Speech Perception
Evaluating Monaural Functioning
To assess fully a child's speech perception abilities, an audiologist
must perform several tests under different conditions. Earphone
testingusually performed at 40 dB SL or at MCLwill provide
information about the child's speech perception abilities in each ear
separately. If retrocochlear pathology is a concern, PB-PI functions
(Bess, Josey, and Humes 1979) can be determined with any of the
word recognition tests discussed previously. Since most speech
perception testing is conducted at what should be comfortably loud
levels, we may not derive information about everyday functioning. To
acquire this knowledge, the audiologist should test the child at normal
and soft conversational levels, preferably in soundfield.
Soundfield Evaluation
Every child should have auditory functioning evaluated regardless of
the basic reason for the evaluation (NIH 1993). Even a child with a
mild conductive hearing loss who performs well under earphones at
40 dB SL may have difficulty with word recognition at soft
conversational levels or in the presence of competing noise. Figure 5.3
shows test results for just such a child. The information obtained by
testing at soft conversational levels and with competing noise will be
valuable in helping physicians, parents, classroom teachers, and the
children themselves recognize the effect of a mild hearing loss on
classroom functioning.
Testing should be conducted routinely at normal (50 dB HL) and soft
(35 dB HL) conversational levels (Madell 1990). If test results are
extremely poor at normal levels, they need not be obtained at soft
levels. After testing in quiet, testing should be repeated at normal and
soft conversational levels in the presence of competing noise. The

most useful competing message is recorded four-or twelve-talker
babble. Because the stimulus is speech, it will be more distracting
than speech noise or white noise and more like the message
competition that the child faces every day.
Testing is usually conducted at +5 or +6 dB S/N. If good results are
obtained at that level, testing can be repeated at 0 dB S/N. For
soundfield testing, the child should be seated facing the loudspeaker at
0 degrees azimuth with the speech stimulus coming from the front
speaker. The competing message can be presented from the same
loudspeaker, from 180 degrees (directly behind the child), or from 90
degrees on both sides of the child. The level (in dBA) at which the
child achieves 80% may be an acceptable norm (McCormick 1993).
When a child has a unilateral hearing loss, it is useful to test with the
loudspeakers at 45 or 90 degrees on each side of the child, with
speech directed to the side of the poorer ear and the competing
message directed to the better ear. This will tax the child's auditory
capability maximally.
 

Page 99
Figure 5.3. 
Word recognition testing for a child with a mild 
hearing loss at normal and soft conversation levels
A child whose word recognition drops significantly in the presence of
competing noise may be demonstrating auditory processing
difficulties. Figure 5.4 demonstrates test results of a child with normal
hearing and good word recognition at normal conversational levels
but with poor word recognition at soft levels and in the presence of
competing noise. Identification of the problem helps the parent,
teacher, and child understand some aberrant academic and behavior
patterns that do not stem from inattention, but from a very real
perceptual problem.

Testing with Amplification
The assessment of amplification follows unaided testing, so
soundfield test results at normal and soft conversational levels in quiet
and in the presence of a competing message will already be available.
The same tests should be repeated
 

Page 100
Figure 5.4. 
Word recognition testing in quiet and in the presence of a competing message  
for a child with normal hearing and a presumed auditory processing disorder
with amplification. If there is any doubt, this type of testing should
verify the benefit obtained from amplification. If aided test results
indicate reduced functioning in quiet or in the presence of a
competing message, a good case can be made for the use of FM
systems in the classroom and in other situations in which distance
from the talker or competing noise is a factor.
Describing Auditory Functioning
A part of each audiologic report should include a description of the
child's auditory functioning. This will help the reader to understand

what to expect from the child in a variety of situations and will assist
the teacher and therapist in
 

Page 101
planning remediation if needed. What can you expect from the child
when speech is presented at normal and soft conversational levels?
What happens in the presence of noise? Can the child perform in an
unclued (open set) situation, or is it necessary for the child to be clued
(closed set or topic information) in order to understand? Does the
child require paragraph or sentence material to follow conversation, or
can she follow single words? Does the child require repetition in order
to understand? If the child wears hearing aids, functioning should be
compared unaided, aided, and with an FM system to develop a
complete picture of the child's auditory strengths and weaknesses.
Summary
Speech perception testing is an exciting and challenging part of the
audiologic test battery. By fully assessing speech perception, we are
able to obtain valuable information about a child's use of audition that
cannot be obtained in any other way. A large variety of speech
perception tests is available. Combining them appropriately, under
different test conditions, allows us to evaluate children of all ages,
with all levels of vocabulary, and with all degrees and types of hearing
loss. These tests afford us an opportunity to assist in maximizing
every child's communication abilities. Speech perception testing is an
essential part of our test battery, and in-depth testing should be
routinely included in every child's audiological evaluation. By doing
so, we fulfill our responsibility to do more than simply identify the
presence or absence of hearing loss and do what audiology was
intended to do: assess and improve communication function.
References
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1988. Guidelines
for determining threshold level for speech. Asha 30:85-89.
Berliner, K.I., and L.S. Eisenberg. 1985. Methods and issues in the

cochlear implantation of children: An overview. The cochlear implant:
An auditory prosthesis for the profoundly deaf child. Ear and Hearing
(Suppl. 6) 3:6S-13S.
Bess, F.H., A.F. Josey, and L.E. Humes. 1979. Performance intensity
functions in cochlear and eighth nerve disorders. American Journal of
Otolaryngology 1: 27-3 1.
Boothroyd, A. 1968. Developments in speech audiometry. Sound 2:3-
10.
.1984. Auditory perception of speech contrasts by subjects with
sensorineural hearing loss. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
27: 134-144.
.1987. Perception of speech pattern contrasts via cochlear implants
and limited hearing. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology
(Suppl. 128) 96:58-62.
.1988. Amplitude compression and profound hearing loss. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research 31:362-376.
Cramer, K.D., and N.P. Erber. 1974. A spondee recognition test for
young hearing-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 39:304-311.
 

Page 102
De Filippo, C.L., and B.L. Scott. 1978. A method for training and
evaluating the reception of ongoing speech. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 63: 1186-1192.
Eilers, R.E. 1977. Context-sensitive perception of naturally produced
stop and fricative consonants by infants. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 61:1321 -1336.
Eilers, R.E., W.R. Wilson, and J.M. Moore. 1977. Developmental
changes in speech discrimination in infants. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 20:766-780.
Eimas, P.D. 1974. Auditory and linguistic processing of cues for place
of articulation by infants. Perception and Psychophysics 16:513-521.
Elliott, L.L., and D. Katz. 1980. Northwestern University children's
perception of speech (NU-CHIPS). St. Louis: Auditec.
Erber, N.P. 1979. An approach to evaluating auditory speech
perception ability. The Volta Review 81:16-24.
.1980. Use of the auditory numbers test to evaluate speech perception
abilities of hearing impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 45:527-532.
.1982. Auditory training. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association
Erber, N.P., and C.M. Alencewicz. 1976. Audiologic evaluation of
deaf children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:256-267.
Friel-Patti, S., T. Finitzo-Hieber, G. Conti, and K. Brown. 1982.
Language delay in infants associated with middle ear disease and mild
fluctuating hearing impairment. Pediatric Infectious Disease 1:104-
109.
Geers, A., and J. Moog. 1989. Evaluating speech perception skills:
Tools for measuring benefits of cochlear implants, tactile aids, and

hearing aids. In Cochlear implants in young deaf children, ed. E.
Owens and D. Kessler. Boston: College-Hill Press.
Haskins, H. 1949. A phonetically balanced test of speech
discrimination for children. Master's thesis, Northwestern University.
Jerger, S., and J. Jerger. 1982. Pediatric speech intelligibility test:
Performance-intensity characteristics. Ear and Hearing 3:325-333.
Kuhl, P.K., and J.D. Miller. 1975. Speech perception in early infancy:
Discrimination of speech-sound changes. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (Suppl. 1) 58:566.
Ling, D. 1978. Auditory coding and recoding: An analysis of auditory
training procedures for hearing impaired children. In Auditory
management of hearing impaired children, ed. M. Ross and T. Giolas.
Baltimore: University Park Press.
Los Angeles County, Office of the Los Angeles County
Superintendent of Schools, Audiology Services, and Southwest
School for the Hearing Impaired. 1980. Test of auditory
comprehension. North Hollywood: Forworks.
McCormick, B. 1993. Behavioural hearing tests 6 months to 3; 6
years. In Paediatric audiology, 0-5 years, 2d ed., ed. B. McCormick.
London: Whurr Publishers.
Madell, J.R. 1990. Audiological evaluation. In Hearing-impaired
children in the mainstream, ed. M.Ross. Parkton, MD: York Press.
.1992. FM systems as primary amplification for children with
profound hearing loss. Ear and Hearing 13: 102-107.
Moog, J., and A. Geers. 1990. Early speech perception test for
profoundly hearing-impaired children. St. Louis: Central Institute for
the Deaf.
Morse, P.A. 1972. The discrimination of speech and non-speech

stimuli in early infancy. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
14:477-492.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). 1993. Early identification of
hearing impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus
Statement 11: 1-24.
 

Page 103
Owens, E., D.K. Kessler, M.W. Raggio, and E.D. Schubert. 1985.
Analysis and revision of the minimal auditory capabilities (MAC)
battery. Ear and Hearing 6:280-290.
Ross, M., and T.G. Giolas. 1978. Auditory management of hearing-
impaired children: Principles and prerequisites for intervention.
Baltimore: University Park Press.
Ross, M., and J. Lerman. 1970. A picture identification test for
hearing-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
13:44-53.
Ross, M., and K. Randolph. 1990. A test of the auditory perception of
alphabet letters for hearing impaired children: The APAL test. The
Volta Review 92:237-244.
Sanderson-Leepa, M.E., and W.F. Rintelmann. 1976. Articulation
function and test-retest performance of normal-hearing children on
three speech discrimination tests: WIPI, PBK 50, and NU auditory
test no. 6. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:503-519.
Siegenthaler, B., and G. Haspiel. 1966. Development of two
standardized measures of hearing for speech by children. Cooperative
research program project #2372. Washington, D.C.: United States
Office of Education.
Thielemeir, M.A. 1982. Discrimination after training test. Los
Angeles: House Ear Institute.
Wallace, I.F., J.S. Gravel, C.M. McCarton, and R.J. Ruben. 1988.
Otitis media and language development at 1 year of age. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 54:245-25 1.
 


Page 104
6
Acoustic Immittance
Shlomo Silman and Carol A. Silverman
Basic Concepts Of Acoustic Immittance
Components
Acoustic immittance can be defined in terms of acoustic impedance or
admittance. Acoustic impedance is defined as the rejection offered by
an acoustico-mechanical system to the flow of energy. The unit of
acoustic impedance is the acoustic ohm. Acoustic admittance is the
reciprocal of acoustic impedance. The unit of acoustic admittance is
the acoustic mho.
Acoustic impedance consists of three components: acoustic mass
reactance, acoustic stiffness reactance, and acoustic resistance.
Acoustic mass reactance is the rejection offered by the mass of a
system to a flow of energy. Acoustic stiffness reactance is the
rejection offered by the stiffness of a system to a flow of energy. The
acoustic mass reactance and acoustic stiffness reactance components
function in opposition to each other.
An acoustic system can be described as mass-dominated or stiffness-
dominated, depending on which componentacoustic mass reactance or
acoustic stiffness reactanceis larger. In the early literature, the normal
human middle ear was erroneously described as a stiffness-dominated
system. The normal human middle ear is indeed a stiffness-dominated
system for low-frequency probe tones. At frequencies below 900 Hz,
the normal middle ear is stiffness dominated, and at probe-tone
frequencies above 1200 Hz, it is mass dominated. The acoustic
resistance is largely unaffected by probe-tone frequency.

Acoustic admittance is defined as the ease with which acoustic energy
passes through a system. The admittance components include acoustic
stiffness susceptance, acoustic mass susceptance, and acoustic
conductance. Acoustic stiffness susceptance is the ease with which
energy flows into a stiff system. Acoustic mass susceptance is the ease
with which energy flows into a mass system. Acoustic conductance is
the ease with which energy flows into friction.
 

Page 105
Acoustic Reflex
When the acoustic reflex is activated at low probe-tone frequencies,
the acoustic middle-ear impedance, which is measured at the tympanic
membrane, changes. Acoustic-reflex activation consists primarily of
contraction of the stapedius muscle. With acoustic-reflex activation,
the ossicular chain is stiffened, causing increased acoustic middle-ear
reactance and, therefore, increased middle-ear impedance.
Acoustic-reflex activation is bilateral, even when stimulation is
unilateral. Therefore, the acoustic reflex can be monitored in the
stimulated ear (ipsilateral acoustic-reflex assessment) or in the ear
contralateral to the stimulated ear (contralateral acoustic-reflex
assessment). In ipsilateral acoustic-reflex measurement, both the
probe-tone signal (used to measure the acoustic-immittance change)
and the acoustic-reflex activating signal are presented to the same ear
through the probe tube. On the other hand, in contralateral acoustic-
reflex measurement, the activating signal is presented to one ear
through an earphone or ear insert, and the probe tone is presented to
the opposite ear through a probe tube. The acoustic-reflex threshold
(ART) is the lowest intensity for the activating signal resulting in a
measurable change in acoustic immittance at the tympanic membrane,
which is monitored in the probe ear.
Advantages of ipsilateral over contralateral acoustic-reflex assessment
include independent ear evaluation and elimination of collapsed ear-
canal effects. Ipsilateral acoustic-reflex assessment has certain
disadvantages that, for the most part, are not shared by contralateral
acoustic-reflex assessment. One disadvantage of ipsilateral acoustic-
reflex measurement results from the presentation of both the acoustic-
reflex activating and probe-tone signals into the same tube, yielding
artifact problems. Presentation of both into the same tube frequently
results in acoustic interaction between these signals. Consequently, the

sound-pressure level of the probe tone is altered, falsely signaling
acousticimpedance change associated with acoustic-reflex contraction.
The occurrence of additive and subtractive artifacts can be prevented
through the use of a multiplexing circuit (incorporated in some
commercially available electroacoustic-immittance devices) in which
the tones are rapidly pulsed in an alternating fashion. The admittance
measures are determined from probe-tone measurements while the
activator is off between pulses.
Another disadvantage of ipsilateral acoustic-reflex measurement (and
of contralateral acoustic-reflex measurement that presents stimulation
through an ear insert instead of an earphone) is the calibration of the
intensity level in a 2-cm3 rather than the 6-cm3 coupler employed for
calibration of intensities in clinical audiometers. Therefore, ipsilateral
ARTs cannot be compared directly with contralateral ARTs, even
when the thresholds are reported in dB HL.
As probe-tone frequency increases, the magnitude of the change in
acoustic middle-ear impedance with acoustic-reflex activation
decreases (Bennett 1984;
 

Page 106
Bennett and Weatherby 1982). Beginning at the probe-tone frequency
of approximately 600-700 Hz, the acoustic middle-ear impedance
decreases rather than increases with acoustic-reflex activation. (The
reversing probe-tone frequency is approximately 665 Hz.) That is, at
higher probe-tone frequencies, the magnitude of the acoustic
resistance decreases and exceeds the magnitude of any change in
acoustic reactance.
Acoustic-reflex adaptation (ARA) (or decay) is the decrease in
magnitude of the change in acoustic-immittance during sustained
acoustic stimulation. With ARA or decay, the decrease in magnitude
of the change in acoustic-immittance reflects the increase in middle-
ear admittance during sustained acoustic stimulation.
ARTs in Normal Persons
As shown in Table 6.1, the 90% range between the 5th and 95th
percentiles for the ipsilateral acoustic-reflex thresholds for the 226-Hz
probe tone in normal-hearing adults is 72-90 dB HL for the 500-Hz
tonal activator, 75-90 dB HL for the 1000-Hz tonal activator, 77-95
dB HL for the 2000-Hz tonal activator, and 55-75 dB HL for the
broadband noise (BBN) activator (Wiley, Oviatt, and Block 1987).
Table 6.1 also shows that the contralateral acoustic-reflex thresholds
for the 220-Hz probe tone range (2 SD above and below the mean) are
between 75 and 95 dB HL for the 500-Hz tonal activator, between 75
and 100 dB HL for the 1000-Hz tonal activator, and between 80 and
100 dB HL for the 2000-Hz tonal activator in normal-hearing adults
(Silman and Gelfand 1981). The mean contralateral ART for normal-
hearing adults is approximately 85-90 dB HL for the 500-1000-, and
2000-Hz tonal-activating signals and approximately 70-75 dB HL for
the BBN noise activating signal obtained with the 220-Hz probe tone
(Silman and Gelfand 1981; Silman, Gelfand, Howard, and Showers
1982; Silverman, Silman, and Miller 1983). The difference between

the contralateral ART for tonal activating signals and the contralateral
ART for broadband noise activators is approximately 10-20 dB.
Tympanometry
With tympanometry, the acoustic-immittance of the middle or total
(outer and middle) ear is measured as air pressure in the ear canal is
varied. The results of
Table 6. 1. 90% Range for the Ipsilaterala ARTs and 2 SD Range for the
Contralateralb ARTs
Mode
500 Hz
1000 Hz
2000 Hz
BBN
Ipsilateral
72-90 dB HL
75-90 dB HL
77-95 dB HL
55-75 dB HI.
Contralateral
75-95 dB HL
75-100 dB HL
80-100 dB HL
aFor the 226-Hz probe tone, based on the data of Wiley et al ( 197).
bFor the 220-Hz probe tone, based on the data of Silman and Gelfand (1981).
 

Page 107
tympanometry yield (a) the tympanometric peak pressure at which
maximum middle-ear (or total-ear) admittance is obtained and (b) the
amplitude and shape of the function relating air pressure in the ear
canal to the magnitude of the acoustic immittance of the middle ear or
total ear.
Static-Acoustic Middle-Ear Admittance
The static-acoustic middle-ear admittance is derived by subtracting
the static ear-canal admittance obtained at an extreme air pressure in
the ear canal (e.g., +200 daPa or -400 daPa) from the static total-ear
admittance obtained at the tympanometric peak pressure. The static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance is reported in acoustic millimhos
(mmhos), and the static-acoustic middle-ear impedance is reported in
acoustic ohms.
The normal range for static-acoustic middle-ear admittance depends
on (a) whether a relative or absolute acoustic-admittance device was
employed, (b) whether +200 or -400 was used to determine the outer-
ear admittance, and (c) the pump speed for the air-pressure variation
in the ear canal. (A pump speed not exceeding 50 daPa/s is generally
used in diagnostic evaluations, whereas a pump speed of 200 daPa/s is
generally used for screening.) The data by Jerger, Jerger, and Mauldin
(1972), based on older children and adults, indicate that the range of
normal static-acoustic middle-ear admittance between the 10th and
90th percentiles is 0.39-1.30 mmhos (or cc), using a pump speed of 50
daPa/s and the +200 daPa pressure point to determine the ear-canal
volume.
With an absolute acoustic-admittance device, the data of Van Camp,
Margolis, Wilson, Creten, and Shanks (1986) suggest that the range of
normal static-acoustic middle-ear admittance between the 5th and
95th percentiles (using -400 daPa as the pressure point to determine
the ear-canal volume) is 0.50-1.75 mmhos for a pump speed not

exceeding 50 daPa/s; the range is 0.57-2.00 for the 200 daPa/s pump
speed (going from a positive to a negative direction). The ASHA
(1990) guidelines for screening for hearing impairment and middle-
ear disorders based on Margolis and Heller's (1987) data defined the
90% range of normal static-acoustic middle-ear admittance between
the 5th and 95th percentiles (using +200 as the pressure point to
determine the ear-canal volume) as 0.3-1.4 mmhos for a pump speed
of 200 daPa/s (going from a positive to a negative direction).
Based on the normative ranges, ears with stiffening pathologysuch as
otosclerosis, congenital ossicular fixation, otitis media, and
cholesteatomawould be expected to have acoustic-admittance values
of less than approximately 0.50-0.57 mmhos. Similarly, ears with
loosening pathologysuch as partial erosion of the ossicular chain and
complete ossicular disarticulationwould have admittance values
greater than approximately 1.75-2.00 mmhos. These expectations are
not completely fulfilled since many pathologic ears have admittance
and impedance values within the normal range. Therefore, the static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance cannot be used as the only audiologic
tool for
 

Page 108
Figure 6. 1. 
Effect of probe frequency on
tympanogram in a patient with grossly abnormal tympanic
membrane. Note that the W'' shape is obvious at 800 and
900 Hz, but only barely discernible at 660 Hz.
(Reprinted by permission of Alberti and Jerger.)
diagnosis of middle-ear disorders; it must be used in conjunction with
the audiometric and other acoustic-immittance findings.
Tympanometric Peak Pressure
It cannot be assumed that the tympanometric peak pressure represents
the middle-ear pressure for the following reasons: Variation in ear-
canal pressure during tympanometry is associated with variation in
middle-ear volume with movement of the tympanic membrane,
leading to changes in tympanometric peak pressure. This effect is
exacerbated in persons with flaccid tympanic membranes. Also, some
acoustic-immittance devices have electronic circuits that do not
rapidly track large acoustic-immittance changes, such as those that
occur with a flaccid tympanic membrane.
The tympanometric peak pressure in adults with normal middle ears

generally ranges between +50 and -50 daPa (Brooks 1980; Holmquist
and Miller 1972; Peterson and Lidén 1972; Porter 1974).
Amplitude and Shape
With an absolute acoustic-immittance device, the amplitude of the
tympanogram (from peak to tail) directly yields the static-acoustic
middle-ear immittance. With a relative acoustic-immittance device,
the amplitude of the tympanogram
 

Page 109
does not directly yield the static-acoustic middle-or outer-ear
immittance. Therefore, amplitude and shape are discussed for the
relative acoustic-immittance device, whereas shape is discussed for
the absolute acoustic-immittance device; amplitude is addressed in the
section on static-acoustic middle-ear admittance.
Figure 6.1 shows the effect of probe-tone frequency on tympanograms
obtained with relative acousticimpedance meters in normal middle
ears (with normal or abnormal tympanic membranes). This figure
illustrates that there is no notching of the tympanogram for the 240-
Hz probe tone although there is a slight w-shaped notching of the
tympanogram for the 660-Hz probe tone and more pronounced
notching at higher probe-tone frequencies.
The lower limit of the normal range of peak amplitude for relative
acousticimpedance meters varies from one manufacturer to another.
The shaded areas in Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show the normal range of
peak amplitude for an American Electromedics 83 acousticimpedance
meter and Madsen ZO-73 acousticimpedance meter, respectively. The
normal range of peak amplitude is 5-10 arbitrary acoustic-immittance
units for the former vs. 3-10 units for the latter device.

Figure 6.2. 
Tympanogram form for the American Electromedics impedance 
meter (relative acousticimpedance device) (Reprinted with 
permission of American Electromedics Corp.)
 

Page 1
Figure 6.3. 
Tympanogram form for the Madsen Electronics impedance meter (relative acoust
impedance device). (Reprinted with permission of Madsen North America, Inc.
Figure 6.4 shows the susceptance, conductance, and admittance
tympanograms obtained with an absolute acoustic-admittance meter fo
the 226-and 678-Hz probe-tone frequencies in a normal middle ear. Th
figure reveals that, for the 226-Hz probe tone, the admittance
tympanogram has one peak and is relatively shallow; the susceptance
tympanogram is similar in shape, and the conductance tympanogram is
very shallow. For the 678-Hz probe tone, the admittance, susceptance,
and conductance tympanograms are multipeaked.
For the 660-Hz probe tone, there are four normal susceptance and
conductance tympanometric patterns (Vanhuyse, Creten, and Van Camp
1975). Figure 6.5 reveals that the 1B1G tympanometric pattern is
defined by single-peaked susceptance and conductance tympanograms
This figure also reveals that the 3B1G tympanometric pattern is defined
by three peaks (i.e., three extrema) for the susceptance tympanogram

and a single-peaked conductance tympanogram. The 3B3G
tympanometric pattern is defined by triple-peaked (three extrema)
susceptance and conductance tympanograms. The 5B3G tympanometri
pattern is defined by a susceptance tympanogram with five peaks (five
extrema) and a triple-peaked (three extrema) conductance tympanogram
In the Vanhuyse et al. (1975) classification system, a normally notched
tympanogram must meet the following criteria: (1) The number of extrema mu
not exceed five for the susceptance (B) and three for the conductance
 

Page 111
Figure 6.4a. 
Susceptance, conductance, and
admittance tympanograms for the 226-Hz probe
tone from the normal middle ear, obtained using
an absolute acoustic-immittance device.

Figure 6.4b. 
Susceptance, conductance, and
admittance tympanograms for the 678-Hz probe
tone from a normal middle ear, obtained using an
absolute acoustic-immittance device.
(G) tympanograms; (2) the distance (in decapascal) between the outermost
conductance maxima must be smaller than the distance between the
susceptance maxima; and (3) the distance between the outermost maxima
must not exceed 75 daPa for tympanograms with three extrema (e.g.,
3B3G) and must not exceed 100 daPa for tympanograms with five extrema
(e.g., 5B3G). (Shanks 1984, p. 274)
Gradient and Tympanometric Width
The tympanometric gradient or width is a measure of the sharpness of
the tympanometric peak. Figure 6.6 illustrates one of the European
definitions of tympanometric gradient. According to Brooks (1969),

the tympanometric gradient is the ratio hp/ht.
 

Page 112
Figure 6.5. 
Four normal high-frequency tympanometric patterns modeled in acoustic 
impedance [resistance (R) and reactance (X) and acoustic admittance 
[conductance (G) and susceptance (B)]. (Vanhuvse et al. 1975. 
Reprinted with permission from Shanks 1984.)
Figure 6.7 illustrates the American procedure for determining the
tympanometric gradient. According to ASHA (1990), the
tympanometric width is the pressure interval corresponding to 50%
reduction in static-acoustic middle-ear admittance during
tympanometric measurement. In order to determine this pressure
interval, the ear-canal volume (admittance) at +200 daPa is subtracted
from the tympanometric peak amplitude. A horizontal line is drawn
through the tympanogram at the point representing half of this
amplitude difference; in

Figure 6.6. 
Definition of tympanometric gradient. Gradient is 
defined as the ratio hp/ht, where ht equals the overall 
height of the tympanogram, and hp equals the vertical 
distance from the peak of the tympanogram to a horizontal line 
intersecting the tympanogram; its width between the points
 of intersection (a,b) is 100 mm H20. The higher the ratio 
hp/ht,  the steeper the gradient.(Adapted from Brooks 1969. Reprinted 
with permission from Paradise, Smith, and Bluestone 1976.)
 

Page 113
Figure 6.7. 
In these figures, templates for evaluating tympanometric width 
are shown for two tympanograms, one recorded from a preschool-aged
child (top) and one recorded from an adult (bottom). The shaded regions in 
each figure represent templates with widths of 150 daPa (bottom), the
upper limits of the 90-percent ranges for children and adults, respectively. 
The template is placed at the ordinate value corresponding to one half of 
the distance from the peak to the tail value. If the template can be placed 
at the appropriate admittance value without intersecting the tympanogram, 
the tympanometric width is outside the normal range. The tympanogram in the 
upper panel has a tympanometric width of 90 daPa, within the normal range for 
a preschool-
aged child. The tympanogram in the lower panel has a tympanometric 
width of 165 daPa, an abnormally wide tympanometric width for an adult.
For typanograms that are automatically corrected for ear-canal volume, 
the tail value is always zero and the template is placed at the admittance 
value corresponding to one half of the peak. This is the case for the example 
in the upper panel. When the tympanogram is not corrected for ear-canal 
volume (lower panel), the template is placed at the value that lies midway 
between the peak and the positive tail [if the norms in Appendix A of the 
ASHA (1990) guidelines are used]. If the negative tail value is used, normative 
data obtained in that manner must be employed (such as those provided by 
Shanks and Wilson 1986). [Reprinted with permission from ASHA (1990).]
addition, vertical lines from the intersection of the horizontal line and
the tympanogram to the abscissa are drawn. The pressure interval is

defined by the intersection of the vertical lines with the abscissa.
According to ASHA, the 95th percentile for tympanometric width in
normal adults is 110 daPa for a pump speed of 200 daPa/s (going from
a positive to a negative direction) and the 226-Hz probe tone. ASHA
recommended that, if measurement parameters other than those they
recommended in 1990 are used, then normative data should be
obtained for those measurement parameters.
The smaller the tympanometric gradient or the larger the
tympanometric width, the less sharp or more broad is the
tympanometric peak.
Maturational Effects
Acoustic Reflex
Neonates and Infants
The acoustic reflex is difficult to measure in neonates at low probe-
tone frequencies, for there is essentially no observable acoustic-
impedance change
 

Page 114
at probe-tone frequencies up to approximately 500 Hz (Bennett 1984;
Weatherby and Bennett 1980). At the low probe-tone frequencies,
there is mismatch between the low acoustic impedance of the
eardrum, where the acoustic-impedance change is measured, and the
high acoustic-impedance of the middle ear (associated with high
acoustic resistance). Therefore, the low acoustic impedance of the
eardrum diverts the high impedance of the middle ear, making it
difficult to ''read" the change in middle-ear impedance associated with
acoustic-reflex activation in neonates. At probe-tone frequencies
between approximately 500 and 1200 Hz, the mechanism of acoustic-
impedance change in neonates is essentially similar to that in adults
between 220 and 665 Hz. The reversing probe-tone frequency at
which the magnitude of the acoustic impedance begins to decrease
(rather than increase) with acoustic-reflex activation is approximately
1200 Hz in neonates (as compared with 665 Hz in adults). The
mechanism of acoustic-impedance change at probe-tone frequencies
above 1200 Hz in neonates is essentially similar to that in adults
above the probe-tone frequency of 665 Hz (Bennett 1984; Weatherby
and Bennett 1980).
Most investigations showed a high percentage of absent contralateral
acoustic reflexes for the low-frequency probe tone (e.g., 220 or 226
Hz) in neonates and infants (McMillan, Bennett, Marchant, and
Shurin 1985; S. Jerger, J. Jerger, Mauldin, and Segal 1974). It is
difficult to compare the contralateral ARTs between neonates or
infants and adults because of the confounding effects of earcanal
volume in which the sound pressure develops for neonates or infants
vs. adults and the coupler volume size. No normative studies on the
contralateral ARTs of neonates and infants have been done that have
controlled for these procedural problems. Investigators have also
reported a high percentage of absent ipsilateral acoustic reflexes for
the 220-Hz probe tone (McMillan et al. 1985). As for the contralateral

acoustic reflexes, a lower percentage of ipsilateral acoustic reflexes
was absent in neonates for the 660-Hz than for the 220-Hz probe tone.
The clinical techniques employed for ipsilateral and contralateral
acoustic-reflex threshold measurement do not control for variation in
sound-pressure level developed in the ear canal because of large
intersubject variability in earcanal volume in neonates and infants.
Therefore, we recommend that absence vs. presence of the acoustic
reflexes rather than the ART levels in neonates and infants be
evaluated for the purpose of determination of middle-ear effusion or
prediction of hearing impairment.
Weatherby and Bennett (1980) reported that the percentage of reflexes
present in newborns increases with probe-tone frequency, becoming
similar to that in adults by 800 Hz, at least for the broadband noise
activator. It is suggested that the presence vs. absence of the acoustic
reflex be established for the 800-Hz or higher frequency probe tone. If
the acoustic reflex is absent for the tonal activators, then the
broadband noise activator should be employed.
The findings of Hirsch, Margolis, and Rykken (1992) illustrate some
of the
 

Page 115
problems of acoustic-reflex assessment in newborns. They found that
infant movement prevented the obtaining of acoustic-reflex data in
approximately 15% of their high-risk newborns.
Children
Several investigators have shown that the mean contralateral ART for
tonal and broadband noise activators decreases as age increases to
approximately twelve years (Himmelfarb, Shanon, Popelka, and
Margolis 1978; S. Jerger et al. 1974; Osterhammel and Osterhammel
1979; Robertson, Peterson, and Lamb 1968). The data of S. Jerger et
al. (1974) suggest that the contralateral tonal ARTs for the 220-Hz
probe tone exceeded 110 dB HL in approximately 20% of normal
children from birth to three years of age, approximately 15% of
normal children between three and four years of age, approximately
12% of normal children between four and five years of age, and
approximately 6% of normal children between five and six years of
age. The data of J. Jerger ( 1970), based on 49 normal children
between six and thirteen years of age, suggest that approximately 4%
of these children have contralateral tonal ARTs for the 220-Hz probe
tone exceeding 110 dB HL. These data show that the percentage of
contralateral ARTs for the 220-Hz probe tone exceeding 110 dB HI.
falls below 10% in children five or more years of age and approaches
adult values at approximately thirteen years of age.
Hall and Weaver's (1979) data suggest that the 95th percentiles for the
contralateral acoustic reflexes for the 220-Hz probe tone in 539
normal-hearing children between one and twenty years of age who
had "minor tympanogram abnormalities" (deep tympanogram and/or
negative tympanometric peak pressure between -50 and -100 daPa)
are approximately 10 dB higher than those in normal-hearing adults.
The possibility of a maturation effect for the ipsilateral as well as
contralateral acoustic reflex for tonal and broadband noise activators

cannot be ruled out.
Static-Acoustic Immittance
Neonates and Infants
There are maturational effects on static-acoustic reactance and
resistance. For the 220-Hz probe tone in neonates, the magnitude of
the static-acoustic resistance component greatly exceeds that of the
static-acoustic reactance component of middle-ear acoustic
impedance. This relation is the reverse of that in adults. In two-to
four-month-old infants, the magnitude of the static-acoustic reactance
is smaller than in neonates but is still larger than that of acoustic
resistance. By approximately four months of age, the relation between
reactance and resistance is similar to that in adults.
 

Page 116
The magnitude of the static-acoustic middle-ear impedance is greater
in neonates than adults at probe tone frequencies above approximately
350 Hz. Below 350 Hz, the magnitude of the static-acoustic middle-
ear impedance appears to be greatly decreased and is similar to that in
adults (Weatherby and Bennett 1980). This reduced static-acoustic
impedance at the low (as compared with the high) frequency probe
tone in neonates reflects resonance related to the characteristics of the
tympanic membrane in this population. In neonates, the acoustic
impedance of the tympanic membrane is much lower that that of the
middle ear, so the higher impedance of the middle ear is shunted,
making static-acoustic middle-ear impedance measurement inaccurate
at low probe-tone frequences such as 226 Hz (Weatherby and Bennett
1980).
In neonates, measurement of the static-acoustic middle ear impedance
is also inaccurate at higher probe-tone frequencies such as 678 Hz.
This inaccuracy results from the contaminating effect of increased
volume of the ear canal because of distention of the soft tissue of the
ear canal (in neonates) with the introduction of positive air pressure in
tympanometry. The acoustic reactance is inversely related to the
product of probe-tone frequency and volume. Therefore, the increased
ear-canal volume from positive air pressure introduced into the ear
canal during tympanometry will result in decreased reactance and, in
turn, decreased impedance, particularly at higher probe-tone
frequencies.
Because of the problems associated with high resistance for the low
probe-tone frequencies and increased ear-canal volume with air-
pressure variation, no normative static-acoustic immittance data are
presently available for neonates and infants.
Children
In general, the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance is lower in

children than in adults (Jerger et al. 1972; Van Camp et al. 1986).
Brooks (1971) obtained normative data on the static-acoustic middle-
ear admittance on children using a relative acoustic-admittance device
with calculation of the ear-canal static-acoustic admittance at +200
daPa and a probe-tone frequency of 220 Hz. The range between the
10th and 90th percentiles was 0.35 to 1.05 mmhos.
Van Camp et al. (1986) obtained normative data on the static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance on children between three and five years using
an absolute acoustic-immittance device with calculation of the ear-
canal static-acoustic admittance at -400 daPa and a probe-tone
frequency of 226 Hz. For low pump speeds (-50 daPa/s), the range
between the 5th and 95th percentiles was 0.35 to 0.90 mmhos. For a
high pump speed (200 daPa/s), the range between the 5th and 95th
percentiles was 0.40 to 1.03 mmhos.
Silman, Silverman, and Arick (1992) obtained normative data on the
static-acoustic middle-ear admittance of children between three and
ten years using an absolute acoustic-immittance device with
calculation of the ear-canal static-
 

Page 117
acoustic admittance at +200 daPa, probe-tone frequency of 226 Hz,
and pump speed of 50 daPa/s. The range between the 5th and 95th
percentiles was 0.35 to 1.25 mmhos.
Tympanometric Peak Pressure
The Eustachian tube is usually collapsed in infants and young children
because it has less cartilage; furthermore, that cartilage is more
compliant in this population than in adults, and the tensor veli palatini
functions less effectively in this population than in adults. As a result,
negative tympanometric peak pressures occur more frequently in
normal infants and young children than in adults. The tympanometric
peak pressure approaches adult values between approximately seven
and thirteen years of age.
There are discrepant findings regarding the normal range for
tympanometric peak pressure in neonates, infants, and children. A
methodologic shortcoming of many of the normative investigations on
tympanometric peak pressure is the use of criteria other than otoscopic
findings for the establishment of middle-ear normalcy. Until
normative data are obtained using otoscopic findings for the
establishment of middle-ear pressure, we suggest that the lower limit
of normal tympanometric peak pressure be -100 daPa in neonates,
infants, and children up to thirteen years of age.
Tympanometric Amplitude and Shape
The characteristics of the outer and middle ears in neonates differ
from those in adults. In neonates, the osseous portion of the external
ear canal is not developed, rendering the infant ear highly compliant
in comparison with the adult ear. Further, the tympanic ring is not
fully developed until the end of the first year. Finally, the outer-and
middle-ear volumes in infants are smaller than those in adults.
Consequently, the tympanometric patterns seen in infants are different

from those seen in adults.
Margolis and Shanks (1985) stated that the introduction of positive
ear-canal air pressure during tympanometry is associated with a
distention of the ear-canal walls, producing an increase in the outer-
ear volume, susceptance, and admittance at the 220-Hz probe-tone
frequency. Therefore, tympanometry with the 220-Hz probe tone is a
less accurate clinical audiologic tool in neonates than adults. The
increase in outer-ear volume during tympanometry in neonates is
tripled in value for the 660-Hz probe tone since the acoustic
susceptance is directly related to the product of probe-tone frequency
and volume. As a result, the 660-Hz tympanogram is even less
accurate than the 220-Hz tympanogram in neonates. The problems
that confound tympanometric assessment in neonates also confound
static-acoustic middle-ear admittance assessment in neonates. By four
months of age, the amplitude and shape of the tympanogram approach
those of adults.
 

Page 118
Tympanometric Gradient or Width
The gradient is considered to be normal in children if it is greater than
0.15, according to some investigators (Brooks 1969; Paradise, Smith,
and Bluestone 1976) or if it is greater than 0.1, according to other
investigators (e.g., Fiellau-Nikolajsen 1983). The 95th percentile for
the tympanometric width in children, according to ASHA (1990), is
150 daPa for the 200 daPa/s (positive-to-negative direction) pump
speed. Silman et al. (1992), using a pump speed of 50 daPa/s
(positive-to-negative direction), reported that the 95th percentile for
the tympanometric width is 180 daPa for their sample of normal
children.
Acoustic-Immittance Test Battery: Procedure
Acoustic-Reflex Threshold
For measurement of the ART, the starting intensity should be well
below the expected threshold. For clinical purposes, intensity is
increased in 5-dB steps until a just noticeable change in acoustic
immittance occurs, as evidenced by needle deflection on the meter of
the acoustic-immittance device or analysis (which may be
retrospective) of the acoustic-immittance change displayed on a
monitor or oscilloscope. The ART is the lowest intensity associated
with a measurable change in acoustic immittance. To verify the
intensity yielding the ART, present a stimulus that is 5-dB greater; this
stimulus also should be associated with an acoustic-immittance
change that is not necessarily larger than the change at threshold
levels. Figure 6.8 illustrates the acoustic-immittance changes at
several intensities and the level associated with the ART.
Some manufacturers of absolute acoustic-immittance devices
recommend that the ART be based on a predetermined amount of
acoustic-immittance change, such as 0.02 mmho; some computer-

generated ARTs are indeed based on this definition of the ART. We
recommend that the ART be based on the smallest detectible acoustic-
immittance change rather than a predetermined magnitude of acoustic-
immittance change for these reasons: (a) the latter is not necessarily
the smallest detectible acoustic-immittance change, and (b) many of
the normative data on the ART, including the Silman and Gelfand
(1981) 90th percentiles for differential diagnosis, are based on the
smallest detectible acoustic-immittance change. The ARTs are
commonly obtained for the 500-Hz, 1000-Hz, 2000-Hz, and
broadband noise (BBN) activators.
Acoustic-Reflex Adaptation (Reflex Decay)
For ARA testing, the activating signal intensity should be 10 dB SL
for the acoustic-reflex threshold. The activating signal is presented for
ten seconds, and the change in acoustic immittance at the tympanic
membrane is monitored in the probe ear.
 

Page 119
Figure 6.8. 
The acoustic-immittance change at successive 5-dB levels 
for the 500-Hz (top row) and 1000-Hz (bottom row) tonal 
activators. Note that the smallest, visible acoustic-immittance 
change occurs at 90 dB HL for the 500-Hz tonal activator. A 
visible acoustic-immittance change is also observable at 95 dB HL, 
confirming selection of 90 dB HL as the ART at 500 Hz. 
At 1000 Hz, note that the smallest, visible acoustic-immittance 
change occurs at 85 dB HL. A visible acoustic-immittance change 
is also observable at 90 dB HL confirming selection 
of 85 dB HL as the ART at 1000 Hz.
To determine whether abnormal ARA is present, the height between
the baseline (postactivating stimulus) and the acoustic middle-ear
admittance at five (or ten) seconds and the height between the
baseline (postactivating stimulus) and onset of the acoustic middle-ear
admittance change are measured. If the former is 50% or less of the
latter, abnormal ARA is present. Figure 6.9 illustrates the procedure
for determining whether abnormal ARA is present.
Anderson, Barr, and Wedenberg (1969) considered abnormal ARA to
be present if the acoustic-reflex magnitude decayed by at least 50%
within the first five seconds. Several investigators use the criterion of
50% or greater ARA within the first ten rather than five seconds (J.

Jerger, Harford, Clemis, and Alford 1974; Olsen, Noffsinger, and
Kurdziel 1975). ARA is evaluated for the 500-Hz and 1000-Hz tonal
activators.
Static-Acoustic Admittance
With a relative acoustic-impedance meter, the clinician must make
two measurements to derive the static-acoustic middle-ear impedance
or acoustic-admittance equivalent air volume. The static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance is actually obtained during tympanometry. For
the first measurement, the ear canal is subjected to an extreme
pressure of +200 or -400 daPa. The potentiometer is then adjusted
(balanced) to bring the needle deflection in the balance meter to 0.
The outer-ear admittance is usually read from the device in acoustic-
admittance equivalent air volume. The air pressure in the ear canal is
then reduced until it reaches the tympanometric peak pressure, the
point of maximum
 

Page 120
Figure 6.9. 
Results of the acoustic-reflex adaptation test on a normal-hearing 
person. The magnitude of the acoustic-immittance change is shown 
as a function of time. Because of baseline shift, the poststimulus tail 
(B) is lower than the prestimulus tail (A). Therefore, a horizontal line 
should be drawn from the poststimulus tail. A horizontal line should also 
be drawn from the peak magnitude at the onset of the activator stimulation 
(C). The vertical line (D) is a marker set at 10 seconds from the signal 
onset. The half-amplitude point between the two horizontal lines (50 percent 
decay point) should be determined (B to E distance along the D vertical line) 
and compared with the amplitude associated with the magnitude of the 
acoustic-immittance change at 10 seconds poststimulus activation (B to F 
distance along the vertical line). If the amplitude of B-F is greater than that 
of B-E, abnormal acoustic-reflex adaptation is not present. (If the 5-second 
rather than the 10-second marker is employed as the criterion for adaptation, 
the procedure is modified accordingly, with amplitudes determined 
based on the 5-second marker.)
deflection of the needle in the balance meter to the left (if +200 daPa
was used for the first measurement) before reversing direction. (If
-400 daPa was used for the first measurement, the tympanometric
peak pressure is reached at the point of maximum deflection of the
needle in the balance meter to the right before reversing direction.) At
the tympanometric peak pressure, the potentiometer is again adjusted
(balanced) to bring the needle deflection in the balance meter to 0 to
yield the second measurement. The total-ear admittance is then read
from the device in acoustic-admittance equivalent air volume. The
first result (the outer-ear static-acoustic admittance in equivalent air
volume) is subtracted from the second result (the total-ear static-

acoustic admittance in equivalent air volume) to yield the middle-ear
static-acoustic admittance in equivalent air volume.
With an absolute acoustic-admittance meter, the two measurements
are automatically made by the acoustic-immittance device during
tympanometry and read directly from the graph of the acoustic-
admittance-pressure function. Figure 6.10 shows the acoustic-
admittance pressure function (tympanogram) obtained with an
absolute acoustic-impedance meter. Figure 6.10 reveals that the static-
acoustic admittance in mmhos is shown on the ordinate and the ear-
canal air pressure in daPa is shown on the abscissa. The static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance is the static-acoustic admittance from the
tympanometric peak pressure (highest point on the tympanogram) to
the baseline on the negative or positive side of the tympanogram (see
B in Figure 6.10). If the baseline feature of the device is employed,
the static-acoustic ear-canal admittance will not be shown in the
tympanogram, and the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance is the
difference between the static-acoustic admittance at the peak pressure
and that at the
 

Page 121
Figure 6.10. 
Admittance tympanogram obtained with the 226-Hz probe tone 
and recorded on the GS 1733 otoadmittance meter (absolute 
acoustic-admittance device) from a normal middle ear. (A) Outer 
ear static-acoustic admittance; (B) Middle-ear static-acoustic 
admittance; (C) Total (combined outer and middle) ear 
static-acoustic admittance.
abscissa. If the baseline feature of the device is not employed, the
static-acoustic ear-canal admittance will be shown on the
tympanogram as the difference between the static-acoustic admittance
at the baseline of the tympanogram and that at the abscissa (see A in
Figure 6.10).
The static-acoustic ear-canal admittance will be smaller if it is based
on -400 rather than +200 daPa. If the static-acoustic ear-canal
admittance is based on -400, the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance
may be spuriously large and may result in lack of detection of some
stiffening middle-ear lesions. Therefore, we recommend basing the
static-acoustic ear-canal admittance on +200 rather than -400 daPa.
Tympanometric Peak Pressure

In Figure 6.10, the tympanometric peak pressure is 0 daPa as it is the
pressure associated with the greatest tympanometric amplitude. In
order to obtain a tympanometric peak pressure that is less affected by
the direction of the air-pressure change (positive to negative vs.
negative to positive), it is recommended that the tympanometric peak
pressure be obtained twice, once while varying the air pressure from
positive to negative and once while varying the air pressure from
negative to positive. The average of the two tympanometric peak
pressures will yield a more accurate tympanometric peak pressure.
This procedure is recommended when a borderline normal
tympanometric peak pressure is obtained.
 

Page 122
Tympanometric Gradient and Width
The procedure for the tympanometric gradient or width follows that
for obtaining the tympanogram. With a relative acoustic-immittance
device, +200 daPa is introduced into the ear canal, and the
potentiometer is adjusted until the deflection needle points to the
extreme right of the range, indicating the highest impedance or lowest
admittance (relative units). Then the air pressure is decreased
gradually to -200 or -400 daPa, and the sound-pressure change with
air pressure is recorded automatically or manually plotted at 50-daPa
intervals. The procedure is similar for an absolute acoustic-immittance
device except there is no adjustment of the potentiometer and the
middle ear or combined outer-and middle-ear admittance at various
ear canal pressures is recorded. Then, one of the methods mentioned
earlier for calculation of the tympanometric gradient or width is
applied to the tympanogram.
Acoustic-Immittance Findings For Various Pathologies
The acoustic-immittance findings are presented for the more
commonly occurring outer ear, middle ear, cochlear, eighth nerve, and
brainstem disorders in neonates, infants, and children, which can
affect aural acoustic immittance. Acoustic immittance findings are
generally diagnostic of auditory site rather than disorder.
Nevertheless, acoustic immittance findings in conjunction with other
audiologic findings and case history may be suggestive of a particular
auditory disorder.
Outer Ear Disorders
External Otitis
In cases of severe external otitis, one finds a mild hearing impairment
and elevated or absent contralateral acoustic reflexes (when the

stimulus ear is the affected ear). The elevated or absent contralateral
acoustic reflexes result from the presence of significant air-bone gaps.
If the external otitis results in a mass growth on the floor of the
external ear canal, the tympanometric amplitude and shape will reflect
mass effects (Shanks 1984), which lower the resonant frequency of
the middle ear. These mass effects can be detected at high probe-tone
frequencies. Therefore, the tympanometric amplitude and shape will
be normal for the 226-Hz probe tone but will be abnormal for the 678-
Hz probe tone, showing an abnormally wide separation between the
outermost extrema, according to the Vanhuyse et al. (1975) criteria.
Other acoustic-immittance findings are normal for external otitis.
Figure 6.11 illustrates the admittance tympanogram for the 220-Hz
probe tone and the susceptance and conductance tympanograms for
the 660-Hz probe tone for a five-year-old child with external otitis.
Note the 5B tympanometric pattern that became a 1B pattern after the
otitis externa resolved.
 

Page 123
Figure 6.11. 
Admittance tympanogram (A) for the 220-Hz probe tone and 
the susceptance (B) and conductance (C) tympanograms for 
the 660-Hz probe tone for a five-year-old child with otitis externa.
Collapsed Ear Canal
The acoustic-immittance findings are unaffected by collapsed canals
when the activating transducer and the probe-tone transducer are
inserts that alleviate the collapsed ear canal. Some acoustic-
immittance devices employ earphones rather than inserts for the
activating signal transducer. In such cases, the contralateral acoustic
reflexes will be elevated or absent when the stimulated ear is the
affected ear as the collapsed canal will result in a blockage in the ear
canal that reduces the intensity of the activating signal. If the collapse
is unilateral, the contralateral acoustic reflexes are affected
unilaterally. If the collapse is bilateral, the contralateral acoustic
reflexes are affected bilaterally. Other acoustic-immittance findings

will be normal for collapsed ear canals.
Cerumen Impaction
With cerumen impaction, the probe tone energy is directed against the
hard wall of the cerumen rather than against the tympanic membrane.
Resultantly, air-pressure variation in the ear canal will produce no
acoustic immittance changes
 

Page 124
in the ear as the probe tone will essentially be totally reflected off the
hard wall of the cerumen at all air pressures. Therefore, the static-
acoustic outer-ear admittance and total-ear admittance will be below
normal limits and essentially equivalent, yielding a static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance near zero. Also, a tympanometric peak pressure
will be absent. The acoustic reflexes will be absent for all activating
frequencies for ipsilateral and contralateral stimulation when the
probe ear is the affected ear. When the stimulus ear is the affected ear,
the contralateral acoustic reflex will be elevated or absent, depending
upon the air-bone gap at the activating frequency. Similar findings are
also obtained for a probe assembly that is incorrectly inserted, with
the result that the probe tone is reflected off the ear-canal wall.
Middle-Ear Disorders
Tympanic Membrane Disorders
PERFORATION: With a perforated tympanic membrane, the probe
tone is always directed against the promontory of the cochlea.
Therefore, air-pressure variation in the ear canal will produce no
acoustic-immittance changes in the ear as the probe tone will
essentially be totally reflected off the bony promontory of the cochlea
at all air pressures. Therefore, as in the case of impacted cerumen, the
static-acoustic outer-ear admittance and total-ear admittance will be
equivalent, yielding a static-acoustic middle-ear admittance near zero.
Unlike the case of impacted cerumen, however, the ear-canal static-
acoustic admittance with a perforated tympanic membrane will be
abnormally increased, exceeding 2.0 mmho, as the perforation causes
inclusion of the middle-ear volume when the ear-canal volume is
being measured. As in the case of impacted cerumen, a
tympanometric peak pressure will be absent in ears with a perforated
tympanic membrane. Also, the acoustic reflexes will be absent for
ipsilateral and contralateral stimulation when the probe ear is the

affected ear. When the stimulus ear is the affected ear, the
contralateral acoustic reflex could occur at normal levels if no
significant air-bone gaps are present; or it may be elevated or absent,
depending upon the magnitude of the air-bone gaps at the activating
test frequency, if a significant air-bone gap is present at that
frequency.
FLACCID: Some persons are born with a flaccid tympanic
membrane. A flaccid tympanic membrane (one with decreased
stiffness) can also result from a healed perforation. The effect of
decreased stiffness is to lower the resonant frequency of the middle
ear to approximately 600-800 Hz. Therefore, at the low probe-tone
frequency (e.g., 226 Hz), a flaccid tympanic membrane will behave
like a compliant system, and a large amount of probe-tone energy will
be admitted into the middle ear. The static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance will be abnormally increased, with tympanometric
amplitude therefore in-
 

Page 125
creased, but other acoustic admittance findings will be normal for the
low-frequency probe tone.
At the high probe-tone frequency (e.g., 678 Hz), the tympanometric
amplitude and shape will tend to reflect resonance effects as
evidenced by multiple peaks in the susceptance and conductance
tympanograms, although the tympanograms will still be normal,
according to the Vanhuyse et al. (1975) criteria. The tympanometric
findings for the high-frequency probe tone are similar for external
otitis and a flaccid tympanic membrane. The findings for the former,
however, are related to an increase in the mass component of the ear;
the latter are related to a decrease in stiffness of the middle ear,
lowering the resonant frequency of the system. A flaccid tympanic
membrane does not result in significant air-bone gaps.
TYMPANOSCLEROSIS: In children, tympanosclerosis is the
condition of scar tissue on the tympanic membrane, usually as a result
of chronic middle-ear effusion. The scar tissue can slightly increase
the mass component of the middle ear. The static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance is generally normal or slightly increased. The other
acoustic-immittance findings are generally normal for the low-
frequency probe tone. At the high probe-tone frequency (e.g., 678
Hz), the tympanometric amplitude and shape will tend to reflect
increased mass effects (which lower the resonant frequency of the
middle ear), yielding multiple peaks in the susceptance and
conductance tympanograms; the tympanograms, however, will still be
normal, according to the Vanhuyse et al. (1975) criteria.
The tympanometric findings for the high-frequency probe tone are
similar to those for external otitis and a flaccid tympanic membrane.
The findings for tympanosclerosis and external otitis, however, are
related to an increase in the mass component of the ear, whereas the
findings for a flaccid tympanic membrane are related to a decrease in

stiffness of the middle ear. Tympanosclerosis is not associated with
significant air-bone gaps.
Eustachian Tube Dysfunction
Normative pediatric data are lacking on Eustachian tube testing for the
Valsalva, Toynbee, inflation, and deflation maneuvers to identify
abnormal Eustachian tube function, differentiate between functional
and mechanical obstruction, and differentiate between obstruction and
abnormal patency. Therefore, tympanometric Eustachian tube tests for
the Valsalva, Toynbee, inflation, and deflation maneuvers in children
are not recommended at this time.
A tympanometric peak pressure more negative than - 100 daPa is
consistent with Eustachian tube dysfunction in children up to thirteen
years of age. Tympanometric peak pressures less than -100 daPa are
present in 10% of newborns, 18% of three-month-old infants, and
39% of six-month-old infants (Gersdorff 1992). In children older than
thirteen years of age, a negative tympanometric peak pressure less
than -50 daPa is consistent with Eustachian tube
 

Page 126
dysfunction (as it is for adults). The static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance may be slightly reduced or within normal limits.
Significant air-bone gaps are occasionally present. As the ear-canal
pressure is routinely adjusted to equal the tympanometric peak
pressure in acoustic-reflex assessment, the contralateral and ipsilateral
acoustic reflexes obtained when the probe ear is the affected ear are
usually within the normal range or are slightly elevated. The
contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes obtained when the
stimulus ear is the affected ear are within normal limits or are slightly
elevated according to the magnitude of the air-bone gap at the
activating signal frequency.
Middle-Ear Effusion
The acoustic immittance results for middle-ear effusion (MEE) are
generally consistent with those for a stiffening middle-ear pathology.
Therefore, when the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance is affected,
it is reduced (J. Jerger et al. 1974). The tympanometric peak pressure
usually is significantly negative (i.e., more negative than the lower
limit of the normal range) or absent (J. Jerger 1970). Reduced
gradients (e.g., less than or equal to 0.1) and large tympanometric
widths (e.g., greater than 150 daPa in children) are associated with the
presence of MEE. The contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes
generally are absent for all stimulus activators when the affected ear is
the probe ear; they are elevated or absent, depending upon the
magnitude of the air-bone gap when the affected ear is the stimulus
ear. Significant (15 dB or more) air-bone gaps are generally present.
Silman, Silverman, and Arick (1994) reported that 100% of their
sample of children with MEE who failed the ASHA (1990) pure-tone
screening and 92% of their sample of children with MEE who passed
the ASHA (1990) pure-tone screening had significant air-bone gaps at
one or more frequencies.

Children
Silman (1990) and Silman et al. (1992) investigated the sensitivity
and specificity of the acoustic-immittance measures in detection of
MEE. Table 6.2 shows the results of their investigation for the total
sample of 82 middle ears with effusion, the subgroup of middle ears
with effusion and hearing loss greater than 20 dB HL at 1000, 2000,
and/or 4000 Hz, the subgroup of middle ears with effusion and normal
hearing threshold levels at 1000-4000 Hz, and a group of 53 middle
ears without effusion. This table reveals fair to poor sensitivity for the
ASHA (1990) tympanometric width and static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance, respectively, and excellent sensitivity for the
tympanometric peak pressure and ipsilateral acoustic reflex measures
for the total MEE sample. In the MEE subgroup with normal-hearing
threshold levels, only the ipsilateral acoustic reflex measure had
excellent sensitivity, approximating 90%. The value of the acoustic
reflex was substantiated by Cavaliere, Masieri, Liberini, Proietti, and
Magalini (1992),
 

Page 127
Table 6.2. Results for ASHA (1990) TW, Static-Acoustic ME
Admittance,
IAR, and TPP in MEE and in Control Ears
ASHA (1990)
Static-Acoustic
TW
ME Admittance
IAR
TPP
Group
P
Fa P
FbP
FcP
Fd
MEE (N=82)
23
77 39
617
9311
89
MEE having 1kHz, 2kHz, and/or 4kHz > 20 dB HL (N=44)
7
93 14
869
912
98
MEE having 1kHz, 2kHz, and 4kHz < 20 dB HL (N=38)
42
58 68
325
9521
79
ME without effusion having normal-hearing thresholds (N=53)
81
19 77
2384
1683
17
P = pass rate (%); F = failure rate (%)
a> 180 daPa (pump speed 50 daPa/s); b< 0.35 mmho (pump speed 50
daPa/s); cabsent at 110 dB HL at
1000 Hz; d£ -100 daPa. Reprinted with permission from Silman et al.
(1992).
who reported that abnormal or absent acoustic reflexes in a sample of
unconscious patients in the intensive care unit usually were associated
with MEE or Eustachian tube dysfunction. Silman (1990) and Silman
et al. (1992) also reported that the specificity ranged between
approximately 81 and 84% for the ASHA (1990) tympanometric
width, ipsilateral acoustic reflex, and tympanometric peak pressure
and was below 80% for the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance.
Ovesen, Passke, and Elbrond's (1993) findings are in accord with
those of Silman et al. (1992). They reported that the specificity of an

acoustic-immittance protocol (based on absent or negative
tympanometric peak pressure) that does not include the acoustic reflex
is low (52.9%). The presence vs. absence of MEE was established
upon myringotomy following otomicroscopy.
Nozza et al. (1992) investigated the acoustic-immittance findings in
children between one and eight years of age who were brought to the
operating room for myringotomy and tube surgery. Their sample
consisted of 81 middle ears with effusion and 30 middle ears without
effusion. When the criterion for MEE based on the static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance was less than or equal to 0.3 mmho, the
sensitivity and specificity were only 73% and 80%, respectively.
Although the sensitivity of the tympanometric gradient (Paradise et al.
1976, based on Brooks 1969) was high at 91%, the specificity was
low at 70% when the criterion was less than or equal to 0.2. The
ipsilateral acoustic reflex measure (110 dB HL at 1000 Hz) was the
only acoustic-immittance measure characterized by high rates for both
sensitivity (88%) and specificity (85%).
Smith, Wiley, and Pyle (1993) also evaluated the efficacy of the
individual acoustic-immittance measures in detection of MEE. Data
were obtained from subjects with surgically-confirmed MEE. The
sensitivity and specificity of the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance
were 60% and 80%, respectively. The
 

Page 128
sensitivity and specificity of the tympanometric width were only 74%
and 48%, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of an absent (at
90 dB HL) contralateral acoustic reflex for pulsed broadband noise
(which was absent for at least two of three activator presentations)
were 84% and 63%, respectively.
The ASHA (1990) protocol for detection of MEE was based on the
static-acoustic middle-ear admittance and tympanometric width.
Silman (1990) and Silman et al. (1992) proposed a protocol for
detection of MEE, based on the ASHA (1990) tympanometric width,
ipsilateral acoustic reflex, and tympanometric peak pressure. That is,
either (a) increased tympanometric width, reduced static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance, and absent ipsilateral acoustic reflex (at 110
dB HL at 1000 Hz), or (b) significantly negative tympanometric peak
pressure (less than or equal to -100 daPa) and absent ipsilateral
acoustic reflex are consistent with middle-ear effusion. They
compared the sensitivity and specificity of their proposed protocol
with those for the ASHA protocol, as shown in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3 reveals that the sensitivity is poor for the ASHA protocol
but excellent for the Silman et al. proposed protocol for the MEE
group with normal-hearing threshold levels. Similarly, the specificity
of the Silman et al. proposed protocol is markedly higher than that for
the ASHA protocol. Smith et al. (1993) reported that the sensitivity
and specificity of the ASHA protocol were only 74% and 69%,
respectively, based on data from subjects with surgically-confirmed
MEE. Smith et al. reported that the sensitivity and specificity of an
acoustic-immittance protocol increased to 83% and 82%, respectively,
when the contralateral BBN acoustic reflex was combined with the
static middle-ear admittance.
For detection of MEE in children, we recommend the use of the
Silman

Table 6.3. Results for the Silman et al. (1992) Proposed Protocol and
ASHA (1990)
Protocol in MEE and in Control Ears
ASHA (1990)
Protocol
[(Static + TW + IAR) or (TPP +
IAR)]*
Group
P
FP
F
MEE
(N=82)
19.5
81.510.0
90.0
MEE having I kHz, 2kHz, and/or 4kHz > 20 dB HL (N=44)
7.0
93.09.0
91.0
MEE having 1kHz, 2kHz, and 4kHz £ 20 dB HL (N=38)
37.0
63.010.5
89.5
ME without effusion having normal-hearing thresholds (N=53)
79.0
21.092.5
7.5
P = pass rate (%); F = failure rate (%)
*Proposed Silman et al. (1992) protocol based on (a) reduced static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance, in-
creased tympanometric width, and absent ipsilateral acoustic reflex, or (b)
significantly negative tympa-
nonmetric peak pressure and absent ipsilateral acoustic reflex. Adapted
from Silman et al. (1992).
 

Page 129
et al. protocol, if the acoustic-immittance device permits ipsilateral
acoustic-reflex testing at 110 dB HL at 1000 Hz with a multiplexing
circuit to control for artifacts. Otherwise, the Smith et al. protocol is
recommended. For diagnostic purposes, the acoustic-reflex threshold
should be established as acoustic reflexes frequently are obtained
below the criterion level of 110 dB HL for the ipsilateral tonal
acoustic reflex and 90 dB HL for the contralateral BBN acoustic
reflex.
Neonates and Infants up to Four Months of Age
As mentioned earlier, the static-acoustic middle-ear admittance and
tympanometric amplitude and shape measures are insensitive to
middle-ear pathology in neonates and infants up to four months of
age.
We suggest that the following be considered as consistent with the
presence of MEE in neonates and infants up to four months of age: (a)
absence of the contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes for the
1000-Hz tonal and BBN activators for the 226-, 678-, and 1000-Hz (if
available) probe-tone frequencies together with a significantly
negative tympanometric peak pressure (less than or equal to -100
daPa); or (b) absent tympanometric peak pressure. Neonates and
infants with absent acoustic reflexes but a tympanometric peak
pressure less than -100 daPa should be followed up as MEE cannot be
ruled out in such cases.
Congenital Ossicular Fixation
Congenital ossicular fixation, a stiffening middle-ear pathology, is
frequently accompanied by significant air-bone gaps. The static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance and, consequently, tympanometric
amplitude for the 226-Hz probe tone can be reduced or normal.
Tympanometric shape is unaffected for the low-and high-frequency

probe tones. When the affected ear is the probe ear, the ipsilateral and
contralateral acoustic reflexes will be absent for all activators. When
the affected ear is the stimulus ear, the contralateral and ipsilateral
acoustic reflexes will be elevated or absent, depending on the
magnitude of the air-bone gap at the activating frequency.
Some children present with both a flaccid tympanic membrane and
ossicular fixation. In such cases, the static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance reflects the most lateral pathology (i.e., the flaccid
tympanic membrane) and is abnormally increased.
Cholesteatoma
In cases exhibiting cholesteatoma, significant air-bone gaps are
usually present. With advanced cholesteatoma, tympanic membrane
perforation and ossicular necrosis can occur. The tympanometric peak
pressure frequently is negative. This stiffening pathology results in an
abnormally reduced static-acoustic middle-ear admittance (J. Jerger et
al. 1974). Compared with congenital ossicular
 

Page 130
fixation, middle-ear effusion, and tympanosclerosis, this is the only
stiffening middle-ear pathology characterized by static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance values that do not overlap with those for
normal middle ears. The tympanometric amplitude or shape can be
reduced or flat for the low-frequency probe tone. The tympanometric
pattern resembles that for ossicular discontinuity if ossicular necrosis
occurs. When the affected ear is the probe ear, the pathology results in
absence of the contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes for all
activators. When the affected ear is the stimulus ear, the contralateral
and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes are absent or elevated, depending
upon the magnitude of the air-bone gap at the activating frequency.
These findings also are generally characteristic of other tumors of the
middle ear.
Ossicular Discontinuity
Ossicular discontinuity is associated with large air-bone gaps
throughout the frequency range, which are often larger at the high
frequencies. Ossicular discontinuity substantially increases the mass
component of the middle ear. The static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance is increased or normal; consequently, the tympanometric
amplitude for the low-frequency probe tone can be increased or
normal. The tympanometric shape for the low-frequency probe tone is
normal. Because of the increase in the mass component of the middle
ear, the tympanometric shape and amplitude are abnormal for the
high-frequency probe tone (e.g., 678 Hz). That is, for the high-
frequency probe tone, more than five extrema in the susceptance
tympanogram, or more than three extrema in the conductance
tympanogram, or greater than 75 daPa distance between the outermost
extrema in a tympanogram with three extrema, and/or greater than
100 daPa distance between the outermost extrema in a tympanogram
with five extrema exist. Congenital ossicular fixation with a flaccid
tympanic membrane as well as ossicular discontinuity may present

with significant air-bone gaps and abnormally increased static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance. The tympanometric pattern for the
high-frequency probe tone (e.g., 678 Hz) will differentiate between
these pathologies as the former condition will be associated with
normal, high-frequency tympanometric shape whereas the latter will
be associated with an abnormal, high-frequency tympanometric shape.
Figure 6.12 contrasts the susceptance and conductance tympanograms
for a child with congenital ossicular fixation and a flaccid tympanic
membrane with those for a child with ossicular discontinuity.
With ossicular discontinuity, the acoustic-reflex pattern is dependent
on the location of the break. A break lateral to the insertion of the
stapedius on the stapes will interrupt the connection between the
insertion point of the stapedius on the stapes and the eardrum. In this
case, the contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes will be absent
for all activators when the affected ear is the probe ear. When the
affected ear is the stimulus ear, the contralateral and ipsilateral
acoustic reflexes are generally absent because of the large air-bone
gaps.
 

Page 131
Figure 6.12. 
Tympanograms obtained using an absolute acoustic-immittance 
device using the 660-Hz probe tone. (A) Susceptance 
tympanogram from the ear with ossicular discontinuity. 
(B) Conductance tympanogram from the ear with ossicular 
discontinuity. (C) Susceptance tympanogram from the ear 
with otosclerosis and a flaccid tympanic membrane or healed 
perforation of the tympanic membrane. (D) Conductance tympanogram 
from the ear with otosclerosis and flaccid tympanic membrane. 
(Reprinted with permission from Silman and Silverman 1991.)

 

Page 132
A break medial to the insertion of the stapedius on the stapes will not
interrupt the connection between the insertion point of the stapedius
on the stapes and the eardrum. In this case, the contralateral and
ipsilateral acoustic reflexes will be present at normal or near normal
levels when the affected ear is the probe ear. Nevertheless, the
contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes will generally be absent
because of the large air-bone gaps when the affected ear is the
stimulus ear.
Cochlear Disorders
In persons with hearing impairment not exceeding approximately 50
to 55 dB HL, the contralateral tonal ARTs for the low-frequency probe
tone (e.g., 220 Hz) are similar to those for normal-hearing persons.
Therefore, the tonal ARTs in such cases are generally unaffected by
hearing impairment of cochlear etiology (Alberti and Kristensen 1970;
Beedle and Harford 1973; Jepsen 1963; J. Jerger 1970; J. Jerger et al.
1972; Metz 1946; Peterson and Lidén 1972). Hearing impairment of
cochlear etiology exceeding approximately 50 to 55 dB HL affects the
afferent acoustic reflex arc. When the magnitude of the hearing
impairment exceeds approximately 50 dB HL, the contralateral tonal
ART for the low-frequency probe tone increases directly with the
degree of hearing impairment (Gelfand, Piper, and Silman 1983;
Holmes and Woodford 1977; Keith 1979; Martin and Brunette 1980;
Norris, Stelmachowicz, and Taylor 1974; Popelka 1981; Silman and
Gelfand 1979, 1981; Silman, Popelka, and Gelfand 1978; Silman et
al. 1982).
The 90th percentiles for the contralateral tonal ARTs as a function of
magnitude of hearing impairment at 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz for the
220-Hz tonal activator in adults (Silman and Gelfand 1981) are shown
in Table 6.4. These data show that the 90th percentiles increase with
increasing magnitude of cochlear hearing impairment beyond

approximately 50 dB HL. Silman and Gelfand also reported that the
frequency of absent contralateral acoustic reflexes for the 220-Hz
probe tone is 30% or less for the 500-, 1000-, and 2000-Hz tonal
activators when the magnitude of hearing impairment does not exceed
85 dB HL; however, it increases to 56% for the 500-Hz tonal
activator, 40% for the 1000-Hz tonal activator, and 58% for the 2000-
Hz tonal activator when the magnitude of the hearing impairment is
90 dB HL or greater. Thus, the Silman and Gelfand 90th percentiles
are feasible for clinical application when the magnitude of the hearing
impairment is less than 90 dB HL at 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz.
Neonates and Infants
The contralateral acoustic reflexes for the 220-Hz probe tone are
absent in a majority of neonates and infants. Therefore, the Silman
and Gelfand (1981) ninetieth contralateral tonal ART percentiles for
normal-hearing thresholds and cochlear hearing impairment cannot be
applied to neonates and infants.
 

Table 6.4. 90th Percentiles (dB HL) for the Contralateral Tonal ARTs
S&Ga (1981)
S&G (1981) + 5dB
S&G (1981) + 1
13+ years
9-13 years
5-9 years
(dB HL)
(dB HL)
(dB HL)
Hearing
loss
(dB HL)
500
1000
2000
500
1000
2000
500
1000
0-5
95
100
95
100
105
100
105
110
10-15
95
100
100
100
105
105
105
110
20-25
95
100
100
100
105
105
105
110
30-35
100
100
105
105
105
110
110
110
40-45
100
105
105
105
110
110
110
115
50-55
105
105
110
110
110
115
115
115
60-65
105
110
115
110
115
120
115
120
70-75
115
115
125
120
120
125
125
80-85
125
125
125
aSilman and Gelfand.
Children
The percentage of contralateral tonal ARTs exceeding 110 dB HL falls 
10% in children who are five or more years of age and approaches adul
by thirteen years of age (S. Jerger et al. 1974). Also, the 95th percentile
the contralateral tonal ARTs for the 220-Hz probe tone are approximate
dB higher in normal-hearing children with minor tympanic membrane
abnormalities than normal-hearing adults.

Based on these data, we suggest that 10 dB be added to the Silman and
(1981) 90th percentile levels for the contralateral ARTs for the low-freq
probe tone to derive the interim 90th percentile levels for children betw
and nine years of age. We also suggest that 5 dB be added to the Silman
Gelfand 90th percentile levels for the contralateral ARTs for the low-fr
probe tone to derive the interim 90th percentile levels for children betw
nine and thirteen years of age. The Silman and Gelfand 90th percentile
can be applied without correction to children who are thirteen or more 
age. The results of the application of the 10-dB and 5-dB correction fac
the Silman and Gelfand 90th percentile levels for the contralateral tona
are shown in Table 6.4. The application of the 5-or 10-dB correction to
percentiles limits their clinical utility to children with magnitudes of he
impairment of less than 80 dB HL at 500 and 1000 Hz and less than 70
at 2000 Hz. It is recommended that these derived, interim 90th percenti
be employed until normative 90th percentile, large-sample data are obt
It is recommended that, for children between four months and five year
age, the contralateral tonal ARTs for the low-frequency probe tone be
compared with the adult or proposed interim norms for children. If the 
do not exceed the proposed pediatric or adult norms, the results can be
considered as consistent
 

Page 134
with normal-hearing thresholds or hearing impairment of cochlear
etiology. If the ARTs exceed both the adult and proposed pediatric
norms, then the 90th percentiles (either corrected or uncorrected) are
not applicable.
Eighth Nerve and Low Brainstem Disorders
Eighth nerve and low brainstem disorders affecting the afferent
acoustic-reflex arc (e.g., at the level of the superior olivary complex,
trapezoid body, ventral cochlear nuclei, facial-nerve nuclei) are
generally associated with elevated or absent ARTs and abnormal
acoustic-reflex adaptation when the stimulus ear is the affected side
(Anderson et al. 1970; Silman, Gelfand, and Chun 1978). Other
acoustic-immittance findings are unaffected by eighth nerve and low
brainstem disorders. The acoustic reflexes are generally unaffected by
higher level central auditory disorders.
Eighth Nerve Disorders
Eighth nerve disorders in children, such as those that can result from
bacterial meningitis and neurosyphilis (congenital or acquired), are
frequently bilateral. Eighth nerve tumors in children, except for those
associated with Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis, are rare. With
unilateral eighth nerve pathology, the contralateral acoustic reflexes
(when the stimulus ear is the affected side) are elevated or absent
beyond the 90th percentile levels, and the ipsilateral acoustic reflexes
also are elevated or absent. Contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic-
reflex adaptation frequently is abnormal when the stimulus ear is the
affected side. With bilateral eighth nerve pathology, the contralateral
and ipsilateral acoustic reflexes are usually bilaterally elevated or
absent; contralateral and ipsilateral acoustic-reflex adaptation is
usually abnormal bilaterally.
Low Brainstem Lesions

In children, unlike adults, the majority (65%) of brain tumors develop
in the posterior fossa (Green, Waggener, and Kriegsfeld 1976). The
most common pattern of acoustic reflex abnormality is bilaterally
elevated or absent contralateral acoustic reflexes and bilaterally
normal ipsilateral acoustic reflexes. Frequently, contralateral acoustic-
reflex adaptation is abnormal bilaterally with bilaterally normal
ipsilateral acoustic-reflex adaptation. When the lesion is extensive,
affecting the ventral cochlear nuclei or facial nerve nuclei unilaterally
or bilaterally, then the ipsilateral acoustic-reflex threshold and
adaptation also can be abnormal for the affected side(s).
Facial Nerve or Stapedial Muscle Pathology
The distinguishing acoustic-immittance feature in cases of facial nerve
pathology medial to the insertion on the stapedius muscle or stapedius
muscle disorders is
 

Page 135
abnormality of the acoustic-reflex threshold (Alford, Jerger, Coats,
Peterson, and Weber 1973) or adaptation (Silman et al. 1988; Wilson,
Shanks, and Lilly 1984), when the affected side is the probe ear.
Disorders of the medial part of the facial nerve or of the stapedius
represent a lesion of the efferent part of the acoustic-reflex arc.
Lesions of the efferent acoustic-reflex arc are manifested when the
affected side is the probe ear. Facial nerve pathology lateral to the
insertion on the stapedius muscle does not affect the acoustic reflex.
Acoustic-Immittance Screening For Detection Of Middle Ear With
Effusion
The ASHA (1990) guidelines for screening to detect MEE were based
on the history, visual inspection, identification audiometry, and
tympanometry. The history was done at the time of screening or in
advance (especially from parents) to establish whether there was
recent occurrence of otalgia (ear pain) or otorrhea (ear discharge).
ASHA recommended immediate medical referral if the history of ear
pain or otorrhea was positive. ASHA also recommended visual
inspection by the unaided eye or otoscopy. If visual inspection reveals
(a) structural defects of the ear, head, or neck; (b) ear-canal
abnormalities (blood or effusion, occlusion, inflammation, excessive
cerumen, tumor, foreign material); or (c) apparent eardrum
abnormalities (abnormal color, bulging eardrum, fluid line or bubbles,
perforation, or tympanic-membrane retraction), the ASHA guidelines
also recommend immediate medical referral.
The ASHA guidelines included identification audiometry for the
purposes of (a) detection of a significant communication problem in
conjunction with abnormal acoustic-immittance findings and (b)
detection of sensorineural hearing impairment. The procedure for
identification (pure-tone screening) audiometry recommended by the
ASHA guidelines was in conjunction with the ASHA (1985)

identification audiometry guidelines. Therefore, pure-tone (air-
conduction) screening was based on 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz at 20
dB HL if the screening program included acoustic-immittance
assessment; it was based on 500 Hz as well as 1000, 2000, and 4000
Hz at 20 dB HL if the screening program did not include acoustic-
immittance assessment. Referral for a complete audiologic evaluation
was based on failure to respond to the recommended screening levels
at any frequency in either ear. Pure-tone rescreening, preferably
within the same test session, was mandatory to reduce the failure rate.
The ASHA (1990) acoustic-immittance measures were based on a
226-Hz probe tone, +200 daPa ear canal volume correction, and a
pump speed of -200 daPa/s (going from a positive to a negative
direction). Interim normative data for children who are three or more
years of age and adults were provided by ASHA for use until more
complete normative data become available. ASHA recommended that
normative data should be collected if acoustic-immittance screening is
based on other combinations of ear canal correction and pump speed.
ASHA stated that the test procedures could be performed by
audiologists
 

Page 136
or personnel other than audiologists, provided they were sufficiently
trained and supervised by a clinical audiologist with appropriate
training and experience related to the test protocol.
The acoustic-immittance measures included equivalent ear canal
volume, static-acoustic middle-ear admittance, and tympanometric
width. Equivalent ear canal assessment was recommended for
detection of many tympanic membrane perforations. The presence of
an equivalent ear canal volume exceeding the 90% range at 1.0 cm3
(based on +200 daPa and a -200 daPa/s pump speed) together with an
absent tympanometric peak pressure constituted the basis for
immediate medical referral. Detection of other middle-ear disorders,
such as chronic or recurrent MEE as opposed to transient,
spontaneously recovering serous otitis media, was based on static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance and tympanometric width.
Based on ASHA's (1990) normative data for children and acoustic-
immittance screening parameters, reduced static-acoustic middle-ear
admittance below 0.9 mmho (the lower limit of the 90% range) or
increased tympanometric width exceeding 150 daPa (the upper limit
of the 90% range), which is determined using the ASHA method,
constitutes a basis for retesting. That is, reduced static-acoustic
middle-ear admittance and/or increased tympanometric width
warrants medical referral only if also present upon a retest after four
to six weeks.
Limitations
Research has shown that a protocol for detection of MEE based on
reduced static-acoustic middle-ear admittance or increased
tympanometric width, such as the ASHA (1990) protocol, is
characterized by low sensitivity, especially in children with normal-
hearing thresholds, and low specificity. In fact, Roush, Drake, and
Sexton (1992) reported that the sensitivity of the revised ASHA

acoustic-immittance test/retest protocol (84%) was lower than that for
the ASHA (1979) acoustic-immittance test-retest protocol (95%).
Roush et al. reported a low specificity for the 1979 protocol as
compared with the revised protocol, probably because of the low
screening level for the ipsilateral acoustic reflex, which did not
account for maturational effects as mentioned earlier. The high
specificity reported by Roush et al. for the revised protocol
contradicts the low specificity for the revised protocol reported by
Smith et al. (1993). The Silman et al. (1992) proposed acoustic-
immittance protocol (based on tympanometric width and peak
pressure, static-acoustic middle-ear admittance, and ipsilateral
acoustic reflex) has sensitivity and specificity that are high and greater
than those for the ASHA (1990) protocol.
ASHA (1990) recognized that a one-shot screening could not detect
recurrent or chronic MEE. Therefore, they recommend retesting
failures at four to six weeks post-initial test. The findings of Silman et
al. (1994) illustrated the fact
 

Page 137
that MEE can resolve spontaneously or persist beyond six to eight
weeks. Conversely, MEE that is absent on an initial test may be
present on a retest. Therefore, screening protocols that refer based
only on failure upon initial test and retest, such as the ASHA (1990)
protocol, will fail to detect children with MEE who pass the initial test
and fail a retest.
It is recommended that screening for detection of OME (i.e., MEE) be
based on the ASHA (1990) pure-tone and acoustic-immittance
guidelines, modified to incorporate the Silman et al. (1992) proposed
acoustic-immittance battery (based on the four acoustic-immittance
measures) in place of the ASHA (1990) acoustic-immittance battery
(essentially based on tympanometric width and static-acoustic middle-
ear admittance). The acoustic-immittance battery based on the static-
acoustic middle-ear admittance and contralateral pulsed BBN
activator (Smith et al. 1993) is recommended in place of the Silman et
al. (1992) battery if the acoustic-immittance screening device does not
permit ipsilateral acoustic-reflex assessment at 110 dB HL at 1000 Hz
while controlling for artifacts.
Prediction Of Hearing Impairment From The Acoustic-Reflex
Threshold
The ART has been used to predict the presence vs. absence of
sensorineural hearing impairment. The basic principle underlying
prediction of the presence vs. absence of sensorineural hearing
impairment from the ART is the relation between the tonal ARTs and
BBN ART for the low-frequency probe tone. As the magnitude of the
hearing impairment increases, the tonal ARTs remain essentially
unchanged until approximately 50 dB HL, and then increase directly
with the degree of hearing impairment. On the other hand, the BBN
ART increases directly with the magnitude of hearing impairment
until approximately 50 dB HL and then remains essentially unchanged

(Popelka 1981; Silman 1976; Silman, Popelka, and Gelfand 1978).
Resultantly, the noise-tone difference (tonal ARTs minus BBN ART)
is small for persons with mild-moderate hearing impairment but large
and essentially equivalent for persons with normal hearing as for
persons with severe hearing impairment. These principles underlie the
bivariate-plot procedure for prediction of the presence vs. absence of
sensorineural hearing impairment from the ART.
With the traditional bivariate-plot procedure (Popelka, Margolis, and
Wiley 1976; Popelka 1981), two acoustic reflex quantities that
increase directly with the magnitude of hearing impairment are plotted
as coordinates on a bivariate graph. The ART for a single tonal
activator or the average of the ARTs for three tonal activators is
represented on the ordinate (in dB SPL). The ratio of the ART for a
noise activator (usually BBN) to the ART (in dB SPL) for a tonal
activator (or the average of the ARTs for several tonal activators,
usually 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz), times 100, is represented on the
abscissa.
To construct a traditional bivariate-plot template, the ART data are
plotted
 

Page 138
for a group of young, normal-hearing subjects. Two line segments
(one vertical and one diagonal) with a slope of -1.0 are drawn, such
that at least 90% of the data from the subjects are located within the
delineated (left) region of the graph as shown in Figure 6.13. The
normal-hearing region should not be drawn to include any obvious
''outliers'' since their inclusion will decrease the sensitivity (hit) rate
for the bivariate-plot procedure. The bivariate-plot template then
should be drawn showing the ordinate, abscissa, horizontal, and
diagonal lines without the individual data points for future clinical
use. We recommend that the miss and false alarm rates of the bivariate
plot be determined by plotting the ART data from a group of hearing-
impaired subjects who have known mild, high-frequency impairment
(PTA between 20 and 29 dB HL or hearing threshold >20 dB HL at
2000 or 4000 Hz) as well as significant hearing impairment (PTA >30
dB HL) along with the ART data from a group of normal-hearing
subjects. The miss rate for the significantly hearing-impaired ears is
the percentage of significantly hearing-impaired ears that fall into the
normal-hearing (left) region of the graph. The miss rate for the mild,
high-frequency hearing-impaired ears is the percentage of mild, high-
frequency hearing-impaired ears that fall into the normal-hearing
region of the graph. The false-positive data are the percentage of
normal-hearing ears that fall into the hearing-impaired (right) region
of the graph.
Silman et al. (1984b) reported that the traditional bivariate-plot
procedure was characterized by hit rates of 86% for ears with
significant hearing impairment (PTA >30 dB HL) and 66% for ears
with mild or high-frequency hearing impairment. Questionable
findings associated with data points on the slope segment of the
bivariate plot were obtained for 3% of the persons with significant or
mild, high-frequency hearing impairment. The false alarm rate was
3%.

Silman et al.'s (1984b) modified bivariate-plot procedure improved
predictive accuracy in comparison with that for the classical bivariate-
plot procedure. The modified bivariate-plot procedure differed from
the classical bivariate-plot procedure as follows:
1. The bivariate-plot was applied to persons younger than forty-five
years of age.
2. The ART data from hearing-impaired as well as normal-hearing
persons were plotted before drawing the line segments.
3. The line segments were drawn to obtain a sensitivity of at least 90%
(for mild, high-frequency as well as significantly hearing-impaired
ears) without incurring a large false alarm rate (the diagonal line
segment is drawn with any slope, in contrast with the -1.0 slope
employed in the classical bivariate-plot procedure). An example of the
modified bivariate plot is shown in Figure 6.14.
According to Silman et al. ( 1984b), the sensitivity of the modified
bivariate-plot procedure was 96% for significantly hearing-impaired
ears as well as for the mild, high-frequency hearing-impaired ears; the
false positive rate was 14%.
 

Page 139
Figure 6.1 3. 
Illustration of the traditional bivariate plot as described by 
Popelka (1981). The ordinate represents the average of the 
ARTs for the 500-, 1000-, and 2000-Hz tonal activators, and the 
abcissa represents the ratio of the ART for the BBN activator to the 
average of the ARTs for the 500-,  1000-, and 2000-Hz tonal 
activators multiplied by 100. The line segments were drawn after 
plotting the data points for the normal-hearing ears. The line 
segments consist of the vertical segment and a diagonal segment with 
a slope of - 1.0. The line segments were drawn so that at least 
90% (here, 97%) of the data points for the normal-hearing ears 
were located to the left of them. (Reprinted by permission of Silman, 
Gelfand, Piper, Silverman, and Van Frank 1984a.)
Because of the higher sensitivity and specificity, the modified
procedure is preferred in children as well as adults, despite the lower
occurrence of mild, high-frequency hearing impairment in children.
The use of the bivariate-plot procedure can easily be employed in
children thirteen years of age or older, whose contralateral ARTs are

similar to those for adults. As mentioned previously, a maturation
effect exists for the contralateral ART up to approximately thirteen
years of age, and the ARTs for children who are five to nine years of
age are higher than those for children who are nine to thirteen years of
age. Therefore, the bivariate-plot procedure can be adapted for use
with children between five and thirteen years of age by constructing
two bivariate-plot templates: one based on ART data from children
who are five to nine years of age and one based on ART data from
children who are nine to thirteen years of age.
 

Pag
Figure 6.14. 
The modification of the bivariate-plot procedure involves adjustment of the vert
line segment to the left (with the diagonal line segment adjusted for the best separ
between the normal-hearing and hearing-impaired ears) until at least 90 percen
of the mild and high-frequency and significantly hearing-impaired ears lay in t
hearing-impaired region. (Reprinted by permission of Silman, 
Silverman, Showers, and Gelfand 1984)
In neonates and infants, the standard deviations for the contralateral AR
at low and high probe-tone frequencies are considerable, especially for
BBN activator, for both low-and high-frequency probe tones (McMilla
al. 1985; Sprague et al. 1985). These large standard deviations primaril
reflect variability in sound-pressure levels associated with variability in
canal volume as well as maturational effects. Therefore, the bivariate-p
procedure has limited potential clinical utility in neonates and infants,
regardless of probe-tone frequency. The data of S. Jerger et al. (1974)
suggest that the standard deviations of the contralateral tonal ARTs for 

low-frequency probe-tone and percentage of occurrence of the acoustic
reflexes do not approach adult values until approximately five years of 
 

Page 141
Functional Hearing Impairment
The presence of acoustic reflex thresholds at or below the pure-tone
thresholds is consistent with the presence of functional (nonorganic)
hearing impairment (Terkildsen 1964).
Silman (1988) investigated the applicability of the modified bivariate-
plot procedure for the low-frequency probe tone in young adults with
functional hearing impairment. The sensitivity of the modified
bivariate-plot procedure was 100%; the false-positive rate was 17%.
The use of the modified bivariate-plot procedure for the low-
frequency probe tone is applicable for detection of functional hearing
impairment in persons older than thirteen years of age, nine to thirteen
years of age, and five to nine years of age, providing the bivariate-plot
template is appropriately developed.
References
Alberti, P.W.R., and J.F. Jerger. 1974. Probe-tone frequency and the
diagnostic value of tympanometry. Archives of Otolaryngology
99:206-210.
Alberti, P.W.R., and R. Kristensen. 1970. The clinical application of
impedance audiometry. Laryngoscope 80:735-746.
Alford, B., J.F. Jerger, A. Coats, C. Peterson, and S. Weber. 1973.
Neurophysiology of facial nerve testing. Archives of Otolaryngology
97:214-217.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1979. Guidelines
for acoustic immittance screening of middle ear function. Asha 27:49-
52.
.1985. Guidelines for identification audiometry. Asha 40:49-52.
.1990. Guidelines for screening for hearing impairments and middle

ear disorders. ASHA (Suppl. 2) 32:17-30.
Anderson, H., B. Barr, and E. Wedenberg. 1969. Intra-aural reflexes
in retrocochlear lesions. In Nobel symposium 10: Disorders of the
skull base region, ed. C.A. Hamberger and J. Wersall. Stockholm:
Almqvist and Wiksell.
.1970. Early diagnosis of VIIIth-nerve tumours by acoustic reflex
tests. Acta OtoLaryngologica 262, 232-237.
Beedle, R.K., and E.R. Harford. 1973. A comparison of acoustic
reflex and loudness growth in normal and pathological ears. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 16:271-281.
Bennett, M. 1984. Impedance concepts relating to the acoustic reflex.
In The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical applications, ed.
S. Silman. New York: Academic Press.
Bennett, M.J., and L.A. Weatherby. 1982. Multiple probe frequency
acoustic reflex measurements. Scandinavian Audiology 12:3-9.
Brooks, D.N. 1969. The use of the electroacoustic impedance bridge
in the assessment of the middle ear function. International Audiology
8:563-569.
.1971. A new approach to identification audiometry. Audiology
10:334-339.
.1980. Impedance in screening. In Clinical impedance audiometry, 2d
ed., ed. by J. Jerger and J.L. Northern. Acton, MA: American
Electromedics Corporation.
 

Page 142
Cavaliere, R., S. Masieri, L. Liberini, R. Proietti, and S.I. Magalini.
1992. Tympanometry for middle-ear effusion in unconscious ICU
patients. European Journal of Anaesthesiology 9:71-75.
Fiellau-Nikolajsen, M. 1983. Tympanometry and secretory otitis
media. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 394): 1-73.
Gelfand, S.A., N. Piper, and S. Silman. 1983. Effects of hearing levels
at the activator and other frequencies upon the expected levels of the
acoustic reflex threshold. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
48: 11 - 17.
Gersdorff, M.C.H. 1992. Diagnostic value of tympanometry in otitis
media with effusion. Acta Oto-Rhino-Laryngolgica Belgica 46:361-
368.
Green, J., J. Waggener, and B. Kriegsfeld. 1976. Classification and
incidence of neoplasms of the central nervous system. In Advances in
neurology, ed. R. Thompson and J. Green. New York: Raven Press.
Hall, J.W., and T. Weaver. 1979. Impedance audiometry in a young
population: The effect of age, sex, and tympanogram abnormalities.
Journal of Otolaryngology 3: 210-221.
Himeelfarb, M.Z., E. Shanon, G.R. Popelka, and R.H. Margolis. 1978.
Acoustic reflex evaluation in neonates. In Early diagnosis of hearing
loss, ed. S.E. Gerber and G.T. Mencher. New York: Grune and
Stratton.
Hirsch, J.E., R.H. Margolis, and J.R. Rykken. 1992. A comparison of
acoustic reflex and auditory brain stem response screening of high-
risk infants. Ear and Hearing 13: 181 - 186.
Holmes, D.E., and C.M. Woodford. 1977. Acoustic reflex threshold
and loudness discomfort level: Relationships in children with
profound hearing losses. Journal of the American Auditory Society 2:

193-196.
Holmquist, J., and J. Miller. 1972. Eustachian tube evaluation using
the impedance bridge. In Mayo Foundation impedance symposium,
ed. D. Rose and L. Keating. Rochester, MN: Mayo Foundation.
Jepsen, O. 1963. Middle ear muscle reflexes in man. In Modern
developments in audiology, ed. J.F. Jerger. New York: Academic
Press.
Jerger, J. 1970. Clinical experience with impedance audiometry.
Archives of Otolaryngology 92:311-324.
Jerger, J., L. Anthony, S. Jerger, and L. Mauldin. 1974. Studies in
impedance audiometry: Middle ear disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99: 165-171.
Jerger, J., E. Harford, J. Clemis, and B. Alford. 1974. The acoustic
reflex in eighth nerve disorders. Archives of Otolaryngology 99:409-
413.
Jerger, J., S. Jerger, and L. Mauldin. 1972. Studies in impedance
audiometry: I. Normal and sensorineural ears. Archives of
Otolaryngology 96:513-523.
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, L. Mauldin, and P. Segal. 1974. Studies in
impedance audiometry: II. Children less than 6 years old. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99: 1-9.
Keith, R.W. 1979. Loudness and the acoustic reflex: Cochlear-
impaired listeners. Journal of the American Auditory Society 5:65-70.
Margolis, R.H., and J.W. Heller. 1987. Screening tympanometry:
Criteria for medical referral. Audiology 26: 197-208.
Margolis, R.H., and J.E. Shanks. 1985. Tympanometry. In Handbook
of clinical audiology, 2d ed., ed. by J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.

Martin, F.N., and G.W. Brunette. 1980. Loudness and the acoustic
reflex. Ear and Hearing 1:106-108.
 

Page 143
McMillan, P.M., M.J. Bennett, C.D. Marchant, and P. Shurin. 1985.
Ipsilateral and contralateral acoustic reflexes in neonates. Ear and
Hearing 6:320-324.
Metz, O. 1946. The acoustic impedance measured on normal and
pathologic ears. Acta OtoLaryngologica (Suppl. 63): 1-254.
Norris, T.W., P.G. Stelmachowicz, and D.J. Taylor. 1974. Acoustic
reflex relaxation to identify sensorineural hearing impairment.
Archives of Otolaryngology 99: 197.
Nozza, R.J., C.D. Bluestone, D. Kardatzke, and R. Bachman. 1992.
Toward the validation of aural acoustic immittance measures for
diagnosis of middle ear effusion in children. Ear and Hearing 13:442-
453.
Olsen, W.O., D. Noffsinger, and S. Kurdziel. 1975. Acoustic reflex
and reflex decay: Occurrence in patients with cochlear and eighth
nerve lesions. Archives of Otolaryngology 101:622-625.
Osterhammel, D., and P. Osterhammel. 1979. Age and sex variations
for the normal stapedial reflex thresholds and tympanometric
compliance values. Scandinavian Audiology 8: 153-158.
Ovesen, T., P.B. Paaske, and O. Elbrond. 1993. Accuracy of an
automatic impedance apparatus in a population with secretory otitis
media: Principles in the evaluation of tympanometrical findings.
American Journal of Otolaryngology 1 : 100-104.
Paradise, J.L., C.G. Smith, and C.D. Bluestone. 1976. Tympanometric
detection of middle ear effusion in infants and young children.
Pediatrics 58: 198-21 0.
Peterson, J.L., and G. Lidén. 1972. Some static characteristics of the
stapedial muscle reflex. Audiology 11:94-114.

Popelka, G.R., ed. 1981. Hearing assessment with the acoustic reflex.
New York: Grune and Stratton.
Popelka, G.R., R.H. Margolis, and T.L. Wiley. 1976. Effect of
activating signal bandwidth on acoustic reflex thresholds. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 59: 153-159.
Porter, T.A. 1974. Otoadmittance measurements in a residential deaf
population. American Annals of the Deaf 119:47-52.
Robertson, P.O., J.L. Peterson, and L.E. Lamb. 1968. Relative
impedance measurements in young children. Archives of
Otolaryngology 88:162-168.
Roush, J., A. Drake, and J.E. Sexton. 1992. Identification of middle
ear dysfunction in young children: A comparison of tympanometric
screening procedures. Ear and Hearing 13:63-69.
Shanks, J.E. 1984. Tympanometry. Ear and Hearing 5:268-280.
Shanks, J.E., and R.H. Wilson. 1986. Effects of direction and rate of
ear-canal pressure changes on tympanometric measures. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research 29: 1 - 19.
Silman, S. 1976. The growth function of the stapedius reflex in
normal ears and ears with hearing loss due to cochlear dysfunction.
Ph.D. diss., New York University, New York.
.1988. The applicability of the modified bivariate plotting procedure
to subjects with functional hearing loss. Scandinavian Audiology 17:
125-127.
.1990. Detection of middle-ear effusion. Short course presented at the
Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, November 1990, Seattle.
Silman, S., and S.A. Gelfand. 1979. The effects of aging on the
acoustic reflex thresholds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of

America 66:735-738.
.1981. The relationship between magnitude of hearing loss and
acoustic reflex threshold levels. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 46:312-316.
 

Page 144
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, and T.H. Chun. 1978. Some observations in
a case of acoustic neuroma. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
43:459-466.
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, J.C. Howard, and T.J. Showers. 1982.
Clinical application of the bivariate plotting procedure in the
prediction of hearing loss with the bivariate plotting procedure.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27:12-19.
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, N. Piper, C.A. Silverman, and L. Van Frank.
1984. Prediction of hearing loss from the acoustic reflex threshold. In
The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical applications, ed. S.
Silman. New York: Academic Press.
Silman, S., G.R. Popelka, and S.A. Gelfand. 1978. Effect of
sensorineural hearing loss on acoustic stapedius reflex growth
functions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 64:1406-1411.
Silman, S., and C.A. Silverman. 1991. Auditory diagnosis: Principles
and applications. San Diego: Academic Press.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, and D.S. Arick. 1992. Acoustic-
immittance screening for detection of middle-ear effusion in children.
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 3:262-268.
.1994. Pure-tone assessment and screening of children with middle-
ear effusion. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 5:173-
182.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, S.A. Gelfand, J. Lutolf, and D.J. Lynne.
1988. Ipsilateral acousticreflex adaptation testing for detection of
facial-nerve pathology: Three case studies. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 53:378-382.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, T.J. Showers, and S.A. Gelfand. 1984.
The effect of age on prediction of hearing loss with the bivariate

plotting procedure. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27: 12-
19.
Silverman, C.A., S. Silman, and M.H. Miller. 1983. The acoustic
reflex threshold in aging ears. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 73:248-255.
Smith, P.S.U., T.L. Wiley, and G.M. Pyle. 1993. Efficacy of ASHA
guidelines for screening middle-ear function in children. Poster
session presented at the Annual Convention of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association. November, Anaheim.
Sprague, B.H., T.L. Wiley, and R. Goldstein. 1985. Tympanometric
and acousticreflex studies in neonates. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 28:265-272.
Terkildsen, K. 1964. Clinical application of impedance measurements
with a fixed frequency technique. International Audiology 3:123-128.
Van Camp, K.J., R.H. Margolis, R.H. Wilson, W.L. Creten, and J.E.
Shanks. 1986. Principles of tympanometry. ASHA Monograph no. 24.
Rockville, MD: American Speech-LanguageHearing Association.
Vanhuyse, V.J., W.L. Creten, and K.J. Van Camp. 1975. On the W-
notching of tympanograms. Scandinavian Audiology 4:45-50.
Weatherby, L., and M. Bennett. 1980. The neonatal acoustic reflex.
Scandinavian Audiology 9:103-110.
Wiley, T.L., D.L. Oviatt, and M.G. Block. 1987. Acoustic immittance
measures in normal ears. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
30:161 - 170.
Wilson, R.H., J.E. Shanks, and D.J. Lilly. 1984. Acousticreflex
adaptation. In The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical
applications, ed. S. Silman. New York: Academic Press.
 


Page 145
7
Auditory Evoked Responses
Herbert Jay Gould and Maurice I. Mendel
Introduction
Auditory evoked responses (AERs) or auditory evoked potentials
(AEPs) have been available for audiologic assessment for several
decades. During that time, they have evolved from crude measures of
gross neurophysiologic responses to sound to sophisticated measures
capable of delineating anatomic areas and psychophysiological
function. For audiologists, AER diagnostic procedures now look at
two different areas. The first area-one that receives a significant
amount of research-is the use of AERs for neurologic assessment.
Does the patient have a lesion? This area is important in many
otologic and audiologic practices dealing with adults but is less
germane to the typical pediatric population. The second area of
diagnosis, highly relevant to pediatric audiology, is estimation of
auditory threshold. This second area is the focus of this chapter.
We strongly recommend that the reader examine the other areas on
behavioral assessment of auditory function before reading this
chapter. The authors believe that AERs are the test of last resort in
evaluating any infant or child who may be testable by other means. It
should be kept in mind that AERs do not evaluate hearing, but rather,
estimate hearing based on neural integrity of the auditory system.
Given technical limitations, the entire auditory system is typically not
evaluated. Therefore, errors in the estimate can arise. In addition,
some of the AERs, notably the quite popular auditory brainstem
response (ABR), not only reflect a limited anatomic area but also a
limited frequency range. This chapter shows methods for evaluation

that are applicable to providing reasonable estimates of auditory
function, aimed primarily at the pediatric population.
Overview Of Auditory Evoked Potentials
It is not the purpose of this chapter to review extensively the basis of
auditory evoked potentials as there are texts and review articles
available for that
 

Page 146
purpose (ASHA 1987; Hall 1992; Kraus, Kileny, and McGee 1994;
Moore 1983; Weber 1994). However, as terminology sometimes
varies among authors, we briefly review the various responses that are
used. As shown in Figure 7.1, the auditory evoked potential is a
continuous response that is arbitrarily subdivided into time domains
based on historical precedent and technological limitations.
Electrocochleogram
The electrocochleogram (ECochG), shown at the bottom of Figure
7.1, is the earliest set of waves recorded from the auditory system. It
reflects the cochlear microphonic and summating potential, which are
waves generated in response to local cochlear activity. In addition, the
N1 wave (labelled AP for action potential) is generated from the
eighth nerve. The ECochG is recorded by either extratympanic or
transtympanic electrodes. The recording quality falls off dramatically
as the distance of the active electrode from the tympanic membrane
increases in extratympanic recordings.
Auditory Brainstem Response
The auditory brainstem response (ABR) also is known as the
brainstem electric response (BSER) and the brainstem auditory
evoked response (BAER). The response is often represented as a
series of five vertex positive waves (labeled I through V in Figure 7.1)
occurring within 10 to 12 msec of signal presentation. The waves
reflect activity within the auditory system up to the level of the
inferior colliculus. The ABR is an extremely robust response using
modern recording techniques. Typical electrode placement locates the
active electrode on the forehead or vertex with the referent electrode
on the earlobe or mastoid ipsilateral to the stimulus. Placing the active
electrode on either the vertex or high forehead does not have an
appreciable effect on latency or amplitude as the ABR is a far field
potential.

Middle Latency Response
The middle latency response (MLR) was also known as the early
response in the literature of the late 1960s and early 1970s. This
terminology, as the early response, created confusion at the time the
ABR was discovered and became the new early response. Thus, after
the mid-1970s, this response became known as the middle latency
response. The MLR is recorded using a vertex active to ipsilateral
earlobe or mastoid referent. It is a series of four waves occurring
primarily within 50 msec of a stimulus and is labeled Po-Nb in Figure
7.1. The MLR is most likely generated from midbrain and primary
auditory cortex of the brain.
 

Figure 7.1.
The auditory evoked potential is a continuous response starting at the st
and progressing to over 200 msec. The responses in the figure are represented as
unconnected lines that represent the sample time and discrete data as represented
 The circled area in each response is the enlarged area represented as the next low
figure. The entire ECochG response at the bottom is represented by one data
 LAR tracing at the top of the figure.

 

Page 148
The amplitude of the MLR appears to be significantly affected by
sleep state, and the morphology may be affected by age in children.
Late Response
The late auditory response (LAR) was the first recorded auditory
evoked potential. It is a large response and, at times, can be seen in
the unaveraged EEG tracing. The response is recorded in the same
manner as the ABR and MLR, with a vertex active electrode and
referent electrode ipsilateral to the stimulus. The LAR is believed to
originate in auditory cortical areas. The classic response is a negative
wave at approximately 90 msec followed by a positive wave at
approximately 120 msec, labelled N1 and P2 in Figure 7.1. The
response is highly influenced by the subject's general physiologic and
psychologic state.
P300
The P300 or P3 response, not shown in Figure 7.1, is a positive wave
occurring about 300 msec after the onset of a stimulus. It is generated
at a cortical level in response to a difference detection. Electrode
arrangement is similar to that for other auditory evoked potentials
from the central nervous system. The presence or absence of the P300
wave is determined by the subject's perception of difference between a
frequently occurring standard stimulus and an intermittently occurring
stimulus that is different. The different stimulus is often referred to as
the oddball stimulus. The response is not widely used in the
assessment of auditory threshold. The P300 requires an alert subject
who is attending to the listening task. In addition, the P300 is highly
dependent on age. Jirsa and Clontz (1990) have used this response in
the evaluation of central auditory processing. Their results indicate
that children with processing problems have smaller amplitude and
longer latency than normal controls. They have further demonstrated
that P300 response latency and amplitude approach normal values

with appropriate therapy.
Mismatched Negativity
The mismatched negativity (MMN) is similar to the P300 in that it is
generated in response to a difference detection between two stimuli.
However, the MMN appears to be unaffected by subject state and may
be less affected by subject age than the P300. Unlike the P300, MMN
appears to be a strictly auditory phenomenon generated in temporal
and frontal lobe areas. The use of the MMN for auditory threshold
assessment has not been reported. Preliminary reports suggest that age
may not affect response latency. However, response magnitude is
generally greater in children than in adults (Kraus et al. 1992, 1993).
For an extensive review of MMN, see Näätänen (1992).
 

Page 149
Contingent Negative Variation
The contingent negative variation (CNV) is also generated by the
detection of two signals. The stimulus generation is different from that
for MMN and P300. For the CNV, the two stimuli must be paired and
have precise timing relationships for occurrence. The response is a
negative shift in potential that is initiated by the first stimulus and
terminates upon presentation of the second stimulus. The CNV is
generated in cortical areas and has been reported as a measure of
auditory threshold in adults and children (Prevec, Ribaric, and Butinar
1984). Responses from children were significantly affected by the
child's attentiveness, stimulus repetition rate, and duration.
Exogenous vs. Endogenous Potentials
Of the responses listed above, the four shown in Figure 7.1 are
classified as exogenous responses (ECochG, ABR, MLR, Late), and
the last three are endogenous responses (P300, MMN, CNV).
Exogenous responses are affected more by stimulus variables such as
level, rate, and frequency than by internal subject variables such as
attention. Endogenous responses, however, are more affected by
internal state and less by the external attributes of stimuli.
Response Detection
That is required for threshold estimation using AERs? There are
several reports that discuss the shape of the various waveforms and
the latencies of the components within a waveform (ASHA 1987;
Davis 1976; Picton et al. 1974). However, as the intensity of the
stimulus is reduced, the structure of the waveform typically
diminishes in amplitude and definition. There is also a prolongation in
latency of each of the components. Finally, when the examiner can no
longer determine that a wave is present, auditory threshold is declared
as the lowest level that elicited the expected waveform. This is the

crux of the problem in auditory threshold estimation: When is a
response present, and when is it absent?
The goal of improving response detection and determining detection
reliability has been pursued from the earliest recordings of auditory
evoked potentials (Derbyshire and McCandless 1964; Palmer,
Derbyshire, and Lee 1966; Schimmel 1967; Schimmel, Rapin, and
Cohen 1974; Wong and Bickford 1980). Response detection takes one
of two forms. The first is a correlational method or template matching.
At its simplest (or most complex, depending on the point of view) is
visual detection of a response. Through experience, we have learned
that the AERs have typical wave shapes. For example, as shown in
Figure 7.1, the ABR is a five-wavelet series occurring within the first
six msec after a signal; the MLR is a four-wave series within 50 msec;
and the Late waveform has a
 

Page 150
negative peak at approximately 90 msec (N1) and a positive peak at
approximately 120 msec (P2). We also have learned to accept a
certain amount of variation and attribute it to noise.
We first match the waveform that we collect against the internal
representation of the wave and then repeat the trace and match the
original to the replication. Several attempts have been made to use
template matching in the computer (Arnold 1985; Elberling 1979;
McClellend and Sayers 1984; Palmer, Derbyshire, and Lee 1966;
Picton et al. 1983). Some of the methods are: (1) cross correlation
with a known signal shape; (2) correlation with a response collected at
a higher signal presentation level; and (3) difference between
replication correlation and correlations performed with the no-
stimulus condition.
The second method of detection is to estimate both the signal level
and the noise level. To help understand these techniques, a quick
review of the composition of an evoked response is necessary. Figure
7.2 is a schematic of a hypothetical evoked response test session. Each
row in the figure represents a single epoch evoked by a click stimulus.
Each column in the figure represents a latency after the stimulus
presentation. Therefore, each cell in the figure represents a particular
latency in a given epoch. Each cell is composed of a signal (S), which
is constant, and a noise (N), which varies. In the ideal AER, the noise
cancels itself out because of its random distribution around 0. So,
when the average is made, the signal is recreated. Using signal-to-
noise ratio measures to determine the presence of a response requires
that an estimate of the noise be obtained. One method for estimating
the noise level was the +/- average of Wong and Bickford (1980). In
this technique, two averages were created for any evoked potential. In
one, a simple average was performed; in the other, every other epoch
was multiplied by -1, so that, when the response was summed, the
signal was eliminated, leaving residual noise. The variance of the

residual noise was computed and compared to the variance of the first
average. This technique, which is computationally intensive, has been
modified for online use and reported as the Fsp or F ratio for a single
point (Don, Elberling, and Waring 1984; Elberling and Don 1984,
1987; Elberling and Walgreen 1985; Sininger 1993; Zapala 1993).
The Fsp is a method for evaluating the probability that the average is
different from the background noise. The Fsp uses a single latency
(i.e., a single column in Figure 7.2) to estimate the noise level in the
average by computing the variance at that time. This assumes that the
signal is stationary and the variance is an estimate of noise strength.
Once the noise variance is estimated, the signal+noise variance in the
average is computed. The two variances, signal+noise and noise, are
then compared with an Fmax statistic.
This technique is helpful with children for two reasons. First, it can
help shorten the length of test administration. This is accomplished by
averaging to a given probability of wave occurrence rather than to a
fixed number of sweeps. Second, the examiner has a probability
measure of response presence. Probability measures for an adult are
shown in Table 7.1.
 

Figure 7.2. 
For any evoked potential, each response to a single stimulus
represented by each of the EEG traces on the left of the figure) is col
computer as a series of numbers. Each number represents the voltage on the s
 a given time (latency) after the stimulus onset. The individual numbers
electrical signal (S) that is evoked by the stimulus plus the ongoing EEG backgro
evoked potential data collection can be envisioned in the computer as a two-dim
 Each row represents one response to a stimulus (epoch), and each column 
of time after the stimulus (latency). As shown, the signal at each time point is c
 varies around zero. Therefore, given a sufficient number of samples, 
average out of the response, leaving just the original signa
 

Page 152
Table 7. 1. Probability of Presence of ABR
Fsp
Probability
3.1
99%
2.3
95%
1.9
90%
1.4
75%
.88
50%
Note: The Fsp procedure is a statistical method of expressing the
variability of a response in relation to
the estimated variability of the background noise. It is based on the Fmax
statistic, and the resulting value
provides the probability that a signal is present in a given average.
The measures shown in Table 7.1 may or may not be reasonable for
infants and neonates. The probability table was generated using
resting adult EEG activity collected within a specific time frame (2 to
12 msec poststimulus) and with a specific filter setting (100-3000 Hz).
The assumption is made that the infant and child will have statistically
similar activity if the tester is using the same time and filter
parameters. If time and filter parameters are changed, the table should
be recomputed. Gould et al. (1992) reported on the Fsp technique for
the middle latency response in adults and provided information using
50 and 100 msec time domains as well as several different high-pass
filter settings. Only minor differences were seen in the cumulative
distributions for the no-signal condition, suggesting that, although not
precise, the probabilities in Table 7.1 may be reasonable estimates of
response probability.
Normal Development
Anatomic and Physiologic Changes

The human auditory system develops rapidly during the first and
second years of life. During the third prenatal trimester and the
infantile period, there is a decrease in the density of the nerve cells in
the cochlear nucleus and inferior colliculus. Myelination, however, is
increasing in the lateral lemniscus (Inagaki et al. 1987). The cochlear
traveling wave is also affected by maturation. Significant decreases in
delay are seen for the basal end of the cochlea with age, whereas the
apical end is relatively unaffected (Eggermont et al. 1991). These
changes in traveling wave are probably related to the changes seen in
cochlear maturation (Rubel et al. 1984).
The external auditory meatus (EAM) is also developing during the
first year. The EAM development is reflected in a resonant frequency
pattern different from that for the normal adult ear (Lurquin et al.
1989). This suggests that stimulus calibration values should be
considered in evaluating the neonate and young infant.
ABR
Because of its extensive use for auditory screening and estimation of
threshold, ABR has been extensively investigated with regard to its
normal and abnormal
 

Page 153
development. In contrast, other responses, such as the MLR and Late
Auditory Response, have received considerably less attention.
Nevertheless, ABR literature is often confusing because of a host of
factors including, but not limited to, the different age ranges studied,
whether the subject was full term or premature, and stimulus
characteristics (Hall 1992).
ABR Morphology Changes with Maturation
The ABR is profoundly affected by the maturation process from birth
to approximately eighteen months of age. The consensus is that waves
III through V are delayed. There is some speculation as to the status of
wave I at birth. Several studies of newborns have shown a delayed
wave I that is from 0.3 to one msec longer than adult values (Cox,
Hack, and Metz 1981; Goldstein et al. 1979; Jacobson, Morehouse,
and Johnson 1982; Stockard, Stockard, and Coen 1983). However,
there is suggestion that wave I is relatively well developed in the
neonate (Morgan, Zimmerman, and Dubno 1987). Gorga et al. (1989)
report little to no change in wave I latency between three months and
three years of age. However, a significant change was noted in wave
V latency. ABR latency and amplitude data showing maturation
effects from several studies have been collected and published (Hall
1992).
Of primary concern, given the shorter hospital stays of many
neonates, are the rapid alterations in the response during the first three
days of life. Maurizi et al. (1986) looked at the ABR wave pattern
during the first fifty-eight hours after birth in full-term newborns. In
two thirds of the cases, wave I was absent in the first nine hours of
life. Latency values for wave I tend to decrease in a statistically
significant way; this decrease is almost complete by the second
recording session at thirty hours. Contralaterally recorded potentials
are often absent at birth but evident fifty-eight hours later. The wave

II-III complex seen in the neonate by contralateral recording is
reported to be separated into individual waves by seven months of age
(Hatanaka et al. 1988).
As the contralateral response can be recorded in the infant, care must
be taken to avoid response recording by stimulating the nontest ear.
Sobhy and Gould (1993) recommended masking for levels greater
than 50 dB used in adults. Hatanaka et al. (1990) recorded a response
from a dead ear to an 85-dB HL click in an infant. They report that a
45 dB HL masker will eliminate such responses.
Auditory Brain Stem Response
The ABR has been the hearing screening test of choice in the neonatal
nursery. Unfortunately, the expense and time required for testing has
limited its use primarily to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).
Because a higher percentage of these infants experiences a hearing
loss than normal newborns do, this limitation is cost efficient. Other
available screening tools, such as the high
 

Page 154
risk register or otoacoustic emissions, should be applied to all
neonates; ABR should then be used as a follow-up tool in those who
fail.
Electrode Application
Electrode application is similar to that for adults, with the
noninverting electrode applied to vertex or forehead and the inverting
electrode applied to the mastoid ipsilateral to the stimulus. The ground
can be applied to the mastoid contralateral to the stimulus. Using a
three-electrode configuration requires switching the ground and
inverting electrodes when the stimulus ear is changed. However, this
method is advantageous in that one less electrode is applied, which
saves time and may avoid waking a sleeping infant. Electrodes in the
neonatal nursery should not be moved between infants unless they
have been properly sterilized. An alternative to sterilization is
disposable electrodes, which are available from most supply houses.
Electrical Safety
Grounding is critical in the intensive care situation (Grass 1978)
because the recording is made in an electrically ''hostile'' environment.
Most NICUs are brightly lit with fluorescent lighting and have
numerous electrical sources generating ambient electrical noise. If the
infant is connected to other equipment, be sure that amplifiers and
other equipment maintain a common AC ground path. If not,
potentially dangerous electrical current can be induced in the leads. A
good ground that is common to the other sources will also help in this
situation by preventing a ground loop that would introduce 60-Hz
interference.
It is required that you know the electrical outlets you will be using. If
going into a new area, take a socket tester to be sure that the hot,
neutral, and ground leads are appropriately wired. Never assume that

the leads of any socket are correct. In a check of 734 outlets in a 100-
bed hospital, 11% had improper wiring, and 67% did not exert proper
tension on the ground plug (Grass 1978).
Stimulus
As most neonates are seen in a screening situation, a click is used to
elicit the response. Although the click creates a wideband signal, the
response reflects primarily the 2000-4000 Hz range in the cochlea.
The use of a click is beneficial in that it has the highest potential for
eliciting a response. The fast rise time of the click creates a synchrony
in neural discharge that is optimum for recording a response. Tonal
stimuli are rarely, if ever, used in the NICU because they do not
provide as clear a response and still reflect the basal region of the
cochlea as click stimuli.
 

Page 155
Latency Intensity Function
The latency intensity function for the neonate (see Figure 7.3) is
longer when compared to the adult (see Figure 7.4). In addition,
infants, such as those with craniofacial malformations, may have
abnormal wave shapes, so care must be taken in using either a specific
latency or shape of waveform to determine threshold. Here the Fsp
technique or some other method for determining signal-to-noise ratio
is beneficial; correlational methods may have less validity.
Normative data for click-evoked ABRs have been published by
several authors (Cevette 1984; Eggermont and Salamy 1988; Fawer
and Dubowitz 1982; Goldstein et al. 1979; Gorga et al. 1989;
Jacobson, Morehouse, and Johnson 1982; Lary et al. 1985; Stockard,
Stockard, and Coen 1983; Weber 1982). Unfortunately, the data are on
different age ranges, using different recording parameters and
stimulus transducers. This disparity in techniques makes it virtually
impossible to compare studies. When evaluating ABRs, local norms
should be established. Published data should be consulted to
determine whether your latency and amplitude measurements are
comparable. When using published data, be sure to use the same age
measuregestational, conceptional, or chronologic. Figure 7.3 provides
information on wave V maturation from four studies. Data in the
figure that were reported using conceptional age have been corrected
to gestational age by subtracting two weeks from the reported date.
Screening procedures often use one or two stimulus levels to
determine the presence of a response. A higher level stimulus provides
a waveform to which the lower level response may be compared.
In the NICU, approximately 1-3% of the population is hearing
impaired; for every child identified, approximately six will fail the
ABR screening test. In the normal newborn nursery, approximately
0.1% of the population is impaired, and for every child identified, 100

will fail the screening test (National Institutes of Health 1993).
Middle Latency Response
MLR Morphology Changes with Maturation and Recording
Parameters
The MLR appears to be less affected by the maturation process than
the ABR (Mendel 1985). The MLR waveform in neonates, infants,
and children resembles that of adults (McRandle, Smith, and
Goldstein 1974; Mendel, Adkinson, and Harker 1977; Mendelson and
Salamy 1981). Recording parameters for the MLR (electrode
application, electrical safety, stimulus) are essentially those described
for the ABR above, with the following differences: The time window
is usually set to 50 or 100 msec; filter settings vary among
laboratories, but 10-1000 Hz is common (see below); and the
repetition rate is between 10 and 20 per second, depending on whether
the 50-or 100-msec window is used. However, slower rates may
provide better waveform morphology.
 

Figure 7.3. 
The latency of the wave V response decreases with increasing age. Th
are from four studies that used a 60-or 65-dB HL click stimulus (Fawer and Dub
 Goldstein et al. 1979 (+); Cevette 1984 (x); and Weber 1982 (v)). Ages that we
conceptional were corrected by two weeks to gestational. It should be noted that t
number of different stimulus delivery and recording methods that could lead to d
latencies. However, all studies show a consistent reduction of wave V latency wit
 

Figure 7.4. 
Adult normative data collected on 120 adult subjects using an earphone produ
tion click. Subjects ranged from 20 to 60 years of age, and both male and female 
A principal use of the MLR is with the use of tone pips or tone bursts in
determination of low frequency threshold at 500 or 1000 Hz. Initial stu
frequency-specific stimuli were reported by McFarland, Vivion, and G
and Thornton, Mendel, and Anderson (1977). A study by Sobhy (1993)
high level click stimuli tend to produce responses from more basal regi
cochlea in a manner similar to the ABR.
Neonates
The middle latency response is not often seen in newborn infants. This 
number of recording factors as well as physiologic differences. As dem
initial studies, the response is reduced in amplitude during deep sleep i
and Goldstein 1971), and a similar effect may occur in the neonate. Re
parameters play a meaningful role in MLR identification. Before six m
and Pa are significantly less detectable than in adults. Kraus et al. (198

40% of children younger than six months of age will not have a detecta
over 80% of those children may not have a detectable Pa.
 

Page 158
Filtering
The high-pass filter appears to have a profound effect on the
detectability of the response. Filtering of the MLR has received a
significant amount of attention, and optimal filter settings remain
controversial (Lane et al. 1974; Ozdamar and Kraus 1983). Raising
the high-pass filter of the response reduces the low frequency
components of the response and phase-shifts energy from the ABR
into the MLR response window (Kavanagh and Domico 1986). This
phase-shifting can be reduced by using digital filters or slopes with
very low rolloffs. However, from a clinical viewpoint of threshold
detection, the energy shift of ABR information into the MLR time
domain is of little consequence, provided locally established norms
are used that were obtained with the same stimulus and recording
parameters.
Sleep State Determination
Initial studies have shown that the middle latency response is reduced
in amplitude during deep sleep in adults, whereas latency remains
essentially stable regardless of stage of sleep (Mendel and Goldstein
1971). Monitoring of sleep stage in neonates may be necessary while
recording the MLR (Crawford 1991; Kraus, Kileny, and McGee
1994).
Pathologic Conditions
Although threshold identification is a primary function in pediatric
evoked potential testing, a knowledge of pediatric neurologic
disorders is helpful in interpreting the test results. Evoked potential
abnormalities have been reported for a number of pathologic entities.
Fortunately, many of these entities are rare. Unfortunately, because of
the small number of patients, results are often presented as anecdotal
case reports. As evoked potential testing is site specific and not

pathology specific, results will be similar in many of these entities.
These cases demonstrate that the ABR results must be interpreted in
light of the overall medical status of the patient.
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)
AIDS is on the rise in newborn populations as a congenital pathology.
Infants and children with AIDS may exhibit prolonged absolute and
interpeak latencies. Increasing stimulation rate will show a larger
latency shift for the AIDS patient than for a normal cohort (Frank et
al. 1992). A case report of one infant suggests that zidovudine may
improve latency measures over a course of twelve months (Brivio et
al. 1991).
 

Page 159
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD)
Adrenoleukodystrophy is a sex-linked genetic disorder leading to
progressive destruction of adrenal cortex and white matter in the
nervous system. Children with ALD show prolonged absolute and
interpeak wave latencies. Wave I-III has been reported as showing the
greatest incidence of abnormality (Shimizu, Moser, and Naidu 1989).
In a single case report, Iinuma et al. (1989) reported normal ABR and
SSEP (Somatosensory Evoked Potential) at an early stage with VEP
(visual evoked potential) being abnormal.
Angelman Syndrome
Angelman syndrome is characterized by abnormal facies with
protruding tongue, paroxysmal laughter, and jerky movements.
Patients often have frequent epileptic seizures and optic nerve and
cerebral atrophy (Niedermeyer and Lopes da Silva 1987). The
syndrome is associated with chromosome DNA deletion (Sugimoto et
al. 1992). Sugimoto et al. report elevated ABR thresholds with normal
interpeak latency in three siblings.
Apert Syndrome
Apert syndrome is characterized by craniosynostosis, midface
hypoplasia, relative prognathism, bony fusion of the middle three
digits of the hands and feet with soft tissue fusion of the other digits,
and limitation of joint movement. Children with Apert syndrome are
at a greatly increased risk for conductive hearing loss, primarily due to
otitis media (Gould and Caldarelli 1982). There are reports of middle
ear malformation (Bergstrom, Neblett, and Hemenway 1972; Gould
and Caldarelli 1982; Lindsay, Black, and Donnelly 1975). ABR
results indicate increased absolute latency consistent with the
conductive pathology and an increased wave I-III interpeak latency.
The I-III change may be related to the cranial configuration.

Atresia
Congenital aural atresia is a prime reason to perform ABR testing.
These children often have an intact cochlea; identification of cochlear
reserve is therefore critical for early habilitation. Two approaches are
possible for assessing the infant with congenital atresia. In the first
approach, a high level air conduction stimulus is used, and a
maximum conductive loss is assumed. Obviously, supraaural or
circumaural earphones would be used; inserts would be impossible. If
thresholds of 70-80 dB HL are seen, a normal cochlea is most likely
present.
 

Page 160
The second approach uses bone conduction stimuli in an attempt to
directly assess cochlear function. Use of this approach may provide a
better estimate of cochlear reserve. However, the examiner must
remember that the skull structure of the neonate and infant maintains a
different energy transfer function from that of the adult. Significantly
shorter wave V latency has been seen in infants younger than one year
of age than in adults with temporal bone placement of the bone
vibrator (Yang et al. 1987). This difference in energy transfer may be
compounded in children who have congenital craniofacial
malformations as well as atresia. Durrant and Hyde (1993) report on
temporal aspects of bone conducted clicks in normal adolescents and
adults. They indicate low frequency filtering effects and propagation
delays. Finally, care must be exercised to reduce vibrator-produced
electrical artifacts that can obscure a response.
Cleft Palate
Cleft palate is a common malformation leading to a high incidence of
conductive hearing impairment. ABR results typically exhibit
prolonged absolute wave I and V latencies that coincide with the
conductive impairment. An increased I-V interpeak latency was
reported for six of ten normal gestation infants with cleft palate
studied between one and twenty months chronologic age (Gould
1980). The trend in these data suggested normal I-V latency by twenty
months. Clefting is often associated with other syndromes. This
necessitates a careful examination to rule out other possible
abnormalities.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth Syndrome
Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome comprises a group of hereditary
motor and sensory neuropathies. It is characterized by sensitivity
disorders, areflexia, and atrophy of leg muscles and was first reported
in 1967 by Lemieux and Neemeh. Approximately 28% of cases will

exhibit hearing loss associated with VIII nerve and brain stem
disorder (Perez et al. 1988). Absolute and interpeak wave latencies
may be affected. Cassandro et al. (1986) report no ABR abnormalities
in five cases. The vestibular system may be affected, as caloric
responses were reported absent in one individual case (Hanson,
Farber, and Armstrong 1970).
Chiari Syndrome
Chiari or Arnold-Chiari syndrome is characterized by displacement of
the medulla and cerebellum into the basilar part of the occipital bone.
It is associated with hydrocephalus, spina bifida, and
meningomyelocele. There may be an increased interpeak latency. In
three cases with malformed pons and tegmen, an increased III-V
latency was noted on one side (Kamuro, Inagaki, and Tomita 1992).
 

Page 161
Cocaine Exposure
In 1990 there were 158,000 infants born in the United States who
were known to have been exposed prenatally to cocaine. This figure
excludes, of course, those in whom the exposure is not known.
Exposure to cocaine causes vasoconstriction of vessels delivering
nutrients and oxygen to a fetus. This exposure may affect
neurobehavioral development. Shih, Cone-Wesson, and Reddix
(1988) investigated ABRs of eighteen neonates born to women who
had used cocaine. These infants were compared to eighteen from the
normal newborn nursery. The cocaine-exposed infants all had
prolonged ABR interpeak latencies as compared to controls. These
prolongations were believed to "reflect abnormalities in brainstem
conduction times rather than a deficit in the auditory periphery" (p.
250). Moreover, five of the eighteen infants appeared to have hearing
thresholds poorer than 20 dB, suggesting a possibility of moderate
hearing impairment. Salamy et al. (1990) also found prolonged brain
transmission times in cocaine-exposed infants.
Down Syndrome
Down syndrome, also known as trisomy 21, is a chromosomal
disorder resulting in short stature, short hands with simian crease,
abnormal dermatoglyphics, congenital heart disease, muscular
hypotonia, and characteristic facies. The facial characteristics are flat
face, downward sloping epicanthal folds, oblique palpebral fissures,
protruding tongue, and open mouth posture. The auricle tends to be
small and somewhat square with small external ear canals.
Conductive, sensorineural, and mixed hearing impairment is
frequently reported. ABR results have been reported as shortened I-V
latency, although this may not occur in older patients who have Down
syndrome (Arao and Niwa 1991; Kaga and Marsh 1986; Maurizi et al.
1985).

Friedreich Ataxia
Friedreich ataxiaan autosomal recessive disorderis characterized as
progressive CNS degeneration with preadolescent onset. The posterior
and lateral columns of the spinal cord exhibit the most marked
degeneration. The syndrome is characterized by gait disturbance,
truncal ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, and impaired muscular power
and sensation. Approximately 25 to 50% of those affected develop
cardiomyopathy. A report of fifteen cases with Friedreich ataxia
(Cassandro et al. 1986) indicated normal pure tone and immittance
findings. The ABR waveforms were absent in eleven patients and
abnormal in the remaining four at elevated stimulus levels; cortical
responses were normal in all cases. Other hereditary ataxias tend not
to show central ABR abnormalities (Taylor, Chan-Lui, and Logan
1985).
 

Page 162
Hyperbilirubinemia
Increased bilirubin, at levels requiring exchange transfusion in the
infant, has been identified as a risk factor for hearing loss (Joint
Committee on Infant Hearing 1991). Because neurotoxic as well as
cochleotoxic events are occurring, ABR testing is advocated for these
infants. Prolonged absolute and interpeak latencies have been noted
and are strongly correlated with serum bilirubin levels (Gupta, Raj,
and Anand 1990). Caution is required in the interpretation of ABR
results, however, as a number of infants have demonstrated marked
improvement in responses after treatment (Hall, Brown, and Mackey-
Hargardine 1985). Post blood exchange ABR testing should show
improved amplitude and latency values in affected infants (Hung
1989). Esbjorner et al. (1991) found that wave latency was inversely
related to the serum reserve albumin concentration for
monoacetyldiaminodiphenyl sulphone (MADDS). They suggest that
the neurotoxicity of bilirubin may be related to binding properties of
the serum albumin. At least the initial changes in ABR with
hyperbilirubinemia appear to be associated with reversible neurotoxic
effects.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus, which is related to abnormal CSF circulation and
absorption, is a result of increased CSF accumulation in the ventricles.
The increased CSF causes an increased intracranial pressure resulting
in brain and skull abnormalities. For the neonate, waves I-V appear to
have longer absolute latencies and smaller amplitudes. The I-V
interpeak latency is within normal limits, and there is a smaller V/I
amplitude ratio. The elevated threshold value may be related to
intracranial pressure rather than sensory hair cell loss (Edwards,
Durieux-Smith, and Picton 1985). Shunt placement to reduce CSF
pressure results in improved ABR response patterns (McPherson,

Amlie, and Foltz 1985).
Congenital Hypothyroidism
In patients with congenital hypothyroidism, the ABR results are
dependent upon age of evaluation. In infants, wave I can be delayed
but interpeak latencies are generally normal (Laureau et al. 1986).
Beginning at about the age of three years, reports of shortened I-V IPL
occur (Hebert et al. 1986). Shortened IPL has been partially correlated
with thyroxine serum levels at diagnosis and thyrotopin levels at the
time of recording. Thyroxine therapy has been reported to result in a
more normal I-V IPL in hypothyroid cases secondary to long-term
anticonvulsant therapy (Kodama et al. 1989).
Neurofibromatosis (Von Recklinghausen Disease)
Neurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease
characterized by multiple tumors associated with the peripheral
nervous system, CNS tumors,
 

Page 163
and cafe-au-lait spots (Niedermeyer and Lopes da Silva 1987). There
is great variability of expression in this disorder. The most common
intracranial tumor is acoustic neurinoma, which often presents as
bilateral tumors. Although usually occurring in early adulthood,
acoustic tumors may be present during childhood. Regular ABRs are
recommended to establish a baseline and then screen for possible
developing acoustic neurinomas.
Rett Syndrome
Rett syndrome is a disease confined to females that becomes evident
at six to eighteen months of age. There is progressive dementia and
loss of language. Purposeful hand motion diminishes, and a
stereotypical hand washing movement appears. Gait apraxia is
present. Epileptic seizures are present in 80% of the population
between one and eight years of age. Most symptoms abate by
adolescence, leaving a residual dementia and scoliosis (Niedermeyer
and Lopes da Silva 1987). EEG abnormalities are present. ABR
abnormality of wave V latency and the III-V interval was noted in a
study of eleven subjects with Rett syndrome compared to two normal
control groups (Pelson and Budden 1987). MLR and Late responses
also have been noted to be abnormal (Bader, Witt-Engerstrom, and
Hagberg 1989). In a more recent study of thirty-six subjects with Rett
syndrome, normal results were seen 100% of the time for ABR, 50%
for MLR, and 36% for late responses (Stach et al. 1994).
Sickle Cell Anemia
Sickle cell anemia is a recessively inherited blood disorder that results
in a change in hemoglobin shape during periods of physiologic stress
or emotional change. The abnormal hemoglobin shape results in
blockage of blood vessels leading to localized ischemia. Auditory
function can be impaired in individuals in which blockage to the
cochlea results. Individuals can either fully or partially recover from

these losses. Central auditory processing has been shown to be
affected in some children with sickle cell disease (Forman-Franco et
al. 1982; Friedman et al. 1980; Sharp and Orchick 1978). Increased
interpeak latency, ITS (Selters and Brackman 1977), and delta V
(Prosser et al. 1983) measures of ABR have been noted in older sickle
cell patients when ischemic events involve the central nervous system
(Gould et al. 1991).
Hearing Aid Fitting
Although evoked auditory potentials have been used primarily to
evaluate auditory threshold in infants and children, their potential as a
means for fitting amplification has been explored (Beauchaine and
Gorga 1988; Beauchaine et al. 1986; Bergman, Beauchaine, and
Gorga 1992; Davidson, Wall, and Goodman 1990; Gerling 1991;
Gorga, Beauchaine, and Reiland 1987; Hall
 

Page 164
and Ruth 1985; Hecox 1983; Kiessling 1982; Kileny 1982;
McPherson and Clark 1983; Rackliffe and Musiek 1983; Thornton,
Farrell, and McSporran 1989; Thornton, Yardley, and Farrell 1987). In
the speech and hearing sciences, a basic assumption is that good
hearing is necessary for normal development of speech and oral
language. Therefore, detection of an auditory deficit calls for the
intervention of an audiologist, who selects correct amplification and
directs aural rehabilitation when medical or surgical management is
precluded.
As in determining auditory threshold, infants and young children pose
a problem for testing to determine the best amplification fit. Not only
must a general hearing level be estimated, but thresholds must be
precisely determined at various frequencies. In addition, most
comfortable loudness (MCL) (McPherson and Clark 1983) and the
loudness discomfort level (LDL) need to be determined. Finally, many
individuals believe that it is important to determine the hearing aids'
effects on speech recognition.
In fitting amplification, two main approaches have been employed
using the ABR. The first assesses auditory function with the hearing
aid in place. A number of pitfalls is associated with this approach,
primarily with the electroacoustic characteristics of the hearing aid
and its interaction with the acoustic requirements of the ABR stimulus
(Kileny 1982).
A second approach evaluates threshold and dynamic range of hearing
using unaided responses and then applying prescriptive formulas to fit
the hearing aid. This approach, too, has limitations. First, prescriptive
formulas require accurate frequency-specific auditory threshold
information. As previously noted both in this chapter and by other
authors (Hall 1992), the click-evoked response permits only high-
frequency threshold estimation. Several techniques have been

developed to estimate frequency-specific threshold. Notched noise
masking (Picton et al. 1979), derived band response (Don,
Eggermont, and Brackmann 1979), and gated tone pips (Gorga and
Thornton 1989) have been recommended for this purpose. The first
two techniquesnotched noise and derived bandsrely on modification
of the cochlear response. These techniques desynchronize neural
activity in unwanted areas of the cochlea, thus preventing them from
contributing to the evoked response. The third techniquegated tone
pipslimits the frequency spectrum of the signal being delivered to the
cochlea. Several studies have demonstrated that high level, low
frequency tone pips have a significant spread into the higher
frequency, basal region of the cochlea (Sobhy 1993). Nevertheless,
clinical studies suggest that tone bursts at several frequencies can
estimate threshold within 20 dB (Hall 1992).
Estimation of LDL by evoked potentials poses a unique challenge.
Several authors have examined amplitude-intensity and latency-
intensity functions for the ABR in attempts to obtain this information.
Kiessling (1982) assumes that the amplitude of V-N5 is a correlate of
loudness perception. He uses the amplitude-intensity curve of the
subject in conjunction with the normative latency-amplitude curve to
project gain and compression functions for the hear-
 

Page 165
ing aid. In a follow-up study, Davidson et al. (1990) tested Kiessling's
assumption of ABR amplitude and loudness perception correlation.
They found that single measures of the amplitude-intensity function
were insufficient to judge loudness perception. However, averaging
the amplitude-intensity functions for four trials with a one-week
separation provided a good correlate with perceived loudness.
Because amplitude is a more variable measure than the latency of
wave V in the ABR, other investigators have tried using latency as an
estimate of LDL. Thornton et al. (1987, 1989) report on using the
slope of the latency-intensity function for LDL estimation. They
found that the subjective LDL was equal to the point at which the
latency-intensity function became 0.1 ms/lOdB plus 15 dB, when
using a 10-dB step size in obtaining the ABR. Employing this
formula, ABR estimates were within 5 dB of subjective LDL in 66%
of subjects and within 11 dB for the remaining 33% of the subjects.
When a 5-dB step size was used for ABR measurement, the formula
LDL = I5 + 10, where I5 0.08ms/5dB, estimated subjective LDL
within five dB for all subjects.
Both of these methods attempt to link parameters of the ABR
waveform to a subjective estimate of loudness, specifically LDL.
Darling and Price (1990), in a study of loudness and ABR, found that
measurement of loudness could not be derived from ABR
measurements because of the influence of rate and absolute intensity
on the latency and amplitude of the response.
Summary
Auditory evoked potentials are valuable tools in the audiologist's
armamentarium for diagnosing hearing loss in children. Nonetheless,
as with any tool, they are limited in scope. The potentials currently
elicited in the diagnosis of hearing loss provide information on subsets

of the auditory nervous system. This information is often confounded
with numerous variables such as maturation, general health,
psychologic state, and stimulus factors. The diagnostician must
remain cognizant of these difficulties and not extend interpretation
beyond the physiologic constraints of the test. Before utilizing
electrophysiologic measures, the reader is well advised to attempt
other behavioral testing of the auditory system if at all possible.
References
Arao, H. and H. Niwa. 1991. Auditory brain stem responses in
Down's syndrome. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho 94:1673-82.
Arnold, S. 1985. Objective versus visual detection of the auditory
brainstem response. Ear and Hearing 6:144-149.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1987. The short
latency auditory evoked potentials. Rockville, MD: American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association.
 

Page 166
Bader, G.G., I. Witt-Engerstrom, and B. Hagberg. 1989.
Neurophysiological findings in the Rett syndrome, II: Visual and
auditory brainstem, middle and late evoked responses. Brain
Development 11:110-114.
Beauchaine, K., and M. Gorga. 1988. Applications of the auditory
brainstem response to pediatric hearing aid selection. Seminars in
Hearing 9:61-74.
Beauchaine, K., M. Gorga, J. Reiland, and L. Larson. 1986.
Application of ABRs to the hearing-aid selection process: Preliminary
data. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 29:120-128.
Bergman, B., K. Beauchaine, and M. Gorga. 1992. Application of the
auditory brainstem response in pediatric audiology. The Hearing
Journal 45: 19-25.
Bergstrom, L., M. Neblett, and W. Hemenway. 1972. Otologic
manifestations in acrocephalosyndactyly. Archives of Otolaryngology
96: 117-123.
Brivio, L., R. Tornaghi, L. Musetti, P. Marchisio, and N. Principi.
1991. Improvement of auditory brainstem responses after treatment
with zidovudine in a child with AIDS. Pediatric Neurology 7:53-55.
Cassandro, E., F. Mosca, L. Sequino, F. De Falco, and G. Campanella.
1986. Otoneurological abnormalities in Friedreich's ataxia and other
inherited neuropathies. Audiology 25:84-91.
Cevette, M. 1984. Auditory brainstem response testing in an intensive
care unit. Seminars in Hearing 5:57-69.
Cox, L., M. Hack, and D. Metz. 1981. Brainstem evoked response
audiometry in the premature infant population. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 3:213-224.

Crawford, M. 1991. The effects of sleep stage on the signal to noise
ratio of the middle components. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State
University.
Darling, R., and L. Price. 1990. Loudness and auditory brain stem
evoked response. Ear and Hearing 11:289-295.
Davidson, S., L. Wall, and C. Goodman. 1990. Preliminary studies on
the use of ABR amplitude projection procedure for hearing aid
selection. Ear and Hearing 11:332-338.
Davis, H. 1976. Principles of electric response audiometry. Annals of
Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology. (Supplement 28) 85: 1-96.
Derbyshire, A., and G. McCandless. 1964. Template for EEG
response to sound. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 7:96-98.
Don, M., J. Eggermont, and D. Brackmann. 1979. Reconstruction of
the audiogram using brain stem responses and high-pass masking.
Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl. 57): 1-20.
Don, M., C. Elberling, and M. Waring. 1984. Objective detection of
averaged auditory brainstem responses. Scandinavian Audiology
13:219-228.
Durrant, J., and R. Hyde. 1993. Observations on temporal aspects of
bone-conduction clicks: Real head measurements. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology 4:213-219.
Edwards, C., A. Durieux-Smith, and T. Picton. 1985. Auditory
brainstem response audiometry in neonatal hydrocephalus. Journal of
Otolaryngology (Suppl. 14):40-46.
Eggermont, J.J., C.W. Ponton, S.G. Coupland, and R. Winkelaar.
1991. Frequency dependent maturation of the cochlea and brainstem
evoked potentials. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 111:220-224.
Eggermont, J.J., and A. Salamy. 1988. Development of ABR

parameters in a preterm and a term-born population. Ear and Hearing
9:283-289.
 

Page 167
Elberling, C. 1979. The use of template and cross correlation
functions in analysis of brainstem potentials. Scandinavian Audiology
8:187-190.
Elberling, C., and M. Don. 1984. Quality estimation of averaged
auditory brainstem responses. Scandinavian Audiology 13:187-197.
.1987. Detection functions for the human auditory brainstem
response. Scandinavian Audiology 16:89-92.
Elberling, C., and O. Walgreen. 1985. Estimation of the auditory
brainstem response (ABR) by means of a Bayesian inference.
Scandinavian Audiology 14:89-96.
Esbjorner, E., P. Larsson, P. Leissner, and L. Wranne. 1991. The
serum reserve albumin concentration for monoacetyldiamino-
diphenyl sulphone and auditory evoked responses during neonatal
hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 80:406-412.
Fawer, C., and L. Dubowitz. 1982. Auditory brainstem responses in
neurologically normal preterm and fullterm newborn infants.
Neuropediatrics 13:200-206.
Forman-Franco, B., G. Karayalin, D. Mandel, and A. Abramson.
1982. The evaluation of auditory function in homozygous sickle cell
disease. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 89:850-856.
Frank, Y., S.M. Vishnubhakat, and S. Pahwa. 1992. Brainstem
auditory evoked responses in infants and children with AIDS.
Pediatric Neurology 8:262-266.
Friedman, E., N. Luban, G. Herr, and I. Williams. 1980. Sickle cell
anemia and hearing. Annals of Otolaryngology 89:342-347.
Gerling, I. 1991. In search of a stringent methodology for using ABR
audiometric results. The Hearing Journal 44:26-30.

Goldstein, P., A. Krumholz, J. Felix, D. Shannon, and R. Carr. 1979.
Brainstem evoked responses in neonates. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 135:622-631.
Gorga, M., K. Beauchaine, and J. Reiland. 1987. Comparison of onset
and steady-state responses of hearing aids: Implications for use of
auditory brainstem response in the selection of hearing aids. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 30:130-136.
Gorga, M., J. Kaminski, K. Beauchaine, W. Jesteadt, and S. Neely.
1989. Auditory brainstem responses from children three months to
three years of age: II. Normal patterns of response. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research 32:281-288.
Gorga, M., and A.R. Thornton. 1989. The choice of stimuli for ABR
measurements. Ear and Hearing 10:217-230.
Gould, H. 1980. Early auditory evoked potentials in infants with
craniofacial malformation. Journal of Auditory Research 20:244-248.
Gould, H., and D. Caldarelli. 1982. Hearing and otopathology in
Apert syndrome. Archives of Otolaryngology 108:347-349.
Gould, H., M. Crawford, M. Mendel, and S. Dodson. 1992.
Quantification technique for the middle latency response. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 3:153-158.
Gould, H., M. Crawford, W. Smith, N. Beckford, W. Gibson, L. Pettit,
and L. Bobo. 1991. Hearing disorders in sickle cell disease: Cochlear
and retrocochlear findings. Ear and Hearing 12:352-354.
Grass, E. 1978. Electrical safety specifically related to EEG. Grass
Technical Bulletin #X757C78. Quincy, MA: Grass Instrument Co.
Gupta, A.K., H. Raj, and N.K. Anand. 1990. Auditory brainstem
responses (ABR) in neonates with hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Journal
of Pediatrics 57:705-711.

Hall, J.W. III. 1992. Handbook of auditory evoked responses. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
 

Page 168
Hall, J.W. III, D. Brown, and J. Mackey-Hargadine. 1985. Pediatric
applications of serial auditory brainstem and middle-latency evoked
response recordings. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 9:201-218.
Hall, J.W. III, and R. Ruth. 1985. Acoustic reflexes and auditory
evoked responses in hearing aid evaluation. Seminars in Hearing
6:251-277.
Hanson, P., R. Farber, and R. Armstrong. 1970. Distal muscle
wasting, nephritis, and deafness. Neurology 20:426-434.
Hatanaka, T., H. Shuto, A. Yasuhara, and Y. Kobayashi. 1988.
Ipsilateral and contralateral recordings of auditory brainstem
responses to monaural stimulation. Pediatric Neurology 4:354-357.
Hatanaka, T., A. Yasuhara, A. Hori, and Y. Kobayashi. 1990. Auditory
brainstem response in newborn infants: Masking effects on ipsi and
contralateral recording. Ear and Hearing 11:233-236.
Hebert, R., E. Laureau, M. Vanasse, J.E. Richard, J. Morrissette, J.
Glorieux, M. Desjardins, J. Letarte, and J.H. Dussault. 1986. Auditory
brainstem response audiometry in congenitally hypothyroid children
under early replacement therapy. Pediatric Research 20: 570-573.
Hecox, K. 1983. Role of auditory brain stem response in the selection
of hearing aids. Ear and Hearing 4:51-55.
Hung, K. 1989. Auditory brainstem responses in patients with
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubin encephalopathy. Brain
Development 11:297-301.
Iinuma, K., K. Haginoya, I. Handa, A. Kojima, N. Fueki, J. Aikawa,
M. Ito, J. Hatazawa, and T. Ido. 1989. Computed tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and
evoked potential at early stage of adrenoleukodystrophy. Tohuku

Journal of Experimental Medicine 159: 195-203.
Inagaki, M., Y. Tomita, S. Takashima, K. Ohtani, G. Andoh, and K.
Takeshita. 1987. Functional and morphometrical maturation of the
brainstem auditory pathway. Brain Development 9:597-601.
Jacobson, J.T., C.R. Morehouse, and M. Johnson. 1982. Strategies for
infant auditory brainstem response assessment. Ear and Hearing
3:263-270.
Jirsa, R.E., and K.B. Clontz. 1990. Long latency auditory event-
related potentials from children with auditory processing disorders.
Ear and Hearing 11:222-232.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (1991). 1990 position statement.
Asha (suppl. 5) 33:3-6.
Kaga, K., and R. Marsh. 1986. Auditory brainstem responses in young
children with Down's syndrome. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 11 :29-38.
Kalmuro, K., M. Inagaki, and Y. Tomita. 1992. Correlation between
morphological abnormalities of Chiari malformation and evoked
potentials. No-To-Hattatsu 24:554-558.
Kavanagh, K., and W. Domico. 1986. High-pass digital filtration of
the 40-Hz response and its relationship to the spectral content of the
middle latency and 40-Hz responses. Ear and Hearing 7:93-99.
Kiessling, J. 1982. Hearing aid selection by brainstem audiometry.
Scandinavian Audiology 11:269-275.
Kileny, P. 1982. Auditory brainstem responses as indicators of hearing
aid performance. Annals of Otolaryngology 9:61-64.
Kodama, S., K. Tanaka, H. Konishi, K. Momota, H. Nakasako, S.
Nakayama, J. Yagi, and K. Koderasawa. 1989. Supplementary
thyroxine therapy in patients with hypothyroidism induced by long

term anticonvulsant therapy. Acta Paediatrica Japan 31:555-562.
 

Page 169
Kraus, N., P. Kileny, and T. McGee. 1994. Middle latency auditory
evoked potentials. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 4th ed., ed. by
J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Kraus, N., T. McGee, A. Micco, A. Sharma, T. Carrell, and T. Nicol.
1993. Mismatch negativity in school-age children to speech stimuli
that are just perceptibly different. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 88:123-130.
Kraus, N., T. McGee, A. Sharma, T. Carrell, and T. Nicol. 1992.
Mismatch negativity eventrelated potential elicited by speech stimuli.
Ear and Hearing 13:158-164.
Kraus, N., N. Reed, I. Smith, L. Stein, and C. Cartee. 1987. High-pass
filter settings affect the detectability of MLRs in humans.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 68:234-236.
Lane, R., M. Mendel, G. Kupperman, M. Vivion, L. Buchanan, and R.
Goldstein. 1974. Phase distortion of the AER imposed by analog
filtering. Archives of Otolaryngology 99:428-432.
Lary, S., G. Briassoulis, L. deVries, L. Dubowitz, and V. Dubowitz.
1985. Hearing threshold in preterm and term infants by auditory
brainstem response. Journal of Pediatrics 107: 593-599.
Laureau, E., M. Vanasse, R. Hebert, J. Letarte, J. Glorieux, M.
Desjardins, and J. Dussault. 1986. Somatosensory evoked potentials
and auditory brainstem responses in congenital hypothyroidism. I: A
longitudinal study before and after treatment in six infants detected in
the neonatal period. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 64: 501-510.
Lemieux, G., and J. Neemeh. 1967. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and
nephritis. Canadian Medical Association Journal 97:1193-1198.
Lindsay, J., F. Black, and W. Donnelly. 1975. Acrocephalosyndactyly

Apert's syndrome: Temporal bone findings. Annals of Otolaryngology
84:174-178.
Lurquin, P., P. Magera, S. Hassid, and D. Hennebert. 1989. Evolution
du seuil auditif durant les premiers mois de la vie liee aux
modifications de la physiologie du conduit auditif externe.
[Development of the auditory threshold during the first months of life
related to modifications of the physiology of the external auditory
canal.] Acta Otorhinolaryngologica Belgica 43:417-426.
Maurizi, M., G. Almadori, L. Cagini, E. Molini, F. Ottaviani, G.
Paludetti, and F. Pierri. 1986. Auditory brainstem responses in the
full-term newborn: Changes in the first 58 hours of life. Audiology
25:239-247.
Maurizi, M., F. Ottaviani, G. Paludetti, and S. Lungarotti. 1985.
Audiological findings in Down's children. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 9:227-232.
McClellend, R., and B. Sayers. 1984. Evaluation of the cross
correlation method for detection of auditory threshold for brainstem
auditory evoked potentials. In Evoked potentials II, ed. R.H. Nodar
and C. Barber. The Second International Evoked Potentials
Symposium. Boston: Butterworth.
McFarland, W., M. Vivion, and R. Goldstein. 1977. Middle
components of the AER to tonepips in normal-hearing and hearing-
impaired subjects. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 20:781-
798.
McPherson, D., R. Amlie, and E. Foltz. 1985. Auditory brainstem
response in infant hydrocephalus. Child's Nervous System 1:70-76.
McPherson, D., and N. Clark. 1983. ABR in hearing aid utilization:
Simulated deafness. Hearing Instruments 34:12-15, 66.
 


Page 170
McRandle, C., M. Smith, and R. Goldstein. 1974. Early averaged
electroencephalic responses to clicks in neonates. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology 83: 695-702.
Mendel, M. 1985. Middle and late auditory evoked potentials. In
Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Mendel, M., C. Adkinson, and L. Harker. 1977. Middle components
of the evoked potentials in infants. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 86:293-300.
Mendel, M., and R. Goldstein. 1971. Early components of the
averaged electroencephalic response to constant level clicks during
all-night sleep. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 14:829-840.
Mendelson, T., and A. Salamy. 1981. Maturational effects on the
middle components of the averaged electroencephalic response.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24: 140-144.
Moore, E. 1983. Bases of auditory brainstem evoked responses. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
Morgan, D., M. Zimmerman, and J. Dubno. 1987. Auditory brainstem
evoked response characteristics in the full-term newborn. Annals of
Otology, Rhinology, and laryngology 96: 142-151.
Näätänen, R. 1992. Attention and brain function. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
National Institutes of Health. 1993. Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11: 1-24. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health.
Niedermeyer, E., and F. Lopes da Silva. 1987.
Electroencephalography: Basic principles, clinical applications, and

related fields. 2d ed. Baltimore: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Ozdamar, O., and N. Kraus. 1983. Auditory middle-latency responses
in humans. Audiology 22:34-49.
Palmer, C., A. Derbyshire, and A. Lee. 1966. A method for analyzing
individual cortical responses to auditory stimuli.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 20: 204-206.
Pelson, R.O., and S.S. Budden. 1987. Auditory brainstem response
findings in Rett syndrome. Brain Development 9:514-516.
Perez, H., J. Vilchez, T. Sevilla, and L. Martinez. 1988. Audiologic
evaluation in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Scandinavian Audiology
(Suppl. 30):21 1-213.
Picton, T.W., S.A. Hillyard, H.J. Kraus, and R. Galambos. 1974.
Human auditory evoked potentials, I: Evaluation of components.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 36: 179-190.
Picton, T., R. Linden, G. Hamel, and J. Maru. 1983. Aspects of
averaging. Seminars in Hearing 4:327-341.
Picton, T., K. Oulette, G. Hamel, and A. Smith. 1979. Brainstem
evoked potential to tone pips in notched noise. Journal of
Otolaryngology 8:289-314.
Prevec, T., K. Ribaric, K., and D. Butinar. 1984. Contingent negative
variation audiometry in children. Audiology 23:114-126.
Prosser, S., E. Arslan, G. Conti, and S. Michelini. 1983. Evaluation of
the monaurally evoked brainstem response in the diagnosis of
sensorineural hearing loss. Scandinavian Audiology 12:103-106.
 

Page 171
Rackliffe, L., and F.E. Musiek. 1983. An introduction to ABR in
hearing aid evaluation. Hearing Instruments 34:9-10.
Rubel, E., D. Born, J. Deitch, and D. Durham. 1984. Recent advances
toward understanding auditory system development. In Hearing
science, ed. C. Berlin. San Diego: College Hill Press.
Salamy, A., L. Eldridge, J. Anderson, and D. Bull. 1990. Brainstem
transmission time in infants exposed to cocaine in utero. The Journal
of Pediatrics 117:627-629.
Shih, L., B. Cone-Wesson, and B. Reddix. 1988. Effects of maternal
cocaine abuse on the neonatal auditory system. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 15:245-25 1.
Schimmel, H. 1967. The +/-reference: Accuracy of estimated mean
components in average response studies. Science 157:92-93.
Schimmel, H., I. Rapin, and M. Cohen. 1974. Improving evoked
response audiometry. Audiology 13:33-65.
Selters, W., and D. Brackman. 1977. Acoustic tumor detection with
brainstem electric response audiometry. Archives of Otolaryngology
103: 181 - 187.
Sharp, M., and D. Orchick. 1978. Auditory function in sickle cell
anemia. Archives of Otolaryngology 104:322-324.
Shimizu, H., H. Moser, and S. Naidu. 1989. Auditory brainstem
response and audiologic findings in adrenoleukodystrophy: Its variant
and carrier. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 98:215-220.
Sininger, Y. 1993. Auditory brain stem response for objective
measures of hearing. Ear and Hearing 14:23-30.
Sobhy, O. 1993. Frequency specificity of the auditory middle latency
response. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State University.

Sobhy, 0., and H. Gould. 1993. Interaural attenuation using insert
earphones: Electrocochleographic approach. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology 4:76-79.
Stach, B., W. Stoner, S. Smith, and J. Jerger. 1994. Auditory evoked
potentials in Rett syndrome. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology 5:226-230.
Stockard, J.E., J.J. Stockard, and R. Coen. 1983. Auditory brain stem
response variability in infants. Ear and Hearing 4: 11-23.
Sugimoto, T., A. Yasuhara, T. Ohta, N. Nishida, S. Saitoh, J. Hamabe,
and N. Niikawa. 1992. Angelman syndrome in three siblings:
Characteristic epileptic seizures and EEG abnormalities. Epilepsia
33:1078-1082.
Taylor, M., W. Chan-Lui, and W. Logan. 1985. Longitudinal evoked
potential studies in hereditary ataxias. Canadian Journal of
Neuroscience 12: 100-105.
Thornton, A., M. Mendel, and C. Anderson. 1977. Effects of stimulus
frequency and intensity on the middle components of the averaged
auditory electroencephalic response. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 20:81-94.
Thornton, A.R.D., G. Farrell, and E. McSporran. 1989. Clinical
methods for the objective estimation of loudness discomfort level
(LDL) using auditory brainstem responses in patients. Scandinavian
Audiology 18:225-230.
Thornton, A.R.D., L. Yardley, and G. Farrell. 1987. The objective
estimation of loudness discomfort level using auditory brainstem
evoked responses. Scandinavian Audiology 16:219-225.
Weber, B.A. 1982. Comparison of auditory brain stem response
latency norms for premature infants. Ear and Hearing 3:257-262.

 

Page 172
.1994. Auditory brainstem response: Threshold estimation and
auditory screening. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 4th ed., ed. by
J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Wong, P., and R. Bickford. 1980. Brain stem auditory evoked
potentials: The use of noise estimate. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 50:25-34.
Yang, E.Y., A.L. Rupert, and G. Moushegian. 1987. A developmental
study of bone conduction auditory brain stem response in infants. Ear
and Hearing 8:244-251.
Zapala, D. 1993. Statistical quantification of auditory brainstem
response waveshape quality and its relation to peak latency
measurement accuracy. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State University.
 

Page 173
8
Testing Otoacoustic Emissions in Newborns, Infants,
Toddlers, and Children
Brenda L. Lonsbury-Martin, Glen K. Martin,
Margaret J. McCoy, and Martin L. Whitehead
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), or sounds generated by the hearing (or
cochlear) portion of the healthy inner ear, can be measured objectively
and noninvasively from a microphone sealed in the outer ear canal
(Kemp 1978). The results of considerable research indicate that OAEs
are produced by the cochlea as part of the normal hearing process.
Outer hair cells (OHCs) are extremely vulnerable to injury from
agents that commonly impair hearing (e.g., systemic pathogens such
as bacteria and viruses, and certain external agents such as excessively
intense sound and ototoxic drugs). Isolated (in vitro) from the cochlea,
OHCs change shape when activated with alternating electrical current
(Brownell et al. 1985). The discovery of this phenomenon has
spawned the popular notion that the stimulus-induced cyclic
lengthenings and shortenings of this very abundant type of sensory
cell generate OAEs (Brownell 1990).
The apparent ability of OAEs to specify the fine vibromechanical
movements of the OHC system has resulted in considerable research
aimed at assessing the clinical utility of these objective tests. These
investigations have consistently indicated that OAE measures show
excellent promise as an objective, noninvasive method for
establishing the differential diagnosis of sensorineural hearing loss.
They may be used for screening hearing and for serial monitoring of
hearing capability in individuals suspected of exhibiting progressive
changes in hearing status. These include individuals with a family

history, known progressive ear pathologies such as Ménière disease,
congenital cytomegalovirus
Portions of this work were supported by grants from the Public Health
Service (DC)00613, DC01668, ES03500). The authors thank B.B. Stagner
for technical assistance, and M.T. Ruiz for secretarial services.
 

Page 174
infection, noise-induced hearing loss, and so on. Although much of
the investigative work so far has been conducted in adult populations
representing both normal-hearing and hearing-impaired patients, an
impressive number of studies has focused on evaluating the usefulness
of OAE testing in various subpopulations of children.
The primary purpose of the present review is to summarize our
current knowledge of the applicability of OAE methods to the
examination of hearing in newborns, infants, toddlers, and preschool
and school-aged children. With this goal in mind, we discuss the
practical features of OAE testing with regard to their benefits and
limitations for these special patient groups; we also address the details
necessary for establishing procedures to measure evoked emissions in
pediatric audiology settings.
To provide a background for considering this growing body of
literature and the adaptation of OAE testing to the special needs of
infants and children, we present (a) the particular advantages of
emitted responses in assessing the hearing capability of these
sometimes difficult-to-test patients; (b) the specific types of OAE
testing available; (c) a summary of our basic knowledge of OAEs and
developing humans; (d) factors that influence the quality and quantity
of the emitted response (including acoustic noises from the patient and
ambient setting); and (e) the status of middle-ear function.
Background
Advantages of OAEs as a Clinical Test
When OAEs were first described, Kemp (1978) recognized that the
beneficial features of this response measure would make it an
important new component of the audiometric test battery. One
principal advantage of OAEs is their objectivity as an unbiased
evaluator of cochlear function. Also, the noninvasive feature of OAEs

yields simple set-up procedures that do not require highly trained
technicians, resulting in a relatively inexpensive and rapidly
administered test.
The typical devices used to measure OAEs are described below for
two common commercial instruments. These devices combine a
sound source and a sensitive microphone into a miniature probe sealed
into the outer ear canal. In addition, the specificity of OAEs for
assessing the functional status of the OHCs (i.e., the cochlear
component most vulnerable to many of the diseases and disorders that
damage hearing) implies that these methods can compose a sensitive
test that detects problems at an early onset stage. This selective OHC-
testing property also suggests that OAEs can function as an objective
means of assessing certain aspects of central auditory processing
because of the known connections between a major component of the
cochlear efferent system, the medial olivocochlear bundle pathway,
and OHCs.
 

Page 175
Finally, results from the OAE assessment of OHC function can be
combined with those provided by conventional and special purpose
audiometric tests to establish the sensory versus neural nature of a
sensorineural impairment. This latter capability has furnished new
information on the primary site of otopathologies that underlie some
of the more puzzling ear ailments. These include Ménière's disease
(Harris and Probst 1992) and sudden idiopathic sensorineural hearing
loss (Sakashita et al. 1991), although these afflictions rarely affect
children.
In addition, the frequency specificity of OAE testing permits a precise
definition of normal compared to abnormal regions of OHC function
with respect to the frequency pattern. This feature may lead to
improved approaches to habilitation with amplification based on a
detailed knowledge of the frequency extent of the impairment.
Moreover, the amenability of the objectively measured OAEs to
computer control results in measures that can be thoroughly,
accurately, and rapidly performed. The ease of computer-based
measures of OAEs also promises to lead to methods that permit an
automatic interpretation of the resulting information (see newborn
screening section below). A final advantage of OAE testing is that
emitted responses can be elicited from essentially all normal ears,
whereas they are reduced or absent in impaired ears. The relationship
between the presence vs. absence of OAEs and hearing ability
provides a metric against which the performance of an unknown ear
can be rigorously assessed based on statistically defined degrees of
abnormality. This characteristic of OAE testing also promises that
some aspect of their specific quantitative features (e.g., detection
threshold, level in response to suprathreshold stimulation, onset
latency) will eventually be used to predict an accurate hearing level.
Together, these positive features support the expectation that OAEs
will become an important new clinical assessor of hearing capability.

These benefits have been primarily responsible for stimulating a great
deal of research, resulting in the publication of more than 800 reports
since their discovery. Figure 8.1 indicates that, as OAEs have become
more recognized, the publication rate of studies on adults (solid
circles) has been augmented from a yearly increase of about five per
year (1978-1987) to approximately twenty-two per year more
recently. Because the data point for 1993 represents only the first six
months of that year, it is probable that up to 200 reports on OAEs
would have been published in 1993 alone.
This overview of the strengths of OAE testing demonstrates that many
of these beneficial properties (including their objectivity, simple and
brief set-up procedures, and potential ability to predict hearing level)
are especially applicable to young patients. Such useful attributes
support the development of OAEs into special-purpose tests
(including exams that screen for hearing problems) especially suited
for use with infants and young children-in particular, newborns, older
infants, toddlers, and preschool children.
 

Page 176
Other OAE procedures can be developed to monitor cochlear status in
the young patient subpopulations who are at risk for developing
hearing problems. Among these are patients who have a familial
tendency for progressive impairment and children who are undergoing
life-saving treatments with drugs or procedures that are potentially
harmful to hearing. Finally, the differential diagnosis attribute of OAE
testing to establish the primary site of pathology in young ears known
to be abnormal helps to optimize the selection of an appropriate
habilitative strategy. Given the considerable strengths that OAEs
contribute to the examination of hearing in young subjects, it is
surprising that so few studies have been conducted on the utility of
emissions testing in these special patients. The curve in Figure 8.1
represented by the open circles supports this observation in that only
about 6% of the total number of OAE studies to date have been
conducted in individuals younger than twenty years old. However, the
cumulative growth rate indicates that in recent years the number of
studies on infants and children has been increasing from none or one
per year to about three per year. Given the current interest in
establishing universal screening programs for neonates, the number of
studies conducted in children is expected to rise dramatically in the
next few years.
Types of OAEs
Otoacoustic emissions are frequently divided into two general
categories based on the nature of the acoustic stimulation needed to
elicit them (Probst, Lons-

Figure 8. 1. 
Number of published reports on otoacoustic emissions for adults
(solid circles) and children (<20 years) as a function of year 
since their discovery in 1978.
 

Page 177
bury-Martin, and Martin 1991). One type, known as spontaneous
OAEs, consists of low-level, tonal-like signals that occur naturally in
the absence of sound stimulation in the ears of over 60% of normal
hearing people.
Spontaneous OAEs (SOAEs) are so weak that they are usually
imperceptible to the individuals who exhibit them. They are not
present in every normal ear, thus making it difficult to judge normality
versus abnormality based simply on their presence or absence. When
they are present, SOAEs are ear-specific; their frequencies and levels
are unique to the ear exhibiting them, making it difficult to develop a
normal database against which the status of an unknown ear can be
judged. Moreover, SOAEs disappear as hearing levels (HLs) increase
beyond 20 dB. For these reasons, it is not expected that this class of
emission will ever be clinically useful. However, knowledge of both
their presence and level and frequency characteristics helps to explain,
for some individuals, focused idiosyncratic enhancements or
reductions in the levels of other types of OAEs. The role of SOAEs in
the normal-hearing process is unknown, but their presence may
indicate the high degree of OHC mechanical activity responsible for
the excellent hearing of the persons who exhibit them.
The other main emission classthe evoked OAEsis elicited from
virtually all normal ears by low-to-moderate-level test sounds. The
various subclasses of evoked OAEs are defined according to the
precise acoustic signal needed to elicit them. These stimuli range from
brief tone pips or clicks, which produce transient-or click-evoked
OAEs (TEOAEs or CEOAEs, respectively), to more continuous single
pure tones, which elicit stimulus-frequency OAEs (SFOAEs) and
combinations of two pure tones, which produce distortion-product
OAEs (DPOAEs). The straightforward methods used to separate the
acoustic energy of the outgoing emitted response in the ear canal from
that of the ingoing stimulus results in greater ease in measuring and

interpreting TEOAEs and DPOAEs; thus, these measures have
received the most investigative attention. In essence, TEOAEs
represent a time-delayed response to brief acoustic stimuli. In
contrast, DPOAEs, which routinely are measured at a frequency that
is particularly robust in the human ear (i.e., at the 2f1-f2 frequency
with f2>f1), are an intermodulated distortion response to two
simultaneously applied pure-tone stimuli.
The review of OAE applications in infants and children below makes
it evident that by far the majority of the studies performed in these
young subjects have used the transient form of the OAE elicited by
clicks (i.e., the CEOAE). Less than one-quarter of the currently
known OAE studies in children have used DPOAEs to examine
cochlear function. The instrumentation and associated protocols now
available for testing both CEOAEs and DPOAEs are comparable in
terms of the total time needed for preparing the subject, performing
the test, and generating the report; therefore, preference for click-
based OAE testing in young patients cannot be wholly explained by
the test-time factor. Thus, it appears that the primary reason for
preferring click-evoked over bitonally-evoked OAEs is the similarity
of the transiently based response to other physiological tests of the
hearing process, including the auditory brainstem response (ABR).
 

Page 178
Understandably, then, the method of evoking transient responses with
brief acoustic stimulation would be more familiar to audiologists,
otologists, and neurotologists than administering complex, long-
lasting bitonal stimuli that elicit an unpleasant-sounding response,
which is called ''distorted.'' In truth, as clinical evaluators of the
peripheral ear, both types of evoked OAEs have benefits and
limitations, and much research has been aimed at establishing the
circumstances that are optimal for applying each test.
It is noteworthy that the CEOAE, in particular, has been used to study
the influence of the medially based cochlear-efferent system on
peripheral processing. The procedure commonly used to investigate
the so-called efferent effect measures the level-reducing consequences
of a contralaterally applied broadband-noise stimulus on the
ipsilaterally recorded CEOAE response (Collet et al. 1990). The
beginning knowledge base concerning the effects of efferent
stimulation on cochlear emissions for adult ears has established that
the resulting CEOAE (Collet et al. 1990) or DPOAE (Moulin, Collet,
and Duclaux 1993) is reduced about one dB on average. However,
there is no comparable information for infants or children. Despite the
seemingly minimal effect of efferent activation on evoked OAEs and
the clear deficiency in forming a similar knowledge base for young
subjects, it is likely that a clinical test of OAE-based efferent function
will eventually be developed. Such a test may provide an important
means of evaluating the role of central auditory-system processing,
particularly in young school children with learning difficulties.
Recording OAEs
For measuring evoked OAEs in infants and young children, typically
one of two subclasses of emitted responses previously noted is
measured. Because the primary goal in testing young individuals is to
screen hearing, the most common OAE method utilized by far for this

patient subpopulation has been the CEOAE. A few investigators have
been testing the feasibility of screening with DPOAEs. For either
technique, the available commercial instrumentation makes use of
noise rejection and signal averaging-principles that are commonly
used in electrophysiological measures of hearing-related processes for
improving the signalto-noise ratio.
Because CEOAEs are separated in time from the acoustic transient,
conventional, time-based, signal-averaging techniques are used to
detect them. In contrast, DPOAEs are measured in the presence of
either long-lasting tone bursts or continuous sounds. However,
because they are separated in frequency from the higher-frequency
evoking tones (i.e., the primary frequencies f1 and f2), they are
typically examined by spectral analysis (i.e., very narrowband
filtering), after time-based, phase-locked averaging has minimized
background noises. Both types of evoked OAEs are recorded using a
specially constructed, conical probe with a detachable, soft rubber
immittance ear tip sealed snugly in the outer ear
 

Page 179
canal. Both to elicit and measure the evoked OAEs, the probe contains
several miniature components developed for the hearing-aid industry
as either one (for CEOAEs) or two (for DPOAEs) earspeakers and a
microphone, respectively.
To measure DPOAEs, rather than incorporate the sound-generators
within the ear probe, several commercially available instruments (see
more details below) incorporate two separate plastic tubes within the
probe for delivering sound from the two external speakers. These are
attached by Velcro to a headband or are mechanically clipped onto the
patient's apparel or swaddling clothes. In all cases, the DPOAE
stimuli are mixed acoustically in the outer ear canal before being
conducted to the inner ear via the middle ear transmission system.
Both types of evoked-OAE test are computer-based. The stimuli are
synthesized digitally, and the emitted responses are measured and
analyzed with either an on-board digital signal processor (DSP)
mounted within a personal microcomputer or with the programmed
capability of the computer's central processing unit (CPU).
TEOAEs and CEOAEs
Although several groups of investigators of TEOAEs in young
subjects have developed their own customized microcomputer-based
approaches to screening hearing with click stimuli (e.g., Cope and
Lutman 1988; Johnsen, Bagi, and Elberling 1983; Stevens et al.
1987), CEOAEs are most commonly recorded and processed using
procedures developed and commercialized by Kemp and Bray (Bray
1989; Bray and Kemp 1987) in several generations of instruments
(Otodynamics Ltd., United Kingdom) developed at the Institute of
Laryngology and Otology (ILO). The original model of this device,
the Otodynamic Analyser or IL088, is shown in the left portion of
Figure 8.2. The IL088 has been modified, updated, and incorporated
into both the IL092 version, with the capability of performing

DPOAE testing, and the more newly developed infant-screening
device. The hardware components of the ILO instrument consist of a
personal microcomputer (IBM compatible) system (microcomputer
with keyboard, video monitor, data-storage medium, hard-copy
printer), which is provided by the user. Other hardware components
are an assortment of acoustic probes configured to fit the outer ear
canal (infant, child, adult), an interface analog box for impedance
matching the probe unit to the computer and amplifying the signal,
one or two (depending on the ILO model) plug-in circuit boards
(analog/digital and digital/analog converters), calibration unit, and
software (Version 3.9x, depending on the ILO model) provided by the
manufacturer.
The plastic ear probe, shaped like an ear speculum, contains a
microphone and an earspeaker (Knowles 1843 and BP1712,
respectively) that are embedded in a clear, plastic resin. For infants
and small children, the stimulus is reduced by 20 or 10 dB,
respectively, to compensate for their small ear canals. The software of
the ILO system generates and controls the presentation of the click
stimulus.
 

It records important details of the data including certain stimulus and re
(see Kemp and Ryan [1993] for a clear explanation of the displayed inf
the responses, and spectrally processes the averaged response and the e
The click stimulus is produced by a nonfiltered, rectangular electrical p
duration. The resulting acoustic transient is typically about 80 dB peSP
presented at a rate of fifty per second.
With the instrument set to the "nonlinear mode" of operation, time-base
alternately by two separate buffers (A and B), resulting in two distinct m
in response to 260 sets of clicks. In this default setting, each stimulus s
clicks (i.e., each A and B response average is generated by 1,040 clicks
one of the four transients is reversed, and its level is three times greater
the remaining three stimuli. This strategy decreases the likelihood that 
averaged response is contaminated by linearly based artifacts including
the middle ear or transmitter components.
Figure 8.2. 
Schematic diagram at left of the commercially available IL088 equipment
CEOAEs using a PC-based system. The right portion of the figure illustrates a ty
used to ascertain pass (P)/fail (F) determinations for screening newborn hearing
example, an overall "pass" (upper right) is defined as displaying clear TEOAE a
area) above the level of background noise (stippled area) within at least four of th

bands (i.e., evoked emissions over a frequency range of 500 Hz within each band
a "partial pass" (middle right) consists of a pattern of TEOAE activity over three
regions of interest; and a "fail" (lower right) is designated as evoked
within fewer than three of the noted frequency regions.
 

Page 181
The standard poststimulus analysis time of the ILO devices is twenty
milliseconds, with the first 2.5 ms nullified to eliminate typical
stimulus-ringing problems. The acquired data are filtered with a
passband of 500 to 6,000 Hz. Presence or absence of the CEOAE is
determined according to the criterion of the reproducibility of the two
A and B averages, which is computed from their cross-correlation and
converted to a percentage. Reproducibility is determined over the
entire CEOAE spectrum (i.e., 0.5-6 kHz) and for the 1-kHz bands
centered at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 kHz. Typically, a reproducibility criterion
of 50% or more is used to ascertain the presence or absence,
respectively, of a response (Bray and Kemp 1987).
Additional criteria sometimes include the requirement(s) that (a) the
total level of the emission be greater than three or five decibels above
the background noise level, (b) the level of the stimulus be within a
few dB of the ideal intensity of 80 dB peSPL, (c) the stimulus stability
be greater than 70%, and (d) the frequency extent of the resulting
amplitude spectrum be present in greater than 50% of each of the
three 1-kHz bands between one and four kHz. Some important
features of the ILO88 and 92 commercial systems are the interactive
artifact-rejection level, which is adjustable on-line by the test giver,
and the "check fit" capability, which ensures that the probe unit is
properly placed in the patient's ear.
For recording DPOAEs from young subjects, customized systems are
typically used (e.g., Bonfils et al. 1992; Lasky, Perlman, and Hecox
1992; Owens et al. 1992; Smurzynski et al. 1993). However, three
commercial devices are now available for measuring DPOAEs. These
are the Otoacoustic Emissions Test Instrument (Model 330, Virtual
Corporation, Portland OR), the CUBeDIS (Etymotic Research, Elk
Grove Village, IL), and the Otoacoustic Analyser (Model ILO92,
Otodynamics Ltd., United Kingdom). An example of a DPOAE-test
instrument is shown in the left portion of Figure 8.3: the Virtual

Model 330. All three marketplace instruments have user-selected
options governing all the significant stimulus and response variables
to DPOAE testing. Typically, however, the 2f1-f2 DPOAE is
measured, which is the most robust acoustic-distortion product in
humans. The f2/fl ratio is set to an optimal value around 1.22 (Harris
et al. 1989); the levels of the lower (f1) and higher-frequency (f2)
primary tones are equivalent (L=L). Each spectrally averaged DPOAE
is a time average of several measurements (e.g., n = 16 or 32) for the
330 and ILO92DP models or an average of about four amplitude
spectra for the CUBeDIS. The DPOAE is plotted with respect to
either the geometric mean (i.e., [f1 x f2]0.5) of the two primaries
(Model 330) or to f2 (ILO92, CUBeDIS). Similar to the response
definition for CEOAEs, DPOAEs are considered measurable if their
level is at least 3 or 5 dB above the noise floor at an adjacent
frequency.
In all three commercial DPOAE systems, stimulus-calibration
software compensates for the level (in dB SPL re 20 µPa) of the
primary signals at each frequency for the particular ear-canal volume
under test. In addition, noise
 

Figure 8.3. 
Schematic diagram at left of the commercially available Virtual Model 3
used to record DPOAEs using a Macintosh-based computer system. The right p
illustrates a common scoring system used to assign pass/fails in newborn hearing
based on this subclass of evoked emission. For example, an overall "pass" (upp
as displaying clear DPOAE activity (line with open triangles) above the level o
(uninterrupted line) within at least four of the six specified frequency bands (i.e., 
 a frequency range greater than or equal to one-half of the number of freq
 within each band) between 1-8 kHz; a "partial pass" (middle right) consists of a
within three or fewer of the six frequency regions of interest; and a "fail" (lower r
no DPOAEs within three or fewer of the noted frequency regions. (See text fo
 explanation of this system for scoring DPOAEs as pass/fails
 

Page 183
rejection is typically effected by the test software comparing the
ambient noise in the ear canal (at a frequency or frequencies around
the DPOAE) to an averaged sample of pretest values; as a result, the
emission is not measured until the noise floor is within a criterion
amount of the prelevel.
Acoustic-distortion products are commonly measured in one of two
forms: either as a level-versus-frequency function (DPOAE
"audiogram" [see Figure 8.31 or DP-gram) or as a response/growth or
input/output (I/O) function. Although user-selectable to a certain
extent, the frequency function is typically measured between 0.5 and 8
kHz with respect to the geometric-mean (Model 330) or f2
(CUBeDIS) frequency, or between 0.7 and 6 kHz with respect to the
f2 frequency (Model IL092), at frequency intervals of a set number of
points per octave (usually four or six). All the commercial devices
also measure I/Os in a user-designated series of step sizes (e.g., 2, 3,
5, 6 dB) between approximately 30 and 75 dB SPL and frequencies
that are commonly related to the standard audiometric frequencies
(i.e., 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 kHz). The lowest primary-tone level for which
a response is detected at the criterion level above the noise floor is
specified as the detection threshold.
Factors Affecting the Measurement of OAEs
It is well recognized that the nature of OAEs as an acoustic signal
makes it exceedingly susceptible to the adverse influences of loud
sounds generated both environmentally and by the patients
themselves. Excessive environmental sound can originate from many
sources, depending on the setting in which the recording is made.
These include noises from nearby individuals (relatives or healthcare
workers who are conversing with one another) or the youngsters
themselves, who talk or cough. The recording device may contain an
internal ventilation fan, or there may be other adjacent

instrumentation, including air-conditioning equipment. Other subject-
generated noises also contaminate the recording of OAEs because
they are converted to acoustic stimuli by the same recording
microphone that measures the OAEs. Thus, limb movements against
the body, loud respiratory sounds (e.g., sucking), crying, and jaw
motions, for example, are subject noises that need to be controlled
because of their adverse effects on the evoked-OAE recording.
Because the conduction pathway involving the middle-ear apparatus is
required to transmit both eliciting stimuli from the tympanic
membrane to the inner ear and the emitted response from the cochlea
to the outer ear canal, its functional status is of primary importance to
the measurement of OAEs. Pathological conditions involving negative
pressure or fluid in the middle-ear space have dire consequences (see
examples below) on not only the frequency and level features of
OAEs but also their recordability (i.e., whether they are present or
absent). This influence of middle ear factors on the measurement of
OAEs is especially important in young-patient populations, in which
middle-ear disease
 

Page 184
is most frequently observed. Moreover, it is the youngest patients (i.e.,
newborns) who still have pre-and perinatal fluids and debris present in
both the middle ear space and the outer canal for the first hours after
birth.
Finally, newborns in the neonatal intensive-care unit are considered at
risk for developing hearing loss. Hence, they are ideal candidates for
hearing screening because of the nature of the relevant life-saving
procedures, many of which involve the administration of potentially
ototoxic drugs. However, at-risk neonates, who often have nasogastric
feeding or airway tubes in place, are especially prone to middle ear
problems because of the direct transmission route to the middle ear
that such tubes provide for disease-causing pathogens (Balkany et al.
1978). Thus, the child populations who would optimally benefit from
OAE testing are the ones most susceptible to middle ear difficulties
and their accompanying adverse effects on our ability to record
emissions.
General Developmental Features of OAEs, TEOAEs, and CEOAEs
TEOAEs
In their early studies of OAEs, Kemp et al. (1986) recognized that
infants and children generated CEOAEs that were different from those
of adults. Specifically, the pattern of CEOAE-elicited activity in
adults is primarily restricted to the 0.5-4 kHz frequency range. In
contrast, the frequency distribution of CEOAEs in newborns and
young children is broader, typically 0.5-6 kHz, with more narrow
band peaks than exhibited by the adult ear. However, with regard to
the frequency range over which CEOAEs can be measured,
frequencies < kHz are usually immeasurable in newborns and
especially infants. This is due to both subject-generated noises (e.g.,
sucking, crying) and the insufficient sound-damping properties of the

external features of the thin bone of the skull and delicate skin of the
external ear and canal with respect to ambient noise in the test
environment.
In a demonstration of the changes in OAE features with age, Johnsen,
Parbo, and Elberling (1989) showed that the frequency content in the
CEOAEs of four-year-olds elicited with 2-kHz, half-sinusoidal clicks
was lower than those obtained from the same subjects as newborns. In
a later study, Kemp, Ryan, and Bray (1990) demonstrated that the
CEOAE levels in neonates were greater than those of the average
adult by about 10 dB. Norton and Widen (1990) assessed CEOAEs in
a series of infants, children, and young adults ranging from about
three weeks to thirty years old. They established systematic and
statistically significant decreases in CEOAE level with increasing age.
These differences between adult and child CEOAEs have been
attributed to the smaller volume of the child's ear canal (Johnsen,
Bagi, and Elberling 1983). However, other possible explanations are
that (a) children have a more efficient middle-ear conduction system
(i.e., better acoustic coupling or impedance
 

Page 185
matching between the microphone and young ear); (b) age-related
alterations in active cochlear mechanisms exist (Bonfils, Uziel, and
Pujol 1988; Norton and Widen 1990); or (c) technical factors
involving the different microphone probe units used to record OAEs
in younger versus older ears contribute to the observed differences.
DPOAEs
The ability of young ears to exhibit emissions has been more intensely
studied for CEOAEs and TEOAEs than for DPOAEs. However, Kim,
Smurzynski, and their colleagues reported detailed information
concerning the features of DPOAEs elicited by 65-dB SPL primaries
in normal-hearing young children (Spektor et al. 1991) and healthy
newborns with no suspected or documented hearing problems
(Lafrenière et al. 1991; Smurzynski et al. 1993). These studies
showed that, although the CEOAEs showed the expected stronger
high-frequency spectral components in the 4-to 6-kHz region (based
on the earlier observations reviewed above) and an average level over
6 dB higher than in adults, the DPOAEs of neonates and young
children were qualitatively similar to those of adults; they showed the
identical frequency distribution between 0.5 and 8 kHz. DPOAEs
were higher in level only within two specific frequency regions: They
were about 5 dB greater in the 1.2 kHz range, yet only a few dB
greater around 6 kHz.
Chuang, S.W., Gerber, and Thornton (1993) showed that CEOAEs
could be acquired from preterm infants who were well otherwise.
Smurzynski and his colleagues (1993) demonstrated the feasibility of
recording DPOAEs and CEOAEs in preterm infants. By quantifying
and comparing both evoked-OAE types regarding their half-octave
RMS (root-mean-square) levels, these investigators showed for
preterm neonates that the average magnitudes of their emissions were
above the ninetieth percentile of those recorded for full-term

newborns. It will be interesting to learn whether the evoked-OAE
levels for preterm babies correspond more closely to the magnitudes
of well babies at postnatal times when the former infants reach
postconceptional ages similar to those of the full-gestation newborns.
In other words, the emission levels of full-term neonates may also be
enhanced at corresponding prenatal periods. Satisfactory resolution of
the observed differences in the magnitudes of evoked OAEs between
pre-and full-term neonates awaits the time when it is technically
feasible to record OAEs from the latter patients using in utero
procedures.
Remaining OAEs
Whereas there is virtually no published information concerning the
primary features of SOAEs in subjects younger than about twenty
years old (Lonsbury-Martin et al. 1990), Burns and associates (Burns,
Arehart, and Campbell 1992; Strickland, Burns, and Tubis 1985) have
studied the prevalences, frequencies,
 

Page 186
and levels of SOAEs in newborns, infants, and young children. They
discovered that the occurrence of SOAEs in young subjects is similar
to that observed in adults, with the same strong gender preference
(about twice as many females demonstrate these emissions as do
males). Moreover, in infants and young children, the levels and
particularly the preferred frequency range tend to be higher than in
their adult counterparts: for adults, 8.5 vs. -3 dB SPL; for infants, 1-2
vs. 2.5-5 kHz (Burns, Arehart, and Campbell 1992). Similar to the
qualifications regarding the differences between the quantitative
features of evoked OAEs in adults and children, it is unknown
whether developmental or technical factors cause these unique level
and frequency effects.
In a study of SOAEs in newborns ranging in age from one to ten days,
Kok, van Zanten, and Brocaar (1993) noted a prevalence of 78%,
which is higher than previously reported for adults and full-term,
healthy neonates. To measure SOAEs, these investigators used the
stimulus-synchronizing technique inherent to the commercial
equipment manufactured Ä" OtodynamiÅ~ Ltd. (i.e., the IL088). This
SOAE-recording software spectrally analyzes the ear-canal sound
activity recorded from twenty-one to eighty ms following the
presentation of standard click stimuli. It is likely that the presence of
click stimuli in the immediate premeasurement period enhances, in
some unknown manner, the number of SOAEs detected with the
IL088 technique. Thus, in measuring SOAE prevalence and features
in young ears, the most accurate method is to record these emissions
in the absence of any sound stimulation.
Clinical Applications of Evoked OAEs in Young Ears
By 1993 there were more than sixty published accounts in either
abstract or full-report form describing the results of OAE testing in
young ears; most of these, however, had been conducted in either

newborns and young infants (birth to three months of age) or older
children (i.e., four to ten years old). There are only isolated
descriptions of emissions in older infants, toddlers, and preschoolaged
children. Because of such a nonmethodical approach, the review
below summarizes our published knowledge about evoked OAEs in
children by concentrating the available information into two general
categories: (1) the neonate and young infant and (2) essentially
schoolaged children, with only limited mention of their properties in
the remaining age categories.
In reviewing the literature on evoked OAEs and children, it is clear
that the primary goal of objective testing of neonates and young
infants (with the CEOAE being the test of choice) has been to screen
newborn hearing. In contrast, the principal aim of evaluating evoked
OAEs in older children, predominantly of school age, has been to
document the confounding effects on emissions of the middle-ear
problems commonly experienced by these young patients. Such
investigations have tended to compare the effects of middle ear
disease on both CEOAEs measured with the IL088 and DPOAEs
analyzed with either a cus-
 

Page 187
tomized version of the CUBeDIS system (e.g., Spektor et al. 1991) or
laboratory-based equipment (e.g., Owens et al. 1992) similar to the
Model 330.
Newborns (birth to 28 days) and Young Infants (29 days to 3 months)
Newborn Hearing Screening
Screening the hearing of a newborn is an important goal of pediatric
audiology. Because the conventional ABR is time-consuming and
requires highly trained technical staff and supervisors, it has been
impractical for screening every live birth. Thus, the major strategy in
screening newborns for hearing impairment has focused on testing
only neonates at risk for hearing loss, that is, those for whom at least
one of the following is relevant: abnormal prenatal history, aberrant
bilirubin value, anatomic head or neck malformation, history of
bacterial meningitis, ototoxic drug use, asphyxia, or family history of
childhood hearing impairment (Joint Committee on Infant Hearing
1994). However, several professional societies composing the Joint
Committee on Infant Hearing (e.g., American Academy of Audiology
[AAA], American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery [AAO-HNS], American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP],
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association [ASHA], Council
on Education of the Deaf [CED], and directors of speech pathology
and audiology programs in state health and welfare agencies) have
recently endorsed the idea of universal hearing screening of infants
before three months of age.
The purpose of this expanded position statement on infant hearing was
"to ensure that all neonates with hearing loss are identified and
intervention is initiated by six months of age" (Joint Committee on
Infant Hearing 1994). Because OAEs can be conducted quickly and
have relatively low test administration costs, they can provide for the
universal screening of newborns. A panel of experts convened by the

National Institutes of Health to discuss the early identification of
hearing impairment in infants and young children recommended that
evoked OAEs be implemented as the initial method for screening
newborns for hearing problems (NIH 1993).
Johnsen, Bagi, and Elberling (1983) were first to report the recording
of half-cycle based, 2-kHz CEOAEs at levels between 50 and 70 dB
peSPL from every ear of a small number (n = 20) of healthy
newborns. These earlier TEOAE findings were replicated later in
another 100 well babies by the same investigators (Johnsen et al.
1988). After the initial demonstration of neonatal TEOAEs, several
researchers have reported CEOAEs in both full-term newborns and
graduates of neonatal intensive care units (Bonfils, Uziel, and Pujol
1988; Bonfils et al. 1990, 1992; Chuang K.W. et al. 1993; Kennedy et
al. 1991; Kok, van Zanten, and Brocaar 1992, 1993; Lafrenière et al.
1991; Plinkert et al. 1990; Salomon et al. 1992; Stevens et al. 1987,
1989, 1990, 1991; Uziel and Piron 1991; Webb and Stevens 1991;
White et al. 1992; White, Vohr, and Behrens 1993;
 

Page 188
Zorowka 1993). The various aspects of these studies (e.g., the
approach to subject selection; their numbers, ages, and risk factors;
type of follow-up evaluation if relevant) have been summarized by
White et al. (1993) and Norton (1994).
In an earlier study of CEOAEs in neonates and young infants, Bonfils
and his colleagues (1988) made a particularly noteworthy observation
about the presence or absence of evoked OAEs and the prediction of
hearing level. By comparing CEOAEs and ABRs from the same
infants aged three months or younger (n = 46), they discovered that
those with ABR wave-V thresholds <30 dB HL had an emission
present. Those with ABR thresholds >40 dB HL did not exhibit
CEOAEs. Other investigators have been less successful in
determining the precise magnitude of the hearing level (e.g., 30, 35,
40, 45 dB HL) at which CEOAEs are immeasurable. Overall, it
appears that the absence of a CEOAE cannot quantify the degree of
hearing loss (Kemp et al. 1986). However, certain properties of
emissions-including their reproducibility or their absolute or relative
CEOAE levels with respect to the magnitude of the noise floor-can be
reliably used to define the presence (pass) or absence (fail) of an
evoked OAE (Prieve et al. 1993).
Most of the early studies used custom, laboratory-based
microcomputer systems to measure neonatal CEOAEs, with the
primary goal of validating the evoked-emissions test by using the
outcome of conventional ABR screening as a reference. The studies
performed by Stevens and his colleagues (1987) on over 700
newborns (with follow-up behavioral hearing tests in over half of
these patients at six months to one year old) represent the most
comprehensive CEOAE data set yet available.
Lutman and his colleagues (Cope and Lutman 1988) developed their
own laboratory-based system to conduct comparative studies of ABR

and CEOAE screening in newborns. These investigators discovered
results that were as impressive as those of the Stevens group. The
failure rate for the emitted responses and both conventional and
automated ABR testing were quite similar at about 3% (Kennedy et
al. 1991).
With the commercial availability of the IL088, essentially all the
studies in the published literature have made use of this CEOAE
method of screening hearing in newborns. The largest newborn
database using IL088-based CEOAEs originated from the Rhode
Island Hearing Assessment Project. In this project, almost 10,000
infants were evaluated to determine whether emitted responses can be
used for the universal screening of all live births. An entire issue of
the Seminars in Hearing (1993, vol. 14) was devoted to reporting the
methods and results of this ongoing clinical trial of a CEOAE-based,
universal screening program. The Rhode Island project has been so
successful that it is being used as a model for similar universal
screening programs in several other states, including Hawaii (Johnson
et al. 1993). Indeed, the NIH study group used data from this neonate
screening project as the basis for recommending evoked OAEs for the
early identification of hearing difficulties in newborns, infants, and
young children. One important practical strategy implemented by the
Rhode Island inves-
 

Page 189
tigators and others to minimize subject-based acoustic artifacts is to
perform these measurements after feeding when neonates are typically
in natural sleep.
Several studies have also discovered that newborn CEOAEs are easier
to detect when measured at least 24 to 48 hours after birth (Chuang
S.W., Gerber, and Thornton 1993; Kok, van Zanten, and Brocaar
1992). This probleman example of which is shown in Figure 8.4also
surfaced in our own research. The original CEOAE and DPOAE
measures (6/22) were obtained when the female infant, BT, was only
ten hours old. Note that for both the right (above) and left (below)
ears, neither evoked-OAE test resulted in an identifiable response
above the level of background noises. For this neonate, the emissions'
testing was repeated several days later (6/25), and the results of both
evaluations show the presence of evoked OAEs. These subsequent
data demonstrate generally lower background noise levels than the
ones measured a few days earlier. Clearly, however, if the OAEs had
been as large during the initial test session as they were during the
later one, they would have been recordable over some portion of the
frequency range during the earlier examination period.
A common explanation for this tendency in newborn ears for OAEs to
increase in level and thus become easier to detect over the first few
postnatal days is that sufficient time is required for prenatal fluids to
clear from the middle-ear space. This notion is consistent with the
observations referred to previously and illustrated below that fluid in
the middle ear decreases the likelihood of measuring OAEs. However,
Chuang K.W. et al. (1993) found no evidence of middle-ear effusions
in over eighty newborn ears they examined otoscopically. Rather, they
noted that intrauterine material (in the form of vernix caseosa and
other prenatally related debris) contaminated the external ear canals of
many of their newly born subjects. The accepted explanation is that
the difficulties in recording evoked OAEs in a significant proportion

(possibly up to 25%) of neonates immediately after birth are more
related to the presence of debris in the outer ear canal as well as to an
extremely pliant ear canal that tends to collapse near the tympanic
membrane. A ''floppy'' ear canal contaminated with debris would
clearly block the propagation pathway of the ingoing acoustic stimuli
and the outgoing emitted response.
As reported earlier, Kim, Lafrenière, Smurzynski, and their colleagues
(e.g., Lafrenière et al. 1991; Smurzynski et al. 1993) were the first to
characterize DPOAEs in both healthy, full-gestation newborns
between two and six days old and in preterm neonates with an average
gestational age at birth of about 29 weeks. So far, however, there is no
published information illustrating the application of DPOAEs as a
newborn hearing-screening procedure.
Implementing an Evoked-OAE-Based Newborn Hearing-Screening
Program
In establishing a newborn-screening program, the type of evoked
OAE to measure (TEOAE or DPOAE) and, for DPOAEs, the
equipment manufacturer
 

Figure 8.4. 
Evoked OAEs for the right (R) and left (L) ears of a ten-hour-old neonate
and for the same newborn at three days of age (6/25). Note the absence
CEOAEs and DPOAEs in the earlier recording sessions and their clear presence t

Figure 8.5. 
A spectral analysis in one-third octave bands of the sounds in a procedure room
a well-
baby nursery showing features of the ambient noise as measured from the emissio
under three conditions: open to the room noise (bold line), in the ear of an
(shaded line), and in the ear of an adult (hatched line).
must be selected. One important aspect of OAE screening in hospitals i
importance of designating a quiet test area, preferably separate from th
loud noises associated with busy neonatal services. In urban hospitals, 
room separate from the nursery may not be an option due to the high ut
physical space in such settings.
The data in Figure 8.5 illustrate the shortcomings of the newborn skull 
an adult's with respect to providing some natural attenuation of the bac
noises associated with a well-baby nursery. Full-term, healthy-baby nu
do not include the high sound levels associated with noisy monitoring
instrumentation outfitted with auditory-feedback features and with the 
verbal interactions of the medical staff. The amplitude spectrum of the

environmental sounds in the nursery (Figure 8.5) indicates that the thin
tissues of a baby's ear provide little impedance to the transmission of lo
sounds. They do not begin to attenuate room noises effectively until ab
reach the full range of an adult's capability only for stimuli above 4 kH
One of several techniques can be used to overcome the disadvantages o
such noisy environments. One viable approach is to obtain a soundtreat
(Acoustic Isolette, Acoustic Systems, Austin, TX) that has been
 

Page 192
specially constructed to accommodate the requirements for recording
OAEs and satisfying the stringent infection-control procedures of
hospitals. Another option is to adopt software-based procedures that
have been specially developed to reduce the influence of extraneous
sounds on measured acoustic signals (e.g., Lonsbury-Martin et al.
1994).
In addition to the physical aspects of the evoked-OAE testing of
newborns, a strategy for assigning passes and fails must be
determined. Because the application of otoacoustic emissions is
relatively new, there is no standardized approach to scoring these data.
Examples that help guide the user can be found in the literature for
both CEOAEs derived from commercially available systems (Kemp
and Ryan 1993; Lafrenière et al. 1991; White, Vohr, and Behrens
1993) and for DPOAEs measured with customized equipment
(Bonfils et al. 1992; Lafrenière et al. 1991; Smurzynski et al. 1993).
To illustrate this aspect of OAE screening, several examples from our
own newborn hearing screening program are presented. A primary
emphasis of our newborn screening research is the investigation of the
benefits and limitations of DPOAEs in determining how best to
interpret the data. The example in Figure 8.6 illustrates the scoring
procedure for DPOAEs from both ears of a two-day-old neonate. In
our approach, the interpretation of DPOAEs from a test ear is based

on the emission level with respect to the magnitude of DPOAEs
measured in a population of healthy newborns (hereafter called
"normal" DPOAEs) and with respect to their own related noise floor,
according to the rules summarized in Table 8.1.
As shown in the table inset at the top of Figure 8.6, the data are
obtained initially between I and 8 kHz in intervals of six points per
octave. The DPOAE frequency-level functions on each side of this
table show plots for the right (R) and left (L) ears of the levels of the
emissions (open triangles) and their related noise floors (bold line) in
dB SPL. For each frequency interval, a comparison of the DPOAE
(DP) level to a database of normal amplitudes at the same frequency
 

Figure 8.6. 
An example of designating pass/fail scores to DPOAEs for a two-day-old
(T341). The "smoothed" (three-point) emission levels in the form of DPOAE 
functions are shown at the top for right (R) and left (L) ears. The numeric form of
 the DPOAEs (DP) and noise floors (NF) along with the assigned pass/fails (P/F) 
(TF) are indicated in the center table. At the bottom of the figure, the resulti
each of the six frequency regions of interest and the global result are indica
graphical representations of the assigned Ps, Fs, and TFs played ab
(See text for a detailed explanation of this particular scoring syste
 

Page 194
and to the level of its corresponding noise floor (NF) is automatically
performed by an Excel-based (Microsoft, V4.0) subroutine.
A pass (P) is assigned to a frequency interval if its DPOAE level is
equal to or greater than the tenth percentile of normal DPOAEs at that
frequency. Conversely, a fail (F) is designated if either one of two
conditions is met. These are that (1) the DPOAE level is below the
10th percentile of normal DPOAEs and is also at or above 3 dB above
the related noise floor for that ear, or (2) the DPOAE level is below
the 10th percentile of normal activity and is also less than 3 dB above
the corresponding noise floor. Finally, a technical fail (TF) is denoted
if the DPOAE is below the 10th percentile of normal emissions and is
also less than 3 dB above the noise floor. The table in the upper part of
Figure 8.6 notes the pass/fail designations (P-F/3dB) for each DPOAE
measured in this infant's ears. The plots in the center of the figure
show graphical representations of the comparative data (DP-NF) for
each of the nineteen frequency intervals. In these plots, the three
possible outcomes are defined as follows: (1) the pass intervals are
indicated as gray columns extending above the 3 dB noise line
(dashed); (2) the fails are shown as open areas at the 0 dB line; and (3)
the technical fails are indicated as gray columns between -5 and +3 dB
above the 0 dB noise level.
Next, an additional software-based subroutine sums the six-
point/octave data into six arbitrary frequency intervals (indicated on
the table by the bold horizontal lines) consisting of the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6-8 kHz regions. For each of these six frequency bands, a pass/fail
score (indicated in the small table near the bottom of the figure) is
assigned based on the rule that the designation agrees with the
majority (i.e., >50%) of the scores for the component bands. When a
frequency band consists of only two bands (e.g., 3, 4, 5 kHz) and one
is a pass and the other a fail or technical fail, the rule is to designate it
a pass. Finally, a global pass/fail is determined in a similar manner:

The general designation is based on the majority of scores, with
passes again determining the final assignment in "tie" instances. Thus,
in Figure 8.6, for the left ear, the findings of six out of a potential of
six passes indicates a total or global pass for this ear. This assignment
clearly agrees with the visual impression provided by both the raw-
data plot at the top right of the figure and their quantitative
representation located directly below. The global outcome is a little
more difficult to discern for the right ear. However, because three of
the six frequency bands are scored as passes, a global pass is assigned
to this ear based on the >50% majority rule that favors passes in
instances of a tie (i.e., in the presence of three fails).
Older Infants and Young Children: Infants (3 to 12 months), Toddlers
(13 to 30 months), and Preschool Aged Children (2.5 to 4 years)
The published literature describing the features of evoked OAEs in
young ears contains only occasional illustrations of the clinical utility
of recording emissions
 

Page 195
in older infants, toddlers, and the younger preschool aged children.
For example, Owens et al. (1992, 1993) and Prieve (1992) illustrate
the distorting effects of tympanostomy tubes on the parametric
properties of DPOAEs or CEOAEs for children between about one
and three years of age. Clearly, a systematic study of evoked OAEs in
these specific subpopulations is needed to establish their usefulness
and to determine the average features of TEOAEs or CEOAEs and
DPOAEs during these particular age intervals.
Older Children: Preschool-Aged Children (4 To 5 Years) and School-
Aged Children (5.I To Teens)
Several survey studies of evoked OAEs have been completed on
children between about two and 14 years of age, with most of the
children being more than four years old. Spektor et al. (1991), in a
study comparing the outcomes of CEOAE and DPOAE testing, were
first to establish normal levels of DPOAEs in children from four to ten
years old (average age = 7.5 years). These results were used to judge
the normality of CEOAEs and DPOAEs for the ears of an additional
fourteen hearing-impaired youngsters of similar age. A major finding
of Spektor and his colleagues was the agreement between the pure-
tone audiogram and the DPOAE frequency-level function in
delineating the regions of hearing difficulties for these children.
The principal aim of other investigations into the application of
evoked-OAE testing in young children has been to document the
effects of middle-ear pathology on the detectability of emissions in a
population of subjects who are most prone to problems involving the
sound-conduction pathway of the peripheral ear. For example, the
studies of Owens et al. (1992, 1993) examined OAE production in
young patients between two and eight years of age who exhibited
various degrees of conductive loss due to inflammation of the middle
ear. As in the earlier Spektor et al. (1991) investigation, the status of

these unknown ears was evaluated based on average levels of
DPOAEs from a group of normal-hearing children of comparable age.
In normal-hearing children with hearing levels of 20 dB or better,
CEOAE levels are well above the related noise floor, and the
frequency range typically extends between about 0.5 and 5 kHz. In
addition, the "repro" value, on average, is about 90%. Similarly,
DPOAE levels for healthy youngsters customarily range between 10
and 20 dB SPL from 0.7 to 8 kHz. However, in young patients with
middle-ear impairment, the emitted responses are drastically affected
by the disease state because of the critical importance of the middle-
ear system in measuring evoked OAEs.
For example, an otoscopic examination of RA, the six-year-old male
of Figure 8.7, revealed a reddened and retracted tympanic membrane
on the right side, with a visible fluid line on the left tympanic
membrane. These observations
 

Figure 8.7. 
The behavioral (top left), standard tympanometric (top right), DPOAE (bo
 CEOAE (bottom right) findings for RA, a six-year-old male child exhibiti
acute episode of otitis media. Note the essentially normal hearing for the right 
 displaying a negative middle-ear pressure of about -250 daPa. No CEOA
below-
average amplitude DPOAEs (open circles) were recordable from this ear. In co
(solid circles) showed a pattern of mild hearing loss affecting the low and high fre
 a flat typanogram (x) that was associated with an otoscopically observable f
tympanic membrane. Below, the evoked OAE measurements indicate th
CEOAEs nor DPOAEs were recordable under these fluid-filled middle ea
 

Page 197
were consistent with the working diagnosis of acute serous otitis
media. The immittance findings for this patient shown in the upper
right portion of Figure 8.7 reveal the presence of negative pressure in
the right ear (open circles) in the form of a type C tympanogram and a
flat type B tympanogram for the left ear (cross). The related acoustic
reflexes were absent (not shown). The remaining functional findings
of Figure 8.7 show that, whereas pure-tone hearing thresholds were
relatively unaffected on the right side (open circles), the left ear (solid
circles) exhibited mild threshold elevations (no air-bone gap). It is
clear from the amplitude spectra in the lower right portion of Figure
8.7 that CEOAEs were immeasurable bilaterally. Similarly, for the left
ear exhibiting visible signs of a middle-ear effusion, DPOAEs (lower
left) were not recordable (solid circles). However, for the right ear
where there was negative pressure in the middle ear, DPOAEs were
reduced from normal levels but were clearly measurable. This pattern
of evoked-OAE findings consisting of reduced DPOAEs and absent
CEOAEs in the presence of negative middle ear pressure and absent
DPOAEs and CEOAEs associated with a fluid-filled middle ear are
typical findings in young patients experiencing an acute episode of
otitis media.
The plots of Figure 8.8 exemplify the results for another situation
commonly observed in young patients. In this case, three-and-a-half-
year-old JG (male) has a long history of recurrent ear and throat
infections consisting of three to four incidents yearly. Although JG's
hearing is in the normal range, the shape of his tympanograms
indicates the presence of a slight amount of negative middle-ear
pressure bilaterally. Although not shown here, threshold testing of the
uncrossed and crossed acoustic reflexes showed either elevated
thresholds or absent reflexes, respectively, for both ears. The CEOAE
results show activity present from about 2 to 5 kHz for the left ear and
a more focused pattern between 2 and 4 kHz for the right ear. From

the DPOAE-frequency functions, the classic observation of negative
middle-ear pressure affecting low more than high frequencies is
evident. Here, DPOAEs become measurable above about 1 kHz for
both ears but remain essentially below normal levels until about 6
kHz. This pattern of evoked-OAE activity involving reduced or
partially present emitted responses, especially for the low test
frequencies, is commonly observed for ears with recurrent episodes of
middle-ear infection.
Finally, the data of Figure 8.9 illustrate another finding that is
commonly observed in older children who exhibit recurrent middle-
ear problems. For AR, an eight-year-old male, the moderate high-
frequency hearing loss shown for the left side is reflected by the
absent CEOAEs and DPOAEs for frequencies >3 kHz. Whereas the
tympanometric findings indicate only a slight amount of negative
pressure in the left middle ear, the acoustic reflexes were absent, and
the otoscopic examination revealed some scarring of the ear drum.
These findings indicate that evoked-OAE testing in ears exhibiting
middle-ear disease provides an invalid assessment of the functional
status of the cochlea's outer hair cell system. Clearly, however, such
testing can be used as a
 

Figure 8.8. 
The behavioral, standard tympanometric, and emissions-testing results for J
old male child who has experienced recurrent ear and throat infections over
 years. This child was reported to speak less fluently than his peers and, at the tim
not under medical treatment for his recurrent-infection condition. Note t
hearing in the presence of a slight negative middle ear pressure that was exhib
Although not shown here, the ipsilateral acoustic reflexes tested at both 1 and 2 k
thresholds. Similar findings were noted for the crossed reflexes that were test
 2 kHz, with thresholds being indeterminable for 4 kHz. Essentially low-level 
 age group) CEOAEs were measured, primarily in the mid-frequency region, 
 about 1.5 kHz to 4 kHz, whereas the DPOAE pattern of below-average to n
showed a classic configuration indicating the adverse influence of the i
middle-ear mass on the low-to mid-frequencies.
 


Figure 8.9. 
The behavioral, standard tympanometric, and evoked-OAE results for AR, a
old male child exhibiting signs of an acute episode of otitus media. Note the
normal hearing for the right ear (open circles) displaying a negative middle-ea
about -50 daPa. No CEOAEs and only below-average amplitude DPOAEs (ope
recordable from this ear. In contrast, the left ear (solid circles) showed a pattern 
loss affecting the low and high frequencies, along with a flat tympanogram (x) tha
with an otoscopically observable fluid line on the tympanic membrane. Below
OAE measurements indicate that neither CEOAEs nor DPOAEs were record
these fluid-filled middle-ear conditions
 

Page 200
simple indicator of the presence or absence of conditions affecting the
signal-conducting function of the middle ear. The findings illustrated
in Figures 8.7 through 8.9 demonstrate the extreme sensitivity of
OAEs to the integrity of middle-ear function. Other work has shown
that this feature can be used advantageously to monitor the efficacy of
subsequent treatment strategies involving either the administration of
systemic antibiotics or antihistamines or the surgical placement of
tympanostomy tubes through the tympanic membrane. The data in
Figure 8.9 for the right ear of AR show that evoked OAEs can be
measured, although with rather atypical patterns of activity in the
presence of ventilating tubes, thus indicating the status of their
patency. In this case, both the DPOAEs and CEOAEs show some
focused emitted-response activity, particularly around 3 kHz.
Future Directions
From this review of OAEs in young patients, it is clear that several
practical aspects of emissions testing should be addressed rather
immediately if this procedure is to be optimized for clinical
utilization. For example, for newborn screening, the optimal timing of
the postnatal test session must be firmly established. Further, if the
initial observations of Kok et al. (1993) are confirmed (i.e., that the
likelihood of detecting evoked OAEs improves for postnatal days
greater than one), safe strategies for cleaning birth-related debris from
the outer ear canal need to be developed. Establishing such
preparatory, pretest methods would be essential because the length of
stay in U.S. hospitals for healthy babies is rapidly becoming one day
or less due to the escalating cost of medical care. In the absence of
effective pretest procedures that can be implemented during the first
postnatal day, hearing screening for healthy babies may be delayed
until, perhaps, a three-month immunization appointment or the first
well baby check.

Another practical problem for applying OAE testing to young children
is the difficulty of assessing ears with middle ear infections. It is
clearly difficult to imagine the development of an acceptable
procedure for combating the effects of middle ear effusions under
acute-testing conditions. However, preliminary evidence indicates that
negative middle-ear pressure can be corrected by introducing
compensatory pressure into the outer ear canal to achieve equal
pressure across the tympanic membrane (Trine, Hirsch, and Margolis
1993). In this manner, CEOAEs that were immeasurable under the
negative-pressure condition became detectable.
Standardization of such compensatory methods will obviously
increase the usefulness of evoked-OAE testing in young children. A
final practical problem that needs immediate solving for the
successful application of OAE testing to young patients is the
development of effective noise-reduction methods. It is common with
such subjects that their own vocalizations and body noises
contaminate, particularly, the low-frequency response region (i.e., <2
kHz). Clearly,
 

Page 201
many techniques used in the signal-processing field can be applied
effectively to OAE instrumentation to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio.
To facilitate the clinical application of evoked-emissions testing to
young patient populations, it is also important to develop quantitative
means for assessing the normality of OAE properties obtained from
unknown ears. Comparing the statistical distributions of certain
features (e.g., detection threshold, slope of the growth of OAE level
with increasing stimulus level, and the amplitude of the OAE at a
given stimulus level in the normal and hearing-impaired ears of
neonates, infants, toddlers, and young children) will permit us to
determine the degree to which emissions can accurately predict the
hearing ability of a previously untested ear. Developing algorithms for
relating OAE properties to audiometric status is clearly the ultimate
aim of the clinical application of evoked OAEs to these special patient
populations.
In addition, the usefulness of measures of other OAE types (e.g.,
SFOAEs, toneburst-TEOAEs as well as other distortion products, 2f2-
fl, 3f1-2f2, and so on) for the same ear needs to be determined in order
to increase the capability for detecting cochlear abnormalities. Finally,
the parametric-test set that is most sensitive to hearing level as
measured by the pure-tone audiogram must also be determined,
especially for DPOAEs.
Summary
One of the health promotion and disease-prevention objectives
identified in the report on ''Healthy People 2000'' (Health and Human
Services 1991) concerns the disclosing of hearing problems in
newborns and infants. Measures of OAEs showed great promise as an
objective, noninvasive technique for screening hearing in these very

special and acknowledged difficult-to-test patient populations.
Because of the emphasis on universal screening of newborn hearing, it
is certain that much information on this unique application of evoked-
OAE testing will be available in the literature.
The OAE attributes of objectivity and rapidity, in particular, can also
be put to good use in evaluating cochlear function in toddlers and very
young children, who cannot yet provide reliable behavioral indices of
hearing capability and who tend to be very active physically. In the
published literature so far, there are only sporadic examples of
isolated cases illustrating the features of evoked OAEs for these
young patients. Clearly, this is one subpopulation of child patient that
lacks the necessary focus of a systematic study.
Although a database describing the features of evoked OAEs in
school-aged children is beginning to accumulate, the advantages of
emissions testing as a hearing screener for the newborn are also
applicable to this age group. This specific application of OAE testing
has been virtually ignored by researchers in the study of the clinical
utility of emissions, and its usefulness for this purpose deserves to be
thoroughly investigated.
 

Page 202
A number of years have passed since the discovery of otoacoustic
emissions (Kemp 1978). It is a tribute to the modern age of
technological development and instantaneous communications that a
basic discovery has progressed so rapidly to an advanced stage of
development. Clearly, the availability of commercial products and the
performance of many on-going clinical trials provide strong evidence
of the importance of OAEs to the screening of hearing and the
diagnosis of hearing problems in children.
References
Balkany, T.J., S.A. Berman, M.A. Simmons, and B.W. Jafek. 1978.
Middle ear effusions in neonates. Laryngoscope 88:398-405.
Bonfils, P., P. Avan, M. Francois, J. Trotoux, and P. Narcy. 1992.
Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions in neonates: Normative data.
Acta Oto-Laryngologica 112: 739-744.
Bonfils, P., A. Dumont, P. Marie, M. Francois, and P. Narcy. 1990.
Evoked otoacoustic emissions in new-born hearing screening.
Laryngoscope 100:186-189.
Bonfils, P., A. Uziel, and R. Pujol. 1988. Screening for auditory
dysfunction in infants by evoked otoacoustic emissions. Archives of
Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery 114:887-890.
Bray, P. 1989. Click evoked otoacoustic emissions and the
development of a clinical otoacoustic hearing test instrument. Ph.D.
diss., London University.
Bray, P., and D.T. Kemp. 1987. An advanced cochlear echo technique
suitable for infant screening. British Journal of Audiology 21: 191
-204.
Brownell, W.E. 1990. Outer hair cell electromotility and otoacoustic

emissions. Ear and Hearing 11:82-92.
Brownell, W.E., C.R. Bader, D. Bertrand, and Y. Rabaupierre. 1985.
Evoked mechanical responses of isolated outer hair cells. Science 227:
194-196.
Burns, E.M., K.H. Arehart, and S.L. Campbell. 1992. Prevalence of
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in neonates. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 91: 1571-1575.
Chuang, K.W., B.R. Vohr, S.J. Norton, and M.D. Iekas. 1993.
External and middle ear status related to evoked otoacoustic emission
in neonates. Archives of Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
119:276-282.
Chuang, S.W., S.E. Gerber, and A.R.D. Thornton. 1993. Evoked
otoacoustic emissions in preterm infants. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 26:39-45.
Collet, L., D.T. Kemp, E. Veuillet, R. Duclaux, A. Moulin, and A.
Morgon. 1990. Effect of contralateral auditory stimuli on active
cochlear micromechanical properties in human subjects. Hearing
Research 43:251 -262.
Cope, Y., and M.E. Lutman. 1988. Otoacoustic emissions. In
Pediatric audiology 0-5 years, ed. B. McCormick. London: Taylor
and Francis.
Harris, F.P., B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, B.B. Stagner, A.C. Coats, and
G.K. Martin. 1989. Acoustic distortion products in humans:
Systematic changes in amplitude as a function of f2/f1 ratio. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 85:220-222. Harris, F.P., and R.
Probst. 1992. Transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions in patients
with Ménière's disease. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 112:36-44.
 


Page 203
Health and Human Services. 1991. Healthy people 2000: National
health promotion and disease prevention objectives. Washington,
D.C.: United States Government Printing Office.
Johnsen, N.J., P. Bagi, and C. Elberling. 1983. Evoked acoustic
emissions from the human ear. III. Findings in neonates. Scandinavian
Audiology 12:17-24.
Johnsen, N.J., P. Bagi, J. Parbo, and C. Elberling. 1988. Evoked
acoustic emissions from the human ear. IV. Final results in 100
neonates. Scandinavian Audiology 17:27-34.
Johnsen, N.J., J. Parbo, and C. Elberling. 1989. Evoked acoustic
emissions from the human ear. V. Developmental changes.
Scandinavian Audiology 18:59-62.
Johnson, J.L., G.W. Mauk, K.M. Takekawa, P.R. Simon, C.C.J. Sia,
and P.M. Blackwell. 1993. Implementing a statewide system of
services for infants and toddlers with hearing disabilities. Seminars in
Hearing 14:105-119.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 1991. 1990 position statement.
AAO-HNS Bulletin March: 15-18.
.1994. 1993 position statement. Audiology Today 6:6-9.
Kemp, D.T. 1978. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the
human auditory system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
64:1386-1391.
Kemp, D.T., P. Bray, L. Alexander, and A.M. Brown. 1986. Acoustic
emission cochleography: Practical aspects. Scandinavian Audiology
Supplementum 25:71-96.
Kemp, D.T., and S. Ryan. 1993. The use of transient evoked
otoacoustic emissions in neonatal hearing screening program.

Seminars in Hearing 14:30-45.
Kemp, D.T., S. Ryan, and P. Bray. 1990. A guide to the effective use
of otoacoustic emissions. Ear and Hearing 11 :93-105.
Kennedy, C.R., L. Kimm, D.C. Dees, P.I.P. Evans, M. Hunter, S.
Lenton, and A.R.D. Thornton. 1991. Otoacoustic emissions and
auditory brainstem responses in the newborn. Archives of Disease in
Childhood 66:1124-1129.
Kok, M.R., G.A. van Zanten, and M.P. Brocaar. 1992. Growth of
evoked otoacoustic emissions during the first days postpartum.
Audiology 31: 140-149.
.1993. Aspects of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in healthy
newborns. Hearing Research 69:115-123.
Kok, M.R., G.A. van Zanten, M.P. Brocaar, and H.C.S. Wallenburg.
1993. Click-evoked otoacoustic emissions in 1036 ears of healthy
newborns. Audiology 32:213-224.
Lafrenière, D., M.D. Jung, J. Smurzynski, G. Leonard, D.O. Kim, and
J. Sasek. 1991. Distortion-product and click-evoked otoacoustic
emissions in healthy newborns. Archives of Otolaryngology: Head
and Neck Surgery 117:1382-1389.
Lasky, R., J. Perlman, and K. Hecox. 1992. Distortion-product
otoacoustic emissions in human newborns and adults. Ear and
Hearing 13:430-441.
Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., F.P. Harris, B.B. Stagner, M.D. Hawkins, and
G.K. Martin. 1990. Distortion-product emissions in humans: II.
Relations to stimulated and spontaneous emissions and acoustic
immittance in normally hearing subjects. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology (Supplement 147) 99:14-28.
Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., G.K. Martin, M.J. McCoy, and M.L.
Whitehead. 1994. Testing young children with otoacoustic emissions:

Middle-ear influences. American Journal of Otology (Supplement 1)
15:13-20.
Moulin, A., L. Collet, and R. Duclaux. 1993. Contralateral auditory
stimulation alters acoustic distortion products in humans. Hearing
Research 65: 193-210.
 

Page 204
National Institutes of Health (1993). Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11: 1-24.
Norton, S.J. 1994. Emerging role of evoked otoacoustic emissions in
neonatal hearing screening. American Journal of Otology (Suppl. 1)
15:4-12.
Norton, S.J., and J.E. Widen. 1990. Evoked otoacoustic emissions in
normal-hearing infants and children: Emerging data and issues. Ear
and Hearing 11:121-127.
Owens, J.J., M.J. McCoy, B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, and G.K. Martin.
1992. Influence of otitis media on evoked otoacoustic emissions in
children. Seminars in Hearing 13:63-66.
.1993. Otoacoustic emissions in children with normal ears, middle-ear
dysfunction, and ventilating tubes. American Journal of Otology
14:34-40.
Plinkert, P.K., G. Sesterhenn, R. Arold, and H.P. Zenner. 1990.
Evaluation of otoacoustic emissions in high-risk infants by using an
easy and rapid objective auditory screening method. European
Archives of Otorhinology 247:356-360.
Prieve, B.A. 1992. Otoacoustic emissions in infants and children:
Basic characteristics and clinical application. Seminars in Hearing
13:37-52.
Prieve, B.A., M.P. Gorga, A. Schmidt, S.T. Neelym, J. Peters, L.
Schultes, and W. Jesteadt. 1993. Analysis of transient-evoked
otoacoustic emissions in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired ears.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 93:3308-3319.
Probst, R., B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, and G.K. Martin. 1991. A review of
otoacoustic emissions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America

89:2027-2067.
Sakashita, T., Y. Minowa, K. Hachikawa, T. Kubo, and Y. Nakai.
1991. Evoked otoacoustic emissions from ears with idiopathic sudden
deafness. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 486):66-72.
Salomon, G., B. Anthonisen, J. Groth, and P.P. Thomsen. 1992.
Otoacoustic hearing screening in newborns: Optimization. In
Screening children for auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall
III. Nashville: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Smurzynski, J., M.D. Jung, D. Lafrenière, D.O. Kim, M.V. Kamath,
J.C. Rowe, M.C. Holman, and G. Leonard. 1993. Distortion-product
and click-evoked otoacoustic emissions of preterm and full-term
infants. Ear and Hearing 14:258-274.
Spektor, Z., G. Leonard, D.O. Kim, M.D. Jung, and J. Smurzynski.
1991. Otoacoustic emissions in normal and hearing-impaired children
and normal adults. Laryngoscope 101:965-976.
Stevens, J.C., H.D. Webb, J. Hutchinson, J. Connell, M.F. Smith, and
J.T. Buffin. 1989. Click evoked otoacoustic emissions compared with
brain stem electric response. Archives of Disease in Childhood 64:
1105-1111.
.1990. Click evoked otoacoustic emissions in neonatal screening. Ear
and Hearing 11:128-133.
.1991. Evaluation of click-evoked otoacoustic emissions in the
newborn. British Journal of Audiology 25:11-14.
Stevens, J.C., H.D. Webb, M.F. Smith, J.T. Buffin, and H. Ruddy.
1987. A comparison of otoacoustic emissions and brain stem electric
response audiometry in the normal newborn and babies admitted to a
special care baby unit. Clinical Physical and Physiological
Measurement 8:95-104.
Strickland, E.A., E.M. Burns, and A. Tubis. 1985. Incidence of

spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in children and infants. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 78:931-935.
Trine, M.B., J.E. Hirsch, and R.H. Margolis. 1993. The effect of
compensatory ear-canal pressure on otoacoustic emissions. Ear and
Hearing 14:401-407.
 

Page 205
Uziel, A., and J-P. Piron. 1991. Evoked otoacoustic emissions from
normal newborns and babies admitted to an intensive care baby unit.
Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 482): 85-91.
Webb, H.D., and J.C. Stevens. 1991. Auditory screening in high risk
neonates: Selection of a test protocol. Clinical Physical and
Physiological Measurement 12:75-76.
White, K.R., A.B. Maxon, T.R. Behrens, P.M. Blackwell, and B.R.
Vohr. 1992. Neonatal screening using evoked otoacoustic emissions:
The Rhode Island hearing assessment project. In Screening children
for auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill
Wilkerson Center Press.
White, K.R., B.R. Vohr, and T.R. Behrens. 1993. Universal newborn
hearing screening using transient evoked otoacoustic emissions:
Results of the Rhode Island hearing assessment project. Seminars in
Hearing 14:18-29.
Zorowka, P.G. 1993. Otoacoustic emissions: A new method to
diagnose hearing impairment in children. European Journal of
Pediatrics 152:626-634.
 

Page 206
9
Central Testing
Gail D. Chermak
Any children suspected of having central auditory processing
disorders (CAPD) are referred to audiologists for evaluation.
Thorough assessment of these children is crucial given the potential
for communication, learning, and socioemotional problems. The
approach to evaluation described in this chapter is consistent with a
model of central auditory processing that recognizes the reciprocal
relationship between auditory perception and language, and a
definition of CAPD that encompasses the concomitant scope of
communication and learning deficits. Comprehensive assessment is
recommended to determine the neuromaturational status and integrity
of the central auditory nervous system and the range of functional
difficulties associated with deficits in processing speech and other
acoustic signals.
Scope and Limitations of the Chapter
An approach to identifying and assessing CAPD in pediatric
populations is described in this chapter. It is divided into sections
presenting tests and procedures useful for screening and evaluating
specific age groups, from neonates to school-age children. Results of
tests and procedures commonly employed in neuroaudiologic
assessment of adults with confirmed neurologic lesions are briefly
reviewed before describing outcomes obtained from children with
CAPD who were administered similar tasks. Current clinical use and
future application of electrophysiologic measures and brain imaging
procedures are also discussed.

The tests presented do not represent an exhaustive compilation; rather,
they offer examples of more widely researched and more frequently
used clinical assessment tools. No attempt is made to study the
neuroanatomy of the auditory system. The reader is advised to consult
sources and become familiar with the anatomy, physiology, and
neuromaturation of the auditory system before undertaking
assessment of central auditory function. Furthermore, the reader will
not find specific instructions regarding administration of the tests
reviewed. To ob-
 

Page 207
tain these instructions, the reader is referred to the original references
in the scientific literature, test manuals, and chapters of text books
devoted to this subject (e.g., Katz 1994; Keith 1977; Lasky and Katz
1983; Pinheiro and Musiek 1985).
Definition and Profile of CAPD
Central auditory processing disorders "are deficits in the information
processing of audible signals not attributed to impaired peripheral
hearing sensitivity or intellectual impairment" (ASHA 1992). CAPDs
disrupt the continuous auditory processing of acoustic, phonetic, and
linguistic information and affect information processing from sound
reception to discourse understanding. Given the potential magnitude
of disruption, diverse functional deficits are often observed in children
with CAPD. These include difficulty comprehending speech in
backgrounds of noise or competing speech, distractibility,
inattentiveness, difficulty understanding verbal directions, reduced
memory, and associated reading difficulties due to auditory-phonetic
confusions (ASHA 1992; Chermak and Musiek 1992; Musiek and
Geurkink 1980; Willeford 1985; Willeford and Burleigh 1985). In
addition to listening and learning problems, children with CAPD often
experience social difficulties, ranging from withdrawal to aggression,
in adjusting to their everyday environments (Willeford and Burleigh
1985).
Auditory Perceptual Versus Linguistic Deficit
That children with CAPD demonstrate both auditory perceptual and
auditory-language processing deficits is undisputed. Besides deficits
in dichotic listening, selective attention, and temporal processing,
children with CAPD often present deficits in auditory memory and
sound blending. Unresolved, however, is whether auditory processing
deficits either underlie or reflect language disorders. Research

suggests that new assessment strategies may clarify the relationships
among auditory processing, cognitive, and linguistic deficits
(Campbell and McNeil 1985; Chermak, Vonhof, and Bendel 1989; J.
Jerger et al. 1991; S. Jerger, Johnson, and Loiselle 1988; S. Jerger,
Martin, and J. Jerger 1987; Tobey and Cullen 1984).
Findings of normal performance on a speech task presented with
ipsilateral competition, with depressed performance on the
contralateral competing condition, in children with confirmed lesions
of the central auditory nervous system, are known in children
suspected of CAPD. Hence, S. Jerger, Johnson, and Loiselle (1988)
concluded that auditory perceptual processing deficits rather than
linguistic processing deficits underlie CAPD. S. Jerger, Martin, and J.
Jerger (1987) reported a general pattern of audiologic and language
results consistent with an auditory-phonologic processing disorder as
opposed to a linguistic-cognitive deficit in a child with learning
disability. Similarly, increased susceptibility to masking regardless of
linguistic content led Chermak et al. (1989) to
 

Page 208
posit an acoustic-phonetic basis for auditory-language deficits
presented by adults with learning disabilities.
Model of Central Auditory Processing
The suggested approach to assessment, elaborated in a subsequent
section, corresponds to an emerging model of central auditory
processing that invokes both bottom-up and topdown processes
involving parallel and interactive networks (Churchland and
Sejnowski 1988; Massaro 1987; Warren 1983). Bottom-up and
topdown processes are regarded as complementary; context (topdown)
guides acoustic and phonetic analysis with constraints supplied by
reciprocal input from bottom-up information sources (Cole and
Jakimak 1980; Cutler and Norris 1988; Luce 1986; Marlsen-Wilson
1987; McClellend and Elman 1986). Listening and situational
demands generally determine the relative role of bottom-up and
topdown processes for message resolution. For individuals with
CAPD, internal distortions degrade the auditory signal to the degree
that topdown processing typically predominates in most listening
situations, particularly those in which complex linguistic and
cognitive demands are coupled with background noise.
Historical View
Although central auditory testing of adults with neurologic
impairments has a rather extensive history, assessment of central
auditory processing in children has gained momentum only in more
recent years as efforts to understand and re-mediate learning
disabilities (LD) have intensified. The behavioral profiles of children
with CAPD, LD, and Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) often overlap, as might be expected given the complex
interactions among auditory processing, language skills, cognition,
and learning. Children with CAPD, LD, and ADHD often exhibit
listening and learning problems despite normal intelligence, normal

peripheral hearing sensitivity, and characteristically unremarkable
neurologic findings. Poor academic performance is the major
complaint of parents of children with CAPD (Willeford 1985), and
many children with CAPD are enrolled in special education programs
(ASHA 1993). CAPD, LD, and ADHD are not necessarily
concomitant, however; not all children with language impairment,
learning disability, or hyperactivity exhibit CAPD. Thorough
assessment can lead to differentiation of these related conditions as
well as refine therapeutic efforts.
Evolving Test Materials and Procedures
Many investigations have shown less efficient auditory processing in
children relative to adults, associated with maturational differences (as
well as peripheral processing differences) in neural and linguistic
development and
 

Page 209
response strategies (Allen et al. 1989; Elliott 1986; Elliott and
Hammer 1988; Hall and Grose 1990, 1991; Maxon and Hochberg
1982; Musiek, Baran, and Pinheiro 1990; Musiek, Verkest, and
Gollegly 1988; Sussman 1991; Werner 1992; Willeford 1977).
Depending on the task, significant improvements in performance have
been observed through age twelve years, the age at which human
auditory pathway maturation is probably completed. Early pediatric
evaluative efforts relied on central auditory tests developed for adults,
with norms adjusted for normal developmental differences (Keith and
Jerger 1991). However, given the multiplicity of factors underlying
performance differences between children and adults, it is unlikely
that simply renorming tests designed for adults will ensure adequate
assessment of central auditory and auditory-language skills in
children.
Some evaluative efforts have incorporated central auditory tests
developed specifically for the pediatric population (Cherry 1980; S.
Jerger and J. Jerger 1984; Keith 1986). These tests are constructed to
minimize linguistic-cognitive demands while emphasizing auditory
perceptual demands (Keith 1981a). Notwithstanding the use of tests
designed for children, maturation and task variables complicate
interpretation of central auditory test results obtained from children.
Hence, interpreting these results may require invoking a maturational
model rather than an adult, neural lesion model.
Objectives of Central Auditory Assessment with Children
A fairly standard test battery is used for assessment of the adult central
auditory nervous system; however, a comparable battery of tests
proven efficient for assessment of central auditory function in children
is less well established. This situation may be related to differences in
assessment objectives. Neuroaudiologic assessment with adults is
directed to detecting and localizing lesions. The objectives of central

auditory assessment in children, however, are to ascertain
neuromaturational status and the functional integrity of the central
auditory nervous system as it relates to the child's communication,
academic, and social skills. Although positive neurologic findings in
children with CAPD are uncommon, a small percentage of these
children may have diffuse neurological involvement or actual lesions
of the central auditory nervous system that may be disclosed through
extensive assessment. Indeed, comprehensive central auditory test
batteries may elucidate a neural basis for a CAPD as revealed by
depressed performance patterns implicating hemispheric, brainstem,
or interhemispheric dysfunction (S. Jerger, Johnson, and Loiselle
1988; Musiek, Gollegly, and Baran 1984a, b).
The clinician must not risk overlooking a serious medical problem.
Cortical or subcortical dysfunction, secondary to maturational lag or
neurodevelopmental morphological abnormality, may underlie CAPD
in children (Galaburda et al. 1985; S. Jerger 1987; S. Jerger et al.
1988; Musiek et al. 1984, 1985). Lesion or dysfunction of the efferent
system-and, in particular, the olivocochlear
 

Page 210
bundlemay influence selective listening deficits commonly observed
in children with CAPD (Musiek and Chermak 1995). Although the
possibility for physiologic abnormality may be small, children
suspected of CAPD should receive a medical examination concurrent
with the audiologic evaluation.
Comprehensive Assessment
The broad objectives of central auditory assessment in children and
the complex interactions among auditory perception, cognition, and
language require inclusion of tests of auditory perception and
auditory-language processing in the pediatric central auditory battery.
These must be preceded by a detailed case history and a basic
audiologic evaluation of peripheral function. The range and wide
intersubject variability of deficits often involved in CAPD (Ferre and
Wilber 1986) warrant a comprehensive test battery to ensure accurate
diagnosis and understanding of the functional deficits and to
appropriately plan remediation.
Examination of auditory processing in the absence of substantial
language processing demands is necessary to determine the integrity
of the central auditory nervous system (Keith 1981b). Language
variables can complicate interpretation of central auditory test results.
Hence, central auditory tests employing nonspeech (e.g., tonal) stimuli
or familiar language should be used to challenge the basic functions of
the central auditory nervous system. However, the additional inclusion
of speech tests is warranted to assess better the range of auditory
perceptual and functional deficits and to direct intervention.
Tests involving more substantial language manipulation allow
examination of processing of the complex signal that underlies
functional deficits in academic and social contexts. Hence, language-
based tests should also be administered to more fully understand the
impact of CAPD for listening, communication, learning, and social

functions. In fact, sensitized speech tests (e.g., low-pass-filtered
speech, time-compressed speech, speech in noise) were among the
first tools used to detect and localize central auditory lesions in adults.
They remain among the more sensitive indicators of central auditory
nervous system integrity.
Given the symptoms of CAPD, clients should be referred to the
speech-language pathologist for administration of auditory-language
tests. An extensive language assessment should be completed because
CAPD can affect the general development of language (Sloan 1980).
Results of metalanguage tests are particularly relevant to diagnosis
and management of children with CAPD. Evaluating metalinguistic
skills (e.g., auditory memory, auditory sequencing, auditory
association, and phonemic synthesis or sound blending) may reveal a
basis for observed or reported functional deficits affecting
communicative, academic, and social behaviors (Katz 1983; Willeford
and Billger 1985; Willeford and Burleigh 1985). The reader is
cautioned that measurement of individual metalinguistic skills in
isolation is difficult because many skills share the com-
 

Page 211
mon underlying processes of attention and discrimination (Keith
1981b; Witkin 1971). However, patterns of performance across
metalinguistic tests may indicate underlying deficits pertinent to the
global functions of listening and classroom performance.
The audiologist may also request neuropsychological evaluation to
estimate the relative contributions of cognitive factors to functional
difficulties. Neuropsychological evaluation is particularly relevant to
the differential diagnosis of CAPD, LD, and ADHD.
Behavioral tests generally reveal functional processing deficits. In
contrast, measures of electrophysiologic function (see chapter 7)
reveal the integrity and capacity of the central auditory nervous
system and may confirm level or site of lesion (Musiek and Gollegly
1988). Indeed, electrophysiologic tests may be more sensitive to
certain lesions of the central auditory nervous system than any
available behavioral test (Baran and Musiek 1991). This is the case for
the auditory brainstem response (ABR), which is highly sensitive to
brainstem lesions (Hall 1992). Reports suggest that P300, an
endogenous, late auditory eventrelated potential reflecting active
cognitive processes, may provide a measure of high level auditory
processing deficits (Jirsa and Clontz 1990; Musiek, Baran, and
Pinheiro 1992; Squires and Hecox 1983).
An unintended consequence of examining various auditory perceptual
and auditory-language processes in children presenting heterogeneous
manifestations of CAPD may be a considerable degree of overlap in
test results for normal subjects and those suspected of CAPD (Berrick
et al. 1984; Musiek, Geurkink, and Keitel 1982). No single test has
proven efficient in detecting and differentiating CAPD due, in part, to
the dispersion and overlap of scores between normal and suspected
CAPD subjects (Keith and Jerger 1991). Moreover, given the
complexity of the central auditory nervous system, it is unlikely that

any one behavioral test can be considered the definitive test of central
auditory function. Hence, a comprehensive pediatric central auditory
evaluation requires a battery of tests to determine neuromaturational
status of the central auditory nervous system, as well as auditory
perceptual and auditory-language abilities. This scope of testing
requires the coordinated efforts of audiologists and speech-language
pathologists, with referral to allied professionals as needed.
Case History
A complete case history with controlled observation in settings
associated with difficulties should precede behavioral tests and
electrophysiologic measures. Findings of the case history may not
only suggest inclusion of particular tests in the battery but also offer a
context for interpreting results and suggest management strategies.
Questions posed during history taking should include information
about the family; the mother's pregnancy and conditions at birth; the
child's growth,
 

Page 212
physical development, and medical history; motor coordination and
visual perception; speech, language, and social development; hearing
and auditory behavior; and educational progress. Questions should
reveal the parents' and other informants' primary concerns. The
examiner should be alerted to the possibility of central auditory
nervous system dysfunction if high risk factors for neurologic disorder
are revealed (e.g., genetic, biologic, or prenatal factors; trauma, and so
on). Willeford and Burleigh (1985) provide an excellent discussion of
information gathering in cases of suspected CAPD and offer a model
case history form.
Uses and Limitations of Standardized Tests
Standardized test protocols and normative data facilitate interpretation
of the substantial variability in performance observed across children,
even of the same age. Standardized tests offer the audiologist a means
of distinguishing the performances of individuals and determining
normality. However, they may not offer the flexibility needed to
assess some difficult-to-test patients. Moreover, normative data may
not be appropriate to a particular patient because of linguistic,
cultural, experiential, or other factors (Musiek and Chermak 1995),
thereby precluding the objective interpretation of test results. For
example, testing nonnative speakers of English using English
language materials is likely to yield scores reflecting language ability
rather than central auditory function. Local norms should be
established for CAPD tests to control for test recording, equipment,
administration, and environmental variables, in addition to differences
among patients (Kreul et al. 1968; Musiek and Chermak 1995).
Standardized tests are also limited in that, by design, they are
constructed only to determine the adequacy of an individual's
performance relative to the performance of normal peers (Salvia and
Ysseldyke 1981). Determining actual skill level and gaining more

explicit information regarding the ramifications of CAPD in a
particular domain require the use of criterion-referenced tests and
verbal or qualitative descriptions derived from systematic observation
or informed report by parents and teachers.
Differential Diagnosis of CAPD, ADHD, and Learning Disabilities
CAPDS are often associated with learning disabilities (LD) and
ADHD, although visual perceptual deficits may also underlie LD
(Boder 1973; Kaufman 1980; Willows, Kershner, and Corcos 1986).
Differential diagnosis of these conditions is challenging given similar
deficit profiles, which include inattention, poor listening skills,
distractibility, and inappropriate social behavior (American
Psychiatric Association 1987; Keller 1992; Willeford and Burleigh
1985). Moreover, these conditions are not mutually exclusive:
Children may display CAPD, ADHD, and LD (Katz 1992; Keith
1986; Keller 1992; Newhoff et al. 1992).
 

Page 213
Similarities in behavioral manifestations have led some to question
whether CAPD, ADHD, and LD reflect a single developmental
disorder (Burd and Fisher 1986; Gascon, Johnson, and Burd 1986).
Even if these conditions were shown to reflect differences in
expression of a common disorder, professionals would still be
required to evaluate the integrity of underlying systems and determine
the predominant deficits to inform remediation planning.
Identification of the primary deficits and conditions underlying
academic and social problems is possible through multidisciplinary
assessment.
ADHD is a medical diagnosis that is usually confirmed through
positive reaction to stimulant medication prescribed to reduce
behavioral sequelae. Characteristically, children with ADHD are
inattentive, impulsive, and hyperactive. Their attention deficits are
pervasive, impacting all sensory modalities. In contrast, children with
CAPD typically experience attention deficits restricted to the auditory
modality. Further, although children with CAPD and ADHD may
experience similar behavioral sequelae, several behaviors are most
often restricted to children with ADHD. For example, difficulty
waiting one's turn, problems playing quietly, and excessive talking
more often characterize children with ADHD rather than CAPD.
Similarly, severe socioemotional sequelae (e.g., conduct disorders,
juvenile delinquency) are more common among children with ADHD
(Newhoff et al. 1992).
Identification of the primary factors underlying listening, learning,
and social problems in children requires careful observation of the
child, parent and teacher input, and multidisciplinary assessment,
including the perspectives of the physician and the psychologist. A
comprehensive test battery must be employed to measure the range of
behavioral sequelae noted previously, in addition to auditory
perception and auditory-language processing. Moreover, appraisal of

visual and tactile processing can determine the breadth of processing
deficits and potentially reveal a pervasive perceptual deficit that
would suggest involvements beyond the auditory system and thereby
help in differentiating CAPD and ADHD.
Assessment Strategy
Perception of speech is fairly easy for those with both normal
peripheral hearing and central auditory function. Ease of perception is
possible due to the redundancy of the speech signal at both acoustic
and linguistic levels (Cooper et al. 1952; Liberman 1970). This is
coupled with the intrinsic redundancy of the central auditory nervous
system due partially to multiple and parallel pathways,
interhemispheric communication, and bilateral representation of the
auditory system. To expose lesions or processing insufficiencies in
this redundant system, materials of low extrinsic (i.e., acoustic or
linguistic) redundancy must be presented in ways that tax the auditory
system. Tests employing low redundancy stimuli, delivered in formats
that strain the central auditory nervous system, are
 

Page 214
most likely to identify individuals for whom intrinsic neural
redundancy has been compromised through lesion or dysfunction
(Bocca et al. 1954, 1955; Kimura 1964; Matzker 1962; Teatini 1970).
Decreasing the extrinsic redundancy of the speech signal can be done
in several ways (e.g., electronic filtering, time compression,
presentation with competing signals).
Brain Imaging
In addition to behavioral and electrophysiologic assessment
techniques, brain imaging studies hold promise for assessing central
auditory processing in children. Given the potential for revealing
underlying brain dysfunction and confirming audiologic outcomes,
brain imaging technology has been applied to the study of children
with CAPD and other conditions presumed related to dysfunction of
the central nervous system. This technology may significantly
increase our understanding of the brain and transform clinical
neurodiagnostic procedures.
Computerized axial tomography (CAT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) reveal the anatomic or structural integrity of the brain.
On the basis of CAT scans, Hier et al. (1978) and Rosenberger and
Hier (1980) reported-in children diagnosed as dyslexicreversals of
hemispheric asymmetries typically observed in normal right-handed
individuals. CAT scans may reveal neoplastic or epileptic disorders
associated with a few children with CAPD (Musiek, Gollegly, and
Ross 1985).
MRI has quickly become the method of choice for imaging acoustic
tumors (Curati et al. 1986; Mikhael, Ciric, and Wolff 1987) and has
also been applied in research involving children with learning
disabilities (Hynd, Semrud-Clikeman, and Lyytinen 1991). MRI
studies revealed that brain regions implicated in language and the
regulation of attention and motor control (e.g., corpus callosum, basal

ganglia) were smaller in brains of children with dyslexia relative to
those of normal children (Hynd and Semrud-Clikeman 1989).
Positron-emission tomography (PET) and single-photon-emission
computed tomography (SPECT) offer a window on brain function,
mapping of regional cerebral blood flow, metabolic activity, and
distribution of specific receptors (Frumkin et al. 1989). Although
audiologists and speech-language pathologists will not likely perform
or interpret CAT, MRI, PET, or SPECT neurodiagnostic techniques,
brain electrical activity mapping (BEAM) may become a clinical tool
in the neuroaudiologic test battery. These procedures provide insights
regarding CAPD and other conditions with suspected or confirmed
involvement of the central auditory nervous system (Finitzo and Pool
1987).
BEAM provides a topographic approach to quantifying
electrophysiologic activity in the brain. BEAM allows the
visualization of voltage distributions of evoked potentials at specific
latencies, providing a dynamic measure of brain metabolism and
blood flow (Finitzo and Pool 1987). The topography of the auditory
brainstem response and the middle-latency response has been
described
 

Page 215
using brain mapping techniques (Grandori 1986; Kraus and McGee
1988). Using BEAM, Duffy et al. (1980) identified differences in
electrical activity in the left temporal, left parietal, and medial frontal
regions of the brains of children diagnosed with dyslexia, relative to
normal-reading counterparts. Although brain imaging may eventually
offer evidence revealing static or active neurologic abnormalities
underlying CAPD in some children, behavioral and electrophysiologic
measures will continue to provide corroborating evidence. Moreover,
behavioral tests will remain essential, offering controlled measures of
functional deficits and playing a primary role in bridging between
assessment and intervention.
Test Battery
Elected tests useful in the identification and assessment of CAPD in
children appear in Table 9.1. In contrast to some other tables (Barr
1976; Dempsey 1983; Keith 1988; Willeford and Billger 1985), here
tests are categorized according to their primary focus on auditory
perception or auditory language. Tests of auditory perception (i.e.,
tests of binaural integration [synthesis], binaural separation, and
resistance to distortion [e.g., speech in noise or selective attention])
are distinguished from tests of metalanguage (e.g., sound blending,
auditory association, auditory closure, auditory memory). Application
and reporting of results consistent with this distinction should benefit
our patients by precisely illuminating underlying capacity of the
central auditory nervous system apart from language skills, and clarify
our understanding of the relationships among auditory processing,
language, and cognition.
Selecting tests for assessing CAPD is a complex matter. The
heterogeneous nature of CAPD and the various abilities of children
require that a customized battery of tests be chosen to ascertain the
neuromaturational status and integrity

Table 9.1. Tests Used to Identify and
Assess Central Auditory Processing
Disorders
BASIC AUDIOLOGIC
EVALUATION: Pure Tone
Thresholds; Aural Acoustic
Immittance Measurement;
Speech Recognition Performance
Intensity Functions
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC
MEASURES: Acoustic Reflex;
Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR);
Middle-
Latency Response (MLR); Late-
Latency Response (LLR); Event-
Related Evoked Potentials (P300)
AUDITORY PERCEPTION: Brief
Tone Audiometry; Competing
Environmental Sounds (CES);
Dichotic
Chords; Dichotic CVs; Dichotic
Digits; Dichotic Sentence
Identification (DSI); Duration Pattern
Percep-
tion; Flowers' Auditory Test of
Selective Attention; Flowers-Costello
Test of Auditory Abilities; Masking
Level Differences (MLD); Pediatric
Speech Intelligibility (PSI); Pitch
Patterns Sequence (PPS); Repetition
Test (Tallal); Screening Test for
Auditory Processing Disorders
(SCAN); Selective Auditory Attention
Test
(SAAT); Speech Perception In Noise
(SPIN); Staggered Spondaic Word Test
(SSW); Synthetic Sentence
Identification (SSI); Time Compressed
Speech (TC); Wepman Auditory
Discrimination

METALANGUAGE: Analysis of the
Language of Learning; Auditory
Conceptualization Test (LAC);
Clinical
Evaluation of Language
Fundamentals-Revised; Denver
Auditory Phoneme Sequencing Test;
Goldman-
Fristoe-Woodcock Auditory Skills Test
Battery; Language Processing Test;
Phonemic Synthesis; Revised
Token Test; Test of Auditory-
Perceptual Skills (TAPS); Test of
Language Competence; Test of Word
Knowledge; Word Test
 

Page 216
of the central nervous system and clarify functional deficits. Several
general issues should be considered in selecting tests.
Test Sensitivity and Specificity
The central auditory test battery should be composed of tests with
high efficiency (S. Jerger and J. Jerger 1983; Musiek et al. 1992;
Turner and Nielsen 1984). A test's overall efficiency in identifying
CAPD is determined by its sensitivity, a measure of a test's ability to
reveal abnormality (when abnormality exists of the type the test is
designed to detect) and specificity, a measure of a test's ability to
reveal normality (when no abnormality exists of the type the test was
designed to detect) (S. Jerger 1983; Turner and Nielsen 1984).
Unfortunately, data regarding the efficiency of central auditory tests
are not always reported in accompanying manuals or in the published
literature.
Test Reliability
Test-retest consistency is essential, particularly when monitoring
changes in the same patient over time. In children, neuromaturation
mediates changes in brain function; therefore, age-appropriate norms
must be established.
Ease of Administration
Tests requiring considerable client practice or time to administer and
score may not be clinically feasible.
Comprehensive Assessment
Given the complexity and redundancy of the central auditory nervous
system, a test battery should consist of sensitive tests assessing a
variety of auditory processes. A degree of redundancy offers
corroborating evidence. However, two tests that are similar in protocol
and task demands are not likely to provide new and clinically useful

information needed to confirm a central auditory processing disorder.
Ideally, selected tests should provide insight regarding the processes
of binaural separation, binaural integration, and interhemispheric
transfer, and incorporate tasks requiring dichotic and temporal
processing as well as processing of monotic low-redundancy input
(Musiek and Chermak 1995; Musiek and Geurkink 1980). Speech
perception depends on precise processing of rapidly presented
transient acoustic patterns embedded in the speech signal (Fujisaki,
Nakamura, and Imoto 1975; Hirsh 1959). Measures of temporal
processing reveal dysfunction at the level of the brainstem (e.g.,
masking level differences) and
 

Page 217
the cortex (e.g., pitch and duration patterns) (Bornstein and Musiek
1984; J. Jerger et al. 1969; Musiek and Baran 1987; Pinheiro and
Musiek 1985; Swisher and Hirsh 1972). Inclusion of a dichotic
listening task can allow differentiation of brainstem from hemispheric
dysfunction or lesion. When interpreted in the context of results from
a monotic low-redundancy test, it can facilitate differentiation of
hemispheric dysfunction or lesion from that of the corpus callosum
involving interhemispheric transfer (Musiek, Gollegly, and Baran
1984a, b).
Electrophysiologic measures should also be considered for inclusion
in the test battery because they allow examination of central auditory
capacity without the confounding influence of linguistic variables.
Further, electrophysiologic measures offer the power to detect some
lesions with greater sensitivity than behavioral tests.
Population Characteristics
Test batteries should be tailored to the client's age, ability, and
suspected dysfunction. Tests must be examined for vocabulary level
and complexity of sentence structure as well as cognitive level
required to perform the task (S. Jerger and J. Jerger 1984). Similarly,
response mode (e.g., verbalization versus picture pointing) must be
considered.
Individualized test selection is underscored by the diversity of our
case load. Testing nonnative speakers of English and non-English
speaking persons requires adaptations such as those requisite to
testing children. Thus, an appropriate battery with nonnative and non-
English speaking adults must rely on tests involving tonal targets
(e.g., frequency and duration patterns, masking level differences) and
electrophysiologic measures rather than English speech materials to
assess auditory processing skills independently of language skills.

Care must be taken to ensure that test instructions are understood
before administering tests. If speech materials are to be used, they
must be translated and recorded using high quality techniques and
normed using an appropriate control population. The importance of
renorming is critical: Translated versions may not be equivalent to the
original tests in difficulty level or efficiency (Musiek and Chermak
1995).
Peripheral Hearing Sensitivity
CAPD may occur with peripheral hearing impairment. Indeed, the
central auditory nervous system and the auditory periphery form a
critical interdependency (Musiek 1989). Functional changes in the
central auditory nervous system, including tonotopic reorganization
and loss of central inhibition, may result from cochlear damage
(Robertson and Irvine 1989; Willot, Demuth, and Lu 1984).
 

Page 218
Further, studies of transsynaptic degeneration reveal degeneration of
fibers in the central auditory nervous system after deprivation of
peripheral input (Morest 1983; Webster and Webster 1977).
Interactions between a central auditory processing deficit and
peripherally degraded auditory input can influence the outcomes of
central auditory tests. Therefore, peripheral impairments must be
quantified before central auditory assessment (Baran and Musiek
1991). Immittance measurement must also be included in the basic
audiologic test battery due to the presumed relationship between
reversible, mild-to-moderate fluctuant hearing loss associated with
otitis media and CAPD (Feagans et al. 1987; Gravel and Wallace
1992; Gunnarson and Finitzo 1991; S. Jerger et al. 1983; Roberts et
al. 1991).
Evaluation of central auditory processing abilities is more difficult
when confounded by peripheral hearing loss, particularly when the
hearing impairment is asymmetrical and greater than mild in severity.
Frequency and duration pattern tests and dichotic digit, word, and
sentence tests, however, are less influenced by sensory hearing loss
(Fifer et al. 1983; Speaks, Niccum, and Van Tassel 1985). They may
be preferred when assessing central auditory function in clients with
peripheral hearing impairment.
Interpretation of Tests
The immature brain demonstrates plasticity and is capable of
functional reorganization that may minimize severity of deficits
associated with lesions (Aoki and Siekevitz 1988; Musiek, Lenz, and
Gollegly 1991). Evidence has accumulated, however, suggesting that
the behavioral auditory manifestations of childhood and adult brain
lesions may not differ significantly (Bergman et al.1984; Goodglass
1967; S. Jerger 1987; S. Jerger, Martin, and J. Jerger 1987; S. Jerger
and Zeller 1989; Nass 1984; Pohl 1979). This similarity suggests that

outcomes of central auditory tests administered to children may be
interpreted according to principles guiding interpretation of
corresponding results in adults, even though the database of auditory
test results in children with confirmed central auditory lesions and
suspected CAPD is limited (Keith and Jerger 1991). Until this
database expands sufficiently to confirm the relationship between
central auditory test results and functional deficits that characterize
CAPD in children, we are unable to exclude the possibility of active
neural lesion (S. Jerger 1987; S. Jerger, Johnson, and Loiselle 1988;
Musiek, Gollegly, and Ross 1985), diffuse neuromaturational disorder,
or maturational delay (Keith 1983) as the basis for observed
functional deficits in children (Keith and Jerger 1991). In interpreting
results obtained on the Staggered Spondaic Word (SSW) test, Keith
(1983) suggested that central auditory test results obtained from
children were more likely an expression of maturational level than
neural lesion. Similarly, depressed performance on binaural fusion
tasks and reduced masking level differences in children may reflect
immaturity of the central auditory nervous system (Hall and
 

Page 219
Grose 1990; Roush and Tait 1984). Perhaps brain imaging techniques
that offer unique opportunities to visualize brain function will allow
differentiation of central auditory nervous system lesions from
neurodevelopmental abnormalities or maturational delays.
Use of Test Data
Selection of tests should also be guided by the intended use of the
results. In addition to ascertaining the integrity of the central auditory
nervous system and quantifying functional deficits requiring
treatment, data derived from behavioral tests provide for monitoring
of neuromaturational development and recovery of function and also
offer a framework for counseling. Particular tests of comparable
efficiency may be preferred for differential diagnosis and monitoring
disease progression or recovery; other tests may be deemed more
useful in revealing functional deficits, guiding intervention planning,
and framing counseling efforts. For example, measurement of
masking level differences and selective attention may each provide
useful diagnostic insight. Masking level differences reveal binaural
synthesis and reflect brainstem integrity, whereas tests of selective
attention reveal resistance to distortion, which reflects the integrity of
the cortex. However, given the abstract nature of the paradigm and the
absence of an everyday listening analog, masking level differences
offer less useful data for counseling parents. Because selective and
divided attention tasks reflect everyday functional problems, results
from these tests can aid the counseling process and offer insight for
auditory and educational management.
Given the usually unremarkable neurologic findings in pediatric
CAPD, the ultimate use of central auditory test results with children is
to confirm functional deficits to determine appropriate strategies for
management. Remedial programs cannot be formulated based on test
results alone, however. Studies report a lack of correlation among

depressed performance on tests of auditory perception, metalanguage,
and reading skills in learning disabled children (Matkin and Hook
1983; Tobey and Cullen 1984). The reader is referred to Chermak and
Musiek (1992) and Katz (1992) for discussions about the use and
limitations of central auditory test data for therapeutic intervention.
Screening for Central Auditory Processing Disorders
The objective of screening is the early identification of a condition in
asymptomatic individuals (World Health Organization 1971). Early
detection of CAPD is essential to ensure timely intervention to
minimize distress and maximize communicative, educational, and
social function. Screening for this condition may be redundant,
however, because children with CAPD typically experience problems
that result in referrals to audiologists and speech-language
pathologists and will be administered a comprehensive diagnostic test
battery to
 

Page 220
determine the nature of the processing deficits (Stach 1992). Even so,
screening for CAPD may be useful because results are used to direct
subsequent assessment efforts. Given the complex relationships
among CAPD and attention deficits, language disorders, and learning
disabilities (Gascon, Johnson, and Burd 1986), an alternative, but
appropriate, use of a screening test for CAPD might be to identify
symptoms for further exploration using auditory, language,
neuropsychological, and psychoeducational tests. In this way, the
influence of nonauditory factors of attention and language may be
parceled out, permitting examination of central auditory perceptual
function.
Assessment of Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Neonate,
Infant, And Toddler
Early identification and evaluation of CAPD and aggressive
intervention are critical given the potentially serious consequences for
learning, socioemotional adjustment, and economic potential. Clearly,
identification and evaluation of CAPD are important to successful
management, as shown by work revealing the functional plasticity of
the maturing central nervous system and consequent opportunity for
functional change if intervention is initiated early (Aoki and Siekevitz
1988; Hassmannova, Myslivecek, and Novakova 1981; Kalil 1989;
Rauschecker and Marler 1987; Schlaggar and O'Leary 1991).
Moreover, federal legislation (i.e., PL 94-142, PL 99-457) mandates
early education of infants and children with disabilities. Nevertheless,
detection and assessment of CAPD in infants and toddlers is not
possible.
Ideally, auditory screening should detect abnormalities at all levels of
the auditory system. Because neurologic deficits are common among
babies born with peripheral hearing impairments (D'Souza et al. 1981;
Gerber, Wile, and Hamai 1985; Hubatch et al. 1985), assessing

dysfunction at more central levels of the auditory nervous system
should be conducted along with peripheral screening. However,
accepted neonatal hearing screening methods (e.g., auditory brainstem
responses, transient-evoked otoacoustic emissions) are limited to
detection of hearing impairment and neural dysfunction up to the level
of the brainstem. Moreover, behavioral screening or assessment of
neonates, infants, and toddlers is complicated by developmental and
maturational limitations, making diagnosis subject to confounding
variables including false positive responses and observer bias (Bench
et al. 1976; Wilson and Thompson 1984). Commonly employed
behavioral tests of central auditory processing (e.g., auditory
discrimination and selective auditory attention) and check list and
performance scales are inappropriate for infants and toddlers due to
task demands and the nature of performance scale probes. Even when
techniques become available, access to neonates will remain a
problem unless mandated statewide hearing screening programs are
implemented across the nation (Blake and Hall 1990; NIH 1993).
Until specific instruments or physiologic measures are developed to
identify
 

Page 221
CAPD in neonates and infants, any baby deemed at risk for central
nervous system damage due to genetic, biological, or prenatal factors
as well as adventitious diseases, trauma, or exposure to toxic
substances associated with adverse developmental outcomes should
be monitored closely for early signs of CAPD, including speech and
language developmental delays and other minimal or equivocal (soft)
signs of neurologic dysfunction or damage (e.g., delayed motor
milestones, awkward gait, difficulties with fine motor coordination).
The reader is cautioned, though, that soft signs may also be
interpreted as evidence of neurologic immaturity (Schmitt 1975)
because they are common in normal children under the age of seven
years (Kinsbourne 1973).
Periodic and systematic observation of behaviors of at-risk infants
must be conducted throughout early childhood to ascertain whether
growth and development are following expected patterns. Integrated
assessment of cognition, communication, motor abilities, sensory
functions, and socioemotional development should be undertaken if a
developmental problem is suspected. Although specific diagnosis of
CAPD has not been possible, several behavioral, neurobehavioral, and
electrophysiologic measures may suggest immaturity or dysfunction
of the central nervous system or central auditory pathways.
Behavioral and Neurobehavioral Approaches to Assessment
Babies who fail behavioral screenings but have normal peripheral
hearing may suffer from neurologic deficits that may manifest as a
CAPD or learning disability (Mencher 1985). Unusual or abnormal
behavioral responses to sound, such as failure to habituate to sound
and hypersensitivity to sound, may suggest central auditory
dysfunction. Absence of auditory reflexes (e.g., startle reflex,
auropalpebral reflex) to sound of moderate intensity, despite normal
hearing sensitivity, may also implicate central dysfunction (Northern

and Downs 1991).
The Visually Reinforced Infant Speech Discrimination (VRISD)
paradigm may offer a behavioral approach to investigating central
auditory function in infants and toddlers (Eilers, Wilson, and Moore
1977). The VRISD paradigm applies the operant conditioning
paradigm of visual reinforcement audiometry to assess infants' speech
perception. Using this paradigm, Diefendorf (1981) found binaural
fusion in six-to eight-month-old infants. Because binaural fusion
reflects the capacity of the brainstem, the VRISD paradigm may offer
clinical possibilities for identifying and assessing potential central
auditory processing disorders in infants as young as six months.
Neurobehavioral assessment of newborns and infants provides a
window on the maturity and integrity of the central nervous system.
The Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (Brazelton 1984)
measures a newborn's coping and organizational capacities in
interacting with the environment. Attention and orientation, self-
regulation, motor status, and autonomic stability are assessed through
behavioral and reflexive probes. The Bayley Scales of Infant
Development (Bayley
 

Page 222
1969) are a standardized measure of development appropriate for
infants and toddlers between two and thirty months of age. The BSID
probes cognition, motor abilities, and behavioral and temperamental
characteristics, furnishing an indication of an infant's current
developmental status.
Early language can be assessed using the Sequenced Inventory of
Communication Development-Revised, SICD-R (Hedrick, Prather,
and Tobin 1984). The SICD-R explores-through parental report and
direct observation of the child's responses to test stimuli-receptive and
expressive communication milestones attained by normally
developing children between four months and four years of age.
Unfortunately, measures derived from these neurobehavioral scales
show poor predictive validity. The scales reflect current
developmental status rather than predict later development (Bornstein
and Sigman 1986; Brooks-Gunn and Lewis 1983; Cohen and
Parmelee 1983; Honzik 1976; McCall 1983; Thoman and Becker
1979). The poor predictability of early infant scales may be due to the
discontinuity of the developmental process; qualitative differences in
the nature of intelligence between infants and children, developing
from primarily nonverbal and nonsymbolic to highly verbal and
symbolic; and the influence of social and environmental factors on
development. Clearly, neurobehavioral assessment does not
specifically diagnose CAPD and has limited prognostic value related
to later emerging listening, learning, and social problems. Limitations
of infant assessment scales underscore the need for periodic follow-
up.
Electrophysiologic Assessment
Electrophysiologic investigation of central auditory processing in
infants may offer an opportunity to detect and evaluate brain
dysfunction underlying later emerging CAPD (Duffy et al. 1979;

Hynd et al. 1990; Jirsa 1992; Jirsa and Clontz 1990; Stach, Loiselle,
and Jerger 1988). Electrophysiologic responses are independent of the
subject's linguistic skill and, except for late-evoked responses, do not
demand cognitive processing of sound.
The acoustic reflex (see chapter 6) has proven useful in the adult
neuroaudiologic test battery due to the fact that normal stapedius
reflex activity in response to acoustic stimuli is contingent upon the
integrity of the afferent, brainstem, and efferent pathways (J. Jerger
and Northern 1980). Besides its sensitivity to sensory hearing loss, the
acoustic reflex can provide information concerning the presence of
auditory disorder at the level of the brainstem through comparison of
ipsilateral to contralateral acoustic reflex thresholds (Greisen and
Rasmussen 1970; J. Jerger, Burney, et al. 1974; J. Jerger and S. Jerger
1977). In the presence of brainstem pathology, crossed (contralateral)
reflexes are absent, but uncrossed (ipsilateral) reflexes are present (J.
Jerger 1975).
Although acoustic reflexes are absent for low-frequency probe tones
in many neonates (McMillan et al 1985; Sprague, Wiley, and
Goldstein 1985),
 

Page 223
neonates' acoustic reflex thresholds approximate those of adults for a
1200-Hz probe tone (Bennett and Weatherby 1982). Recording of
contralateral acoustic reflexes for a 660-Hz probe tone can be
expected in 38 to 63% of neonates (McMillan et al. 1985).
Measurement of the acoustic reflex is also highly dependent upon the
state of the middle ear and cochlea; therefore, these factors must be
considered before interpreting acoustic reflex results (J. Jerger,
Anthony et al. 1974; J. Jerger, Burney et al. 1974). Further, acoustic
reflexes should be interpreted within the context of other acoustic
immittance measurements (ASHA 1990; J. Jerger, Burney et al. 1974;
Northern 1981).
Because contralateral suppression of otoacoustic emissions suggests
normal function of the efferent system (Berlin et al. 1993; Collet et al.
1990; Mott et al. 1989; Norton 1993), otoacoustic emissions (see
chapter 8) may also prove useful in assessing central auditory
processing in infants in addition to their application in monitoring
cochlear function (Kemp et al. 1986).
The use of evoked potentials (see chapter 7) to complement
behavioral procedures for the assessment of central auditory function
in children merits attention (Adams et al. 1987; Jirsa 1992; Jirsa and
Clontz 1990). The ABR is the most sensitive audiologic test for
detection of intra-axial brainstem pathology in adults (Cohen and
Prasher 1988). It has been useful also in confirming brainstem
neoplasms in children (Nodar, Hahn, and Levine 1980) and in
identifying brain dysfunction in children with autism, minimal brain
damage, and psychomotor delay (Gillberg, Rosenhall, and Johansson
1983; Sohmer and Student 1978). However, ABR does not appear
particularly sensitive to CAPD in children (Roush and Tait 1984;
Shimizu and Brown 1981; Worthington 1981) and should not be relied
upon to diagnose CAPD.

The utility of the ABR in the assessment of CAPD in children is quite
limited due to the low probability with which central nervous system
lesions are found in children, unless specific neurologic symptoms are
presented (Ferry 1981; Keith 1983; Musiek and Chermak 1995). Since
ABR does not reflect neural synchrony above the brainstem, it cannot
reveal neural dysfunction at higher levels thought to be involved in
CAPD in children. Moreover, ABR may not be sensitive to diffuse
brainstem dysfunction that may be involved in CAPD in children.
Protti (1983) reported abnormal ABR tracings in only two of thirteen
children whose behavioral test results indicated CAPD. Roush and
Tait (1984) reported no difference in ABR results between normal
children and children with CAPD.
Because their presence requires the integrity of the higher central
auditory centers (Picton et al. 1977), middle-latency and late-latency
auditory evoked responses offer greater opportunity than early
potentials to discern central auditory dysfunction in children. Late-
occurring endogenous potentials have been recorded in infants
ranging in chronological ages between one and three months
(Tokioka, Crowell, and Pierce 1987). Further research is necessary,
however, to determine the eventual role of middle-and late-latency
potentials in assessing CAPD in infants and toddlers.
 

Page 224
Assessment of Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Preschool-
Aged Child
Preschool-aged and older children's greater sophistication and abilities
ease evaluation of central auditory function. A clinically accepted
criterion for CAPD diagnosis is not available, however, and data
regarding the efficiency of available screening tests are sparse
(Chermak and Montgomery 1992; Chermak, O'Neill, and Seikel 1992;
Stach 1992). Testing speech recognition in the presence of
background noise or competing speech is a common approach to
identifying children with CAPD and learning disabilities (Katz and
Wilde 1985; Keith 1981b). Several commercially available test
instruments incorporate speech-in-noise testing or performance-
intensity functions in the assessment of central auditory function in
young children (Cherry 1980; Keith 1986; S. Jerger and J. Jerger
1984).
Screening Instruments
Limited data are available regarding the reliability and validity of two
commercially available screening tests for CAPD: the Selective
Auditory Attention Test (SAAT) and the SCAN, a Screening Test for
Auditory Processing Disorders.
The Selective Auditory Attention Test is a screening instrument
developed by Cherry (1980) to help in the identification of young
children (aged four to eight years) ''whose selective attention deficits
may interfere with academic achievement'' (p. 1). The SAAT is a brief
and intrinsically interesting task for children and can be administered
in less than ten minutes in a quiet, well-lighted room using a high-
quality tape recorder (Cherry 1980; Sanderson-Leepa and Rintelmann
1976). The SAAT is a closed-set word identification test that uses new
recordings of the four 25-monosyllabic-word lists of the Word

Intelligibility by Picture Identification (WIPI) test (Ross and Lerman
1971). The SAAT employs two lists of the WIPI, one list in quiet and
one in a competing speech (story) background, under earphones or
sound field. The target words and the competing story (message-to-
competition ratio of 0 dB) are presented by the same male talker. The
child is instructed to point to the picture corresponding to the target
word. Performance on the list presented in quiet assesses auditory
discrimination; performance on the list presented against the
competing speech background reflects selective auditory attention
ability (Chermak and Montgomery 1992).
Unfortunately, only limited psychometric data are available for the
SAAT. Test-retest and equivalent forms reliability seem adequate as
reported by Cherry (1980) and Chermak and Montgomery (1992).
Cherry examined the validity of the SAAT based on the performance
of 321 four-to eight-year-old children, including some who were
diagnosed with or suspected of learning disability. Cherry reported
that the SAAT identified 90% of the learning disabled children
 

Page 225
and 40% of the children judged by teachers as at risk for learning
problems. However, 13% of normally-achieving children were
incorrectly identified as at risk for learning problems. Moreover,
although Dalebout et al. (1991) did not attempt to validate the SAAT,
they concluded that it exhibits poor sensitivity to attention deficits in
children diagnosed with ADHD and poor specificity in failing to
identify normally functioning subjects as normal.
The SCAN: A Screening Test for Auditory Processing Disorders
(Keith 1986) was also developed to assist in the identification of
children (aged three to eleven years) at risk for auditory-language
processing problems and educational difficulties. The SCAN test
battery consists of three subtests: auditory figureground and low-pass
filtered monosyllabic words (both administered monaurally) and a
dichotic competing monosyllabic word subtest. The auditory
figureground subtest provides a measure of selective attention,
requiring recognition of monosyllables presented in the presence of a
multitalker competing speech background (+8 dB message-to-
competition ratio). Performance on the filtered words subtest reflects
ability to process minimally distorted, low-pass-filtered (1 kHz)
words. The competing words subtest involves dichotic presentation of
monosyllabic words and provides insight regarding auditory
maturation (Keith 1986). Unlike the SAAT, the child repeats the
stimulus word on the SCAN. Because the SCAN can be administered
in quiet environments in twenty minutes and requires only a high
fidelity portable stereo cassette player and quality headphones, it is
particularly appealing for application in the school setting.
The SCAN was standardized on a sample of 1034 children between
the ages of three and eleven years, from a variety of geographic
regions and racial and economic groups. Keith (1986) reported
internal consistency coefficients of moderate to substantial strength.
Test-retest reliability coefficients, however, ranged from weak for the

filtered word subtest to moderately strong for the competing word
subtest and composite score.
Limited data are available corroborating the validity of the SCAN
(Chermak, O'Neill, and Seikel 1992; Keith 1986; Keith and Engineer
1991; Keith et al. 1989). In addition to establishing content validity,
Keith affirmed the construct validity of the SCAN based upon two
lines of reasoning. First, Keith noted that increases in test mean scores
with age corroborate the SCAN's ability to reflect auditory
maturation. Second, a factor analysis revealed that the SCAN test
items represented both a general auditory processing factor and a
specific clustering consistent with the assumptions upon which the
SCAN was based. Keith also reported a criterion validity study that
revealed positive, but weak, correlations between the SCAN subtests
and general measures of language. Keith et al. (1989) interpreted a
similar pattern of correlation coefficients as evidence that the SCAN
is a valid measure of auditory processing. They reasoned that higher
correlations with general measures of language should not be seen
because the SCAN is focused on a specific aspect of auditory-
language processing ability. Besides its reported sensitivity to CAPD,
the SCAN appears sensitive
 

Page 226
to the presence of learning disability and ADHD and reveals
improvements in auditory processing following administration of
methylphenidate for control of ADHD (Keith and Engineer 1991).
In comparing the SAAT and the SCAN administered to boys with
histories of otitis media, and thus at risk for CAPD, Chermak, O'Neill,
and Seikel (1992) reported equivalent group means for the two tests.
However, individual subject comparisons revealed the SAAT to be
more conservative than the SCAN, identifying additional children as
at risk for CAPD. Since neither the SCAN nor the SAAT is accepted
as the a priori criterion for classifying children with CAPD, they were
unable to conclude which of the two tests more efficiently identified
CAPD.
The SCAN's apparent sensitivity to CAPD, ADHD, and learning
disabilities underscores the pressing need to design pediatric tests of
central auditory processing capable of differentiating specific central
auditory functions apart from more generalized receptive language
deficits, attention deficits, hyperactivity, and other associated, but not
necessarily true, disorders of central auditory processing (Stach 1992).
Indeed, given the broad conceptualization of CAPD (ASHA 1992),
efficient tests must be designed to identify the various levels and types
of processing deficits to improve management.
Various checklists and performance inventories have been used to
screen and explore the nature of CAPD (Smoski 1990). A more
comprehensive scale, the Children's Auditory Processing Performance
Scale (CHAPPS) eases quantification of a child's auditory attention
span and memory as well as ability to process auditory signals in a
variety of settings, including quiet, noise, and with multiple sensory
inputs (Smoski, Brunt, and Tannahill 1992). Fisher's Auditory
Problems Checklist also purports to identify children at risk for CAPD
(Fisher 1980). In addition to identifying CAPD, listening performance

scales may also offer a means to measure the effects of therapeutic
intervention (Garstecki et al. 1990).
Assessment
Most behavioral tests of central auditory processing require verbal or
manual responses (e.g., pointing to pictures depicting stimulus words)
and are restricted to use with children in whom language has emerged.
The well known influence of receptive language on speech
audiometry in young children (Elliott 1979) has prompted the
development of speech recognition and central auditory speech tests
for these patients (Cherry 1980; Elliott and Katz 1980; S. Jerger and J.
Jerger 1984; Keith 1986; Ross and Lerman 1971). Besides controlling
vocabulary level, attempts have been made to control the additional
influence of nonauditory cognitive factors (e.g., attention, expectation,
motivation) through the use of closed message sets, carrier phrases,
and vocal contrasts between the primary and competing messages (S.
Jerger and J. Jerger 1984).
 

Page 227
Performance-intensity functions (i.e., graphic plots of speech
recognition performance in percent correct at several sensation levels)
using speech recognition materials appropriate for children are useful
in the evaluation of central auditory function. They may reveal ear
differences that cannot be explained by peripheral sensitivity (J. Jerger
and S. Jerger 1975). A significant reduction in performance as
presentation levels are raised beyond the level at which the best score
is achieved for phonetically balanced word lists (PB max), known as
rollover, is frequently observed in the ear ipsilateral to an eighth nerve
or brainstem lesion (J. Jerger and S. Jerger 1971). In addition to
rollover, a disproportionate word recognition score (PB max) relative
to the puretone average suggests retrocochlear involvement (Yellin,
Jerger, and Fifer 1983).
Comparing performance-intensity functions for monosyllabic words
and sentences, as recommended by Jerger and Hayes (1977), may also
differentiate peripheral from central involvement and can be
performed using the Pediatric Speech Intelligibility (PSI) test.
Pediatric Speech Intelligibility Test
The Pediatric Speech Intelligibility (PSI) test is modeled on adult
diagnostic approaches and was developed for use with children
between three and six years of age (S. Jerger and J. Jerger 1984). The
PSI consists of monosyllabic words and sentence materials composed
by normal children in this age range (S. Jerger 1980; S. Jerger, J.
Jerger, and Abrams 1983). The use of stimuli generated by children
serves to control vocabulary level, yielding a closed message set. To
engage children's attention and minimize cultural differences,
sentence materials employ animals rather than people as agents. As
with the SAAT, children are required to point to pictures depicted in a
closed response set. Although administering the PSI requires more
time and more elaborate equipment (i.e., standard two channel speech

audiometer) than required for the SAAT or the SCAN, incorporation
of two procedures (i.e., performance-intensity functions and message-
to-competition ratio functions) shown to be particularly sensitive
components of the neuroaudiologic evaluation with adult patients
argues for the inclusion of the PSI in pediatric assessment of central
auditory processing (S. Jerger 1987). Performance-intensity functions
and message-to-competition ratio functions for words (+4 dB) and
sentences (0 dB) presented with ipsilateral (ICM) and contralateral
(CCM) competition provide multiple measures with diagnostic
relevance to CAPD. Normative data are available for six clinical
indices derived from performance-intensity and message-to-
competition ratio functions.
Good test-retest reliability has been reported for the PSI, with
correlation coefficients ranging between 0.82 and 0.96 (S. Jerger and
J. Jerger 1984; S. Jerger, Jerger, and Abrams 1983). Validation studies
support the efficiency of the PSI in identifying and differentiating
children with developmental abnormalities and auditory and
nonauditory lesions of the central nervous system (S. Jerger
 

Page 228
1987). S. Jerger, Johnson, and Loiselle (1988) found the PSI useful in
differentiating three-to eight-year-old children with confirmed lesions
from those with suspected CAPD; abnormal PSI results were specific
to involvement of the central auditory pathways. Further, comparison
of ICM (degraded monotic) versus CCM (dichotic) functions
differentiated between brainstem and temporal lobe sites of lesion or
disorder. Abnormal CCM results in children suspected of CAPD led
them to conclude that these children have neurodevelopmental or
pathologic dysfunction at the level of the auditory cortex.
Assessment of Central Auditory Processing Disorders: School-Aged
Child
Although only a few tests are available to assess central auditory
processing in preschool-aged and younger children and infants, a wide
variety of tests is available for use with school-aged children, who are
generally more cooperative, have greater linguistic sophistication, and
are able to meet the listening demands of the more difficult central
auditory test battery. Musiek and Chermak recommended specific
tests for assessing central auditory function in school-aged children.
Dichotic digits, competing sentences, pitch patterns, and the PSI were
designated as preferred. The Staggered Spondaic Word (SSW) test,
middle-latency evoked response, Tallal's temporal processing tests
(Tallal and Piercy 1974), and compressed speech with acoustic
modifications (Bornstein and Musiek 1992) were cited as second-
order tests, providing additional options if the preferred tests are
unavailable or if additional information is needed.
Electrophysiologic Measures
As discussed previously, the acoustic reflex may provide evidence of
the integrity of the brainstem. Indeed, acoustic reflex abnormalities
have been observed in children with CAPD, despite lack of clinical

indication of brainstem involvement (Kraus et al. 1984).
Although ABR may offer only limited utility for assessing CAPD in
children (Musiek, Gollegly, and Baran 1984a; Roush and Tait 1984;
Shimizu and Brown 1981; Worthington 1981), middle-latency (MLR)
and late-latency evoked potentials may offer greater diagnostic
potential with school-aged children. Musiek, Gollegly, and Ross
(1985) reported the MLR effective in confirming high auditory system
dysfunction in a child with a subarachnoid cyst. The P300 auditory
late-latency event-related potential appears sensitive to CAPD in
children and may serve both screening and diagnostic efforts (Jirsa
1992; Jirsa and Clontz 1990; Stach, Loiselle, and Jerger 1988).
School-aged children with CAPD presented delayed P300 latencies
and reduced amplitudes relative to control subjects (Jirsa and Clontz
1990). Beyond diagnosis, Jirsa (1992) found P300 capable of
documenting changes in clinical status following a treatment program.
 

Page 229
Monaural Low-Redundancy Speech Tests
Low-Pass Filtered Speech
Contralateral deficits for low-pass filtered speech have been seen in
adult subjects with temporal lobe lesions (Bocca 1958; Bocca,
Calearo, and Cassinari 1954; J. Jerger 1960a, b; Lynn and Gilroy
1972). Ipsilateral, contralateral, and bilateral ear effects have been
reported for adults with brainstem lesions (Calearo and Antonelli
1968; Lynn and Gilroy 1977).
Although widely used, the low-pass filtered speech subtest of
Willeford's (1976) central auditory test battery presents only limited
sensitivity to CAPD in children (Baran and Musiek 1991). Willeford
and Billger (1978) reported that only 57% of learning disabled
children studied obtained abnormal scores. Similarly, other
investigators have reported the insensitivity of low-pass filtered
speech testsincluding filtered versions of the WIPI test and the PBK
word listsin identifying children with suspected or diagnosed CAPD
(Martin and Clark 1977; Musiek and Geurkink 1982; Musiek,
Geurkink, and Keitel 1982; Pinheiro 1977; Willeford 1980). In
contrast, Ferre and Wilber (1986) found a filtered version of the NU-
CHIPS able to distinguish learning disabled children with and without
presumed auditory impairment. Likewise, Farrer and Keith (1981)
found that low-pass-filtered words separated children with normal and
abnormal auditory processing abilities. The filtered words subtest of
the SCAN offers a standardized, commercially available alternative.
However, Chermak, O'Neill, and Seikel (1992) found this subtest least
challenging to subjects at risk for CAPD.
TimeCompressed Speech
Although not as sensitive as low-pass-filtered speech, accelerated or
timecompressed speech appears moderately sensitive to intracranial

lesions, particularly diffuse lesions, involving the temporal lobe
(Calearo and Lazzaroni 1957; Kurdziel, Noffsinger, and Olsen 1976;
Mueller, Beck, and Sedge 1987). Reduced performance, especially at
the 60% compression rate, is typically observed in adults in the ear
contralateral to the temporal lobe with diffuse damage.
Beasley, Maki, and Orchik (1975), studying the effect of time
compression on four-to eight-year-old children's auditory perception,
reported increases in word identification as a function of increases in
age and sensation level, and a decrease in percentage of time
compression. Beasley and Freeman (1977) and Freeman and Beasley
(1978) reported poorer performance on 60% timecompressed speech
(PBK-50 and WIPI test) among children with reading problems.
Children with learning disabilities performed more poorly than normal
peers when rapid rates of compression were used (Manning, Johnston,
and Beasley 1977). Contrary to these reports, Ferre and Wilber (1986)
were not able
 

Page 230
to differentiate learning disabled children with and without central
auditory impairment using 60% time-compressed NU-CHIPS.
Speech in Noise Competition
The redundancy of the speech signal can also be decreased by adding
an ipsilateral competing message or noise. Reduced word recognition
has been observed in adults in the ear contralateral to the temporal
lobe lesion and in the ipsilateral ear of patients with eighth nerve and
extra-axial brainstem lesions (Dayal, Tarantino, and Swisher 1966;
Heilman, Hammer, and Wilder 1973; Morales-García and Poole 1972;
Noffsinger et al. 1972). Olsen, Noffsinger, and Kurdziel (1975) found
marked reductions in speech recognition measured in the presence of
ipsilateral competition to be associated with lesions at all levels of the
central auditory nervous system. They concluded that speech-in-noise
testing may be useful in detecting central auditory nervous system
disorders but not in specifying site of lesion.
Recognizing speech in the presence of background competition is
among the most common deficits seen among children with learning
disabilities (Katz and Illmer 1972; Lasky and Tobin 1973). Many
assessment instruments developed for children take advantage of this
finding, incorporating a monaural speech-in-noise subtest in the test
battery (Cherry 1980; S. Jerger and J. Jerger 1984; Keith 1986). The
SAAT, SCAN auditory figure-ground subtest, and the PSI ipsilateral
competing message subtest are examples of standardized,
commercially available speech-in-noise tests. Although the SAAT and
the performance-intensity functions of the PSI may be administered
under earphones or sound field, earphone administration allows for
comparisons between ears. The Synthetic Sentence Identification
(SSI) with ipsilateral competing message subtest (described under
Dichotic Speech Tests) may be appropriate for the older school-aged
child, as reading is required.

Dichotic Speech Tests
Results Obtained From Adults with Neurologic Lesions
Dichotic speech tasks involve the simultaneous stimulation of both
ears with different stimuli and may be classified as binaural
integration or binaural separation tasks. Binaural integration tasks
(e.g., SSW, SCAN competing word subtest, masking level differences,
and dichotic digits, consonant-vowel syllables, and words) require the
listener to process stimuli presented to both ears. In contrast, binaural
separation tasks require the listener to process stimuli selectively
presented to the target ear (e.g., PSI with contralateral competing
message, SSI with contralateral competing message, and the
Competing Sentence test). The reader
 

Page 231
is referred to Silman and Silverman (1991) for an excellent discussion
of the neural pathways and mechanisms underlying dichotic listening
and outcomes expected in persons with central nervous system
compromise.
A right ear advantage for dichotic presentations has been reported
consistently in normal subjects (Berlin et al. 1973; Kimura 1961a, b).
Kimura found depressed recognition performance when digits were
presented to the ear contralateral to temporal lobe damage. Many
other reports confirm the contralateral deficit on dichotic digits, CVs,
words, and sentences in cases of temporal lobe damage (J. Jerger and
S. Jerger 1975; Katz, Basil, and Smith 1963; Lynn and Gilroy 1972,
1977; Niccum, Rubens, and Speaks 1981; Speaks et al. 1975).
An ipsilateral-ear (left) effect has been demonstrated in persons with
lesions involving the interhemispheric (i.e., corpus callosum)
pathways (Baran, Musiek, and Reeves 1986; Milner, Taylor, and
Sperry 1968; Musiek and Wilson 1979; Musiek, Wilson, and Pinheiro
1979; Sparks and Geschwind 1968). Beyond the expected
contralateral ear effect seen for persons with cortical lesions, Musiek
(1983c) reported predominantly ipsilateral ear effects for persons with
unilateral brainstem lesions. Further, he found dichotic digits slightly
more sensitive to hemispheric rather than brainstem lesions.
Similar outcomes have been obtained for CV syllables (Berlin et al.
1972, 1975) and competing sentences (Lynn and Gilroy 1975; Musiek
1983a) in adult patients. However, many reports reveal dispersion of
outcomes-including ipsilateral, bilateral, and contralateral effects-on
dichotic tests administered to patients with brainstem lesions (J. Jerger
and S. Jerger 1974, 1975; Katz 1970; Musiek 1983a; Musiek and
Geurkink 1982; Pinheiro, Jacobson, and Boiler 1982; Rintelmann and
Lynn 1983). The variability in outcomes probably results from the
intricate and compact nature of the brainstem (Musiek 1983c). J.

Jerger and S. Jerger (1974, 1975) concluded that ipsilateral deficits are
most commonly seen in extra-axial brainstem lesions, and
contralateral ear effects are most commonly seen in intra-axial (i.e.,
above the cochlear nuclei) brainstem lesions.
Results Obtained from Children with CAPD
Dichotic listening tasks have been shown to differentiate normal
children from children with learning disabilities (Hynd et al. 1979;
Obrzut et al. 1981; Stubblefield and Young 1975). The expected right
ear advantage is seen in children with auditory perceptual deficits and
learning disabilities. However, left ear performance is typically
depressed relative to normal controls (Baran and Musiek 1991;
Musiek, Gollegly, and Baran 1984b; Pinheiro 1977; Willeford 1985)
and is highly variable in subjects eight years and younger (Musiek and
Pinheiro 1985).
Since dichotic digits appear moderately sensitive to brainstem,
cortical, and interhemispheric dysfunction, they may serve as a useful
screening tool for CAPD in children (Baran and Musiek 1991; Musiek
1983a; Sommers and Taylor
 

Page 232
1972). Although normative data are available for children (Berlin,
Hughes, et al. 1973; Berlin, Lowe-Bell, et al. 1973), the sensitivity of
dichotic CV syllable tests for the assessment of central auditory
processing function in children remains unclear (Dermody, Katsch,
and Mackey 1983; Harris, Keith, and Novak 1983; Roeser, Millay,
and Morrow 1983). In contrast, dichotic digits, SSW, and competing
sentences were among the tests causing the greatest percentage of
failures among children with CAPD (Musiek, Geurkink, and Keitel
1982). With the Pitch Patterns Sequence (PPS) test (described below
in "Temporal Processing"), they exposed the auditory perceptual
deficits of children with learning disabilities (Musiek, Gollegly, and
Baran 1984b).
Several standardized dichotic word and sentence tests are available for
use with school-aged children, including the SSW, the SCAN, the PSI
contralateral competing message subtest, the SSI contralateral
competing message subtest, and the Competing Sentence test.
Competing Sentence Test
The Competing Sentence (CS) test, developed by Willeford (1978),
involves the dichotic presentation of natural sentences of similar
length and semantic content. A right ear advantage is seen for the
single ear response mode, and norms reveal improved performance
between the ages of six and twelve years. Although comparative data
are not available for children, Musiek (1983c) reported that the CS
was the least sensitive of three dichotic speech tests administered to
adult subjects with intracranial lesions. Moreover, only 48% of 150
children with learning disabilities obtained abnormal competing
sentence scores (Willeford and Billger 1985).
Staggered Spondaic Word Test
The Staggered Spondaic Word (SSW) test involves the dichotic

presentation of familiar spondees that are partially overlapped to
deliver both noncompeting and competing syllables to each ear (Katz
1962). The leading ear is alternated on consecutive word pairs so that
twenty word pairs are presented to the right ear first and the remaining
twenty pairs are presented to the left ear first. The SSW is easily
administered in ten to fifteen minutes and, with some practice, is
relatively easy to score.
Depressed SSW recognition scores for competing syllables are
typically observed for the ear contralateral to the cortical lesion
involving the primary auditory reception area (Katz 1962; Katz, Basil,
and Smith 1963; Lynn and Gilroy 1977). Results are less predictable
in cases of brainstem lesion, although some investigators have
reported depressed performance in such cases (Musiek 1983c; Musiek
and Geurkink 1982; Pinheiro, Jacobson, and Boller 1982; Stephens
and Thornton 1976).
 

Page 233
Error patterns known as response biases are thought to localize
cortical lesions in adults (Arnst and Katz 1982). These response biases
include: ear effects, in which significantly greater numbers of errors
are committed in response to words presented to the first or second ear
receiving stimuli; order effects, in which significantly greater numbers
of errors are committed for the first spondee or the second spondee;
and reversals, in which a correct response is given but in improper
sequence of syllables.
In addition to providing site of lesion information, the SSW has been
used to evaluate children with suspected CAPD (Katz 1992). The
SSW appears to differentiate children with CAPD from those without
such difficulties (Johnson, Enfield, and Sherman 1981; Katz and
Illmer 1972; Stubblefield and Young 1975). Musiek, Geurkink, and
Keitel (1982) found the SSW to be among the more sensitive tests in
confirming CAPD in children previously diagnosed.
Although SSW outcomes may reflect localized brain damage in some
children, children's performance deficits on the SSW and other
dichotic tests may also result from a developmental delay in the
maturation of the auditory nervous system, a maturational delay
correlated with learning problems (Keith 1983). Indeed, a
maturational effect, including a strong right ear advantage, is seen
when administering the SSW to normal children aged five to eleven
years (Johnson et al. 1981; Keith 1983; Lukas and Guencher-Lucas
1985; Stubblefield and Young 1975; White 1977). Therefore, when
administered to children, reduced scores in the competing conditions
may be more appropriately interpreted as suggestive of auditory
maturation or neurodevelopmental status, rather than brain lesions.
Invoking a maturational model, Keith (1983) suggested alternate
interpretations for response biases in children, relating ear effects to
directed attention deficits, order effects to memory deficits, and

reversals to deficits in sequential memory. A functional deficits
interpretation of SSW outcomes in children based on an auditory
maturational model may not only offer a more accurate explanation
but also provide a more explicit basis for management planning. In
noting the large number of children with confirmed reading problems
who do not display the expected response bias, Keith (1983)
cautioned that the validity of the auditory maturational (i.e., functional
deficits) interpretation of SSW outcomes must be substantiated.
Katz (1992) identified four categories of CAPD in children based on
response biases that are commonly observed error patterns seen in
learning disabled children who present with language deficits,
memory deficits, reading comprehension difficulties, and general
disorganization. Unlike the maturational model employed by Keith
(1983), the taxonomy developed by Katz is derived from data
generated by adults with brain lesions and implements a probable site
of lesion model corroborated by similarities in symptoms shared by
children and adults with brain lesions. Both approaches to interpreting
SSW results, however, offer similar insights for management.
 

Page 234
Competing Environmental Sounds
The Competing Environmental Sounds (CES) test is a nonlinguistic
dichotic test for use along with the SSW (Arnst and Katz 1982;
Johnson, Enfield, and Sherman 1981; Katz, Kushner, and Pack 1975).
The listener is instructed to either verbalize or point to pictures
depicting familiar everyday sounds. Limited data suggest that the CES
may be less sensitive than is the SSW to CAPD.
Synthetic Sentence Identification
The Synthetic Sentence Identification (SSI) test, developed by Speaks
and Jerger (1965), appears sensitive to brainstem and cortical lesions
in adults (J. Jerger, Speaks, and Trammel 1968). Generally, patients
with brainstem lesions demonstrate poorer sentence recognition on the
SSI when the competing message is presented to the ear ipsilateral to
the lesion (SSI-ICM). Patients with temporal lobe lesions perform
more poorly when the competing message is presented to the ear
contralateral to the lesion (SSI-CCM) (J. Jerger and S. Jerger 1975). J.
Jerger and Hayes (1977) suggested comparing performance-intensity
functions for monosyllabic words and sentences of the SSI to
differentiate peripheral from central sites of lesion. Use of the SSI
with younger children is limited because administration of the SSI
requires that the subject read the list of ten possible sentences
presented with either ipsilateral or contralateral competition.
Other Binaural Interaction Tasks
Masking Level Differences
The difference between binaural masked thresholds obtained in a
homophasic condition (masking noise and signal presented to both
ears in-phase) and an antiphasic condition (i.e., one of the signals is
presented 180° out-of-phase relative to the signal at the opposite ear)

is known as binaural release from masking, masking level difference
(MLD), or binaural unmasking. The binaural advantage seen in the
MLD reveals the central auditory nervous system's sensitivity to
binaural asymmetries and interaural phase differences (Durlach and
Colburn 1978). Adult patients with low brainstem lesions do not show
significant release from masking, whereas patients with lesions above
the low brainstem show masking level differences comparable to
normal subjects (Cullen and Thompson 1974; Lynn et al. 1981;
Noffsinger 1982; Noffsinger, Martinez, and Schaefer 1982; Olsen and
Noffsinger 1976; Olsen, Noffsinger, and Carhart 1976).
Auditory processing of interaural cues underlying the MLD is mature
at about age six years (Hall and Grose 1990); hence, reduced MLDs in
children six years and older suggests difficulty interpreting binaural
difference cues at the level of the brainstem. MLDs did not
differentiate six-to twelve-year-old learning disabled children from
normal children (Roush and Tait 1984) although
 

Page 235
Sweetow and Reddell (1978) reported that some children with
learning disabilities exhibit significantly reduced MLDs for tonal
signals.
Binaural Fusion
Dichotic and diotic presentations of bandpass-filtered speech have
been used to examine central auditory function. Although bandpass
stimuli are not highly intelligible when presented monaurally, normal
listeners generally achieve high recognition scores when stimuli are
presented in tandem, either simultaneously to both ears (i.e., diotic) or
to opposite ears (i.e., dichotic). Binaural fusion, thought to take place
at the level of the brainstem (Matzker 1959), involves the integration
of complementary information presented simultaneously to the two
ears. Typically, the low-and high-pass bands comprising a word are
presented to opposite ears, and the listener must summate binaurally.
The task appears only moderately sensitive to brainstem lesions in
adults (Linden 1964; Lynn and Gilroy 1975, 1977; Musiek 1983b;
Musiek and Geurkink 1982; Ohta, Hayashi, and Morimoto 1967).
Although some investigators have reported the binaural fusion task
capable of distinguishing children with learning disabilities from
normal children (Ferre and Wilber 1986; Martin and Clark 1977;
Willeford and Billger 1985), other investigators have reported
binaural fusion to have only limited value in assessing CAPD in
children (Harris 1963; Musiek, Geurkink, and Keitel 1982; Pinheiro
1977). Roush and Tait (1984) reported reduced word recognition
scores under both diotic and dichotic conditions for children with
learning disabilities between six and twelve years of age. Because
these same subjects demonstrated normal MLDs and ABR, these
results were interpreted as evidence of overall central auditory
processing difficulty due to the distortion caused by the acoustic
filtering rather than evidence of brainstem lesion or dysfunction.

Rapidly Alternating Speech Perception
Bocca and Calearo (1963) developed a ''swinging speech test,'' in
which the message alternates between ears. They reported the test to
be sensitive to many cases of brainstem pathology but insensitive to
diffuse cerebral pathology. Rapidly alternating speech perception
(RASP) tests constructed in English have been shown sensitive only
to grossly abnormal brainstem function in adults (Lynn and Gilroy
1977; Musiek 1983b; Musiek and Geurkink 1982), nor is RASP
particularly sensitive to CAPD in children (Musiek et al. 1982;
Pinheiro 1977; Willeford 1977; Willeford and Billger 1985).
Temporal Processing
Temporal processing tasks (e.g., temporal sequencing, gap detection)
have been used to examine the integrity and function of the central
auditory nervous system. Temporal processing deficits have been
reported fairly
 

Page 236
consistently in adult patients with cerebral lesions. Deficits in
sequencing tonal patterns and ordering acoustic stimuli have also been
reported in children with CAPD and learning disabilities (Musiek,
Geurkink, and Keitel 1982; Musiek, Gollegly, and Baran 1984a, b;
Pinheiro 1977; Tallal 1985; Tallal and Piercy 1973, 1974, 1975).
Pitch Patterns Sequence Test
The Pitch Patterns Sequence (PPS) Test is a monaural test that
assesses several central auditory processes, including interhemispheric
transfer, sequence analysis, and pattern perception (Musiek and
Pinheiro 1987; Pinheiro 1977). A low (880 Hz) and a high (1430 Hz)
frequency tone are presented in groups of three, with six possible
sequences. The listener is required to hum, verbalize, or manually
indicate the tonal pattern. Verbalizing or manually responding to the
tone pattern requires coordinated processing in both hemispheres.
Tonal patterns must be recognized in the right hemisphere and
sequenced and encoded using a verbal or manual output in the left
hemisphere, thereby requiring interhemispheric transfer across the
corpus callosum (Musiek and Kibbe 1984; Musiek, Pinheiro, and
Wilson 1980; Pinheiro 1977). Verbal responses reveal the integrity of
the contralateral hemisphere and the corpus callosum. The PPS
appears to be a sensitive measure (Musiek and Geurkink 1980) and is
normed for children six to nine years old.
Patients with brainstem lesions may perform normally on the PPS
(Musiek, Weider, and Mueller 1983); however, abnormal performance
has also been reported (Musiek and Geurkink 1982; Pinheiro,
Jacobson, and Boller 1982). Children with CAPD and learning
disabilities present depressed tonal sequencing on the PPS.
Demonstrating the benefits of a test battery including tasks requiring
temporal processing as well as processing of monaural low-
redundancy input, Musiek, Pinheiro, and Wilson (1980) suggested

compromise of the auditory interhemispheric pathways based on
findings of depressed pattern recognition scores on the PPS, coupled
with normal filtered-speech scores.
Given the crucial role that temporal sequencing of acoustic and
linguistic patterns serves for speech production and perception (Hirsh
1959, 1967; Lashley 1951; Neff 1964), the PPS offers a unique
opportunity to assess central auditory processes underlying everyday
function using a nonlanguage-based task (Musiek and Chermak
1995). Similar in task and processing demands, a duration pattern
sequence test can be substituted for the PPS (Musiek, Baran, and
Pinheiro 1990).
Willeford's Central Auditory Test Battery
Willeford (1977) normed a central auditory test battery developed for
children. This battery consists of dichotic competing speech and
dichotic binaural fusion
 

Page 237
subtests, a monotic filtered speech subtest, and a binaural rapidly
alternating speech subtest. Maturation effects and large intersubject
variability were documented for all subtests (except the rapidly
alternating speech test) for children between five and ten years of age.
Willeford reported performance deficits on at least one subtest for
seven children with below expected academic performance or
diagnosed learning disabilities. The rapidly alternating speech subtest
appears least sensitive to CAPD (Willeford and Billger 1985).
Summary
The objectives of central auditory assessment with children are to
determine the neuromaturational status and integrity of the central
auditory nervous system and identify functional auditory processing
deficits underlying communication and learning problems. Achieving
these objectives requires a thorough evaluation, including a detailed
case history and battery of tests of auditory perception and auditory-
language or metalanguage. Basic audiologic testing must precede
central testing because peripheral hearing impairment can influence
central test outcomes. Although uncommon, some children with
CAPD may have neurologic involvement or actual lesions of the
central auditory nervous system (S. Jerger 1987; S. Jerger, Johnson,
and Loiselle 1988; Musiek, Gollegly, and Ross 1985). Hence, children
suspected of CAPD should get a medical examination to complement
the audiologic assessment.
Given the heterogeneous nature of CAPD and the complexity of the
central auditory nervous system, a test battery consisting of sensitive
tests that assess a variety of auditory processes (e.g., binaural
separation, binaural integration, and interhemispheric transfer) must
be administered, appropriate for the patient's age, ability, and
suspected dysfunction. Preliminary reports indicating the potential of
late auditory event-related potentials to reveal CAPD in children

suggest consideration of electrophysiologic measures for inclusion in
the central test battery (Jirsa 1992; Jirsa and Clontz 1990; Stach,
Loiselle, and Jerger 1988). Comprehensive test batteries employing
distinct behavioral measures of auditory perception and auditory-
language skills, as well as selected electrophysiologic measures, may
assist in clarifying the relationships among CAPD, attention deficit
disorders, and learning disabilities. Brain imaging may also offer new
opportunities to reveal brain dysfunction (Duffy and McAnulty 1985;
Finitzo and Pool 1987; Hynd, Semrud-Clikeman, and Lyytinen 1991;
Kraus and McGee 1988).
The limited database pertaining to the relationship between central
auditory test results and neurologic and functional deficits in children
complicates interpretation of test results (Keith and Jerger 1991).
Positive neurologic findings are uncommon in children with CAPD
(Burd and Fisher 1986; Schain 1977; Willeford and Burleigh 1985;
Wright et al. 1982). Typically, however, one is not able to establish
whether diffuse neuromaturational disorder or maturational delay is
 

Page 238
the basis for observed functional deficits. Employing a comprehensive
test battery, including audiologic tests and measures (e.g., Pitch
Patterns Sequence test, dichotic speech) that reflect auditory
maturational status and electrophysiologic measures (e.g., middle-and
late-latency evoked potentials) that reveal neural synchrony may
suggest the etiologic basis for the observed CAPD.
Identifying and assessing central auditory processing deficits in
infants and toddlers are difficult given the task demands of behavioral
tests and incomplete understanding and application of
electrophysiologic and imaging techniques. Besides behavioral
observation of their responses to sound, auditory evoked potentials
(see chapter 7) and otoacoustic emissions (see chapter 8) provide
insight into the capacity of the central auditory nervous system in
infants (Northern and Downs 1991). Infants deemed at risk for central
nervous system damage should be monitored closely for early signs of
CAPD, focusing on speech and language developmental delays and
other minimal signs of neurologic dysfunction or damage.
Neurobehavioral assessment instruments, such as the Bayley Scales of
Infant Development, may provide a window on the maturity and
integrity of the central nervous system; however, such scales have
limited predictive value and do not specifically implicate CAPD
(Gibbs 1990).
Many tests and procedures are available for screening and assessing
central auditory function in preschool-aged and older children. Given
the common observation of selective attention deficits among children
with CAPD, several commercially available instruments have been
developed that incorporate a speech-in-noise or competing message
task (Cherry 1980; S. Jerger and J. Jerger 1984; Keith 1986).
Although some data are available, additional data must be collected
documenting the efficiency of these tests and procedures (Chermak,
O'Neill, and Seikel 1992; Stach 1992). Several checklists and

performance inventories are also available to elucidate the impact of
CAPD (Fisher 1980; Smoski et al. 1992).
Although norms for pediatric populations have not been published, a
compact disc containing materials for central auditory assessment
offers unprecedented acoustic-quality recordings of some
experimental and many clinically known test materials (Musiek,
Baran, and Pinheiro 1992). Included on the disc are speech masking
level differences, dichotic digits, dichotic sentence identification,
filtered words, frequency and duration pattern perception,
timecompressed speech, and timecompressed speech with
reverberation. These materialsand others designed specifically for
childrenmay offer greater opportunity to explore functional deficits
and resolve the etiologic basis for the heterogeneous manifestations of
CAPD in children.
References
Adams, J., E. Courchesne, R. Elmasian, and A. Lincoln. 1987.
Increased amplitude of the auditory P2 and P3b components in
adolescents with developmental dysphasia. In Elec-
 

Page 239
troencephalography and clinical neurophysiology: Current trends
in event-related potential research, ed. R. Johnson, J.W.
Rohrbaugh, and R. Parasuraman. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Allen, P., F. Wightman, D. Kistler, and T. Dolan. 1989. Frequency
resolution in children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
32:317-322.
American Psychiatric Association. 1987. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders. 3d ed. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychiatric Association.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1990. Guidelines
for screening for hearing impairments and middle ear disorders. Asha
(Suppl. 2) 32: 17-30.
.1992. Issues in central auditory processing disorders. Rockville,
MD: American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
.1993. Guidelines for audiology services in the schools. Asha (Suppl.
10) 35: 24-32.
Aoki, C., and P. Siekevitz. 1988. Plasticity in brain development.
Scientific American 2596: 56-64.
Arnst, D.J., and J. Katz. 1982. Central auditory assessment: The SSW
test-development and clinical use. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Baran, J.A., and F.E. Musiek. 1991. Behavioral assessment of the
central auditory nervous system. In Hearing assessment, 2d ed., ed.
by W.F. Rintelmann. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Baran, J.A., F.E. Musiek, and A.G. Reeves. 1986. Central auditory
function following anterior sectioning of the corpus callosum. Ear
and Hearing 7:359-362.

Barr, D.F. 1976. Auditory perceptual disorders. 2d ed. Springfield, II:
Charles C. Thomas.
Bayley, N. 1969. Bayley scales of infant development. New York:
Psychological Corporation.
Beasley, D.S., and B.A. Freeman. 1977. Time-altered speech as a
measure of central auditory processing. In Central auditory
dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith, New York: Grune and Stratton.
Beasley, D.S., J.E. Maki, and D.J. Orchik. 1975. Children's perception
of time-compressed speech using two measures of speech
discrimination. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:216-225.
Bench, J., Y. Collyer, L. Mentz, and I. Wilson. 1976. Studies in infant
behavioral audiometry. I. Neonates. Audiology 15:85-105.
Bennett, M.J., and L.A. Weatherby. 1982. Newborn acoustic reflexes
to noise and pure-tone signals. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 25:383-387.
Bergman, M., H. Costeff, V. Koren, N. Koifman, and A. Reshef.
1984. Auditory perception in early lateralized brain damage. Cortex
20:233-242.
Berlin, C.I., J.K. Cullen, Jr., L.F. Hughes, H.L. Berlin, S.S. Lowe-
Bell, and C.L. Thompson. 1975. Acoustic variables in dichotic
listening. In Proceedings of a symposium on central auditory
processing disorders, ed. M.D. Sullivan. Omaha: University of
Nebraska Medical Center.
Berlin, C.I., L.J. Hood, R.P. Cecola, D.F. Jackson, and P. Szabo. 1993.
Does type I afferent neuron dysfunction reveal itself through lack of
efferent suppression? Hearing Research 65:40-50.
Berlin C.I., L.F. Hughes, S.S. Lowe-Bell, and H.L. Berlin. 1973.
Dichotic right ear advantage in children 5 to 13. Cortex 9:394-402.

Berlin, C.I., S.S. Lowe-Bell, J.K. Cullen, Jr., S. Thompson, and C.
Loovis. 1973. Dichotic speech perception: An interpretation of right-
ear advantage and temporal offset effects. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 53:699-709.
 

Page 240
Berlin, C.I., S.S. Lowe-Bell, P.J. Jannetta, and D.G. Kline. 1972.
Central auditory deficits of temporal lobectomy. Archives of
Otolaryngology 96:4-10.
Berrick, J., G. Shubow, M. Schultz, H. Freed, S. Fournier, and J.
Hughes. 1984. Auditory processing tests for children: Normative and
clinical results on the SSW test. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 49:318-325.
Blake, P.E., and J.W. Hall III. 1990. The status of statewide policies
for neonatal hearing screening. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology 1:67-74.
Bocca, E. 1958. Clinical aspects of cortical deafness. Laryngoscope
68:301-309.
Bocca, E., and C. Calearo. 1963. Central hearing processes. In
Modern developments in audiology, ed. J. Jerger. New York:
Academic Press.
Bocca, E., C. Calearo, and V. Cassinari. 1954. A new method for
testing hearing in temporal lobe tumors: Preliminary report. Acta
OtoLaryngologica 44:219-221.
Bocca, E., C. Calearo, V. Cassinari, and F. Migliavacca. 1955. Testing
"cortical" hearing in temporal lobe tumors. Acta OtoLaryngologica
42:289-304.
Boder, E. 1973. Developmental dyslexia: A diagnostic approach based
on three atypical reading-spelling patterns. Developmental Medicine
and Child Neurology 15:663-687.
Bornstein, M.H., and M.D. Sigman. 1986. Continuity in mental
development from infancy. Child Development 57:251-274.
Bornstein, S.P., and F.E. Musiek. 1984. Implications of temporal

processing for children with learning and language problems, In
Audition in childhood: Methods of study, ed. D.S. Beasley and T.H.
Shriner. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
.1992. Recognition of distorted speech in children with and without
learning problems. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology
3:22-32.
Brazelton, T.B. 1984. Neonatal behavioral assessment scale. 2d ed.
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
Brooks-Gunn, J., and M. Lewis. 1983. Screening and diagnosing
handicapped infants. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education
3:14-28.
Burd, L., and W. Fisher. 1986. Central auditory processing disorder or
attention deficit disorder? Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics 7:215-216.
Calearo, C., and A.R. Antonelli. 1968. Audiometric findings in
brainstem lesions. Acta OtoLaryngologica 66:305-319.
Calearo, C., and A. Lazzaroni. 1957. Speech intelligibility in relation
to the speed of the message. Laryngoscope 67:410-419.
Campbell, T.F., and M.R. McNeil. 1985. Effects of presentation rate
and divided attention on auditory comprehension in children with an
acquired language disorder. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
28:513-520.
Chermak, G.D., and M.J. Montgomery. 1992. Form equivalence of
the selective auditory attention test administered to 6-year-old
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 35:661-665.
Chermak, G.D., and F.E. Musiek. 1992. Managing central auditory
processing disorders in children and youth. American Journal of
Audiology 1:61-65.

Chermak, G.D., S.A. O'Neill, and J.A. Seikel. 1992. Criterion validity
of the selective auditory attention test. Presented at annual convention
of the American Speech-LanguageHearing Association.
Chermak, G.D., M. Vonhof, and R.B. Bendel. 1989. Word
identification performance in the presence of competing speech and
noise in learning disabled adults. Ear and Hearing 10:90-93.
Cherry, R.S. 1980. Selective auditory attention test (SAAT). St. Louis:
Auditec.
 

Page 241
Churchland, P.S., and T.J. Sejnowski. 1988. Perspectives on cognitive
neuroscience. Science 242:741-746.
Cohen, M. and D. Prasher. 1988. The value of combining auditory
brainstem responses and acoustic reflex threshold measurements in
neuro-otological diagnosis. Scandinavian Audiology 17: 153-162.
Cohen, S.E., and A.H. Parmelee. 1983. Prediction of five-year
Stanford-Binet scores in preterm infants. Child Development 54:1241-
1253.
Cole, R., and J. Jakimik. 1980. A model of speech perception. In
Perception and production of fluent speech, ed. R. Cole. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collet, L., D.T. Kemp, E. Veuillet, R. Duclaux, A. Moulin, and A.
Morgon. 1990. Effect of contralateral auditory stimuli on active
cochlear micromechanical properties in human subjects. Hearing
Research 43:251-262.
Cooper, F.S., P.C. Delattre, A.M. Liberman, J. Borst, and L.
Gerstman. 1952. Some experiments on the perception of synthetic
speech sounds. journal of the Acoustical Society of America 24:597-
606.
Cullen, J.K., and C.L. Thompson. 1974. Masking release for speech in
subjects with temporal lobe resection. Archives of Otolaryngology
100:113-116.
Curati, W.L., M. Graif, D.P.E. Kingsley, T. King, C.L. Scholtz, and
R.E. Steiner. 1986. MRI in acoustic neuroma: A review of 35 patients.
Neuroradiology 28:208-214.
Cutler, A., and D. Norris. 1988. The role of strong syllables in
segmentation for lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 14: 113-121.

D'Souza, S.W., E. McCartney, M. Nolan, and I.G. Taylor. 1981.
Hearing, speech and language in survivors of severe perinatal
asphyxia. Archives of Diseases in Children 56: 245-252.
Dalebout, S., N. Nelson, P. Hletko, and B. Frentheway. 1991.
Selective auditory attention and children with attention-deficit
disorder: Effects of repeated measurement with and without
methylphenidate. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
22:219-228.
Dayal, V.S., L. Tarantino, and L.P. Swisher. 1966. Neurootologic
studies in multiple sclerosis. Laryngoscope 76:1798-1809.
Dempsey, C. 1983. Selecting tests of auditory function in children. In
Central auditory processing disorders: Problems of speech, language
and learning, ed. E.Z. Lasky and J. Katz. Baltimore: University Park
Press.
Dermody, P., R. Katsch, and K. Mackey. 1983. Auditory processing
limitations in low verbal children: Evidence from a two-response
dichotic listening task. Ear and Hearing 4: 272-277.
Diefendorf, A.O. 1981. An investigation of one aspect of central
auditory function in an infant population utilizing a binaural
resynthesis fusion task. Ph.D. diss., University of Washington.
Duffy, F.H., J. Burchfield, and C. Lombroso. 1979. Brain electrical
activity mapping. BEAM: A method for extending the clinical utility
of EEG and evoked potential data. Annals of Neurology 5:309-321.
Duffy, F.H., M.B. Denckla, R.H. Bartell, and G. Sandini. 1980.
Dyslexia: Regional differences in brain electrical activity by
topographic mapping. Annals of Neurology 5:412-420.
Duffy, F.H., and G.B. McAnulty. 1985. Brain electrical activity in
mapping. BEAM: The search for a physiology signature of dyslexia.
In Dyslexia: A neuroscientific approach to clinical evaluation, ed.

F.H. Duffy and N. Geschwind. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
 

Page 242
Durlach, N.I., and H.S. Colburn. 1978. Binaural phenomena. In
Handbook of perception, vol. 4., ed. E.C. Carterette and M.F.
Friedman. Orlando: Academic Press.
Eilers, R.E., W.R. Wilson, and J.M. Moore. 1977. Developmental
changes in speech discrimination in infants. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 20:766-780.
Elliott, L.L. 1979. Performance of children 9 to 17 years on a test of
speech intelligibility in noise using sentence material with controlled
word predictability. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
66:651-653.
.1986. Discrimination and response bias for CV syllables differing in
voice onset time among children and adults. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 80:1250-1255.
Elliott, L.L., and M. Hammer. 1988. Longitudinal changes in auditory
discrimination in normal children and children with language-learning
problems. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 53:467-474.
Elliot, L.L., and D. Katz. 1980. Development of a new children's test
of speech discrimination. St. Louis: Auditec.
Farrer, S., and R. Keith. 198 1. Filtered word testing in the assessment
of children's central auditory abilities. Ear and Hearing 2:267-269.
Feagans, L.V., M. Sanyal, F. Henderson, A. Collier, and M.
Applebaum. 1987. Relationship of middle ear disease in early
childhood to later narrative and additional skills. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology 12:581-594.
Ferre, J.M., and L.A. Wilber. 1986. Normal and learning disabled
children's central auditory processing skills: An experimental test
battery. Ear and Hearing 7:336-343.

Ferry, P.C. 1981. Neurological considerations in children with
learning disabilities. In Central auditory and learning disorders in
children, ed. R.W. Keith. Houston: College-Hill Press.
Fifer, R.C., J.F. Jerger, C.I. Berlin, E.A. Tobey, and J.C. Campbell.
1983. Development of a dichotic sentence identification test for
hearing-impaired adults. Ear and Hearing 4: 300-305.
Finitzo, T., and K.D. Pool. 1987. Brain electrical activity mapping.
Asha 29:21-25.
Fisher, L. 1980. Fisher's auditory problems checklist. Cedar Rapids,
IA: Grant Wood.
Freeman, B., and D. Beasley. 1978. Performance of reading-impaired
and normal reading children on time-compressed monosyllabic and
sentential stimuli. Paper presented at annual meeting of the American
Speech and Hearing Association.
Frumkin, N.L., E.J. Potchen, A.S. Aniskiewicz, J.B. Moore, and P.A.
Cooke. 1989. Potential impact of magnetic resonance imaging on the
field of communication disorders. Asha 31:95-99.
Fujisaki, H., K. Nakamura, and T. Imoto. 1975. Auditory perception
of duration of speech and nonspeech stimuli. In Auditory analysis and
perception of speech, ed. G. Fant and M. Tatham. New York:
Academic Press.
Galaburda, A., G. Sherman, G. Rosen, F. Aboitiz, and N. Geschwind.
1985. Developmental dyslexia: Four consecutive patients with cortical
anomalies. Annals of Neurology 18: 222-233.
Garstecki, D., C.L. Hutton, M.A. Nerbonne, C.W. Newman, and W.J.
Smoski. 1990. Case study examples using self-assessment. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl.) 11 :48S-56S.
Gascon, G.G., R. Johnson, and L. Burd. 1986. Central auditory
processing and attention deficit disorders. Journal of Child Neurology

1 :27-33.
Gerber, S.E., E. Wile, and N.T. Hamai. 1985. Central auditory
dysfunction in deaf children. Human Communication 9:39-44.
Gibbs, E.D. 1990. Assessment of infant mental ability: Conventional
tests and issues of pre-
 

Page 243
diction. In Interdisciplinary assessment of infants: A guide for early
intervention professionals, ed. E.D. Gibbs and D.M. Teti.
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Gillberg, C., U. Rosenhall, and E. Johansson. 1983. Auditory
brainstem responses in children. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 13:181 - 195.
Goodglass, H. 1967. Binaural digit presentation and early lateral brain
damage. Cortex 3:295-306.
Grandori, F. 1986. Field analysis of auditory evoked brainstem
potentials. Hearing Research 21:51-58.
Gravel, J.S., and I.F. Wallace. 1992. Listening and language at four
years of age: Effects of early otitis media. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 35:588-595.
Greisen, D., and P. Rasmussen. 1970. Stapedius muscle reflexes and
otoneurological examinations in brain stem tumors. Acta Oto-
Laryngologica 70:366-370.
Gunnarson, A.D., and T. Finitzo. 1991. Conductive hearing loss in
infancy: Effects on later auditory brain stem electrophysiology.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34: 1207-1215.
Hall, J.W., III. 1992. Handbook of auditory evoked responses. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
Hall, J.W., III, and J.H. Grose. 1990. The masking-level difference in
children. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 1:81 - 88.
.1991. Notched-noise measures of frequency selectivity in adults and
children using fixed-masker-level and fixed-signal-level presentation.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34:651-660.
Harris, R. 1963. Central auditory functions in children. Perceptual

and Motor Skills 16: 207-214.
Harris, V., R. Keith, and K. Novak. 1983. Relationship between two
dichotic listening tests and the token test for children. Ear and
Hearing 4:278-282.
Hassmannova, J., J. Myslivecek, and V. Novakova. 1981. Effects of
early auditory stimulation on cortical areas. In Neuronal mechanisms
of hearing, ed. J. Syka and L. Aitkin. New York: Plenum Press.
Hedrick, D., E. Prather, and A. Tobin. 1984. Sequenced inventory of
communication development. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
Heilman, K.M., L.C. Hammer, and B.J. Wilder. 1973. An audiometric
defect in temporal lobe dysfunction. Neurology 23:384-386.
Hier, D.B., M. LeMay, P.B. Rosenberger, and V.P. Perlo. 1978.
Developmental dyslexia: Evidence for a subgroup with a reversal of
cerebral asymmetry. Archives of Neurology 35:90-92.
Hirsh, I.J. 1959. Auditory perception of temporal order. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 31 :759-767.
.1967. Information processing in input channels for speech and
language: The significance of serial order of stimuli. In Brain
mechanisms underlying speech and language, ed. C.H. Millikan and
F.L. Darley. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Honzik, M.P. 1976. Value and limitations of infant tests: An overview.
In Origins of intelligence, ed. M. Lewis. New York: Plenum Press.
Hubatch, L.M., C.J. Johnson, D.J. Kistler, W.J. Burns, and W.
Moneka. 1985. Early language abilities of high-risk infants. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Disorders 50:195-207.
Hynd, G.W., J. Obrzut, W. Weed, and C. Hynd. 1979. Development of
cerebral dominance: Dichotic listening asymmetry in normal and

learning-disabled children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
28:445-454.
 

Page 244
Hynd, G.W., and M. Semrud-Clikeman. 1989. Dyslexia and brain
morphology. Psychological Bulletin 106:447-482.
Hynd, G.W., M. Semrud-Clikeman, A.R. Lorys, E.S. Novey, and D.
Eliopulos. 1990. Brain morphology in developmental dyslexia,
attention deficit disorder/hyperactivity. Archives of Neurology 47:919-
926.
Hynd, G.W., M. Semrud-Clikeman, and H. Lyytinen. 1991. Brain
imaging in learning disabilities. In Neuropsychological foundations of
learning disabilities, ed. J.E. Obrzut and G.W. Hynd. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Jerger, J. 1960a. Audiological manifestations of lesions in the auditory
nervous system. Laryngoscope 70:417-425.
.1960b. Observations on auditory behavior in lesions of the central
auditory pathways. Archives of Otolaryngology 71:797-806.
.1975. Diagnostic use of impedance measures. In Handbook of
clinical impedance audiometry, ed. J. Jerger. Dobbs Ferry, NY:
American Electromedics Corp.
Jerger, J., L. Anthony, S. Jerger, and L. Mauldin. 1974. Studies in
impedance audiometry: Middle ear disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99:165-171.
Jerger, J., P. Burney, L. Mauldin, and B. Crump. 1974. Predicting
hearing loss from the acoustic reflex. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 39: 11 -22.
Jerger, J., and D. Hayes. 1977. Diagnostic speech audiometry.
Archives of Otolaryngology 103:216-222.
Jerger, J., and S. Jerger. 1971. Diagnostic significance of PB word
function. Archives of Otolaryngology 93:573-580.

.1974. Auditory findings in brain stem disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99: 342-350.
.1975. Clinical validity of central auditory tests. Scandinavian
Audiology 4: 147-163.
.1977. Diagnostic value of crossed versus uncrossed acoustic reflexes:
Eighth nerve and brainstem disorders. Archives of Otolaryngology
103:445-450.
Jerger, J., K. Johnson, S. Jerger, N. Coker, F. Pirozzolo, and L. Gray.
1991. Central auditory processing disorder: A case study. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 2: 36-54.
Jerger, J., and J.L. Northern. 1980. Clinical impedance audiometry.
Acton, MA: American Electromedics Corp.
Jerger, J., C. Speaks, and J. Trammel. 1968. A new approach to
speech audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 33:318-
328.
Jerger, J., N. Weikers, F. Sharbrough, and S. Jerger. 1969. Bilateral
lesions of the temporal lobe: A case study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
(Suppl.) 258:1-51.
Jerger, S. 1980. Evaluation of central auditory function in children. In
Central auditory and language disorders in children, ed. R.W. Keith.
Houston: College-Hill Press.
.1983. Decision matrix and information theory analyses in the
evaluation of neuroaudiological tests. Seminars in Hearing 4:121 -
132.
.1987. Validation of the pediatric speech intelligibility test in children
with central nervous system lesions. Audiology 26:298-311.
Jerger, S., and J. Jerger. 1983. Evaluation of diagnostic audiometric
tests. Audiology 22:144-161.

.1984. Pediatric speech intelligibility test: Manual for administration.
St. Louis: Auditec.
 

Page 245
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, and S. Abrams. 1983. Speech audiometry in the
young child. Ear and Hearing 4:56-66.
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, B.R. Alford, and S. Abrams. 1983. Development
of speech intelligibility in children with recurrent otitis media. Ear
and Hearing 4: 138-145.
Jerger, S., K. Johnson, and L. Loiselle. 1988. Pediatric central
auditory dysfunction: Comparison of children with confirmed lesions
versus suspected processing disorders. American Journal of Otology
9:63-71.
Jerger, S., R. Martin, and J. Jerger. 1987. Specific auditory perceptual
dysfunction in a learning disabled child. Ear and Hearing 8:78-86.
Jerger, S., and R. Zeller. 1989. Dichotic listening in a child with a
cerebral lesion: The ''paradoxical'' ipsilateral ear deficit. Ear and
Hearing 10:167-172.
Jirsa, R.E. 1992. The clinical utility of the P3 AERP in children with
auditory processing disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 35:903-912.
Jirsa, R.E., and K.B. Clontz. 1990. Long latency auditory event-
related potentials from children with auditory processing disorders.
Ear and Hearing 11:222-232.
Johnson, D., M. Enfield, and R. Sherman. 1981. The use of the
staggered spondaic word test and the competing environmental
sounds test in the evaluation of central auditory function in hearing
disabled children. Ear and Hearing 2:70-77.
Kalil, R.E. 1989. Synapse formation in the developing brain.
Scientific American 2616: 76-85.
Katz, J. 1962. The use of staggered spondaic words for assessing the

integrity of the central auditory system. Journal of Auditory Research
2:327-337.
.1970. Audiologic diagnosis: Cochlea to cortex. Menorah Medical
Journal 1:25-38.
.1983. Phonemic synthesis. In Central auditory processing disorders:
Problems of speech, language, and learning, ed. E.Z. Lasky and J.
Katz. Baltimore: University Park Press.
.1992. Classification of auditory processing disorders. In Central
auditory processing: A transdisciplinary view, ed. J. Katz, N.A.
Stecker, and D. Henderson. St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
.1994. Handbook of clinical audiology. 4th ed. Baltimore: Williams
and Wilkins.
Katz, J., R.A. Basil, and J.M. Smith. 1963. A staggered spondaic word
test for detecting central auditory lesions. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology 72:906-917.
Katz, J., and R. Illmer. 1972. Auditory perception in children with
learning disabilities. In Handbook of clinical audiology, ed. J. Katz.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Katz, J., D. Kushner, and G. Pack. 1975. The use of competing speech
SSW and environmental sounds: CES tests for localizing brain
lesions. Presented at annual convention of the American Speech and
Hearing Association.
Katz, J., and L. Wilde. 1985. Auditory perceptual disorders in
children. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Kaufman, N.L. 1980. Review of research on reversal errors.
Perceptual and Motor Skills 51:55-79.
Keith, R.W. 1981a. Audiological and auditory-language tests of

central auditory function. In Central auditory and language disorders
in children, ed. R.W. Keith. Houston: College-Hill Press.
.1981b. Tests of central auditory function. In Auditory disorders in
school children, ed. R.J. Roeser and M.P. Downs. New York: Thieme-
Stratton, Inc.
 

Page 246
.1983. Interpretation of the staggered spondee word (SSW) test. Ear
and Hearing 4:287-292.
.1986. SCAN: A screening test for auditory processing disorders. San
Antonio: Psychological Corp.
.1988. Central auditory tests. In Handbook of speech, language
pathology, and audiology, ed. N.J. Lass, L.V. McReynolds, and J.L.
Northern. Philadelphia: B.C. Decker.
Keith, R.W., ed. 1977. Central auditory dysfunction. New York:
Grune and Stratton.
Keith, R.W., and P. Engineer. 1991. Effects of methylphenidate on the
auditory processing abilities of children with attention deficit-
hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Learning Disabilities 24:630-363.
Keith, R.W., and S. Jerger. 1991. Central auditory disorders. In
Diagnostic audiology, ed. J.T. Jacobson and J.L. Northern. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Keith, R.W., J. Rudy, P.A. Donahue, and B. Katbamna. 1989.
Comparison of SCAN results with other auditory and language
measures in a clinical population. Ear and Hearing 10:382-386.
Keller, W.D. 1992. Auditory processing disorder or attention-deficit
disorder? In Central auditory processing: A transdisciplinary view,
ed. J. Katz, N.A. Stecker, and D. Henderson. St. Louis: Mosby Year
Book.
Kemp, D.T., P. Bray, L. Alexander, and A.M. Brown. 1986. Acoustic
emission cochleography: Practical aspects. Scandinavian Audiology
Supplementum n 25:71-96.
Kimura, D. 1961a. Cerebral dominance and the perception of verbal
stimuli. Canadian Journal of Psychology 15: 166-171.

.1961b. Some effects of temporal lobe damage on auditory perception.
Canadian Journal of Psychology 15: 157-165.
.1964. Left-right differences in the perception of melodies. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 14:355-358.
Kinsbourne, M. 1973. Minimal brain dysfunction as a
neurodevelopmental lag. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
205:268-273.
Kraus, N., and T. McGee. 1988. Color imaging of the human middle
latency response. Ear and Hearing 9:159-167.
Kraus, N., O. Ozdamar, L. Stein, and N. Reed. 1984. Absent auditory
brain stem response: Peripheral hearing loss or brain stem
dysfunction? Laryngoscope 94:400-406.
Kreul, J., J. Nixon, K. Kryter, D. Bell, S. Lang, and E. Schubert. 1968.
A proposed clinical test of speech discrimination. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research 11:536-552.
Kurdziel, S., D. Noffsinger, and W. Olsen. 1976. Performance by
cortical lesion patients on 40% and 60% time-compressed materials.
Journal of the American Audiological Society 2:3-7.
Lashley, K.S. 1951. The problem of serial order in behavior. In
Cerebral mechanisms in behavior, ed. L.A. Jeffress. New York: Wiley.
Lasky, E.Z., and J. Katz, eds. 1983. Central auditory processing
disorders. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Lasky, E.Z., and H. Tobin. 1973. Linguistic and nonlinguistic
competing message effects. Journal of Learning Disabilities 6:243-
250.
Liberman, A. 1970. The grammars of speech and language. Cognitive
Psychology 1:301.
Linden, A. 1964. Distorted speech and binaural speech resynthesis

tests. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 58:32-48.
 

Page 247
Lubert, N. 1981. Auditory perceptual impairments in children with
specific language disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
46:3-9.
Luce, P. 1986. Neighborhoods of words in the mental lexicon:
Research on speech perception. Technical Report no. 6. Bloomington:
Indiana University Department of Psychology, Speech Research
Laboratory.
Lukas, R.A., and J. Guenchur-Lukas. 1985. Spondaic word tests. In
Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Lynn, G.E., and J. Gilroy. 1972. Neuroaudiological abnormalities in
patients with temporal lobe tumors. Journal of Neurological Sciences
17:167-184.
.1975. Effects of brain lesions on the perception of monotic and
dichotic speech stimuli. In Proceedings of symposium on central
auditory processing disorders, ed. H. Sullivan. Omaha: University of
Nebraska Medical Center.
.1977. Evaluation of central auditory dysfunction in patients with
neurological disorders. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W.
Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Lynn, G.E., J. Gilroy, P.C. Taylor, and R.P. Leiser. 1981. Binaural
masking-level differences in neurological disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 107:357-362.
Manning, W., K. Johnston, and D. Beasley. 1977. The performance of
children with auditory perceptual disorders on a time-compressed
speech discrimination measure. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 42:77-84.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. 1987. Functional parallelism in spoken word-

recognition. Cognition 25:71-102.
Martin, F.N., and J.G. Clark. 1977. Audiologic detection of auditory
processing disorders in children. Journal of the American Audiology
Society 3:140-146.
Massaro, D.W. 1987. Speech perception by ear and eye: A paradigm
for psychological inquiry. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Matkin, N.D., and P.E. Hook. 1983. A multidisciplinary approach to
central auditory evaluations. In Central auditory processing
disorders: Problems of speech, language, and learning, ed. E.Z.
Lasky and J. Katz. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Matzker, J. 1959. Two methods for the assessment of central auditory
functions in cases of brain disease. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 68:1155-1197.
.1962. The binaural test. International Audiology 1:209-211.
Maxon, A.B., and I. Hochberg. 1982. Development of psychoacoustic
behavior: Sensitivity and discrimination. Ear and Hearing 3:301-308.
McCall, R.B. 1983. A conceptual approach to early mental
development. In Origins of intelligence, ed. M. Lewis. New York:
Plenum Press.
McClelland, J.L., and J.L. Elman. 1986. The TRACE model of speech
perception. Cognitive Psychology 18:1-86.
McMillan, P.M., M.J. Bennett, C.D. Marchant, and P. Shurin. 1985.
Ipsilateral and contralateral acoustic reflexes in neonates. Ear and
Hearing 6:320-324.
Mencher, G.T. 1985. Hearing screening programs and identification of
central auditory disorders. Human Communication 9:45-49.
Mikhael, M.A., I.S. Ciric, and A.P. Wolff. 1987. MR diagnosis of
acoustic neuromas. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography

11:232-235.
Milner, B., S. Taylor, and R. Sperry. 1968. Lateralized suppression of
dichotically presented digits after commissural section in man.
Science 161:184-185.
 

Page 248
Morales-Garcia, C., and J.O. Poole. 1972. Masked speech audiometry
in central deafness. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 74:307-316.
Morest, D.K. 1983. Degeneration in the brain following noise
exposure. In New perspectives in noise induced hearing loss, ed. R.P.
Hammernik, D. Henderson, and R.J. Salvi. New York: Raven Press.
Mott, J.B., S.T. Norton, S.T. Neely, and B. Warr. 1989. Changes in
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions produced by acoustic stimulation
of the contralateral ear. Hearing Research 38:229-242.
Mueller, H.G., W.G. Beck, and R.K. Sedge. 1987. Comparison of the
efficiency of cortical level speech tests. Seminars in Hearing 8:279-
298.
Musiek, F.E. 1983a. Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: The
dichotic digit test revisited. Ear and Hearing 4:79-83.
.1983b. The evaluation of brainstem disorders using ABR and central
auditory tests. Monographs in Contemporary Audiology 4:1-24.
.1983c. The results of three dichotic speech tests on subjects with
intracranial lesions. Ear and Hearing 4:318-323.
.1989. Probing brain function with acoustic stimuli. Asha 31:100-108.
Musiek, F.E., and J.A. Baran. 1987. Central auditory assessment:
Thirty years of challenge and change. Ear and Hearing 8:22S-35S.
Musiek, F.E., J.A. Baran, and M.L. Pinheiro. 1990. Duration pattern
recognition in normal subjects and patients with cerebral and cochlear
lesions. Audiology 29:304-313.
.1992. P300 results in patients with lesions of the auditory areas of the
cerebrum. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 3: 5-15.
Musiek, F.E., and G.D. Chermak. 1994. Three commonly asked

questions about central auditory processing disorders: Assessment.
American Journal of Audiology 3:23-27.
Musiek, F.E., and G.D. Chermak. 1995. Three commonly asked
questions about central auditory processing disorders: Management.
American Journal of Audiology 4: 15-18.
Musiek, F.E., and N.A. Geurkink. 1980. Auditory perceptual
problems in children: Considerations for the otolaryngologist and
audiologist. Laryngoscope 90:962-971.
.1982. Auditory brainstem response (ABR) and central auditory test
(CAT) findings for patients with brainstem lesions: A preliminary
report. Laryngoscope 92:891-900.
Musiek, F.E., N.A. Geurkink, and S. Keitel. 1982. Test battery
assessment of auditory perceptual dysfunction in children.
Laryngoscope 92:25 1 -257.
Musiek, F.E., and K.M. Gollegly. 1988. Maturational considerations
in the neuroauditory evaluation of children. In Hearing impairment in
children, ed. F.H. Bess. Parkton, MD: York Press.
Musiek, F.E., K.M. Gollegly, and J.A. Baran. 1984a. Myelination of
the corpus callosum and auditory processing problems in learning
disabled children: Theoretical and clinical correlates. Seminars in
Hearing 5:219-242.
.1984b. Myelination of the corpus callosum in learning disabled
children: Theoretical and clinical correlates. Seminars in Hearing
5:219-229.
Musiek, F.E., K.M. Gollegly, and M.K. Ross. 1985. Profiles of types
of central auditory processing disorders in children with learning
disabilities. Journal of Childhood Communication Disorders 9:43-61.
Musiek, F.E., and K. Kibbe. 1984. Audiologic test results in patients
with commissurotomy. In Epilepsy and the corpus callosum, ed. A.G.

Reeves. New York: Plenum Press.
 

Page 249
Musiek, F.E., S. Lenz, and K. Gollegly. 1991. Neuroaudiologic
correlates to anatomical changes of the brain. American Journal of
Audiology 1: 19-24.
Musiek, F.E., D. Noffsinger, R. Wilson, S. Bornstein, and C.
Martinez. 1992. Tonal and speech materials for central auditory
assessment. Presented at annual convention of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association. San Antonio, Texas.
Musiek, F.E., and M.L. Pinheiro. 1985. Dichotic speech tests in the
detection of central auditory dysfunction. In Assessment of central
auditory dysfunction: Foundations and clinical correlates, ed. M.L.
Pinheiro and F.E. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
.1987. Frequency patterns in cochlear, brainstem and cerebral lesions.
Audiology 26:79-88.
Musiek, F.E., M.L. Pinheiro, and D.H. Wilson. 1980. Auditory pattern
perception in "split brain" patients. Archives of Otolaryngology
106:610-6 12.
Musiek, F.E., S.B. Verkest, and K.M. Gollegly. 1988. Effects of
neuromaturation on auditoryevoked potentials. In Seminars in
hearing, ed. D.W. Worthington. New York: Thieme Medical
Publishers, Inc.
Musiek, F.E., D.J. Weider, and R.J. Mueller. 1983. Reversible
audiologic results in a patient with an extra-axial brain stem tumor.
Ear and Hearing 4:169-172.
Musiek, F.E., and D.H. Wilson. 1979. SSW and dichotic digit results
pre-and postcommissurotomy: A case report. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 44:528-533.
Musiek, F.E., D.H. Wilson, and M.L. Pinheiro. 1979. Audiological
manifestations in splitbrain patients. Journal of the American

Auditory Society 5:25-29.
Nass, R. 1984. Case report: Recovery and reorganization after
congenital unilateral brain damage. Perceptual and Motor Skills
59:867-874.
National Institutes of Health. 1993. Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11: 1-24. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health.
Neff, W.D. 1964. Temporal pattern discrimination in lower animals
and its relation to language perception in man. In Disorders of
language, ed. A.V.S. deRueck and M. O'Connor. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Newhoff, M., M.J. Cohen, G.W. Hynd, J.J. Gonzalez, and C.A.
Riccio. 1992. Etiological, educational and behavioral correlates of
ADHD and language disabilities. Presented at annual convention of
the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, San Antonio,
Texas.
Niccum, N., A. Rubens, and C. Speaks. 1981. Effects of stimulus
material on the dichotic listening performance of aphasic patients.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24:526-534.
Nodar, R.H., J. Hahn, and H.L. Levine. 1980. Brain stem auditory
evoked potentials in determining site of lesion of brain stem gliomas
in children. Laryngoscope 90:258-266.
Noffsinger, D. 1982. Clinical application of selected binaural effects.
Scandinavian Audiology Supplement 15:157-165.
Noffsinger, D., C.D. Martinez, and A.B. Schaefer. 1982. Auditory
brainstem responses and masking level differences from persons with
brainstem lesions. Scandinavian Audiology Supplement 15:81-93.
Noffsinger, D., W.O. Olsen, R. Carhart, C.W. Hart, and V. Sahgal.
1972. Auditory and vestibular aberrations in multiple sclerosis. Acta

Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl.) 303:1-63.
Northern, J.L. 1981. Impedance measurement in infants. In Early
management of hearing loss, ed. G.T. Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
 

Page 250
Northern, J.L., and M.P. Downs. 1991. Hearing in children. 4th ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Norton, S.J. 1993. Application of transient evoked otoacoustic
emissions to pediatric populations. Ear and Hearing 14:64-73.
Obrzut, J., G. Hynd, A. Obrzut, and F. Pirozzolo. 1981. Effects of
directed attention on cerebral asymmetries in normal and learning-
disabled children. Developmental Psychology 17:118-125.
Obrzut, J., W. Weed, and C. Hynd. 1979. Development of cerebral
dominance: Dichotic listening asymmetry in normal and learning-
disabled children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 28:445-
454.
Ohta, F., R. Hayashi, and M. Morimoto. 1967. Differential diagnosis
of retrocochlear deafness: Binaural fusion test and binaural separation
test. International Audiology 6: 58-62.
Olsen, W.O., and D. Noffsinger. 1976. Masking level differences for
cochlear and brain stem lesions. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 85:820-825.
Olsen, W.O., D. Noffsinger, and R. Carhart. 1976. Masking level
differences encountered in clinical populations. Audiology 15:287-
301.
Olsen, W.O., D. Noffsinger, and S. Kurdziel. 1975. Speech
discrimination in quiet and in white noise by patients with peripheral
and central lesions. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 80:375-382.
Pickles, J.O. 1982. An introduction to the physiology of hearing. New
York: Academic Press.
Picton, T.W., D.L. Woods, J. Baribeau-Braun, and T.L. Healey. 1977.
Evoked potential audiometry. Journal of Otolaryngology 6:90-119.

Pinheiro, M.L. 1977. Tests of central auditory function in children
with learning disabilities. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W.
Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Pinheiro, M.L., G.P. Jacobson, and F. Boller. 1982. Auditory
dysfunction following a gunshot wound of the pons. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 47:296-300.
Pinheiro, M.L., and F.E. Musiek. 1985. Sequencing and temporal
ordering in the auditory system. In Assessment of central auditory
dysfunction: Foundations and clinical correlates, ed. M. Pinheiro and
F. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Pinheiro, M.L., and F.E. Musiek, eds. 1985. Assessment of central
auditory dysfunction. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Pohl, P. 1979. Dichotic listening in a child recovering from acquired
aphasia. Brain and Language 8:372-379.
Protti, E. 1983. Brainstem auditory pathways and auditory processing
disorders: Diagnostic implications of subjective and objective tests. In
Central auditory processing disorders, ed. E. Lasky and J. Katz.
Baltimore: University Park Press.
Rauschecker, J.P., and P. Marler. 1987. Cortical plasticity and
imprinting: Behavioral and physiological contrasts and parallels. In
Imprinting and cortical plasticity, ed. J.P. Rauschecker and P. Marler.
New York: John Wiley.
Rintelmann, W.F., and G.E. Lynn. 1983. Speech stimuli for
assessment of central auditory disorders. In Principles of speech
audiometry, ed. D.F. Konkle and W.F. Rintelmann. Baltimore:
University Park Press.
Roberts, J.E., M.R. Burchinal, B.P. Davis, A.M. Collier, and F.W.
Henderson. 1991. Otitis media in early childhood and later language.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34:1158-1168.

Robertson, D., and D.R.F. Irvine. 1989. Plasticity of frequency
organization in auditory cor-
 

Page 251
tex of guinea pigs with partial unilateral deafness. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 282:456-471.
Roeser, R., K. Millay, and J. Morrow. 1983. Dichotic consonant-
vowel (cv) perception in normal and learning-impaired children. Ear
and Hearing 4:293-299.
Rosenberger, P., and D. Hier. 1980. Cerebral asymmetry and verbal
intellectual deficits. Annals of Neurology 8:300-304.
Ross, M. and J. Lerman. 1971. Word intelligibility by picture
identification. Pittsburgh: Stanwix House.
Roush, J., and C.A. Tait. 1984. Binaural fusion, masking level
differences, and auditory brain stem responses in children with
language-learning disabilities. Ear and Hearing 5: 37-41.
Salvia, J., and J.E. Ysseldyke. 1981. Assessment in special and
remedial education. 2d ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Sanderson-Leepa, M.E., and W.F. Rintelmann. 1976. Articulation
function and test-retest performance of normal-hearing children on
three speech discrimination tests: WIPI, PBK 50, and NU auditory
test no. 6. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41: 503-519.
Schain, R. 1977. Neurology of childhood learning disorders. 2d ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Schlaggar, B.L., and D.D.M. O'Leary. 1991. Potential of visual cortex
to develop an array of functional units unique to somatosensory
cortex. Science 252: 1556-1560.
Schmitt, B.D. 1975. The minimal brain dysfunction myth. American
Journal of Diseases of Children 129:1313-1318.
Shimizu, H., and F. Brown. 1981. ABR in children with MBD.
Presented at annual convention of the American Speech-Language-

Hearing Association, Los Angeles.
Silman, S., and C.A. Silverman. 1991. Auditory diagnosis: Principles
and applications. San Diego: Academic Press.
Sloan, C. 1980. Auditory processing disorders and language
development. In Auditory processing and language: Clinical and
research perspectives, ed. P.J. Levinson and C. Sloan, 101-115. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
Smoski, W.J. 1990. Use of CHAPPS in a children's audiology clinic.
Ear and Hearing (Suppl.) 11:53-56.
Smoski, W.J., M.A. Brunt, and C. Tannahill. 1992. Listening
characteristics of children with central auditory processing disorders.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 23:145-152.
Sohmer, H., and M. Student. 1978. Auditory nerve and brainstem
evoked responses in normal, autistic, minimal brain dysfunction and
psychomotor retarded children. Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology 44:380-388.
Sommers, R.K., and M.L. Taylor. 1972. Cerebral speech dominance
in language-disorderd and normal children. Cortex 8:224-232.
Sparks, R., and N. Geschwind. 1968. Dichotic listening in man after
section of neocortical commissures. Cortex 4:3-16.
Speaks, C., T. Gray, J. Miller, and A. Rubens. 1975. Central auditory
deficits and temporallobe lesions. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 40: 192-205.
Speaks, C., and J. Jerger. 1965. Method for measurement of speech
identification. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 8:185-194.
Speaks, C., N. Niccum, and D. van Tassel. 1985. Effects of stimulus
material on the dichotic

 

Page 252
listening performance of patients with sensorineural hearing loss.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 18:16-25.
Sprague, B.H., T.L. Wiley, and R. Goldstein. 1985. Tympanometric
and acoustic reflex studies in neonates. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 28:265-272.
Squires, K., and K. Hecox. 1983. Electrophysiological evaluation of
higher level auditory processing. Seminars in Hearing 4:415-432.
Stach, B.A. 1992. Controversies in the screening of central auditory
processing disorders. In Screening children for auditory function, ed.
F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Stach, B.A., L.H. Loiselle, and J.F. Jerger. 1988. Auditory evoked
potential abnormalities in children with central auditory disorder.
Asha 30:133 (abstract).
Stephens, S., and A. Thornton. 1976. Subjective and
electrophysiologic tests in brainstem lesions. Archives of
Otolaryngology 102:608-613.
Stubblefield, J., and C. Young. 1975. Central auditory dysfunction in
learning-disabled children. Journal of Learning Disabilities 8:32-37.
Sussman, J.E. 1991. Stimulus ratio effects on speech discrimination
by children and adults. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
34:671-678.
Sweetow, R., and R. Reddell. 1978. The use of masking level
differences in the identification of children with perceptual problems.
Journal of the American Auditory Society 4: 52-56.
Swisher, L., and I. Hirsh. 1972. Brain damage and the ordering of two
temporally successive stimuli. Neuropsychologia 10:137-152.
Tallal, P. 1985. Neuropsychological research approaches to the study

of central auditory processing. Human Communication 9 (Part 1): 17-
22.
Tallal, P., and M. Piercy. 1973. Developmental aphasia: Impaired rate
of nonverbal processing as a function of sensory modality.
Neuropsychologia 11:389-398.
.1974. Developmental aphasia: Rate of auditory processing and
selective impairment of consonant perception. Neuropsychologia
12:83-94.
.1975. Developmental aphasia: The perception of brief vowels and
extended consonants. Neuropsychologia 13:69-74.
Teatini, G.P. 1970. Sensitized speech tests: Results in normal subjects.
In Speech audiometry, ed. C. Rojskjaer. Odense: Danavox.
Thoman, E.B., and P.T. Becker. 1979. Issues in assessment and
prediction for the infant born at risk. In Infants born at risk, ed. T.
Field. Jamaica, NY: Spectrum.
Tobey, E.A., and J.K. Cullen, Jr. 1984. Temporal integration of tone
glides by children with auditory-memory and reading problems.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27: 527-533.
Tokioka, A.B., D.H. Crowell, and J.W. Pierce. 1987.
Electrophysiological investigation of cognition in infants. In Thinking
across cultures: The third international conference on thinking, ed.
D.M. Topping, D.C. Crowell, and V.N. Kobayashi. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Turner, R.G., and D.W. Nielsen. 1984. Application of clinical decision
analysis to audiological tests. Ear and Hearing 5: 125-133.
Warren, R.M. 1983. Multiple meanings of "phoneme": Articulatory,
acoustic, perceptual, graphemic, and their confusions. In Speech and
language: Advances in basic research and practice, vol. 9., ed. N.J.
Lass. New York: Academic Press.

 

Page 253
Webster, D.B., and M. Webster. 1977. Neonatal sound deprivation
affects brainstem auditory nuclei. Archives of Otolaryngology
103:392-396.
Werner, L.A. 1992. Interpreting developmental psychoacoustics. In
Developmental psychoacoustics, ed. L.A. Werner and E.W. Rubel.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
White, E.J. 1977. Children's performance on the SSW test and
Willeford battery: Interim clinical data. In Central auditory
dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Willeford, J.A. 1976. Differential diagnosis of central auditory
dysfunction. In Audiology: An audio journal for continuing education,
vol. 2, ed. L. Bradford. New York: Grune and Stratton.
.1977. Assessing central auditory behavior in children: A test battery
approach. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith. New York:
Grune and Stratton.
1978. Sentence tests of central auditory function. In Handbook of
clinical audiology, 2d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.
.1980. Central auditory behaviors in learning disabled children.
Seminars in Speech Language and Hearing 1:127-140.
.1985. Assessment of central auditory disorders in children. In
Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: Foundations and clinical
correlates, ed. M.L. Pinheiro and F.E. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams
and Wilkins.
Willeford, J.A., and J.M. Billger. 1985. Auditory perception in
children with learning disabilities. In Handbook of clinical audiology,
3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.

Willeford, J.A., and J.M. Burleigh. 1985. Handbook of central
auditory processing disorders in children. Orlando: Grune and
Stratton.
Willott, J.F., R.M. Demuth, and S.M. Lu. 1984. Excitability of
auditory neurons in the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei of DBA/2
and C57BL/6 mice. Experimental Neurology 83:495-506.
Willows, D.M., J.R. Kershner, and E. Corcos. 1986. Visual processing
and visual memory in reading and writing disabilities: A rationale for
reopening a "closed case." Paper presented at symposium, The Role
of Visual Processing and Visual Memory in Reading and Writing.
Annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
April, San Francisco.
Wilson, W.R., and G. Thompson. 1984. Behavioral audiometry. In
Pediatric audiology: Current trends, ed. J. Jerger. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
Witkin, B.R. 1971. Auditory perception: Implications for language
development. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
4:31-52.
World Health Organization. 1971. Mass health examinations. Public
Health Papers no. 45: 81-82. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Worthington, D. 1981. ABR in special populations. Paper presented at
ABR workshop, Cleveland, Ohio.
Wright, F., R. Schain, W. Weinberg, and R. Ischelle. 1982. Learning
disabilities and associated conditions. In The practice of pediatric
neurology, ed. K. Swaiman and F. Wright. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby.
Yellin, M.W., J.F. Jerger, and R.C. Fifer. 1983. Norms for
disproportionate loss in speech intelligibility. Presented at American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association convention, Cincinnati.

 

Page 254
10
Amplification
Dale O. Robinson and Frances Eldis
The goal of this chapter is to present the reader with practical
information concerning the provision for and management of
amplification with real children encountered in real clinical settings.
We are interested in sharing our experiences in a way that is helpful to
the working clinician by bringing together the theoretical selection
and fitting procedures taught in the classroom or workshop with the
reality of clinical application. This is not an attempt to present a
technical or academic review of the many fine hearing aid selection
procedures detailed in the literature. Those are best presented by the
original authors. Several excellent overviews of selection procedures
can be found in texts such as those by Hodgson (1986), Mueller,
Hawkins, and Northern (1992), Pollack (1988), and Skinner (1988),
and in professional journals.
The Hearing Aid Selection
Once a child is identified as hearing impaired, it is critical that an
intervention program be initiated. A key component of this is the
selection of appropriate amplification. Through amplification the child
will have an opportunity to hear spoken language and speech and have
contact with the world of sound. Even profoundly hearing-impaired
children, who may never receive speech, may benefit from
amplification to help them make contact with the acoustic
environment. Therefore, the hearing aid selection process is a critical
step in habilitation.
Accurate measurement of hearing in children requires extensive

experience with the pediatric population. Often, the audiologist must
make clinical decisions that may not be based on documented
responses. In the hands of an inexperienced individual, this could be a
catastrophe. The same is true for hearing aid selection procedures. A
large percentage of children in the clinical setting will not be able to
tolerate the probe tube for real ear measurements, for example. There
is no substitute for competent clinical judgment in the hands of an
audiologist experienced in working with children.
 

Page 255
We believe that the hearing aid selection process for children consists
of three elements: (1) choosing the most appropriate type of earmolds;
(2) selecting the instrument that best meets the hearing-impaired
child's needs; and (3) involving the parent or caregiver in the process
from the beginning. It is our opinion that parental involvement is
critical to the successful use of hearing aids and to a successful
habilitation program.
This introduction is presented to help lay the groundwork for the
discussion of hearing aid selection procedures. The primary purpose
of fitting any type of amplification is to improve the child's
communication ability; in fact, the hearing aid has become the central
point around which all other aspects of auditory habilitation are
planned. Traditionally, hearing aid selection and fitting procedures
have relied on clinical measures of communicative ability that
involved the application of some type of speech material that requires
a voluntary response from the patient. The results of these measures
provide data that help the audiologist in making the final
recommendation of amplification devices.
The major challenge in selecting and fitting hearing aids for hearing-
impaired children is the children's ability to cooperate in the process.
Frequently, that ability is significantly limited for reasons of age,
maturation, development, multiplicity of impairments, or the degree
of hearing loss. Although reasons may be age related, this is not
always the case. For example, a child may be fifteen years of age
chronologically but unable to participate in customary hearing aid
selection procedures because of cognitive difficulties, severity of the
hearing loss, age of onset, quality and quantity of educational
intervention, or other factors. Nevertheless, a child of fifteen years
cannot and should not be managed in the same manner as a six-year-
old child with similar problems affecting the ability to cooperate.

Some generalizations can be made based on age, and we attempt to do
so in this chapter. Deviations from the usual, however, are many and
significant. In addition, those features deemed important in hearing
aid selection and fitting procedures are normally not tied to a specific
age group.
The first challenge for the audiologist is to realize that each child is an
individual, one who is very likely to need an approach or procedure
different from the last child or the next. Flexibility, extensive technical
knowledge, and a high level of expertise with children are therefore
critical requirements for the audiologist. As audiologists we must be
equipped and able to apply both objective and functional measures,
often in nonstandard ways, to select and fit hearing aids for children
successfully.
Functioning within one's clinical ''means'' is an important but often
overlooked pragmatic of the real world. Audiology services are
offered to children in a variety of settings with varied and, almost
always, limited instrumentation. The minimum equipment needed for
hearing aid selections must allow for testing in a soundfield
environment for presentation of speech material and frequency-
modulated pure tones as well as equipment for immittance
measurements, electroacoustic analysis of hearing aids, and real ear
measurements.
 

Page 256
It is unlikely that all clinical settings will have a full complement of
contemporary evaluation instruments. It is also unlikely that all
audiologists are fully aware of, and skilled in, the entire range of
procedures described in the literature. Operating from a base of ethical
principles and realistic goals, therefore, might be more important than
the specific practices utilized. It is simply impossible to offer every
client all the newest applications; it is also unnecessary.
The goal of improving the hearing-impaired child's ability to develop
and use communication should be the audiologist's primary
consideration. It is critical to approach this goal from the basis of
principles that address it. This may mean that the audiologist will
make good use of the practices learned in the classroom or written
about in texts. Or the audiologist may disregard those practices
completely, maintain the principles behind them, and use creative
nonstandard techniques never before used but effective and in the best
interest of the child. This is where the audiologist's knowledge must
be fully supported by flexibility and pediatric experience. We believe
very strongly that the audiologist who cannot be flexible or who lacks
experience with children should reconsider working with these young
patients, at least until supervised experience is gained.
As audiologists, we must recognize that, although both age of onset of
the hearing loss and its degree will help determine impact on the
linguistic development of the hearing-impaired child, neither the
audiogram nor real ear measures will be able to predict the
effectiveness of amplification for spoken language acquisition or other
areas of development. Therefore, selecting amplification based on the
audiogram or real ear measurements, alone or together, is acceptable
neither in principle nor in practice.
Finally, given the importance of early spoken language stimulation in
the developmental process, we believe that it is imperative to stress

the need for providing amplification as soon as possible after a
hearing loss is identified.
Preselection Considerations
Several decisions can be made before initiating the formal hearing aid
selection procedure. Among these are: (1) type of hearing aid,
instrument style, microphone directionality (if there is a choice); (2)
type of fitting to be done (e.g., BTE); (3) auditory input alternative or
telecoil options such as earmold style, acoustics, material, and color.
These decisions are not mutually exclusive, but the audiologist must
prioritize choices based on attitudes of the child and parent or
caregiver, economic circumstances of the family, and the audiologist's
knowledge, experience, and biases.
Electroacoustic characteristics of hearing aids are frequently the
primary focus both in the professional literature and in the minds of
some audiologists. Allowing frequency, gain, and output
characteristics to become primary determining factors for making a
recommendation for hearing aids can result in a real world disaster.
Although these factors are important and must be consid-
 

Page 257
ered seriously, it is critical to remember that hearing-impaired children
must first wear the hearing aids if they are to receive benefit from
amplification. Therefore, factors such as style, size, brand, controls,
and so forth must be considered for many children.
Binaural vs. Monaural Fitting
Fitting children binaurally seems to be the common wisdom (Bentler
1993; Langford and Faires 1973; Lidén and Hartford 1985; Maxon
1981; Mueller 1986; Northern, Gabbard, and Kinder 1990). We prefer
binaural hearing aid fittings whenever possible and believe that
Mueller and Hawkins (1990) offered sufficient support for this
position in their description of the primary advantages of binaural
amplification. These advantages were identified as binaural
summation (6-10 dB), elimination of head shadow, and binaural
squelch (more effective reduction of noise and reverberation with
binaural input).
The long-time concern over whether a binaural fitting improves
speech recognition in quiet continues. However, there is now
apparently some agreement that there is improved speech recognition
in noise (perhaps as a result of the advantages described by Mueller,
Hawkins, and Northern 1992) as well as improved localization. In
addition, our experience is consistent with many previous accounts
such as those of Northern and Downs (1991) that users of binaural
amplification report improved sound quality, better fidelity, and easier
listening.
Occasionally there will be a child who has significant difficulty
tolerating binaural hearing aids. The child may be able to do well with
a monaural fitting when the second aid simply causes a disruption in
the processing of incoming information. In very young children, this
may be evident by the tolerance of one aid but the rejection of both
when the second aid is placed. Children who are able to communicate

will inform the audiologist of the problem. We must be alert and
sensitive to those who communicate poorly.
Obviously, fitting binaurally is easiest when there is a symmetrical,
bilateral, sensorineural hearing loss. However, there is no reason that
asymmetrical hearing loss could not be fit binaurally if there is
flexibility with regard to internal adjustments or hearing aid makes
and models. Similarly, if a child has a bilateral conductive hearing
loss and there are no contraindications for personal amplification, we
recommend a binaural hearing aid selection.
The CROS type fitting was developed by Harford and Barry (1965) to
be used for patients with unilateral hearing loss. Since then, many
variations on the idea have been published. One of these is the
BICROS, developed for use with asymmetrical hearing loss. These
fittings are recommended for specific losses (Bess and Tharpe 1984;
Hodgson 1986; Matkin and Thomas 1972). Both theoretical and
experimental benefits are quite real. In our experience, however, the
practical management of CROS and BICROS fittings has been very
difficult. As
 

Page 258
a result, we recommend these fittings only when there is no
alternative. We have never experienced either a wired or radio version
that performed up to manufacturer's specification for an entire school
year; and the younger the child, the more frequent the problems seem
to be. Moreover, the management of CROS and BICROS seems to
intimidate both parents and teachers.
Type of Hearing Aid
Digitally programmed hearing aids have the advantage of greater
precision. The multichannel type has the additional benefit of greater
electroacoustic flexibility and performance in noisy environments, but
the cost can be as much as 100% more than for a conventional aid.
Nevertheless, we believe that the precision and flexibility offered by
the multichannel automatic signal processing units are well worth the
investment for the child who can participate to the necessary degree in
the selection process and, of course, if the units are available through
the child's audiologist.
Educational type FM amplification units might also be considered as
the initial or primary fitting for neonates and infants in the critical
language development period. Madell (1992) presents several
convincing reasons for the use of FM amplification on preschool-age
children. Among them are improved communication between child
and parent, improved signal-to-noise ratio, somewhat better frequency
gain characteristics (as shown by audiological testing), and improved
speech perception.
Instrument Style
In our experience, body hearing aids are seldom, if ever, used. There
is little reason to prescribe this type of instrument unless there is a
compelling need. Such a need might occur when a hearing-impaired
child has a neuromotor disorder such as cerebral palsy that interferes

with the ability to handle the smaller, postauricular instruments. The
child might be capable of managing a hearing aid if it were in front.
At times, we have encountered a parent who was unable to handle the
smaller devices but could manage the larger, body-type instrument.
For the most part, children of any age can be fitted with behind-the-
ear instruments. This is true also for children who are multiply-
impaired because they do not usually manipulate their own hearing
aids.
It is obvious that behind-the-ear aids (BTEs) have become used most
widely with children. BTEs have many advantages over the body-
style aids, including reasonably good binaural qualities, flexible
electroacoustics, a variety of sizes, and a wide range of powers so that
even a profound loss can be fitted. In addition, some manufacturers
offer a variety of bright colors or even see-through models, which can
help capture the interest of children and encourage in them a positive
attitude toward hearing aids. It should be noted here, however, that the
 

Page 259
parents must have completed the grieving process to the point of
accepting the hearing loss before they can accept the child's choice of
either hearing aids or earmolds in nonstandard colors or styles (see
chapter 13).
In-the-ear (ITE) hearing aids provide better binaural qualities than do
BTEs, and binaural qualities are thought to improve speech
recognition in the classroom. Nevertheless, ITEs are not often
recommended for children under the age of ten years because they are
still growing, and the instruments would have to be recased too often
to keep up with growth. Bentler (1993) suggested two other
limitations: poor telecoil response and no provision for direct audio
input. Of these two, we consider the lack of audio input to be the more
detrimental. However, we agree with Northern and Downs (1991),
who suggest that ITEs or in-the-canal (ITC) hearing aids should be
fitted as often as possible. They report successful fitting of ITEs for
children as young as two years, and we encourage this. ITEs can be
fitted to provide enough power to all but the most severe hearing
losses. They have adequate frequency-gain flexibility; output-limiting
microphone directionality is natural; and recasing is only a matter of
days if a reputable company is notified of the need to rush an order.
Although telecoil and direct audio input limitations need to be
considered, we find that many of our children do not use the telecoils
for telephone use even when they have the option. If booting to an FM
system is a requirement, then BTE instruments are the answer. Of
course, not all BTEs have equally good telecoils. If this is of real
concern to the audiologist, then choice of instruments will be limited
to only a handful of companies who produce top quality telecoil
response characteristics and who actually check the instrument's
function to ensure that it meets ANSI specifications before delivery.
Finally, it is easy to assume that children as young as five or six years

of age are not vain. Our observations indicate that they are indeed
conscious of their appearance, which makes the cosmetic effect of a
hearing aid an important ingredient in the child's decision to accept
and wear the instrument.
Insurance
Although we prefer not to be concerned about the cost of
amplification, in reality it is an issue of great concern. Many insurance
carriers provide no hearing benefits. Others place restrictions on the
use of hearing benefits, such as stipulating which hearing aid dealers
may dispense the instruments or which brand of hearing aids must be
used. Often earmolds are provided only once per year and sometimes
only one earmold per year may be allowed. Further, some carriers will
cover only one hearing aid every three years. In the United States, all
fifty states have some state or federally mandated insurance program
for children with chronic illnesses or disabilities. Although the
program goes by different names in different locations, hearing-
impaired children are typically covered. This insurance usually
provides hearing aids, earmolds, and sometimes even
 

Page 260
batteries at no cost to the families. However, to qualify for coverage
by such programs, families must meet financial eligibility guidelines.
The result is that payment for assessments, hearing aids, earmolds and
batteries must be made directly by the parents. This can, and often
does, place a heavy financial burden on many families of hearing-
impaired children. A factor such as economics of necessity may
influence whether the audiologist will prescribe monaural or binaural
fittings or whether the instrument that would best meet the child's
needs electroacoustically will be prescribed at all.
Earmolds
The earmold is a critical part of the amplification system because it
connects the hearing aid to the child and significantly affects the
acoustics delivered to the tympanic membrane. The earmold is often
the most problematic component in the system. Feedback occurs
frequently due to an inadequate fit, broken or hard tubing, a vent that
is too large, and so on. Discomfort is also a frequent complaint. The
better the earmold is at the beginning, the fewer the problems later.
Our experience is that many clinical audiologists seldom, if ever, see
the earmold problems once the child has been fitted with hearing aids
because they often do not follow up beyond the hearing aid pick-up or
orientation appointments. Subsequent earmolds might best be made
by the educational audiologist, if available, as this individual has the
opportunity to see the child and communicate with teachers regularly.
Badly made, poorly fitting earmolds are a significant management
problem that must be addressed if successful use of amplification is to
be achieved.
Earmold Impression
When making an impression, children to two years of age are usually
held by their parents or caregivers, positioned on the lap with the

adult's arms wrapped around the infant. If necessary, the child's legs
can be caught between the adult's legs. Some children from 18 to 24
months are able to sit quietly enough to cooperate in the process of
obtaining earmold impressions. A highchair is ideal for those who can
sit independently as the tray serves to hold a mirror and something
with which to play. If the child is too large for a highchair, a standard,
comfortable chair can be used.
One effective technique is to place a mirror in front of the child who
can then watch what you are doing. The ability to see themselves in
the mirror while you work serves to reduce anxiety. For children who
are able to comprehend, showing them the tools and materials you
will be using also helps them to relax.
It is necessary, of course, to ensure that the ear canal is reasonably
clean and free of debris before proceeding. It is best to do so at the
time of the otologic visit so that the physician can clean the ears if
necessary. However, the audiolo-
 

Page 261
gist should be trained and prepared to do the cleaning if the canals are
not clear and ENT services are not readily available.
Because children do not stop talking or moving their mouths when
they are wearing their earmolds, no attempt is made to keep them
from talking or moving their mouths while the impression material is
setting. This will lead to a better earmold fit. It is imperative that the
audiologist not attempt to pack or push the material into the ear.
Children's ears are so pliable that the slightest pressure will push them
out of a natural shape, adversely affecting the impression.
The length of the canal piece is a critical factor in obtaining a good
earmold fit for children with severe or profound hearing impairments.
Be certain that the impression material gets into the canal deeply
enough to obtain an appropriate canal fit. A good helix is important in
maintaining a lock on the fit of the earmold, especially for younger
children.
For children who will be fitted with postauricular hearing aids (most
of our patients), impressions should be obtained only with the hearing
aid in place over the pinna and with the battery in the hearing aid.
This is crucial for children who are still growing. Actually, it is good
practice to do this with all clients. Some people have pinnae that are
very pliable or abnormal in shape or position (e.g., too close to the
skull, rotated backward, low set, or malformed in another manner). As
a result, we have found poor earmold fit when impressions were
obtained without the hearing aids in place. If the children wear
glasses, we recommend that the glasses be in place with the hearing
aids because it is likely that they will be utilizing their amplification
while they also will be wearing their glasses.
Showing video cartoons during the time it takes the impression
material to set has been successful in containing children of all ages.
The child may prefer to play with toys at a table, and this too is

acceptable as long as playing does not require standing up and moving
around the room. Often, children three years of age or older enjoy
playing with the unused impression material while they wait. This
should be permitted only under supervision. The excess material
should ordinarily be taken from the child after the process because
some children will attempt to mimic the procedure by putting the
leftover material in their ear canals when alone.
Style and Material for Earmolds
We prefer a soft material such as silicone or vinyl. Although silicone
is more difficult to modify, it has two advantages over vinyl. First, it is
an inert material (hypoallergenic) and is softer, thus permitting a
tighter fit and reduced probability of feedback. Soft earmolds are best
accepted by parents, teachers, and children alike. Also, they do not
work their way out of the ear as easily as those made from hard
material. The type of material is essential to the fit, comfort, and
performance, and should be specified by the audiologist.
 

Page 262
In our practice, we have found the Select-A-Vent to be the least useful
modification to earmolds, even for those children who need less low
frequency gain. However, it is necessary to have a pressure vent for
some of these children because they will otherwise complain about the
quality of the sound. Our most frequently used modification is the
continuous flow adapter (C.F.A.), which is ordered for virtually all our
infants and young children who have hearing losses ranging from mild
to severe and sometimes profound. Our clinical experience has
demonstrated that high frequency enhancement is often better with
C.F.A. than that produced by a horn modification. In addition, the fit
is better because the connector makes the tubing adjustable to some
degree. Finally, the size of the ear canal is not a problem as it is with
the horn-type bore. The C.F.A. is not without problems, however. The
elbow fit may loosen, causing feedback, and the connection breaks
down faster. We advise parents to have spare elbows available, and we
teach them how to replace elbows and tubing.
A horn modification can be utilized when the child is older and the
ears have stopped growing. To benefit from the horn, one needs the
correct length and cross-sectional dimensions, but many children do
not have large enough canals to accommodate even a three-millimeter
horn.
Of course, the more severe the hearing loss, the thicker the tubing
needed for the earmold. We order the thicker tubing routinely, except
for those children with mild hearing losses, because it also adds
stability to the hearing aid placement and is more durable. It is also
helpful to know that a product known as "dry tube" is available for
children who collect excessive moisture in the tubing. Dry tube is
earmold tubing that prevents condensation from forming within the
tubing.
In general, we order a full shell earmold for most of our hearing-

impaired children. Whenever appropriate, and with parent or caregiver
permission, we let children select the color of earmold they prefer.
The neon colors, while a little more expensive, are very popular, and
we believe this helps reduce the perceived stigma of hearing aids.
Finally, keep handy a plentiful supply of a lubricating cream such as
Otoferm. It not only eases insertion of the earmold, especially when
the mold has a long canal piece, but it also improves the seal that aids
in preventing feedback.
Real Ear Measurements
Real ear or probe tube measurement is the preferred method for
beginning the hearing aid selection; unfortunately, it is not always
feasible. Infants and toddlers, as a rule, are unable to cooperate. We
choose not to sedate children to obtain real ear data. Furthermore, we
strongly recommend that, in the selection procedure, behavioral
measurements be used to corroborate data from real ear measurements
before a final recommendation of instrument is made. Of course,
behavioral measurements may also be difficult to obtain.
 

Page 263
Using real ear or probe tube measurements requires a fairly quiet
location. The ear canals should be free of debris, and the child's
personal earmolds should be utilized. Therefore, the child must be
tolerant of the earmolds in the ears. To do this, it may be necessary for
some children to become accustomed to wearing their earmolds
before the hearing aid selection procedure. We prefer to do this with
amplification attached. Unfortunately, the child must be able to leave
the earmolds in place if further progress is to be made. Tolerance for
the earmolds becomes essential for those children who are tactilely
defensive.
When making real ear measurements, we routinely use the NAL-R
formula for mild to moderate hearing losses, and POGO is used for
severe and profound losses. Other procedures such as the CID: Phase
IV or the DSL may be useful also. (See Mueller et al. [1992] for an
overview of these methods.) Each audiologist will need to make an
individual choice regarding a formula and must take into account the
child's needs.
As in obtaining earmold impressions, it is helpful to place a mirror in
front of children during real ear measurements so that they can watch
what is happening and not be fearful. The equipment that will be used
should be shown to the children. Use of video cartoons with the sound
off has been found to be helpful in entertaining many children during
this procedure.
If two different hearing aids appear to meet your target for the child,
then it is important to make your choice based on another factor. The
choice may be based on the size of the hearing aids, if desired, but
only after behavioral measurements are done in the soundfield and an
aided audiogram is obtained. Again, if two or more aids perform
equally well, the decision may need to be based on how the child does
at speech awareness with the Ling five-sound test (see chapter 5) or

speech recognition at a distance, or perhaps in noise. Children who are
experienced hearing aid users or who are old enough and have
adequate language will be able to tell the audiologist if they prefer one
instrument to another. Finally, the choice of instruments may be based
on economics or on the preference of the parent or audiologist.
Whenever possible, MCL and UCL levels (both with real ear
measurements) should be obtained while you are obtaining the aided
audiogram.
Setting Targets
When determining how much amplification is appropriate for the
hearing-impaired child, the target should be as close to the speech
range as it is possible to get without distortion or discomfort; an
additional pitfall to avoid is exceeding what we consider the safe
limit.
What is the safe limit? Although there is no general agreement,
temporary and permanent threshold shifts due to overamplification
have been documented and reported in the literature (Hawkins, 1982;
Heffernan and Simons 1979; Rintelmann and Bess 1988). Clinically,
we have seen incidents of temporary
 

Page 264
(fortunately) threshold shift in children using high levels of maximum
power output. These have occurred when hearing aids have been
repaired and placed on the child without readjustment of internal
settings. Our rule of thumb is never to exceed 124 to 128 dB SPL as a
protection against possible deterioration of hearing levels. This can
best be measured by real ear procedures.
Besides the safety issue, it appears that high levels of maximum
power output contribute nothing to improved speech awareness or
recognition when compared to lower levels. A pilot study done at
Children's Hospital of Michigan (Schneider, Rich, and Bazell 1989)
evaluated a group of hearing-impaired children with severe to
profound degrees of loss. They were tested under two conditions:
With their hearing aids set at full on (130 dB SSPL or greater) and the
SSPL levels as close to 125 dB as it was possible to set the
instruments. Measures obtained included aided thresholds, correct
perception of the Ling Five Sound Test with sounds presented directly
behind the child, and at three, five, and ten feet from the child. Where
possible, speech recognition scores were obtained using standard lists.
The results of the pilot study indicated that aided audiograms were not
substantially different between the two conditions. When high SSPL
settings resulted in better thresholds for frequency modulated pure
tones, the difference was five to ten dB at two or three frequencies.
However, even when the higher settings elicited better thresholds for
tones, discrimination or detection of the Ling sounds was poorer than
at the lower power setting. Speech recognition scores, where obtained,
were also poorer at the higher power settings.
Our preferred target for setting internal controls on hearing aids is a
volume use of three (3) when the dial ranges from one (1) to four (4)
for severe and profound hearing loss, or one-half to two-thirds of the
maximum on the volume control. This affords some leeway for

adjusting volume up or down as suggested by Mueller, Hawkins, and
Northern (1992). Whatever volume setting is chosen, it should
provide the child with the targeted frequency gain characteristics.
The reader is referred to Mueller, Hawkins, and Northern (1992) for a
complete discussion of real ear measurements in the hearing aid
evaluation process.
Alternatives to Real Ear Measurements
There are alternatives to the use of real ear measurements for hearing
aid selection if equipment is not available. We stress, however, that
extensive pediatric experience is required to utilize behavioral
procedures well. The major problem in using the calibrated soundfield
is the lack of cooperation or ability to respond by the child. Visual
reinforcement procedures may or may not be usable. VRA is not
usable with infants below six months of age. In addition, ability to
respond to this technique relies on cognitive level and neuromotor
control.
When using behavioral measures to select amplification, the targets
remain the same. That is, maximum power is limited to 125 to 128 dB
SPL. Internal settings are made with the goal of using a volume level
that will yield the pre-
 

Page 265
ferred power output; another aim is to select hearing aids that will
provide amplification as close to the speech range as it is possible to
get without distortion, discomfort, or exceeding the safe limit.
Sometimes the hearing aid selection is done using the ''by guess and
by gosh'' procedure because all other attempts have failed, and it is
imperative that amplification be provided. In this instance, the ideal
situation would be to have a large stock of loaner hearing aids from
which various instruments can be tried on the child for a week or two.
This permits the audiologist to follow the child closely and receive
feedback from the parent or caregiver regarding behavior while
wearing the hearing aids. Often, once the child has worn some type of
amplification for a week or two, responses begin to emerge and
further testing can be undertaken.
General Procedures
Regardless of whether the audiologist uses real ear measurements, a
minimum of three hearing aids should be tried out in the selection
process. At times more will be used. With very young children, it may
be necessary to conduct the hearing aid selection in two appointments
to complete all the assessments or measurements.
The size of the hearing aid may be a consideration, especially for very
young children or those with small, malformed, or close-set ears.
However, the size of the instrument should never be the critical
feature in the choice of a hearing aid.
In a pediatric practice, it is necessary to have an ample supply of
"baby" ear hooks. One must be aware, of course, that these change the
frequency response of the hearing aids. If a pediatric-size hook is
utilized, the selection process must be done with that hook on the
hearing aid. If not, real ear measurements will have to be repeated at
the conformity to determine exactly what the ear is receiving. We also

mention here the often overlooked availability of the Etymotic hooks.
Although they are not particularly attractive, we have found them to
be effective in achieving certain response characteristics.
All hearing aids selected through real ear measurements should be
evaluated in the soundfield also. In addition to obtaining responses to
aided frequency-modulated pure tones, speech recognition should be
tested if possible. At the very least, speech detection thresholds must
be obtained, and the Ling Five Sound Test should be utilized. The
Ling sounds should be presented both in the soundfield and at
distances of five and ten feet. We believe it is critical to fit hearing
aids for distance as well as for near settings. Other speech material
may be utilized. For example, numbers are frequently recognized even
by children with the severest of hearing impairments.
Our target for aided responses to the Ling sounds is 46 dB HL. If the
child is unable to respond at that intensity level, increase gain until all
five sounds elicit responses or until best performance is obtained.
Then adjust the aid accordingly.
 

Page 266
Finally, we caution that the shape of the aided audiogram should never
be precipitous. That is, do not permit amplification to produce an
aided audiogram that results in responses of 10 dB at 250 Hz, 20 dB at
500 Hz, and 50 dB or more at 1000 Hz and above. In this condition,
the low frequency amplification masks information at the other
frequencies.
Fitting the Hearing Aid
Before delivering the hearing aids to the child, an electroacoustic
analysis should be completed for each instrument. It is important to
run the instruments according to ANSI specifications in order to
compare them to the manufacturer's specifications. However, we
believe it is equally important to run the hearing aids at the "to be
worn" setting based on the results of the hearing aid selection
procedure. This includes the correct internal control settings and the
target volume selected for the child.
A conformity test, which should include the same measures that were
done when the hearing aids were selected, is performed when the
hearing aids are delivered. If the child's aided performance does not
match that obtained at the time of the selection, one must consider
doing real ear measurements to identify the reason for the poorer
performance. We recommend that real ear measures be made routinely
at the time of the conformity to fine-tune targets. It will be necessary
at times for first-time hearing aid users to be fitted with gain below
the target so that they can become used to amplified sound gradually.
If the audiologist is unsure about the exact internal settings for the
hearing aids (and this does happen), the gain should be estimated on
the low side and increased as needed.
Caregiver Training
At the time the hearing aids are delivered, the parent or caregiver is

trained to manage the instruments. Of course, the audiologist
demonstrates battery insertion, attachment of the earmold to the ear-
hook, and the on-off switch and volume settings. The adult should
then repeat the process. Inserting the earmold in the ear is then
demonstrated. Many children will be able to learn how to handle the
hearing aids at the time of fitting. We have had children as young as
two years of age be able to put on their own instruments. If the
audiologist has concerns about the ability of the adult (or child) to
manage the hearing aids, weekly appointments should be scheduled
until management is mastered. The initial orientation should include
some techniques parents can use to initiate auditory training for the
child. Some of these are discussed in the last section of this chapter.
Keeping the Hearing Aids on the Ears
It is often difficult to keep hearing aids in place on a young child's
ears. This problem results in failure to receive full benefit from
amplification and may also
 

Page 267
result in lost or broken devices. Several products have been usedwith
various degrees of success-to alleviate this problem. Two-sided tape
that is reported not to irritate skin will sometimes work. In our
experience, even this tape irritates the skin in young children. A
device such as the Huggie Aid assists in keeping the hearing aid in
place and may help prevent tampering with the battery drawer or
volume control. However, we find that some children use this device
as a faster way to pull their hearing aids out because it is easy to grab
and pull.
We have found that an eyeglass cord used to suspend glasses from the
neck when not being worn works very well in helping avoid lost
hearing aids. The cord is attached to the hearing aids, and the center is
pinned to the inside of a shirt, dress, or sweater. If an aid should fall
out, the cord keeps it from falling to the ground or being lost. Parents
have also reported some success with an elastic sports band that holds
glasses in place for the physically active. On occasion, we have had to
resort to sweat bands or ski bands to keep the aids in place and stop
the child from pulling them off. One must exercise care that the
hearing aid microphones are not covered by the fabric.
Continuing Follow-up
Following the initial hearing aid fitting-and assuming the audiologist
is comfortable with the parent's or caregiver's ability to manage the
hearing aids-our experience is that a follow-up visit should be
scheduled in three months. At the first follow-up visit, a hearing aid
conformity examination should be conducted. It is recommended that
the same test materials utilized during the selection and the fitting be
used again at this time. The parent or caregiver is asked to
demonstrate the management of the hearing aids. Any questions that
have occurred since the child was last seen can be answered. The
follow-up visit also provides an opportunity to ensure that the

recommendations for educational placement are being followed.
The second follow-up visit should occur six months after the first, and
the procedures should be the same. Now the child may be capable of
further testing. The audiologist should keep in mind the need to
conduct formal testing as soon as possible. Any standardized test with
which the audiologist is comfortable and that is consistent with the
age of the child can be used.
Attitudes
It is imperative that the use of hearing aids be presented to the child,
regardless of age, in the most positive light possible. Parents must
understand that their attitude about amplification will influence how
their child adapts to the use of hearing aids. Therefore, the aids need
to be viewed by all concerned as absolutely wonderful. The
experienced audiologist will understand the need to provide skills and
techniques to the parents to help them initiate habilitation. The parents
need to have some positive feedback as soon as possible so that the
 

Page 268
child can be positively reinforced. This is best achieved when the
adults are able to see the effects of amplification by obtaining
responses from the child. This creates a positive reinforcement for
both parent and child.
The School Program
The presence of an educational audiologist within a school program
makes life easier because that person serves as the contact for the
clinical audiologist. Only through the educational audiologist can we
be assured that the child's hearing aids will be monitored periodically,
earmold fit will be checked routinely, and any internal settings for the
hearing aid are reset following repairs. It is imperative that the school
program know the correct hearing aid settings for any hearing-
impaired child. If the child is not receiving school services for the
hearing loss, parents must be made aware that hearing aids are never
to be put back on the child's ears following repair unless first seen by
an audiologist. We have had some parents who were perfectly capable
of resetting hearing aids following repair. However, only the
audiologist in a clinical or educational setting will be able to evaluate
the devices electroacoustically.
FM Amplification
The audiologist who has done the hearing aid selection for the child
and the educational audiologist, if available, should work together to
determine the most appropriate settings for any FM amplification
system that will be used in school. We recommend that these devices
be set as close as possible to the chosen settings for the hearing aids.
This may be done most precisely by use of real ear measurements to
ensure that the children are not overamplified and, possibly, provide
some consistency in input between the hearing aid and FM unit.
This is not always possible, however, particularly with neonates and

infants. Moreover, the instrumentation for real ear measurements may
not be available. A clear description of the procedures for this as well
as other aspects of FM amplification system selection and use can be
found in Ross (1992).
Parents, Caregivers, and the Hearing Aid Selection Process
Parents As Partners
Parents are the critical link between the hearing aid fitting and
successful adaptation and use of amplification by the child. Adult
attitudes about amplification will influence the child's response. When
aids are considered to be a wonderful invention, that feeling is
transmitted to the youngster. The audiologist must spend sufficient
time counseling the adult regarding the need for a positive attitude,
both at the beginning of the hearing aid selection process and
 

Page 269
during fitting and follow-up visits. However, this is to be done only
when the caregivers are ready (see chapter 13).
Care and Maintenance of the Hearing Aids
Training in the care and maintenance of hearing aids is, of course,
very important. An excellent discussion of all the features of a
maintenance program is presented by Musket (1988). Clinically, we
have found that parents function best when provided with tangible
material to which they can refer as necessary. The addendum to this
chapter is a sample of the material we provide to parents of hearing-
impaired children.
Grief and Grieving
Audiologists must recognize the grieving process and all its stages in
order to work effectively with the parents of hearing-impaired
children (see chapter 13). It is important to recognize in what stage
parents may be and to know what type of responses to expect from
them. Often the audiologist who first identifies a child's hearing loss
becomes the villain in the scene. When this occurs, parents may seek
out second and even third opinions. In our experience, parents
invariably make a full circle back to the original professional.
Audiologists must also recognize their own limitations in counseling
parents through the grieving process. At times it may be necessary
only to sit and listen, whereas at other times it may be essential to
make comments and suggestions. Appropriate referrals should be
made when needed for available support services. Although it is often
difficult to find counseling professionals who have an understanding
of hearing impairment and its effects on families, it may be vital to
have access to such individuals. We have found that deaf parents of
deaf children reject such referrals for the most part, whereas hearing
parents of deaf children may request referral.

It is helpful to be familiar with the literature that deals with both the
grieving process and counseling families. The reader is referred to the
writings of Kubler-Ross (1969, 1974), who has clearly identified and
described the stages of grief. This information may help the
audiologist recognize where parents may be in the process. Moses
(1985) has addressed grief and counseling for parents of hearing-
impaired infants. Luterman (1984, 1987) has addressed counseling
and the effect of hearing impairment on the family of the impaired
individual (also see chapter 13).
Parents' Groups
An effective means of both educating parents and helping them adjust
to their child's hearing loss is a parents' group, conducted by parents
and not professionals. The most common threads in such groups are
their children's hearing
 

Page 270
losses and the decisions that need to be made about education and
habilitation programs.
The parents of our hearing-impaired patients have formed such a
group and have invited participation of parents from many different
clinics and programs. It has proven to be an excellent resource for the
parents, who determine when and how often they will meet and what
their programs will consist of. Annually they include a panel of
hearing-impaired children who discuss their feelings, opinions, and
needs. Our professional staff does not participate except by invitation
of the parents or as a learning experience for themselves. Included in
the parents' group programs are periodic meetings described as "For
Parents Only," which serve as "gripe sessions." Gripes may be
directed toward school programs, physicians, audiologists, or any
other issue felt to be important to members of the group.
By airing concerns and complaints, parents help each other resolve
many conflicts. In addition, the group empowers individual members,
enabling them to advocate for their child.
Early Intervention
Parents frequently relate feelings of helplessness in dealing with their
hearing-impaired children. Their active involvement in the youngster's
habilitation program is indispensable, for it helps them develop a
communication system and feel that they are constructively engaged
in helping their children. Intense parental participation is probably the
most effective means of ensuring that amplification will yield positive
reinforcement for the childand for the parent as well.
The audiologist must be responsible for directing the early attempts at
habilitation both by providing activities that can be joined in by all at
home and by making referrals for other support services. Besides the
necessary educational referrals, it is importantas part of a total

programthat the child receive some type of hearing therapy, whether it
is provided by a speech-language pathologist or an audiologist.
As part of management of the child, parents should observe the
training sessions and be encouraged to reinforce the training at home.
Positive reinforcement from the specialist treating the child provides
support for the parents and serves as the stimulus to keep them
working. Within our clinical settings, we advise all parents of infants
and preschool children to contact the John Tracy Clinic to obtain the
free-to-parents material that agency provides. Involvement in this type
of program also serves to help parents feel useful. Parents are also
provided with the names and addresses of other agencies and
organizations whose primary function is service to the hearing
impaired.
An excellent source of material for interventionfor audiologists,
speech-language pathologists, and parentsis Parent-Infant
Communication: A Pro-
 

Page 271
gram of Clinical and Home Training for Parents and Hearing-
Impaired Infants (Schuyler et al. 1985). It is a well-organized and
thorough training program that is fairly easy to initiate and conducive
to home training by parents. Audiologists working with hearing-
impaired children should be familiar with this publication.
Educational Options
Choosing an educational program for a hearing-impaired child is often
a difficult decision for parents. However, it must be the child's parents
who make the choice and not the professionals who are or will be
involved in the habilitation or education process. Input from the
audiologist may be solicited, but information should always be
provided as objectively as possible. It is the audiologist's
responsibility to ensure that parents are aware of the choices available
to them both within their local school districts and by state and federal
mandate. Schwartz (1987) provides an excellent presentation for
parents on educational options for hearing-impaired children.
Another excellent source of information for parents is Beginnings for
Parents of Hearing-Impaired Children (Greene 1990). The
Beginnings Program was instituted by and developed through the
extensive effort of Art Mines, who was, for a time, its executive
director, and through the input of many parents and professionals.
Greene's publication is a resource that evolved from those efforts. It
contains an excellent, objective presentation of educational choices.
We recommend that parents have access to the material. The
audiologist's professional responsibility includes ensuring that the
parents are fully informed.
References
Bentler, R. A. 1993. Amplification for the hearing impaired child. In
Rehabilitative audiology: Children and adults, 2d ed., ed. J.G. Alpiner

and P.A. McCarthy. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Bess, F.H., and A.M. Tharpe. (1984). Unilateral hearing impairment
in children. Pediatrics 74:206-216.
Greene, J.C. 1990. Beginnings for parents of hearing impaired
children: A parent manual. Durham, NC: The Beginnings for Parents
of Hearing Impaired Children, Inc.
Harford, E.R., and J. Barry. 1965. A rehabilitative approach to the
problems of unilateral hearing impairment: The contralateral routing
of signals CROS. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 30:121-
128.
Hawkins, D.R. 1982. Overamplification: A well documented case
report. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 47:382-384.
Heffernan, H.P., and M.R. Simons. 1979. Temporary increase in
sensorineural hearing loss with hearing aid use. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology and Laryngology 88:86-91.
Hodgson, W.R., ed. 1986. Hearing aid assessment and use in
audiologic habilitation. 3d ed. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Kubler-Ross, E. 1969. On death and dying. New York: Macmillan.
 

Page 272
.1974. Questions and answers on death and dying. New York: Collier
Books.
Langford, S.E., and W.L. Faires. 1973. Objective evaluation of
monaural vs. binaural amplification for congenitally hard-of-hearing
children. Journal of Auditory Research 13:263-267.
Lidén, G., and E.R. Harford. 1985. The pediatric audiologist: From
magician to clinician. Ear and Hearing 6:6-9.
Luterman, D. 1984. Counseling the communicatively disordered and
their families. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
.1987. Deafness in the family. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Madell, J.R. 1992. FM systems for children birth to age five. In FM
auditory training systems: Characteristics, selections, and use, ed.
M.A.Ross. Timonium, MD: York Press.
Matkin, N.D., and J. Thomas. 1972. The utilization of CROS hearing
aids in children. Maico Audiological Library Series 10:8.
Maxon, A.B. 198 1. Binaural amplification of young children: A
clinical application of Ross's theory. Ear and Hearing 2:2 15-219.
Moses, K.L. 1985. Infant deafness and parental grief: Psychosocial
early intervention. In Education of the hearing-impaired child, ed. F.
Powell, T. Fenitzo-Hieber, S.F. Friel-Patti, and D. Henderson. San
Diego: College-Hill Press.
Mueller, H.G. 1986. Binaural amplification: Attitudinal factors. The
Hearing Journal 39: 7-10.
Mueller, H.G., and D.B. Hawkins. 1990. Three important
considerations in hearing aid selection. In Handbook of hearing aid
amplification, ed. R. Sandlin. Boston: College-Hill Press.

Mueller, H.G., D. Hawkins, and J. Northern. 1992. Probe microphone
measurements: Hearing aid selection and assessment. San Diego:
Singular Publishing Group.
Musket, C.H. 1988. Maintenance of personal hearing aids. In Auditory
disorders in school children, 2d ed., ed. R. Roeser and M. Downs.
New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Northern, J.L., and M.P. Downs. 1991. Hearing in children. 4th ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Northern, J.L., S.A. Gabbard, and D.L. Kinder. 1990. Pediatric
consideration in selecting and fitting hearing aids. In Handbook of
hearing aid amplification, Vol. II, ed. R.E. Sandlin. Boston: College-
Hill Press.
Pollack, M.C., ed. 1988. Amplification for the hearing-impaired. 3d
ed. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Rintelmann, W.F., and F.H. Bess. 1988. High-level amplification and
potential hearing loss in children. In Hearing impairment in children,
ed. F.H. Bess. Parkton, MD: York Press.
Ross, M.A., ed. 1992. FM auditory training systems: Characteristics,
selections, and use. Timonium, MD: York Press.
Schneider, P.K., J.A. Rich, and C. Bazell. 1989. The effect of SSPL
setting on gain measurement in the soundfield in children: A pilot
study. Poster session presented at MSHA Annual Conference, March.
Schuyler, V., N. Rushmer, R. Arpan, A. Melum, J. Sowers, and N.
Kennedy. 1985. Parentinfant communication: A program of clinical
and home training for parents and hearing-impaired infants. Portland,
OR: Infant Hearing Resource Publications.
Schwartz, S., ed. 1987. Choices in deafness: A parent's guide.
Kensington, MD: Woodbine House.

Skinner, M.W. 1988. Hearing aid evaluation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
 

Page 273
Addendum
For Parents of Hearing-Impaired Children Prepared by the Staff of
the Marie Carls Communication Disorders Centers, Children's
Hospital of Michigan
Learning to listenor auditory trainingis one of your child's most
important goals. You need to make sure that the child's hearing aid is
always working well and that you do a lot of talking to the child. The
responsible adult must be "in charge" of the hearing aids. This means
that you will determine when they are put on and when they are
removed from the ears. If your child pulls the hearing aids off, it is
critical that you replace them immediately. If you think that your child
has worn the instruments long enough for that period of the day, then
remove the hearing aids yourself. Remember, you are in control.
In the Beginning
1. Practice putting the hearing aid on and adjusting its controls.
Encourage the childif old enoughto take care of the aid unassisted.
2. To put the earmold into the ear, place the canal part down into the
ear canal. Gently push and rotate the earmold back and forth until it
sits firmly in the ear.
3. Turn up the volume to the recommended setting. If you hear
"whistling" (feedback), the earmold is probably not in correctly.
4. Always remember to turn the aid off before removing it to prevent
feedback.
5. Children get used to their new hearing aids and earmold at different
rates. In general, your child should begin wearing the aids for short
periods of time and then gradually increase the length of these
periods. Since the child has been living in a quiet world up until now,

loud sounds and noise may bother the child. Start with quiet listening
environments and work toward more difficult or noisy situations.
Point out some of the familiar sounds in your house, such as the
telephone, washing machine, and so on.
What to Do Every Day
Always listen to your child's hearing aid through your hearing aid
stethoscope before the aids are worn. This procedure should be
followed each day and any time your child does not seem to be
hearing as well as usual.
1. Always use a battery at full strength. It is best to check the battery
at night with a battery tester.
2. Put the battery into the battery compartment so the positive (+) side
of the batterv matches the positive (+) mark on the compartment.
3. With the hearing aid stethoscope attached to the earmold, turn the
hearing aid on. If possible, listen to the aid at the recommended
volume setting. As you turn the volume control, the hearing aid
should gradually increase in loudness. Say the following five sounds
into the microphone of the hearing aid: oo as in moon, ah as in father,
ee as in key, sh as in shoe, s as in say.
These five sounds cover the frequency range for speech and will
indicate whether speech sounds are being adequately picked up by the
hearing aid. The vowel sounds should be clear. No hissing or other
distortion should be present when saying "sh" or "s."
 

Page 274
4. If you notice a problem, consult the "possible problems and their
causes" sheet.
5. Turn the hearing aid on: If the child is too young or is unable to
handle the aid alone, put it on for the child.
6. If old enough, the child should now put the aid in and turn it on.
Note the volume setting. Did the child set it at the recommended
setting? If not or if the child turns the volume all the way down during
the day, call us, and we will check to see if all the internal settings are
appropriate.
7. Do the five-sound test with your child facing you. Have your child
indicate that the sounds are heard by clapping, pointing to the ear, or
repeating the sound.
8. Ask your child to turn around and do the five-sound test again.
What to Do at Night
1. Always turn the aid off before taking it out of the ear.
2. Open the battery compartment and take the battery out. Check it on
the battery tester. It is best to test the battery after it has been used all
day. Discard any bad batteries.
3. Check the earmold for wax. Pick the wax out of the little hole that
lets the sound into the ear. Pipe cleaners work very well for this. Wipe
the outside with a damp cloth. Do not use alcohol because that will
dry out the earmold material.
4. Put the hearing aid in a safe place away from extreme heat or cold,
water, pets, and so on. It is wise to put the aids in an air-tight container
along with a package of silica gel.
What to Do Yearly

Have the audiologist recheck your child's hearing.
What Never to Do
Never put the hearing aid back on your child after it has been repaired
without first having the audiologist reset the internal settings.
Questions Asked Most Often
1. How can I get my child to wear the aid(s)?
Your child's self-concept and willingness to wear the hearing aid have
a lot to do with parent attitude. Your acceptance and firm and
consistent reinforcement will encourage the child to wear the aids just
as shoes, socks, and glasses are worn.
2. Do hearing aids make my child hear normally?
No. A hearing aid does not work the same way for hearing as glasses
do for seeing. It makes the speech sound that your child hears louder
and tunes your child into environmental sounds that may not be heard
without the aid. It does not make speech clearer, though. Consistent
auditory training needs to be done to increase the child's ability to
understand the sounds the child is hearing. The more you work with
your child, the better off he/she will be.
3. When should my child wear the aid(s)?
The child needs to wear them all the time while awake, except when
bathing, swimming, or playing in the sandbox. For parents of napping
children: Some parents turn their child's aid
 

Page 275
off but leave them in during naptime, whereas others take the aids out.
Always remember to put the hearing aids back in and turn them on.
4. How long does a battery last?
This depends on:
(a) the type of battery;
(b) how powerful the hearing aid is;
(c) how many hours the aid is worn during the day; and
(d) whether the aid is in good working order.
That is why it is so important to check the battery on the battery tester.
A battery can build up power overnight and seem ok in the morning,
so get into the habit of checking the battery when your child gets
home from school or at night before bed. Battery testers can be
purchased from a hearing aid dealer or from:
Hal-Hen Company 
36-14 Eleven Street 
Long Island City, NY 11106
5. How long will a hearing aid last?
Depending upon the daily care it is given, between two and four years,
and sometimes longer.
6. What if the earmold seems to be bothering my child's ear?
Sometimes the ear can get irritated or sore from the earmold. If this
happens, have your audiologist or the hearing aid dealer check how
well the earmold fits. There are nonallergenic materials available if
they have not been tried already. If the problem persists, take your
child to an ear doctor (otolaryngologist or otologist) for evaluation
and treatment. The child may have a skin disorder in the ear canal or

other problems that need medical attention. Sometimes the problem
does not have a medical cause nor is it the earmold. Your child may be
sensitive to loud sounds. Call your audiologist in order to make sure
the power controls are set appropriately.
7. Will my child learn to talk?
Children learn and progress at their own rate. (How far your child will
go toward that goal depends on many factors, however.) Ask your
audiologist to discuss this with you. One of the most important
influences is you, the parent. Your son or daughter needs to develop
listening skills as soon as possible. You need to encourage dependence
on sound and do a lot of talking about the things that matter to the
child. Daily activities such as dressing, bathing, eating, and playing
are perfect opportunities. Ask your audiologist or your child's teacher
for suggestions.
8. What if my child accidentally swallows a battery?
This could be dangerous. Call the National Button-Battery Ingestion
Hotline, 1-202625-3333, or your local poison control hotline.
9. In addition to my daily test check, how often should I have my
child's hearing aids checked?
Two or three times each year (or more if a problem comes up). To
help your child improve listening skills, here are some things to
remember:
(a) Shouting distorts your voice and leads to frustration and
irritability. Stay close to your child and talk in a normal voice.
 

Page 276
(b) Do not touch the child to get his/her attention. If you speak first,
your child will get used to listening and paying attention to your
voice. If you act as though you don't expect to be heard, your child
will become conditioned to not listening.
(c) Try sitting side-by-side or have the child on your lap when you
talk about pictures in books or play games. This encourages more use
of hearing.
(d) If you have not already contacted the John Tracy Clinic, we
strongly recommend it. They will send good activities, free of charge,
to help you work with your child. The address and form are in the
back of this pamphlet.
Daily Check List
1. Did you check the battery?
2. Did you check the earmold?
3. Did you listen to the hearing aid and check the volume control?
4. Did you do the five-sound test?
 

Page 277
11
Cochlear Implants
Judith A. Brimacombe and Anne L. Beiter
Cochlear implants are state-of-the-art microelectronic devices
designed to restore a level of auditory function to profoundly deafened
individuals who do not benefit from conventional amplification.
These biomedical mechanisms convert sound into electrical current
and bypass the damaged receptive sensory end-organ to stimulate
directly the remaining auditory nerve fibers. The resulting neural
activity propagates along the auditory pathways to the cortex. In
individuals who have had prior auditory experience, and thus have
some auditory memory, the sensations are reported as hearing
immediately. It is difficult to know how these sensations are
interpreted initially by congenitally deaf children who have had no
exposure to acoustic stimuli. However, with experience, these children
also respond to auditory input and display the ability to use the
information provided by the cochlear implant in a meaningful way.
This chapter discusses the management of profoundly deaf children at
different chronological ages and stages of auditory development who
may be candidates for, or utilize, this technology.
Research on direct electrical stimulation of the auditory system has a
long history. The first reported application of direct stimulation of the
auditory system occurred in 1957 when two French physicians,
Djourno and Eyries, placed an electrode on a segment of the auditory
nerve during facial nerve reconstructive surgery. The patient reported
hearing background sounds and found the device helpful with
lipreading (Luxford and Brackmann 1985). Shortly after that, several
investigators in the United States (e.g., House, Michelson, Simmons,

and Eddington) began their investigations into the feasibility of direct
electrical stimulation of the auditory system. Soon researchers in
Australia (Clark) and Europe (Chouard, Douek, Fisch, Hochmair, and
Hochmair-Desoyer) began their research studies. Other investigators
followed in the 1980s. More detailed information on the historical
development of cochlear prostheses can be found in House and
Berliner (1991), Luxford and Brackmann (1985), Mecklenburg and
Lehnhardt (1991), Mecklenburg and Shallop (1988), Shallop and
Mecklenburg (1987), Simmons (1966), Staller (1985), and Tyler and
Tye-Murray (1991).
 

Page 278
Today, cochlear implants are considered a safe and effective medical
treatment for profound, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in
appropriately selected adults and children. In November 1984, the
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first
cochlear implant for commercial use in adults. It was a single-channel
device developed by House and his colleagues and manufactured by
3M Corporation, St. Paul, Minnesota. Soon after that, in October
1985, the FDA approved commercial distribution of the Nucleus
22channel cochlear implant developed by Clark and his colleagues at
the University of Melbourne and manufactured by Cochlear Pty. Ltd.,
Sydney, Australia. The FDA's approval of this multichannel device
was restricted to adults. In 1980, the first child was implanted with the
3M/House single-channel cochlear implant (Eisenberg and House
1982). Multisite clinical trials with this device began in 1983 and
1984 (Berliner and Eisenberg 1985).
The first pediatric implantation of the Nucleus multichannel device
took place in Melbourne, Australia, in 1985. A multisite clinical trial
began in the United States in 1986 (Mecklenburg, Demorest, and
Staller 1991). Before FDA approval of the single-channel cochlear
implant in children, 3M Corporation ceased manufacture of the single-
channel device. Final FDA approval was never achieved. In 1990, the
FDA approved commercial distribution of the Nucleus multichannel
cochlear implant in children, ages two to seventeen years.
These FDA approvals are the only ones granted for cochlear implants
in the United States. Several cochlear prostheses are considered
investigational in the United States. These include the Ineraid device,
manufactured by Smith and Nephew Richards, Memphis, Tennessee
(Dorman et al. 1989), and the Clarion device, manufactured by
Advanced Bionics Corporation (formerly MiniMed Technologies,
Ltd.), Sylmar, California (Schindler and Kessler, 1993). There are a
number of other single-channel and multichannel devices that have

been implanted in adults and children in Europe, where there are
fewer regulatory constraints. Mecklenburg and Lehnhardt (1991)
provide a thorough review of these devices, most of which are not
available in the United States. The focus of this chapter is on the only
commercially approved cochlear implant for children, the Nucleus
22channel cochlear implant system.
Device Description
The Nucleus device consists of three basic components: the cochlear
implant, the speech processor, and headset. The system is illustrated in
Figure 11.1. The cochlear implant is composed of a receiver-
stimulator and an electrode array. The receiver-stimulator contains a
custom-designed integrated circuit and other passive components. The
circuitry is sealed hermetically within a titanium capsule. Connected
to the hermetic package is a platinum receiving coil with a samarium
cobalt magnet seated in the middle of the coil. These components are
coated with a biocompatible, medical grade, silicone rubber. A
smoothly
 

Page 279
Figure 11.1. 
The Nucleus 22-channel cochlear implant system consists of the receiver-
stimulator and electrode array, a miniaturized speech processor, an ear-
level directional 
microphone, and transmitting coil.
tapered and flexible electrode array is connected to the receiver-
stimulator via ceramic feedthroughs. It consists of thirty-two evenly
spaced platinum bands supported on a silicone rubber carrier. The
distal twenty-two bands are active and are used for electrical
stimulation, whereas the proximal ten bands serve only as mechanical
support rings, aiding in electrode array insertion into the scala
tympani of the cochlea. The thirty-two bands vary in a smooth taper
from 0.6 millimeter (mm) at the proximal end (closest to the receiver-
stimulator) to 0.4 mm at the distal end. The bands are spaced equally
at 0.75 mm intervals. For the active twenty-two electrodes, a separate,
insulated platinum-iridium wire is connected to each electrode; these
wires course through the silicone rubber carrier, connecting each
electrode individually to the receiver-stimulator (Beiter and
Brimacombe 1993; Brimacombe and Beiter 1994; Clark et al. 1987a;
Patrick and Clark 1991).

The cochlear implant procedure is performed under general
anesthesia. The receiver-stimulator is placed under the skin in a
surgically created depression in the mastoid bone. The electrode array
is placed up to 25 mm into the scala tympani, either through the round
window or, more commonly, through a cochleostomy near the round
window. More information about the surgical procedure can be found
in Clark et al. (1987b); Clark, Franz et al. (1991); Clark, Cohen, and
Shepherd (1991); Webb et al. (1990).
 

Page 280
The speech processor and headset (microphone, transmitting coil, and
cables) comprise the externally worn portion of the system. Sound
from the environment is picked up by an ear-level, directional, electret
microphone and is transmitted via cabling to the speech processor.
The processor is a minature personal computer that uses a dedicated,
custom-designed digital signal processor (DSP) for preemphasis,
analog-to-digital conversion, and analysis of the incoming signal. The
speech processor contains a random-access memory (RAM) that
stores an individualized program. This program contains
measurements of the amount of electrical current required to elicit a
threshold and maximum acceptable listening level for each electrode
pair to be used in the patient's program. These measurements vary
across the electrode array and from individual to individual. Also
stored is information that relates the frequency of spectral peaks in the
acoustic signal to electrode position within the cochlea. Frequency
information between 250 Hz and 6000 Hz is divided into the number
of channels available for electrical stimulation (most commonly 20 to
22). Stimuli with a low-frequency component activate more apical
electrode pairs, and those with a high-frequency component activate
more basal electrode pairs. In this way, the cochlea is stimulated
following the general tonotopic order of neural distribution.
Once the patient-specific program has been configured, it is accessed
by the speech processor's encoder chip to generate a series of digital
pulses that power and control the implanted receiver-stimulator. These
pulses provide information regarding the stimulating and indifferent
electrodes and the amount of current to be delivered. This digital code
is sent by radio frequency (2.5 MHz) across the skin via the
transmitting coil that is worn over the implant site. The transmitting
coil is held in place with a rare-earth magnet identical to the one
inside the cochlear implant. To start up the receiver-stimulator, power
from the AA battery in the speech processor is also transmitted across

the skin on the same link.
The speech processor is programmed using an IBM-compatible
computer, two multibit interface cards, a specialized interface unit to
hold the speech processor, and custom-designed software. The
specialized interface unit allows the computer to control the electrical
stimulation delivered by the speech processor. Electrical threshold and
maximum acceptable listening level measurements are obtained for
each electrode pair. Next, the electrode pairs are balanced for equal
loudness (unless the patient is too young to understand this task), and
the electrodes are stimulated in rapid sequence to assess place pitch
perception. Then the patient-specific program is configured, tested
using live-voice stimuli, and automatically placed on the speech
processor's RAM.
Coding Strategies
In the Nucleus cochlear implant system, the primary function of the
speech processor is to analyze and encode the incoming acoustic
information and send it to the implanted receiver-stimulator. The
processor has been designed to ex-
 

Page 281
tract specific parameters of speech that are critical for speech
recognition. This method of signal processing is called speech feature
extraction and contrasts with a vocoder or filter bank approach, which
divides the incoming signal into a series of bandwidths that are then
assigned to specific electrode pairs.
The first speech processor encoded three parameters: the amplitude of
the ongoing acoustic signal, the fundamental frequency (F0), and the
second-formant frequency (F2) in the range of 800 to 4000 Hz (Tong
et al. 1979, 1980, 1982). Later, the estimate of the first-formant
frequency in the range of 280 to 1000 Hz was added to the encoding
scheme (Blamey, Dowell, Brown et al. 1987; Blamey, Dowell, Clark
et al. 1987; Blamey and Clark 1990; Dowell et al. 1987). In these
strategies, amplitude information is encoded as the amount of
electrical current delivered to an electrode pair. The amount of current
delivered falls between the measured threshold and maximum
acceptable listening level for each electrode pair and directly
translates into perceived loudness. The place of stimulation within the
cochlea varies and is dependent upon the estimates of the spectral
peaks that are measured in the Fl and F2 range. Approximately the
most apical one-third of the electrodes in the cochlea are assigned to
track F1 information. Each of these electrodes is assigned a frequency
bandwidth within the range of 280 to 1000 Hz. Thus, if the estimate of
Fl is 300 Hz, the most apical Fl electrode would be stimulated.
Conversely, if the F1 estimate is close to 1000 Hz, a more basal
electrode in the apical one-third of the array would be stimulated.
The remaining two-thirds of the electrodes track frequency
information in the F2 range. For inputs with a relatively high F2, one
of the basally placed electrodes is stimulated. If the estimate of F2 is
lower in frequency, then a more apically placed electrode in the F2
range would be stimulated. This strategy takes advantage of the
tonotopic organization of the cochlea, with the result that different

input frequencies generate different pitch perceptions for the listener.
The stimulus delivered to the selected Fl and F2 electrode pairs is
pulsatile and rapidly sequential, with the F2 electrode pair stimulated
first, followed by the F1 pair. Estimates of F1 and F2 are made in real
time. The rate of pulsatile stimulation to the selected electrode pairs
represents the fundamental frequency or voice pitch.
More recently, in an attempt to provide supplementary cues for
consonant recognition, the extraction of further high-frequency
information has been added to the parameters discussed above. This
latest speech feature coding strategy is called Multipeak (MPEAK).
This scheme extracts, encodes, and delivers the Fl and F2 estimates
and the amplitudes in three high-frequency bands: 2000 to 2800 Hz
(Band 3), 2800 to 4000 Hz (Band 4), and 4000 Hz and above (Band
5). A simplified block diagram of the speech processor is presented in
Figure 11.2. Three fixed basal electrodes (one for each band) are
stimulated according to the amount of energy detected in each of the
three bands. The speech processor digitizes the information and sends
it to the receiver-stimulator, where it is decoded. The stimulator
delivers charge-balanced biphasic current pulses to four
 

Page 282
Figure 11.2.
 A simplified block diagram of the Mini Speech Processor with its
custom-designed digital signal processor (DSP) and high-frequency filter chip.
specific pairs of electrodes along the implanted electrode array. These
electrical current pulses directly stimulate remaining neural tissue
(Dowell et al. 1990; Skinner et al. 1991; von Wallenberg and Battmer
1991).
A later development in speech coding research for the Nucleus device
is based on studies conducted by McDermott, McKay, and their
colleagues at the University of Melbourne using an experimental
Spectral Maxima Sound Processor (SMSP) (McDermott, McKay, and
Vandali 1992; McKay et al. 1991, 1992; McKay and McDermott
1993). These studies showed significantly improved speech
recognition, especially in the presence of background noise, when the
SMSP was compared to the commercially available MPEAK strategy.
Based on these findings, a new custom-designed CMOS integrated
circuit (IC) was developed. This IC contains twenty digitally
programmable bandpass filters that span the audio spectrum from 200
Hz to 10 kHz. A simplified block diagram of the new speech
processor with its twenty programmable filters is presented in Figure

11.3. These twenty filters are assigned to twenty of the twenty-two
electrodes on the Nucleus array in a tonotopic order. The
programmable filters are repetitively scanned, and the largest outputs
(or maxima) are selected and presented to their assigned electrodes.
Typically four to ten maxima are selected for every scan cycle. Figure
11.4 illustrates the selection of six maxima from the twenty filter
outputs.
The stimulation rate is adaptive in nature. When twenty stimulation
sites are available, the pulse rate on each channel varies between
approximately 180 and 300 Hz, depending upon the spectral
composition, the intensity of the incoming acoustic signal, and the
individual's speech processor program or MAP. For broad spectrum
signals such as vowels, more maxima are present, and the stim-
 

Page 283
 Figure 11.3. 
A simplified block diagram of the Spectra 22 processor with its
custom-designed digital signal processor (DSP) and SPEAK chip.
Figure 11.4. 
The SPEAK chip measures the energy in 20 programmable
filters and selects a predetermined number of bands (typically six) with the 
greatest energy. The electrode pairs assigned to the filters with the largest 
maxima are then selected for stimulation
ulation rate is reduced to allow a more detailed representation of the
spectral content. For sounds with limited spectral content, such as
high-frequency voiceless plosives or fricatives, fewer maxima are

present, and the stimulation rate increases automatically to provide
improved temporal resolution. This strategy is called Spectral Peak
(SPEAK).
 

Page 284
Application of Cochlear Implants to the Pediatric Population
Preoperative Evaluation
Cochlear implants are indicated for carefully selected, profoundly
deaf children, ages two to seventeen years, who show little or no
benefit from amplification. Table 11.1 provides the recommended
selection criteria. The clinical evaluation of a pediatric candidate
requires a team of professionals representing a variety of disciplines,
including otolaryngology, audiology, speech-language pathology,
psychology, and deaf education. In addition, the parents and family
play an important role in the team process.
Medical-Surgical Evaluation
Preoperatively, the otolaryngologist conducts a detailed evaluation of
the child's medical status. This consists of a comprehensive history,
physical examination, and high-resolution CAT scans. The history
should include information regarding the pregnancy, the child's
developmental milestones, any postnatal complications, additional
disabling conditions, and a family history related to hearing loss.
High-resolution CAT scans are used to estimate the degree of cochlear
patency. In some instances, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has
also been used (Yune, Miyamoto, and Yune 1991). Proper electrode
placement may be impeded by fibrous or bony occlusions in the
cochlea. Ossification of the cochlea is of greater concern in the
pediatric population for several reasons. First, a large proportion (42
to 64%) of the children who have received cochlear implants have
been deafened due to meningitis (Luxford and House 1985; Staller,
Beiter, and Brimacombe 1991; Staller et al. 1991; Yune, Miyamoto,
and Yune 1991). Secondly, studies have shown a higher incidence of
ossification in individuals deafened by meningitisand in
meningitically deafened children in particular (Balkany, Gantz, and

Nadol 1988; Eisenberg et al. 1984; Ketten 1994; Luxford and House
1985; Yune, Miyamoto, and Yune 1991).
Despite this concern, the average electrode insertion length of the
Nucleus array was 17.32 mm for a group of 212 meningitically
deafened children as
Table 11.1. Preoperative Selection Criteria
1. Profound sensorineural hearing loss, bilaterally.
2. At least two years of age.
3. Little or no benefit from hearing aids as defined by obtaining
virtually zero on open-set measures or
chance performance on closed-set segmental tasks.
4. No radiological contraindications.
5. No medical contraindications to undergoing the operation:
a. No deafness due to lesions of the acoustic nerve or central auditory
pathway;
b. No active middle ear infection;
c. No absence of cochlear development.
6. Appropriate trial period with hearing aids and a tactile device (when
necessary).
7. Recommend enrollment in educational settings that emphasize oral-
aural training.
8. Families and candidates (if possible) should be psychologically and
motivationally suitable.
 

Page 285
compared to 20.03 mm for a group of 294 nonmeningitically deafened
children. Studies have shown that, when the new bone formation is
limited to the inferior segment of the basal turn of the cochlea, a full
insertion of all thirty-two bands (approximately 25 mm) can be
achieved. When ossification extends throughout the cochlea, it is
possible to drill a bony trough and insert the electrode array up to 9
mm (Balkany, Gantz, and Nadol 1988).
High-resolution CAT scans are also used to determine whether
cochlear malformations are present. This type of malformation, often
called Mondini dysplasia, may include a small cochlear bud, an
incomplete cochlear partition, or a common cavity. For a complete
classification of the different categories of Mondini dysplasia, see
Jackler, Luxford, and House (1987). When these congenital
malformations are identified, a partial insertion of the electrode may
be anticipated due to the incomplete development of the sensory end-
organ. In addition, electrode array insertion may be impeded by a
perilymph gusher when the scala is opened (Clark, Cohen, and
Shepherd 1991; Cohen and Hoffman 1993; Webb et al. 1990). Despite
these concerns, 24 deaf children with congenital malformations had
been implanted by 1994 with the Nucleus multichannel device. The
average electrode insertion length was 17.88 mm for this group.
Cochlear agenesis and the absence of an eighth nerve are
contraindications to cochlear implantation (Jackler, Luxford, and
House 1987). These conditions are rare. When the Organ of Corti is
severely damaged due to infectious, traumatic, metabolic, or genetic
causes, some reduction in spiral ganglion cells may be expected. The
extent of spiral ganglion cell degeneration may have an impact on the
degree of benefit that can be derived from a multichannel cochlear
implant (Hinojosa and Marion 1983; Otte, Schuknecht, and Kerr
1978).

The general status of the auditory nerve can be evaluated using
preoperative electrical stimulation of the promontory or round
window. For this procedure, a transtympanic needle electrode is
placed on the promontory and a ground electrode on the cheek.
Alternatively, a tympanomeatal flap can be raised and a ball electrode
placed in the round window niche. In either case, small amounts of
electrical current are delivered, and the patient is asked to indicate
when sound is perceived. Although this technique has been used
extensively with profoundly deafened adults, it is difficult to test
young children using this behavioral method (Rickards et al. 1990).
Kileny (1991, 1994) has reported a modification of the procedure that
involves sedation of young children and the recording of electrically
elicited auditory brainstem and middle latency (where appropriate)
responses while stimulating the promontory(Kileny and Kemink
1987). This procedure is not done on a routine clinical basis. One
drawback is the difficulty in controlling the electrical stimulus artifact
generated, which can easily contaminate the evoked responses (Gardi
1985; Kileny 1991; Shallop et al. 1990; Waring, Don, and
Brimacombe 1985). Another concern is the sedation of young
children. In addition, experience has shown that the incidence of
nonstimulability in profoundly deafened
 

Page 286
children is very low. Of 126 children implanted with the 3M/House
single-channel cochlear implant, only two did not obtain auditory
sensations (Thielemeir et al. 1985). For the Nucleus multichannel
device, only 3 of 1905 children (0.15%) did not display behavioral
responses to electrical stimulation. Interestingly, three meningitically
deafened children who received the Nucleus device did not respond
initially to electrical stimulation. Following five to twelve months of
device use, reliable behavioral responses were noted (Geier et al.
1993).
The medical evaluation for candidacy should also include an
assessment of middle ear pathology. Otitis media is as prevalent in
profoundly deafened children as it is in the general pediatric
population. If an active condition is found, surgery may need to be
postponed until the sequelae of the otitis media have been resolved
(Clark, Cohen, and Shepherd 1991). In the past, there was concern
that the development of otitis media in children with cochlear
implants might lead to potentially life-threatening complications such
as labrynthitis and meningitis. Several studies have shown that the
presence of a cochlear implant does not increase the incidence or
severity of otitis media in children. In addition, no complications were
reported when otitis media occurred in the implanted ear (Clark,
Cohen, and Shepherd 1991; Cohen and Hoffman 1993; House,
Luxford, and Courtney 1985).
In summary, cochlear implantation of young children is a safe
procedure when performed by a well-trained otolaryngologist. The
overall medical-surgical complication rate in children has been
acceptably low and is less than that reported for adults.
Audiological Evaluation
The initial objective of the audiological evaluation is to determine the
extent of the hearing loss and whether any middle ear pathology

exists. Standard audiometric measures should be obtained; these
include unaided pure-tone thresholds under headphones for
frequencies ranging from 125 Hz to 8000 Hz, as well as bone
conduction, immittance, and acoustic reflex testing. The immittance
battery is administered to rule out significant middle ear pathology,
and acoustic reflexes should be consistent with a profound bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss. Electrophysiological tests may also be
performed to confirm the behavioral findings.
Once a profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss has been
determined, the degree of benefit obtained from amplification should
be assessed. First, sound field detection thresholds using warble tones
or narrow bands of noise should be obtained with high-gain
amplification. To ensure accuracy, measurements in decibels (dB)
sound pressure level (SPL) are made using a microphone placed at ear
level (close to the hearing aid microphone) and connected to a sound
level meter. To verify the appropriateness of the hearing aid fitting,
real ear measurements are recommended. For a thorough discussion of
hearing aid selection and evaluation, see chapter 10 and Skinner
(1988).
 

Page 287
For children who have not worn appropriately fitted hearing aids, an
extended trial with amplification should be undertaken. Generally, at
least a six-month trial is recommended. During this time, the child
should be enrolled in a (re)habilitation program that emphasizes the
development of auditory skills for communication. The training
should incorporate diagnostic therapy to assess the child's use of
amplified sound. For very young children, the training should
emphasize basic auditory concepts and the development of specific
vocabulary that will later be used in the assessment of aided speech
perception. The specific tests and methods for assessing speech
perception abilities in children of different age groups are described in
the sections that follow.
Speech-Language Evaluation
The primary benefits of cochlear implantation relate to the restoration
of hearing sensation and the improvement in speech perception
abilities. Important secondary benefits involve the development of
improved speech production and oral language skills, provided
adequate training is received. The speech-language pathologist on the
team should evaluate the child's general communication, with special
emphasis on speech production and receptive and expressive oral
language abilities. Although speech and language skills typically do
not determine a child's candidacy for implantation, the speech-
language pathologist may recommend additional habilitation before
surgery if a young child cannot communicate at a basic level using
either oral or manual means.
The objective of the speech production assessment is to evaluate the
fundamental skills that underlie expressive communication and to
measure more complex processes such as overall speech intelligibility
(Tobey and Hasenstab 1991). Speech production should be evaluated
using standardized tests whenever possible. The child's ability to

imitate nonsegmental contours and segmental speech patterns can be
assessed using the Ling Phonetic Level Speech Evaluation (Ling
1976). The Ling evaluation also provides logical sequences for
training speech production skills. The child's use of speech for
communicative purposes can be assessed using the Phonologic Level
Speech Evaluation (Ling 1976). An elicited or spontaneous language
sample is gathered while the child is engaged in play, enabling the
specialist to evaluate the child's speech skills, language abilities, and
general intelligibility.
The choice of test measures for evaluating receptive and expressive
language depends upon the child's chronologic age, mode of
communication, general linguistic competence, and cognitive
development. Standardized tests should be used whenever possible;
instruments that have norms for hearing-impaired children are
preferred. Two such tests are the Grammatical Analysis of Elicited
Language (GAEL) (Moog and Geers 1979, 1980) and the Rhode
Island Test of Language Structures (RITLS) (Engen and Engen 1983).
Both tests provide normative data for children in total communication
settings; the GAEL also has norms for
 

Page 288
children using oral communication. A commonly used test of
receptive vocabulary is the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised
(Dunn 1981).
Educational Assessment
The cochlear implant team may include an educational consultant
whose role is to interact with the child's teachers to determine the
child's current academic, auditory, cognitive, linguistic, and social
functioning in school (Nevins et al. 1991). Following implantation,
the educational consultant may conduct periodic school visits to
observe the child in the classroom and to give suggestions to the
classroom teachers regarding techniques for maximizing auditory skill
development. The child's teachers also should play an important role
in advising the cochlear implant team on the educational suitability of
a particular child for implantation. Postoperatively, the classroom
teacher plays a significant role in documenting changes in the child's
use of hearing as well as any changes in speech and language. It is
vital that the teachers communicate this information, including any
problems they observe, to the cochlear implant team.
Psychological Evaluation
The psychologist may provide meaningful information about
cognitive, social, and emotional development. It is critical to rule out
any significant organic abnormalities or personality disorders.
Typically, the psychologist interviews the parents and, when
appropriate, the older child to determine their motivation for
considering implantation and whether their expectations regarding
potential benefit are realistic. Tests of nonverbal intelligence may be
administered, such as the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence (WPPSI), Wechsler Performance Scale for children
(Wechsler 1967), the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-
Revised (WISC-R) (Wechsler 1974), and the Central Institute for the

Deaf (CID) Preschool Performance Scale (Geers and Lane 1984).
Family
The family plays a vital role in the evaluation and habilitation process
and is regarded as an integral part of the team. The parents provide
information regarding the child's communication skills within the
home and family environment. If a cochlear implant is considered, it
is imperative that the family realizes the long-term commitment and
support required for any child to achieve maximum potential.
Children Under the Age of Two Years
FDA indications for device use exclude children under the age of two
years. This age constraint has been set for several reasons. Although
the cochlea is adult size at birth, the mastoid bone of the skull is not
sufficiently developed to
 

Page 289
accommodate the receiver-stimulator package. Significant skull
growth takes place within the first two years of life (Mangham et al.
1986). The distance from the cochlear promontory to the mastoid
cortex increases approximately 1.7 cm from birth to adulthood; half of
this growth occurs during the first two years (O'Donoghue et al.
1986). In addition, when hearing loss has been diagnosed within the
first two years of life, there must be sufficient time to confirm the
degree of loss, the amount of aidable residual hearing, and the extent
to which hearing aids will be beneficial before making a
recommendation for cochlear implantation (Northern et al. 1986).
It is critical that young children with hearing loss be identified as early
as possible and fitted with appropriate amplification (see chapter 10).
Once this has been done, the child and parents should be enrolled in a
parent-infant stimulation program. One aim of the program should be
to facilitate the development of age-appropriate auditory skills,
leading to the child's use of oral language. The parents have the
greatest contact with the child and serve as the primary facilitators of
auditory skill development. Typically, the parent-infant program offers
the parents instruction and guidance in using daily activities to teach
listening skills and early language development. Hasenstab and
Horner (1982), Pollack (1985), and Schuyler and Rushmer (1987)
provide comprehensive reviews of parent-infant habilitation.
Throughout the habilitation period, there should be an ongoing
assessment of the child's utilization of amplified sound. For those
children who, after an appropriate trial period, do not show responses
to acoustic stimuli when using high-gain amplification, a tactile
device should be used in conjunction with the hearing aids. The tactile
device is added to facilitate stimulus-response conditioning. One
device used is the Tactaid 7 (Audiological Engineering Corporation).
This multichannel vibrotactile device extracts estimates of the first
and second formants and delivers the output to seven vibratory

stimulators worn on the back of the neck or on the sternum. More
information on other single-channel and multichannel vibrotactile and
electrotactile devices can be found in Weisenberger and Kozma-
Spytek (1991).
Preschool Children (Two To Five Years Of Age)
The evaluation and selection of young, profoundly deafened children
for cochlear implantation presents challenges concerning candidate
selection, device fitting, (re)habilitation, and determination of
postoperative outcome. These challenges are outweighed by the long-
term potential benefit derived from early intervention with a
multichannel cochlear implant.
If the child has been diagnosed recently with a profound sensorineural
hearing loss, a minimum six-month trial period with high-gain
amplification should be undertaken. During this period, the parent and
child should be enrolled in a parent-infant program for developing
auditory skills and conditioned responses. If the child was diagnosed
earlier in life and is making minimal progress with
 

traditional amplification, a determination must be made whether the ch
concepts underlying stimulus-response testing. If the child is not yet sh
responses to acoustic stimulation, a tactile aid should be used to teach o
child understands the stimulus-response paradigm. Once this has been 
tactile device should be removed for the purpose of assessment only. T
tested again in the unaided condition under earphones and in the aided 
aids only) in sound field to determine unaided (individual ear) and aide
across the frequency range.
Figure 11.5 illustrates typical preoperative unaided and aided detection
the frequency range for pediatric cochlear implant recipients. Also show
detection thresholds postoperatively with the cochlear implant. For the 
mean thresholds are shown. For the aided conditions, both means and s
are presented. Preoperatively, with high-gain amplification, these child
access to sound within the normal conversational speech spectrum, esp
Hz. Postoperatively, detection thresholds improved, falling well within
conversational speech range.
Following audiometric testing, a determination of aided speech percept
be made. Establishing the degree of benefit a young child receives from
tactile device can be challenging because young

Figure 11.5. 
Mean preoperative unaided thresholds obtained under headphones as a fu
quency for 284 children. Also shown, are mean ( ± one standard deviation) aided
in the sound field, preoperatively with hearing aids, and at the first annual postop
the cochlear implant. The conversational speech spectrum is illustrated by the
 

deaf children have limited linguistic abilities. Therefore, most standard
perception measures are inappropriate.
The Discrimination after Training (DAT) test was developed for use wi
young, profoundly deaf children who were evaluated for the 3M/House
channel cochlear implant (Thielemeir 1984). This test, which is admini
using monitored live-voice, consists of twelve levels and progresses in 
hierarchy of difficulty. It begins with the discrimination of a long versu
sound while lipreading to determine that the child understands the task 
1). It proceeds to auditory-only detection of sound (level 2), auditory-o
discrimination of nonlinguistic speech stimuli of various temporal patte
(levels 3 to 5), auditory-only discrimination of linguistic speech stimul
various patterns (levels 6 to 8), and auditory-only discrimination of spo
small sets (levels 9 to 12). Levels 9 through 12 require the perception o
spectral cues at a segmental level.
Figure 11.6 presents longitudinal mean scores on the DAT, both preope
and at five annual postoperative test intervals. These data show clinical
significant gains from preoperative to postoperative conditions. Preope
only 5 of 86 children (6%) achieved level 9 or higher. Scores at this lev
indicate some ability to process spectral cues. Postoperatively, at the
twelvemonth test interval, 43 of 77 children (56%) achieved level 9 or 
21 of these children (49%) reached level 12. At the 24-month test sessi
59 children (73%) achieved level 9 or higher; 33 of these children (77%
reached level 12. Clearly, this test is too easy for many young children 
a multichannel cochlear implant.
Another test that was developed specifically for young, profoundly dea
children is the Central Institute for the Deaf (CID) Early Speech Percep
(ESP)

Figure 11.6. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Discrimination After Training (D
preoperatively and at five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to 
 

Page 292
Test-Standard Version (Geers and Moog 1992; Moog and Geers
1990). This test consists of three subtests administered in the auditory-
only condition: pattern perception, spondee identification, and
monosyllable identification. The twelve-item pattern perception
subtest is the easiest and requires the child to identify words based on
the number of syllables (one, two, or three) and the stress patterns
(trochee versus spondee). The spondee and monosyllable subtests
require the identification of a specific stimulus item out of a set of
twelve alternatives. Each of the subtests requires a picture pointing
response. In addition, there is a low-verbal version of the ESP
designed for children ages two to three years who are unable to take
the standard version of the test (Moog and Geers 1990). The low-
verbal version incorporates the same three subtests as the standard
version but uses objects instead of pictures. The child is required to
select the stimulus item from a set of four alternatives.
Figures 11.7, 11.8, and 11.9 present pre-and postoperative mean
scores on the pattern perception, spondee identification, and
monosyllable identification subtests of the ESP battery. Scores
obtained on the two versions of the test have been combined.
Preoperatively, when the child is younger and vocabulary is more
limited, the low-verbal version may be used. Postoperatively, as the
child matures and vocabulary increases, the standard version is more
likely to be administered. The number of children who were
administered the spondee and monosyllable identification subtests
preoperatively is rather small. This is most likely because the test is
criterion based, and it is recommended that the more difficult subtests
not be given if the child does not demonstrate pattern perception (8
out of 12 items correct on the low-verbal version or 17 out of 24 items
correct on the standard version).

Figure 11.7. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the pattern perception
subtest of the Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at five
annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
 

Page 293
Figure 11.8. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the spondee subtest
of the Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at five annual 
postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
Figure 11.9. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the monosyllable
subtest of the Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at five
annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
Preoperatively, only three of 16 children (19%) showed pattern
perception. After twelve months of device use, 17 of 23 children
(74%) had this skill; 52% of the children scored 90% or higher on the
pattern perception subtest. On the more difficult subtests, after one

year of cochlear implant experience, 25% of the children scored 90%
or higher on spondee identification, and 36% scored 90% or higher on
monosyllable identification. Despite the small sample size
preoperatively, there is a clear trend toward improvement on all three
subtests after at least twelve months of cochlear implant use. There
was also a trend toward improvement over time, postoperatively.
 

Page 294
Another test developed for use with young hearing-impaired children
is the Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee (MTS) test (Erber and
Alencewicz 1976). It predates the ESP test and uses twelve pictured
stimuli consisting of four monosyllables, four trochees, and four
spondees. It assesses pattern perception and word identification. This
test is also administered in the auditory-only condition. The
longitudinal mean data for pattern perception and word identification
are presented in Figures 11.10 and 11.11, respectively. These data
show improve-
Figure 11.10. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the pattern subtest of the 
Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee (MTS) test, preoperatively and at five
annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.

Figure 11.11. Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the word subtest
of the Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee (MTS) test, preoperatively
and at five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
 

Page 295
Figure 11.12. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Northwestern
University Children's Perception of Speech (NU-CHIPS) test, preoperatively
and at five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
ments from the preoperative to the postoperative conditions. Repeated
measures analyses of variance revealed statistically significant
improvements in performance over time for twelve children who were
tested preoperatively, and at the first three annual postoperative test
intervals (F=12.97; P<.0001). The mean scores for this group were not
different from the data for all children tested (see Figures 11.10 and
11.11).
Another pediatric test of speech perception is the Northwestern
University Children's Perception of Speech (NU-CHIPS) test
developed by Elliott and Katz (1980) (see chapter 5). It is a more
difficult closed-set measure appropriate for children with more
sophisticated vocabularies. The test consists of monosyllabic words in
a four-alternative picture paradigm. There are fifty items,
administered auditory-only. Figure 11.12 presents longitudinal mean
data for the NU-CHIPS test. Preoperatively, on average, the children
did not score significantly above chance. At the one year
postoperative test interval, mean performance was significantly above

chance. A significant improvement between the first and second
annual postoperative test periods was also noted (t = 3.67; p <.002).
There are few tests of open-set word recognition that are appropriate
for young deaf children. One closed-set test that has been adapted for
administration in an open-set format is the Glendonald Auditory
Screening Procedure (GASP) (Erber 1982; Thielemeir et al. 1985).
This twelve-item test measures word recognition using simple
vocabulary that varies in syllable length (e.g. fish, toothbrush, Santa
Claus). Figure 11.13 presents longitudinal mean data on this measure,
preoperatively and at five annual postoperative intervals. Few young
children have been given this test preoperatively (N = 6 in our
sample). The mean score for these six children was less than one word
correct. A child who
 

Page 296
Figure 11.13. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Glendonald Auditory
Screening Procedure (GASP), preoperatively and at five annual
postoperative intervals, for children ages two to five years.
recognizes more than one word on the GASP typically would not be
considered for cochlear implantation.
Postoperatively, there was a clear trend toward improved performance
between the first and second annual test sessions. For a group of
thirteen children who were tested at both the one-and two-year test
periods, mean scores were significantly better at the two-year interval
(mean = 35%, S.D. = 32% at one year; mean = 60%, S.D. = 38% at
two years; t = 4.12; p <0.001). These average scores at the one-and
two-year intervals were very similar to the mean scores of all children
tested. After one year of cochlear implant experience, 17 of 33
children (52%) showed no open-set word recognition; 16 of the
children (48%) scored 25% or greater on this simple open-set test. In
contrast, after two years of implant use, only five of 37 children (14%)
had no open-set word recognition; 30 of these children (81%) scored
25% or higher.
Summary: Preschool Children

Regarding the audiological evaluation of the young child, the typical
candidate presents with a profound sensorineural hearing loss and
little residual hearing above 1000 Hz. These children do not detect
conversational speech levels even with appropriately fit high-gain
amplification. For those children who have detection thresholds
within the average conversational speech spectrum, detection is most
likely limited to the low-frequency region.
During the aided speech perception evaluation, these children may
demonstrate above chance performance on the easiest subtest of the
ESP (pattern) but may not score high enough to be considered pattern
perceivers (17 out of 24 items correct). On the more difficult spondee
subtest of the ESP, these children
 

Page 297
may score above chance, but average performance typically falls
below the criterion level for demonstration of some word
identification ability (8 out of 24 spondees). On the most difficult
subtest of the ESP (monosyllables), these children may score at
chance levels. If above chance scores are achieved, the typical
cochlear implant recipient will score well below 54% (the criterion
level for consistent word identification). If performance on the
monosyllables subtest exceeds 50%, the child most likely is receiving
too much benefit from hearing aids to be considered a cochlear
implant candidate. It is unlikely that a young child who is being
considered for cochlear implantation would score above chance
preoperatively on the NU-CHIPS or MTS tests, in part due to the
more difficult vocabulary. Similarly, scores on the open-set GASP test
would most likely be below 10% (one out of 12 words correct).
School-Age Children (Six To Seventeen Years Of Age)
When determining candidacy for a cochlear implant, the young
school-age child presents similar challenges to the preschool child.
Most likely, the profound nature of these children's hearing loss has
been confirmed already, and they have been wearing hearing aids.
However, they may not have gained enough benefit from
amplification to develop auditory skills beyond basic detection or
simple discrimination. Oral language for communication purposes
may be very limited.
For children in this age group, standard audiometric testing techniques
should be used to confirm the amount of residual hearing, bilaterally.
For children under the age of ten years, the tests of speech perception
described in the section on Preschool Children will be administered to
assess benefit from amplification. If the child's vocabulary is
sufficiently developed and test scores on the ESP are high, the NU-
CHIPS test or the Word Intelligibility by Picture Identification (WIPI)

test (Ross and Lerman 1971) should be administered. The WIPI is a
twenty-five-item monosyllabic word test, using a six-alternative
picture-pointing paradigm. It can be administered in three conditions:
auditory-only, speechreading only, and the bimodal condition.
Whenever possible, it is helpful to obtain a measure of speechreading
ability with and without amplification to help in the determination of
general hearing aid benefit.
Another test that can be used to measure speechreading abilities is the
Craig Lipreading Inventory-Word Recognition (Cochlear Corporation
1990a; Craig 1964; Jeffers and Barley 1977). It is a thirty-three-item
monosyllabic word test, using a four-alternative picture-pointing
paradigm. The Craig Lipreading Inventory is administered in the
speechreading-only and auditory-speechreading conditions.
To assess open-set word recognition abilities, the GASP (described in
the section on Preschool Children) or the Kindergarten Phonetically
Balanced Word List (PBK) (Haskins 1949) can be administered. The
PBK is a very difficult test.
 

Page 298
The stimulus items are monosyllabic, the vocabulary is more
advanced, and there are more test items than the GASP (50 versus 12).
If a child achieves a score of two or more words correct on the GASP
or PBK tests, some benefit from amplification is evident, and the child
would not be considered a cochlear implant candidate.
For older children, it is also beneficial to assess open-set sentence
recognition. Few sentence tests have been developed for children.
Consequently, measures typically administered to adults may be given
if the child's vocabulary is fairly well developed. Examples of open-
set sentence recognition measures include the CID Sentences of
Everyday Speech test (Davis and Silverman 1978), the Bamford-
Kowal-Bench (BKB) Sentences (Bench and Bamford 1979), and the
Iowa Sentence Understanding With and Without Context, which is an
adaptation of the BKB Sentences test (Tyler, Preece, and Lowder
1983). If the child is older and postlinguistically deafened, a battery of
tests may be used that has been developed for the assessment of adults
(Cochlear Corporation 1986). It includes three closed-set measures:
the Four-Choice Spondee subtest of the Minimal Auditory
Capabilities (MAC) Battery (Owens et al. 1985), and the Iowa Vowel
and Medial Consonant tests (Tyler, Preece, and Lowder 1983). The
Four-Choice Spondee test is the easiest in the battery. It consists of 20
spondaic word items in a 4-alternative format. The Iowa Vowel test
assesses the identification of the nine pure vowels in American
English within a hVd context. It is a 45-item, 9-alternative task. The
Iowa Medial Consonant test is the hardest closed-set measure in this
battery. It consists of nonsense syllables in an aCa context. It is a 70-
item 14-alternative test.
Three open-set measures are included in this battery. The CID
Sentences of Everyday Speech and the Iowa Sentence Understanding
Without Context assess open-set sentence recognition. The CID
Sentences test consists of twenty sentences. It is scored by the number

of key words correctly identified out of one hundred. The Iowa
Sentences test contains thirty sentences and eighty-eight key words.
The Northwestern University No. 6 (NU #6) Monosyllabic Word test
(Tillman and Carhart 1966) assesses open-set word recognition and is
the most difficult test in the battery. It consists of fifty items and is
scored for the number of words and phonemes correctly identified.
Several tests have been developed by Osberger and colleagues
(Osberger et al., 1991). These include the Change/No Change,
Minimal Pairs, Hoosier Auditory Visual Enhancement, and Common
Phrases tests. These measures assess speech perception from simple
discrimination (Change/No Change) through open-set word
recognition (Common Phrases). They are used primarily with school-
age children and are not commercially available.
The speech perception battery for assessing benefit from amplification
will most likely begin with the administration of the ESP, unless the
child is much older and postlinguistically deafened. Figures 11.14,
11.15, and 11.16 present mean scores obtained on the pattern,
spondee, and monosyllable subtests of the
 

Pag
Figure 11.14. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the pattern subtest of the
Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at the five annual postope
intervals, for children ages six to seventeen years.
Figure 11.15. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the spondee
subtest of the Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at the 
five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen years.
ESP, preoperatively and at five annual postoperative evaluations. The d
are strikingly similar to the data on the two-to five-year-old children.
Other tests of closed-set pattern and word identification include the MT
and NU-CHIPs tests. Figures 11.17 and 11.18 provide mean scores for

these two measures, preoperatively and at five annual postoperative tes
intervals. Again, the data are very similar to the average performance
achieved by the preschool children. For the school-age children, a
statistically significant improvement on all closed-set measures was
observed between the preoperative
 

Page 300
Figure 11.16. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the monosyllable
subtest of the Early Speech Perception (ESP) test, preoperatively and at the five
annual postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen years.
Figure 11.17. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the pattern
and word subtests of the Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee (MTS) test, 
preoperatively and at the five annual postoperative intervals,
for children ages six to seventeen years.
and the first annual postoperative test session. In addition, repeated
measures analyses of variance revealed a statistically significant main
effect of length of cochlear implant use for several test measures

(MTS pattern, ESP pattern, NUCHIPS). For the NUCHIPS test, mean
scores were found to be significantly improved over the first four
postoperative intervals for a group of nineteen children (F = 12.33, p
<.0001). For these nineteen children, mean scores were 36% at
 

Page 301
Figure 11.18. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Northwestern
University Children's Perception of Speech (NU-CHIPS) test, preoperatively and 
at the five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen years
one year, 42% at two years, 48% at three years, and 54% at four years,
postimplantation. These mean scores are all significantly above chance
levels.
Several measures of open-set word and sentence recognition have
been administered to school-age children, including the GASP, PBK
monosyllables, and CID Sentences of Everyday Speech tests. Mean
scores on each of these measures can be found in Figures 11.19, 11.20,
and 11.21, respectively. For the GASP test, the mean scores for the
school-age children were very similar to those obtained for the
preschool children at the preoperative test interval, but were poorer at
each of the annual evaluations, postoperatively. At the preoperative
test interval, 41 of 45 (91%) of the children tested scored zero or one
word correct. At the one-year postoperative evaluation, 45 of 81
children tested (56%) scored zero or one word correct, whereas 26 of
81 children tested (32%) scored 25% or higher. At the second year
evaluation, 38 of 80 children tested (48%) scored zero or one word
correct, whereas 34 of 80 children tested (43%) scored 25% or higher.

Mean scores for the GASP, PBK monosyllables, and CID Sentences
tests were near zero preoperatively, and paired t-tests revealed a
statistically significant improvement in performance from the
preoperative to the first postoperative evaluations for all three
measures (GASP: n=26, t=3.71, P<.001; PBK: n=19, t=2.32, p<.03;
CID Sentences n=27, t=2.95, p<.007). In addition, repeated measures
analyses of variance revealed a main effect of length of cochlear
implant use for the CID Sentences test (F=9.87, p<.001), but not the
PBK monosyllables. For 11 children who had been evaluated on the
CID Sentences test at each of the first three postoperative evaluations,
mean scores improved from 17% at one year, to 29% at two years, and
34% after three years of implant use.
 

Page
Figure 11.19. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Glendonald
Auditory Screening Procedure (GASP), preoperatively and at the five annual
postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen years.
Figure 11.20. 
Mean word and phoneme scores (± one standard deviation)
for the Phonetically Balanced Kindergarten Word List (PBK), preoperatively
and at the five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen y
Summary: School-Age Children
The school-age child has a preoperative audiologic profile that is very
similar to that of the preschool child. One advantage in the assessment 
the school-age child is the wider range of tests available. For example,

speechreading measures may have been given to the older school-age
child, unlike the preschool child, who rarely has the visual attention
necessary to take such a test. If a speechreading measure has been give
scores for the bimodal condition are often very simi-
 

Page
Figure 11.21. 
Mean scores (± one standard deviation) for the Central Institute 
for the Deaf (CID) Sentences of Everyday Speech test, preoperatively
and at the five annual postoperative intervals, for children ages six to seventeen y
lar to the speechreading-only condition. If the child's vocabulary is mor
advanced and an open-set word or sentence recognition test has been
administered, the typical cochlear implant candidate will score near zer
on these measures preoperatively.
Device Fitting
When the pediatric clinical trial began with the Nucleus multichannel
device, concern was raised over the feasibility of measuring electrical
thresholds and maximum acceptable listening levels for very young
children whose exposure to auditory information had been limited.
Clinical experience has proven that with adequate stimulus-response
training preoperatively, even two-year-old children can be successfully
with the device.
A typical programming session for a young child involves the use of pl
audiometry techniques to determine the electrical threshold levels for e
electrode pair, using an ascending stimulus presentation technique. For
assessment of maximum acceptable listening levels, it is important to

increase slowly the amount of electrical stimulation to avoid an aversio
response from the child. When working with younger children who are
developing the concepts of loudness scaling, clinicians may use
behavioral observation to establish thresholds for hearing and to ensure
that the device is set at comfortable levels. These behavioral changes
might include quieting or subtle changes in facial expression (see chap
4). Cochlear Corporation (1990b) has developed programming cards fo
older children that allow them to associate a soft or loud, but comfortab
sound with a particular picture; other cards have also been developed to
teach the concept of high and low pitch.
 

Page 304
For the very young child, the clinician may obtain measurements on
only a few electrode pairs during the initial programming session.
These measurements are configured into a program for the child to
wear home. Additional measurements will be made, and electrode
pairs added to the child's program at subsequent sessions. Typically,
the measurements for all electrode pairs can be made during the first
two or three programming sessions, even for very young children. As
the child gains experience listening through the cochlear implant,
these measurements are refined.
Educational Setting
For years, there has been ongoing debate concerning the most
appropriate method of educating deaf children. Several methods have
been advocated: total communication, auditory-oral, and manual (see
chapter 12). All auditory-oral programs emphasize the importance of
developing audition; they vary in the amount of speechreading
support utilized. Total communication (TC) aims to combine the use
of auditory-oral and signed communication. In reality, many TC
programs do not emphasize the auditory-oral component and are
primarily manual in nature. Strictly manual programs use American
Sign Language (ASL) rather than signed English systems.
Educators have speculated that children with cochlear implants might
derive more benefit from them when they are placed in programs that
emphasize the use of audition and spoken language for
communication (Boothroyd, Geers, and Moog 1991). Over a period of
years, implanted children have been placed in both TC and auditory-
oral environments. Postoperative GASP data were reviewed to
determine whether differences existed between the open-set word
recognition abilities of congenitally deafened children in oral and TC
programs. Data from the most recent postoperative evaluation period
(most often the second or third annual interval) were analyzed for

seventy children. Twenty-six children were educated in oral settings.
For this group, 77% had open-set word recognition (two or more
words correct); 42% scored 50% or greater. The remaining forty-four
children were in TC programs. For these children, 34% showed open-
set word recognition; 18% scored 50% or higher.
Figures 11.22 and 11.23 present individual data on the GASP for
congenitally deaf children as a function of age at implant and
educational setting. In general, children implanted before the age of
seven years displayed better speech recognition abilities, despite
educational setting. Of the 26 children in oral programs, 13 were
implanted before the age of seven years, and 12 of these children
scored greater than 30% on the GASP. Of the 13 children implanted
after the age of seven, eight developed some open-set word
recognition abilities. Of the 44 children educated in TC programs, 17
were implanted before the age of seven years, and 9 of them achieved
open-set scores of 25% or greater. Of the 27 children implanted after
the age of seven, only 5 children demonstrated any open-
 

Page 305
Figure 11.22. 
Individual postoperative scores on the Glendonald
Auditory Screening Procedure (GASP) for congenitally deafened children,
educated in auditory-oral settings, as a function of the age at implantation.
Figure 11.23. 
Individual postoperative scores of the Glendonald Auditory 
Screening Procedure (GASP) for congenitally deafened children, educated 
in total communication settings, as a function of the age at implantation.
set word recognition. It appears that children implanted at an early age
are more likely to achieve open-set word recognition. In addition,
children in oral environments may reach higher levels of performance
with the cochlear implant than children in total communication
programs.

Controversies
Ethical issues have been raised by the Deaf community regarding the
use of cochlear implants in children (see chapter 13). Specifically, the
National Association for the Deaf (NAD) takes exception to the
decision of the FDA
 

Page 306
regarding its approval of the Nucleus multichannel device for
children. The NAD position paper, prepared by the Task Force on
Cochlear Implants in Children (Lane et al. 1991), raises several issues
concerning the scientific merit, clinical protocol and procedures, and
the social implications of cochlear implantation. The NAD position
paper makes general statements about the lack of scientific evidence
of benefit from the device, without citing any data to support their
position. The position paper criticizes the fact that no one from the
Deaf community was a member of the FDA's Ear, Nose, and Throat
Advisory Panel, which voted unanimously to approve the device.
One of the group's main concerns is that parents who are making the
decision to proceed with a cochlear implant for their child may be
poorly informed about the Deaf Culture. Lane (1992) believes that the
child's inability to give informed consent for cochlear implantation is
a serious ethical issue. He implies that parents should not be allowed
to assume this responsibility. He further states that even if cochlear
implants provided essentially normal hearing, young deaf children
should not be implanted. What seems to be at the heart of the
controversy is the perception that the Deaf Culture will be eliminated
by the advent of widespread cochlear implantation in children.
The NAD has taken an extreme position on the issue of pediatric
cochlear implantation. Cohen (1994) argues strongly that there is a
substantial body of scientific evidence regarding the merits of
cochlear implantation, especially with early intervention. In addition,
he believes that it is the parents' responsibility to choose any medical
treatment that they believe is in the best interests of their child.
According to Cohen, deaf children of hearing parents are not members
of the Deaf community until they willingly choose to become
members or until their parents make that decision for them before the
age of consent. There is a growing body of data supporting Cohen's
assertion that there is a window of opportunity within which early

intervention will allow young deaf children to achieve optimal benefit
from cochlear implantation. To defer implantation until the child can
make the decision for himself decreases the likelihood of a successful
outcome.
Future Directions
Many improvements in cochlear implant design have been studied,
and some have been introduced. As more complex speech encoding
strategies have been developed, providing greater redundancy in the
electrical signal delivered, open-set speech recognition has improved
(Dowell et al. 1987, 1990; McDermott, McKay, and Vandali 1992;
McKay et al. 1991, 1992; McKay and McDermott 1993; Skinner et
al. 1991, 1994; Tye-Murray, Lowder, and Tyler 1990; von Wallenberg
and Battmer 1991; Wilson et al. 1991).
The growing body of evidence suggests that performance can be
enhanced further by additional developments in signal processing
technology. The use of a greater number of channels of electrical
stimulation to provide more spectral
 

Page 307
information shows promise. For example, the new SPEAK strategy
described earlier uses six to eight channels within one scan cycle to
convey additional information about the highest amplitude spectral
energy. A study of sixty-five postlinguistically deafened adults
comparing speech perception with the SPEAK and current MPEAK
coding strategies has shown improved performance for test measures
in quiet and especially in noise (Skinner et al. 1994).
Ongoing research also suggests that the delivery of higher stimulation
rates, which may better represent the temporal fine structure of
speech, has the potential to enhance speech understanding. Wilson and
his colleagues (1991) have shown improved open-set speech
recognition when using a six-channel continuous interleaved sampling
(CIS) strategy. A key feature of this strategy is its high rate of
stimulation on each channel, usually above 800 Hz.
Improvements in digital signal processing may enable greater
preservation of important amplitude and spectral cues in speech and
environmental sounds such as music. Improved noise reduction
techniques may allow even better speech comprehension in the
presence of background noise. As microelectronic technology
develops, devices will become smaller.
In the future, the selection criteria for cochlear implantation may be
broadened slightly. Miyamoto et al. (1993) and Osberger (1994) have
studied profoundly deaf children who obtained limited benefit of
various degrees from their hearing aids and compared their
performance to that of children with the Nucleus device. These data
suggest that children with cochlear implants often perform as well as,
or better than, the children who used hearing aids. The Nucleus device
has been studied in postlinguistically deafened adults who have small
amounts of residual hearing and derive some benefit from hearing
aids. Results of this multisite clinical trial have shown that speech

perception abilities are significantly improved with the use of the
multichannel device (Brimacombe et al. 1993). As cochlear implant
technology improves and provides ever greater levels of speech
recognition, more children with severe-to-profound hearing losses and
marginal benefit from amplification may be considered for cochlear
implantation.
References
Audiological Engineering Corporation, 35 Medford Street,
Somerville, MA.
Balkany, T., B.J. Gantz, and J.B. Nadol. 1988. Multichannel cochlear
implants in partially ossified cochleas. Annals of Otology, Rhinology,
and Laryngology (Suppl. 135) 97:3-7.
Beiter, A.L., and J.A. Brimacombe. 1993. Cochlear implants. In
Rehabilitative audiology: Children and adults, ed. J.G. Alpiner and
P.A. McCarthy, 417-440. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins.
Bench, J., and J. Bamford, eds. 1979. Speech-hearing tests and the
spoken language of hearing-impaired children. London: Academic
Press.
Berliner, K.I., and L.S. Eisenberg. 1985. Methods and issues in the
cochlear implantation of children: An overview. The cochlear implant:
An auditory prosthesis for the profoundly deaf child. Ear and Hearing
(Suppl. 6) 3:6S-13S.
 

Page 308
Blarey, P.J., and G.M. Clark. 1990. Place coding of vowel formants
for cochlear implant patients. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 88:667-673.
Blarney, P.J., R.C. Dowell, A.M. Brown, G.M. Clark, and P.M.
Seligman. 1987. Vowel and consonant recognition of cochlear implant
patients using formant-estimating speech processors. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 82:48-57.
Blarney, P.J., R.C. Dowell, G.M. Clark, and P.M. Seligman. 1987.
Acoustic parameters measured by a formant-estimating speech
processor for a multiple-channel cochlear implant. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 82:38-47.
Boothroyd, A., A.E. Geers, and J.S. Moog. 1991. Practical
implications of cochlear implants in children. In Multichannel
cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing
(Suppl. 12) 4:81S-89S.
Brimacombe, J.A., P.L. Arndt, S.J. Staller, and A.L. Beiter. 1993.
Multichannel cochlear implantation in adults with severe-to-profound
sensorineural hearing loss. Paper presented at the Third International
Cochlear Implant Conference, April 4-7. Innsbruck, Austria.
Brimacombe, J.A., and A.L. Beiter. 1994. The application of digital
technology to cochlear implants. In Understanding digitally
programmable hearing aids, ed. R.E. Sandlin. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.
Clark, G.M., P.J. Blarney, A.M. Brown, et al. 1987a. The engineering
of the receiver/stimulator and speech processor. In The University of
Melbourne-Nucleus multielectrode cochlear implant, ed. C.R. Pfaltz.
Advances in Otorhinolaryngology 38:63-84. Basel: Karger.
.The surgery. 1987b. In The University of Melbourne-Nucleus

multielectrode cochlear implant, ed. C.R. Pfaltz. Advances in
Otorhinolaryngology 38:93-112.
Clark, G.M., N.L. Cohen, and R.K. Shepherd. 1991. Surgical safety
considerations of multichannel cochlear implants in children. In
Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl. 12) 4: 15S-24S.
Clark, G.M., B.K.-H. Franz, B.C. Pyman, and R.L. Webb. 1991.
Surgery for multichannel cochlear implantation. In Cochlear
implants: A practical guide, ed. H. Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers
Ltd.
Cochlear Corporation. 1986. Cochlear Corporation/University of
Iowa cochlear implant test battery. Englewood, CO: Resource Point.
.1990a. Craig lipreading inventory-word recognition. Englewood,
CO: Resource Point.
.1990b. Pediatric test materials and programming kit. Englewood,
CO: Resource Point.
Cohen, N.L. 1994. The ethics of cochlear implants in young children.
American Journal of Otology 15:1-2.
Cohen, N.L., and R.A. Hoffman. 1993. Complications of cochlear
implant surgery. In Complications in head and neck surgery, ed. D.W.
Eisele. St Louis: Mosby.
Craig, W.N. 1964. Effects of preschool training on the development of
reading and lipreading skills of deaf children. American Annals of the
Deaf 109:280-296.
Davis, H., and S.R. Silverman. 1978. Hearing and deafness. 3rd ed.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Dorman, M.F., M.T. Hannley, K. Dankowski, L. Smith, and G.
McCandless. 1989. Word recognition by 50 patients fitted with the

Symbion multichannel cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 10:44-49.
Dowell, R.C., P.M. Seligman, P.J. Blarney, and G.M. Clark. 1987.
Speech perception using a two-formant 22-electrode cochlear
prosthesis in quiet and in noise. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 104:439-
446.
 

Page 309
Dowell, R.C., L.A. Whitford, P.M. Seligman, B.K.-H. Franz, and
G.M. Clark. 1990. Preliminary results with a miniature speech
processor for the 22-electrode Melbourne cochlear hearing prosthesis.
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 98:1167-1173.
Dunn, L. 1981. Peabody picture vocabulary test (Revised). Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Services.
Eisenberg, L.S., and W.F. House. 1982. Initial experience with the
cochlear implant in children. In Cochlear implants: Progress and
perspectives, ed. W.F. House and K.I. Berliner. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl.) 91:67-73.
Eisenberg, L.S., W.M. Luxford, T.S. Becker, and W.F. House. 1984.
Electrical stimulation of the auditory system in children deafened by
meningitis. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 92:700-705.
Elliott, L., and D. Katz. 1980. Northwestern University children's
perception of speech (NUCHIPS). St. Louis: Auditec.
Engen, E., and T. Engen. 1983. Rhode Island test of language
structure. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Erber, N.P. 1982. Auditory training. Washington, D.C.: Alexander
Graham Bell Association for the Deaf.
Erber, N.P., and C.M. Alencewicz. 1976. Audiologic evaluation of
deaf children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:256-267.
Gardi, J.N. 1985. Human brain stem and middle latency responses to
electrical stimulation: Preliminary observations. In Cochlear implants,
ed. R.A. Schindler and M.M. Merzenich. New York: Raven Press.
Geers, A.E., and H.S. Lane. 1984. The CID preschool performance
scale. Chicago: Stoelting.
Geers, A.E., and J.S. Moog. 1992. The Central Institute for the Deaf

cochlear implant study: A progress report. Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology and Audiology 16:129-140.
Geier, L., J. Gilden, C. Luetje, and H. Maddox. 1993. Delayed
perception of cochlear implant stimulation in children with
postmeningitic ossified cochleae. American Journal of
Otolaryngology 14:556-561.
Hasenstab, M.S., and J.S. Horner. 1982. Comprehensive intervention
with hearing-impaired infants and preschool children. Rockville:
Aspen Systems.
Haskins, J. 1949. Kindergarten phonetically balanced word lists
(PBK). St Louis: Auditec.
Hinojosa, R., and M. Marion. 1983. Histopathology of profound
sensorineural deafness. In Cochlear prostheses: An international
symposium, ed. C.W. Parkins and S.W. Anderson. New York: New
York Academy of Sciences.
House, W.F., and K.I. Berliner. 1991. Cochlear implants: From idea to
clinical practice. In Cochlear implants: A practical guide, ed. H.
Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
House, W.F., W.M. Luxford, and B. Courtney. 1985. Otitis media in
children following the cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing (Suppl.)
6:24S-26S.
Jackler, R.K., W.M. Luxford, and W.F. House. 1987. Congenital
malformations of the inner ear: A classification based on
embryogenesis. Laryngoscope (Suppl. 40) 90:2-14.
Jeffers, J., and M. Barley. 1977. Speech reading: ''Lipreading.''
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Ketten, D.R. 1994. Differences in postmeningitic inner ear occlusions
in children vs. adults. Paper presented at the Fifth Symposium on
Cochlear Implants in Children, February 4-5. New York.

 

Page 310
Kileny, P. 1991. Use of electrophysiologic measures in the
management of children with cochlear implants: Brainstem, middle
latency, and cognitive (P300) responses. In Cochlear implants in
children, ed. R.T. Miyamoto and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of
Otolaryngology (Suppl.) 12:37-42.
.1994. Objective measures: Evoked potentials as indicators of
auditory electrical excitability. Paper presented at the Fifth
Symposium on Cochlear Implants in Children, February 4-5. New
York.
Kileny, P., and J.L. Kemink. 1987. Electrically evoked middle-latency
auditory potentials in cochlear implant candidates. Archives of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 113:1072-1077.
Lane, H. 1992. The mask of benevolence. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.
Lane, H., B. Brauer, L. Fleischer, J. Groode, N. Marbury, and M.
Schwartz. 1991. Cochlear implants in children: A position paper of
the National Association of the Deaf. NAD Broadcaster (March).
Ling, D. 1976. Speech and the hearing impaired child: Theory and
practice. Washington, D.C.: Alexander Graham Bell Association.
Luxford, W.M., and D.E. Brackmann. 1985. The history of cochlear
implants. In Cochlear implants, ed. R.F. Gray. San Diego: College-
Hill Press.
Luxford, W.M., and W.F. House. 1985. Cochlear implants in children:
Medical and surgical considerations. Ear and Hearing (Suppl) 6:20S-
23S.
Mangham, C.A., W.M. Luxford, T.J. Balkany, F.O. Black, N.L.
Cohen, B.J. Gantz, M.S. Hirshorn, J.L. House, S.A. Martinez, R.E.
Mischke, R.T. Miyamoto, M. Novak, and J.J. Shea. 1986. Cochlear

prosthesis surgery in children. In Cochlear implants in children, ed.
D.J. Mecklenburg. Seminars in Hearing 7:361-369.
McDermott, H.J., C.M. McKay, and A.E. Vandali. 1992. A new
portable sound processor for the University of Melbourne-Nucleus
limited multielectrode cochlear implant. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 91:3367-3371.
McKay, C.M., and H.J. McDermott. 1993. Perceptual performance of
subjects with cochlear implants using the spectral maxima sound
processor (SMSP) and the mini speech processor (MSP). Ear and
Hearing 14:350-367.
McKay, C.M., H.J. McDermott, A.E. Vandali, and G.M. Clark. 1991.
Preliminary results with a six spectral maxima sound processor for the
University of Melbourne-Nucleus multiple-electrode cochlear
implant. Journal of the Otolaryngological Society of Australia 6:354-
359.
.1992. A comparison of speech perception of cochlear implantees
using the spectral maxima sound processor (SMSP) and the MSP
(multipeak) processor. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 112:752-761.
Mecklenburg, D.J., M.E. Demorest, and S.J. Staller. 1991. Scope and
design of the clinical trial of the Nucleus multichannel cochlear
implant in children. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children,
ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4): 10S-14S.
Mecklenburg, D.J., and E. Lehnhardt. 1991. The development of
cochlear implants in Europe, Asia, and Australia. In Cochlear
implants: A practical guide, ed. H. Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers
Ltd.
Mecklenburg, D.J., and J.K. Shallop. 1988. Cochlear implants. In
Handbook of speech-language pathology and audiology, ed. N.J.
Lass, L.V. McReynolds, J.L. Northern, and D.E. Yoder. Toronto: B.C.

Decker.
 

Page 311
Miyamoto, R.T., M.J. Osberger, S.L. Todd, and A.M. Robbins. 1993.
Speech perception skills of children with multichannel cochlear
implants. Paper presented at the Third International Cochlear Implant
Conference, April 4-7. Innsbruck, Austria.
Moog, J., and A. Geers. 1979. Grammatical analysis of elicited
language: Simple sentence level. St. Louis: Central Institute for the
Deaf.
.1980. Grammatical analysis of elicited language: Complex sentence
level. St. Louis: Central Institute for the Deaf.
.1990. Early speech perception test for profoundly hearing-impaired
children. St. Louis: Central Institute for the Deaf.
Nevins, M.E., R.E. Kretschmer, P.M. Chute, S.A. Hellman, and S.C.
Parisier. 1991. The role of an educational consultant in a pediatric
cochlear implant program. Volta Review 93: 197-204.
Northern J.L., F.O. Black, J.A. Brimacombe, N.L. Cohen, L.S.
Eisenberg, S.V. Kuprenas, S.A. Martinez, and R.E. Mischke. 1986.
Selection of children for cochlear implantation. In Cochlear implants
in children, ed. D.J. Mecklenburg. Seminars in Hearing 7:341-347.
O'Donoghue, G.M., R.K. Jackler, W.M. Jenkins, and R.A. Schindler.
1986. Cochlear implantation in children: The problem of head growth.
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 94:78-81.
Osberger, M.J. 1994. Auditory perception and speech production
results. Paper presented at the Fifth Symposium on Cochlear Implants
in Children, April 4-5, New York.
Osberger, M.J., A.M. Robbins, R.T. Miyamoto, S.W. Berry, W.A.
Myres, K.S. Kessler, and M.L. Pope. 1991. Speech perception
abilities of children with cochlear implants, tactile aids, or hearing
aids. In Cochlear implants in children, ed. R.T. Miyamoto and M.J.

Osberger. American journal of Otology (Suppl.) 12:105-115.
Otte, J., H.F. Schuknecht, and A.G. Kerr. 1978. Ganglion cell
populations in normal and pathological human cochlea: Implications
for cochlear implantation. Laryngoscope 88: 1231-1246.
Owens, E., D. Kessler, C. Telleen, M. Raggio, and E. Schubert. 1985.
The minimal auditory capabilities battery. St. Louis: Auditec.
Patrick, J.F., and G.M. Clark. 1991. The Nucleus 22-channel cochlear
implant system. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed.
S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4):3S-9S.
Pollack, D. 1985. Educational audiology for the limited-hearing
infant and preschooler. 2d ed. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas.
Rickards, F.W., S.J. Dettman, P.A. Busby, R.L. Webb, R.C. Dowell,
S.E. Dennehy, and T.G. Nienhuys. 1990. Preoperative evaluation and
selection of children and teenagers. In Cochlear prostheses, ed. G.M.
Clark, Y.C. Tong, and J.F. Patrick. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Ross, M., and J. Lerman. 1971. Word intelligibility by picture
identification. Pittsburgh: Stanwix House.
Schindler, R.A., and D.K. Kessler. 1993. Clarion cochlear implant:
Phase I investigational results. American Journal of Otology 14:263-
272.
Schuyler, V., and N. Rushmer. 1987. Parent-infant habilitation.
Portland: IHR Publications.
Shallop, J.K., A.L. Beiter, D.W. Goin, and R.E. Mischke. 1990.
Electrically evoked auditory brain stem responses (EABR) and middle
latency responses (EMLR) obtained from patients with the Nucleus
multichannel cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 11: 5-15.
 


Page 312
Shallop, J.K., and D. J. Mecklenburg. 1987. Technical aspects of
cochlear implants. In Handbook of hearing aid amplification, ed. R.E.
Sandlin. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Simmons, F.B. 1966. Electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve in
man. Archives of Otolaryngology 84:2-54.
Skinner, M.W. 1988. Hearing aid evaluation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Skinner, M.W., G.M. Clark, L.A. Whitford, P.M. Seligman, S.J.
Staller, D.B. Shipp, J.K. Shallop, C. Everingham, C.M. Menapace,
P.L. Arndt, T. Antogenelli, J.A. Brimacombe, S. Pijl, P. Daniels, C.R.
George, H.J. McDermott, and A.L. Beiter. 1994. Evaluation of a new
spectral peak coding strategy for the Nucleus 22 channel cochlear
implant system. American Journal of Otolaryngology 15 (Suppl. 2):
15-27.
Skinner, M.W., L.K. Holden, T.A. Holden, R.C. Dowell, P.M.
Seligman, J.A. Brimacombe, and A.L. Beiter. 1991. Performance of
postlinguistically deaf adults with the wearable speech processor
(WSPIII) and mini speech processor (MSP) of the Nucleus
multielectrode cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 12:3-22.
Staller, S.J. 1985. Cochlear implant characteristics: A review of
current technology. In Cochlear implants, ed. G.A. McCandless.
Seminars in Hearing 23-32.
Staller, S.J., A.L. Beiter, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1991. Children and
multichannel cochlear implants. In Cochlear implants: A practical
guide, ed. H. Cooper, 283-3221. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
Staller, S.J., R.C. Dowell, A.L. Beiter, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1991.
Perceptual abilities of children with the Nucleus 22-channel cochlear
implant. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J.

Staller. Seminars in Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4):34S-47S.
Thielemeir, M.A. 1984. The discrimination after training test. Los
Angeles: House Ear Institute.
Thielemeir, M.A., L.L. Tonokawa, B. Petersen, and L.S. Eisenberg.
1985. Audiological results in children with a cochlear implant. Ear
and Hearing (Suppl.) 6:27S-35S.
Tillman, T.W., and R. Carhart. 1966. An expanded test for speech
discrimination utilizing CNC monosyllabic words (Northwestern
University auditory test no. 6). Technical report, SAM-TR-66-55,
USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Aerospace Medical Division
(AFSC), Brooks Air Force Base, Texas.
Tobey, E.A., and M.S. Hasenstab. 1991. Effects of a Nucleus
multichannel cochlear implant upon speech production in children. In
Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4):48S-54S.
Tong, Y.C., R.C. Black, G.M. Clark, I.C. Forster, J.B. Millar, B.J.
O'Loughlin, and J.F. Patrick. 1979. A preliminary report on a
multiple-channel cochlear implant operation. Journal of Laryngology
and Otology 93:7:679-695.
Tong, Y.C., G.M. Clark, P.J. Blamey, P.A. Busby, and R.C. Dowell.
1982. Psychophysical studies for two multiple-channel cochlear
implant patients. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 71:
153-160.
Tong, Y.C., G.M. Clark, P.M. Seligman, and J.F. Patrick. 1980.
Speech processing for a multiple-electrode cochlear implant
prosthesis. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 68:1897-
1899.
Tye-Murray, N., M. Lowder, and R.S. Tyler. 1990. Comparison of the
FOF2 and FOFIF2 processing strategies for the Cochlear Corporation

cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 11:195-200.
Tyler, R.S., J. Preece, and M. Lowder. 1983. The Iowa cochlear
implant tests. Iowa City: University of Iowa, Department of
Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery.
 

Page 313
Tyler, R.S., and N. Tye-Murray. 1991. Cochlear implant signal-
processing strategies and patient perception of speech and
environmental sounds. In Cochlear implants: A practical guide, ed. H.
Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
von Wallenberg, E.L., and R.D. Battmer. 1991. Comparative speech
recognition results in eight subjects using two different coding
strategies with the Nucleus 22-channel cochlear implant. British
Journal of Audiology 25:371-380.
Waring, M.D., M. Don, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1985. ABR assessment
of stimulation in induction coil implant patients. In Cochlear
implants, ed. R.A. Schindler and M.M. Merzenich. New York: Raven
Press.
Webb, R.L., B.C. Pyman, B.K.-H. Franz, and G.M. Clark. 1990. The
surgery of cochlear implantation. In Cochlear prostheses, ed. G.M.
Clark, Y.C. Tong, and J.F. Patrick. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Wechsler, D. 1967. Wechsler primary and preschool intelligence
scale. New York: Psychological Corp.
.1974. Wechsler intelligence scale for children (Revised). New York:
Psychological Corp.
Weisenberger, J.M., and L. Kozma-Spytek. 1991. Evaluating tactile
aids for speech perception and production by hearing-impaired adults
and children. In Cochlear implants in children, ed. R.T. Miyamoto
and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of Otolaryngology (Suppl.)
12:188-200.
Wilson, B.S., C.C. Finley, D.T. Lawson, R.D. Wolford, D.K.
Eddington, and W.M. Rabinowitz. 1991. Better speech recognition
with cochlear implants. Nature 352:236-238.
Yune, H.Y., R.T. Miyamoto, and M.E. Yune. 1991. Medical imaging

in cochlear implant candidates. In Cochlear implants in children, ed.
R.T. Miyamoto and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of
Otolaryngology (Suppl.) 12:11-17.
 

Page 314
12
Audiology and Education
E. Harris Nober
Definitions of Hearing Impairment
The generic term "hearing-impaired" denotes an auditory pure tone
average (PTA) threshold that exceeds the designated 26-decibel
average over the speech frequencies 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz (AAO-
ACO 1979). For young children, it is more appropriate to assume that
a PTA threshold of 15 decibels can interfere with the normal
development of auditory communication and the skills needed for the
educational process. About 8 to 10% of the U.S. population has some
level of auditory impairment that may interfere with communication.
If the hearing impairment is severe (70-90 dB) or profound (91 dB or
more), the individual is often considered deaf, particularly if the
individual is a child. The 91-dB PTA is considered the upper limit for
the auditory system to serve a child effectively in educational and
social settings even with amplification (Paul and Quigley 1990).
Definitions of human function and performance are always complex
and relate to an array of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. When the
auditory processing mechanism is defective, several parameters are
pertinent to educational management: (1) age of onset, identification,
and intervention; (2) degree, type, and locus of the hearing
impairment; (3) etiology; (4) intellectual and linguistic abilities; (5)
family and caregivers' communication mode and emotional support;
(6) socioeconomic status; (7) cultural diversity; (8) psychological
profile; (9) prevention activities; (10) general integrity of the auditory
and related mechanisms; and (11) other physical aberrations.

There are additional factors, to be sure, but the issue of prelingual
(two years or younger) and postlingual onset (two years or older) will
have an impact on the educational plans for management and
transition into the workplace despite delineations for terms such as
hard-of-hearing and deaf. Over 90% of children attending special
schools for the hearing-impaired have a prelingual onset (Allen and
Osborn 1984; Paul and Quigley 1990). Many children with multiple
 

Page 315
disabilities at special schools for the deaf show hearing thresholds that
are below a 70-dB PTA threshold level at speech frequencies 500,
1000, and 2000 Hz.
Advocates of deaf culture (e.g., Lane 1988) contend that hearing
threshold levels connote a clinical or pathological perspective that
dwells falaciously on auditory deprivation and a set of behavioral
performance consequences relating to a hearing norm. Whereas
proponents of the clinical view cite research that presents speech,
language, academic, cultural, and social deficits, Lane contended that
the methods of these studies were flawed because the standards and
norms were set by normal-hearing control groups. Furthermore, he
asserted that the research should be conducted by trained deaf
researchers. Proponents of the clinical view (e.g., Myklebust 1964)
have proposed that the lack of bona fide language development
precluded normal learning mainly because of the inability to use
abstract thought effectively.
Early Intervention
When deafness is first confirmed in an infant, considerations about the
form of communication become a preoccupation for the family as
communication is a formidable bonding process with the family and
environment. Family acceptance of the deafness, in itself, is a
traumatic and consuming event for parents and siblings who have
normal hearing and few or no experiences with congenital hearing
loss. These parents, who represent 90% of the parent population of
deaf children, go through a grieving process involving shock, denial,
guilt, depression, anger, anxiety, and (we hope) full acceptance and
confidence in various degrees (see chapter 13). Frequently, these
stages overlap and linger for extended periods. Hearing-impaired
infants in this family constellation are usually delayed in language and
social development as emotional issues are resolved and future

educational decisions are formulated (Meadow-Orlans 1990). This is a
major adjustment period for the family and other caregivers.
When a deaf infant is born into a hearing family, it is most often the
audiologist who confirms the deafness and notifies the parents.
Accordingly, the audiologist monitors early intervention strategies and
may play an integral role in the individual family service plan (IFSP)
now required by law. This role is crucial as the audiologist is often the
person to discuss the benefits of oral language vs. manual language.
During this initial crisis period, the audiologist works with a team of
professionals to counsel the family.
For the 10% of deaf infants born to deaf parents, the lack of hearing
may be welcome and a relief. In these families, the communication
process is predetermined and enables the infant to become an integral
part of the family from the outset. For these all-deaf families,
American Sign Language (ASL) is the prevailing operational
language; the result is an immediate and strong family and cultural
identity and cohesiveness. These deaf infants acquire language by
signing
 

Page 316
in a developmental pattern similar to that of a normal-hearing infant
using the auditory processing mechanism (Meadow-Orlans 1990).
Prevention
Prevention of secondary communication impairment is a formidable
goal of early intervention. From the outset, a normal-hearing infant
learns that crying brings the parent or caregiver, and an initial bond of
trust and love quickly forms between the two. This author believes
that most mothers start the bonding-love process while the baby is in
utero, followed by instant adoration when the baby is first brought to
them and the other family members. The bonding process with the
deaf baby involves a considerable amount of vision constrained to the
immediate field. Loss of auditory input impedes the protective
benefits ascribed to the normal hearing mechanism. With early
intervention, maximum use of the critical years for language
development is accomplished, thus diminishing social isolation
despite the mode of communication. Deaf children learn sign
language at an accelerated rate during the formative language years.
Often, early identification of a hearing loss abates negative attitudes
and perceptions in school and among family members. Secondary
prevention also has a significant impact on long-range total
educational costs (Bricker 1986).
The birth-to-two-years early management program is necessarily
shared with the parent or caregiver. Sometimes clinic visits are
scheduled after working hours to accommodate single-parent working
families. Group counseling and technical training intervention
sessions foster team consistency. Many larger clinic settings have
mini-apartment facilities to demonstrate kitchen, bathroom, bedroom,
and play techniques. Because of the rapid changes in multicultural
dynamics, some centers include cultural issues in the training agenda.

Federal Laws for the Disabled and Educational Management
National legislation for the education of hearing-impaired individuals
in the United States dates to 1827 when Public Law 19-8 approved the
purchase of land in Florida and Kentucky to establish "Asylums for
the Deaf and Dumb." However, this law was not funded until 1847 as
PL 29-1; other states quickly followed suit. Thirty years later, in 1857,
Congress passed Public Law 34-36, establishing the Columbia
Institution for the Deaf and Dumb. The school was renamed Gallaudet
College in 1954 (PL 83-420) and 32 years later, Gallaudet University,
as part of the 1986 Education of the Deaf Act. The National Technical
Institute for the Deaf was also established in this act. The 1986
Education of the Deaf Act was reauthorized as Public Law 102-421 in
October of 1992. The reauthorization included funds for Gallaudet
University and the National Technical Institute for the Deaf,
interpreters for schools, research, and scholarships for deaf-minority
students majoring in special education.
 

Page 317
Within twenty to thirty years after the establishment of the Columbia
Institution, schools for the deaf, blind, mentally retarded, and other
disabled persons were established in New York, Boston, Philadelphia,
Providence, and Hartford. By the end of the 1800s, there were about
fourteen federal laws with improved or expanded entitlements to aid
the disabled. Federal priorities for disabled children exceeded those
for disabled adults. In 1965, Public Law 89-10, the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA), was enacted. A local education
agency (LEA) is a school district (e.g., the Boston Public Schools). A
state education agency (SEA) denotes an agency such as the
Massachusetts Board of Education. Under PL-89-10, LEAs and SEAs
are to provide special education for low-income, educationally-
deprived children, many with hearing impairments.
In 1960, the Captioned Film for the Deaf Act (PL 89-258) was passed.
In the sixties, the Title I program (PL 89-313) was established with a
plethora of other federal legislative acts including:
1. creation of the National Technical Institute for the Deaf;
2. mental retardation and mental health and community health center
construction;
3. extended federal assistance for state-operated and state-supported
schools for the disabled;
4. the Vocational Rehabilitation Act (PL 89-333) and its amendments;
5. the Model Secondary School for the Deaf Act (PL 89-694), with
amendments to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act;
6. the National Eye Institute;
7. the Disabled Children Early Education Assistance Act (PL 90-538);
and

8. the National Center in Educational Media for the Disabled (PL 91-
61).
The first major law to affect directly the educational management of
disabled children was Public Law 94-142, the Education for All
Handicapped Children's Act, passed in 1975. This act entitled all
school-aged children to an appropriate and free education; it also
established due process state requirements and nondiscriminatory
testing. Public Law 94-142 did not emerge from a vacuum; indeed, it
was nearly the two hundredth federal law for disabled persons or
social entitlements.
Over a decade later, in 1986, PL 94-142 was amended by PL 99-457,
the Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments, which changed
the management and education of disabled infants, toddlers, preschool
children, and their families. It added two significant segments: a
program for handicapped infants and toddlers and preschool grant
program. Shortly afterward, in 1991, PL 101476, the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), reauthorized PL 99-457. It
adopted the term "disabled" instead of "handicapped," changed the
term "children'' to "individuals," added autism and traumatic brain
injury, and installed a transition requirement to assist adolescents.
Also in 1991, PL 102119, the Early Childhood Amendments Act, was
passed to provide full rights to
 

Page 318
infants, toddlers, children three to five, and any other children
determined to be at risk. One milestone, the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA) in 1965 (PL 89-10), supplemented
costs for LEA programs designed for educationally-deprived children.
During a ten-year period, fifty-four laws relating to the disabled were
enactedan impressive fact compared to the fifty-one acts between
1920 and 1959, a period of nearly forty years.
The Education for All Handicapped Children Act (PL 94-142) of 1975
is often called the Educational Bill of Rights for Handicapped
Children or the Quiet Revolution. This law included a revision of Part
B of a prior Education of the Handicapped Act (PL 91-230) that had a
significant impact on all phases of educational management of
disabled children. To comply, a massive cooperative effort evolved
among agencies throughout the country. Compliance included
accountability and direct family involvement for all disabled children
aged three to twenty-one years. Public Law 94-142 ensures:
1. a constitutional right to a free (no cost to parents) and appropriate
education;
2. a redistribution of resources and revenue sharing;
3. due process;
4. nondiscriminatory testing and evaluation;
5. an individualized education program (IEP) to provide a unique
special education;
6. a least-restrictive-environment (LRE) educational placement;
7. teams that include parents or advocate substitutes;
8. funding schedules including a schedule of SEA's and LEA's
responsibilities;

9. well-trained and competent vendors;
10. self-contained and required in-service programs;
11. classrooms, physical education, home instruction, hospitals, and
institutions.
When PL 94-142 was first implemented, in 1977, 800,000 children
were identified as hearing impaired, and the prevalence growth was 2
to 3% a year. It is noteworthy that, between 1976-1977, mental
retardation prevalence decreased by 38% because of reclassification to
"learning disability." In 1992, the U.S. Department of Education
Fourteenth Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act recounted that, of the 12%
of school-aged children who were disabled, four of the ten disability
types accounted for 96% of the total group:
1. learning disabled: 49.1% of the total, involved 2,144,377 children
in the U.S.;
2. speech impaired: 22.7% of the total, involved 990,185 children in
the U.S.;
3. mentally retarded: 12.7% of the total, involved 552,658 children in
the U.S.;
 

Page 319
4. seriously emotionally disturbed: 9.0% of the total, involved
393,300 children in the U.S.
The remaining 6.5%the low incidence six categories (multiply
handicapped, orthopedically impaired, hard of hearing, visually
impaired, deaf-blind, and other health problems)composed this group.
The 1992 report revealed that 6.7% of the general population between
three and twenty-one years of age received special education and
related services in a regular class, resource room, separate class,
residential facility, or a homebound or hospital environment. Serving
these four million children were 300,000 full-time special teachers
and paraprofessional nonteachers; the latter group is 53.4% of the
total. Learning disability teachers are 32.1% of the workforce; speech
and hearing clinicians, 13.7%; teachers of the mentally retarded,
17.7%; and teachers of children with severe emotional disturbance,
10% of the workforce.
The Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments (PL 99-457)
passed in 1986. It required significant changes in the management and
education of disabled infants, toddlers, preschool children, and their
families. Many of these provisions were comprehensive and required
significant preparation and effort by educational agencies. One new
segment, the ''Handicapped Infants and Toddlers Program," focused
on the birth through two years age group, while another new feature,
the "Preschool Grant Program," targeted the three-to five-year-old age
group. As both age groups required different services, creative
changes within educational and healthcare institutions were required.
States were required to implement PL 99-457 by September 1, 1991.
By that date, each state governor had appointed an "Interagency
Coordinating Council" and identified the "Lead Agency" in that state
to guarantee the following:
1. a definition of developmentally delayed;

2. establishment of a service timetable;
3. provision for multidisciplinary assessment of child and family
needs;
4. preparation of an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) with a case
manager;
5. development of "Child Find" and other operational referral systems;
6. promulgation of a public awareness program;
7. development of a Central Directory of resources, services, experts,
and programs;
8. development of a "Comprehensive Service Personnel
Development" (CSPD) plan;
9. activation of a "Lead Agency" to oversee the activities;
10. development of procedures for contracting with local providers;
11. establishment of a fiscal payment timetable;
12. provision of "Due Process" protection;
13. establishment of personnel standards and requirements for service
providers;
14. maintenance of a data bank of early intervention programs;
 

Page 320
15. creation of a Disabled Infants and Toddlers Program for children
from birth through two years; and
16. creation of a Preschool Grant Program for children from three
through five years of age.
The Handicapped Infants and Toddlers Program (birth through two
years) advanced the need for an early intervention Case Manager for
closer and more efficient family and professional interdisciplinary
coordination. Early intervention, a planned element, required a
detailed and comprehensive multidisciplinary Individual Family
Service Plan (IFSP) for any infant suspect of or identified as at risk
from the case history, developmental delays in physical and mental
maturity, cognition, or speech and language communication.
The Preschool Grant Program for children of ages three to five years
did not require the usual categorical labels for treatment eligibility to
facilitate ongoing diagnostic exploration. Funds for innovative family
training programs were made available along with funds to access
health care and other social services for disabled children and their
families. This provision included environmentally abused and
deprived children and their families.
PL 99-457 provided financial support for early identification using at-
risk registers and other systems. Ideally, hearing-impaired infants
would be identified during the first few months rather than at 2 to 2½
years, the national average for identifying hearing impairment (Stein,
Clark, and Kraus 1983). Early identification ensures an early IFSP
with extended family-focused training and interagency collaboration.
The early childhood literature abounds with evidence that early
intervention has significant long-standing beneficial effects on
maturation and development. Despite these innovations, there was
considerable unrest about the specific accountability of deaf
education, so a special Commission on Education of the Deaf was

appointed. As expected, the commission determined that deaf
education was poor, and serious changes were critical.
In 1991, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (PL 101-476)
was passed. Fundamentally, it reauthorized PL 99-457 and changed
the word "children" to "individuals" and the word "handicapped" to
"disabled," thus earning its acronym, IDEA. The act added autism and
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and required transition for adolescents
into the workplace. The law also stipulated that an attention deficit
disorder (ADD) was not a separate category of disability but a
symptom of a learning disability or a TBI, enabling these children to
receive aid. The act defined a TBI as: ''an acquired injury to the brain
caused by an external physical force, resulting in total or partial
functional disability or psychosocial impairment, or both, that
adversely affects educational performance ... resulting in impairment
in one or more areas such as cognition; language; memory; attention;
reasoning; abstract thinking; judgment; problem solving; sensory,
perceptual, and motor abilities; psychosocial behavior; physical
functions; information processing; and speech." The term excludes
congenital and birth trauma defects.
 

Page 321
The Americans with Disabilities Act 1990 (PL 101-366) was enacted
and became effective in July of 1992. It is a sweeping bill that protects
forty million Americans with regard to employment, public service,
transportation, public accommodations, and telecommunications, with
an emphasis on "assistive technology" and "reasonable
accommodation." Even the term disability was redefined into three
components (Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 3, Summary of
Existing Legislation Affecting People with Disabilities, U.S.
Department of Education, Office of Special Education and
Rehabilitation Services, Washington, D.C., June 1992):
(a) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of the major life activities of such individual;
(b) a record of such an impairment; or
(c) being regarded as having such an impairment.
Two other noteworthy terms were defined: a "reasonable
accommodation" and "undue hardship." The former includes
modifying existing facilities, policies, examinations, work schedules,
assignment to vacant positions, new technology, and use of qualified
readers and interpreters. Undue hardship denotes a significant expense
on the total cost to an employer, the type of operation, and the number
affected.
The ADA evolved from decades of legislative bills enacted to protect
the disabled, based on the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution. The collective benefits from preceding bills offered
disabled children and adults medical treatment, protection from abuse,
accessibility to public and private facilities, and protection against
employment discrimination. The ADA contains five titles:
Title I prohibits employment discrimination via employment tests,
hiring practices, advancement, discharge, compensation, job training,

and other conditions by denying reasonable accommodations to the
limitations of the disability.
Title II prohibits discrimination in public services, transportation
vehicles, and buildings (including new construction) by making all
state and local activities subject to the ADA. This sweeping protection
was not afforded by the earlier Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act.
Title III prohibits discrimination of private services open to the public
or with public accommodations. The latter includes food, clothing and
other stores, hotels, restaurants, bars, movies, theaters, concert halls,
stadiums, auditoriums, shopping centers, gas stations, health facilities,
museums, libraries, parks, schools, nurseries, day care centers, and
exercise and recreation centers.
Title IV mandates that telephone companies install telecommunication
equipment for the disabled with speech and hearing disorders.
Title V specifies that no other laws, particularly state or local laws,
can be construed to invalidate, negate, or reduce the scope of this act.
The federal government has a central role to enforce these titles using
congressional authority
 

Page 322
based on the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. This act
waives immunity under the Eleventh Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, prohibiting retaliation. It also authorizes the
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board to issue
minimum accessibility guidelines and authorizes the Attorney General
and the National Council on Disability to spell out and enforce their
procedures.
Educational Models and Settings for Severely Hearing-Impaired
Children
There are several educational setting prototypes for children with a
hearing disability. Very young children can be treated in a clinical or
home-based setting, a preschool setting, special programs in agencies,
day or residential schools for the deaf, special resource settings for
children in inclusion programs, public schools with a variety of
options that cascade the child toward the least restrictive environment,
and so on. These programs can be located in private clinics,
universities, public or private schools, community and governmental
agencies, and professional agency clinics. Age is one parameter for
eligibility, but other parameters are considered for the programs
below.
Preschool
Children with hearing disability, ages three to five years, are entitled
to a preschool education. Children can be placed in these classes with
normal-hearing children to avail themselves of a wholesome
interactive mix of speech and language. Frequently, the parent or
caregiver participates in the structured activities. These classes are
part of the ongoing evaluation and assessment continuum and involve
numerous trial and error tasks during a crucial developmental stage. A
variety of support services can be made available to the child and the

parent to facilitate the communication process. During this period of
development, various options such as amplification, auditory training,
and combined technologies are tried in an effort to produce oral
speech. Caregivers are also trained during this period.
Mainstreaming
This term receives surprisingly broad attention in the literature despite
a paucity of definitions for it. It is probable that mainstreaming was
widely popularized for academic placement of disabled children when
PL 94-142 was enacted, but the term was never actually used in the
act. The phrase found in PL 94-142 was "least restrictive
environment," which conceptualized the idea of assimilating a
disabled child into the regular or normal classroom setting. Thus,
mainstream
 

Page 323
connotes a regular, normal, or standard school setting. It also connotes
a movement toward the norm-and criterion-referenced standards, with
placement in a regular classroom as the ultimate goal.
This paradigm precludes manual communication. Ross, Brackett, and
Maxon (1982, 1991) reported an increase in the oral mode of
communication because of the mainstreamed school setting. Some
school programs attempted to use total communication as the
intermediary model in the school setting (Moores, Cerney, and Garcia
1990; Reagan 1990). An even greater restriction on the
communication model of choice is imposed by the "inclusion"
paradigm that swept the United States (Heward and Orlansky 1992).
A goal of PL 94-142 was to enable disabled children to share
experiences with nondisabled peers to maximize experiences. It
enables the family to remain intact and the children to attend the same
school as their siblings. These experiences need to be socially and
psychologically sound within the educational and academic
framework of the normal school environment. Indeed, the very title of
PL 94-142 includes the phrase "appropriate education." One
mainstreaming goal is to provide the most appropriate integrated
education for the disabled child using support services.
"Appropriate" relates to the performance ability of the child and
determines how restrictive the placement needs to be at a particular
time and development level. It applies to preschool as well as school-
aged children. Because learning is a dynamic process, what is
appropriate will vary over time; hence, a hard-of-hearing child who
shows language benefits with amplification may require only minimal
support services.
Depending on the student's ability, mainstream can range from full
classroom inclusion to placement into a special class located in a
regular school setting. Optimal benefits are expected if the

mainstreamed child was chronologically within two years of the
classmates or one year in language, reading, and writing skills at time
of placement. These benefits are also expected if the child had good
auditory skills, was able to follow the regular curriculum, was socially
mature, and had a strong self-image.
The range of services reflects the scope of the restriction. Ross,
Brackett, and Maxon (1991) referred to full-and partial-
mainstreaming. In a full-mainstreamed program, the regular
classroom teacher assumes full responsibility for the academic and
social activities with special services providing help to the child in
special-needs areas such as language, speech, reading, and so on.
They described partial-mainstreaming as the resource room
instruction that follows the classroom curriculum in academic areas
with which the child is having difficulty. Finally, these authors
referred to social-mainstreaming as the placement of a child in a
regular school setting but separation for special academic instruction.
The special academic setting may be a class within the same building
or class instruction contracted at a school for the deaf for part of the
day, if the child is hearing-impaired.
 

Page 324
Inclusion
Inclusion is one component of the educational school reform
movement. The term refers to placement of the disabled child in the
regular class with the regular classroom teacher as the instructor. Full
inclusion means that there is no tracking or placement of students into
sections based on test scores or performance. The classroom teacher
alone is responsible for the disabled student along with all the other
children in the class.
This issue has political implications. The National Joint Committee on
Learning Disabilities (ASHA 1993) questioned whether all students
with learning disabilities should be served solely in the regular
education classroom. Many leaders in the special education, speech-
language pathology, and deaf communities oppose full inclusion. The
NJCLD asserted that the unique needs of the LD child require an
individualized program to achieve maximum performance. The
responsibility for developing the IEP rests with the combined efforts
of regular and special educators, parents, and student consumers of the
services (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 1993;
Council for Exceptional Children 1993; Heward and Orlansky 1992).
A draft statement from the Council for Exceptional Children (1993)
supported a "rich variety of educational and vocational program
options and experiences, available in community based, nonschool
environments, special schools, and options for individual or small
group instruction in 'regular' or 'home' schools." The CEC stressed the
importance of placement in mainstream classes for part of the day. It
views inclusive schools as the "first and foremost call for a change in
attitudes and values. . . a new ethos that celebrates diversity; promotes
accountability, culturalism, and professional collaboration; values the
strengthening of social relationships among children; and explores
strategies for pursuing excellence without sacrificing equity."

Classroom Acoustics, Noise, and Speech Perception
The physical characteristics of the classroom environment (room size,
reverberation, absorption, reflection) modify the sound energy and
subsequently affect perception of the speech signal for hearing-
impaired students. Whereas the adverse acoustic effects may be
minimal for the normal-hearing student with full language
development, the hearing-impaired student with diminished speech
perception and language development will have difficulty in a poor
acoustic environment. The audiologist is expected to analyze the
acoustic situation and make suggestions to minimize adverse acoustic
conditions and thus enhance speech perception in the classroom
(Madell 1992).
Transmitted sound will (1) penetrate an object, (2) reverberate or
reflect off the object, and (3) circumscribe the object. Usually, all
three occur to various degrees, depending on a room's structural
characteristics and its contents. Soft
 

Page 325
items absorb sound better than hard items because they have a higher
absorption coefficient. An empty or perfectly rectangular or square
room will reflect and produce more standing wave patterns than
rooms with multidimensional walls. Pictures on walls and other
decorative objects in the room will disrupt standing wave patterns.
High frequency sounds with short wavelengths are more direct than
low frequency sounds with longer wavelengths that can circumscribe
an object. Sound intensity diminishes with distance and as it
penetrates an object; the intensity reduction is called transmission
loss.
Thus, reverberation or sound reflection depends on the interaction
between the acoustic composition of the room and the sound signals.
It is measured as reverberation time (RT), the fraction of a second it
takes for a sound stimulus to diminish 60 decibels after the sound has
stopped. The greater the RT, the more the initial sound lingers and
interferes with successive sounds. Reverberation can cause the energy
of an early sound to augment a later sound and increase the combined
sound intensity. If the two sounds are out of phase, reverberation can
diminish intensity or even cancel the energy if the two conflicting
sounds are precisely in opposite phase direction and of equal
magnitude. Acoustic changes ("smearing of the time domain") from
reverberation essentially alter the characteristics of combined sounds,
reducing signal fidelity. Thus, increased reverberation time increases
signal distortion. The perception of consonants is more susceptible to
auditory error than the perception of vowels because consonants are of
shorter duration and have less intensity than vowels. Earlier vowel
signals mask later or successive consonants during continuous speech
output (Berg 1986). As a longer RT increases speech signal distortion,
there is a notable speech perception reduction in the auditory
discrimination of the hearing impaired.
Speech signal reverberation of 0.02 to 0.03 second can induce

"coloration," which enhances timbre or quality and sometimes
perception (Lochner and Burger 1961; Nabalek and Robinette 1978).
Reflected sound greater than the incident sound by .03 second will
diminish speech perception for any listener and with significantly
greater disruption to the hearing impaired. The critical RT for the
hearing impaired appears to be near 1.2 seconds where word
recognition performance can diminish to less than half (Finitzo-Hieber
1981; Olsen 1981). In general, audiologists (Bess and McConnell
1981; Crandell and Bess 1986, 1987; Olsen 1981) recommend that the
ideal classroom RT should not exceed 0.4 second, a criterion that is
met in only 22% of classrooms.
Clearly, extraneous noise will reduce speech perception further in a
reverberant room that exceeds 0.3 second RT. When the teacher's (or
student's) speech is the acoustic signal, all other sound is designated
as noise, and the relative levels of the two sound sources are the
signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for that classroom. There is no absolute
classroom S/N ratio setting. Rather there is a dynamic interactive
continuum of sound changes. Therefore, only best estimates can be
determined from sampling ongoing conditions (e.g., student presence
and movement, period of the day, subject matter, age and class levels,
classroom location,
 

Page 326
internal and external noise such as ventilation, mechanical and traffic
noise, and so on) (Finitzo-Hieber 1981; Nober and Nober 1977). As
unwanted sound, noise masks the signal when its intensity approaches
or supersedes the signal intensity; furthermore, the frequency
spectrum of the signal and noise affects the auditory perceptual
masking impact on both normal and hearing-impaired listeners. A
reduced S/N ratio has a greater negative impact with increased RT for
hearing and hearing-impaired listeners, but the impact is greater on
the hearing impaired; this deficit in auditory discrimination increases
as the hearing loss increases.
On average, the traditional classroom noise level with twenty-five
students and a teacher ranges from 56 dBA to 63 dBA with the mean
around 60 dBA (Finitzo-Hieber 1981; Nober and Nober 1962, 1977;
Ross and Giolas 1971; Sanders 1965). The traditional classroom, with
the teacher three feet from the students, has a speech signal intensity
of 60 to 65 dBA (Madell 1992); in addition, the teacher's speech level
is about 60 dBA. Thus, with ambient classroom noise at 60 dBA, the
S/N is 0 dB. Their intensity levels are similar, but frequency
composition differs. In this typical classroom listening condition,
normal hearing students perceive well. Crandell (1993) showed
sentence recognition scores of 93.2% for students with normal
hearing, whereas students with a mild hearing loss scored 25% lower.
These score differences increase precipitously as the S/N diminishes
and hearing loss increases. As noise is disproportionally more
detrimental to speech perception of the hearing impaired, a S/N of
+20 dB is often recommended for these students in the mainstreamed
classroom (Finitzo-Hieber and Tillman 1978; Tillman, Carhart, and
Olsen 1970). To ensure favorable listening conditions for the hearing-
impaired student in the classroom during the day as signal and noise
conditions change, Bess and McConnell (1981) recommended an
empty-classroom ambient noise maximum of 35 dBA.

The S/N ratio is influenced directly by the acoustic distance between
the speaker and the listener (in this instance, the teacher and the
student). On average, the teacher's speech level is about 66 dB at three
feet from the student (Ross, Brackett, and Maxon 1982), and the
typical classroom ambient noise level can be estimated at 60 dBA, as
indicated earlier. With these values, Ross et al. determined the S/N
was +6 dB; at twelve feet the speech level was 54 decibels, so the S/N
was -6 dB with corresponding S/N decreases as teacher-student
distance and noise levels increased. Speech perception performance is
improved by increasing the S/N ratio (i.e., by reducing the teacher-
student distance).
Maintaining a favorable S/N can be difficult, particularly in preschool
and earlier grades. Amplification using an FM device or a regular
hearing aid will not alter the detrimental effects of reverberation but
will improve the S/N ratio to counterbalance reverberation (see
chapter 10). With the teacher wearing a microphone and the student
wearing a receiver, the teacher-student distance is reduced to a three-
to four-inch span between the teacher's (or student's) microphone and
the mouth. With this amplification setup, background noise and
reverberation have less of a deleterious impact on the speech
perception of the hearing-impaired child. With a microphone-to-
mouth distance of about
 

Page 327
4.5 inches, speech can reach 84 dB, or a favorable S/N ratio of +24 dB
if the background classroom noise is estimated at 60 dBA.
The interaction of distance and reverberation can yield a critical
distance situation for the hearing impaired because the two are
inversely related (i.e., as RT increases, critical distance decreases).
Critical distance occurs when the amounts of incident and reflected
sound reaching the ear are equal. A listener receives more direct sound
within this critical distance and more reflected sound when beyond it
(Niemoeller 1981). The hearing-impaired child should be seated
closer to the teacher to facilitate direct reception of speech.
Communication Alternatives
Oral Communication
Oral communication dates from the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries and is based on the premise that the natural auditory route is
preferred despite severe damage to the auditory system. Oral
communication uses vision to read the oral movements of the speaker.
The combination of speechreading and audition is preferred by
devoted oralists for multisensory stimulation that discourages manual
input during communication. The rationale is to avoid isolation of the
hearing-impaired from the hearing community.
In the 1960s, the efficacy of oralism was challenged because of low
academic performance by deaf students in the United States30% were
unable to pass literacy tests and 60% scored at the fifth grade reading
level (Evans 1982)resulting in a corresponding drift back to
manualism. The preferred choice was American Sign Language
(ASL). By 1994, the oral approach was the sole communication
system in only a few schools in the United States, whereas two
decades earlier, only a few facilities had used a manual system as the
exclusive mode of communication and teaching.

Manual Sign Systems
Manual (or nonverbal) systems also were developed during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. There are several of these hand-
gesture systems, some used as auxiliaries to other approaches. Deaf
children naturally gesture to each other to communicate (Charrow
1975); indeed, a manual system is so natural to the prelingual deaf
child with deaf parents that these children even dream in sign
language. In some normal-hearing cultures, manual movements
provide a secondary source of information. A manual sign system is
considered different from a manual sign language. The former creates
an equivalent to oral language (fingerspelling), whereas the latter
(ASL) is a distinctively different language with its own vocabulary,
syntax, and lexical components (Wilcox 1988, 1990).
There are many similarities between manual and oral language. Both
are a form of communication and can serve as a primary language.
Both have
 

Page 328
structured information codes such as phonetic (or cheremic) elements,
syntactic, and lexical (or semantic) elements. Both have group
similarities and differences that reflect cultural and social patterns.
Vocabulary, however, is quite different. In ASL, there are about 6000
signs vs. 600,000 dictionary words, although only about 3000 words
are used orally in conversation with hearing people. There are other
differences as well: Because the hands and body are much larger than
the tongue and oral cavity, signs take twice as long to produce as
speech; however, the expression of ideas is transmitted at the same
speed. Signed language is sometimes influenced by oral language, but
the reverse does not occur.
Fingerspelling (Rochester Method)
Fingerspelling is a supplemental manual system. The Rochester
method, a modification of a single-handed letter-spelling approach,
was developed at the Rochester (NY) School for the Deaf. It is based
on a letter alphabet of finger signs (twenty-six positions in English)
used with speechreading to aid students in elementary school. When it
became apparent that preschool-age children using oralism could also
benefit from fingerspelling, the Rochester method was adopted to
facilitate the total communication approach (Evans 1982).
Words are spelled out on the fingers, often with ASL (which has
borrowed signs from fingerspelling), and is used to convey technical
information, new terms, and proper nouns. This manual system
became an integral peg in the development of the Total
Communication (TC) model. Although fingerspelling is about three
times slower than other signed communication, it is precise and has
minimal ambiguity. Fingerspelling has been found to improve the
reading and writing skills of elementary and secondary deaf students
(Quigley 1969) as well as their Stanford Achievement Test scores
(Braverman-Callahan and Radzirwicz 1989). Most people who use

ASL will occasionally supplement information using fingerspelling
(Moores 1987, 1991).
Cued Speech
Because it was slow, the Rochester method was largely replaced by
cued speech (Cornett 1967), a set of manual signs used to indicate
speech movements. Furthermore, it is easier for hearing parents to
learn because it is dependent on lip movements and follows the
syllable flow. The hands are used to supplement lip movements that
are not visible; cued speech is not carried out in isolation (Bench
1992). It has been found effective for teaching speech to deaf children
(Quenin and Blood 1989).
American Sign Language (ASL)
American Sign Language is the language system most used by the
deaf community in the United States. It is a system of gestures with its
own unique vocabulary,
 

Page 329
grammar, and prosodic features. Variations of movements convey the
equivalence of intensity, frequency, continuation, movement, and so
on (King and Quigley 1985). Toddlers learn the hand, facial, and body
gestures during their formative years with the same facility their
hearing counterparts learn language using the auditory route (Stokoe
1960). Not until the 1970s did educators and psycholinguists take
serious note of Stokoe's research (1960, 1975) that established ASL as
a formidable and distinct language with the equivalence of the
phonology, syntax, and semantic components that constitute standard
English.
The impact of ASL manifested itself in two major ways: English was
regarded as a second language for the deaf, and a representative deaf
culture began to emerge. These ideas spread throughout the world
where deaf signed language was the first language and the national
language of the normal-hearing was the second language (Gerber and
Prutting 1981; Kyle and Woll 1985). Part of the reemergent success of
ASL as the preeminent communication mode is that it
''depathologizes" deafness and is itself treated as a bona fide first
language (Paul and Jackson 1993). The signed systems of various
nations differ so significantly that a deaf person in England using the
British Sign Language (BSL) does not communicate well with an
American using ASL, despite the equivalence of the two spoken
languages. Because ASL lacks a written form, written information is
borrowed from English. Many deaf individuals are from multicultural-
multilinguistic groups (e.g., ASL and English).
American Sign Language has ties to French Sign Language but not to
British Sign Language. A sign is the equivalent of the spoken word in
most sign systems. In ASL, one dominant hand is manipulated in
space from the top of the head to the bottom of the hands. There are
three components of ASL, called cheremes, that are roughly
equivalent to syllables: (1) place on the body where the sign is made

(tab); (2) shape of the hand making the sign (dez); and (3) the
movement of the hands (sig). Altogether, there are 55 cheremes: 12
tab, 19 dez, and 24 sig; a change in any of these elements alters the
meaning. Cheremes provide the distinctive features of ASL and foster
a dynamic interplay with social and political forces, just as oral
language responds to societal forces. In ASL, prosodic or
suprasegmental characteristics are conveyed by breadth of movement
to connote intensity; intonation is conveyed by hand movement
sharpness, facial expressions, and general body language. Dialectal
cheremes occur culturally (Stokoe 1975).
A conference on ASL at Gallaudet University (October 28-30, 1992)
concluded that, for the deaf:
1. ASL should be the primary language, and English, the secondary;
2. ASL should be used for communication and instruction because it
is easier to learn than oral English; it facilitates language acquisition,
whereas English inhibits communication;
3. When oral and TC methods fail, ASL is the preferred alternative;
 

Page 330
4. Deaf children with hearing parents have difficulty with ASL and
may not want to learn English;
5. Speech-language pathologists and audiologists have to reconsider
(a) use of amplification for children who use ASL and (b) whether
speech is advised.
While the Gallaudet meeting was taking place, a policy statement was
issued by the U.S. Department of Education (October 30, 1992) about
deaf education with reference to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
and IDEA. The statement said that schools must consider these issues:
1. Communication needs of the child and family and their preferred
communication mode;
2. Linguistic needs and academic level of performance;
3. Social, emotional, and cultural needs and peer interactions;
4. Curriculum, content, and method of teaching;
5. Least restrictive environment plus supplemental aids must meet
student needs; otherwise, it is not a least restrictive environment;
6. Some deaf children can be placed in regular classes with
supplements to provide the least restrictive environment;
7. SEA and LEA must fully inform parents of rights, alternatives,
procedures, and the school's obligations.
Signed English; Manual English (ME)
Many educators prefer to use these supplemental systems early
because they are based on regular English grammar and enable the
child to read and write with greater ease and clarity. In both systems,
signs and fingerspelling are combined with ASL as an aid to language
reception. Using different formats, these systems offer a variety of

ways to assist communication by positioning the hand near the lips to
sign words, vowels, consonants, intensity, and so on. There is little or
no effect on spoken language.
Seeing Essential English 1 (SEE 1)
This manual language system uses formal rules to alter ASL so that it
is more like English. There is a different sign for English words with
the same English spelling but different meaning. The semantic
boundaries of the signs are adjusted to meet English. At the syntactic
level, SEE 1 has pronouns that follow English word order. This
system is easier for hearing parents to learn because it follows the
structure of oral English (Anthony 1971).
Signing Exact English 2 (SEE 2)
Developed by Gustason (1983), this system superseded SEE 1. The
rules in this manual language system are very similar to SEE 1 but are
simpler and less rigorous. Because it is closer to ASL than to English
and uses signs to represent
 

Page 331
the whole word (not just a component), it is more easily used by
younger deaf children and their parents (Bench 1992).
Total Communication (TC)
Developed by a graduate of Gallaudet University in the mid-seventies,
TC adapts signed systems (usually not ASL) to employ the vocabulary
and syntax of written standard English and concurrently use and
watch spoken English. Controversy has raged over whether a
combined (oral-manual) or ''simultaneous" approach is more effective
than a straight manual approach (Ling 1984; Schlesinger 1972). Total
Communication was tried for several years but never achieved its goal
of improving English language competence because it is difficult to
use the spoken language route and the visual ASL route
simultaneously (Moores 1987).
The two different language strategies (reading the hand and lip
movements concurrently) were better suited for younger deaf
children, who naturally default to the signed system, which is easier
and learned faster. TC did not produce the academic benefits,
improved self-concept, and improved speech projected in the original
rationale for the combined system. Some claimed it diminished speech
production (Nix 1983). Another problem with TC is the difficulty of
identifying what TC really means. A specific definition of TC is
construed differently by oralists and manualists. The differences have
to do with the stress given the different approaches in the
communication interplay (Eagney 1987).
Language Development and Hearing Impairment
Language is a form of communication and, as speech, is a coded set of
verbal symbols, manual gestures, facial expressions, body language,
and other prosodic features. Communication is interpersonal where
thoughts, ideas, meaning, and social intercourse are shared among

people (Bench 1992). Normally, human communication consists of
several forms, starting with the birth cry, progressing shortly
afterward to infant coos, smiles, and reflexive and purposeful
vocalizations. Within a short period, vocabulary zooms to hundreds,
then thousands, of words and, by young adulthood, can reach 50,000
words.
An integral part of language development is found in the context of
social interaction. This setting intertwines syntax and semantics in a
relationship known as pragmatics. Pragmatics in deafness is not the
same as for normal-hearing children. This skill base of perceptual and
cognitive language enables the hearing child to learn to read and write
and is a major educational and social deterrent for the deaf child who
did not develop oral language.
Speech Development and Production
Speech is the product of several integrated physiologic processes:
articulation (the molding of sounds into phonetic units); phonation
(the vocal
 

Page 332
tones); respiration (the basic air stream); and resonance (the
modification of the acoustic parameters). Speech is cognitive verbal
language, an intellectual event. In speech development, the normal-
hearing infant associates the sounds of speech with surrounding
activities, particularly the facial movements of the caregiver and the
infant's own articulatory sounds. A child unable to hear the speech of
the caregiver does not automatically associate facial movements with
speech. As normal speech production is acquired by a normal-hearing
toddler, the pattern is stabilized via the auditory feedback (or servo
feedback mechanism). But clear and articulate speech is always
dependent on auditory feedback monitoring; therefore, a loss of
hearing is rapidly reflected in speech output even if the speech was
once fully developed.
Speech deterioration occurs quickly (Waldstein 1990). In general, the
speech production errors that characterize hard-of-hearing vs. deaf
speakers are quantitative rather than qualitative: The errors may be
similar, but deaf people have more of them. Furthermore, the greater
the hearing loss, the greater the number of speech errors because
motor speech production is inextricably related to sensory perception
of the speech signal.
An improvement in speech audibility quickly results in improved
speech (Levitt 1989). Hence, an individual with a conductive loss
shows changes in speech output intensity by diminishing the vocal
intensity output. On the other hand, persons with a sensorineural loss
of hearing may speak with greater intensity to compensate for the
auditory feedback reduction and an intrinsic need to balance the input
feedback homeostasis level with the speech output level. The
relationship between auditory threshold level and speech output level
is frequency-dependent as well. Hearing loss in the high frequencies is
quickly translated into deterioration of high frequency consonant
production in adults with normal speech.

Age of onset of the hearing impairment is crucial: The dichotomy is
prelingual vs. postlingual onset. The earlier a prelingual onset and the
later a postlingual onset, the greater are the differences in speech and
language development. During the first four years, speech is easily
and rapidly acquired by normal or near-normal-hearing infants and
toddlers who attend to the comprehension of speech, not the acoustic
event (Ross, Brackett, and Maxon 1991). With mild hearing loss
(down to fifteen decibel thresholds), speech may be delayed or
slightly defective, but it is absent in a deaf child. As hearing
diminishes, the defective speech elements increase until total deafness
and complete lack of speech development are reached. Total or near
total lack of speech development is characteristic of prelingual onset
and a better ear threshold of eighty decibels or more.
Deaf speech is often unintelligible to the average listener. During
infant development, reflexive babbling occurs, possibly from tactile
exteroception and kinesthetic proprioception, but this jabbering
disappears. Deaf speech is distinctive: It has flawed articulation,
breathing, phonation, rhythm, intonation, and
 

Page 333
phrasing due to a lack of segmental perception. The difference in
speech errors between a hard-of-hearing and a deaf child is more
quantitative than qualitative.
Listener perception and speaker intelligibility are aided by the
intrinsic redundancy in language. Deaf speech does not encode the
complex array of neuromotor synergy that reflects normal emotion
and is consequently less intelligible. Children with severe hearing loss
have defective spoken language as well as defective speech output and
therefore generate a speech product with fewer of the redundant
features that are inherent in the basic structure and delivery of
language. The loss of redundancy is evidenced in reduced language
comprehension, speech recognition, and speech perception in the
prelingually deaf child. Oralists attempt to minimize poor speech
production in deaf children by using residual hearing and
reinforcement from tactile, visual, and kinesthetic modalities; early
intervention auditory training programs are initiated to enhance
speech intelligibility.
Deaf children lack the full range of phonologic, phonemic, and
suprasegmental distinctive elements (Boothroyd 1984; Geers and
Moog 1987; Kretschmer and Kretschmer 1978; Nober 1967; Oller,
Jensen, and Lafayette 1978). As a result, individual sounds and
syllables are omitted and distorted; sound order is incorrect;
intonation, stress, rate, and temporal patterns are faulty. Breathing
incoordination is apparent as intensity distortion. Vowel and
consonant phonemes may be neutralized where one sound replaces
several other sounds. Even articulatory coordination and
suprasegmental features of deaf children differ (Robb and Saxman
1985; Tye-Murray 1987). More than half a century ago, Hudgins and
Numbers (1942) depicted "deaf speech" with five type of-vowel errors
and seven type-of-consonant errors. Among other problems, they were
the first to note excessive breath; slow, labored, and arhythmical

speech; a voice quality that is colorless, monotonous, and lacks
sufficient volume; inappropriate manipulation of the articulators;
defective resonance and nasality. Deaf individuals use more vowels
than consonants in a ratio of 2:1; such instances involve substitutions,
omissions, distortions, improper relative durations among phonemes,
and confusion of voiced and voiceless cognates (Nober 1967).
Nober (1967) studied the articulation of deaf children. He ranked the
errors following a developmental pattern in which the easiest to
produce, most visible, and most intense sounds (learned first by
normal-hearing infants) were the most intelligible and least distorted
by deaf children. A review relative to placement, manner of
articulation, and voicing exhibited that the more visible, more intense,
and easiest consonants to produce were the least defective and most
intelligible.
Nober also reviewed literature relating to the rank order of phonetic
development and intelligibility for children with other congenital
disabilities such as mental retardation (developmental disabilities),
cerebral palsy, and cleft palate. Collectively, these children represent
disabilities that encompass sensory, motor,
 

Page 334
cognitive, and structural areas, but the developmental profile of each
followed the normal maturational sequence of normal sound
development. Usually the first sounds developed are more visible and
easier to produce accurately.
Academic Profile of the Hearing-Impaired Child
Language skills are preparatory to the education of the young child.
All other things equal, the magnitude of the hearing impairment will
have a significant impact on the development of language skills and,
subsequently, educational achievement in reading, writing,
mathematics, social areas, and general academic skills (Paul and
Jackson 1993). Variations always occur, but, in the continuum of
development, hearing loss is detrimental to academic achievement in a
young child. Clearly, one functional and major difference between the
deaf and the hard-of-hearing child, regardless of hearing thresholds, is
the language learned by the hard-of-hearing child by the auditory
route, perhaps with amplification and some visual assistance. The deaf
child uses a different language base (i.e., ASL) that is not replicated in
written form.
Reading
Literacy in hearing students is said to be a translation of oral language
from a repository of information, often called inner language or inner
speech. Research shows that, when children and adults read, there is
concomitant subvocal muscular activity (as during speech) as the
written information is decoded. This covert and silent phonological
coding (Rayner and Pollatsek 1989) is extended into adulthood
(Conrad 1979; Hanson, Goodell, and Perfetti 1991). Deaf children use
a visual-imagery code rather than a phonological code (Hirsh-Pasek
and Treiman 1982; Locke 1978). Reading is ordinarily the major
vehicle for educating children and extending their knowledge of world

of events. When the deaf child is taught to read in the second
language, there are often problems with multiple meaning, idioms,
metaphors, and syntax because the words have a different syntactic
and semantic system (Webster and Ellwood 1985).
Research has not demonstrated a clear benefit of any one mode of
communication used by severely deaf students learning to read, but
reading proficiency is related to the nature of the texts. There is
evidence that most good deaf readers use primarily a speech-based
code rather than a visual-based code to mediate print (Cohen,
Fishgrund, and Redding 1990). Despite the reading mechanism, most
deaf students who complete high school attain the reading level of a
nine-to eleven-year-old normal-hearing student (Furth 1966; Quigley
and Kretchmer 1982), and this gap increases with age and experience.
It is noteworthy that prelingually deaf students with deaf parents who
signed achieved better reading scores than deaf children with hearing
parents (Kampfe and Turecheck 1987). We assume that this is due to
earlier acquisition
 

Page 335
of language. Another factor that contributes to the poor reading levels
of deaf children is their qualitatively poorer skills involving short-and
long-term memory. Both are essential components for reading, and
short-term memory needs to be recoded into long-term memory
(Hanson 1990; Paul and Jackson 1993). Additional issues include the
cerebral dominance of the deaf child and its relationship to language
development, reading, and writing.
Writing
Writing is the graphic expression of verbal discourse and reading
material; hence, it is derived from the same verbal syntax and
semantic context. Because there is a strong correlation to reading
comprehension ability, hearing-impaired students manifest significant
writing problems. The difficulty is related to the degree of hearing
impairment among other factors. Because of the wide range of
intervening variables, Quigley and Paul (1984) contended that
sentences must be taught at a "broader pragmatic context" level
dealing with the structure of the text. Many reasons have been
ascribed as causative to the writing limitations of hearing-impaired
students. There is controversy about structural aberrations and
whether the writing is at an arrested level of writing development
(Bench 1992; Gormley and Sarachan-Deily 1987; McAfee, Kelly, and
Samar 1990).
Psychosocial Attributes of Hearing Impairment
There is one school of thought that claims severe hearing impairment
does not qualitatively alter the cognitive processes of the severely
hearing-impaired child (Furth 1966). Other researchers, however,
believe that severe hearing impairment causes language imbalance
and precludes normal cognitive development (Myklebust 1964), such
as an inner language that a normal-hearing child develops to engage in

abstract thought. The latter group contends that the use of alternative
sensory input establishes a qualitatively different type of short-and
long-term memory ability. Hence, severely hearing-impaired children
cannot be educated in a fashion described as normal.
Substantively, the question is one of language delay or language
difference. Studies indicate that memory skills based on auditory
codes will be troublesome to deaf students who use visual input.
Nevertheless, deaf students will perform as well as normal-hearing
children when the memory items are based on visual coding (Paul and
Jackson 1993). Information processing speed is also a factor for
children with a severe hearing disability who use alternative forms of
communication.
Researchers often refer to the "deaf personality" (Lane 1988; Levine
1960, 1981). Some depict social immaturity, dependence, low self-
image, low self-esteem, aggression, paranoia, and reduced
intelligence. Research using variables such as degree of hearing loss,
age of onset, parent attitudes, language mode,
 

Page 336
educational setting, and so on demonstrate conflicting results.
Research in this area began over three-quarters of a century ago with
the pioneering work of Pintner and Patterson (1916), whose findings
are still used as a viable reference. Myklebust (1964) confirmed some
of the earlier findings of Pintner and Patterson and added that he
found more psychopathology in deaf adults than in hearing adults. An
updated, detailed theoretical and pragmatic review on the psychology
of deaf individuals can be found in Paul and Jackson (1993).
Deaf Culture
Helen Keller said "blindness cuts people off from things, deafness
cuts people off from people." More recently, the deaf culture
movement has become a powerful influence in connecting deaf people
socially and in shaping educational reform. Deaf power advocates
describe the Deaf as an ethnic group biologically equipped to do
everything but hear. These proponents contend that deaf culture is a
shared affirmation, not a denial of their condition. In the September
1993 issue of the Atlantic Monthly, Edward Dolnick writes that the
"new" deaf culture claims to be distinctive, rewarding, and worth
preserving. Deaf power activists insist that deafness is not deprivation;
consequently, they do not perceive deafness as a disability such as
blindness.
Deaf culture thrives on the pride of deaf people, and some deaf power
advocates claim to prefer a deaf baby over a hearing baby for
maintaining family identity and harmony. Some even claim
"ownership" of a deaf child born to hearing parents for educational
management because the deafness will make the deaf child a linguistic
minority in the hearing family. Over 90% of children born deaf will
have hearing parents and siblings. Dolnick further states that deaf
power activists vehemently reject alteration by assistive devices such
as hearing aids or-worse still-cochlear implants wired into the inner

ear, indeed, "a retrofit to nature's choice . . . the ultimate invasion of
the ear."
Furthermore, deaf power advocates contend that the mainstream
movement isolates deaf children in the classroom because of their low
incidence and because the deaf student may be alone or older than
other students in the class. However, mainstreaming is recommended
by this author for the hard-of-hearing or deaf child who is
postlingually deaf (after three years of age) and who has developed
spoken language proficiency before the loss of hearing.
Multicultural Issues and Deafness
By the year 2000, about half of the population of inner cities (and
about one third of the nation) will be multicultural (Christensen and
Delgado 1993). There has been a serious educational and
psycholinguistic movement for educational reform for students who
require bilingual education. For these culturally diverse students,
English represents their second language. From this linguistic
 

Page 337
perspective, minority and multicultural students who are severely
hearing-impaired would be trilingual. They are indeed linguistically
different from the mainstream. The issues involving their
communication barriers are reflected in standardized test scores,
below grade-level academic performance, and arrested reading and
writing proficiency.
The drive to reduce the inequities prompted sensitivity to
multicultural education concerns. Part of the movement toward equity
was the development of child-centered, individualized curricula and
programs to improve the self-esteem and social profiles of minority
groups. Federal reform laws have facilitated enlightened multicultural
and multiethnic teaching programs. Diversity plans fostered the
growth of students' natural strengths and the acquisition of new
education and social skills.
The deaf population is historically a "minority" group, although the
federal term has been "low incidence." Low incidence serves to
temper the perceived responsibility of society although deaf culture
advocates historically have professed a more functional and utilitarian
perspective. To deaf culturalists, deaf communication needs require
two languages: the ASL manual language based on visual-spatial
perception and the auditory-oral written language of English
(Christensen and Delgado 1993). Some believe strongly that ASL is
the native or natural visual-feedback language system of the deaf
(Paul and Jackson 1993; Stokoe 1975).
Significantly depressed achievement of deaf children from ethnic,
linguistic, and racial minority backgrounds relative to Anglo deaf
peers was reported by Cohen, Fishgrund, and Redding (1990). They
reported that deaf students from African-American and Hispanic
groups were less likely to be placed in mainstreamed settings with
their Anglo counterparts, were exposed to less curriculum content,

and were more likely to be placed in lower grade levels (Holt and
Allen 1989). This imposes serious implications for "educational
assessment, placement, student expectations, curriculum development,
staffing, and policy making." This critical situation gave rise to the
first national conference on the needs of African-American and
Hispanic children, sponsored by the Committee on Ethnic and
Multicultural Concerns of the Conference of Educational
Administrators Serving the Deaf (CEASD) at Gallaudet University in
March of 1989. To improve the education of minority deaf children,
the conference focused on four areas: (1) home-school relations; (2)
staff development; (3) curriculum and instruction; (4) assessment and
placement. Although minority children with normal hearing generally
have more educational problems than their white peers for a variety of
reasons, African-American and Hispanic children have had more
severe problems.
In a study of 3,866 students in twenty-three schools and programs for
severe-to-profound hearing-impaired students, Nober (1993) reported
that only 3% of the teachers were themselves deaf. Cohen, Fishgrund,
and Redding (1990) reported that 6.8% of the minority teachers
treated 35.6% of the minority deaf
 

Page 338
students in the deaf school population. The situation is unlikely to
improve in the future. Only 8.7% of the undergraduate students and
7.8% of the Master's level students who are in training programs in
the field of speech-language-hearing disorders are minority, culturally
diverse, or disabled themselves. In the larger inner-city areas, 70 to
90% of the children in the special needs programs represent racial,
linguistic, and ethnic minority backgrounds. In schools for the deaf,
minority and other multicultural students constitute 36% of the
student population. Reform will require a national effort that includes
the audiologist in a major role.
References
Allen, T., and T. Osborn. 1984. Academic integration of hearing-
impaired students: Demographic, handicapping, and achievement
factors. American Annals of the Deaf 129: 100-113.
American Academy of Otolaryngology and American Council of
Otolaryngology. 1979. Guide to evaluation of hearing handicap. 241
:2055-2059.
American Speech-language-Hearing Association and National Joint
Committee on Learning Disabilities. 1993. Reaction to "full
inclusion": A reaffirmation of the rights of students with learning
disabilities to a continuum of services (November):63.
Anthony, D.A. 1971. Seeing essential English. Anaheim: Anaheim
Union High School District.
Bench, J. 1992. Communication skills in hearing-impaired children.
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, Inc.
Berg, F. 1986. Classroom acoustics and signal transmission. In
Educational audiology for the hard of hearing child, ed. F. Berg, J.
Blair, S. Viehweg, and A. Wilson-Vlotman. Orlando: Grune and

Stratton.
Bess, F., and F. McConnell. 1981. Audiology, education, and the
hearing impaired child. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby.
Boothroyd, A. 1984. Auditory perception of speech contrasts by
subjects with sensorineural hearing loss. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 27: 134-144.
Braverman-Callahan, J., and C.K. Radzirwicz. 1989. Hearing
impaired children: Language acquisition and remediation. In
Language and communication disorders in children, ed. D.K.
Bernstein and E. Tiegerman. Columbus: Merrill Publishing Co.
Bricker, D. 1986. Early education of at-risk and handicapped infants,
toddlers, and preschool children. Glenville, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Charrow, V.R. 1975. A psycholinguistic analysis of "deaf" English.
Sign Language Studies 7:139-150.
Christensen, K., and G. Delgado. 1993. Multicultural issues in
deafness. New York: Longman.
Cohen, O.P., J.E. Fishgrund, and R. Redding. 1990. Deaf children
from ethnic, linguistic, and racial minorities backgrounds: An
overview. American Annals of the Deaf 135: 67-73.
Conrad, R. 1979. The deaf school child. London: Harper and Row.
Cornett, O. 1967. Cued speech. American Annals of the Deaf 112:3-
13.
Council for Exceptional Children. 1993. The council for exceptional
children's draft statement on inclusive schools. Reprinted in
Masstream (Spring).
 


Page 339
Crandell, C. 1993. Speech recognition in noise by children with
minimal degrees of sensorineural hearing loss. Ear and Hearing
14:210-216.
Crandell, C., and F. Bess. 1986. Speech recognition of children in a
''typical" classroom setting. Asha 28:82.
.1987. Sound field amplification in the classroom setting. Asha 29:87.
Dolnick, E. 1993. Deafness and culture. Atlantic Monthly September,
37-53.
Eagney, P. 1987. ASL? English? Which? Comparing comprehension.
American Annals of the Deaf 132:272-275.
Evans, L. 1982. Total communication. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Finitzo-Hieber, T. 1981. Classroom acoustics. In Auditory disorders in
school children, ed. R.J. Roeser and M.P. Downs. New York: Thieme-
Stratton.
Finitzo-Hieber, T., and T. Tillman. 1978. Room acoustics effects on
monosyllabic word discrimination ability for normal and children
with hearing impairments. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
21:440-458.
Furth, H.G. 1966. A comparison of reading test norms of deaf and
hearing children. American Annals of the Deaf 111:461-462.
Geers, A., and J. Moog. 1987. Predicting spoken language acquisition
of profoundly hearing impaired children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 52:84-94.
Gerber, S.E., and C.A. Prutting. 1981. Bilingualism: An environment
for the deaf infant. In Early management of hearing loss, ed. G.T.
Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune and Stratton.

Gormley, K., and A.B. Sarachan-Deily. 1987. Evaluating hearing-
impaired students: A practical approach. Volta Review 89:157-169.
Gustason, G. 1983. Teaching and learning signing exact English. Los
Alamitos, CA: Modern Signs Press.
Hanson, V.L. 1990. Recall of order information of deaf signers:
Phonetic coding in temporal order recall. Memory and Cognition
18:604-610.
Hanson,V.L., E.W. Goodell, and C.A. Perfetti. 1991. Tongue-twister
effects in the silent reading of hearing and deaf college students.
Journal of Memory and Language 30:319-330.
Heward, W., and M. Orlansky. 1992. Exceptional children: An
introductory survey to special education. 4th ed. Columbus: Merrill
Publishing Co.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., and R. Treiman. 1982. Recoding in silent reading:
Can the deaf child translate print into a more manageable form? Volta
Review 84:71-82.
Holt, J.A., and T. Allen. 1989. The effects of schools and their
curricula on the reading and mathematics achievement of hearing
impaired students. International Journal of Educational Research.
13:547-562.
Hudgins, R., and F. Numbers. 1942. An investigation of intelligibility
of speech of the deaf. Genetic Psychology Monographs 25:289-392.
Kampfe, C.M., and A.G. Turecheck. 1987. Reading achievement of
prelingually deaf students and its relationship to parental method of
communication: A review of the literature. American Annals of the
Deaf 132:11 -15.
King, C., and S. Quigley. 1985. Reading and deafness. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.

Kretschmer, R., and L. Kretschmer. 1978. Language development and
intervention with the hearing impaired. Baltimore: University Park
Press.
Kyle, J., and B. Woll. 1985. Sign language: The study of deaf people
and their language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 

Page 340
Lane, H. 1988. Is there a "psychology of the deaf"? Exceptional
Children 55:7-19.
Levine, E. 1960. The psychology of deafness: Techniques of appraisal
for rehabilitation. New York: Columbia University Press.
.1981. The ecology of early deafness: Guides to fashioning
environments and psychological assessment. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Levitt, H. 1989. Speech and hearing in communication. In The
handbook of special education: Research and practice. Vol. 3, ed. M.
Wang, M. Reynolds, and H. Waldberg. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Ling, D., ed. 1984. Early intervention of hearing impaired children:
Total communication options. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Lochner, J., and J. Burger. 1961. The intelligibility of speech under
reverberant conditions. Acustica 11: 195-200.
Locke, J.L. 1978. Phonemic effects in the silent reading of hearing
and deaf students. Cognition 6:185-187.
Madell, J.R. 1992. FM systems for children birth to age five. In FM
auditory training systems: Characteristics, selections, and use, ed.
M.A. Ross. Timonium, MD: York Press.
McAfee, M.C., J.F. Kelly, and V.J. Samar. 1990. Spoken and written
English errors of postsecondary students with severe hearing
impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 55:528-634.
Meadow-Orlans, K. 1990. Research in developmental aspects of
deafness. In Educational and developmental aspects of deafness, ed.
D. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Moores, D.F. 1987. Educating the deaf: Psychology, principles, and

practices. 3d ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
.1991. The great debate: Where, how and what to teach deaf children.
American Annals of the Deaf 135:35-37.
Moores, D.F., B. Cerney, and M. Garcia. 1990. School placement and
least restrictive environment. In Educational and developmental
aspects of deafness, ed. D.F. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans.
Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University Press.
Myklebust, H. 1964. The psychology of deafness: Sensory
deprivation, learning, and adjustment. 2d ed. New York: Grune and
Stratton.
Nabalek, A., and L. Robinette. 1978. Influences of the precedence
effect on word identification by normally hearing and hearing
impaired subjects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 63:
187-194.
Niemoeller, A. 1981. Physical concepts of speech communication in
classrooms for the deaf. In Amplification in education, ed. F. Bess, B.
Freeman, and J. Sinclair. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association for
the Deaf.
Nix, G.W. 1983. How total is total communication? Journal of the
British Association of Teachers of the Deaf 7: 177-181.
Nober, E.H. 1967. Articulation of the deaf. Exceptional Children
33:611 -621.
.1993. Section IV. P.L. 99-457 and its effects on educational
management of hearing impaired children. Presented to in-service,
training, research, and assistive warning device programs for the
hearing impaired in Australia and New Zealand. Durham, NH:
University of New Hampshire, International Exchange of Experts and
Information in Rehabilitation.

 

Page 341
Nober, E.H., and L.W. Nober. 1962. Speech reception thresholds and
discrimination scores as a function of method of presentation and
frequency response. Journal of Auditory Research 2:1 -4.
.1977. Effects of hearing loss on speech and language in the post-
babbling stage. In Hearing loss in children, ed. B. Jaffe. Baltimore:
University Park Press.
Oiler, D.K., H. Jensen, and R. Lafayette. 1978. The relatedness of
phonological processes of a hearing-impaired child. Journal of
Communication Disorders 11: 97-105.
Olsen, W. 1981. The effects of noise and reverberation on speech
intelligibility. In Amplification in education, ed. F. Bess, B. Freeman,
and J. Sinclair. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association for the Deaf.
Paul, P., and D. Jackson. 1993. Toward a psychology of deafness.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Paul, P., and S. Quigley. 1990. Education and deafness. New York:
Longman.
Peterson, N. 1987. Early intervention for handicapped and at-risk
children. Denver: Love Publishing.
Pintner, R., and D. Patterson. 1916. A measurement of the language
ability of deaf children. Psychological Review 23:413-436.
Quenin, C.S., and I. Blood. 1989. A national survey of cued speech
programs. Volta Review 91:283-289.
Quigley, S. 1969. The influence of fingerspelling on the development
of language, communication and educational achievement in deaf
children. Urbana: University of Illinois, Institute for Research on
Exceptional Children.
Quigley S., and R. Kretschmer. 1982. The education of deaf children:

Issues, theory and practice. Austin: Pro-Ed.
Quigley, S., and P. Paul. 1984. Language and deafness. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
Rayner, K., and A. Pollatsek. 1989. The psychology of reading.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Reagan, T. 1990. Cultural considerations in the education of deaf
children. In Educational and developmental aspects of deafness, ed.
D. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Robb, M., and J. Saxman. 1985. Developmental trends in vocal
fundamental frequency of young children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 28:42 1-427.
Ross, M., D. Brackett, and A. Maxon. 1982. Hard of hearing children
in the regular schools. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
.1991. Assessment and management of mainstreamed hearing
impaired children. Austin: Pro-Ed.
Ross, M., and T. Giolas. 1971. Effects of three classroom listening
conditions on speech intelligibility. American Annals of the Deaf
116:580-584.
.1978. Auditory management of hearing-impaired children: Principles
and prerequisites for intervention. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Sanders, D. 1965. Noise conditions in normal school classrooms.
Exceptional Children 31:344-353.
Schlesinger, H. 1972. A developmental model applied to problems of
deafness. In Sound and sign: Childhood deafness and mental health,
ed. H. Schlesinger and K. Meadow. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Stein, L., S. Clark, and N. Kraus. 1983. The hearing-impaired infant:

Patterns of identification and habilitation. Ear and Hearing 4:232-
236.
 

Page 342
Stokoe, W. 1960. Sign language structure: An outline of the visual
communication systems of the American deaf. Studies in Linguistics.
Occasional Papers no. 8. Buffalo: University of Buffalo Department
of Anthropology and Linguistics.
.1975. The use of sign language in teaching English. American Annals
of the Deaf 120:417-421.
Tillman, T., R. Carhart, and W. Olsen. 1970. Hearing aid efficiency in
a competing speech situation. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 13:789-811.
Tye-Murray, N. 1987. Effects of vowel context on the articulatory
closure postures of deaf speakers. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 30:99-104.
U.S. Department of Education. 1992. To assure the free appropriate
education of all handicapped children. Fourteenth annual report to
Congress on the implementation of P.L. 94-142: The education for all
handicapped children act. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Waldstein, R. 1990. Effects of postlingual deafness on speech
production: Implications for the role of auditory feedback. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 88:2099-2114.
Webster, A., and J. Elwood. 1985. The hearing impaired child in the
ordinary school. London: Croom Helm.
Wilcox, S. 1988. Introduction: Academic acceptance of American
Sign Language. Sign Language Studies 59:101-108.
.1990. The structure of signed and spoken languages. Sign Language
Studies 67:141-151.
 


Page 343
13
Counseling Families of Hearing-Impaired Children:
Suggestions for the Audiologist
George T. Mencher
Introduction
If we could remain healthy, wealthy, and wise, many of us would like
to live forever. Well, we can't. So the next best thing is to live as long
as we can and, when our time has come, let our children keep us alive
through their memories and their contributions. To many of us, our
children are our immortality. We want them to do more than we did,
have more than we had, and achieve more than we achieved. Our
children are extensions of us; they truly give us a chance to continue
and to relive our lives. Given that relationship, it is easy to see why
parents have dreams and sometimes even fantasies about their
children's achievements.
The birth of a disabled child usually shatters those dreams. It denies
parents the opportunity to extend and relive their lives through their
children. This is a serious blow to the ego and usually triggers a
grieving process. Grieving is not abnormal, nor is it pathological. It is
a normal process through which an individual may recognize a
situation, seek support from others, cope with the difficulty, adjust to
change, and then move on to other things. One of the most important
roles the audiologist plays is in explaining the diagnosis of hearing
impairment to parents and then supporting them as they adjust to the
impact of that diagnosis through grieving.
Three critical elements should be kept in mind as parents begin to
recognize that their concerns about their child are realized. First, some

parents begin to see a hearing loss or handicap foremost, and then a
child. Second, many are confronted with a sense of overwhelming
self-doubt and fear about their ability to care for a disabled child.
Finally, the bonding necessary for personal and
 

Page 344
psychological growth may be interrupted. Bonding requires
interaction between parent and child. The parents' reaction to the child
and the child's inability to react to the parents because of its
impairment may lead to serious difficulties and delays in language,
cognition, and emotional development.
The diagnosis itself is rarely a single-step procedure. Most children
undergo several appointments with a variety of practitioners before a
loss is confirmed. Because most parents have a sense of the hearing
deficit long before the final word is given, the grieving process
usually begins before that fateful day. Consequently, at the time of
final confirmation of a loss, clinicians may be the recipients of a flood
of anguish or hostility that has been building and waiting for an
opportunity for expression. The response parents receive to that
outpouring will often determine the patient-clinician relationship in
the future and may strongly influence the parents' response to their
child. A responsive, empathetic, and knowledgeable clinician can
establish a level of trust with the family that can serve the child for a
lifetime. A key element in the clinician's response is a full
understanding of the nature of the grieving process.
Breaking the News
One of the most uncomfortable situations for any human being is to
tell another bad news. It is reasonable, therefore, that clinicians may
have difficulty informing parents that their child is hearing impaired.
Tales are often repeated about the physician who bluntly notifies
someone they will die and then moves hurriedly on to the next patient.
This hit-and-run approach allows the clinician to report the diagnosis
quickly and then escape before the patient has a chance to react. That
way, the clinician does not have to deal with the patient's pain or
anger. Of course, the patient is left confused, wondering what
happened and what to do next.

Sometimes, to soften the blow, a caring clinician may exaggerate the
potentially positive outcome of the situation. Statements such as ''With
the use of hearing aids, special schooling, and a little hard work, your
child will grow up to be normal" can result in a parent having false
expectations or unreasonable goals for the child.
Other clinicians may take a different tack. In an effort to be thorough
and professional, the clinician explains every nuance of the audiogram
and indeed of human hearing. The benefits of hearing aids are
outlined, and the options available for educational programming are
detailed to the Nth degree. In these situations, the parent rarely says
anything, hears little, and understands even less, and the clinician
manages to avoid listening to the parent by monopolizing the session.
To ensure that parents get off on a good footing, some clinicians
present a set of organized tasks for them to pursue. Even before the
diagnosis has been completed, the parent is given a list of instructions
to follow and places to visit or call. Although, on the surface, this
approach may appear to be helpful by
 

Page 345
providing specific assignments and a focus for a parent's activity, it
does not provide an opportunity to express feelings or to focus
thoughts and emotions. Often more important to the parent-child
relationship and the child's well-being are these latter activities, for
they are an essential part of grieving and the healing process.
An appropriate counseling session includes a complete explanation of
what the audiogram means and, more importantly, what the child
hears and does not hear. It is sometimes helpful to present a tone at the
parent's hearing threshold level as a baseline and then the lowest
intensity tone the child hears in contrast. Parents are often astounded
at the difference, and it really brings home the extent of the pure tone
loss to them.
The most frequent questions often focus on medical treatments
available to cure the problem. A clear picture of medical options, if
any, is vital. Information concerning psychological support groups for
parents in the area is very important. If the parent asks for and is ready
to receive additional information, an explanation of educational
programs (auditory, oral, and so on) in the community is quite
worthwhile. It helps to establish in the parent's mind that there is a
variety of resources they can turn to for help.
Before the initial session ends, both the parents and the clinician
should restate any agreements reached. Finally, phone numbers to call
in case of emergency are exchanged, and the clinician offers
reassurance about future meetings and ongoing support. Note that a
hearing aid fitting has not even been mentioned. It takes an unusual
parent to accept that step so early in the process, and the clinician
should wish to avoid focusing the grieving process on the
amplification device.
The Grieving Process

Kubler-Ross (1969) described grieving in her book, On Death and
Dying. Moses and Van Hecke-Wulatin (1981) adapted her work and
applied it to understanding the actions and reactions of families of
disabled children. They suggested that grieving consists of a series of
affective states, each of which is independent, but all of which can be
felt at the same time. These states allow individuals to grow, to
reconstruct their internal affective world, and to adjust to the new
reality. The reactions are healthy and spontaneous and should not be
judged or "treated." Briefly, the states are denial, guilt, depression,
anger, and anxiety. This chapter examines each of these attitudes and
then discusses how to cope with and move beyond them.
Denial
There are two reasons to deny something. First, because you believe it
is not true; and second, because you may recognize intellectually that
something is true
 

Page 346
but are simply not ready to accept it. Through denial, parents can hope
against hope that things will change, while simultaneously providing
themselves with the time and opportunity to build the inner strength
necessary to accept reality. Parents do this by searching for and
finding people and ideas that reinforce and strengthen belief in one's
own abilities. Parents need time to search out these community
resources. The audiologist is a major source of support and
information but is also the entry to additional resources. Empathy,
trust, and appropriate information in proper doses and according to
parental need will go a long way toward helping a family move from
denial to acceptance of their child and the hearing impairment.
There are several classic manifestations of denial. "Shopping for a
new diagnosis" is a frequent one. This often occurs when parents
refuse to accept the accuracy of the results at one institution and travel
to another for a second opinion. This is not to suggest that seeking a
second opinion is wrong or inappropriate. Many clinics recommend
that families do so. However, shoppers sometimes seek a second,
third, and even a fourth evaluation to confirm results. They find fault
with equipment, competence, clinical manner, and so on if they do not
like what they are told. But those are the extremes. For most families,
a second opinion is sufficient. By that time, they have begun to accept
the hearing loss and have read enough and met enough people with
relevant information to begin to develop a sense of understanding.
A second frequently seen denial mechanism is inactivity or
inconsistent activity. Parents may bring a child to appointments and
agree to many things; however, they seem never to accomplish them.
The child never seems to be wearing a hearing aid, or the batteries are
always dead. Speech or sign lessons are missed or incomplete.
Excuses are plentiful, but effort is sparse. The behavior is, in reality, a
passive resistance. It is easy for the clinician to engage in a tug of war
with the parents over this lack of activity. However, doing so misses

the essence of the problem. There is no room for criticism in this
situation. The good clinician recognizes the behavior for what it
isdenialand helps the parents by moving them toward acceptance
through education, counseling, and modeling.
Guilt
It is frustrating and annoying for human beings to have a mystery and
no solution. The lack of closure leaves one feeling incomplete. Thus it
is to be expected that, when a child is diagnosed with a disorder, the
parents want to know "Why?" Because it is normal for parents to feel
protective of their child, it is reasonable for them to wonder if they are
responsible for the child's predicament. If the parents have even the
slightest doubt about their situation relating to the child, this may be
expressed as guilt. Parents in this situation have been heard to say
things such as "If I hadn't gone here" or ''done that," "I could have
avoided this.'' Carried to the extreme, parents have even reported,
"This is my cross to bear for. . . ."
 

Page 347
Sometimes parents channel their feelings of guilt into constructive
efforts. For example, they may become active in church. However,
religious activity based solely on the notion of penitence or receiving
forgiveness for causing a child's disability is clearly an expression of
grief and guilt that requires special care. Occasionally, effort is
channeled into other constructive avenues such as parents' groups or
school activities. However, sometimes the parents' participation is so
dominant it interferes with the effectiveness of the group. These are
parents who must be present to guide their child in every activity and
who are so overprotective that the child lacks a life of his/her own.
These are parents who take guilt to heart and seem to give up their
lives to atone for it. Often these are angry, militant people.
Again, it is important to stress that these are not abnormal or
pathological responses that require treatment. They are normal
feelings triggered by the parents' need to know the etiology of the
hearing loss and by their need for reassurance that they have not
harmed their child. The clinician's role is to help define the etiology
whenever possible by utilizing the available resources. Opinions are
no substitute for facts. The clinician should seek help from the
experts, including all the many appointments and investigations that
may entail. For some parents, the act of arriving at a conclusion
themselves, after exhausting all avenues of inquiry, serves as a major
step in the healing process.
Sometimes a parent could have prevented a hearing loss. Typically,
this involves failure to immunize or exposure to drugs, diseases, or
disorders known to cause hearing loss. The clinician must be sensitive
to the parents' remarks and attitudes and react accordingly. The wise
clinician knows when to let the grieving process continue as a normal
part of healing and when the client needs outside help. Referral for
appropriate professionals for counseling is always a good idea.

Depression
For most people, depression is a disconcerting phenomenon to
observe. We sense the futility and frustration, and we often regard the
inactivity as pitiful. What we need to do, however, is look beyond the
external signs and explore the roots of those symptoms. People who
are depressed feel powerless to control their lives or the events around
them. The parents of a disabled child are no different. They have
prepared themselves to be the protectors of their newborn; they want
to defend that child from evil. Suddenly, they discover they have
failed. The child is not perfect; it is flawed. Theythe guardiansdid not
prevent a problem nor can they cure it. Their internal definitions of
their own potency and competence have been destroyed and must now
be altered, unfortunately, in a negative direction. For some people, this
is devastating.
A classic sign of depression is inactivity based on a sense of futility
and powerlessness. Overtly, the behavior is similar to that seen in
denial. After all, if one can deny something has occurred, one does not
have to take action to fix it.
 

Page 348
Parents will often find excuses not to complete tasks. They seem
unable to get the earmold or to ensure that the child wears the hearing
aid. What they are acting out is what they are feeling: "I cannot do
this" or "I cannot cure that." The clinician can help the parent find
fulfillment in carrying out some of the smaller, yet important,
activities essential to the child and build up to more critical tasks.
Satisfaction leads to a sense of achievement, accomplishment, and
power. On the other hand, the clinician does not serve the child or the
parent well by forcing activity upon a depressed parent or criticizing
inaction. When the parent is ready and able to assume duties, it will
happen. A supportive clinician suggests ideas and models activities,
allowing the parent to adapt to the child's changing needs and to
develop gradually a sense of ability and responsibility.
Anger
When parents feel the frustration of shattered dreams and hopes, when
they feel powerless but still sense the need to do something, they
might justifiably express anger. The question is, "At whom are they
angry?" Themselves? The clinician? The child? Fate? The answer, of
course, is all and yet none of these. The danger in anger lies in the
responses it may evoke. The most critical situations occur when anger
is pointedly directed toward the child, the spouse, or another family
member and results in physical or mental abuse.
Despite these negative elements, however, the clinician should
recognize that anger is an expression of internal confusion and is
actually a coping mechanism. It allows an individual time to
reevaluate the unwelcome situation; it also helps develop a sense of
focus. Initially, anger may be displayed at everything and everyone,
but it will gradually narrow. The fewer the targets for the anger, the
more likely a specific constructive action will result. This, of course,
reestablishes and redefines competence and leads to further productive

action.
The clinician should neither react to anger nor provoke it. Allow
expression and help to focus activity effectively. Be aware of the
potential for abuse, and have appropriate resources available to help if
mistreatment is apparent. Anger is not to be treated; it is to be
understood and recognized for what it is. Parents who do not know a
clinician well enough to be angry but who nevertheless appear to be
so, are probably reacting to their own situation and not to the
clinician. Empathy is the appropriate response.
Anxiety
We all have fears about the future. "Will I be healthy?" "Will I have
enough money to buy a house?" "How can I ensure that my children
are properly clothed and fed?" These are questions we all ask. The
parent of a hearing-impaired child has these questions and a host of
others. ''How can I pay for those hearing aids?" "Will my child learn
to talk and go to school?'' "Do I have to
 

Page 349
learn to sign?" "Will I have to give up my own life and activities to
take care of this child?" Is it any wonder that such a parent is anxious?
Anxiety can lead to frustration and depression. However, as a normal
part of a coping process, anxiety forces one to reassess responsibilities
and capabilities and to set reasonable goals. Anxiety helps to focus
attention on resources (both internal and external) and to move an
individual toward rational decisions.
A fundamental role of the clinician is to be a channel to external
resources for parents. This does not mean providing the family with a
list of things to do and places to go at every session. It does mean
having information available as it is requested and being prepared to
assist parents in their struggle to clarify issues and learn which
questions to ask of whom. Providing the answers to questions not yet
asked can be counterproductive. Helping to focus ideas so that
questions are asked spontaneously helps to build trust and allows
parents to move through the grieving process in a comfortable and
positive manner.
Coping
Several things should occur when parents have adjusted reasonably
well to the notion of having a hearing-impaired child. In the newfound
acceptance of their offspring, they should restructure the dreams they
thought were dashed. Their new dreams should include the hearing-
impaired child and should have no less value than the original dreams.
They should see a child first, and only then the disability. By
containing the effects of the disability, parents learn to recognize and
appreciate what their child can do. They come to take pleasure in what
is accomplished and not to brood over what might have been achieved
"if...."
Parents must also learn to devalue the outward signs of a disability,

signs they previously thought were negative. Many parents try to
conceal their child's hearing aid or will make excuses for the child's
behavior. Recently a parent came to a clinic and refused to put a
hearing aid on a child because "It makes her ugly." When appraising
her daughter, that parent places great value on physical appearance
and sees the hearing aid as destroying that image. She needs to
restructure her value system. Until she does so, no clinician is going to
convince her to ensure that her daughter wears an aid. Parents who
have accepted and adjusted to their child's hearing loss, however, want
the hearing aid to be visible so that others recognize that the child may
experience difficulty in communication.
It can be quite difficult to comprehend how another person perceives
things. Parents know the joy of music and the pleasure of a familiar
voice. They often fall into the trap of assuming that because their
child does not hear those same sounds, the child does not have as rich
a life. It is very hard to grasp the notion that a hearing-impaired child
of fifteen years who can read at the level of a ten-year-old can enjoy it
more than a normal-hearing child of fifteen who can read like a
twenty-year-old but never does. Parents (and clinicians) must realize
that
 

Page 350
utilizing their own values to judge the child's is inappropriate. It is not
a question of what you can do; it is a question of what you actually
do! As they begin to understand that their child can derive as much
joy from one set of activities as they derive from another, they move
toward adjustment and acceptance.
Developing Trust and Empathy
Trust is basic to all relationships; this is no less so in the parent-
clinician relationship. Developing trust begins at the first meeting
when the clinician is empathetic, understanding, nonjudgmental, and
supportive. Sympathy is often equated with pity, but empathy equates
with understanding. It is obvious which will be more effective in
moving parents through the grieving process. Trustworthiness
increases as the parent realizes the clinician promises only what can
be delivered-and expects the parent to do the same. The clinician must
always be aware of the limitations of time, ability, and motivation and
must neither commit nor require more than is possible. Obviously,
confidentiality must be maintained. This is true not only for the larger
issues but also all those little exchanges, thoughts, and mutterings a
grieving parent may utter. The parents must always believe the
clinician values them and their child. Critical remarks may appear to
lessen that esteem and thus weaken their trust in you or their concept
of your trust in them.
This is particularly difficult for the clinician when the parents express
unrealistic goals for themselves or their child. Frank responses,
diplomatically presented, will go a lot farther than avoidance, small
lies, or inappropriate encouragement. Sometimes the parent verbalizes
unrealistic objectives and ideas for the sole purpose of eliciting a
negative reply. This is not necessarily a test of the clinician's
trustworthiness; rather, it may be an attempt by the parents to seek
reasonable limits for their new dreams.

The successful clinician utilizes a few simple rules when counseling
grieving parents. First, avoid asking the parent "yes" or "no"
questions. Open-ended questions are more likely to evoke answers
that accurately reflect the parents' thoughts. Second, learn to
differentiate between what is said and what is meant. Feelings may or
may not be expressed overtly, and real information may be masked by
a flood of emotions. Be on the lookout, therefore, for nonverbal clues
(e.g., facial expressions, gestures). Third, develop listening skills.
Parents cannot express their feelings if they are listening to the
clinician pontificate. Finally, avoid forming ideas about the parents
before you know the whole story. It is sometimes difficult for young
clinicians to accept their own feelings toward a family or child. It is
not always possible to believe a parent's grief, attitude, or behavior.
Sharing that information with other clinicians is essential to the
therapeutic process. Occasionally, it is necessary to transfer a case to
another clinician because of certain feelings. This is not failure, nor
should it be construed in any negative sense. We all bond with some
people and clash with others.
 

Page 351
The most significant role the clinician plays is in helping parents to
nurture a healthy outlook that includes a sense of control and an
acknowledgement of the hearing loss. As the child grows and
encounters certain critical stages in life, the parents may require
assistance in adjusting to a new perspective. School, puberty,
independence, and parental retirement are times of stress and doubt.
Will the child succeed? Will the child marry? Will the child always be
a financial burden? These are all momentous issues that provide
opportunities for the clinician to continue in a strong supportive role.
Moreover, hearing-impaired children may also enter a period of
grieving. This occurs most often when they realize that they have a
hearing loss, that they are different. It may also occur at such pivotal
periods as puberty and independence. At such times, the clinician
must maintain a keen awareness of the need to remain available to
both parents and child.
Of course, sometimes grief becomes so extreme that sophisticated
therapeutic techniques are required. Knowing when and to whom to
refer can be the most important step in the counseling process. Very
few audiologists are properly trained to do in-depth counseling. Be
aware. Get help. Be supportive and remember: Grieving is a part of
the natural healing process and is not to be treated. It is to be
considered an enriched environment for the growth and development
of the family and the child.
References
Kubler-Ross, E. 1969. On death and dying. New York: Macmillan.
Moses, K.L., and M. Van Hecke-Wulatin. 1981. The socioemotional
impact of infant deafness. In Early management of hearing loss, ed.
G.T Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune and Stratton.

 

Page 352
14
Pediatric Audiology Service Delivery Models: Systems in
Flux
Evelyn Cherow
Introduction
Change is inevitable. We are on a journey into the twenty-first
century. In this context, U.S. policymakers and prognosticators wax
polemic about the complex and interrelated issues shaping this
country's future: workforce projections and personnel training needs;
economic forces and the emerging global economy; healthcare
reform, health promotion, and disease prevention. These are bywords
symbolizing efforts to streamline healthcare costs while improving the
citizenry's physical health and the nation's fiscal health. The U.S.
public education system prepares for major renovation under the
rubric of the Goals 2000 agenda. The term "equal rights" takes on a
broader meaning as the multicultural demographic imperative
challenges both educational and healthcare system structures and
processes. The federal government is insisting that educational and
healthcare agencies use innovative ways to measure the outcomes of
services. Total quality management (better known as TQM) has
leaped from the corporate world and infiltrated the management
milieu of schools and hospitals. Third-party payers are paying for best
and efficient practices that yield effective outcomes. Last, but
certainly not least, savvy "baby boomers" are forging a consumerism
movement and demanding greater accountability from service
providers as data that reflect the quality and effectiveness of services
delivered.

The magnitude and complexity of changes now affecting service
delivery models to children at risk for or having hearing loss and the
professionals providing these services is probably without precedent
in this nation. Consideration of the issues encapsulated in these trends
is necessary for the effective planning, conduct, and evaluation of
audiology services to children from neonates through
 

Page 353
adolescence. This chapter explores both trends of consequence to
current and future pediatric audiology practice and specific issues of
relevance to service providers.
The Broader View
An environmental scanning of issues and consequences affecting
professional associations by a "futures think tank" revealed seventeen
trends falling into six major categories (Coates and Jarrett 1993).
Some of these tendencies have a specific, immediate, or delayed
impact on delivery systems (Table 14.1).
A brief discussion of these trend patterns and their interrelatedness
and relevance to pediatric service delivery provides a foundation for
recommendations to modify and expand audiology service delivery
models for children.
Shifting Cultural Patterns and Cultural Diversity
Immigration patterns in the United States over the last twenty-five
years have dramatically altered the cultural composition of the U.S.
population. Census reports estimated that, in 1990, 25% of the U.S.
population consisted of people of color: 12% African-American, 9%
Hispanic, 3% Asian-Pacific Americans, and 1% Native Americans
and Eskimos. Projections of growth in these populations
Table 14.1.
U.S. Demographics
The U.S. population is aging and more of our elders will be over 75
years of age;
Immigration and the growth of minorities drive toward a multi-racial
and multi-ethnic society;
Baby boomers focus on the family through the 1990s and beyond.
Social and Value Changes
Middle class values become dominant in the U.S.;

Economics drive family changes and non-traditional families proliferate;
The white collar and service sectors of the work force continue to lag in
productivity, quality, service,
and reliability.
Globalization of the American Economy
Changes in world populations fuel the global economy;
Regional trading blocs are forming throughout the world;
New relationships in globalization give rise to certain U.S. policies;
National standards are increasingly driven by global competition.
Information Technology
Information networks are drastically modifying all professional
relationships;
Information technology alters the limitations of distance and time.
Science, Technology, and the Environment
U.S. society is increasingly technology intensive and science dependent.
Government and Regulation
Proliferation of single issues politics continues;
Regulation continues as an inevitable growth enterprise;
States and local government take on new responsibilities and roles.
 

Page 354
indicate a 3% rate of population growth for Caucasians compared to
110% for Asian-Pacific Americans, 55% for Hispanics, 38% for
Native Americans and Eskimos, and 15% for African-Americans. By
the year 2010, people of color should compose one-third of the
population of the United States (Battle 1993).
These population estimates have profound assessment and treatment
implications for providing appropriate services to pediatric clients and
their families or caregivers. Audiologists need to evaluate the
instruments used to measure auditory and communication function to
determine whether they are appropriately normed for the populations
to be tested. New tools are required to accommodate language and
cultural differences of these diverse populations. Standardized
approaches in the use of foreign language interpreters for interviews
and history collection, assessment, and auditory rehabilitation must be
generated so that our measures are valid for all clients. Audiologists
must develop a knowledge base of the values and beliefs of people
from different cultures so that counseling and recommendation
strategies are acceptable and effective.
A 1993 demographic profile of the audiology membership of the
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) revealed
that, of 10,209 certified audiologists, 94.5% were white, 2.08% Asian-
Pacific Islander, 1.6% African-American, 1.52% Hispanic, and 0.3%
Native American or Alaskan Native. Clearly, despite vigorous
recruitment efforts among culturally diverse student populations, the
representation of these groups in audiology is inadequate to meet
current population trends, much less meet those trends projected for
the future.
In 1988, ASHA adopted a definition of bilingual speech-language
pathologists and audiologists to guide professionals in serving persons
of color:

Speech-language pathologists or audiologists who present themselves as
bilingual for the purposes of providing clinical services must be able to
speak (or sign) at least one other language with native or near-native
proficiency in lexicon (vocabulary), semantics (meaning), phonology
(pronunciation), morphology or syntax (grammar), and pragmatics (uses)
during clinical management.... (ASHA 1989b, 93)
This definition urges professionals to consider the competence needed
to serve populations whose native language is other than standard
American English. An opportunity exists to develop unique services
for these segments of this country's population and also to offer them
to developing nations seeking consultation on audiology program
implementation. Efforts by organizations such as the International
Society of Audiology, the World Health Organization, Hearing
International, and the Pan American Society of Audiology have been
instituted to bridge the cultural gaps among nations and provide an
essential exchange of science and services for populations at risk for
or with hearing impairment.
 

Page 355
The Economics of Reform
Economics is concerned with the production, distribution, and
consumption of goods and services. Analyses of both educational and
healthcare systems in this country over the past decade warn that the
outcomes from services in these systems are costly, inefficient, and, in
some venues, lag behind those in other industrial countries. For these
reasons, the Clinton administration launched an aggressive campaign
to overhaul the public educational and healthcare systems in the
United States. New models to contain costs and simultaneously define
effective and efficient "best practices" or standards of care are
evolving. Nationally, statewide, and locally, audiology service
providers must take part in efforts to innovate and define new models,
or they may find themselves extinct. A discussion of the issues and
problems associated with reform efforts will clarify the applications
for pediatric service delivery.
Healthcare Reform
Reform of the healthcare system takes on a special significance with
regard to children. Not only does their good health or lack of it affect
them as individuals and their families, but their health status has a
multiplier effect on the future productivity and well-being of our
democratic society. Changes in the way medical care is provided and
financed under a reformed system must not result in a reduction in the
quantity or quality of services available to children (Behrman 1993).
On the heels of a period of economic recession and with an estimated
37 million Americans in need of healthcare and without insurance and
access to the system, the Clinton administration outlined its proposal
for healthcare reform, the Health Security Act of 1993. Within this act,
coverage for ear exams was discussed only briefly. As a result, ASHA
(singly and as part of several coalitions concerned with persons with

disabilities) urged that the act and other bills emanating from
congressional representatives and senators be expanded to include
hearing exams and hearing aids for children. Reassurance forthcoming
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
stipulated that:
medically necessary or appropriate ear/hearing examinations will be
covered under the Health Security Act although they are not explicitly
identified in the legislative language. Coverage for ear and hearing
examinations under the Health Security Act is provided under the
diagnostic services provision. Diagnosis and testing for defects in hearing
will be covered under this provision. In addition, routine ear/hearing
exams for children are expected to be part of clinician visits at regular
intervals.
These visits are fully covered with no cost sharing under the
administration proposal. Other ear and hearing examinations
determined to be medically necessary or appropriate will receive
coverage as well (Ellwood 1993). The fact is
 

Page 356
that almost two-thirds of all uninsured children have working parents
or caregivers without employer insurance coverage for the family or,
for 18%, coverage for the children of workers (Marquis and Long
1992).
Children of families living below the poverty level have had access to
audiology services and hearing aids through Medicaid law and the
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Program
(EPSDT). Revisions in Medicaid law (effective April 1990) through
the 1989 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) ensured this
coverage through state plans. The Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA) intended, at a minimum, to include diagnosis
and treatment (including hearing aids) for defects in hearing. An
audiologist who is recognized as a Medicaid provider has been
eligible to become a partial EPSDT screening provider.
The 1990 OBRA phase-in would reduce the number of uninsured
children by almost one-third through the year 2002 (Marquis and
Long 1992). However, with reform of the healthcare system, it is still
unclear what will occur with programs funded through Medicaid.
Some congressional staff members contend that the basic benefit
package cannot afford to provide the scope of services allotted under
current EPSDT definitions. For example, the Clinton proposal
originally did not provide coverage for outpatient rehabilitation except
when related to injury or illness. This stipulation excluded persons
with developmental disabilities, and hearing loss is included in federal
definitions of the term "developmental disability." Some contend that,
whereas the Medicaid provisions are comprehensive, in reality,
service access is constrained by low reimbursement rates, complex
administrative practices, and a reduced workforce of providers in
areas most in need of services (Hill 1992).
One report on the effects of healthcare reform on children's services

delineates the major differences between the healthcare needs of
children and adults. Most pediatric healthcare emphasizes wellness
and preventive care or care for self-limiting acute illnesses and trauma
(Behrman 1993). Behrman proposes that the ideal health benefit
package for children would encompass the traditional acute medical
services and preventive and chronic care services.
Besides the problem of what services will be covered is the debate
over which mechanisms are appropriate as delivery models. The
contrast between indemnity or fee-for-service models that allow for
independent choice of family-preferred providers may be obsolete if
the managed care model of primary care-gatekeeper route (to reduce
utilization of specialists) dominates reform (see chapter 2). Many
employers attempting to reduce healthcare costs are already offering
health maintenance organization (HMO) or preferred provider
organization (PPO) options for their employees.
Audiologists must consider the forces at work in the healthcare reform
movement and provide input to evolving state plans that may interface
with federal legal mandates. Pediatric audiology programs need to
align with new referral sources to accommodate the changing service
delivery patterns. This means providing both wellness model
programs for children as well as traditional
 

Page 357
identification, diagnostic, and treatment services. Contracts with
HMOs and PPOs or the formation of a PPO of audiologists should be
pursued.
Another critical area of concern (not unique to pediatric audiology
service delivery) is the ability of providers to present payers and
program administrators with cost effectiveness and cost-benefit data
related to outcomes of services. Neither physicians nor other
nonphysician providers have created the optimal tools for measuring
treatment efficacy. Federal agencies, payers, accrediting agencies, and
consumers, however, have demanded that the healthcare delivery
process incorporate data collection mechanisms. Early attempts at
national collection of clinical outcomes data through the efforts of
ASHA bore no fruit as clinical program administrators were
unprepared to expend resources on automation (hardware and
software) and personnel to input, compile, and analyze such data. As a
result, federally funded projects have resulted in development of a
functional assessment tool for this purpose.
Audiologists and speech-language pathologists have found that these
tools (e.g., the Functional Independence Measure [FIM]) have only
limited use for measuring outcomes of treatment of persons with
communication and hearing disorders. ASHA is again delineating a
plan for gathering the treatment efficacy data necessary to convince
federal agencies of the value of providing audiology and speech-
language pathology services to persons requiring them.
Audiologists must consider incorporating efficacy measures into the
normal course of a business day for the benefit of clients who need
access to and coverage for these audiology services. Demand for
audiology services is inextricably linked to the perceived value by
consumers and payers for such services. Federal and state legislators
want to hear both from consumers about the impact of audiology

services on their ability to function and from the profession about
national efficacy outcomes.
Another cost containment strategy under consideration by the federal
government and healthcare institutions is the training and utilization
of multiskilled practitioners who can provide services across
disciplines and in a support personnel framework. This model has
been offered by the American Hospital Association (AHA) and the
well-funded Pew Health Professions Commission. The Pew
commissioners have developed policy papers on restructuring the
nation's healthcare workforce and disseminated these to policy makers
with recommendations for accomplishing change. The National Fund
for Medical Education (NFME)1 is initiating a grant program to:
encourage health professions schools to educate more primary care
providers with skills the new healthcare system will require. Through
small grants, Primary Care 2000 will help schools in changing curricula,
program design, student admissions, and other activities that will influence
the nature of education and character of medical, nursing, and other health
professional graduates (Pew Health Professions Commission 1994, 1)
1NFME administers the Pew Commission's grantmaking program.
 

Page 358
The Pew Commission is working with the U.S. Bureau of Health
Professions to reform allied health education. Several conferences
have been held and are planned to outline the workforce needs and
provide input to allied health educators on training to prepare
practitioners to address system changes. Audiologists must define the
efficient and appropriate use of support personnel in providing
pediatric audiology services. They must also be clear about
professional guidelines for practice with pediatric clients so that
critical risk management strategies are ensured and professional
liability considerations addressed (ASHA 1994).
Education Reform
In 1990, in response to a study of the nation's schools (A Nation at
Risk 1983), President Bush and the U.S. governors adopted the
America 2000 education strategy, a plan to reform the nation's
schools. Six major goals constituted the backbone of the reform plan:
1. All children in America will start school ready to learn;
2. The high school graduation rate will increase to at least 90%;
3. American students will leave grades 4, 8, and 12 having
demonstrated competence in challenging subject matter ...;
4. U.S. students will be first in the world in science and mathematics
achievement;
5. Every adult American will be literate and will possess the
knowledge and skills necessary to compete in a global economy and
exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship;
6. Every school in America will be free of drugs and violence and will
offer a disciplined environment conducive to learning.
Report cards, or a public reporting system, were devised to determine

how well these goals are met on the local, district, state, and national
levels (comparable to attempts to measure healthcare outcomes in the
healthcare system). ASHA provided input to the National Education
Goals Panel, which was charged with monitoring progress toward
meeting the goals. ASHA emphasized the need to consider the
receptive and expressive components of language learning and the
variables that affect a child's readiness to enter school or achieve
competence in subjects. The latter variables include history of chronic
middle ear disease, hearing sensitivity, auditory disorders, and
multicultural factors.
President Clinton expanded the Bush plan with the enactment of
Goals 2000: Educate America Act of 1993, seeking to firm up public
and private partnerships to effect school reform and to measure the
outcome of education efforts in the work world and international
competitiveness.
Professionals who have been involved with special education have
voiced concerns to policymakers that special education initiatives be
considered in this broad context of regular education reform on the
federal and state levels. As the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (IDEA) was debated before the re-
 

Page 359
sponsible committees of the U.S. Congress during reauthorization
hearings in 1994, advocates and consumers advocated for reform of
special education (The Regional Resource and Federal Center
Program 1993).
Considerable debate is underway concerning the interpretation of
inclusion (integration of children with disabilities in regular
classrooms in neighborhood schools). Certain parties insist that the
full continuum of educational placement options be maintained so that
families can choose a school setting based on family preferences and
individualized assessment. A Policy Guidance issued by the U.S.
Department of Education (October 1992) clarified the department's
interpretation of free and appropriate public education (FAPE), least
restrictive environment (LRE), and the requirements for
Individualized Education Program (IEP) development for deaf
children. This clarification was issued to ensure appropriate placement
decisions for children with hearing loss. The policy guidance was
reissued in 1994 to reinforce the Department of Education's
commitment to these principles. However, advocates for inclusion are
seeking revision of IDEA to mandate neighborhood school placement
for all children with disabilities.
Audiologists will be involved with placement decisions, IEP
development, and audiology service delivery systems evolving as a
result of general reform and IDEA reauthorization. As such,
audiologists again will need to demonstrate that student outcomes are
enhanced as a result of audiology service delivery and
recommendations. The importance of language and communication
skill development as fundamental to academic achievement and
psychosocial development for children must be emphasized.
Measurement and reporting of outcomes of audiology services is
critical to ensuring that such services are available to children in need.
Audiologists may choose to adapt models for service delivery to be

congruent with the collaborative-consultative and curriculum
integration models that are emerging.
Access to technology is another critical issue in educating children
with hearing loss to meet the goals of school reform. As defined in
IDEA, assistive technology devices and services must be provided if
required as part of special education, related services, or
supplementary aids and services. In response to an inquiry about
whether a district is required to buy a hearing aid for a student when
the device is on the student's IEP, the Office of Special Education
Programs (OSEP) responded that the Department of Education
intended that assistive technology devices and services be limited to
those situations in which they are required for a child to receive
FAPE. OSEP concluded that, when a student's IEP reflects the need
for a hearing aid to receive FAPE, the school district is responsible for
providing the hearing aid at no cost to the child (letter to Seiler,
20IDELR 1216 [OSEP 1993] Individuals with Disabilities Education
Law Report 1994). This interpretation has interesting ramifications for
delivery of hearing aids to children of school age and reimbursement
for the devices.
Policymakers responsible for lawmaking for special education are
studying the implications of related services (e.g., audiology, speech-
language pathology,
 

Page 360
occupational and physical therapy) and coverage for these services in
the context of definitions for educational versus healthcare or medical
services. In either context, audiologists must assume more
responsibility for demonstrating enhanced student outcomes related to
audiology services.
Traditional Models of Pediatric Audiology Service Delivery
Audiology services for children evolved in community health
departments; community, teaching, and pediatric hospitals;
community hearing and speech centers; otolaryngologists' offices;
schools; and private practice audiology offices. The 1993 ASHA
Membership Update survey data reveal that of the 10,209 certified
audiologists who are ASHA members, 10% are employed in schools
as their primary employment setting (special, preschool, elementary,
or secondary schools). Approximately 73% of ASHA-certified
audiologists are employed in healthcare facilities: nonresidential
healthcare facilities (48%); hospitals (22%); private physicians'
offices (21%); private audiologists' or speech-language pathologists'
offices (12%); speech and hearing centers (8%); residential health
settings (3%); and home care (1%).
The ASHA membership employment-setting data are not clear as to
the number of audiologists who, while employed in healthcare
settings, have contracts to provide services to schools. Another critical
consideration in pediatric audiology service delivery continues to be
access to services, particularly for underserved populations: those who
have no insurance coverage. They are estimated at 37 million
Americans, including those who live in rural or remote areas of the
country (ASHA 1988).
Emphases in pediatric service delivery have traditionally
encompassed identification of children at risk or with temporary or

permanent hearing loss and provision of intervention (auditory
[re]habilitation). Results of studies indicating that both language and
cognitive skill development occur during critical periods in the first
three to six years of life influenced efforts to produce better hearing
assessment tools and systematic mechanisms for finding children at
risk for permanent hearing loss. Audiologists have launched hearing
conservation programs to teach children and their families to protect
their hearing from exposure to loud sounds (e.g., noisy toys, loud
music from personal stereos or concerts, appliances, and recreational
sources). Primary prevention activities related to noise-induced
hearing loss continue to receive media attention as the world becomes
a noisier place (ASHA 1991a).
Early Identification of Neonates and Infants
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing
In 1969, a group of audiologists, otolaryngologists, pediatricians, and
later, nurses formed the Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH) to
urge research
 

Page 361
on effective methods for screening the hearing of babies (Northern
and Downs 1991). Later, the committee recommended the use of a
risk register as an effective tool for finding those newborns most at
risk for permanent hearing loss in combination with regular hearing
testing for those babies who fell within the five risk categories.
This national policy on the need for early identification and
intervention for infants with hearing loss based on expanded risk
categories served as a standard of care through 1990 (JCIH 1990).
Initially, this approach seemed to accommodate cost benefit
considerations as well as test sensitivity and specificity concerns.
However, subsequent research led the JCIH to modify its stance (JCIH
1994). The JCIH developed a 1994 position statement that calls for
the universal detection of all infants with hearing impairment. This
change in strategy to target all newborns for screening and follow
babies who have risk indicators as well resulted from research
indicating that assessment of the risk registry babies missed 50% of
those who have or develop hearing loss during critical language
learning years (Elssman, Matkin, and Sabo 1987; Mauk et al. 1991;
Pappas 1983). The availability of new and more cost effective
technologies for screening (automatic auditory brainstem response
[ABR] and otoacoustic emissions [OAE]) has paved the way for the
advent of universal newborn hearing screening programs to detect
infants with conductive, sensorineural, or mixed loss, unilateral or
bilateral in nature, and of mild to profound degrees.
The JCIH, in its 1994 position statement, endorsed the goal of
universal detection of infants with hearing impairment as early as
possible. The committee stated that all infants with hearing
impairment should be identified before three months of age and
receive intervention by six months of age. JCIH urges a continued use
of risk indicators when universal hearing screening is not available or
for those infants who require periodic monitoring of hearing. This

position statement was reviewed by the policymaking bodies of the
component organizations: the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery, the American Academy of Audiology, the American
Academy of Pediatrics, the Council on Education of the Deaf, and the
Directors of Speech and Hearing Programs in State Health and
Welfare Agencies.
NIH Consensus Development Conference
On March 1-3, 1993, the National Institutes of Health convened a
consensus development conference on the topic ''Early Identification
of Hearing Impairment in Infants and Young Children.'' These
consensus statements are prepared by a nonfederal and nonadvocate
panel of experts resulting from presentations of investigators,
statements by conference attendees, and panel deliberations. The
panel was to address the following issues:
1. Advantages of early identification of hearing impairment and
consequences of late identification;
 

Page 362
2. Guidelines for deciding which children to screen for hearing
impairment and when;
3. Advantages and disadvantages of current screening methods;
4. Guidelines for deciding which model to utilize for hearing
screening and follow-up; and
5. Future directions for research in diagnosis and management of
hearing impairment in infants and young children.
The panel concluded that:
1. All infants admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit should be
screened for hearing loss prior to discharge;
2. Universal screening should be implemented for all infants within
the first three months of life;
3. The preferred model for screening should begin with an evoked
otoacoustic emissions (EOAE) test (see chapter 8), followed by an
auditory brainstem response test (see chapter 7) for all infants who fail
the EOAE test;
4. Comprehensive intervention and management programs must be an
integral part of a universal screening program;
5. Universal neonatal screening should not be a replacement for
surveillance throughout infancy and early childhood; and
6. Education of primary caregivers and primary healthcare providers
on the early signs of hearing impairment is essential (National
Institutes of Health 1993).
The general effect of the NIH consensus statement has been to
reinforce the public health agenda for finding babies with hearing loss
at as early an age as possible to offset the potential long-term

consequences of hearing loss (e.g., delayed language, cognitive and
psychosocial development, and academic achievement). In addition,
the NIH-through the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders (NIDCD)-has funded a critical five-year
multisite study to evaluate different assessment protocols and the
outcomes of early identification programs. As part of the study, an
attempt was made to track the incidence of progressive hearing loss
during the first year of life (White and Behrens 1993).
Healthy People 2000
The mission of the United States Public Health Service (PHS) is to
focus existing knowledge and resources on the prevention of major
chronic illnesses, injuries, and infectious diseases as well as premature
mortality and morbidity. To this end, Healthy People 2000: National
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, a PHS document, was
developed with a set of measurable public health targets to encourage
new and increased health promotion and disease prevention activities.
The three overriding goals of the enterprise are to (1) increase the
span of
 

Page 363
healthy life for all Americans; (2) reduce health disparities among
Americans; and (3) achieve access to preventive services for all
Americans (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service 1991).
The Healthy People 2000 report contains two targets specific to
hearing loss in the section on chronic disabling conditions:
1. Increase to at least 80% the proportion of pediatric primary care
providers who routinely refer or screen infants and children for
impairments of vision, hearing, speech and language, and assess other
developmental milestones as part of well-child care; and
2. Reduce to no more than twelve months the average age at which
children with significant hearing impairment are identified.
This public health program is designed to reduce healthcare costs in
the United States through widespread prevention efforts. Audiologists
can use this document, the NIH consensus report, and the JCIH
position statements to prove the need to establish early identification
programs.
Early Identification Programs in States
In July 1992, ASHA chose to survey state health and welfare agencies
to assess the status of early identification programs for infants in this
country because professionals, consumers, and policymakers had
expressed a need for these data (Welsh and Slater 1993). Three types
of infant hearing impairment identification programs (IHIIP) were
identified: statewide legislatively mandated programs (N=18);
statewide programs with no legislative mandate (N=5); and states with
individual birthing sites that operate IHIIPs (N=22).
Survey results revealed variety in the approaches used in infant
hearing screening, at risk criteria and follow-up mechanisms used, and

approaches to collection of data. Welsh and Slater (1993) found that:
1. Various terms had different meanings, depending on the state's
specific program;
2. No substantial difference was found between funding sources for
legislatively-mandated programs and programs without a legislative
mandate;
3. Most states do not operate centrally managed programs;
4. Many states do not have data collection mechanisms; and 5. The
purpose of screening programs needed reexamination as follow-up
care was not necessarily part of the legal mandate.
Preferred Practice Patterns, Guidelines, and Policies
ASHA has published several practice guidelines and reports that
discuss audiological procedures for screening and evaluation of
infants and toddlers from birth through age 36 months (ASHA 1989a,
1991a). In addition, preferred
 

Page 364
practice patterns that outline the critical components of pediatric
assessment are available (ASHA 1993). The fitting of FM
amplification for infants and preschool children is addressed in a
position statement (ASHA 1991b) that provides a rationale for
audiologists to consider both hearing aids and FM systems as
necessary technical devices for children with hearing loss.
National Priorities
As the Congress works to carve out a healthcare package that will
provide access for all U.S. citizens, ASHA has actively worked with
administration and congressional staff to include coverage of
audiology services, hearing evaluations, and hearing aids for children.
Draft legislation amending the Health Security Act to include
audiology services under outpatient rehabilitation and hearing aids for
children was reviewed by the U.S. Senate Labor and Human
Resources Committee. A similar amendment had been introduced to a
bill marked up by the House Education and Labor Subcommittee. It is
uncertain how these amendments will fare in the evolution of this
controversial piece of legislation.
The Preschool Through Secondary Years
As Nober discusses in chapter 12, the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA) Part H Amendments, is the critical legislative
initiative affecting service delivery to preschool-aged children with
hearing loss. Despite federal legislation, implementation at the state
level is dependent on funding and resources available. In addition,
because hearing loss is a low incidence disability, program
administrators in schools may not be as familiar with the needs of this
population as with other disabilities.
For these reasons, the Deaf Education Initiatives Project, funded by
the U.S. Department of Education Office of Special Education and

Rehabilitative Services (OSERS), and a collaborative effort by the
National Association of State Directors of Special Education
(NASDSE) and Northern Illinois University, has two major foci.
These are: (1) the development of guidelines for educational services
to deaf and hard-of-hearing students from identification through
secondary level; and (2) training workshops for key personnel with
responsibility for planning and implementing educational and related
programs for students who are deaf or hard of hearing. The guidelines
describe the need for qualified personnel, including audiologists, to
provide appropriate services to children in school programs.
A report by the Joint Committee of ASHA and the Council on
Education of the Deaf (JCASHA/CED) was developed to outline the
roles, knowledge, and experience required by professionals providing
services under IDEA-Part H to children who are deaf or hard of
hearing, ages birth through 36 months. The report delineates critical
professional roles including participation as a multidisci-
 

Page 365
plinary team member; working with families; assessment and
diagnosis of hearing loss; assessment of communication competence;
assessment of cognitive, motor, and social skills; otologic evaluation;
developing and implementing the Individual Family Service Plan;
provision of sensory devices; management of sensory devices;
maximizing auditory potential; facilitating communication
development and cognitive development.
Other program milieus that are appropriate targets for the provision of
audiological services include daycare programs and Headstart. The
Clinton Administration has designated the Headstart program for
increased program development and funding.
The Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research (Stool et al. 1994) has sponsored an expert
panel to develop clinical practice guidelines on otitis media with
effusion to help healthcare practitioners and consumers in providing a
standard of care to this population. The target group is children
between 13 and 36 months of age. Audiologists have a significant role
to play in assessing the hearing loss associated with chronic or acute
middle ear disease and determining the effects on communication.
The ASHA Guidelines for Identification Audiometry (ASHA 1985)
presented a philosophy and procedures for identifying children with
hearing loss with potential for interfering with communication. The
focus group was children age three years through grade three. The
authors proposed that the guidelines were appropriate for use with
older children as well. Depending on program goals and whether these
include the identification of medical conditions requiring medical
referral, identification protocols would be altered. No specific
guidelines are available that specify the criteria for periodic
monitoring of children above grade three. These guidelines and those
for screening for middle ear disorders were determined to need

updating to reflect current research.
With more exposure to noise in the environment (e.g., music, toys,
recreation), children of all ages are at greater risk for noise-induced
hearing loss. With the focus on healthcare reform, health promotion,
and disease prevention, audiologists can play a key role in the
education of children, primary care providers, and educators about the
need for hearing conservation programs and auditory monitoring
throughout the school years through postsecondary education.
Summary
This chapter outlines several general and specific policy-making
trends that Tare influential in determining pediatric audiology service
models. Audiologists can make a major contribution to shaping these
trends by demonstrating effective and efficient outcomes of audiology
services for children at risk for permanent or temporary hearing loss.
Automation will be a necessary component of service delivery
systems so that professionals can not only capture the types of
treatment offered, the populations served, and the effects of different
treatment
 

Page 366
paradigms for children in need of audiology services, but also report
meaningful data to consumers and policymakers.
References
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1985. Guidelines
for identification audiometry. Asha 27:49-52.
.1988. Utilization and employment of speech-language pathology
supportive personnel with underserved populations. Asha 30:55-56.
.1989a. Audiologic screening of newborn infants who are at risk for
hearing impairment. Asha 31:89-92.
.1989b. Definition: Bilingual speech-language pathologists and
audiologists. Asha 31:93.
.1991a. Guidelines for the audiologic assessment of children from
birth through 36 months of age. Asha (Suppl. 5) 33:37-43.
.1991b. The use of FM amplification instruments for infants and
preschool children with hearing impairment. Asha (Suppl. 5) 33:1-2.
.1993. Preferred practice patterns for the professions of speech-
language pathology and audiology. Asha (Suppl. 11) 35:1-102.
.1994. Professional liability and risk management for the audiology
and speech-language pathology professions. Asha (Suppl. 12) 36:25-
38.
Battle, D.E. 1993. Communication disorders in multicultural
populations. Boston: Andover Medical Publishers.
Behrman, R.E. 1993. Statement of purpose. In The future of children,
ed. R.E. Behrman. Los Angeles: David and Lucile Packard
Foundation and the Center for the Future of Children.
Coates, J.F., and J. Jarrett. 1993. Scanning the environment for

association implications: Seventeen key trends. Washington, D.C.:
Coates and Jarrett, Inc.
Ellwood, D. Letter to author, 30 November 1993.
Elssman, S., N. Matkin, and M. Sabo. 1987. Early identification of
congenital sensorineural hearing impairment. The Hearing Journal
13:7-12.
Hill, I.T. 1992. The role of Medicaid and other government programs
in providing medical care for children and pregnant women. The
Future of Children 2:134-153.
Joint Committee of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association and the Council on Education of the Deaf. n.d. Technical
report regarding service provision under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (Part H), as amended by IDEA-Part H to
children who are deaf and hard of hearing, ages birth to 36 months.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 1991. 1990 position statement.
Asha (Supplement 5) 33:3-6.
.1994 position statement. Audiology Today 6:6-9.
Letter to P.J. Seller, 20 IDELR 1216 OSEP 1993. 1994. Individuals
with Disabilities Education Law Report. p. 1216-1217.
Marquis, S.M., and S.H. Long. 1992. Uninsured children and national
health care reform. Journal of the American Medical Association
268:3473-3477.
Mauk, G.W., K.R. White, L.B. Mortenson, and T.R. Behrens. 1991.
The effectiveness of screening programs based on high risk
characteristics in early identification of hearing impairment. Ear and
Hearing 8:217-221.
 


Page 367
National Institutes of Health. 1993. Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11:1-24. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health.
NFME launches primary care 2000 initiative under new leadership.
1994. Making progress: Practitioners for 2005. Pew Health
Professions Commission (spring): l.
Northern, J.L., and M.P. Downs. 1991. Hearing in children. 4th ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Pappas, D.G. 1983. A study of the high-risk registry for sensorineural
hearing impairment. Journal of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery 91:41-4.
Regional Resource and Federal Centers Program. 1993. Education
reforms and special education: The era of change for the future.
Plantation, FL: South Atlantic Regional Resource Center, Florida
Atlantic University.
Stool, S.E., A.O. Berg, S. Berman, C.J. Carney, J.R. Cooley, L.
Culpepper, R.D. Eavey, L.V. Feagans, T. Finitzo, E.M. Friedman, et
al. 1994. Otitis media with effusion in young children. Clinical
Practice Guideline #12, July. AHCPR Publication No. 94-0622.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Public
Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
U. S. Department of Education. 1992. Deaf students education
services: Policy guidance. Federal Register (October 30) Vol. 57. No.
211:49274-49276.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service. 1991. Healthy people 2000: National health promotion and
disease prevention objectives. DHHS Publication No. PHS1-50212.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. A
nation at risk: the imperative for educational reform: a report to the
Nation and the Secretary of Education, United States Department of
Education. Washington, D.C.: The Commission.
Welsh, R., and S. Slater. 1993. The state of infant hearing impairment
identification programs. Asha 35:49-52.
White, K.R., and T.R. Behrens, eds. 1993. The Rhode Island hearing
assessment project: Implications for universal newborn hearing
screening. Seminars in Hearing 14: 1.
 

Page 369
Bibliography
Abramovich, S.J., S. Gregory, M. Slemick, and A. Stewart. 1979.
Hearing loss in very low birth weight infants treated with neonatal
intensive care. Archives of Disorders of Children 54:421-426.
Adams, J., E. Courchesne, R. Elmasian, and A. Lincoln. 1987.
Increased amplitude of the auditory P2 and P3b components in
adolescents with developmental dysphasia. In
Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology: Current trends
in event-related potential research, ed. R. Johnson, J.W. Rohrbaugh,
and R. Parasuraman. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.
Alberti, P.W., and J.F. Jerger. 1974. Probe-tone frequency and the
diagnostic value of tympanometry. Archives of Otolaryngology
99:206-210.
Alberti, P.W., and R. Kristensen. 1970. The clinical application of
impedance audiometry. Laryngoscope 80:735-746.
Alberti, P.W., M.L. Hyde, K. Riko, H. Corgin, and S. Ambramovich.
1983. An equivalent of BERA for hearing screening in high-risk
neonates. Laryngoscope 93:1115 -1121.
Alford, B., J.F. Jerger, A. Coats, C. Peterson, and S. Weber. 1973.
Neurophysiology of facial nerve testing. Archives of Otolaryngology
97:214-217.
Alford, C.A., S. Stagno, and R.F. Pass. 1980. Natural history of
perinatal cytomegaloviral infection. In Perinatal infections, ed. K.
Elliot, M. O'Connor, and J. Whelan. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica.
Allen, D., I. Rapin, and M. Wiznitzer. 1988. Communication disorders
of preschool children: The physician's responsibility. Developmental

and Behavioral Pediatrics 9: 164-170.
Allen, P., F. Wightman, D. Kistler, and T. Dolan. 1989. Frequency
resolution in children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
32:317-322.
Allen, T., and T. Osborn. 1984. Academic integration of hearing-
impaired students: Demographic, handicapping, and achievement
factors. American Annals of the Deaf 129: 100-113.
American Academy of Otolaryngology and American Council of
Otolaryngology. 1979. Guide to evaluation of hearing handicap. 241
:2055-2059.
American Psychiatric Association. 1987. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders. 3d ed. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychiatric Association.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1979. Guidelines
for acoustic immittance screening of middle ear function. Asha 27:49-
52.
.1985. Guidelines for identification audiometry. Asha 27:49-52.
.1987. The short latency auditory evoked potentials. Rockville, Md.:
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
 

Page 370
.1988a. Guidelines for determining threshold level for speech. Asha
30:85-89.
.1988b. Utilization and employment of speech-language pathology
supportive personnel with underserved populations. Asha 30:55-56.
.1989a. Audiologic screening of newborn infants who are at risk for
hearing impairment. Asha 31:89-92.
.1989b. Definition: Bilingual speech-language pathologists and
audiologists. Asha 31:93.
.1990. Guidelines for screening for hearing impairments and middle
ear disorders. Asha (Suppl. 2) 32:17-30.
.1991a. Combatting noise in the '90s: A national strategy for the
United States. Rockville, MD: American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association.
.1991b. Guidelines for the audiologic assessment of children from
birth through 36 months of age. Asha (Suppl. 5) 33:37-43.
.1991c. The use of FM amplification instruments for infants and
preschool children with hearing impairment. Asha (Suppl. 5) 33:1-2.
.1992. Issues in central auditory processing disorders. Rockville,
Md.: American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
.1993a. Guidelines for audiology services in the schools. Asha (Suppl.
10) 35: 24-32.
.1993b. Preferred practice patterns for the professions of speech-
language pathology and audiology. Asha (Suppl. 11) 35:1-102.
.1994. Professional liability and risk management for the audiology
and speech-language pathology professions. Asha (Suppl. 12) 36:25-
38.

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and National Joint
Committee on Learning Disabilities. 1993. Reaction to "full inclusion
": A reaffirmation of the rights of students with learning disabilities to
a continuum of services (November): 63.
Anderson, H., B. Barr, and E. Wedenberg. 1969. Intra-aural reflexes
in retrocochlear lesions. In Nobel symposium 10: Disorders of the
skull base region, ed. C.A. Hamberger and J. Wersall. Stockholm:
Almqvist and Wiksell.
.1970. Early diagnosis of VIIIth-nerve tumours by acoustic reflex
tests. Acta OtoLaryngologica 262:232-237.
Anonymous. 1989. Early intervention programs for infants and
toddlers with handicaps. Final regulations. Federal Register 54
119:26306-26348.
Anthony, D.A. 1971. Seeing essential English. Anaheim: Anaheim
Union High School District.
Aoki, C., and P. Siekevitz. 1988. Plasticity in brain development.
Scientific American 2596: 56-64.
Arao, H., and H. Niwa. 1991. Auditory brain stem responses in
Down's syndrome. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho 94:1673-82.
Arnold, S. 1985. Objective versus visual detection of the auditory
brainstem response. Ear and Hearing 6:144-149.
Arnst, D.J., and J. Katz. 1982. Central auditory assessment: The SSW
test-development and clinical use. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Audiological Engineering Corporation, 35 Medford Street,
Somerville, Mass.
Bader, G.G., I. Witt-Engerstrom, and B. Hagberg. 1989.
Neurophysiological findings in the Rett syndrome, II: Visual and
auditory brainstem, middle and late evoked responses. Brain

Development 11:110-114.
Balkany, T.J., S.A. Berman, M.A. Simmons, and B.W. Jafek. 1978.
Middle ear effusions in neonates. Laryngoscope 88:398-405.
 

Page 371
Balkany, T., P.J. Gantz, and J.B. Nadol. 1988. Multichannel cochlear
implants in partially ossified cochleas. Annals of Otology, Rhinology,
and Laryngology (Suppl. 135) 97:3-7.
Baloh, R.W. 1982. Hearing loss. In Cecil textbook of medicine, 16th
ed., ed. J.B. Wyngarden and L.H. Smith. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Baran, J.A., and F.E. Musiek. 1991. Behavioral assessment of the
central auditory nervous system. In Hearing assessment, 2d ed., ed.
W.F. Rintelmann. Austin, Texas: Pro-Ed.
Baran, J.A., F.E. Musiek, and A.G. Reeves. 1986. Central auditory
function following anterior sectioning of the corpus callosum. Ear
and Hearing 7:359-362.
Barr, D.F. 1976. Auditory perceptual disorders. 2d ed. Springfield, IL:
Charles C. Thomas.
Battle, D.E. 1993. Communication disorders in multicultural
populations. Boston: Andover Medical Publishers.
Bayley, N. 1969. Bayley scales of infant development. New York:
Psychological Corporation.
Beasley, D.S., and B.A. Freeman. 1977. Time-altered speech as a
measure of central auditory processing. In Central auditory
dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Beasley, D.S., J.E. Maki, and D.J. Orchik. 1975. Children's perception
of time-compressed speech using two measures of speech
discrimination. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:216-225.
Beauchaine, K., and M. Gorga. 1988. Applications of the auditory
brainstem response to pediatric hearing aid selection. Seminars in
Hearing 9:61-74.
Beauchaine, K., M. Gorga, J. Reiland, and L. Larson. 1986.

Application of ABRs to the hearing-aid selection process: Preliminary
data. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 29:120-128.
Beedle, R.K., and E.R. Harford. 1973. A comparison of acoustic
reflex and loudness growth in normal and pathological ears. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 16:271-281.
Behrman, R.E. 1993. Statement of purpose. In The future of children,
ed. R.E. Behrman. Los Angeles: David and Lucile Packard
Foundation and the Center for the Future of Children.
Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology 1992. Statistics of ototoxic
drugs in China. A report submitted to the World Health Organization.
Beijing: Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology.
Beiter, A.L., and J.A. Brimacombe. 1993. Cochlear implants. In
Rehabilitative audiology: Children and adults, 2d ed., ed. J.G. Alpiner
and P.A. McCarthy. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Bench, J. 1992. Communication skills in hearing-impaired children.
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Bench, J., and J. Bamford, eds. 1979. Speech-hearing tests and the
spoken language of hearing-impaired children. London: Academic
Press.
Bench, J., Y. Collyer, L. Mentz, and I. Wilson. 1976. Studies in infant
behavioral audiometry. I. Neonates. Audiology 15:85-105.
Bennett, M. 1984. Impedance concepts relating to the acoustic reflex.
In The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical applications, ed.
S. Silman. New York: Academic Press.
Bennett, M.J., and L.A. Weatherby. 1982a. Multiple probe frequency
acoustic reflex measurements. Scandinavian Audiology 12:3-9.
.1982b. Newborn acoustic reflexes to noise and pure-tone signals.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 25:383-387.

Bentler, R. A. 1993. Amplification for the hearing impaired child. In
Rehabilitative audiology: Children and adults, 2d ed., ed. J.G. Alpiner
and P.A. McCarthy. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
 

Page 372
Berg, F. 1986. Classroom acoustics and signal transmission. In
Educational audiology for the hard of hearing child, ed. F. Berg, J.
Blair, S. Viehweg, and A. Wilson-Vlotman. Orlando: Grune and
Stratton.
Bergman, B., K. Beauchaine, and M. Gorga. 1992. Application of the
auditory brainstem response in pediatric audiology. The Hearing
Journal 45:19-25.
Bergman, M., H. Costeff, V. Koren, N. Koifman, and A. Reshef.
1984. Auditory perception in early lateralized brain damage. Cortex
20:233-242.
Bergstrom, L. 1984. Congenital hearing loss. In Hearing disorders, 2d
ed., ed. J.L. Northern. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Bergstrom, L., M. Neblett, and W. Hemenway. 1972. Otologic
manifestations in acrocephalosyndactyly. Archives of Otolaryngology
96:117-123.
Berlin, C.I., J.K. Cullen, Jr., L.F. Hughes, H.L. Berlin, S.S. Lowe-
Bell, and C.L. Thompson. 1975. Acoustic variables in dichotic
listening. In Proceedings of a symposium on central auditory
processing disorders, ed. M.D. Sullivan. Omaha: University of
Nebraska Medical Center.
Berlin, C.I., L.J. Hood, R.P. Cecola, D.F. Jackson, and P. Szabo. 1993.
Does type I afferent neuron dysfunction reveal itself through lack of
efferent suppression? Hearing Research 65:40-50.
Berlin, C.I., L.F. Hughes, S.S. Lowe-Bell, and H.L. Berlin. 1973.
Dichotic right ear advantage in children 5 to 13. Cortex 9:394-402.
Berlin, C.I., S.S. Lowe-Bell, J.K. Cullen, Jr., S. Thompson, and C.
Loovis. 1973. Dichotic speech perception: An interpretation of right-
ear advantage and temporal offset effects. Journal of the Acoustical

Society of America 53:699-709.
Berlin, C.I., S.S. Lowe-Bell, P.J. Jannetta, and D.G. Kline. 1972.
Central auditory deficits of temporal lobectomy. Archives of
Otolaryngology 96:4-10.
Berliner, K.I., and L.S. Eisenberg. 1985. Methods and issues in the
cochlear implantation of children: An overview. The cochlear implant:
An auditory prosthesis for the profoundly deaf child. Ear and Hearing
(Suppl. 6) 3:6S-13S.
Bernstein, R.S., and J.S. Gravel. 1992. Orienting as a means of
assessing hearing in newly born infants. In Screening children for
auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill
Wilkerson Center Press.
Berrick, J., G. Shubow, M. Schultz, H. Freed, S. Fournier, and J.
Hughes. 1984. Auditory processing tests for children: Normative and
clinical results on the SSW test. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 49:318-325.
Bess, F.H., and J.W. Hall III. 1992. Screening children for auditory
dysfunction. Nashville: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Bess, F.H., A.F. Josey, and L.E. Humes. 1979. Performance intensity
functions in cochlear and eighth nerve disorders. American Journal of
Otolaryngology 1:27-31.
Bess, F.H, and F. McConnell. 1981. Audiology, education and the
hearing impaired child. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby.
Bess, F.H., and A.M. Tharpe. 1984. Unilateral hearing impairment in
children. Pediatrics 74:206-216.
Blake, P.E., and J.W. Hall III. 1990. The status of statewide policies
for neonatal hearing screening. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology 1:67-74.

.1992. Screening children for auditory dysfunction. Nashville: Bill
Wilkerson Center Press.
 

Page 373
Blarney, P.J., and G.M. Clark. 1990. Place coding of vowel formants
for cochlear implant patients. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 88:667-673.
Blamey, P.J., R.C. Dowell, A.M. Brown, G.M. Clark, and P.M.
Seligman. 1987. Vowel and consonant recognition of cochlear implant
patients using formant-estimating speech processors. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 82:48-57.
Blarney, P.J., R.C. Dowell, G.M. Clark, and P.M. Seligman. 1987.
Acoustic parameters measured by a formant-estimating speech
processor for a multiple-channel cochlear implant. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 82:38-47.
Bluestone, C., et al. 1986. Controversies in screening for middle ear
disease and hearing loss in children. Pediatrics 77:57-70.
Bocca, E. 1958. Clinical aspects of cortical deafness. Laryngoscope
68:301-309.
Bocca, E., and C. Calearo. 1963. Central hearing processes. In
Modern developments in audiology, ed. J. Jerger. New York:
Academic Press.
Bocca, E., C. Calearo, and V. Cassinari. 1954. A new method for
testing hearing in temporal lobe tumors: Preliminary report. Acta Oto-
Laryngologica 44:219-221.
Bocca, E., C. Calearo, V. Cassinari, and F. Migliavacca. 1955. Testing
''cortical'' hearing in temporal lobe tumors. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
42:289-304.
Boder, E. 1973. Developmental dyslexia: A diagnostic approach based
on three atypical reading-spelling patterns. Developmental Medicine
and Child Neurology 15:663-687.

Bond, E.K. 1972. Perception of form by the human infant.
Psychological Bulletin 77: 225-245.
Bonfils, P., P. Avan, M. Francois, J. Trotoux, and P. Narcy. 1992.
Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions in neonates: Normative data.
Acta Oto-Laryngologica 112:739-744.
Bonfils, P., A. Dumont, P. Marie, M. Francois, and P. Narcy. 1990.
Evoked otoacoustic emissions in new-born hearing screening.
Laryngoscope 100:186-189.
Bonfils, P., A. Uziel, and R. Pujol. 1988. Screening for auditory
dysfunction in infants by evoked otoacoustic emissions. Archives of
Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery 114:887-890.
Boothroyd, A. 1968. Developments in speech audiometry. Sound 2:3-
10.
.1984. Auditory perception of speech contrasts by subjects with
sensorineural hearing loss. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
27:134-144.
.1987. Perception of speech pattern contrasts via cochlear implants
and limited hearing. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology
(Suppl. 128) 96:58-62.
.1988. Amplitude compression and profound hearing loss. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research 31:362-376.
Boothroyd, A., A.E. Geers, and J.S. Moog. 1991. Practical
implications of cochlear implants in children. In Multichannel
cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing
(Suppl. 12) 4:81S-89S.
Bordley, J., and Y.P. Kapur. 1977. Histopathologic changes in the
temporal bone resulting from measles infection. Archives of
Otolaryngology 103:162-168.

Bornstein, M.H., and M.D. Sigman. 1986. Continuity in mental
development from infancy. Child Development 57:251-274.
Bornstein, S.P., and F.E. Musiek. 1984. Implications of temporal
processing for children with learning and language problems, In
Audition in childhood: Methods of study, ed. D.S. Beasley and T.H.
Shriner. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
.1992. Recognition of distorted speech in children with and without
learning problems. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology
3:22-32.
 

Page 374
Bradford, I.J. 1975. Respiration audiometry. In Physiological
measures of the audiovestibular system, ed L.J. Bradford. New York:
Academic Press.
Braverman-Callahan, J., and C.K. Radzirwicz. 1989. Hearing
impaired children: Language acquisition and remediation. In
Language and communication disorders in children, ed. D.K.
Bernstein and E. Tiegerman. Columbus: Merrill.
Bray, P. 1989. Click-evoked otoacoustic emissions and the
development of a clinical otoacoustic hearing test instrument. Ph.D.
diss., London University.
Bray, P., and D.T. Kemp. 1987. An advanced cochlear echo technique
suitable for infant screening. British journal of Audiology 21: 191-
204.
Brazelton, T.B. 1973. Neonatal behavioral assessment scale. London:
William Heinemann.
.1984. Neonatal behavioral assessment scale. 2d ed. Clinics in
Developmental Medicine no. 88. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
Bricker, D. 1986. Early education of at-risk and handicapped infants,
toddlers, and preschool children. Glenville, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Brimacombe, J.A., P.L. Arndt, S.J. Staller, and A.L. Beiter. 1993.
Multichannel cochlear implantation in adults with severe-to-profound
sensorineural hearing loss. Paper presented at the Third International
Cochlear Implant Conference, April 4-7. Innsbruck, Austria.
Brimacombe, J.A., and A.L. Beiter. 1994. The application of digital
technology to cochlear implants. In Understanding digitally
programmable hearing aids, ed. R.E. Sandlin. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.

Brivio, L., R. Tornaghi, L. Musetti, P. Marchisio, and N. Principi.
1991. Improvement of auditory brainstem responses after treatment
with zidovudine in a child with AIDS. Pediatric Neurology 7:53-55.
Brooks, D.N. 1969. The use of the electroacoustic impedance bridge
in the assessment of the middle ear function. International Audiology
8:563-569.
.1971. Electroacoustic impedance bridge studies on normal ears of
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 14:247-253.
.1980. Impedance in screening. In Clinical impedance audiometry, 2d
ed., ed. J. Jerger and J.L.Northern. Acton, MA: American
Electromedics Corporation.
Brooks-Gunn, J., and M. Lewis. 1983. Screening and diagnosing
handicapped infants. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education
3:14-28.
Brownell, W.E. 1990. Outer hair cell electromotility and otoacoustic
emissions. Ear and Hearing 11: 82-92.
Brownell, W.E., C.R. Bader, D. Bertrand, and Y. Rabaupierre. 1985.
Evoked mechanical responses of isolated outer hair cells. Science
227:194-196.
Buchanan, L.H., K.M. Harding, and C.M. Hudner. 1991. Hearing
disorder management in Down's syndrome. Hearing Instruments
42:12-15.
Burd, L., and W. Fisher. 1986. Central auditory processing disorder or
attention deficit disorder? Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics 7:215-216.
Burns, E.M., K.H. Arehart, and S.L. Campbell. 1992. Prevalence of
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in neonates. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 91: 1571-1575.

Calearo, C., and A.R. Antonelli. 1968. Audiometric findings in
brainstem lesions. Acta OtoLaryngologica 66:305-319.
Calearo, C., and A. Lazzaroni. 1957. Speech intelligibility in relation
to the speed of the message. Laryngoscope 67:410-419.
 

Page 375
Campbell, T.F., and M.R. McNeil. 1985. Effects of presentation rate
and divided attention on auditory comprehension in children with an
acquired language disorder. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
28:513-520.
Carey, W.B. 1982. Validity of parental assessments of development
and behavior. American Journal of Diseases of Children 136:97-99.
Caron, R.F., and A.J. Caron. 1968. The effects of repeated exposure
and stimulus complexity on visual fixation in infants. Psychonomic
Science 10:207-208.
.1969. Degree of stimulus complexity on visual fixation in infants.
Psychonomic Science 14:78-79.
Cassandro, E., F. Mosca, L. Sequino, F. DeFalco, and G. Campanella.
1986. Otoneurological abnormalities in Friedreich's ataxia and other
inherited neuropathies. Audiology 25:84-91.
Catlin, F.I. 1985. Prevention of hearing impairment from infection and
ototoxic drugs. Archives of Otolaryngology 111:377-384.
Cavaliere, R., S. Masieri, L. Liberini, R. Proietti, and S.I. Magalini.
1992. Tympanometry for middle-ear effusion in unconscious ICU
patients. European Journal of Anaesthesiology 9:71-75.
Cevette, M. 1984. Auditory brainstem response testing in an intensive
care unit. Seminars in Hearing 5:57-69.
Charrow, V.R. 1975. A psycholinguistic analysis of "deaf" English.
Sign Language Studies 7:139-150.
Chermak, G.D., and M.J. Montgomery. 1992. Form equivalence of
the selective auditory attention test administered to 6-year-old
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 35:661-665.
Chermak, G.D., and F.E. Musiek. 1992. Managing central auditory

processing disorders in children and youth. American Journal of
Audiology 1:61-65.
Chermak, G.D., S.A. O'Neill, and J.A. Seikel. 1992. Criterion validity
of the selective auditory attention test. Presented at annual convention
of the American Speech-LanguageHearing Association.
Chermak, G.D., M. Vonhof, and R.B. Bendel. 1989. Word
identification performance in the presence of competing speech and
noise in learning disabled adults. Ear and Hearing 10:90-93.
Cherry, R.S. 1980. Selective auditory attention test (SAAT). St. Louis:
Auditec.
Christensen, K., and G. Delgado. 1993. Multicultural issues in
deafness. New York: Longman.
Chuang, K.W., B.R. Vohr, S.J. Norton, and M.D. Lekas. 1993.
External and middle ear status related to evoked otoacoustic emission
in neonates. Archives of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery
119:276-282.
Chuang, S.W., S.E. Gerber, and A.R.D. Thornton. 1993. Evoked
otoacoustic emissions in preterm infants. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 26:39-45.
Churchland, P.S., and T.J. Sejnowski. 1988. Perspectives on cognitive
neuroscience. Science 242:741-746.
Clark, G.M., P.J. Blamey, A.M. Brown, et al. 1987a. The engineering
of the receiver/stimulator and speech processor. In The University of
Melbourne-Nucleus multielectrode cochlear implant, ed. C.R. Pfaltz.
Advances in Otorhinolaryngology 38:63-84.
.The surgery. 1987b. In The University of Melbourne-Nucleus
multielectrode cochlear implant, ed. C.R. Pfaltz. Advances in
Otorhinolaryngology 38:93-112.

 

Page 376
Clark, G.M., N.L. Cohen, and R.K. Shepherd. 1991. Surgical safety
considerations of multichannel cochlear implants in children. In
Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl. 12) 4:15S-24S.
Clark, G.M., B.K.-H. Franz, B.C. Pyman, and R.L. Webb. 1991.
Surgery for multichannel cochlear implantation. In Cochlear
implants: A practical guide, ed. H. Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers
Ltd.
Coates, J.F. 1994. Managing your future as an association: Thinking
about trends and working with their consequences: 1993-2020.
Washington, D.C.: Coates and Jarrett, Inc.
Coates, J.F., and J. Jarrett. 1993. Scanning the environment for
association implications: Seventeen key trends. Washington, D.C.:
Coates and Jarrett, Inc.
Cochlear Corporation. 1986. Cochlear Corporation/University of
Iowa cochlear implant test battery. Englewood, Colo.: Resource
Point.
.1990a. Craig lipreading inventory-word recognition. Englewood,
Colo.: Resource Point.
.1990b. Pediatric test materials and programming kit. Englewood,
Colo.: Resource Point.
Cohen, M., and D. Prasher. 1988. The value of combining auditory
brainstem responses and acoustic reflex threshold measurements in
neuro-otological diagnosis. Scandinavian Audiology 17:153-162.
Cohen, N.L. 1994. The ethics of cochlear implants in young children.
American Journal of Otology 15:1-2.
Cohen, N.L., and R.A. Hoffman. 1993. Complications of cochlear

implant surgery. In Complications in head and neck surgery, ed. D.W.
Eisele. St Louis: Mosby.
Cohen, O.P., J.E. Fishgrund, and R. Redding. 1990. Deaf children
from ethnic, linguistic, and racial minorities backgrounds: An
overview. American Annals of the Deaf 135:67-73.
Cohen, S.E., and A.H. Parmelee. 1983. Prediction of five-year
Stanford-Binet scores in preterm infants. Child Development 54:1241-
1253.
Cole, R., and J. Jakimik. 1980. A model of speech perception. In
Perception and production of fluent speech, ed. R. Cole. Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collet, L., D.T. Kemp, E. Veuillet, R. Duclaux, A. Moulin, and A.
Morgon. 1990. Effect of contralateral auditory stimuli on active
cochlear micromechanical properties in human subjects. Hearing
Research 43:251-262.
Conrad, R. 1979. The deaf school child. London: Harper and Row.
Cook, R.A., and R.W. Teel, Jr. 1979. Negative middle ear pressure
and language development. Clinical Pediatrics 18:296-297.
Cooper, F.S., P.C. Delattre, A.M. Liberman, J. Borst, and L.
Gerstman. 1952. Some experiments on the perception of synthetic
speech sounds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 24:597-
606.
Cope, Y., and M.E. Lutman. 1988. Otoacoustic emissions. In
Pediatric audiology 0-5 years, ed. B. McCormick. London: Taylor
and Francis.
Coplan, J. 1993. Early language milestone scale. 2d ed. Austin: Pro-
Ed.
Coplan J., and J. Gleason. 1982. Validation of early language

milestone scale in high-risk population. Pediatrics 70:677.
Cornett, 0. 1967. Cued speech. American Annals of the Deaf 112:3-
13.
Council for Exceptional Children. 1993. The council for exceptional
children's draft statement on inclusive schools. Reprinted in
Masstream (spring).
Cox, L., M. Hack, and D. Metz. 1981. Brainstem evoked response
audiometry in the pre-
 

Page 377
mature infant population. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 3: 213-224.
Craig, W.N. 1964. Effects of preschool training on the development of
reading and lipreading skills of deaf children. American Annals of
Deaf Children 109:280-296.
Cramer, K.D., and N.P. Erber. 1974. A spondee recognition test for
young hearing-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 39:304-311.
Crandell, C. 1993. Speech recognition in noise by children with
minimal degrees of sensorineural hearing loss. Ear and Hearing
14:210-216.
Crandell, C., and F. Bess. 1986. Speech recognition of children in a
"typical" classroom setting. Asha 28:82.
.1987. Sound field amplification in the classroom setting. Asha 29:87.
Crawford, M. 1991. The effects of sleep stage on the signal to noise
ratio of the middle components. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State
University.
Cullen, J.K., and C.L. Thompson. 1974. Masking release for speech in
subjects with temporal lobe resection. Archives of Otolaryngology
100:113-116.
Curati, W.L., M. Graif, D.P.E. Kingsley, T. King, C.L. Scholtz, and
R.E. Steiner. 1986. MRI in acoustic neuroma: A review of 35 patients.
Neuroradiology 28:208-214.
Cutler, A., and D. Norris. 1988. The role of strong syllables in
segmentation for lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 14: 113-121.
D'Eugenio, D.B., T.A. Slagle, B.B. Mettelman, and S.J. Gross. 1993.

Developmental outcome of preterm infants with transient neuromotor
abnormalities. American Journal of Diseases of Children 147:570-
574.
D'Souza, S.W., E. McCartney, M. Nolan, and I.G. Taylor. 1981.
Hearing, speech and language in survivors of severe perinatal
asphyxia. Archives of Diseases in Children 56: 245-252.
Dalebout, S., N. Nelson, P. Hletko, and B. Frentheway. 1991.
Selective auditory attention and children with attention-deficit
disorder: Effects of repeated measurement with and without
methylphenidate. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
22:219-227.
Darling, R., and L. Price. 1990. Loudness and auditory brain stem
evoked response. Ear and Hearing 11:289-295.
Davidson, J., M.L. Hyde, and P.W. Alberti. 1989. Epidemiologic
patterns in childhood hearing loss: A review. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 17: 239-266.
Davidson, S., L. Wall, and C. Goodman. 1990. Preliminary studies on
the use of ABR amplitude projection procedure for hearing aid
selection. Ear and Hearing 11:332-338.
Davis, A., and J. Sancho. 1988. Screening for hearing impairment in
children: A review of current practice in the United Kingdom. In
International Perspectives on Communication Disorders, ed. S.E.
Gerber and G.T. Mencher. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University
Press, 1988.
Davis, H. 1976. Principles of electric response audiometry. Annals of
Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl. 28) 85:1-96.
Davis, H., and S. Onishi. 1969. Maturation of auditory evoked
potentials. International Audiology 8:24-33.
Davis, H., and S.R. Silverman. 1978. Hearing and deafness, 3d ed.

New York: Holt, Rhinehart, and Winston.
 

Page 378
Davis, H., and S. Zerlin. 1966. Acoustic relations of the human vertex
potential. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 39: 109-116.
Dayal, V.S., L. Tarantino, and L.P. Swisher. 1966. Neurootologic
studies in multiple sclerosis. Laryngoscope 76:1798-1809.
De Filippo, C.L., and B.L. Scott. 1978. A method for training and
evaluating the reception of ongoing speech. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 63:1186-1192.
DeHirsch K., J. Jansky, and W.S. Langford. 1966. Comparisons
between prematurely and maturely born children at three age levels.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 36: 610-628.
Dempsey, C. 1983. Selecting tests of auditory function in children. In
Central auditory processing disorders: Problems of speech, language
and learning, ed. E.Z. Lasky and J. Katz. Baltimore: University Park
Press.
Derbyshire, A., and G. McCandless. 1964. Template for EEG
response to sound. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 7:96-98.
Dermody, P., R. Katsch, and K. Mackey. 1983. Auditory processing
limitations in low verbal children: Evidence from a two-response
dichotic listening task. Ear and Hearing 4: 272-277.
deVries, L.S., S. Lary, and L.M.S. Dubowitz. 1985. Relationship of
serum bilirubin levels to ototoxicity and deafness in high risk low
birth weight infants. Pediatrics 76:351-354.
Diefendorf, A.O. 1981. An investigation of one aspect of central
auditory function in an infant population utilizing a binaural
resynthesis fusion task. Ph.D. diss., University of Washington.
Dolnick, E. 1993. Deafness and culture. Atlantic Monthly September,
37-53.

Don, M., J. Eggermont, and D. Brackmann. 1979. Reconstruction of
the audiogram using brain stem responses and high-pass masking.
Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl. 57): 1-20.
Don, M., C. Elberling, and M. Waring. 1984. Objective detection of
averaged auditory brainstem responses. Scandinavian Audiology
13:219-228.
Dorman, M.F., M.T. Hannley, K. Dankowski, L. Smith, and G.
McCandless. 1989. Word recognition by 50 patients fitted with the
Symbion multichannel cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 10:44-49.
Dowell, R.C., P.M. Seligman, P.J. Blamey, and G.M. Clark. 1987.
Speech perception using a two-formant 22-electrode cochlear
prosthesis in quiet and in noise. Acta OtoLaryngologica 104:439-446.
Dowell, R.C., L.A. Whitford, P.M. Seligman, B.K.-H. Franz, and
G.M. Clark. 1990. Preliminary results with a miniature speech
processor for the 22-electrode Melbourne cochlear hearing prosthesis.
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 98:1167-1173.
Downs, M.P. 1976. Early identification of hearing loss: Where are
we? Where do we go from here? In Early identification of hearing
loss, ed. G.T. Mencher. Basel: S. Karger.
Downs, M.P., and G.M. Sterritt. 1964. Identification audiometry for
neonates: A preliminary report. Journal of Auditory Research 4:69-80.
.1967. A guide to newborn and infant hearing screening. Archives of
Otolaryngology 85:15-22.
Drillien, C.M., A.M. Thompson, and K. Burgoyne. 1980. Low
birthweight children at early school age: A longitudinal study.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 22: 26-47.
 


Page 379
Dubowitz, L.M., V. Dubowitz, and C. Goldberg. 1970. Clinical
assessment of gestational age in the newborn infant. Journal of
Pediatrics 77:1 - 10.
Duffy, F.H. 1982. Topographic display of evoked potentials: Clinical
applications of brain electrical activity mapping, BEAM. Annals of
the New York Academy of Science 388: 183-196.
Duffy, F.H., J. Burchfield, and C. Lombroso. 1979. Brain electrical
activity mapping. BEAM: A method for extending the clinical utility
of EEG and evoked potential data. Annals of Neurology 5:309-321.
Duffy, F.H., M.B. Denckla, R.H. Bartell, and G. Sandini. 1980.
Dyslexia: Regional differences in brain electrical activity by
topographic mapping. Annals of Neurology 5:412-420.
Duffy, F.H., and G.B. McAnulty. 1985. Brain electrical activity in
mapping. BEAM: The search for a physiology signature of dyslexia.
In Dyslexia: A neuroscientific approach to clinical evaluation, ed.
F.H. Duffy and N. Geschwind. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Dunn, L. 1981. Peabody picture vocabulary test (Revised). Circle
Pines, Minn.: American Guidance Services.
Durieux-Smith, A., T. Picton, C. Edwards, J.T. Goodman, and B.
MacMurray. 1985. The crib-o-gram in the NICU: An evaluation based
on brain stem electric response audiometry. Ear and Hearing 6:20-24.
Durlach, N.I., and H.S. Colburn. 1978. Binaural phenomena. In
Handbook of perception, Vol. 4., ed. E.C. Carterette and M.F.
Friedman. Orlando: Academic Press.
Durrant, J., and R. Hyde. 1993. Observations on temporal aspects of
bone-conduction clicks: Real head measurements. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology 4:213-219.

Eagney, P. 1987. ASL? English? Which? Comparing comprehension.
American Annals of the Deaf 132:272-275.
Edwards, C., A. Durieux-Smith, and T. Picton. 1985. Auditory
brainstem response audiometry in neonatal hydrocephalus. Journal of
Otolaryngology (Suppl. 14):40-46.
Eggermont, J.J., C.W. Ponton, S.G. Coupland, and R. Winkelaar.
1991. Frequency dependent maturation of the cochlea and brainstem
evoked potentials. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 111:220-224.
Eggermont, J.J., and A. Salamy. 1988. Development of ABR
parameters in a preterm and a term-born population. Ear and Hearing
9:283-289.
Eilers, R.E. 1977. Context-sensitive perception of naturally produced
stop and fricative consonants by infants. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 61:1321 -1336.
Eilers, R.E., E. Miskiel, O. Ozdamar, R. Urbano, and J.E. Widen.
1991. Optimization of automated hearing test algorithms: Simulations
using an infant response model. Ear and Hearing 12:191-198.
Eilers, R.E., O. Ozdamar, and M.L. Steffens. 1993. Classification of
audiograms by sequential testing: Reliability and validity of an
automated behavioral hearing screening algorithm. Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology 4:172-181.
Eilers, R.E., J.E. Widen, R. Urbano, T.M. Hudson, and L. Gonzales.
1991. Optimization of automated hearing test algorithms: A
comparison of data from simulations and young children. Ear and
Hearing 12:199-214.
Eilers, R.E., W.R. Wilson, and J.M. Moore. 1977. Developmental
changes in speech discrimination in infants. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 20:766-780.
Eimas, P.D. 1974. Auditory and linguistic processing of cues for place

or articulation by infants. Perception and Psychophysics 16:513-521.
 

Page 380
Eisenberg, L.S., and W.F. House. 1982. Initial experience with the
cochlear implant in children. In Cochlear implants: Progress and
perspectives, ed. W.F. House and K.I. Berliner. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl.) 91:67-73.
Eisenberg, L.S., W.M. Luxford, T.S. Becker, and W.F. House. 1984.
Electrical stimulation of the auditory system in children deafened by
meningitis. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 92:700-705.
Eisenberg, R.B. 1969. Auditory behavior in the human neonate:
Functional properties of sound and their ontogenetic implications.
International Audiology 8:34-45.
Eisenberg, R.B., E.J. Griffen, D.B. Coursin, and M.A. Hunter. 1964.
Auditory behavior in the human neonate: A preliminary report.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 7: 245-269.
Elberling, C. 1979. The use of template and cross correlation
functions in analysis of brainstem potentials. Scandinavian Audiology
8:187-190.
Elberling, C., and M. Don. 1984. Quality estimation of averaged
auditory brainstem responses. Scandinavian Audiology 13:187-197.
.1987. Detection functions for the human auditory brainstem
response. Scandinavian Audiology 16:89-92.
Elberling, C., and 0. Walgreen. 1985. Estimation of the auditory
brainstem response (ABR) by means of a Bayesian inference.
Scandinavian Audiology 14:89-96.
Elliott, L.L. 1979. Performance of children 9 to 17 years on a test of
speech intelligibility in noise using sentence material with controlled
word predictability. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
66:651-653.

.1986. Discrimination and response bias for CV syllables differing in
voice onset time among children and adults. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 80: 1250-1255.
Elliott, L.L., and M. Hammer. 1988. Longitudinal changes in auditory
discrimination in normal children and children with language-learning
problems. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 53:467-474.
Elliott, L.L., and D. Katz. 1980a. Development of a new children's test
of speech discrimination. St. Louis: Auditec.
.1980b. Northwestern University children's perception of speech (NU-
CHIPS). St. Louis: Auditec.
Ellwood, D. personal communication, November 30, 1993.
Elssman, S., N. Matkin, and M. Sabo. 1987. Early identification of
congenital sensorineural hearing impairment. The Hearing Journal
13:7-12.
Engen, E., and T. Engen. 1983. Rhode Island test of language
structure. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Erber, N.P. 1979. An approach to evaluating auditory speech
perception ability. The Volta Review 81:16-24.
.1980. Use of the auditory numbers test to evaluate speech perception
abilities of hearing impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 45:527-532.
.1982. Auditory training. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association.
Erber, N.P., and C.M. Alencewicz. 1976. Audiologic evaluation of
deaf children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41:256-267.
Esbjorner, E., P. Larsson, P. Leissner, and L. Wranne. 1991. The
serum reserve albumin concentration for monoacetyldiamino-
diphenyl sulphone and auditory evoked responses during neonatal
hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 80:406-412.

 

Page 381
Evans, L. 1982. Total communication. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Everberg, G. 1957. Deafness in mumps. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
48:397-403.
Farrer, S., and R. Keith. 1981. Filtered word testing in the assessment
of children's central auditory abilities. Ear and Hearing 2:267-269.
Fawer, C., and L. Dubowitz. 1982. Auditory brainstem responses in
neurologically normal preterm and fullterm newborn infants.
Neuropediatrics 13:200-206.
Feagans, L.V., M. Sanyal, F. Henderson, A. Collier, and M.
Applebaum. 1987. Relationship of middle ear disease in early
childhood to later narrative and additional skills. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology 12:581-594.
Feinmesser, M., L. Tell, and H. Levi. 1982. Follow-up of 40,000
infants screened for hearing defect. Audiology 21:197-203.
Ferre, J.M., and L.A. Wilber. 1986. Normal and learning disabled
children's central auditory processing skills: An experimental test
battery. Ear and Hearing 7:336-343.
Ferry, P.C. 1981. Neurological considerations in children with
learning disabilities. In Central auditory and learning disorders in
children, ed. R.W. Keith. Houston: College-Hill Press.
Field, J., D. DiFranco, P. Dodwell, and D. Muir. 1979. Auditory-
visual coordination in two and one-half-month-old infants. Infant
Behavior and Development 2: 113-122.
Field, J., D. Muir, R. Pilon, M. Sinclair, and P. Dodwell. 1980. Infants'
orientation to lateral sounds from birth to three months. Child
Development 51:295-298.

Fiellau-Nikolajsen, M. 1983. Tympanometry and secretory otitis
media. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 394):1-73.
Fifer, R.C., J.F. Jerger, C.I. Berlin, E.A. Tobey, and J.C. Campbell.
1983. Development of a dichotic sentence identification test for
hearing-impaired adults. Ear and Hearing 4: 300-305.
Finitzo, T., and K.D. Pool. 1987. Brain electrical activity mapping.
Asha 29:21-25.
Finitzo-Hieber, T. 1981. Classroom acoustics. In Auditory disorders in
school children, ed. R.J. Roeser and M.P. Downs. New York: Thieme-
Stratton.
Finitzo-Hieber, T., and T. Tillman. 1978. Room acoustics effects on
monosyllabic word discrimination ability for normal and children
with hearing impairments. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
21:440-458.
Fisher, L. 1980. Fisher's auditory problems checklist. Cedar Rapids,
Iowa: Grant Wood.
Flexer, C., and D.P. Gans. 1985. Comparative evaluation of the
auditory responsiveness of normal infants and profoundly
multihandicapped children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
28:163-168.
Forman-Franco, B., G. Karayalin, D. Mandel, and A. Abramson.
1982. The evaluation of auditory function in homozygous sickle cell
disease. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 89:850-856.
Frank, Y., S.M. Vishnubhakat, and S. Pahwa. 1992. Brainstem
auditory evoked responses in infants and children with AIDS.
Pediatric Neurology 8:262-266.
Fraser, G.R. 1976. The causes of profound deafness in childhood.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Freeman, B., and D. Beasley. 1978. Performance of reading-impaired
and normal reading children on time-compressed monosyllabic and
sentential stimuli. Paper presented at annual meeting of the American
Speech and Hearing Association.
Friedman, E., N. Luban, G. Herr, and I. Williams. 1980. Sickle cell
anemia and hearing. Annals of Otolaryngology 89:342-347.
 

Page 382
Friel-Patti, S., T. Finitzo-Hieber, G. Conti, and K. Brown. 1982.
Language delay in infants associated with middle ear disease and mild
fluctuating hearing impairment. Pediatric Infectious Disease 1:104-
109.
Frumkin, N.L., E.J. Potchen, A.S. Aniskiewicz, J.B. Moore, and P.A.
Cooke. 1989. Potential impact of magnetic resonance imaging on the
field of communication disorders. Asha 31:95-99.
Fujisaki, H., K. Nakamura, and T. Imoto. 1975. Auditory perception
of duration of speech and nonspeech stimuli. In Auditory analysis and
perception of speech, ed. G. Fant and M. Tatham. New York:
Academic Press.
Furth, H.G. 1966. A comparison of reading test norms of deaf and
hearing children. American Annals of the Deaf 111:461 -462.
Galaburda, A., G. Sherman, G. Rosen, F. Aboitiz, and N. Geschwind.
1985. Developmental dyslexia: Four consecutive patients with cortical
anomalies. Annals of Neurology 18: 222-233.
Gans, D.P. 1987. Improving behavior observation audiometry testing
and scoring procedures. Ear and Hearing 8:92-100.
Cans, D.P., and C. Flexer. 1983. Auditory response behavior of
severely handicapped children. Journal of Auditory Research 23: 137-
148.
Gardi, J.N. 1985. Human brain stem and middle latency responses to
electrical stimulation: Preliminary observations. In Cochlear implants,
ed. R.A. Schindler and M. M. Merzenich. New York: Raven Press.
Garstecki, D., C.L. Hutton, M.A. Nerbonne, C.W. Newman, and W.J.
Smoski. 1990. Case study examples using self-assessment. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl.) 11 :48S-56S.

Gascon, G.G., R. Johnson, and L. Burd. 1986. Central auditory
processing and attention deficit disorders. Journal of Child Neurology
1 :27-33.
Geers, A.E., and H.S. Lane. 1984. The CID preschool performance
scale. Chicago: Stoelting.
Geers, A., and J. Moog. 1987. Predicting spoken language acquisition
of profoundly hearing impaired children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 52:84-94.
.1989. Evaluating speech perception skills: Tools for measuring
benefits of cochlear implants, tactile aids, and hearing aids. In
Cochlear implants in young deaf children, ed. E. Owens and D.
Kessler. Boston: College-Hill Press.
.1992. The Central Institute for the Deaf cochlear implant study: A
progress report. Journal of Speech-Language Pathology and
Audiology 16:129-140.
Geier, L., J. Gilden, C.M. Luetje, and H.E. Maddox. 1993. Delayed
perception of cochlear implant stimulation in children with
postmeningitic ossified cochleae. American Journal of
Otolaryngology 14:556-561.
Gelfand, S.A., N. Piper, and S. Silman. 1983. Effects of hearing levels
at the activator and other frequencies upon the expected levels of the
acoustic reflex threshold. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
48: 11 - 17.
Gerber, S.E. 1969. Auditory behavioral responses of some hearing
infants. Volta Review 71:340-346.
.1982. The use of noise-making toys as audiometric devices.
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 4:309-315.
.1990. Review of a high risk register for congenital or early-onset
deafness. British Journal of Audiology 24:347-356.

Gerber, S.E., and M.S. Dobkin. 1984. The effect of noise bandwidth
on the auditory arousal response of neonates. Ear and Hearing 5:195-
198.
 

Page 383
Gerber, S.E., C.J. Lynch, and W.S. Gibson, Jr. 1987. The acoustic
characteristics of an infant with unilateral vocal fold paralysis.
International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 13:1-9.
Gerber, S.E., and G.T. Mencher. 1979. Arousal responses of neonates
to wide band and narrow band noise. Paper presented at the annual
convention of the American SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association.
Gerber, S.E., M.I. Mendel, and M. Goller. 1979. Progressive hearing
loss subsequent to congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Human
Communication 4:231-234.
Gerber, S.E., and C.A. Prutting. 1981. Bilingualism: An environment
for the deaf infant. In Early management of hearing loss, ed. G.T.
Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Gerber, S.E., E. Wile, and N.T. Hamai. 1985. Central auditory
dysfunction in deaf children. Human Communication 9:39-44.
Gerling, I. 1991. In search of a stringent methodology for using ABR
audiometric results. The Hearing Journal 44:26-30.
Gersdorff, M.C.H. 1992. Diagnostic value of tympanometry in otitis
media with effusion. Acta Oto-Rhino-Laryngologica Belgica 46:361-
368.
Gibbs, E.D. 1990. Assessment of infant mental ability: Conventional
tests and issues of prediction. In Interdisciplinary assessment of
infants: A guide for early intervention professionals, ed. E.D. Gibbs
and D.M. Teti. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Gillberg, C., U. Rosenhall, and E. Johansson. 1983. Auditory
brainstem responses in children. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 13:181 - 195.
Goldstein, P., A. Krumholz, J. Felix, D. Shannon, and R. Carr. 1979.

Brainstem evoked responses in neonates. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 135:622-631.
Goodglass, H. 1967. Binaural digit presentation and early lateral brain
damage. Cortex 3: 295-306.
Gorga, M., K. Beauchaine, and J. Reiland. 1987. Comparison of onset
and steady-state responses of hearing aids: Implications for use of
auditory brainstem response in the selection of hearing aids. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 30:130-136.
Gorga, M., J. Kaminski, K. Beauchaine, W. Jesteadt, and S. Neely.
1989. Auditory brainstem responses from children three months to
three years of age: II. Normal patterns of response. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research 32:281-288.
Gorga, M., and A.R. Thornton. 1989. The choice of stimuli for ABR
measurements. Ear and Hearing 10:217-230.
Gormley, K., and A=Nn Sarachan<Ü·ily. 1987. Evaluating hearing-
impaired students: A practical approach. Volta Review 89:157-169.
Gottlieb, M.I., P. Zinkus, and A. Thompson. 1979. Chronic middle ear
disease and auditory perceptual deficits. Clinical Pediatrics 18:725-
732.
Gould, H. 1980. Early auditory evoked potentials in infants with
craniofacial malformation. Journal of Auditory Research 20:244-248.
Gould, H., and D. Caldarelli. 1982. Hearing and otopathology in
Apert syndrome. Archives of Otolaryngology 108:347-349.
Gould, H., M. Crawford, M. Mendel, and S. Dodson. 1992.
Quantification technique for the middle latency response. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 3:153-158.
Gould, H., M. Crawford, W. Smith, N. Beckford, W. Gibson, L. Pettit,
and L. Bobo. 1991. Hearing disorders in sickle cell disease: Cochlear

and retrocochlear findings. Ear and Hearing 12:352-354.
 

Page 384
Grandori, F. 1986. Field analysis of auditory evoked brainstem
potentials. Hearing Research 21:51-58.
Grass, E. 1978. Electrical safety specifically related to EEG. Grass
Technical Bulletin #X757C78. Quincy, Mass.: Grass Instrument Co.
Gravel, J.S., ed. 1989. Assessing auditory system integrity in high-
risk infants and young children. Seminars in Hearing 10:213-292.
Gravel, J.S., and I.F. Wallace. 1992. Listening and language at four
years of age: Effects of early otitis media. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 35:588-595.
Green, J., J. Waggener, and B. Kriegsfeld. 1976. Classification and
incidence of neoplasms of the central nervous system. In Advances in
neurology, ed. R. Thompson and J. Green. New York: Raven Press.
Green, M., and J.B. Richmond. 1992. Pediatric diagnosis:
Interpretation of signs and symptoms in different age periods. 5th ed.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Greenberg, D.B., W.R. Wilson, J.M. Moore, and G. Thompson. 1978.
Visual reinforcement audiometry VRA with young Down's syndrome
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 43:8-458.
Greene, J.C. 1990. Beginnings for parents of hearing impaired
children: A parent manual. Durham, NC: The Beginnings for Parents
of Hearing Impaired Children, Inc.
Greisen, D., and P. Rasmussen. 1970. Stapedius muscle reflexes and
otoneurological examinations in brain stem tumors. Acta Oto-
Laryngologica 70:366-370.
Grellong, B., H.G. Vaughan, Jr., L. Rotkin, et al. 1981. Neonatal
performance, cognitive and neurologic outcome to 40 months among
low birthweight infants. Presented at Biennial Meeting, Society for

Research in Child Development, Boston.
Grundfast, K.M., and A.K. Lalwani. 1992. Practical approach to
diagnosis and management of hereditary hearing impairment (HHI).
ENT Journal 71:479-493.
Gunnarson, A.D., and T. Finitzo. 1991. Conductive hearing loss in
infancy: Effects on later auditory brain stem electrophysiology.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34: 1207-1215.
Gupta, A.K., H. Raj, and N.K. Anand. 1990. Auditory brainstem
responses (ABR) in neonates with hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Journal
of Pediatrics 57:705-711.
Gustason, G. 1983. Teaching and learning signing exact English. Los
Alamitos, Calif.: Modern Signs Press.
Hack, M., J.D. Horbar, M.H. Malloy, J.E. Tyson, E. Wright, and L.
Wright. 1991. Very low birth weight outcomes of the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development neonatal network.
Pediatrics 87:587-597.
Hall, J.W. III. 1992. Handbook of auditory evoked responses. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
Hall, J.W. III, D. Brown, and J. Mackey-Hargadine. 1985. Pediatric
applications of serial auditory brainstem and middle-latency evoked
response recordings. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 9:201-218.
Hall, J.W. III, and J.H. Grose. 1990. The masking-level difference in
children. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 1:81-88.
.1991. Notched-noise measures of frequency selectivity in adults and
children using fixed-masker-level and fixed-signal-level presentation.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34:651-660.
Hall, J.W. III, and R. Ruth. 1985. Acoustic reflexes and auditory

evoked responses in hearing aid evaluation. Seminars in Hearing
6:251-277.
 

Page 385
Hall, J.W. III, and T. Weaver. 1979. Impedance audiometry in a young
population: The effect of age, sex, and tympanogram abnormalities.
Journal of Otolaryngology 3:210-221.
Hanson, P., R. Farber, and R. Armstrong. 1970. Distal muscle
wasting, nephritis, and deafness. Neurology 20:426-434.
Hanson, V.L. 1990. Recall of order information of deaf signers:
Phonetic coding in temporal order recall. Memory and Cognition
18:604-610.
Hanson,V.L., E.W. Goodell, and C.A. Perfetti. 1991. Tongue-twister
effects in the silent reading of hearing and deaf college students.
Journal of Memory and Language 30: 319-330.
Hardy, J.B., J.F. Drage, and E.C. Jackson. 1979. The first year of life:
The collaborative perinatal project of the National Institute of
Neurological and Communication Disorders and Stroke. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Harford, E.R., and J. Barry. 1965. A rehabilitative approach to the
problems of unilateral hearing impairment: The contralateral routing
of signals, CROS. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 30:121-
128.
Harris, F.P., B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, B.B. Stagner, A.C. Coats, and
G.K. Martin. 1989. Acoustic distortion products in humans:
Systematic changes in amplitude as a function of f2/f1 ratio. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 85:220-222.
Harris, F.P., and R. Probst. 1992. Transiently evoked otoacoustic
emissions in patients with Ménière's disease. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
112:36-44.
Harris, R. 1963. Central auditory functions in children. Perceptual
and Motor Skills 16: 207-214.

Harris, V., R. Keith, and K. Novak. 1983. Relationship between two
dichotic listening tests and the token test for children. Ear and
Hearing 4:278-282.
Hasenstab, M.S., and J.S. Horner. 1982. Comprehensive intervention
with hearing-impaired infants and preschool children. Rockville:
Aspen Systems.
Haskins, H. 1949a. Kindergarten phonetically balanced word lists
(PBK). St Louis: Auditec.
.1949b. A phonetically balanced test of speech discrimination for
children. Master's thesis, Northwestern University.
Hassmannova, J., J. Myslivecek, and V. Novakova. 1981. Effects of
early auditory stimulation on cortical areas. In Neuronal mechanisms
of hearing, ed. J. Syka and L. Aitkin. New York: Plenum Press.
Hatanaka, T., H. Shuto, A. Yasuhara, and Y. Kobayashi. 1988.
Ipsilateral and contralateral recordings of auditory brainstem
responses to monaural stimulation. Pediatric Neurology 4:354-357.
Hatanaka, T., A. Yasuhara, A. Hori, and Y. Kobayashi. 1990. Auditory
brainstem response in newborn infants: Masking effects on ipsi and
contralateral recording. Ear and Hearing 11:233-236.
Hawkins, D.R. 1982. Overamplification: A well documented case
report. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 47:382-384.
Health and Human Services. 1991. Healthy people 2000: National
health promotion and disease prevention objectives. Washington,
D.C.: United States Government Printing Office.
Hebert, R., E. Laureau, M. Vanasse, J.E. Richard, J. Morrissette, J.
Glorieux, M. Desjardins, J. Letarte, and J.H. Dussault. 1986. Auditory
brainstem response audiometry in congenitally hypothyroid children
under early replacement therapy. Pediatric Research 20: 570-573.

 

Page 386
Hecox, K. 1983. Role of auditory brain stem response in the selection
of hearing aids. Ear and Hearing 4:51-55.
Hecox, K., and R. Galambos. 1974. Brainstem auditory evoked
responses in human infants and adults. Archives of Otolaryngology
99:30-33.
Hedrick, D., E. Prather, and A. Tobin. 1984. Sequenced inventory of
communication development. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Heffernan, H.P., and M.R. Simons. 1979. Temporary increase in
sensorineural hearing loss with hearing aid use. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology and Laryngology 88:86-91.
Heilman, K.M., L.C. Hammer, and B.J. Wilder. 1973. An audiometric
defect in temporal lobe dysfunction. Neurology 23:384-386.
Henderson, R.H. 1981. Vaccine-preventable diseases: The role of the
immunization services. In Disability prevention: The global
challenge, ed. Sir John Wilson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heward, W., and M. Orlansky. 1992. Exceptional children: An
introductory survey to special education. 4th ed. Columbus: Merrill.
Hier, D.B., M. LeMay, P.B. Rosenberger, and V.P. Perlo. 1978.
Developmental dyslexia: Evidence for a subgroup with a reversal of
cerebral asymmetry. Archives of Neurology 35: 90-92.
Hill, 1.T. 1992. The role of Medicaid and other government programs
in providing medical care for children and pregnant women. The
Future of Children 2:134-153.
Himmelfarb, M.Z., E. Shanon, G.R. Popelka, and R.H. Margolis.
1978. Acoustic reflex evaluation in neonates. In Early diagnosis of
hearing loss, ed. S.E. Gerber and G.T. Mencher. New York: Grune
and Stratton.

Hinojosa, R., and M. Marion. 1983. Histopathology of profound
sensorineural deafness. In Cochlear prostheses: An international
symposium, ed. C.W. Parkins and S.W. Anderson. New York: New
York Academy of Sciences.
Hirsh, I.J. 1959. Auditory perception of temporal order. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 31:759-767.
.1967. Information processing in input channels for speech and
language: The significance of serial order of stimuli. In Brain
mechanisms underlying speech and language, ed. C.H. Millikan and
F.L. Darley. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Hirsch, J.E., R.H. Margolis, and J.R. Rykken. 1992. A comparison of
acoustic reflex and auditory brain stem response screening of high-
risk infants. Ear and Hearing 13:181-186.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., and R. Treiman. 1982. Recoding in silent reading:
Can the deaf child translate print into a more manageable form? Volta
Review 84:71-82.
Hodgson, W.R., ed. 1986. Hearing aid assessment and use in
audiologic habilitation. 3d ed. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Hoekelman, R., S.B. Friedman, N.M. Nelson, and H.M. Seidel. 1992.
Primary pediatric care. 2d ed. St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
Holmes, D.E., and C.M. Woodford. 1977. Acoustic reflex threshold
and loudness discomfort level: Relationships in children with
profound hearing losses. Journal of the American Auditory Society 2:
193-196.
Holmquist, J., and J. Miller. 1972. Eustachian tube evaluation using
the impedance bridge. In Mayo Foundation impedance symposium,
ed. D. Rose and L. Keating. Rochester, Minn.: Mayo Foundation.
Holt, J.A., and T. Allen. 1989. The effects of schools and their
curricula on the reading and

 

Page 387
mathematics achievement of hearing impaired students.
International Journal of Educational Research 13:547-562.
Honzik, M.P. 1976. Value and limitations of infant tests: An overview.
In Origins of intelligence, ed. M. Lewis. New York: Plenum Press.
House, W.F., and K.I. Berliner. 1991. Cochlear implants: From idea to
clinical practice. In Cochlear implants: A practical guide, ed. H.
Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
House, W.F., W.M. Luxford, and B. Courtney. 1985. Otitis media in
children following the cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing (Suppl.)
6:24S-26S.
Hubatch, L.M., C.J. Johnson, D.J. Kistler, W.J. Burns, and W.
Moneka. 1985. Early language abilities of high-risk infants. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Disorders 50:195-207.
Hudgins, R., and F. Numbers. 1942. An investigation of intelligibility
of speech of the deaf. Genetic Psychology Monographs 25:289-392.
Hung, K. 1989. Auditory brainstem responses in patients with
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubin encephalopathy. Brain
Development 11:297-301.
Hynd, G.W., J. Obrzut, W. Weed, and C. Hynd. 1979. Development of
cerebral dominance: Dichotic listening asymmetry in normal and
learning-disabled children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
28:445-454.
Hynd, G.W., and M. Semrud-Clikeman. 1989. Dyslexia and brain
morphology. Psychological Bulletin 106:447-482.
Hynd, G.W., M. Semrud-Clikeman, A.R. Lorys, E.S. Novey, and D.
Eliopulos. 1990. Brain morphology in developmental dyslexia,
attention deficit disorder/hyperactivity. Archives of Neurology 47:919-

926.
Hynd, G.W., M. Semrud-Clikeman, and H. Lyytinen. 1991. Brain
imaging in learning disabilities. In Neuropsychological foundations of
learning disabilities, ed. J.E. Obrzut and G.W. Hynd. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Iinuma, K., K. Haginoya, I. Handa, A. Kojima, N. Fueki, J. Aikawa,
M. Ito, J. Hatazawa, and T. Ido. 1989. Computed tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and
evoked potential at early stage of adrenoleuko-dystrophy. Tohuku
Journal of Experimental Medicine 159:195-203.
Inagaki, M., Y. Tomita, S. Takashima, K. Ohtani, G. Andoh, and K.
Takeshita. 1987. Functional and morphometrical maturation of the
brainstem auditory pathway. Brain Development 9:597-601.
Indian Council of Medical Research. 1983. Collaborative study on
prevalence and etiology of hearing impairment. New Delhi: Indian
Council of Medical Research.
Jackler, R.K., W.M. Luxford, and W.F. House. 1987. Congenital
malformations of the inner ear: A classification based on
embryogenesis. Laryngoscope (Suppl. 40) 90:2-14.
Jacobson, J.T., and C.R. Morehouse. 1984. A comparison of auditory
brainstem response and behavioral screening in high risk and normal
newborn infants. Ear and Hearing 5: 247-253.
Jacobson, J.T., C.R. Morehouse, and M. Johnson. 1982. Strategies for
infant auditory brainstem response assessment. Ear and Hearing
3:263-270.
Jaroff, L. 1992. The new genetics. Knoxville, Tenn.: Whittle
Communications.
Jeffers, J., and M. Barley. 1977. Speech reading: ''Lipreading.''
Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas.

Jepsen, O. 1963. Middle ear muscle reflexes in man. In Modern
developments in audiology, ed. J.F. Jerger. New York: Academic
Press.
 

Page 388
Jerger, J. 1960a. Audiological manifestations of lesions in the auditory
nervous system. Laryngoscope 70:417-425.
.1960b. Observations on auditory behavior in lesions of the central
auditory pathways. Archives of Otolaryngology 71:797-806.
.1970. Clinical experience with impedance audiometry. Archives of
Otolaryngology 92:311-324.
.1975. Diagnostic use of impedance measures. In Handbook of
clinical impedance audiometry, ed. J. Jerger. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.:
American Electromedics Corp.
Jerger, J., L. Anthony, S. Jerger, and L. Mauldin. 1974. Studies in
impedance audiometry: Middle ear disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99:165-171.
Jerger, J., P. Burney, L. Mauldin, and B. Crump. 1974. Predicting
hearing loss from the acoustic reflex. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 39:11-22.
Jerger, J., E. Harford, J. Clemis, and B. Alford. 1974. The acoustic
reflex in eighth nerve disorders. Archives of Otolaryngology 99:409-
413.
Jerger, J., and D. Hayes. 1977. Diagnostic speech audiometry.
Archives of Otolaryngology 103:216-222.
Jerger, J., and S. Jerger. 1971. Diagnostic significance of PB word
function. Archives of Otolaryngology 93:573-580.
.1974. Auditory findings in brain stem disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99: 342-350.
.1975. Clinical validity of central auditory tests. Scandinavian
Audiology 4: 147-163.

.1977. Diagnostic value of crossed versus uncrossed acoustic reflexes:
Eighth nerve and brainstem disorders. Archives of Otolaryngology
103:445-450.
Jerger, J., S. Jerger, and L. Mauldin. 1972. Studies in impedance
audiometry: L. Normal and sensorineural ears. Archives of
Otolaryngology 96:513-523.
Jerger, J., K. Johnson, S. Jerger, N. Coker, F. Pirozzolo, and L. Gray.
1991. Central auditory processing disorder: A case study. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 2: 36-54.
Jerger, J., and J.L. Northern. 1980. Clinical impedance audiometry.
Acton, Mass.: American Electromedics Corp.
Jerger, J., C. Speaks, and J. Trammel. 1968. A new approach to
speech audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 33:318-
328.
Jerger, J., N. Weikers, F. Sharbrough, and S. Jerger. 1969. Bilateral
lesions of the temporal lobe: A case study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica
(Suppl.) 258:1-51.
Jerger, S. 1980. Evaluation of central auditory function in children. In
Central auditory and language disorders in children, ed. R.W. Keith.
Houston: College-Hill Press.
.1983. Decision matrix and information theory analyses in the
evaluation of neuroaudiological tests. Seminars in Hearing 4:121-132.
.1987. Validation of the pediatric speech intelligibility test in children
with central nervous system lesions. Audiology 26:298-311.
Jerger, S., and J. Jerger. 1982. Pediatric speech intelligibility test:
Performance-intensity characteristics. Ear and Hearing 3:325-333.
.1983. Evaluation of diagnostic audiometric tests. Audiology 22:144-
161.

.1984. Pediatric speech intelligibility test: Manual for administration.
St. Louis: Auditec.
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, and S. Abrams. 1983. Speech audiometry in the
young child. Ear and Hearing 4:56-66.
 

Page 389
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, B.R. Alford, and S. Abrams. 1983. Development
of speech intelligibility in children with recurrent otitis media. Ear
and Hearing 4:138-145.
Jerger, S., J. Jerger, L. Mauldin, and P. Segal. 1974. Studies in
impedance audiometry: II. Children less than 6 years old. Archives of
Otolaryngology 99:1 -9.
Jerger, S., K. Johnson, and L. Loiselle. 1988. Pediatric central
auditory dysfunction: Comparison of children with confirmed lesions
versus suspected processing disorders. American Journal of Otology
9:63-71.
Jerger, S., R. Martin, and J. Jerger. 1987. Specific auditory perceptual
dysfunction in a learning disabled child. Ear and Hearing 8:78-86.
Jerger, S., and R. Zeller. 1989. Dichotic listening in a child with a
cerebral lesion: The "paradoxical" ipsilateral ear deficit. Ear and
Hearing 10:167-172.
Jirsa, R.E. 1992. The clinical utility of the P3 AERP in children with
auditory processing disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 35:903-912.
Jirsa, R.E., and K.B. Clontz. 1990. Long latency auditory event-
related potentials from children with auditory processing disorders.
Ear and Hearing 11 :222-232.
Johnson, J.L., G.W. Mauk, K.M. Takekawa, P.R. Simon, C.C.J. Sia,
and P.M. Blackwell. 1993. Implementing a statewide system of
services for infants and toddlers with hearing disabilities. Seminars in
Hearing 14:105-119.
Johnsen, N.J., P. Bagi, and C. Elberling. 1983. Evoked acoustic
emissions from the human ear. III. Findings in neonates. Scandinavian
Audiology 12:17-24.

Johnsen, N.J., P. Bagi, J. Parbo, and C. Elberling. 1988. Evoked
acoustic emissions from the human ear. IV. Final results in 100
neonates. Scandinavian Audiology 17:27-34.
Johnsen, N.J., J. Parbo, and C. Elberling. 1989. Evoked acoustic
emissions from the human ear. V. Developmental changes.
Scandinavian Audiology 18:59-62.
Johnson, D., M. Enfield, and R. Sherman. 1981. The use of the
staggered spondaic word test and the competing environmental
sounds test in the evaluation of central auditory function in hearing
disabled children. Ear and Hearing 2:70-77.
Johnson, S.J., H. Hosford-Dunn, S. Paryani, A. Yeager, and N.
Malachowski. 1986. Prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss in
premature and sick term infants with perinatally acquired
cytomegalovirus infection. Ear and Hearing 7:325-327.
Joint Committee of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association and the Council on Education of the Deaf. n.d. Technical
report regarding service provision under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (Part H), as amended by IDEA-Part H to
children who are deaf and hard of hearing, ages birth to 36 months.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 1972. Supplementary statement
on infant hearing screening. Asha 16:160.
.1991. 1990 position statement. AAO-HNS Bulletin. (March): 15-18.
.1991. 1990 position statement. Asha (Supplement 5) 33:3-6.
.1994. 1993 position statement. Asha.
.1994. 1994 position statement. Audiology Today 6:6-9.
Kaga, K., and R. Marsh. 1986. Auditory brainstem responses in young
children with Down's syndrome. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 11 :29-38.

Kalil, R.E. 1989. Synapse formation in the developing brain.
Scientific American 2616: 76-85.
Kampfe, C.M., and A.G. Turecheck. 1987. Reading achievement of
prelingually deaf students and its relationship to parental method of
communication: A review of the literature. American Annals of the
Deaf 132: 11-15.
 

Page 390
Kamuro, K., M. Inagaki, and Y. Tomita. 1992. Correlation between
morphological abnormalities of Chiari malformation and evoked
potentials. No-To-Hattatsu 24:554-558.
Kankkunen, A. 1982. Preschool children with impaired hearing in
Goteborg. 1964-1980. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 391) 14: 1-
124.
Kaplan, G.J., J.K. Fleshman, T.R. Bender, C. Baum, and P.S. Clark.
1973. Long term effects of otitis media: A ten-year cohort study of
Alaskan Eskimo children. Pediatrics 52:577-585.
Kapur, Y.P. 1983. The principal causes of acute conditions: Deafness.
In Disability prevention: The global challenge, ed. Sir John Wilson.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Katz, J. 1962. The use of staggered spondaic words for assessing the
integrity of the central auditory system. Journal of Auditory Research
2:327-337.
.1970. Audiologic diagnosis: Cochlea to cortex. Menorah Medical
Journal 1:25-38.
.1983. Phonemic synthesis. In Central auditory processing disorders:
Problems of speech, language, and learning, ed. E.Z. Lasky and J.
Katz. Baltimore: University Park Press.
.1992. Classification of auditory processing disorders. In Central
auditory processing: A transdisciplinary view, ed. J. Katz, N.A.
Stecker, and D. Henderson. St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
.1994. Handbook of clinical audiology. 4th ed. Baltimore: Williams
and Wilkins.
Katz, J., R.A. Basil, and J.M. Smith. 1963. A staggered spondaic word
test for detecting central auditory lesions. Annals of Otology,

Rhinology, and Laryngology 72:906-917.
Katz, J., and R. Illmer. 1972. Auditory perception in children with
learning disabilities. In Handbook of clinical audiology, ed. J. Katz.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Katz, J., D. Kushner, and G. Pack. 1975. The use of competing speech
SSW and environmental sounds: CES tests for localizing brain
lesions. Presented at annual convention of the American Speech and
Hearing Association.
Katz, J., and L. Wilde. 1985. Auditory perceptual disorders in
children. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Kaufman, N.L. 1980. Review of research on reversal errors.
Perceptual and Motor Skills 51:55-79.
Kavanagh, K., and W. Domico. 1986. High-pass digital filtration of
the 40-Hz. response and its relationship to the spectral content of the
middle latency and 40-Hz. responses. Ear and Hearing 7:93-99.
Keith, R.W. 1979. Loudness and the acoustic reflex: Cochlear-
impaired listeners. Journal of the American Auditory Society 5:65-70.
.198 la. Audiological and auditory-language tests of central auditory
function. In Central auditory and language disorders in children, ed.
R.W. Keith. Houston: College-Hill Press.
.1981b. Tests of central auditory function. In Auditory disorders in
school children, ed. R.J. Roeser and M.P. Downs. New York: Thieme-
Stratton, Inc.
.1983. Interpretation of the staggered spondee word (SSW) test. Ear
and Hearing 4:287-292.
.1986. SCAN: A screening test for auditory processing disorders. San
Antonio: Psychological Corp.

.1988. Central auditory tests. In Handbook of speech-language
pathology, and audiology, ed. N.J. Lass, L.V. McReynolds, and J.L.
Northern. Philadelphia: B.C. Decker.
Keith, R.W., ed. 1977. Central auditory dysfunction. New York:
Grune and Stratton.
Keith, R.W., and P. Engineer. 1991. Effects of methylphenidate on the
auditory processing
 

Page 391
abilities of children with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder.
Journal of Learning Disabilities 24:630-636.
Keith, R.W., and S. Jerger. 1991. Central auditory disorders. In
Diagnostic audiology, ed. J.T. Jacobson and J.L. Northern. Austin,
Texas: Pro-Ed.
Keith, R.W., J. Rudy, P.A. Donahue, and B. Katbamna. 1989.
Comparison of SCAN results with other auditory and language
measures in a clinical population. Ear and Hearing 10: 382-386.
Keller, W.D. 1992. Auditory processing disorder or attention-deficit
disorder? In Central auditory processing: A transdisciplinary view,
ed. J. Katz, N.A. Stecker, and D. Henderson. St. Louis: Mosby Year
Book.
Kemp, D.T. 1978. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the
human auditory system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
64:1386-1391.
Kemp, D.T., P. Bray, L. Alexander, and A.M. Brown. 1986. Acoustic
emission cochleography: Practical aspects. Scandinavian Audiology
Supplementum 25:71-96.
Kemp, D.T., and S. Ryan. 1993. The use of transient evoked
otoacoustic emissions in neonatal hearing screening program.
Seminars in Hearing 14:30-45.
Kemp, D.T., S. Ryan, and P. Bray. 1990. A guide to the effective use
of otoacoustic emissions. Ear and Hearing 11: 93-105.
Kennedy, C.R., L. Kimm, D.C. Dees, P.I.P. Evans, M. Hunter, S.
Lenton, and A.R.D. Thornton. 1991. Otoacoustic emissions and
auditory brainstem responses in the newborn. Archives of Disease in
Childhood 66:1124-1129.

Ketten, D.R. 1994. Differences in postmeningitic inner ear occlusions
in children vs. adults. Paper presented at the Fifth Symposium on
Cochlear Implants in Children, February 4-5. New York.
Kiessling, J. 1982. Hearing aid selection by brainstem audiometry.
Scandinavian Audiology 11:269-275.
Kileny, P. 1982. Auditory brainstem responses as indicators of hearing
aid performance. Annals of Otolaryngology 9:61-64.
.1991. Use of electrophysiologic measures in the management of
children with cochlear implants: Brainstem, middle latency, and
cognitive (P300) responses. In Cochlear implants in children, ed. R.T.
Miyamoto and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of Otolaryngology
(Suppl.) 12: 37-42.
.1994. Objective measures: Evoked potentials as indicators of
auditory electrical excitability. Paper presented at the Fifth
Symposium on Cochlear Implants in Children, February 4-5. New
York.
Kileny, P., and J.L. Kemink. 1987. Electrically evoked middle-latency
auditory potentials in cochlear implant candidates. Archives of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. 113:1072-1077.
Kimura, D. 1961a. Cerebral dominance and the perception of verbal
stimuli. Canadian Journal of Psychology 15:166-171.
.1961b. Some effects of temporal lobe damage on auditory perception.
Canadian Journal of Psychology 15:157-165.
.1964. Left-right differences in the perception of melodies. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 14:355-358.
King, C., and S. Quigley. 1985. Reading and deafness. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
Kinsbourne, M. 1973. Minimal brain dysfunction as a

neurodevelopmental lag. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
205:268-273.
 

Page 392
Koch, H., and N.J. Dennison. 1974. Office visits to pediatricians.
Washington, D.C.: National Center for Health Statistics.
Kodama, S., K. Tanaka, H. Konishi, K. Momota, H. Nakasako, S.
Nakayama, J. Yagi, and K. Koderasawa. 1989. Supplementary
thyroxine therapy in patients with hypothyroidism induced by long
term anticonvulsant therapy. Acta Paediatrica Japan 31:555-562.
Kok, M.R., G.A. van Zanten, and M.P. Brocaar. 1992. Growth of
evoked otoacoustic emissions during the first days postpartum.
Audiology 3 1:140-149.
.1993. Aspects of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in healthy
newborns. Hearing Research 69:115-123.
Kok, M.R., G.A. van Zanten, M.P. Brocaar, and H.C.S. Wallenburg.
1993. Click-evoked otoacoustic emissions in 1036 ears of healthy
newborns. Audiology 32:213-224.
Konigsmark, B.W. 1969. Hereditary deafness in man. New England
Journal of Medicine 281:713-720, 774-778, 827-832.
Konigsmark, B., and R. Gorlin. 1976. Genetic and metabolic
deafness. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Kraus, N., P. Kileny, and T. McGee. 1994. Middle latency auditory
evoked potentials. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 4th ed., ed. J.
Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Kraus, N., and T. McGee. 1988. Color imaging of the human middle
latency response. Ear and Hearing 9:159-167.
Kraus, N., T. McGee, A. Micco, A. Sharma, T. Carrell, and T. Nicol.
1993. Mismatch negativity in school-age children to speech stimuli
that are just perceptibly different. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 88:123-130.

Kraus, N., T. McGee, A. Sharma, T. Carrell, and T. Nicol. 1992.
Mismatch negativity eventrelated potential elicited by speech stimuli.
Ear and Hearing 13: 158-164.
Kraus, N., O. Ozdamar, L. Stein, and N. Reed. 1984. Absent auditory
brain stem response: Peripheral hearing loss or brain stem
dysfunction? Laryngoscope 94:400-406.
Kraus, N., N. Reed, I. Smith, L. Stein, and C. Cartee. 1987. High-pass
filter settings affect the detectability of MLRs in humans.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 68:234-236.
Kretschmer, R., and L. Kretschmer. 1978. Language development and
intervention with the hearing impaired. Baltimore: University Park
Press.
Kreul, J., J. Nixon, K. Kryter, D. Bell, S. Lang, and E. Schubert. 1968.
A proposed clinical test of speech discrimination. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research I 1: 536-552.
Kubler-Ross, E. 1969. On death and dying. New York: Macmillan.
.1974. Questions and answers on death and dying. New York: Collier
Books.
Kuhl, P.K., and J.D. Miller. 1975. Speech perception in early infancy:
Discrimination of speech-sound changes. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (Suppl. 1) 58:566.
Kurdziel, S., D. Noffsinger, and W. Olsen. 1976. Performance by
cortical lesion patients on 40%/ and 60% time-compressed materials.
Journal of the American Audiological Society 2:3-7.
Kurtzberg, D., H.G. Vaughan, Jr., C.M. McCarton-Daum, B.A.
Grellong, S. Albin, and L. Rotkin. 1979. Neurobehavioral
performance of low birth weight infants at 40 weeks conceptional age:
Comparison with normal full-term infants. Developmental Medicine
and Child Neurology 21:590-607.

Kutnik, L. 1993. Surviving the '90s: A primer. AAP conference, La
Jolla, Calif.
Kyle, J., and B. Woll. 1985. Sign language: The study of deaf people
and their language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 

Page 393
Lafrenière, D., M.D. Jung, J. Smurzynski, G. Leonard, D.O. Kim, and
J. Sasek. 1991. Distortion-product and click-evoked otoacoustic
emissions in healthy newborns. Archives of Otolaryngology: Head
and Neck Surgery 117: 1382-1389.
Lane, H. 1988. Is there a "psychology of the deaf"? Exceptional
Children 55:7-19.
.1992. The mask of benevolence. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Lane, H., B. Brauer, L. Fleischer, J. Groode, N. Marbury, and M.
Schwartz. 1991. Cochlear implants in children: A position paper of
the National Association of the Deaf. NAD Broadcaster (March).
Lane, R., M. Mendel, G. Kupperman, M. Vivion, L. Buchanan, and R.
Goldstein. 1974. Phase distortion of the AER imposed by analog
filtering. Archives of Otolaryngology 99:428-432.
Langford, S.E., and W.L. Faires. 1973. Objective evaluation of
monaural vs. binaural amplification for congenitally hard-of-hearing
children. Journal of Auditory Research 13: 263-267.
Lary, S., G. Briassoulis, L. deVries, L. Dubowitz, and V. Dubowitz.
1985. Hearing threshold in preterm and term infants by auditory
brainstem response. Journal of Pediatrics 107: 593-599.
Lashley, K.S. 1951. The problem of serial order in behavior. In
Cerebral mechanisms in behavior, ed. L.A. Jeffress. New York: Wiley.
Lasky, E.Z., and J. Katz, eds. 1983. Central auditory processing
disorders. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Lasky, E.Z., and H. Tobin. 1973. Linguistic and nonlinguistic
competing message effects. Journal of Learning Disabilities 6:243-
250.
Lasky, R., J. Perlman, and K. Hecox. 1992. Distortion-product

otoacoustic emissions in human newborns and adults. Ear and
Hearing 13:430-441.
Laureau, F., M. Vanasse, R. Hebert, J. Letarte, J. Glorieux, M.
Desjardins, and J. Dussault. 1986. Somatosensory evoked potentials
and auditory brainstem responses in congenital hypothyroidism. I: A
longitudinal study before and after treatment in six infants detected in
the neonatal period. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 64:50 1-510.
Lemieux, G., and J. Neemeh. 1967. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and
nephritis. Canadian Medical Association Journal 97:1193-1198.
Letter to P.J. Seiler, 20 IDELR 1216 OSEP 1993. 1994. Individuals
with Disabilities Education Law Report. p. 1216-1217.
Levine, E. 1960. The psychology of deafness: Techniques of appraisal
for rehabilitation. New York: Columbia University Press.
.1981. The ecology of early deafness: Guides to fashioning
environments and psychological assessment. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Levine, M.D., W.B. Carey, and A.C. Crocker. 1992. Developmental-
behavioral pediatrics. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Levitt, H. 1989. Speech and hearing in communication. In The
handbook of special education: Research and practice. Vol. 3, ed. M.
Wang, M. Reynolds, and H. Waldberg. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Lewis, M., and S. Goldberg. 1969. The acquisition and violation of
expectancy: An experimental paradigm. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 1 :775-86.
Liberman, A. 1970. The grammars of speech and language. Cognitive
Psychology 1: 301.
Lidén, G., and E.R. Harford. 1985. The pediatric audiologist: From

magician to clinician. Ear and Hearing 6:6-9.
 

Page 394
Lidén, G., and A. Kankkunen. 1969. Visual reinforcement
audiometry. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 67:281-292.
Linden, A. 1964. Distorted speech and binaural speech resynthesis
tests. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 58:32-48.
Lindsay, J., F. Black, and W. Donnelly. 1975. Acrocephalo-syndactyly
Apert's syndrome: Temporal bone findings. Annals of Otolaryngology
84: 174-178.
Lindsay, J.R., and W.G. Hemenway. 1954. Inner ear pathology due to
measles. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology 263:754-
771.
Ling, D. 1976. Speech and the hearing impaired child: Theory and
practice. Washington, D.C.: Alexander Graham Bell Association.
.1978. Auditory coding and recoding: An analysis of auditory training
procedures for hearing impaired children. In Auditory management of
hearing impaired children, ed. M. Ross and T. Giolas. Baltimore:
University Park Press.
.ed. 1984. Early intervention of hearing impaired children: Total
communication options. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Lipsitt, L.P., and J.S. Werner. 1981. The infancy of human learning
processes. In Developmental plasticity: Behavioral and biological
aspects of variations in development, ed. E.S. Gollin. New York:
Academic Press.
Lochner, J., and J. Burger. 1961. The intelligibility of speech under
reverberant conditions. Acustica 11: 195-200.
Locke, J.L. 1978. Phonemic effects in the silent reading of hearing
and deaf students. Cognition 6:185-187.
Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., F.P. Harris, B.B. Stagner, M.D. Hawkins, and

G.K. Martin. 1990. Distortion-product emissions in humans: II.
Relations to stimulated and spontaneous emissions and acoustic
immittance in normally hearing subjects. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngology (Suppl. 147) 99: 14-28.
Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., G.K. Martin, M.J. McCoy, and M.L.
Whitehead. 1994. Otoacoustic emissions testing in young children:
Middle-ear influences. American Journal of Otology (Suppl. 1) 15:13-
20.
Los Angeles County, Office of the Los Angeles County
Superintendent of Schools, Audiology Services, and Southwest
School for the Hearing Impaired. 1980. Test of auditory
comprehension. North Hollywood: Forworks.
Lubert, N. 1981. Auditory perceptual impairments in children with
specific language disorders. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
46:3-9.
Luce, P. 1986. Neighborhoods of words in the mental lexicon:
Research on speech perception. Technical Report no. 6. Bloomington:
Indiana University Department of Psychology, Speech Research
Laboratory.
Lukas, R.A., and J. Guenchur-Lukas. 1985. Spondaic word tests. In
Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Lurquin, P., P. Magera, S. Hassid, and D. Hennebert. 1989. Evolution
du seuil auditif durant les premiers mois de la vie liee aux
modifications de la physiologie du conduit auditif externe.
[Development of the auditory threshold during the first months of life
related to modifications of the physiology of the external auditory
canal]. Acta Otorhinolaryngologica Belgica 43:417-426.
Luterman, D. 1984. Counseling the communicatively disordered and

their families. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
.1987. Deafness in the family. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
 

Page 395
Luxford, W.M., and D.E. Brackmann. 1985. The history of cochlear
implants. In Cochlear implants, ed. R.F. Gray. San Diego: College-
Hill Press.
Luxford, W.M., and W.F. House. 1985. Cochlear implants in children:
Medical and surgical considerations. Ear and Hearing (Suppl) 6:20S-
23S.
Lynn, G.E., and J. Gilroy. 1972. Neuroaudiological abnormalities in
patients with temporal lobe tumors. Journal of Neurological Sciences
17: 167-1 84.
.1975. Effects of brain lesions on the perception of monotic and
dichotic speech stimuli. In Proceedings of symposium on central
auditory processing disorders, ed. H. Sullivan. Omaha: University of
Nebraska Medical Center.
.1977. Evaluation of central auditory dysfunction in patients with
neurological disorders. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W.
Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Lynn, G.E., J. Gilroy, P.C. Taylor, and R.P. Leiser. 1981. Binaural
masking-level differences in neurological disorders. Archives of
Otolaryngology 107:357-362.
Madell, J.R. 1990. Audiological evaluation. In Hearing-impaired
children in the mainstream, ed. M.Ross. Parkton, Md.: York Press.
.1992a. FM systems as primary amplification for children with
profound hearing loss. Ear and Hearing 13: 102-107.
.1992b. FM systems for children birth to age five. In FM auditory
training systems: Characteristics, selections, and use, ed. M.A.Ross.
Timonium, Md.: York Press.
Mangham, C.A., W.M. Luxford, T.J. Balkany, F.O. Black, N.L.

Cohen, B.J. Gantz, M.S. Hirshorn, J.L. House, S.A. Martinez, R.E.
Mischke, R.T. Miyamoto, M. Novak, and J.J. Shea. 1986. Cochlear
prosthesis surgery in children. In Cochlear implants in children, ed.
D.J. Mecklenburg. Seminars in Hearing 7:361-369.
Manning, W., K. Johnston, and D. Beasley. 1977. The performance of
children with auditory perceptual disorders on a time-compressed
speech discrimination measure. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 42:77-84.
Margolis, R.H., and J.W. Heller. 1987. Screening tympanometry:
Criteria for medical referral. Audiology 26:197-208.
Margolis, R.H., and J.E. Shanks. 1985. Tympanometry. In Handbook
of clinical audiology, 2d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.
Marquis, S.M., and S.H. Long. 1992. Uninsured children and national
health care reform. Journal of the American Medical Association
268:3473-3477.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. 1987. Functional parallelism in spoken word-
recognition. Cognition 25:71-102.
Martin, F.N., and G.W. Brunette. 1980. Loudness and the acoustic
reflex. Ear and Hearing 1:106-108.
Martin, F.N., and J.G. Clark. 1977. Audiologic detection of auditory
processing disorders in children. Journal of the American Audiology
Society 3: 140-146.
Martin, J.A.M. 1982. Aetiological factors relating to childhood
deafness in the European community. Audiology 21:149-158.
Massaro, D.W. 1987. Speech perception by ear and eye: A paradigm
for psychological inquiry. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Matkin, N.D. 1984. Early recognition and referral of hearing impaired

children. Pediatrics in Review 6:151-156.
Matkin, N.D., and P.E. Hook. 1983. A multidisciplinary approach to
central auditory evaluations. In Central auditory processing
disorders: Problems of speech, language, and learning, ed. E.Z.
Lasky and J. Katz. Baltimore: University Park Press.
 

Page 396
Matkin, N.D., and J. Thomas. 1972. The utilization of CROS hearing
aids in children. Maico Audiological library Series 10: 8.
Matzker, J. 1959. Two methods for the assessment of central auditory
functions in cases of brain disease. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 68:1155 - 1197.
.1962. The binaural test. International Audiology 1:209-211.
Mauk, G.W., K.R. White, L.B. Mortenson, and T.R. Behrens. 1991.
The effectiveness of screening programs based on high risk
characteristics in early identification of hearing impairment. Ear and
Hearing 8:217-221.
Maurizi, M., G. Almadori, L. Cagini, E. Molini, F. Ottaviani, G.
Paludetti, and F. Pierri. 1986. Auditory brainstem responses in the
full-term newborn: Changes in the first 58 hours of life. Audiology
25:239-247.
Maurizi, M., F. Ottaviani, G. Paludetti, and S. Lungarotti. 1985.
Audiological findings in Down's children. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 9:227-232.
Maxon, A.B. 1981. Binaural amplification of young children: A
clinical application of Ross's theory. Ear and Hearing 2:215-2 19.
Maxon, A.B., and I. Hochberg. 1982. Development of psychoacoustic
behavior: Sensitivity and discrimination. Ear and Hearing 3:301 -308.
McAfee, M.C., J.F. Kelly, and V.J. Samar. 1990. Spoken and written
English errors of postsecondary students with severe hearing
impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 55:528-634.
McCall, R.B. 1983. A conceptual approach to early mental
development. In Origins of intelligence, ed. M. Lewis. New York:
Plenum Press.

McClelland, J.L., and J.L. Elman. 1986. The TRACE model of speech
perception. Cognitive Psychology 18:1-86.
McClellend, R., and B. Sayers. 1984. Evaluation of the cross
correlation method for detection of auditory threshold for brainstem
auditory evoked potentials. In Evoked potentials II, The Second
International Evoked Potentials Symposium, ed. R.H. Nodar and C.
Barber. Boston: Butterworth.
McConnell, P., and M. Berry. 198 1. The effect of refeeding after
neonatal starvation on Purkinje cell dendritic growth in the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 178 :759-772.
McCormick, B. 1993. Behavioural hearing tests 6 months to 3; 6
years. In Paediatric audiology, 0-5 years, ed. B. McCormick. 2d ed.
London: Whurr Publishers, Ltd.
McCormick, B., ed. 1993. Paediatric audiology: 0-5 years, 2d ed.
London: Whurr Publishers, Ltd.
McDermott, H.J., C.M. McKay, and A.E. Vandali. 1992. A new
portable sound processor for the University of Nelbourne-Nucleus
limited multielectrode cochlear implant. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 91: 3367-337 1.
McFarland, W., M. Vivion, and R. Goldstein. 1977. Middle
components of the AER to tonepips in normal-hearing and hearing-
impaired subjects. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 20:781-
798.
McKay, C.M., and H.J. McDermott. 1993. Perceptual performance of
subjects with cochlear implants using the spectral maxima sound
processor (SMSP) and the mini speech processor (MSP). Ear and
Hearing 14:350-367.
McKay, C.M., H.J. McDermott, A.E. Vandali, and G.M. Clark. 1991.
Preliminary results with a six spectral maxima sound processor for the

University of Melbourne-Nucleus multiple-electrode cochlear
implant. Journal of the Otolaryngological Society of Australia 6:354-
359.
 

Page 397
McKay, C.M., H.J. McDermott, A.E. Vandali, and G.M. Clark. 1992.
A comparison of speech perception of cochlear implantees using the
spectral maxima sound processor (SMSP) and the MSP
(MULTIPEAK) processor. Acta Otolaryngologica 112:752-761.
McMillan, P.M., M.J. Bennett, C.D. Marchant, and P. Shurin. 1985.
Ipsilateral and contralateral acoustic reflexes in neonates. Ear and
Hearing 6:320-324.
McPherson, B., and C.A. Holborow. 1985. A study of deafness in
West Africa: The Gambian hearing health project. International
Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 10: 115-135.
McPherson, D., R. Amlie, and E. Foltz. 1985. Auditory brainstem
response in infant hydrocephalus. Child's Nervous System 1:70-76.
McPherson, D., and N. Clark. 1983. ABR in hearing aid utilization:
Simulated deafness. Hearing Instruments 34:12-15, 66.
McRandle, C., M. Smith, and R. Goldstein. 1974. Early averaged
electroencephalic responses to clicks in neonates. Annals of Otology,
Rhinology, and laryngology 83:695-702.
Meadow-Orlans, K. 1990. Research in developmental aspects of
deafness. In Educational and developmental aspects of deafness, ed.
D. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Mecklenburg, D.J., M.E. Demorest, and S.J. Staller. 1991. Scope and
design of the clinical trial of the Nucleus multichannel cochlear
implant in children. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children,
ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing (Suppl) 12(4): 10S-14S.
Mecklenburg, D.J., and E. Lehnhardt. 1991. The development of
cochlear implants in Europe, Asia, and Australia. In Cochlear
implants: A practical guide, ed. H. Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers

Ltd.
Mecklenburg, D.J., and J.K. Shallop. 1988. Cochlear implants. In
Handbook of speech-language pathology and audiology, ed. N.J.
Lass, L.V. McReynolds, J.L. Northern, and D.E. Yoder. Toronto: B.C.
Decker.
Mencher, G.T. 1985. Hearing screening programs and identification of
central auditory disorders. Human Communication 9:45-49.
Mencher, G.T., B. McCullouch, A.J. Derbyshire, and R. Dethlefs.
1977. Observer bias as a factor in neonatal hearing screening. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Research 20: 27-34.
Mendel, M. 1985. Middle and late auditory evoked potentials. In
Handbook of clinical audiology, 3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Mendel, M., C. Adkinson, and L. Harker. 1977. Middle components
of the evoked potentials in infants. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 86:293-300.
Mendel, M., and R. Goldstein. 1971. Early components of the
averaged electroencephalic response to constant level clicks during
all-night sleep. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 14:829-840.
Mendelson, T., and A. Salamy. 1981. Maturational effects on the
middle components of the averaged electroencephalic response.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24: 140-144.
Metz, 0. 1946. The acoustic impedance measured on normal and
pathologic ears. Acta OtoLaryngologica (Suppl. 63):1-254.
Meyerhoff, W.L., and S.L. Liston. 1991. Metabolic hearing loss. In
Otolaryngology, 3d ed., ed. M.M. Paparella et al. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders.
Mikhael, M.A., I.S. Ciric, and A.P. Wolff. 1987. MR diagnosis of

acoustic neuromas. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography
11:232-235.
 

Page 398
Milner, B., S. Taylor, and R. Sperry. 1968. Lateralized suppression of
dichotically presented digits after commissural section in man.
Science 161:184-185.
Miyamoto, R.T., M.J. Osberger, S.L. Todd, and A.M. Robbins. 1993.
Speech perception skills of children with multichannel cochlear
implants. Paper presented at the Third International Cochlear Implant
Conference, April 4-7. Innsbruck, Austria.
Moog, J., and A. Geers. 1979. Grammatical analysis of elicited
language: Simple sentence level. St. Louis: Central Institute for the
Deaf.
.1980. Grammatical analysis of elicited language: Complex sentence
level. St. Louis: Central Institute for the Deaf.
.1990. Early speech perception test for profoundly hearing-impaired
children. St. Louis: Central Institute for the Deaf.
Moore, L. 1983. Bases of auditory brainstem evoked responses. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
Moore, J.M., G. Thompson, and M. Thompson. 1975. Auditory
localization of infants as a function of reinforcement conditions.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 40:29-34.
Moore, J.M., W.R. Wilson, and G. Thompson. 1977. Visual
reinforcement of head-turn responses in infants under 12 months of
age. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 42:328-334.
Moores, D.F. 1987. Educating the deaf: Psychology, principles, and
practices. 3d ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
.1991. The great debate: Where, how and what to teach deaf children.
American Annals of the Deaf 135:35-37.
Moores, D.F., B. Cerney, and M. Garcia. 1990. School placement and

least restrictive environment. In Educational and developmental
aspects of deafness, ed. D.F. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans.
Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University Press.
Morales-Garcia, C., and J.O. Poole. 1972. Masked speech audiometry
in central deafness. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 74:307-316.
Morest, D.K. 1983. Degeneration in the brain following noise
exposure. In New perspectives in noise induced hearing loss, ed. R.P.
Hammernik, D. Henderson, and R.J. Salvi. New York: Raven Press.
Morgan, D., M. Zimmerman, and J. Dubno. 1987. Auditory brainstem
evoked response characteristics in the full-term newborn. Annals of
Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology 96:142-151.
Morse, P.A. 1972. The discrimination of speech and non-speech
stimuli in early infancy. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
14:477-492.
Moses, K.L. 1985. Infant deafness and parental grief: Psychosocial
early intervention. In Education of the hearing-impaired child, ed. F.
Powell, T. Fenitzo-Hieber, S.F. Friel-Patti, and D. Henderson. San
Diego: College-Hill Press.
Moses, K.L., and M. Van Hecke-Wulatin. 1981. The socioemotional
impact of infant deafness. In Early management of hearing loss, ed.
G.T Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Mott, J.B., S.T. Norton, S.T. Neely, and B. Warr. 1989. Changes in
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions produced by acoustic stimulation
of the contralateral ear. Hearing Research 38:229-242.
Moulin, A., L. Collet, and R. Duclaux. 1993. Contralateral auditory
stimulation alters acoustic distortion products in humans. Hearing
Research 65:193-210.
Mueller, H.G. 1986. Binaural amplification: Attitudinal factors. The
Hearing Journal 39:7-10.

 

Page 399
Mueller, H.G., W.G. Beck, and R.K. Sedge. 1987. Comparison of the
efficiency of cortical level speech tests. Seminars in Hearing 8:279-
298.
Mueller, H.G., and D.B. Hawkins. 1990. Three important
considerations in hearing aid selection. In Handbook of hearing aid
amplification, ed. R. Sandlin. Boston: College-Hill Press.
Mueller, H.G., D. Hawkins, and J. Northern. 1992. Probe microphone
measurements: Hearing aid selection and assessment. San Diego:
Singular Publishing Group.
Muir, D., W. Abraham, B. Forbes, and L. Harris. 1979. The
ontogenesis of an auditory localization response from birth to four
months of age. Canadian Journal of Psychology 33: 320-333.
Muir, D., and J. Field. 1979. Newborn infants orient to sounds. Child
Development 50: 431-436.
Musiek, F.E. 1983a. Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: The
dichotic digit test revisited. Ear and Hearing 4:79-83.
.1983b. The evaluation of brainstem disorders using ABR and central
auditory tests. Monographs in Contemporary Audiology 4:1-24.
.1983c. The results of three dichotic speech tests on subjects with
intracranial lesions. Ear and Hearing 4:318-323.
.1989. Probing brain function with acoustic stimuli. Asha 31: 100-
108.
Musiek, F.E., and J.A. Baran. 1987. Central auditory assessment:
Thirty years of challenge and change. Ear and Hearing 8:22-35.
Musiek, F.E., J.A. Baran, and M.L. Pinheiro. 1990. Duration pattern
recognition in normal subjects and patients with cerebral and cochlear
lesions. Audiology 29:304-313.

.1992. P300 results in patients with lesions of the auditory areas of the
cerebrum. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 3:5-15.
Musiek, F.E., and G.D. Chermak. 1994. Three commonly asked
questions about central auditory processing disorders: Assessment.
American Journal of Audiology 3:23-27.
.1995. Three commonly asked questions about central auditory
processing disorders: Management. American Journal of Audiology
4:15-18.
Musiek, F.E., and N.A. Geurkink. 1980. Auditory perceptual
problems in children: Considerations for the otolaryngologist and
audiologist. Laryngoscope 90:962-971.
.1982. Auditory brainstem response (ABR) and central auditory test
(CAT) findings for patients with brainstem lesions: A preliminary
report. Laryngoscope 92:891-900.
Musiek, F.E., N.A. Geurkink, and S. Keitel. 1982. Test battery
assessment of auditory perceptual dysfunction in children.
Laryngoscope 92:251-257.
Musiek, F.E., and K.M. Gollegly. 1988. Maturational considerations
in the neuroauditory evaluation of children. In Hearing impairment in
children, ed. F.H. Bess. Parkton, Md.: York Press.
Musiek, F.E., K.M. Gollegly, and J.A. Baran. 1984a. Myelination of
the corpus callosum and auditory processing problems in learning
disabled children: Theoretical and clinical correlates. Seminars in
Hearing 5:219-242.
.1984b. Myelination of the corpus callosum in learning disabled
children: Theoretical and clinical correlates. Seminars in Hearing
5:219-229.
Musiek, F.E., K.M. Gollegly, and M.K. Ross. 1985. Profiles of types

of central auditory processing disorders in children with learning
disabilities. Journal of Childhood Communication Disorders 9:43-61.
 

Page 400
Musiek, F.E., and K. Kibbe. 1984. Audiologic test results in patients
with commissurotomy. In Epilepsy and the corpus callosum, ed. A.G.
Reeves. New York: Plenum Press.
Musiek, F.E., S. Lenz, and K. Gollegly. 1991. Neuroaudiologic
correlates to anatomical changes of the brain. American Journal of
Audiology 1: 19-24.
Musiek, F.E., D. Noffsinger, R. Wilson, S. Bornstein, and C.
Martinez. 1992. Tonal and speech materials for central auditory
assessment. Presented at annual convention of the American Speech-
language-Hearing Association. San Antonio, Texas.
Musiek, F.E., and M.L. Pinheiro. 1985. Dichotic speech tests in the
detection of central auditory dysfunction. In Assessment of central
auditory dysfunction: Foundations and clinical correlates, ed. M.L.
Pinheiro and F.E. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
.1987. Frequency patterns in cochlear, brainstem and cerebral lesions.
Audiology 26:79-88.
Musiek, F.E., M.L. Pinheiro, and D.H. Wilson. 1980. Auditory pattern
perception in ''split brain'' patients. Archives of Otolaryngology
106:610-612.
Musiek, F.E., S.B. Verkest, and K.M. Gollegly. 1988. Effects of
neuromaturation on auditoryevoked potentials. In Seminars in
hearing, ed. D.W. Worthington. New York: Thieme Medical
Publishers.
Musiek, F.E., D.J. Weider, and R.J. Mueller. 1983. Reversible
audiologic results in a patient with an extra-axial brain stem tumor.
Ear and Hearing 4:169-172.
Musiek, F.E., and D.H. Wilson. 1979. SSW and dichotic digit results
pre-and postcommissurotomy: A case report. Journal of Speech and

Hearing Disorders 44:528-533.
Musiek, F.E., D.H. Wilson, and M.L. Pinheiro. 1979. Audiological
manifestations in splitbrain patients. Journal of the American
Auditory Society 5:25-29.
Musket, C.H. 1988. Maintenance of personal hearing aids. In Auditory
disorders in school children, 2d ed., ed. R. Roeser and M. Downs.
New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Myklebust, H. 1964. The psychology of deafness: Sensory
deprivation, learning, and adjustment. 2d ed. New York: Grune and
Stratton.
Näätänen, R. 1992. Attention and brain function. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Nabalek, A., and L. Robinette. 1978. Influences of the precedence
effect on word identification by normally hearing and hearing
impaired subjects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 63:
187-194.
Nadol, J.B. 1980. Hearing loss as a sequela of meningitis.
Laryngoscope 88:739-755.
Nass, R. 1984. Case report: Recovery and reorganization after
congenital unilateral brain damage. Perceptual and Motor Skills
59:867-874.
National Institutes of Health. 1993. Early identification of hearing
impairment in infants and young children. NIH Consensus Statement
11: 1-24. Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health.
Neff, W.D. 1964. Temporal pattern discrimination in lower animals
and its relation to language perception in man. In Disorders of
language, ed. A.V.S. deRueck and M. O'Connor. Boston: Little,
Brown and Co.

Nevins, M.E., R.E. Kretschmer, P.M. Chute, S.A. Hellman, and S.C.
Parisier. 1991. The role of an educational consultant in a pediatric
cochlear implant program. Volta Review 93: 197-204.
Newhoff, M., M.J. Cohen, G.W. Hynd, J.J. Gonzalez, and C.A.
Riccio. 1992. Etiological, educational and behavioral correlates of
ADHD and language disabilities. Presented at
 

Page 401
annual convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, San Antonio, Texas.
Newton, V.E. 1985. Etiology of sensorineural hearing loss in young
children. Journal of Otology and Laryngology (Suppl. 10): 1-57.
NFME. 1994. NFME launches primary care 2000 initiative under new
leadership. Making progress: Practitioners for 2005. Pew Health
Professions Commission (spring): 1.
Niccum, N., A. Rubens, and C. Speaks. 1981. Effects of stimulus
material on the dichotic listening performance of aphasic patients.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24: 526-534.
Niedermeyer, E., and F. Lopes da Silva. 1987.
Electroencephalography: Basic principles, clinical applications, and
related fields. 2d ed. Baltimore: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Niemoeller, A. 1981. Physical concepts of speech communication in
classrooms for the deaf. In Amplification in education, ed. F. Bess, B.
Freeman, and J. Sinclair. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association for
the Deaf.
Nix, G.W. 1983. How total is total communication? Journal of the
British Association of Teachers of the Deaf 7: 177-181.
Nober, E.H. 1967. Articulation of the deaf. Exceptional Children
33:611-621.
.1993. Section IV. P.L. 99-457 and its effects on educational
management of hearing impaired children. Presented to in-service,
training, research, and assistive warning device programs for the
hearing impaired in Australia and New Zealand. Durham, N.H.:
University of New Hampshire, International Exchange of Experts and
Information in Rehabilitation.

Nober, E.H., and L.W. Nober. 1962. Speech reception thresholds and
discrimination scores as a function of method of presentation and
frequency response. Journal of Auditory Research 2:1-4.
.1977. Effects of hearing loss on speech and language in the post-
babbling stage. In Hearing loss in children, ed. B. Jaffe. Baltimore:
University Park Press.
Nodar, R.H., J. Hahn, and H.L. Levine. 1980. Brain stem auditory
evoked potentials in determining site of lesion of brain stem gliomas
in children. Laryngoscope 90:258-266.
Noffsinger, D. 1982. Clinical application of selected binaural effects.
Scandinavian Audiology Supplement 15:157-165.
Noffsinger, D., C.D. Martinez, and A.B. Schaefer. 1982. Auditory
brainstem responses and masking level differences from persons with
brainstem lesions. Scandinavian Audiology Supplement 15:81-93.
Noffsinger, D., W.O. Olsen, R. Carhart, C.W. Hart, and V. Sahgal.
1972. Auditory and vestibular aberrations in multiple sclerosis. Acta
Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl.) 303: 1-63.
Norris, T.W., P.G. Stelmachowicz, and D.J. Taylor. 1974. Acoustic
reflex relaxation to identify sensorineural hearing impairment.
Archives of Otolaryngology 99:197.
Northern, J.L. 1981. Impedance measurement in infants. In Early
management of hearing loss, ed. G.T. Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
Northern J.L., F.O. Black, J.A. Brimacombe, N.L. Cohen, L.S.
Eisenberg, S.V. Kuprenas, S.A. Martinez, and R.E. Mischke. 1986.
Selection of children for cochlear implantation. In Cochlear implants
in children, ed. D.J. Mecklenburg. Seminars in Hearing 7:341 -347.
Northern, J.L., and M.P. Downs. 1991. Hearing in children. 4th ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.

Northern, J.L., S.A. Gabbard, and D.L. Kinder. 1990. Pediatric
consideration in selecting and
 

Page 402
fitting hearing aids. In Handbook of hearing aid amplification, vol.
II, ed. R.E. Sandlin. Boston: College-Hill Press.
Norton, S.J. 1993. Application of transient evoked otoacoustic
emissions to pediatric populations. Ear and Hearing 14:64-73.
.1994. Emerging role of evoked otoacoustic emissions in neonatal
hearing screening. American Journal of Otology (Suppl. 1) 15:4-12.
Norton, S.J., and J.E. Widen. 1990. Evoked otoacoustic emissions in
normal-hearing infants and children: Emerging data and issues. Ear
and Hearing 11: 121-127.
Nozza, R.J., C.D. Bluestone, D. Kardatzke, and R. Bachman. 1992.
Toward the validation of aural acoustic immittance measures for
diagnosis of middle ear effusion in children. Ear and Hearing 13:442-
453.
Obrzut, J., G. Hynd, A. Obrzut, and F. Pirozzolo. 1981. Effects of
directed attention on cerebral asymmetries in normal and learning-
disabled children. Developmental Psychology 17:118-125.
Obrzut, J., W. Weed, and C. Hynd. 1979. Development of cerebral
dominance: Dichotic listening asymmetry in normal and learning-
disabled children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 28:445-
454.
O'Donoghue, G.M., R.K. Jackler, W.M. Jenkins, and R.A. Schindler.
1986. Cochlear implantation in children: The problem of head growth.
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 94:78-81.
Ohta, F., R. Hayashi, and M. Morimoto. 1967. Differential diagnosis
of retrocochlear deafness: Binaural fusion test and binaural separation
test. International Audiology 6: 58-62.
Oiler, D.K., H. Jensen, and R. Lafayette. 1978. The relatedness of

phonological processes of a hearing-impaired child. Journal of
Communication Disorders 11: 97-105.
Olsen, W. 1981. The effects of noise and reverberation on speech
intelligibility. In Amplification in education, ed. F. Bess, B. Freeman,
and J. Sinclair. Washington, D.C.: A.G. Bell Association for the Deaf.
Olsen, W.O., and D. Noffsinger. 1976. Masking level differences for
cochlear and brain stem lesions. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology 85:820-825.
Olsen, W.O., D. Noffsinger, and R. Carhart. 1976. Masking level
differences encountered in clinical populations. Audiology 15:287-
301.
Olsen, W.O., 1). Noffsinger, and S. Kurdziel. 1975a. Acoustic reflex
and reflex decay: Occurrence in patients with cochlear and eighth
nerve lesions. Archives of Otolaryngology 101:622-625.
.1975b. Speech discrimination in quiet and in white noise by patients
with peripheral and central lesions. Acta Oto-Laryngologica 80:375-
382.
Osberger, M.J. 1994. Auditory perception and speech production
results. Paper presented at the Fifth Symposium on Cochlear Implants
in Children, April 4-5, New York.
Osherger, M.J., A.M. Robbins, R.T. Miyamoto, S.W. Berry, W.A.
Myres, K.S. Kessler, and M.I,. Pope. 1991. Speech perception
abilities of children with cochlear implants, tactile aids, or hearing
aids. In Cochlear implants in children, ed. R.T. Miyamoto and M.J.
Osberger. American Journal of Otology (Suppl.) 12:105-115.
Osterhammel, D., and P. Osterhammel. 1979. Age and sex variations
for the normal stapedial reflex thresholds and tympanometric
compliance values. Scandinavian Audiology 8: 153-158.
Otte, J., H.F. Schuknecht, and A.G. Kerr. 1978. Ganglion cell

populations in normal and
 

Page 403
pathological human cochlea: Implications for cochlear
implantation. Laryngoscope 88: 1231-1246.
Ovesen, T., P.B. Paaske, and O. Elbrond. 1993. Accuracy of an
automatic impedance apparatus in a population with secretory otitis
media: Principles in the evaluation of tympanometrical findings.
American Journal of Otolaryngology 1:100-104.
Owens, E., D.K. Kessler, M.W. Raggio, and E.D. Schubert. 1985.
Analysis and revision of the minimal auditory capabilities (MAC)
battery. Ear and Hearing 6:280-290.
Owens, J.J., M.J. McCoy, B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, and G.K. Martin.
1992. Influence of otitis media on evoked otoacoustic emissions in
children. Seminars in Hearing 13:63-66.
.1993. Otoacoustic emissions in children with normal ears, middle-ear
dysfunction, and ventilating tubes. American Journal of Otology
14:34-40.
Ozdamar, O., and N. Kraus. 1983. Auditory middle-latency responses
in humans. Audiology 22:34-49.
Pal, J., H.L. Bhatia, B.G. Prasad, D. Dyal, and P.C. Jain. 1974.
Deafness among the urban community: An epidemiological study at
Lucknow UP, India. Indian Journal of Medical Research 62:857-868.
Palmer, C., A. Derbyshire, and A. Lee. 1966. A method for analyzing
individual cortical responses to auditory stimuli.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 20: 204-206.
Pappas, D.G. 1983. A study of the high-risk registry for sensorineural
hearing impairment. Journal of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery 91:41-4.
Paradise, J.L., C.G. Smith, and C.D. Bluestone. 1976. Tympanometric

detection of middle ear effusion in infants and young children.
Pediatrics 58:198-210.
Parke, R. 1974. Father-infant interaction in maternal attachment and
mothering disorders: A roundtable. Sausalito, CA: Johnson and
Johnson Co.
Parving, A. 1983. Epidemiology of hearing loss and aetiological
diagnosis of hearing impairment in childhood. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 5:151 - 165.
.1984. Early detection and identification of congenital/early acquired
disability. Who takes the initiative? International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology 7:107-117.
.1991. Detection of infants with congenitally acquired hearing
disability. Acta OtoLaryngologica (Suppl. 482):111-116.
.1992. Pediatric audiologic medicine: A strategy for a regular
department. Journal of Audiological Medicine 1:99-111.
Patrick, J.F., and G.M. Clark. 1991. The Nucleus 22-channel cochlear
implant system. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed.
S.J. Staller. Ear and Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4):3S-9S.
Paul, P., and D. Jackson. 1993. Toward a psychology of deafness.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Paul, P., and S. Quigley. 1990. Education and deafness. New York:
Longman.
Pelson, R.O., and S.S. Budden. 1987. Auditory brainstem response
findings in Rett syndrome. Brain Development 9:514-516.
Perez, H., J. Vilchez, T. Sevilla, and L. Martinez. 1988. Audiologic
evaluation in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Scandinavian Audiology
(Suppl. 30):211 -213.
Peterson, J.L., and G. Lidén. 1972. Some static characteristics of the

stapedial muscle reflex. Audiology 11:94-114.
Pickles, J.O. 1982. An introduction to the physiology of hearing. New
York: Academic Press.
Picton, T.W., S.A. Hillyard, H.J. Kraus, and R. Galambos. 1974.
Human auditory evoked po-
 

Page 404
tentials, I: Evaluation of components. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 36: 179-190.
Picton, T., R. Linden, G. Hamel, and J. Maru. 1983. Aspects of
averaging. Seminars in Hearing 4:327-341.
Picton, T., K. Oulette, G. Hamel, and A. Smith. 1979. Brainstem
evoked potential to tone pips in notched noise. Journal of
Otolaryngology 8:289-314.
Picton, T.W., D.L. Woods, J. Baribeau-Braun, and T.L. Healey. 1977.
Evoked potential audiometry. Journal of Otolaryngology 6: 90-11 9.
Pinheiro, M.L. 1977. Tests of central auditory function in children
with learning disabilities. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W.
Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Pinheiro, M.L., G.P. Jacobson, and F. Boller. 1982. Auditory
dysfunction following a gunshot wound of the pons. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 47:296-300.
Pinheiro, M.L., and F.E. Musiek. 1985. Sequencing and temporal
ordering in the auditory system. In Assessment of central auditory
dysfunction: Foundations and clinical correlates, ed. M. Pinheiro and
F. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Pinheiro, M.L., and F.E. Musiek, eds. 1985. Assessment of central
auditory dysfunction. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Pintner, R., and D. Patterson. 1916. A measurement of the language
ability of deaf children. Psychological Review 23:413-436.
Plinkert, P.K., G. Sesterhenn, R. Arold, and H.P. Zenner. 1990.
Evaluation of otoacoustic emissions in high-risk infants by using an
easy and rapid objective auditory screening method. European
Archives of Otorhinology 247:356-360.

Plotnick, C.H., and J.G. Leppler. 1986. Infant hearing assessment: A
program for identification and habilitation within four months of age.
The Hearing Journal 39:23-25.
Pohl, P. 1979. Dichotic listening in a child recovering from acquired
aphasia. Brain and Language 8:372-379.
Pollack, D. 1985. Educational audiology for the limited-hearing
infant and preschooler. 2d ed. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas.
Pollack, M.C., ed. 1988. Amplification for the hearing-impaired. 3d
ed. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Popelka, R.G., ed. 1981. Hearing assessment with the acoustic reflex.
New York: Grune and Stratton.
Popelka, G.R., R.H. Margolis, and T.L. Wiley. 1976. Effect of
activating signal bandwidth on acoustic reflex thresholds. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 59: 153-159.
Porter, T.A. 1974. Otoadmittance measurements in a residential deaf
population. American Annals of the Deaf 119:47-52.
Preus, M., and G.C. Fraser. 1971. Genetics of hereditary nephropathy
with deafness: Alport's syndrome. Clinical Genetics 2:331-333.
Prevec, T., K. Ribaric, K., and D. Butinar. 1984. Contingent negative
variation audiometry in children. Audiology 23: 114-126.
Prieve, B.A. 1992. Otoacoustic emissions in infants and children:
Basic characteristics and clinical application. Seminars in Hearing
13:37-52.
Prieve, B.A., M.P. Gorga, A. Schmidt, S.T. Neelym, J. Peters, L.
Schultes, and W. Jesteadt. 1993. Analysis of transient-evoked
otoacoustic emissions in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired ears.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 93:3308-3319.
Primus, M.A., and G. Thompson. 1985. Response strength of young

children in operant audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 28:539-547.
 

Page 405
Probst, R., B.L. Lonsbury-Martin, and G.K. Martin. 1991. A review of
otoacoustic emissions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
89:2027-2067.
Prosser, S., E. Arslan, G. Conti, and S. Michelini. 1983. Evaluation of
the monaurally evoked brainstem response in the diagnosis of
sensorineural hearing loss. Scandinavian Audiology 12:103-106.
Protti, E. 1983. Brainstem auditory pathways and auditory processing
disorders: Diagnostic implications of subjective and objective tests. In
Central auditory processing disorders, ed. E. Lasky and J. Katz.
Baltimore: University Park Press.
Quenin, C.S., and I. Blood. 1989. A national survery of cued speech
programs. Volta Review 91:283-289.
Quigley, S. 1969. The influence of fingerspelling on the development
of language, communication and educational achievement in deaf
children. Urbana: University of Illinois, Institute for Research on
Exceptional Children.
Quigley S., and R. Kretschmer. 1982. The education of deaf children:
Issues, theory and practice. Austin: Pro-Ed.
Quigley, S., and P. Paul. 1984. Language and deafness. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
Rackliffe, L., and F.E. Musiek. 1983. An introduction to ABR in
hearing aid evaluation. Hearing Instruments 34:9-10.
Rapin, I. 1983. The child neurologist's contribution to the care of
children with hearing loss. In The Multiply Handicapped Hearing
Impaired Child, ed. G.T. Mencher and S.E. Gerber. New York: Grune
and Stratton.
Rauschecker, J.P., and P. Marler. 1987. Cortical plasticity and

imprinting: Behavioral and physiological contrasts and parallels. In
Imprinting and cortical plasticity, ed. J.P. Rauschecker and P. Marler.
New York: John Wiley.
Rayner, K., and A. Pollatsek. 1989. The psychology of reading.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Reagan, T. 1990. Cultural considerations in the education of deaf
children. In Educational and developmental aspects of deafness, ed.
D. Moores and K. Meadow-Orlans. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press.
Regional Resource and Federal Centers Program. 1993. Education
reforms and special education: The era of change for the future.
Plantation, Fla.: South Atlantic Regional Resource Center, Florida
Atlantic University.
Rickards, F.W., S.J. Dettman, P.A. Busby, R.L. Webb, R.C. Dowell,
S.E. Dennehy, and T.G. Nienhuys. 1990. Preoperative evaluation and
selection of children and teenagers. In Cochlear prostheses, ed. G.M.
Clark, Y.C. Tong, and J.F. Patrick. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Rintelmann, W.F., and F.H. Bess. 1988. High-level amplification and
potential hearing loss in children. In Hearing impairment in children,
ed. F.H. Bess. Parkton, Md.: York Press.
Rintelmann, W.F., and G.E. Lynn. 1983. Speech stimuli for
assessment of central auditory disorders. In Principles of speech
audiometry, ed. D.F. Konkle and W.F. Rintelmann. Baltimore:
University Park Press.
Robb, M., and J. Saxman. 1985. Developmental trends in vocal
fundamental frequency of young children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 28:421 -427.
Roberts, J.E., M.R. Burchinal, B.P. Davis, A.M. Collier, and F.W.
Henderson. 1991. Otitis media in early childhood and later language.

Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 34:1158-1168.
Robertson, D., and D.R.F. Irvine. 1989. Plasticity of frequency
organization in auditory cor-
 

Page 406
tex of guinea pigs with partial unilateral deafness. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 282:456-471.
Robertson, P.O., J.L. Peterson, and L.E. Lamb. 1968. Relative
impedance measurements in young children. Archives of
Otolaryngology 88: 162-168.
Rodier, P.M. 1980. Chronology of neuron development: Animal
studies and their clinical implications. Developmental Medicine and
Child Neurology 22:525-545.
Roeser, R., and M. Downs. 1988. Maintenance of personal hearing
aids. In Auditory disorders in school children, eds. R. Roeser and M.
Downs. 2d ed. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Roeser, R., K. Millay, and J. Morrow. 1983. Dichotic consonant-
vowel (cv) perception in normal and learning-impaired children. Ear
and Hearing 4:293-299.
Rosenberger, P., and D. Hier. 1980. Cerebral asymmetry and verbal
intellectual deficits. Annals of Neurology 8:300-304.
Ross, M.A., ed. 1992. FM auditory training systems: Characteristics,
selections, and use. Timonium, Md.: York Press.
Ross, M., D. Brackett, and A. Maxon. 1982. Hard of hearing children
in the regular schools. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
.1991. Assessment and management of mainstreamed hearing
impaired children. Austin: Pro-Ed.
Ross, M., and T. Giolas. 1971. Effects of three classroom listening
conditions on speech intelligibility. American Annals of the Deaf
116:580-584.
.1978. Auditory management of hearing-impaired children: Principles
and prerequisites for intervention. Baltimore: University Park Press.

Ross, M., and J. Lerman. 1970. A picture identification test for
hearing-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
13:44-53.
.1971. Word intelligibility by picture identification. Pittsburgh:
Stanwix House.
Ross, M., and K. Randolph. 1990. A test of the auditory perception of
alphabet letters for hearing impaired children: The APAL test. The
Volta Review 92:237-244.
Roush, J., A. Drake, and J.E. Sexton. 1992. Identification of middle
ear dysfunction in young children: A comparison of tympanometric
screening procedures. Ear and Hearing 13: 63-69.
Roush, J., and C.A. Tait. 1984. Binaural fusion, masking level
differences, and auditory brain stem responses in children with
language-learning disabilities. Ear and Hearing 5:37-41.
Rubel, E., D. Born, J. Deitch, and D. Durham. 1984. Recent advances
toward understanding auditory system development. In Hearing
science, ed. C. Berlin. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Ruben, R.J. 1983. Diseases of the inner ear and sensorineural
deafness. In Pediatric otolaryngology, vol. 1, ed. C.D. Bluestone and
S.E. Stool. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
.1991. Language screening as a factor in the management of the
pediatric otolaryngic patient. Archives of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery 117:1021-1025.
Ruben, R.J., and I. Rapin. 1988. Management of the hearing-impaired
deaf infant and child. In Otologic medicine and surgery, ed. P.W.
Alberti and R.J. Ruben. New York: Churchill Livingstone.
Ruben, R.J., and D.L. Rozycki. 1970. Clinical aspects of genetic
deafness. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology 80:255-263.

Ruben, R.J., and S.M. Yankelowitz. 1989. Spontaneous perilymphatic
fistula in children. American Journal of Otology 10: 198-207.
 

Page 407
Rybak, L.P., and G.J. Matz. 1988. Ototoxicity. In Otologic medicine
and surgery, ed. P.W. Alberti and R.J. Ruben. New York: Churchill
Livingstone.
Sakashita, T., Y. Minowa, K. Hachikawa, T. Kubo, and Y. Nakai.
1991. Evoked otoacoustic emissions from ears with idiopathic sudden
deafness. Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 486):66-72.
Salamy, A., L. Eldridge, J. Anderson, and D. Bull. 1990. Brainstem
transmission time in infants exposed to cocaine in utero. The Journal
of Pediatrics 117:627-629.
Salomon, G., B. Anthonisen, J. Groth, and P.P. Thomsen. 1992.
Otoacoustic hearing screening in newborns: Optimization. In
Screening children for auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall
III. Nashville: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Salvia, J., and J.E. Ysseldyke. 1981. Assessment in special and
remedial education. 2d ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sanders, D. 1965. Noise conditions in normal school classrooms.
Exceptional Children 31:344-353.
Sanderson-Leepa, M.E., and W.F. Rintelmann. 1976. Articulation
functions and test-retest performance of normal-hearing children on
three speech discrimination tests: WIPI, PBL-50, and NU Auditory
Test no. 6. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 41: 503-519.
Sando, I., S. Suehiro, and R.P. Wood. 1983. Congenital anomalies of
the external and middle ear. In Pediatric otolaryngology, ed. C.D.
Bluestone and S.E. Stool. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Scarr, S., and M.L.Williams. 1971. The assessment of neonatal and
later status of low birthweight infants. Presented at meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development, Minneapolis.

Schain, R. 1977. Neurology of childhood learning disorders. 2d ed.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Schein, J.D., and M.T. Delk. 1974. The deaf population of the United
States. Washington, D.C.: National Association of the Deaf.
Schimmel, H. 1967. The +- reference: Accuracy of estimated mean
components in average response studies. Science 157:92-93.
Schimmel, H., I. Rapin, and M. Cohen. 1974. Improving evoked
response audiometry. Audiology 13:33-65.
Schindler, R.A., and D.K. Kessler. 1993. Clarion cochlear implant:
Phase I investigational results. American Journal of Otology 14:263-
272.
Schlaggar, B.L., and D.D.M. O'Leary. 1991. Potential of visual cortex
to develop an array of functional units unique to somatosensory
cortex. Science 252:1556-1560.
Schlesinger, H. 1972. A developmental model applied to problems of
deafness. In Sound and sign: Childhood deafness and mental health,
ed. H. Schlesinger and K. Meadow. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Schmitt, B.D. 1975. The minimal brain dysfunction myth. American
Journal of Diseases of Children 129:1313-1318.
Schneider, P.K., J.A. Rich, and C. Bazell. 1989. The effect of SSPL
setting on gain measurement in the soundfield in children: A pilot
study. Poster session presented at MSHA Annual Conference, March.
Schulman, C.A. 1973. Heart rate audiometry. Part I. An evaluation of
heart rate response to auditory stimuli in newborn hearing screening.
Neuropaediatrie 4:362-374.
Schuyler, V., N. Rushmer, R. Arpan, A. Melum, J. Sowers, and N.
Kennedy. 1985. Parent-

 

Page 408
infant communication: A program of clinical and home training for
parents and hearing-impaired infants. Portland, Oreg.: Infant
Hearing Resource Publications.
Schwartz, S., ed. 1987. Choices in deafness: A parent's guide.
Kensington, Md.: Woodbine House.
Schuyler, V., and N. Rushmer. 1987. Parent-infant habilitation.
Portland: IHR Publications.
Selters, W., and D. Brackman. 1977. Acoustic tumor detection with
brainstem electric response audiometry. Archives of Otolaryngology
103:181-187.
Shallop, J.K., A.L. Beiter, D.W. Coin, and R.E. Mischke. 1990.
Electrically evoked auditory brain stem responses (EABR) and middle
latency responses (EMLR) obtained from patients with the Nucleus
multichannel cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 11:5-15.
Shallop, J.K., and D. J. Mecklenburg. 1987. Technical aspects of
cochlear implants. In Handbook of hearing aid amplification, ed. R.E.
Sandlin. San Diego: College-Hill Press.
Shanks, J.E. 1984. Tympanometry. Ear and Hearing 5:268-280.
Shanks, J.E., and R.H. Wilson. 1986. Effects of direction and rate of
ear-canal pressure changes on tympanometric measures. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research 29: 11 -19.
Sharp, M., and D. Orchick. 1978. Auditory function in sickle cell
anemia. Archives of Otolaryngology 104:322-324.
Shih, L., B. Cone-Wesson, and B. Reddix. 1988. Effects of maternal
cocaine abuse on the neonatal auditory system. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 15: 245-251.
Shimizu, H. 1992. Carhart Memorial Lecture: 1991. Childhood

hearing impairment: Issues and thoughts on diagnostic approaches.
American Auditory Society Bulletin 17: 15-37.
Shimizu, H., and F. Brown. 1981. ABR in children with MBD.
Presented at annual convention of the American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association, Los Angeles.
Shimizu, H., H. Moser, and S. Naidu. 1989. Auditory brainstem
response and audiologic findings in adrenoleukodystrophy: Its variant
and carrier. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 98:215-220.
Siegenthaler, B., and G. Haspiel. 1966. Development of two
standardized measures of hearing for speech by children. Cooperative
research program project #2372. Washington, D.C.: United States
Office of Education.
Silman, S. 1976. The growth function of the stapedius reflex in
normal ears and ears with hearing loss due to cochlear dysfunction.
Ph.D. diss., New York University, New York.
.1988. The applicability of the modified bivariate plotting procedure
to subjects with functional hearing loss. Scandinavian Audiology
17:125-127.
.1990. Detection of middle-ear effusion. Short course presented at
Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, Seattle.
Silman, S., and S.A. Gelfand. 1979. The effects of aging on the
acoustic reflex thresholds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 66:735-738.
.1981. The relationship between magnitude of hearing loss and
acoustic reflex threshold levels. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 46:312-316.
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, and T.H. Chun. 1978. Some observations in
a case of acoustic neuroma. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders

43:459-466.
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, J.C. Howard, and T.J. Showers. 1982.
Clinical application of the bivariate plotting procedure in the
prediction of hearing loss with the bivariate plotting procedure.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27:12-19.
Silman, S., S.A. Gelfand, N. Piper, C.A. Silverman, and L. Van Frank.
1984. Prediction of
 

Page 409
hearing loss from the acoustic reflex threshold. In The acoustic
reflex: Basic principles and clinical applications, ed. S. Silman.
New York: Academic Press.
Silman, S., G.R. Popelka, and S.A. Gelfand. 1978. Effect of
sensorineural hearing loss on acoustic stapedius reflex growth
functions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 64:1406-1411.
Silman, S., and C.A. Silverman. 1991. Auditory diagnosis: Principles
and applications. San Diego: Academic Press.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, and D.S. Arick. 1992. Acoustic-
immittance screening for detection of middle-ear effusion in children.
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 3:262-268.
.1994. Pure-tone assessment and screening of children with middle-
ear effusion. journal of the American Academy of Audiology. 5: 173-
182.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, S.A. Gelfand, J. Lutolf, and D.J. Lynne.
1988. Ipsilateral acousticreflex adaptation testing for detection of
facial-nerve pathology: Three case studies. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 53:378-382.
Silman, S., C.A. Silverman, T.J. Showers, and S.A. Gelfand. 1984.
The effect of age on prediction of hearing loss with the bivariate
plotting procedure. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27:12-
19.
Silverman, C.A., S. Silman, and M.H. Miller. 1983. The acoustic
reflex threshold in aging ears. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 73:248-255.
Simmons, F.B. 1966. Electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve in
man. Archives of Otolaryngology 84:2-54.

Sininger, Y. 1993. Auditory brain stem response for objective
measures of hearing. Ear and Hearing 14:23-30.
Skinner, M.W. 1988. Hearing aid evaluation. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall.
Skinner, M.W., G.M. Clark, L.A. Whitford, P.M. Seligman, S.J.
Staller, D.B. Shipp, J.K. Shallop, C. Everingham, C.M. Menapace,
P.L. Arndt, T. Antogenelli, J.A. Brimacombe, S. Pijl, P. Daniels, C.R.
George, H.J. McDermott, and A.L. Beiter. 1994. Evaluation of a new
spectral peak coding strategy for the Nucleus 22 channel cochlear
implant system. American Journal of Otolaryngology 15 (Suppl. 2):
15-27.
Skinner, M.W., L.K. Holden, T.A. Holden, R.C. Dowell, P.M.
Seligman, J.A. Brimacombe, and A.L. Beiter. 1991. Performance of
postlinguistically deaf adults with the wearable speech processor
(WSPIII) and mini speech processor (MSP) of the Nucleus
multielectrode cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 12:3-22.
Sloan, C. 1980a. Auditory processing disorders and language
development. In Auditory processing and language: Clinical and
research perspectives, ed. P.J. Levinson and C. Sloan, 101-115. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
.1980b. Auditory processing disorders in children: Diagnosis and
treatment. In Auditory processing and language: Clinical and
research perspectives, ed. P.J. Levinson and C. Sloan 117-133. New
York: Grune and Stratton.
Smith, D.W. 1981. Recognizable patterns of human deformation.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Smith, G.A., and R.A. Gussen. 1976. Inner ear pathology following
mumps infection: Report of a case in an adult. Archives of
Otolaryngology 102:108-1 11.

Smith, P.S.U., T.L. Wiley, and G.M. Pyle. 1993. Efficacy of ASHA
guidelines for screening middle-ear function in children. Poster
session presented at the Annual Convention of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association. November, Anaheim.
 

Page 410
Smoski, W.J. 1990. Use of CHAPPS in a children's audiology clinic.
Ear and Hearing (Suppl.) 11:53-56.
Smoski, W.J., M.A. Brunt, and C. Tannahill. 1992. Listening
characteristics of children with central auditory processing disorders.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 23:145-152.
Smurzynski, J., M.D. Jung, D. Lafrenière, D.O. Kim, M.V. Kamath,
J.C. Rowe, M.C. Holman, and G. Leonard. 1993. Distortion-product
and click-evoked otoacoustic emissions of preterm and full-term
infants. Ear and Hearing 14:258-274.
Sobhy, O. 1993. Frequency specificity of the auditory middle latency
response. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State University.
Sobhy, O., and H. Gould. 1993. Interaural attenuation using insert
earphones: Electrocochleographic approach. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology 4:76-79.
Sohmer, H., and M. Student. 1978. Auditory nerve and brainstem
evoked responses in normal, autistic, minimal brain dysfunction and
psychomotor retarded children. Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology 44:380-388.
Solnit, S. 1961. Mourning and the birth of a defective child.
Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, Monograph #16.
Sommers, R.K., and M.L. Taylor. 1972. Cerebral speech dominance
in language-disordered and normal children. Cortex 8:224-232.
Sparks, R., and N. Geschwind. 1968. Dichotic listening in man after
section of neocortical commissures. Cortex 4:3-16.
Speaks, C., T. Gray, J. Miller, and A. Rubens. 1975. Central auditory
deficits and temporallobe lesions. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 40: 192-205.

Speaks, C., and J. Jerger. 1965. Method for measurement of speech
identification. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 8:185-194.
Speaks, C., N. Niccum, and D. van Tassel. 1985. Effects of stimulus
material on the dichotic listening performance of patients with
sensorineural hearing loss. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
18:16-25.
Spektor, Z., G. Leonard, D.O. Kim, M.D. Jung, and J. Smurzynski.
1991. Otoacoustic emissions in normal and hearing-impaired children
and normal adults. Laryngoscope 101: 965-976.
Sprague, B.H., T.L. Wiley, and R. Goldstein. 1985. Tympanometric
and acoustic reflex studies in neonates. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research 28:265-272.
Squires, K., and K. Hecox. 1983. Electrophysiological evaluation of
higher level auditory processing. Seminars in Hearing 4:415-432.
Stach, B.A. 1992. Controversies in the screening of central auditory
processing disorders. In Screening children for auditory function, ed.
F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
Stach, B.A., L.H. Loiselle, and J.F. Jerger. 1988. Auditory evoked
potential abnormalities in children with central auditory disorder.
Asha 30:133 (abstract).
Stach, B., W. Stoner, S. Smith, and J. Jerger. 1994. Auditory evoked
potentials in Rett syndrome. Journal of the American Academy of
Audiology 5:226-230.
Staller, S.J. 1985. Cochlear implant characteristics: A review of
current technology. In Cochlear implants, ed. G.A. McCandless.
Seminars in Hearing 23-32.
Staller, S.J., A.L. Beiter, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1991. Children and
multichannel cochlear implants. In Cochlear implants: A practical
guide, ed. H. Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.

 

Page 411
Staller, S.J., R.C. Dowell, A.L. Beiter, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1991.
Perceptual abilities of children with the Nucleus 22-channel cochlear
implant. In Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J.
Staller. Seminars in Hearing (Suppl.) 12(4): 34S-47S.
Steele, M.W. 1981. Genetics of congenital deafness. Pediatric Clinics
of North America 28: 973-980.
Stein, L., S. Clark, and N. Kraus. 1983. The hearing-impaired infant:
Patterns of identification and habilitation. Ear and Hearing 4:232-
236.
Stein, L., T. Jabaley, R. Spitz, D. Stoakley, and T. McGee. 1990. The
hearing-impaired infant: Patterns of identification and habilitation
revisited. Ear and Hearing 11:128-133.
Stephens, S., and A. Thornton. 1976. Subjective and
electrophysiologic tests in brainstem lesions. Archives of
Otolaryngology 102:608-613.
Stevens, J.C., H.D. Webb, J. Hutchinson, J. Connell, M.F. Smith, and
J.T. Buffin. 1989. Click evoked otoacoustic emissions compared with
brain stem electric response. Archives of Disease in Childhood
64:1105-1111.
.1990. Click evoked otoacoustic emissions in neonatal screening. Ear
and Hearing 11:128-133.
.1991. Evaluation of click-evoked otoacoustic emissions in the
newborn. British Journal of Audiology 25:11-14.
Stevens, J.C., H.D. Webb, M.F. Smith, J.T. Buffin, and H. Ruddy.
1987. A comparison of otoacoustic emissions and brain stem electric
response audiometry in the normal newborn and babies admitted to a
special care baby unit. Clinical Physical and Physiological
Measurement 8:95-104.

Stockard, J.E., J.J. Stockard, and R. Coen. 1983. Auditory brain stem
response variability in infants. Ear and Hearing 4:11-23.
Stokoe, W. 1960. Sign language structure: An outline of the visual
communication systems of the American deaf. Studies in Linguistics.
Occasional Papers no. 8. Buffalo: State University of New York at
Buffalo Department of Anthropology and Linguistics.
.1975. The use of sign language in teaching English. American Annals
of the Deaf 120:417-421.
Stool, S.E., A.O. Berg, S. Berman, C.J. Carney, J.R. Cooley, L.
Culpepper, R.D. Eavey, L.V. Feagans, T. Finitzo, E.M. Friedman, et
al. 1994. Otitis media with effusion in young children. Clinical
Practice Guideline #12, July. AHCPR Publication No. 94-0622.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Public
Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Strickland, E.A., E.M. Burns, and A. Tubis. 1985. Incidence of
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in children and infants. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 78:931 -935.
Stubblefield, J., and C. Young. 1975. Central auditory dysfunction in
learning-disabled children. Journal of Learning Disabilities 8:32-37.
Sugimoto, T., A. Yasuhara, T. Ohta, N. Nishida, S. Saitoh, J. Hamabe,
and N. Niikawa. 1992. Angelman syndrome in three siblings:
Characteristic epileptic seizures and EEG abnormalities. Epilepsia
33:1078-1082.
Sussman, J.E. 1991. Stimulus ratio effects on speech discrimination
by children and adults. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
34:671-678.
Suzuki, T., and Y. Ogiba. 1960. A technique of pure-tone audiometry
for children under three years of age: Conditioned orientation reflex
(COR) audiometry. Revue de Laryngologie, Otologie, Rhinologie

81:33-45.
Sweetow, R., and R. Reddell. 1978. The use of masking level
differences in the identification
 

Page 412
of children with perceptual problems. Journal of the American
Auditory Society 4: 52-56.
Swisher, L., and I. Hirsh. 1972. Brain damage and the ordering of two
temporally successive stimuli. Neuropsychologia 10: 137-152.
Tallal, P. 1985. Neuropsychological research approaches to the study
of central auditory processing. Human Communication 9 (Part 1): 17-
22.
Tallal, P., and M. Piercy. 1973. Developmental aphasia: Impaired rate
of nonverbal processing as a function of sensory modality.
Neuropsychologia 11:389-398.
.1974. Developmental aphasia: Rate of auditory processing and
selective impairment of consonant perception. Neuropsychologia
12:83-94.
.1975. Developmental aphasia: The perception of brief vowels and
extended consonants. Neuropsychologia 13:69-74.
Taylor, M., W. Chan-Lui, and W. Logan. 1985. Longitudinal evoked
potential studies in hereditary ataxias. Canadian Journal of
Neuroscience 12:100-105.
Teatini, G.P. 1970. Sensitized speech tests: Results in normal subjects.
In Speech audiometry, ed. C. Rojskjaer. Odense: Danavox.
Teele, D.W., J.O. Klein, B.A. Rosner, et al. 1980. Epidemiology of
otitis media in children. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and
Laryngology (Suppl. 68) 89:5-6.
.1984. Otitis media with effusion during the first three years of life
and development of speech and language. Pediatrics 74:282-287.
Terkildsen, K. 1964. Clinical application of impedance measurements
with a fixed frequency technique. International Audiology 3:123-128.

Tharpe, A.M., and D.H. Ashmend. 1993. Computer simulation
technique for assessing pediatric auditory test protocols. Journal of
the American Academy of Audiology 4:80-90.
Thielemeir, M.A. 1982. Discrimination after training test. Los
Angeles: House Ear Institute.
.1984. The discrimination after training test. Los Angeles: House Ear
Institute.
Thielemeir, M.A., L.L. Tonokawa, B. Petersen, and L.S. Eisenberg.
1985. Audiological results in children with a cochlear implant. Ear
and Hearing (Suppl.) 6:27S-35S.
Thoman, E.B., and P.T. Becker. 1979. Issues in assessment and
prediction for the infant born at risk. In Infants born at risk, ed. T.
Field. Jamaica, N.Y.: Spectrum.
Thompson, G., and R.C. Folsom. 1984. A comparison of two
conditioning procedures in the use of visual reinforcement audiometry
(VRA). Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 49:241-245.
Thompson, G., and B.A. Weber. 1974. Responses of infants and
young children to behavior observation audiometry (BOA). Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 39: 140-147.
Thompson, G., W.R. Wilson, and J.M. Moore. 1979. Application of
visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA) to low-functioning children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 44:80-90.
Thompson, M., and G. Thompson. 1972. Response of infants and
young children as a function of auditory stimuli and test method.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 15: 699-707.
Thornton, A., M. Mendel, and C. Anderson. 1977. Effects of stimulus
frequency and intensity on the middle components of the averaged
auditory electroencephalic response. Journal of Speech and Hearing

Research 20:81-94.
Thornton, A.R.D., G. Farrell, and E. McSporran. 1989. Clinical
methods for the objective estimation of loudness discomfort level
(LDL) using auditory brainstem responses in patients. Scandinavian
Audiology 18:225-230.
 

Page 413
Thornton, A.R.D., L. Yardley, and G. Farrell. 1987. The objective
estimation of loudness discomfort level using auditory brainstem
evoked responses. Scandinavian Audiology 16: 219-225.
Thringer, K., A. Kankkunen, G. Lidén, and A. Niklasson. 1984.
Perinatal risk factors in the etiology of hearing loss in preschool
children. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 26:799-807.
Tillman, T.W., and R. Carhart. 1966. An expanded test for speech
discrimination utilizing CNC monosyllabic words (Northwestern
University auditory test no. 6). Technical report, SAM-TR-66-55,
USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Aerospace Medical Division
(AFSC), Brooks Air Force Base, Texas.
Tillman, T., R. Carhart, and W. Olsen. 1970. Hearing aid efficiency in
a competing speech situation. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 13:789-811.
Tobey, E.A., and J.K. Cullen, Jr. 1984. Temporal integration of tone
glides by children with auditory-memory and reading problems.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27: 527-533.
Tobey, E.A., and M.S. Hasenstab. 1991. Effects of a Nucleus
multichannel cochlear implant upon speech production in children. In
Multichannel cochlear implants in children, ed. S.J. Staller. Ear and
Hearing (Suppl.) 12:48S-54S.
Tokioka, A.B., D.H. Crowell, and J.W. Pierce. 1987.
Electrophysiological investigation of cognition in infants. In Thinking
across cultures: The third international conference on thinking, ed.
D.M. Topping, D.C. Crowell, and V.N. Kobayashi. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tong, Y.C., R.C. Black, G.M. Clark, I.C. Forster, J.B. Millar, B.J.
O'Loughlin, and J.F. Patrick. 1979. A preliminary report on a

multiple-channel cochlear implant operation. Journal of Laryngology
and Otology 93:7:679-695.
Tong, Y.C., G.M. Clark, P.J. Blamey, P.A. Busby, and R.C. Dowell.
1982. Psychophysical studies for two multiple-channel cochlear
implant patients. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 71:153-
160.
Tong, Y.C., G.M. Clark, P.M. Seligman, and J.F. Patrick. 1980.
Speech processing for a multiple-electrode cochlear implant
prosthesis. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 68:1897-
1899.
Trine, M.B., J.E. Hirsch, and R.H. Margolis. 1993. The effect of
compensatory ear-canal pressure on otoacoustic emissions. Ear and
Hearing 14:401-407.
Turner, R.G., and D.W. Nielsen. 1984. Application of clinical decision
analysis to audiological tests. Ear and Hearing 5:125-133.
Tye-Murray, N. 1987. Effects of vowel context on the articulatory
closure postures of deaf speakers. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research 30:99-104.
Tye-Murray, N., M. Lowder, and R.S. Tyler. 1990. Comparison of the
FoF2, and FoF1F2 processing strategies for the Cochlear Corporation
cochlear implant. Ear and Hearing 11: 195-200.
Tyler, R.S., J. Preece, and M. Lowder. 1983. The Iowa cochlear
implant tests. Iowa City: University of Iowa, Department of
Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery.
Tyler, R.S., and N. Tye-Murray. 1991. Cochlear implant signal-
processing strategies and patient perception of speech and
environmental sounds. In Cochlear implants: A practical guide, ed. H.
Cooper. London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
U. S. Department of Education. 1992. Deaf students education

services: Policy guidance. Federal Register (October 30) Vol. 57. No.
211:49274-49276.
 

Page 414
.1992. To assure the free appropriate education of all handicapped
children. Fourteenth annual report to Congress on the implementation
of P.L. 94-142: The education for all handicapped children act.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service. 1990. Healthy people 2000: National health promotion and
disease prevention objectives. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
.1991. Healthy people 2000: National health promotion and disease
prevention objectives. DHHS Publication No. PHSI-50212.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research. 1994. Clinical practice guideline: Otitis
media with effusion in young children. Washington, D.C.: Public
Health Service.
U.S. National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1993. A
nation at risk: the imperative for educational reform: a report to the
Nation and the Secretary of Education, United States Department of
Education. Washington, D.C.: The Commission.
Upfold, L.J., and J. Isepy. 1982. Childhood deafness in Australia.
Medical Journal of Australia 2:323-326.
Uziel, A., and J.P. Piron. 1991. Evoked otoacoustic emissions from
normal newborns and babies admitted to an intensive care baby unit.
Acta Oto-Laryngologica (Suppl. 482): 85-91.
Van Camp, K.J., R.H. Margolis, R.H. Wilson, W.L. Creten, and J.E.
Shanks. 1986. Principles of tympanometry. ASHA Monograph no. 24.
Rockville, Md.: American SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association.

Vanhuyse, V.J., W.L. Creten, and K.J. Van Camp. 1975. On the W-
notching of tympanograms. Scandinavian Audiology 4:45-50.
von Wallenberg, E.L., and R.D. Battmer. 1991. Comparative speech
recognition results in eight subjects using two different coding
strategies with the Nucleus 22-channel cochlear implant. British
Journal of Audiology 25:371-380.
Waldstein, R. 1990. Effects of postlingual deafness on speech
production: Implications for the role of auditory feedback. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 88: 2099-2114.
Wallace, I.F., S.K. Escalona, C.M. McCarton-Daum, and H.G.
Vaughan. 1982. Neonatal precursors of cognitive development in low
birth weight children. Seminars in Perinatology 6:327-333.
Wallace, I.F., J.S. Gravel, C.M. McCarton, and R.J. Ruben. 1988.
Otitis media and language development at 1 year of age. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 54:245-25 1.
Wallace, S.P., C.A. Prutting, and S.E. Gerber. 1990. Degeneration of
speech, language, and hearing in a patient with
mucopolysaccharidosis VII. International Journal of Pediatric
Otolaryngology 19:97-107.
Waring, M.D., M. Don, and J.A. Brimacombe. 1985. ABR assessment
of stimulation in induction coil implant patients. In Cochlear
implants, ed. R.A. Schindler and M.M. Merzenich. New York: Raven
Press.
Warren, R.M. 1983. Multiple meanings of ''phoneme'': Articulatory,
acoustic, perceptual, graphemic, and their confusions. In Speech and
language: Advances in basic research and practice, vol. 9, ed. N.J.
Lass. New York: Academic Press.
Weatherby, L., and M. Bennett. 1980. The neonatal acoustic reflex.
Scandinavian Audiology 9:103-110.

 

Page 415
Webb, J.D., and J.C. Stevens. 1991. Auditory screening in high risk
neonates: Selection of a test protocol. Clinical Physical and
Physiological Measurement 12:75-76.
Webb, R.L., B.C. Pyman, B.K.-H. Franz, and G.M. Clark. 1990. The
surgery of cochlear implantation. In Cochlear prostheses, ed. G.M.
Clark, Y.C. Tong, and J.F. Patrick. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Weber, B.A. 1969. Validation of observer judgements in behavioral
observation audiometry. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
34:350-355.
.1982. Comparison of auditory brain stem response latency norms for
premature infants. Ear and Hearing 3:257-262.
.1994. Auditory brainstem response: Threshold estimation and
auditory screening. In Handbook of clinical audiology, 4th ed., ed. J.
Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Webster, A., and J. Elwood. 1985. The hearing impaired child in the
ordinary school. London: Croom Helm.
Webster, D.B., and M. Webster. 1977. Neonatal sound deprivation
affects brainstem auditory nuclei. Archives of Otolaryngology
103:392-396.
Wechsler, D. 1967. Wechsler primary and preschool intelligence
scale. New York: Psychological Corp.
.1974. Wechsler intelligence scale for children (Revised). New York:
Psychological Corp.
Weisenberger, J.M., and L. Kozma-Spytek. 1991. Evaluating tactile
aids for speech perception and production by hearing-impaired adults
and children. In Cochlear implants in children, ed. R.T. Miyamoto
and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of Otolaryngology (Suppl.)

12:188-200.
Welsh, R., and S. Slater. 1993. The state of infant hearing impairment
identification programs. Asha 35:49-52.
Werner, L.A. 1992. Interpreting developmental psychoacoustics. In
Developmental psychoacoustics, ed. L.A. Werner and E.W. Rubel.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
White, E.J. 1977. Children's performance on the SSW test and
Willeford battery: Interim clinical data. In Central auditory
dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith. New York: Grune and Stratton.
White, K.R., and T.R. Behrens, eds. 1993. The Rhode Island infant
hearing assessment project: Implications for universal newborn
hearing screening. Seminars in Hearing 14: 1.
White, K.R., A.B. Maxon, T.R. Behrens, P.M. Blackwell, and B.R.
Vohr. 1992. Neonatal screening using evoked otoacoustic emissions:
The Rhode Island hearing assessment project. In Screening children
for auditory function, ed. F.H. Bess and J.W. Hall III. Nashville: Bill
Wilkerson Center Press.
White, K.R., B.R. Vohr, and T.R. Behrens. 1993. Universal newborn
hearing screening using transient evoked otoacoustic emissions:
Results of the Rhode Island hearing assessment project. Seminars in
Hearing 14:18-29.
Widen, J.E. 1990. Behavioral screening of high-risk infants using
visual reinforcement audiometry. Seminars in Hearing 11:342-356.
.1993. Adding objectivity to infant behavioral audiometry. Ear and
Hearing, 14:49-57.
Wilcox, S. 1988. Introduction: Academic acceptance of American
Sign Language. Sign Language Studies 59:101-108.
.1990. The structure of signed and spoken languages. Sign Language

Studies 67: 141-151.
Wiley, T.L., D.L. Oviatt, and M.G. Block. 1987. Acoustic immittance
measures in normal ears. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research
30:161-170.
 

Page 416
Willeford, J.A. 1976. Differential diagnosis of central auditory
dysfunction. In Audiology: An audio journal for continuing education,
vol. 2, ed. L. Bradford. New York: Grune and Stratton.
.1977. Assessing central auditory behavior in children: A test battery
approach. In Central auditory dysfunction, ed. R.W. Keith. New York:
Grune and Stratton.
.1978. Sentence tests of central auditory function. In Handbook of
clinical audiology, 2d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.
.1980. Central auditory behaviors in learning disabled children.
Seminars in Speech Language and Hearing 1:127-140.
.1985. Assessment of central auditory disorders in children. In
Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: Foundations and clinical
correlates, ed. M.L. Pinheiro and F.E. Musiek. Baltimore: Williams
and Wilkins.
Willeford, J.A., and J.M. Billger. 1985. Auditory perception in
children with learning disabilities. In Handbook of clinical audiology,
3d ed., ed. J. Katz. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Willeford, J.A., and J.M. Burleigh. 1985. Handbook of central
auditory processing disorders in children. Orlando: Grune and
Stratton.
Willott, J.F., R.M. Demuth, and S.M. Lu. 1984. Excitability of
auditory neurons in the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei of DBA/2
and C57BL/6 mice. Experimental Neurology 83:495-506.
Willows, D.M., J.R. Kershner, and E. Corcos. 1986. Visual processing
and visual memory in reading and writing disabilities: A rationale for
reopening a "closed case." Paper presented at symposium, The Role
of Visual Processing and Visual Memory in Reading and Writing.

Annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
April, San Francisco.
Wilson, B.S., C.C. Finley, D.T. Lawson, R.D. Wolford, D.K.
Eddington, and W.M. Rabinowitz. 1991. Better speech recognition
with cochlear implants. Nature 352:236-238.
Wilson, C.B., J.S. Remington, S. Stagno, and D.W. Reynolds. 1980.
Development of adverse sequelae in children born with subclinical
congenital toxoplasma infection. Pediatrics 66:767-774.
Wilson, R.H., J.E. Shanks, and D.J. Lilly. 1984. Acoustic-reflex
adaptation. In The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical
applications, ed. S. Silman. New York: Academic Press.
Wilson, W.R. 1978. Behavioral assessment of auditory function in
infants. In Communicative and cognitive abilities: Early behavioral
assessment, ed. F.D. Minifie and L.L. Lloyd. Baltimore: University
Park Press.
Wilson, W.R., and J.M. Moore. 1978. Pure-tone earphone thresholds
of infants utilizing visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA). Paper
presented at the American Speech and Hearing Association Annual
Convention, San Francisco.
Wilson, W.R., J.M. Moore, and G. Thompson. 1976. Sound-field
auditory thresholds of infants utilizing visual reinforcement
audiometry (VRA). Paper presented at American Speech and Hearing
Association Annual Convention, Houston.
Wilson, W.R., and G. Thompson. 1984. Behavioral audiometry. In
Pediatric audiology: Current trends, ed. J. Jerger. San Diego:
College-Hill Press.
Witkin, B.R. 1971. Auditory perception: Implications for language
development. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
4:31-52.

Wong, P., and R. Bickford. 1980. Brain stem auditory evoked
potentials: The use of noise estimate. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 50:25-34.
 

Page 417
World Health Organization. 1971. Mass health examinations. Public
Health Papers no. 45:81-82. Geneva: World Health Organization.
1985. WHA39-19.
1986. Prevention of deafness and hearing impairment. Report by the
Director General of the 79th Session, EB 79/10. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
1991. Report of the informal working group on prevention of deafness
and hearing impairment programme planning. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Worthington, D. 1981. ABR in special populations. Paper presented at
ABR workshop, Cleveland, Ohio.
Wright, F., R. Schain, W. Weinberg, and R. Ischelle. 1982. Learning
disabilities and associated conditions. In The practice of pediatric
neurology, ed. K. Swaiman and F. Wright. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby.
Yang, E.Y., A.L. Rupert, and G. Moushegian. 1987. A developmental
study of bone conduction auditory brain stem response in infants. Ear
and Hearing 8:244-251.
Yellin, M.W., J.F. Jerger, and R.C. Fifer. 1983. Norms for
disproportionate loss in speech intelligibility. Presented at American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association convention, Cincinnati.
Yune, H.Y., R.T. Miyamoto, and M.E. Yune. 1991. Medical imaging
in cochlear implant candidates. In Cochlear implants in children, ed.
R.T. Miyamoto and M.J. Osberger. American Journal of
Otolaryngology (Suppl.) 12:11 -17.
Zapala, D. 1993. Statistical quantification of auditory brain-stem
response waveshape quality and its relation to peak latency
measurement accuracy. Ph.D. diss., Memphis State University.

Zorowka, P.G. 1993 Otoacoustic emissions: A new method to
diagnose hearing impairment in children. European Journal of
Pediatrics 152:626-634.
 

Page 419
Author Index
A
Aboitiz, F., 209
Abraham, W., 78
Abramovich, S.J., 27
Abrams, S., 218, 227
Abramson, A., 163
Adams, J., 223
Adkinson, C., 155
Aikawa, J., 159
Alberti, P.W., 4, 19, 27, 73, 132
Albin, S., 72
Alencewicz, C.M., 85, 96, 294-295
Alexander, L., 184, 188, 223
Alford, B., 119, 135
Alford, C.A., 6
Allen, D., 27
Allen, P., 208-209
Allen, T., 314, 337
Almadori, G., 153

Ambramovich, S., 73
American Academy of Otolaryngology and American Council of
Otolaryngology (AAO-ACO), 314
American Psychiatric Assocation, 212
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), 92, 108,
110-111, 118, 126, 127-129, 135-137, 145-146, 149, 207, 208, 223,
226, 324, 354, 358, 360, 363-364, 365;
National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities, 324
Amlie, R., 162
Anand, N.K., 162
Anderson, C., 157
Anderson, H., 119, 134
Anderson, J., 161
Andoh, G., 152
Aniskiewicz, A.S., 214
Anthonisen, B., 187-188
Anthony, D.A., 330
Anthony, L., 126, 130, 223
Antonelli, A.R., 229
Aoki, C., 218, 220
Applebaum, M., 218
Arao, H., 161
Arehart, K.H., 185-186

Arick, D.S., 116-117, 118, 126, 127-129, 136-137
Armstrong, R., 160
Arndt, P.L., 307
Arnold, S., 150
Arnst, D.J., 233, 234
Arold, R., 187-188
Arpan, R., 270-271
Arslan, E., 163
Ashmeade, D.H., 65
Avan, P., 181, 187-188, 192
B
Bachman, R., 127
Bader, C.R., 173
Bader, G.G., 163
Bagi, P., 179, 184, 187
Balkany, T.J., 184, 284-285, 289
Baloh, R.W., 9
Bamford, J., 298
Baran, J.A., 208-209, 211, 217, 218, 228, 229, 231, 232, 235-236, 238
Baribeau-Braun, J., 223
Barley, M., 297
Barr, B., 119, 134

Barr, D.F., 215
Barry, J., 257-258
Bartell, R.H., 215
Basil, R.A., 231, 232
Battles, D.E., 353-354
Battmer, R.D., 306
Baum, C., 31
Bayley, N., 221-222
Bazell, C., 264
Beasley, D.S., 229
Beauchaine, K., 153, 155, 163-164
Beck, W.G., 229
Becker, P.T., 222
Becker, T.S., 284
Beckford, N., 163
Beedle, R.K., 132
 

Page 420
Behrens, T.R., 187-188, 192, 361, 362
Behrman, R.E., 355, 356
Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, 7
Beiter, A.L., 278-27, 281-282, 284, 285-286, 306, 307
Bell, D., 212
Bench, J., 220, 298, 328, 330-331, 335
Bendel, R.B., 207-208
Bender, T.R., 31
Bennett, M., 105-106, 112-113, 114, 140, 222-223
Bentler, R.A., 257, 259
Berg, A.O., 365
Berg, F., 325
Bergman, B., 163-164
Bergman, M., 218
Bergstrom, L., 56, 159
Berlin, C.I., 218, 223, 231, 232
Berlin, H.L., 231, 232
Berliner, K.I., 96, 277, 278
Berman, S., 365
Berman, S.A., 184
Bernstein, R.S., 78

Berrick, J., 2 11
Berry, M., 21
Berry, S.W., 298
Bertrand, D., 173
Bess, F.H., 23, 98, 257-258, 263, 325, 326
Bhatia, H.L.., 4
Bickford, R., 149-150
Billger, J.M., 210, 215, 229, 232, 235, 237
Black, F., 159, 289
Black, R.C., 281
Blackwell, P.M., 187-188
Blake, P.E., 220
Blamey, P.J., 278-279, 281, 306
Block, M.G., 106
Blood, I., 328
Bluestone, C., 17, 28, 118, 127
Bobo, L., 163
Bocca, E., 214, 229, 235
Boder, E., 212
Boller, F., 231, 232, 236
Bond, E.K., 67
Bonfils, P., 181 , 185, 187-188, 192

Boothrovd, A., 84, 87, 94, 95, 304, 333
Bordley, J.. 9
Born, 1)., 152
Bornstein, M.H., 222
Bornstein, S.P., 216, 217, 228
Borst, J., 213
Brackett, D., 323, 326, 332
Brackmann, D.E., 163, 164, 277
Bradford, L.J., 56
Brauer, B., 306
Braverman-Callahan, J., 328
Bray, P., 179, 181, 184, 188, 223
Brazelton, T.B., 24, 221
Briassoulis, G., 155
Bricker, D., 316
Brimacombe, J.A., 278-279, 281-282, 284, 285-286, 289, 306, 307
Brivio, L., 158
Brocaar, M.P., 186, 187-188, 189, 200
Brooks, D.N., 108, 110, 116, 118, 127
Brooks-Gunn, J., 222
Brown, A.M., 184, 188, 223, 278-279
Brown, D., 162

Brown, F., 223, 228
Brown, K., 84
Brownell, W.E., 173
Brunette, G.W., 132
Brunt, M.A., 226, 238
Buchanan, L., 158
Buchanan, L.H., 29
Budden, S.S., 163
Buffin, J.T., 179, 187-188
Bull, D., 161
Burchfiel, J., 222
Burchinal, M.R., 218
Burd, L., 213, 220, 237
Burger, J., 325
Burgoyne, K., 77
Burleigh, J.M., 207, 210, 212, 237
Burney, P., 222, 223
Burns, E.M., 185-186
Burns, W.J., 220
Bushy, P.A., 281, 285
Butinar, D., 149
C

Cagini,L., 153
Caldarelli, D., 159
Calearo, C., 214, 229, 235
Campanella, G., 160, 161
Campbell, J.C., 218
Campbell, S.L., 185-186
Campbell, T.F., 207
Carey, W.B., 18, 31
Carhart, R., 230, 234, 298, 326
Carney, C.J., 365
Caron, A.J., 68
Caron, R.F., 68
Carr, R., 153, 155
Carrell, T., 148
Cartee, C., 157
Cassandro, E., 160, 161
Cassinari, V., 214, 229
Catlin, F.I., 6
Cavaliere, R., 127
Cecola, R.P., 223
Cerney, B., 323
Cevette, M., 155

 

Page 421
Chan-Lui, W., 161
Charrow, V.R., 327
Chermak, G.D., 207-208, 210, 212, 216, 217, 219, 223, 224, 225, 226,
228, 229, 236, 238
Cherry, R.S., 209, 224-225, 226, 230, 238
Christensen, G., 336-337
Chuang, K.W., 187, 189
Chuang, S.W., 185, 189
Chun, T.H., 134
Churchland, P.S., 208
Chute, P.M., 288
Ciric, I.S., 214
Clark, G.M., 278, 279, 281, 282, 285, 286, 306
Clark, J.G., 229, 235
Clark, N., 163-164
Clark, P.S., 31
Clark, S., 56, 320
Clemis, J., 119
Clontz, K.B., 148, 211, 222, 223, 228, 237
Coates, J.F., 353
Coats, A., 135, 181
Cochlear Corporation, 297, 298

Coen, R., 153, 155
Cohen, M., 149-150, 223
Cohen, M.J., 212, 213
Cohen, N.L., 278-279, 285, 286, 289, 306
Cohen, O.P., 334, 337-338
Cohen, S.E., 222
Coker, N., 207
Colburn, H.S., 234
Cole, R., 208
Collet, L., 178, 223
Collier, A., 218
Collyer, Y., 220
Cone-Wesson, B., 161
Connell, J., 187-188
Conrad, R., 334
Conti, G., 84, 163
Cook, R.A., 31
Cooke, P.A., 214
Cooley, J.R., 365
Cooper, F.S., 213
Cope, Y., 179, 188
Coplan, J., 44

Corcos, E., 212
Corgin, H., 73
Cornett, O., 328
Costeff, H., 218
Council for Exceptional Children, 324
Coupland, S.G., 152
Courchesne, E., 223
Coursin, D.B., 76
Courtney, B., 286
Cox, L., 153
Craig, W.N., 297
Cramer, K.D., 92
Crandell, C., 325, 326
Crawford, M., 152, 158, 163
Creten,W.L., 108, 109-110, 116, 123, 125
Crocker, A.C., 31
Crowell, D.H., 223
Crump, B., 222, 223
Cullen, J.K., Jr., 207, 219, 234
Culpepper, L.., 365
Curati, W.L., 214
Cutler, A., 208

D
Dalebout, S., 225
Dankowski, K., 278
Darling, R., 165
Davidson, J., 4, 19, 27
Davidson, S., 163-164, 165
Davis, B.P., 218
Davis, H., 55, 149, 298
Dayal, V.S., 230
Dees, D.C., 187-188
De-Falco, F., 160, 161
DeFilippo, C.L., 95
DeHirsch, K., 77
Deitch, J., 152
Delattre, P.C., 213
Delgado, G., 336-337
Delk, M.T., 4
Demorest, M.E., 278
Dempsey, C., 215
Demuth, R.M., 217
Denckla, M.B., 215
Dennehy, S.E., 285

Dennison, N.J., 27
Department of Education, U.S., 318, 321, 330, 359
Department of Health and Human Services, U.S., 201;
Public Health Service, 362-363
Derbyshire, A., 56, 149-150
Dermody, P., 232
Desjardins, M., 162
Dethlefs, R., 56
Dettman, S.J., 285
D'Eugenio, D.B., 27
deVries, L., 155
deVries, L.S., 8
Diefendorf, A.O., 221
DiFranco, D., 78
Dobkin, M.S., 74-75
Dodson, S., 152
Dodwell, P., 78
Dolan, T., 208-209
Dolnick, E., 336
Domico, W., 158
Don, M., 150, 164, 285-286
Donahue, P.A., 225-226

Donnelly, W., 159
Dorman, M.F., 278
 

Page 422
Dowell, R.C., 281-282, 284, 285, 306
Downs, M.P., 27, 28, 55, 56, 76, 221, 238, 257, 259, 360-361
Drage, J.F., 24
Drake, A., 136
Drillien, C.M., 77
D'Souza, S.W., 220
Dubno, J., 153
Dubowitz, L., 8, 24, 155
Dubowitz, V., 24
Duclaux, R., 178, 223
Duffy, F.H., 215, 222, 237
Dumont, A., 187-188
Dunn, L., 288
Durham, D., 152
Durieux-Smith, A., 73, 162
Durlach, N.I., 234
Durrant, J., 160
Dussault, J., 162
Dyal, D., 4
E
Eagney, P., 331

Eavey, R.D., 365
Eddington, D.K., 277, 306, 307
Edwards, C., 73, 162
Eggermont,J.J., 152, 155, 164
Eilers, R.E., 65, 69, 70-71, 97, 221
Eimas, P.D., 97
Eisenberg, L.S., 96, 278, 284 , 286, 289, 295-296
Eisenberg, R.B., 56, 76
Elberling, C., 150, 179, 184, 187
Elbrond, O., 127
Eldridge, L., 161
Eliopulos, D., 222
Elliott, L.L., 93, 208-209, 226, 295
Ellwood, D., 355
Elman, J.L., 208
Elmasian, R., 223
Elssman, S., 361
Elwood, J., 334
Enfield, M., 233, 234
Engen, E., 287-288
Engen, T., 287-288
Engineer, P., 225-226

Erber, N.P., 85, 92, 93, 95, 96, 294-296
Esbjorner, E., 162
Escalona, S.K., 72, 77, 78
Evans, L., 327, 328
Evans, P.I.P., 187-188
Everberg, G., 9
F
Faires, W.L., 257
Farber, R., 160
Farrell, G., 163-164, 165
Farrer, S., 229
Fawer, C., 155
Feagans, L.V., 218, 365
Feinmesser, M., 4
Felix, J., 153, 155
Ferre, J.M., 210, 229-230, 235
Ferry, P.C., 223
Field, J., 78
Fiellau-Nikolajsen, M., 118
Fifer, R.C., 218, 227, 281
Finitzo, T., 214, 218, 237, 365
Finitzo-Hieber, T., 84, 325-326

Finley, C.C., 306, 307
Fisher, L., 226, 238
Fisher, W., 213, 237
Fishgrund, J.E., 334, 337-338
Fleischer, L, 306
Fleshman, J.K., 31
Flexer, C., 73, 74-75
Folsom, R.C., 65
Foltz, E., 162
Forbes, B., 78
Forman-Franco, B., 163
Forster, I.C., 281
Fournier, S., 211
Francois, M., 181, 187-188, 192
Frank, Y., 158
Franz, B.K.-H., 278-279, 281-282, 285
Fraser, G.R., 10, 11, 19
Freed, H., 211
Freeman, B.A., 229
Frentheway, B., 225
Friedman, E., 163
Friedman, E.M., 365

Friedman, S.B., 6
Friel-Patti, S., 84
Frumkin, N.L., 214
Fueki, N., 159
Fujisaki, H., 216
Furth, H.G., 334, 335
G
Gabbard, S.A., 257
Galaburda, A., 209
Galambos, R., 56, 149
Gans, D.P., 73, 74-75, 76, 77
Gantz, B.J., 284-285, 289
Garcia, M., 323
Gardi, J.N., 285-286
Garstecki, D., 226
Gascon, G.G., 213, 220
Geers, A., 96, 287-288, 291-292, 304, 333
Geier, L., 286
Gelfand, S.A., 106, 118, 132-134, 135, 137, 138-140
Gerber, S.E., 8, 10, 19, 26, 42, 74-75, 78, 79, 185, 189, 220, 329
 


Page 423
Gerling, I., 163-164
Gersdorff, M.C.H., 126
Gerstman, L., 213
Geschwind, N., 209, 231
Geurkink, N.A., 207, 211, 216, 229, 231, 232, 233, 235-236
Gibbs, E.D., 238
Gibson, W.S., Jr., 26, 163
Gilden, J., 286
Gillberg, C., 223
Gilroy, J., 229, 231, 232, 234, 235
Giolas, T.G., 84, 326
Gleason, J., 44
Glorieux, J., 162
Goin, D.W., 285-286
Goldberg, C., 24
Goldberg, S., 68
Goldstein, P., 153, 155
Goldstein, R., 140, 155, 157, 158, 222
Gollegly, K.M., 208-209, 209, 211, 214, 217, 218, 228, 231, 232, 235-
236, 237
Goller, M., 42
Gonzales, L., 65, 69, 70-71

Gonzalez, J.J., 212, 213
Goodell, E.W., 334
Goodglass, H., 218
Goodman, C., 163-164, 165
Goodman, J.T., 73
Gorga, M., 153, 155, 163-164
Gormley, K., 335
Gottlieb, M.I., 31
Gould, H., 152, 153, 159, 160, 163
Graif, M., 214
Grandori, F., 215
Grass, E., 154
Gravel, J.S., 49, 63, 78, 84, 218
Gray, L., 207
Gray, T., 231
Green, J., 134-135
Green, M., 17
Greenberg, D.B., 66
Greene, J.C., 271
Gregory, S., 27
Greisen, D., 222
Grellong, B., 72, 77

Griffen, E.J., 76
Groode, J., 306
Grose, J.H., 208-209, 218-219, 234
Groth, J., 187-188
Grundfast, K.M., 10, 11
Guenchur-Lukas, J., 233
Gunnarson, A.D., 218
Gupta, A.K., 162
Gussen, R.A., 9
Gustason, G., 330-331
H
Hachikawa, K., 175
Hack, M., 21, 153
Hagberg, B., 163
Haginoya, K., 159
Hahn, J., 223
Hall, J.W., III, 23, 115, 145-146, 152-153, 162, 163-164, 208-209,
211, 218-219, 220, 234
Hamabe, J., 159
Hamai, N.T., 220
Hamel, G., 150, 164
Hammer, L.C., 230
Hammer, M., 208-209

Handa, I., 159
Hannley, M.T., 278
Hanson, P., 160
Hanson, V.L., 334, 335
Harding, K.M., 29
Hardy, J.B., 24
Harford, E.R., 119, 132, 257-258
Harker, L., 155
Harris, F.P., 175, 181, 185-186
Harris, L., 78
Harris, R., 235
Harris, V., 232
Hart, C.W., 230
Hasenstab, M.S., 287, 289
Haskins, H., 95
Haskins, J., 297-298
Haspiel, G., 92, 94
Hassid, S., 152
Hassmannova, J., 220
Hatanaka, T., 153
Hatazawa, J., 159
Hawkins, D., 254, 257, 263, 264

Hawkins, D.R., 263
Hawkins, M.D., 185-186
Hayashi, R., 235
Hayes, D., 227, 234
Healey, T.L., 223
Hebert, R., 162
Hecox, K., 56, 163-164, 181, 211
Hedrick, D., 222
Heffernan, H.P., 263
Heilman, K.M., 230
Heller, J.W., 108
Hellman, S.A., 288
Hemenway, W., 9, 159
Henderson, F., 218
Henderson, R.H., 9
Hennebert, D., 152
Herr, G., 163
Heward, W., 323, 324
Hier, D., 214
Hill, I.T., 356
Hillyard, S.A., 149
 


Page 424
Himmelfarb, M.Z., 114
Hinojosa, R., 285
Hirsch, J.E., 114, 200
Hirsh, I., 216, 217, 236
Hirshorn, M.S., 289
Hirsh-Pasek, K., 334
Hletko, P., 225
Hochberg, I., 208-209
Hodgson, W.R., 254, 257-258
Hoekelman, R., 6
Hoffman, R.A., 285, 286
Holborow, C.A., 4, 8
Holden, L.K., 281-282, 306
Holden, T.A., 281-282, 306
Holman, M.C., 181, 185, 189, 192
Holmes, D.E., 132
Holmquist, J., 108
Holt, J.A., 337
Honzik, M.P., 222
Hood, L.J., 223
Hook, P.E., 219

Horbar, J.D., 21
Hori, A., 153
Horner, J.S., 289
Hosford-Dunn, H., 6
House, J.L., 289
House, W.F., 277, 278, 284 , 285, 286
Howard, J.C., 106, 132
Hubatch, L.M., 220
Hudgins, R., 333
Hudner, C.M., 29
Hudson, T.M., 65, 69, 70-71
Hughes, J., 211
Hughes, L.F., 231, 232
Humes, L.E., 98
Hung, K., 162
Hunter, M., 76, 187-188
Hutchinson, J., 187-188
Hutton, C.L., 226
Hyde, M.L., 4, 19, 27, 73
Hyde, R., 160
Hynd, C., 231
Hynd, G.W., 212, 213, 214, 222, 231, 237

I
Ido, T., 159
linuma, K., 159
Illmer, R., 230, 233
Imoto, T., 216
Inagaki, M., 152, 160
Indian Council of Medical Research, 10
Irvine, D.R.F., 217
Ischelle, R., 237
Ito, M., 159
J
Jabaley, T., 56
Jackler, R.K., 285, 289
Jackson, D., 329, 334, 335, 336, 337
Jackson, D.F., 223
Jackson, E.C., 24
Jacobson, G.B., 231
Jacobson, G.P., 232, 236
Jacobson, J.T., 73, 153, 155
Jafek, B.W., 184
Jain, P.C., 4
Jakimik, J., 208

Jannetta, P.J., 231
Jansky, J., 77
Jaroff, L., 19
Jarrett, J., 353
Jeffers, J., 297
Jenkins, W.M., 289
Jensen, H., 333
Jepsen, O., 132
Jerger,J., 94, 108, 113, 114-115, 116, 119, 126, 130, 132, 133, 140,
163, 207, 209, 216, 217, 218, 222, 224, 226, 227, 229, 230, 231, 234,
238
Jerger,J.F., 135, 218, 222, 227, 228, 237, 281
Jerger, S., 94, 108, 113, 114, 116, 126, 130, 132, 133, 140, 207, 209,
211, 216, 217, 218, 222, 223, 224, 226, 227-228, 230, 231, 237, 238
Jesteadt, W., 153, 155
Jirsa, R.E., 148, 211, 222, 223, 228, 237
Johansson, E., 223
Johnsen, N.J., 179, 184, 187
Johnson, C.J., 220
Johnson, D., 233, 234
Johnson, J.L., 188
Johnson, K., 207, 209, 218, 227-228, 229, 237
Johnson, M., 153, 155

Johnson, R., 213, 220
Johnson, S.J., 6
Joint Committee of the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association and the Council on Education of the Deaf
(JCASHA/CED), 364-365
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing, 7, 20, 55-56, 162, 187, 361
Josey, A.F., 98
Jung, M.D., 181, 185, 186-188, 189, 192, 195
K
Kaga, K., 161
Kalil, R.E., 220
Kamath, M.V., 181, 185, 189, 192
Kaminski,J., 153, 155
Kampfe, C.M., 334-335
Kamuro, K., 160
Kankkunen, A., 4, 58
 

Page 425
Kaplan, G.J., 31
Kapur, Y.P., 9, 10
Karayalin, G., 163
Kardatzke, D., 127
Katbamna, B., 225-226
Katsch, R., 232
Katz, D., 93, 226, 295
Katz, J., 207, 210, 212, 219, 224, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234
Kaufman, N.L., 212
Kavanagh, K., 158
Keitel, S., 211, 229, 232, 233, 235-236
Keith, R., 132, 207, 209, 210, 211, 212, 215, 218, 223, 224, 225-226,
229, 230, 232, 233, 237, 238
Keller, W.D., 212
Kelly, J.F., 335
Kemp, D.T., 173, 174, 178, 179, 180, 181, 184, 188, 192, 202, 223
Kennedy, C.R., 187-188
Kennedy, N., 270-271
Kerr, A.G., 285
Kershner, J.R., 212
Kessler, D.K., 95, 97, 278, 298
Kessler, K.S., 298

Ketten, D.R., 284
Kibbe, K., 209, 236
Kiessling, J., 163-165
Kileny, P., 145-146, 158, 163-164, 285-286
Kim, D.O., 181, 185, 186-188, 189, 192, 195
Kimm, L., 187-188
Kimura, D., 214, 231
Kinder, D.L., 257
King, C., 328-329
King, T., 214
Kingsley, D.P.E., 214
Kinsbourne, M., 220-221
Kistler, D., 208-209, 220
Klein, J.O., 27, 28
Kline, D.G., 231
Kobayashi, Y., 153
Koch, H., 27
Kodama, S., 162
Koderasawa, K., 162
Koifman, N., 218
Kojima, A., 159
Kok, M.R., 186, 187-188, 189, 200

Konigsmark, B.W., 10
Konishi, H., 162
Koren, V., 218
Kozma-Spytek, L., 289
Kraus, H.J., 149
Kraus, N., 56, 145-146, 148, 157, 158, 215, 228, 237, 320
Kretschmer, L., 333
Kretschmer, R., 288, 333, 334
Kreul, E., 212
Kriegsfeld, B., 134-135
Kristensen, R., 132
Krumholz, A., 153, 155
Kryter, K., 212
Kubler-Ross, E., 269, 345
Kubo, T., 175
Kuhl, P.K., 97
Kupperman, G., 158
Kuprenas, S.V., 289
Kurdziel, S., 119, 229, 230
Kurtzberg, D., 72
Kushner, D., 234
Kutnik, L., 15

Kyle, J., 329
L
Lafayette, R., 333
Lafrenière, D., 181, 185, 187-188, 189, 192
Lalwani, A.K., 10, 11
Lamb, L.E., 114
Lane, H., 306, 315, 335-336
Lane, H.S., 288
Lane, R., 158
Lanford, S.E., 257
Lang, S., 212
Langford, W.S., 77
Larson, L., 163-164
Larsson, P., 162
Lary, S., 8, 155
Lashley, K.S., 236
Lasky, E.Z., 207, 230
Lasky, R., 181
Laureau, E., 162
Lawson, D.T., 306, 307
Lazzaroni, A., 229
Lee, A., 149-150

Lehnhardt, E., 277, 278
Leiser, R.P., 234
Leissner, P., 162
Lekas, M.D., 187, 189
LeMay, M., 214
Lemieux, G., 160
Lenton, S., 187-188
Lenz, S., 218
Leonard, G., 181, 185, 186-188, 189, 192, 195
Leppler, J.G., 72
Lerman, J., 93-94, 224, 226, 297
Letarte, J., 162
Levi, H., 4
Levine, E., 335-336
Levine, H.L., 223
 

Page 426
Levine, M.D., 31
Levitt, H., 332
Lewis, M., 68, 222
Liberini, L., 127
Liberman, A.M., 213
Lidén, G., 4, 58, 108, 132, 257
Lilly, D.J., 135
Lincoln, A., 223
Linden, A., 235
Linden, R., 150
Lindsay, J., 159
Lindsay, J.R., 9
Ling, D., 91, 287, 331
Lipsitt, L.P., 67, 68
Liston, S.L., 7
Lochner, J., 325
Locke, J.L., 334
Logan, W., 161
Loiselle, L., 207, 209, 218, 222, 227-228, 237
Lombroso, C., 222
Long, S.H., 355-356

Lonsbury-Martin, B.L., 176, 181, 185-186, 187, 188, 192, 195
Loovis, C., 232
Lopes da Silva, F., 159, 162-163
Lorys, A.R., 222
Los Angeles County, Office of the Los Angeles County
Superintendent of Schools, Audiology Services, and Southwest
School for the Hearing Impaired, 97
Lowder, M., 298, 306
Lowe-Bell, S.S., 231, 232
Lu, S.M., 217
Luban, N., 163
Luce, P., 208
Luetje, C., 286
Lukas, R.A., 233
Lungarotti, S., 161
Lurquin, P., 152
Luterman, D., 269
Lutman, M.E., 179, 188
Lutolf, J., 135
Luxford, W.M., 277, 284 , 285, 286, 289
Lynch, C.J., 26
Lynn, G.E., 229, 231, 232, 234, 235
Lynne, D.J., 135

Lyytinen, H., 214, 237
M
Mackey, K., 232
Mackey-Hargadine, J., 162
MacMurray, B., 73
Maddox, H., 286
Madell, J.R., 91, 258, 324, 326
Magalini, S.I., 127
Magera, P., 152
Maki, J.E., 229
Malachowski, N., 6
Malloy, M.H., 21
Mandel, D., 163
Mangham, C.A., 289
Manning, W., 229
Marbury, N., 306
Marchant, C.D., 113, 140, 222-223
Marchisio, P., 158
Margolis, R.H., 108, 114, 116, 117, 137-138, 200
Marie, P., 187-188
Marion, M., 285
Marler, P., 220

Marquis, S.M., 355-356
Marsh, R., 161
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., 208
Martin, F.N., 132, 229, 235
Martin, G.K., 176, 181, 185-186, 187, 188, 192, 195
Martin, J.A.M., 4
Martin, R., 207, 209, 218
Martinez, C.D., 216, 234
Martinez, L., 160
Martinez, S.A., 289
Maru,J., 150
Masieri, S., 237
Massaro, D.W., 208
Matkin, N.D., 16, 219, 257-258, 361
Matz, G.J., 7
Matzker, J., 214, 235
Mauk, G.W., 188, 361
Mauldin, L., 108, 113, 114, 116, 126, 130, 132, 133, 140, 222, 223
Maurizi, M., 153, 161
Maxon, A., 187-188, 208-209, 257, 323, 326, 332
McAfee, M.C., 335
McAnulty, G.B., 237

McCall, R.B., 222
McCandless, G., 149-150, 278
McCartney, E., 220
McCarton, C.M., 84
McCarton-Daum, C.M., 72, 77, 78
McClelland, J.L., 208
McClellend, R., 150
McConnell, F., 325, 326
McConnell, P., 21
McCormick, B., 98
McCoy, M.J., 181, 187, 192, 195
McCullouch, B., 56
McDermott, H.J., 282, 306
McFarland, W., 157
McGee, T., 56, 145-146, 148, 158, 215, 237
McKay, C.M., 282, 306
 

Page 427
McMillan, P.M., 113, 140, 222-223
McNeil, M.R., 207
McPherson, B., 4, 8
McPherson, D., 162, 163-164
McRandle, C., 155
McSporran, E., 163-164, 165
Meadow-Orlans, K., 315-316
Mecklenburg, D.J., 277, 278
Melum, A., 270-271
Mencher, G.T., 56, 75, 221
Mendel, M., 42, 152, 155, 157, 158
Mendelson, T., 155
Mentz, L, 220
Metz, D., 153
Metz, O., 132
Meyerhoff, W.L., 7
Micco, A., 148
Michelini, S., 163
Migliavacca, F., 214
Mikhael, M.A., 214
Millar, J.B., 281

Millay, K., 232
Miller, J., 108, 231
Miller, J.D., 97
Miller, M.H., 106
Milner, B., 231
Minowa, Y., 175
Mischke, R.E., 285-286, 289
Miskiel, E., 65, 69, 70-71
Miyamoto, R.T., 284, 289, 298, 307
Molini, E., 153
Momota, K., 162
Moneka, W., 220
Montgomery, M.J., 224
Moog, J., 96, 287-288, 291-292, 304, 333
Moore, E., 145-146
Moore, J.B., 214
Moore, J.M., 58, 66, 97, 221
Moores, D.F., 323, 328, 331
Morales-García, C., 230
Morehouse, C.R., 73, 153, 155
Morest, D.K., 218
Morgan, D., 153

Morgon, A., 178, 223
Morimoto, M., 235
Morrissette, J., 162
Morrow, J., 232
Morse, P.A., 97
Mortenson, L.B., 361
Mosca, F., 160, 161
Moser, H., 159
Moses, K.L., 269, 345
Mott, J.B., 223
Moulin, A., 178, 223
Moushegian, G., 160
Mueller, H.G., 229, 254, 257, 263, 264
Mueller, R.J., 236
Muir, D., 78
Musetti, L., 158
Musiek, F.E., 163-164, 207, 208-209, 210, 211, 212, 214, 216, 217,
218, 219, 223, 228, 229, 231, 232, 233, 235-236, 237, 238
Musket, C.H., 269
Myklebust, H., 315, 335, 336
Myres, S.W., 298
Myslivecek, J., 220
N

Näätänen, R., 148
Nabalek, A., 325
Nadol, J.B., 8, 284-285
Naidu, S., 159
Nakai, Y., 175
Nakamura, K., 216
Nakasako, H., 162
Nakayama, S., 162
Narcy, P., 181, 187-188, 192
Nass, R., 218
National Fund for Medical Education (NFME), 357
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 98, 155, 187, 361-362
Neblett, M., 159
Neely, S., 153, 155, 223
Neemeh, J., 160
Neff, W.D., 236
Nelson, N., 225
Nelson, N.M., 6
Nerbonne, M.A., 226
Nevins, M.E., 288
Newhoff, M., 212, 213
Newman, C.W., 226

Newton, V.E., 4, 8
Niccum, N., 218, 231
Nicol, T., 148
Niedermeyer, E., 159, 162-163
Nielsen, D.W., 216
Niemoeller, A., 327
Nienhuys, T.G., 285
Niikawa, N., 159
Niklasson, A., 4
Nishida, N., 159
Niwa, H., 161
Nix, G.W., 331
Nixon, J., 212
Nober, E.H., 325-326, 333-334, 337
Nober, L.W., 325-326
Nodar, R.H., 223
Noffsinger, D., 119, 216, 229, 230, 234
Nolan, M., 220
Norris, D., 208
 

Page 428
Norris, T.W., 132
Northern, J., 27, 28, 221, 222, 223, 238, 254, 257, 259, 263, 264, 289,
360-361
Norton, S.J., 184, 187, 189, 223
Norton, S.T., 223
Novak, K., 232
Novak, M., 289
Novakova, V., 220
Novey, E.S., 222
Nozza, R.J., 127
Numbers, F., 333
O
Obrzut, A., 231
Obrzut, J., 231
O'Donoghue, G.M., 289
Ogiba, Y., 58
Ohta, F., 235
Ohta, T., 159
Ohtani, K., 152
O'Leary, D.D.M., 220
Oiler, D.K., 333
O'Loughlin, B.J., 281

Olsen, W., 119, 229, 230, 234, 325, 326
O'Neill, S.A., 224, 225, 226, 229, 238
Onishi, S., 55
Orchick, D., 163, 229
Orlansky, M., 323, 324
Osberger, M.J., 298, 307
Osborn, T., 314
Osterhammel, D., 114
Osterhammel, P., 114
Ottaviani, F., 153, 161
Otte, J., 285
Oulette, K., 164
Ovesen, T., 127
Oviatt, D.L., 106
Owens, E., 95, 97, 298
Owens, J.J., 181, 187, 195
Ozdamar, O., 65, 69, 70-71, 158, 228
P
Paaske, P.B., 127
Pack, G., 234
Pahwa, S., 158
Pal, J., 4

Palmer, C., 149-150
Paludetti, G., 153, 161
Pappas, D.G., 361
Paradise, J.L., 118, 127
Parbo, J., 184, 187
Parisier, S.C., 288
Parke, R., 25
Parmelee, A.H., 222
Parving, A., 4, 8
Paryani, S., 6
Pass, R.F., 6
Patrick, J.F., 278-279, 281
Patterson, D., 335-336
Paul, P., 314, 329, 334, 335, 336, 337
Pelson, R.O., 163
Perez, H., 160
Perfetti, C.A., 334
Perlman, J., 181
Perlo, V.P., 214
Petersen, B., 286, 295-296
Peterson, C., 135
Peterson, J.L., 108, 114, 132

Pettit, L., 163
Pew Health Professions Commission, 357
Picton, T., 73, 149, 150, 162, 164, 223
Pierce, J.W., 223
Piercy, M., 228, 235-236
Pierri, F., 153
Pilon, R., 78
Pinheiro, M.L., 207, 208-209, 211, 217, 229, 231, 232, 235-236, 238
Pintner, R., 335-336
Piper, N., 132
Piron, J-P., 187-188
Pirozzolo, F., 207, 231
Plinkert, P.K., 187-188
Plotnick, C.H., 72
Pohl, P., 218
Pollack, D., 289
Pollack, M.C., 254
Pollatsek, A., 334
Ponton, C.W., 152
Pool, K.D., 214, 237
Poole, J.O., 230
Pope, M.L., 298

Popelka, G.R., 114, 132, 137-138
Porter, T.A., 108
Potchen, E.J., 214
Prasad, B.G., 4
Prasher, D., 223
Prather, E., 222
Preece, J., 298
Preus, M., 11
Prevec, T., 149
Price, L., 165
Prieve, B.A., 195
Primus, M.A., 64, 65, 67, 68
Principi, N., 158
Probst, R., 175, 176, 188
Proietti, R., 127
Prosser, S., 163
Protti, E., 223
Prutting, C.A., 19, 329
Pujol, R., 185, 187-188
Pyle, G.M., 127, 128-129, 136, 137
Pyman, B.C., 278-279, 285
 


Page 429
Q
Quenin, C.S., 328
Quigley, S., 314, 328-329, 334, 335
R
Rabaupierre, Y., 173
Rabinowitz, W.M., 306, 307
Rackliffe, L., 163-164
Radzirwicz, C.K., 328
Raggio, M.W., 95, 97, 298
Raj, H., 162
Randolph, K., 93
Rapin, I., 5, 27, 149-150
Rasmussen, P., 222
Rauschecker, J.P., 220
Rayner, K., 334
Reagan, T., 323
Reddell, R., 234-235
Redding, R., 334, 337-338
Reddix, B., 161
Reed, N., 157, 228
Reeves, A.G., 231

Regional Resource and Federal Centers Program, 359
Reiland, J., 163-164
Remington, J.S., 6
Reshef, A., 218
Reynolds, D.W., 6
Ribaric, K., 149
Riccio, C.A., 212, 213
Rich, J.A., 264
Richard, J.E., 162
Richmond, J.B., 17
Rickards, F.W., 285
Riko, K., 73
Rintelmann, W.F., 95, 224, 231, 263
Robb, M., 333
Robbins, A.M., 298, 307
Roberts, J.E., 218
Robertson, D., 217
Robertson, P.O., 114
Robinette, L., 325
Rodier, P.M., 21
Roeser, R., 232
Rosen, G., 209

Rosenberger, P., 214
Rosenhall, U., 223
Rosner, B.A., 27, 28
Ross, M., 84, 93-94, 207, 224, 226, 323, 326, 332
Ross, M.A., 268
Ross, M.K., 214, 218, 228, 237
Rotkin, L., 72, 77
Roush, J., 136, 218-219, 223, 228, 234-235
Rowe, J.C., 181, 185, 189, 192
Rozycki, D.L., 8
Rubel, E., 152
Ruben, R.J., 5, 8, 11, 42, 84
Rubens, A., 231
Ruddy, H., 179, 187-188
Rudy, J., 225-226
Rupert, A.L., 160
Rushmer, N., 270-271, 289
Ruth, R., 163-164
Ryan, S., 180, 184, 192
Rybak, L.P., 7
Rykken, J.R., 114
S

Sabo, M., 361
Sahgal, V., 230
Saitoh, S., 159
Sakashita, T., 175
Salamy, A., 155, 161
Salomon, G., 187-188
Salvia, J., 212
Samar, V.J., 335
Sanders, D., 326
Sanderson-Leepa, M.E., 95, 224
Sandini, G., 215
Sando, I., 7
Sanyal, M., 218
Sarachan-Deily, A.B., 335
Sasek, J., 185, 187-188, 192
Saxman, J., 333
Sayers, B., 150
Scarr, S., 77
Schaefer, A.B., 234
Schain, R., 237
Schein, J.D., 4
Schimmel, H., 149-150

Schindler, R.A., 278, 289
Schlaggar, B.L., 220
Schlesinger, H., 331
Schmitt, B.D., 220-221
Schneider, P.K., 264
Scholtz, C.L., 214
Schubert, E., 95, 97, 212, 298
Schuknecht, H.F., 285
Schulman, C.A., 56
Schultz, M., 211
Schuyler, V., 270-271, 289
Schwartz, M., 306
Schwartz, S., 271
Scott, B.L., 95
Sedge, R.K., 229
Segal, P., 113, 114, 133, 140
Seidel, H.M., 6
Seikel, J.A., 224, 225, 226, 229, 238
Seiler, P.J., 359
Sejnowski, T.J., 208
Seligman, P.M., 281-282, 306
Selters, W., 163

 

Page 430
Semrud-Clikeman, M., 214, 222, 237
Sequino, L., 160, 161
Sesterhenn, G., 187-188
Sevilla, T., 160
Sexton, J.E., 136
Shallop, J.K., 277, 285-286
Shanks, J.E., 108, 109-110, 116, 117, 123, 135
Shannon, D., 153, 155
Shanon, E., 114
Sharbrough, F., 217
Sharma, A., 148
Sharp, M., 163
Shea, J.J., 289
Shepherd, R.K., 278-279, 285, 286
Sherman, G., 209
Sherman, R., 233, 234
Shih, L., 161
Shimizu, H., 7, 10, 159, 223, 228
Showers, T.J., 106, 132, 138-140
Shubow, G., 211
Shurin, P., 113, 140, 222-223

Shuto, H., 153
Sia, C.C.J., 188
Siegenthaler, B., 92, 94
Siekevitz, P., 218, 220
Sigman, M.D., 222
Silman, S., 106, 116-117, 118, 126, 127-129, 132-134, 135, 136-137,
138-140, 141, 230-231
Silverman, C.A., 106, 116-117, 118, 126, 127-129, 135, 136-137, 138-
140, 230-231
Silverman, S.R., 298
Simmons, F.B., 277
Simmons, M.A., 184
Simon, P.R., 188
Simons, M.R., 263
Sinclair, M., 78
Sininger, Y., 150
Skinner, M.W., 254, 281-282, 286, 306
Slater, S., 363
Slemick, M., 27
Sloan, C., 210
Smith, A., 164
Smith, C.G., 118, 127
Smith, D.W., 26

Smith, G.A., 9
Smith, L., 157
Smith, J.M., 231, 232
Smith, L., 278
Smith, M., 155
Smith, M.F., 179, 187-188
Smith, P.S.U., 127, 128-129, 136, 137
Smith, S., 163
Smith, W., 163
Smoski, W.J., 226, 238
Smurzynski, J., 181, 185, 186-188, 189, 192, 195
Sobhy, O., 153, 157, 164
Sohmer, H., 223
Solnit, S., 25
Sommers, R.K., 231-232
Sowers, J., 270-271
Sparks, R., 231
Speaks, C., 218, 231, 234
Spektor, Z., 185, 186-187, 195
Sperry, R., 231
Spitz, R., 56
Sprague, B.H., 140, 222

Squires, K., 211
Stach, B., 163, 219-220, 222, 224, 226, 228, 237, 238
Stagner, B.B., 181, 185-186
Stagno, S., 6
Staller, S.J., 277, 278, 284, 307
Steele, M.W., 10
Steffens, M.L., 65, 70-71
Stein, L., 56, 157, 228, 320
Steiner, R.E., 214
Stelmachowicz, P.G., 132
Stephens, S., 232
Sterritt, G.M., 55, 76
Stevens, J.C., 179, 187-188
Stewart, A., 27
Stoakley, D., 56
Stockard,J.E., 153, 155
Stockard, J.J., 153, 155
Stokoe, W., 328-329, 337
Stoner, W., 163
Stool, S.E., 365
Strickland, E.A., 185-186
Stubblefield,J., 231, 233

Student, M., 223
Suehiro, S., 7
Sugimoto, T., 159
Sussman, J.E., 208-209
Suzuki, T., 58
Sweetow, R., 234-235
Swisher, L., 217, 230
Szabo, P., 223
T
Tait, C.A., 218-219, 223, 228, 234-235
Takashima, S., 152
Takekawa, K.M., 188
Takeshita, K., 152
Tallal, P., 228, 235-236
Tanaka, K., 162
Tannahill, C., 226, 238
Tarantino, L., 230
Taylor, D.J., 132
Taylor, I.G., 220
 

Page 431
Taylor, M., 161
Taylor, M.L., 231-232
Taylor, P.C., 234
Taylor, S., 231
Teatini, G.P., 214
Teel, R.W., Jr., 31
Teele, D.W., 27, 28
Tell, L., 4
Telleen, C., 298
Tharpe, A.M., 65, 257-258
Thielemeir, M.A., 96, 286, 291, 295-296
Thoman, E.B., 222
Thomas, J., 257-258
Thompson, A., 31
Thompson, A.M., 77
Thompson, C.L., 234
Thompson, G., 56, 58, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 74-75, 77, 220
Thompson, M., 56, 58, 66, 74-75, 77
Thompson, S., 232
Thomsen, P.P., 187-188
Thornton, A., 157, 232

Thornton, A.R.D., 163-164, 165, 185, 189
Thringer, K., 4
Tillman, T., 298, 326
Tobey, E.A., 207, 218, 219, 287
Tobin, A., 222
Tobin, H., 230
Todd, S.L., 307
Tokioka, A.B., 223
Tomita, Y., 152, 160
Tong, Y.C., 281
Tonokawa, L.L., 286, 295-296
Tornaghi, R., 158
Trammel, J., 234
Traquina, D.N., 63
Treiman, R., 334
Trine, M.B., 200
Trotoux,J., 181, 187-188, 192
Tubis, A., 185-186
Turecheck, A.G., 334-335
Turner, R.G., 216
Tye-Murray, N., 277, 306, 333
Tyler, R.S., 277, 298, 306

Tyson, J.E., 21
U
Urbano, R., 65, 69, 70-71
Uziel, A., 185, 187-188, 188
V
Vanasse, M., 162
Van Camp, K.J., 108, 109-110, 116, 123, 125
Vandali, A.E., 282, 306
Van Hecke-Wulatin, M., 345
Vanhuyse, V.J., 109-110, 123, 125
van Tassel, D., 218
van Zanten, G.A., 186, 187-188, 189, 200
Vaughan, H.G., 72, 77, 78
Verkest, S.B., 208-209
Veuillet, E., 178, 223
Vilchez, J., 160
Vishnubhakat, S.M., 158
Vivion, M., 157, 158
Vohr, B.R., 187, 189, 192
Vonhof, M., 207-208
von Wallenberg, E.L., 306
W

Waggener, J., 134-135
Waldstein, R., 332
Walgreen, O., 150
Wall, L., 163-164, 165
Wallace, I.F., 72, 77, 78, 84, 218
Wallace, S.-P., 19
Waring, M., 150, 285-286
Warr, B., 223
Warren, R.M., 208
Weatherby, .., 105-106, 111-113, 114, 223
Weaver, T., 115
Webb, H.D., 179, 187-188
Webb, R.L., 278-279, 285
Weber, B.A., 56, 77, 145-146, 155
Weber, S., 135
Webster, A., 334
Webster, D.B., 218
Webster, M., 218
Wechsler, D., 288
Wedenberg, E., 119, 134
Weed, W., 231
Weider, D.J., 236

Weikers, N., 217
Weinberg, W., 237
Weisenberg, J.M., 289
Welsh, R., 363
Werner, J.S., 67, 68
Werner, L.A., 208-209
White, E.J., 233
White, K.R., 187-188, 192, 361, 362
Whitehead, M.L., 192
Whitford, L.A., 281-282
Widen, J.E., 65, 66, 69, 70-71, 184, 185
Wightman, F., 208-209
Wilber, L.A., 210, 229-230, 235
Wilcox, S., 327
Wilde, L., 224
Wilder, B.J., 230
Wile, E., 220
Wiley, T.L., 106, 127, 128-129, 136, 137-138, 140, 222
Willeford, J.A., 207, 208-209, 210, 212, 215, 229, 231, 232, 235, 236-
237
Williams, I., 163
 


Page 432
Williams, M.L., 77
Willott, J.F., 217
Willows, D.M., 212
Wilson, B.S., 306, 307
Wilson, C.B., 6
Wilson, D.H., 231, 236
Wilson, L., 220
Wilson, R.H., 108, 116, 135, 216
Wilson, W.R., 58, 66, 97, 220, 221
Winkelaar, R., 152
Witkin, B.R., 211
Witt-Engerstrom, L., 163
Wiznitzer, M., 27
Wolff, A.P., 214
Wolford, R.D., 306, 307
Woll, B., 329
Wong, P., 149-150
Wood, R.P., 7
Woodford, C.M., 132
Woods, D.L., 223
World Health Organization (WHO), 3-4, 219

Worthington, D., 223, 228
Wranne, L., 162
Wright, E., 21
Wright, F., 237
Wright, L., 21
Y
Yagi,J., 162
Yang, E.Y., 160
Yankelowitz, S.M., 42
Yardley, L., 163-164, 165
Yasuhara, A., 153, 159
Yeager, A., 6
Yellin, M.W., 227
Young, C., 233
Young, J., 231
Ysseldyke, J.E., 212
Yune, H.Y., 284
Yune, M.E., 284
Z
Zapala, D., 150
Zeller, R., 218
Zenner, H.P., 187-188

Zerlin, S., 55
Zimmerman, M., 153
Zinkus, P., 31
Zorowka, P.G., 187-188
 

Page 433
Subject Index
Page numbers in italics refer to tables and figures
A
AAA (American Academy of Audiology), 187, 361
AAO-HNS (American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery), 187, 361
AAP (American Academy of Pediatrics), 55, 187, 361
ABR. See Auditory brainstem response (ABR); Auditory brainstem
response (ABR) audiometry
Achondroplastic dwarfism, 22
Acoustic admittance, 104
Acoustic conductance, 104
Acoustic distance, 326-327
Acoustic immittance
and acoustic reflex, 105-106, 111-114, 118-121, 137-141
associated with pathologies, 108, 123-135, 218
basic concepts of, 104-111
components of, 104
definition of, 104
maturational effects on, 111-118
measurement prior to testing central auditory processing, 218

and middle-ear effusion, 126-129, 135-137
and prediction of hearing impairment, 138-141
and static-acoustic middle-ear admittance, 107-111, 115-117
test battery for, 118-122
tympanometric amplitude and shape of, 107, 109-110, 117
tympanometric gradient and width of, 111-113, 118, 122
and tympanometric peak pressure, 107, 108, 117, 121-122
tympanometry of, 106-113, 117-118, 121-122
Acoustic impedance, 104
Acoustic Isolette, 191
Acoustic mass reactance, 104
Acoustic mass suspectance, 104
Acoustic neurinoma, 163
Acoustic reflex
in children, 114-115, 139-140, 228
description of, 105-106
maturational effects on, 111 -114
measurement of, 118 - 121, 215 , 222-223, 286
in neonates, 111-114, 140, 222-223
normal, 106
and prediction of hearing impairment, 137-141
Acoustic-reflex adaptation (ARA)

definition of, 106
measurement of, 118-121
Acoustic-reflex threshold (ART)
in children, 114-115, 139-140
with cochlear disorders, 132-134
definition of, 105
measurement of, 118
in neonates and infants, 111-114, 140
normal, 106
prediction of hearing impairment from, 137-141
Acoustic resistance, 104
Acoustic stiffness reactance, 104
Acoustic stiffness susceptance, 104
Acoustic Systems (Austin, TX), 191
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), 36, 158
ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) of 1990 (PL 101-366), 321-
322
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), 159
AEP. See Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs)
AERs (auditory evoked responses). See Auditory evoked potentials
(AEPs)
AGA (appropriate for gestational age), 21, 24
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, U.S. Department of

Health and Human Services (HHS), 365
AHA (American Hospital Association), 357
 

Page 434
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome), 36, 158
Alcoholism and alcohol abuse, 22, 36
Allergies, hearing loss associated with, 29, 43
Alphabet (APAL) test, 93
Alport syndrome, 11, 19
Altitude, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Amblyopia, 30
America 2000 education strategy, 358
American Academy of Audiology (AAA), 187, 361
American Academy of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology, 55
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
(AAO-HNS), 187, 361
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), 55, 187, 361
American Electromedics 83 acoustic-impedance meter, 109
American Hospital Association (AHA), 357
American Sign Language (ASL), xiv, 304, 315-316, 327-330, 337
American Speech and Hearing Association, 55
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), 187, 354,
355, 357, 358, 360, 361, 363-364
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (PL 101-366), 321-
322
Aminoacidopathology, 19

Aminoglycosides, ototoxicity of, 7, 9-10
Aminopterin, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Amniotic fluid, testing of, 19
Amplification
with cochlear implants. See Cochlear implants
FM amplification, 258, 268, 326, 364
with hearing aids. See Hearing aids
testing of speech perception with, 99-100
Analysis of the Language of Learning test, 215
Anesthesia
and assessment of hearing loss, 37
influence on neonates, 23
for laryngoscopy, 47-49
Angelman syndrome, 159
Anoxia, 8
ANT (Auditory Numbers Test), 93, 95
Antimetabolites, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Apert syndrome, 159
Apgar risk scores, 24-25, 25
Appropriate for gestational age (AGA), 21, 24
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, 322
Arnold-Chiari syndrome, 160

Arousal test, 55
Articulation, 331, 333
ASHA (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association), 187, 354,
355, 357, 358, 360, 361, 363-364
ASHA Guidelines for Identification
Audiometry, 365
ASL (American Sign Language), xiv, 304, 315-316, 327-330, 337
Asphyxia, 187
Asthma, of mothers, 21
Atresia, 159-160
Attention, in sound perception, 211
Attention deficit disorders (ADDs), 31-32, 320
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), 208, 212-215,
225, 226
Attorney General, U.S., 322
Audiologists
ASHA-certified, 360
referrals to, 15
Auditory association, 210
Auditory brainstem response (ABR). See also Cortical evoked
potentials
associated with pathologies, 158-163
and central auditory processing disorders, 211, 223, 238

in children, 228
and cochlear implants, 285-286
definition of, 146
effect of maturation on, 152-153
in neonates, 56, 153, 220, 223, 361, 362
and otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), 177, 188
purpose of, 41
representation of, 146
topography of, 214
wave shape of, 149
Auditory brainstem response (ABR) audiometry
description of, 153-155, 215
limitations of, 57, 145, 187
of neonates, 153-155, 361, 362
Auditory Conceptualization Test (LAC), 215
Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs)
assessment of, 50, 51
associated with pathologies, 158-163
in children, 56
composition of, 150
definition of, 146
estimate of loudness discomfort level (LDL) by, 164-165

measurement of, 146-152
probability of presence of, 150, 152
Auditory evoked responses (AERs). See Auditory evoked potentials
(AEPs)
Auditory functioning, assessment of, 72, 100-101, 145
Auditory memory, 207, 210, 277
Auditory Numbers Test (ANT), 93, 95
 

Page 435
Auditory-oral communication, 304, 337
Auditory perception. See Speech perception testing
Auditory sequencing, 210
Auditory skills matrix, 85, 86
Auditory threshold. See Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs); Auditory
functioning; Loudness, target levels of
Auditory training, 273, 274.
See also Education
Aural Acoustic Immittance Measurement (test), 215
Auropalpebral reflex, 221
Australia, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Autism, 317, 320
Autoimmune antibodies, assessment of, 53
Autoimmune diseases (disorders), 42, 43, 49
Autosomal dominant genes, 10-11
Autosomal recessive genes, 10, 11, 22, 40, 161
Autosomal trisomy, 22
B
''Baby'' ear hooks, 265
Bacterial meningitis. See Meningitis
BAER (brainstem auditory evoked response). See Auditory brainstem
response (ABR)

Balance problems, 28
Bamford-Kowal-Bench (BKB) Sentences test, 298
Barbiturates, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID), 66, 221-222, 238
BEAM (brain electrical activity mapping), 214-215
Beginnings for Parents of Hearing-Impaired Children (Greene), 271
Behavioral audiograms, 51
Behavioral observation audiometry (BOA), 57
applied to neurobehavioral assessment, 77-79
applied to special populations, 73
assessment outcomes of, 76-77
clinical application of, 79-80
limitations of, 72-73, 74
scoring of, 76
state of patient in, 76
stimulus factors in, 74-75
test considerations for, 75-76, 78-79
test methodology for, 74
Behavioral screening
advantages of, 57
as alternative method, 57
for central auditory processing disorders, 211

problems in, 55, 56
Behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aids, 258-259
Belgium, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Benign hematuria, 19
BICROS hearing aids, 257-258
Bilateral stapedial footplate subluxation, 37
Bilingualism, 354. See also American Sign Language (ASL);
Communication; Speech and language acquisition
Bilirubin values. See Hyperbilirubinemia
Binaural fusion, 218, 221, 235
Binaural hearing aids, 257-258
Binaural integration and separation tasks, 230-231
Binaural release from masking (binaural unmasking). See Masking
level differences (MLD)
Biological systems, review of, 37, 38
Birth trauma, influence on perinatal hearing loss, 8, 22-23, 40-42
BKB (Bamford-Kowal-Bench) Sentences test, 298
Blood tests, neonatal testing of, 19
BOA. See Behavioral observation audiometry (BOA)
Body hearing aids, 258
Body parts, identification of, 92, 93
Bone oscillators (Radioear B-70A), 62-63, 65
Brain electrical activity mapping (BEAM), 214-215

Brain imaging
brain electrical activity mapping (BEAM), 214-215
computerized axial tomography (CAT) scans, 43, 49, 52, 214, 284
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 52 , 214, 284
positron-emission tomography (PET), 214
single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT), 214
Brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER). See Auditory brainstem
response (ABR)
Brainstem electric response (BSER). See Auditory brainstem response
(ABR)
Brain tumors
and acoustic immittance, 134-135
detection of, 214
Breastfeeding, and prevention of ear infections, 29
Breech deliveries, 23
Brief Tone Audiometry, 215
British Sign Language (BSL), 329
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 26
BSER (brainstem electric response). See Auditory brainstem response
(ABR)
BSID (Bayley Scales of Infant Development), 66, 221-222, 238
BSL (British Sign language), 329
BTE (behind-the-ear) hearing aids, 258-259

Bureau of Health Professions, U.S., 358
Bush, George, 358
 

Page 436
C
Cancer, family history of, 36
Captioned Film for the Deaf Act of 1960, 317
Cardiotachometry, 56
Case histories. See Family history; Patient history
CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans, 43, 49, 52 , 214, 284
CEASD (Conference of Educational Administrators Serving the
Deaf), Committee on Ethnic and Multicultural Concerns, 337
CEC (Council for Exceptional Children), 324
CED (Council on Education of the Deaf), 187, 361, 364
Centers for Disease Control (U.S. Public Health Service), 7
Central auditory processing, xiii
in children, 208-212
dysfunction of. See Central auditory processing disorders (CAPD)
impact of bilirubin toxicity on, 8
influence of malnutrition on development of, 21
maturation effects on, 208-209, 233, 237-238
model of, 206, 208
and otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), 174, 178, 223, 238
redundancy of, 213-214
tests of. See Central auditory processing tests
Central auditory processing disorders (CAPD)

assessment of, 209-212
and auditory brainstem response (ABR), 211, 223, 238
in children, 224-234, 237, 238
definition of, 207
early detection of, 219-220
manifestations of, 207
in neonates, 28, 220-223, 238
profile of, 206, 207-208
Central auditory processing tests
age-and ability-appropriateness of, 217
battery of, 215 , 215-217, 237-238
on children, 224-234, 238
efficiency of, 216
history of, 208
influence of peripheral hearing sensitivity on, 217-218, 220
interpretation of, 218-219
limitations of, 216
on neonates, 220-223, 238
purpose of, 237
reliability of, 216
in screening programs, 219-220
use of test results, 219

Central Institute for the Deaf (CID), 55
Central Institute for the Deaf (CID): Phase IV, for ear measurement,
263
Central Institute for the Deaf (CID) Early Speech Perception (ESP)
Test-Standard Version, 96-97, 291-293, 296-297, 298-300
Central Institute for the Deaf (CID) Preschool Performance Scale, 288
Central Institute for the Deaf (CID) Sentences of Everyday Speech
test, 298, 301
Central nervous system (CNS)
assessment of, 37, 38
injuries in neonates, 26
progressive degeneration of, 161
CEOAEs (click-evoked otoacoustic emissions), 177-183, 184-185,
195-200
Cerebral cortex, 50
Cerebral palsy, 258, 333
Cerumen, impaction and removal of, 45, 48 , 123
CES (Competing Environmental Sounds) test, 215 , 234
Cesarean section, delivery via, 23, 40
C.F.A. (continuous flow adapter). for hearing aids, 262
Change/No Change test, 298
CHAPPS (Children's Auditory Processing Performance Scale), 226
Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome, 160
Cheremes, of ASL, 329

Chest, assessment of, 37, 38
Chiari syndrome, 160
Child development. See also Maturation effects
of auditory system, 152-153
impediments to, xi
and otoacoustic emissions, 184-186
Children
acoustic reflex in, 114-115, 139-140, 228
auditory brainstem response (ABR) in, 228
auditory evoked response (AERs) in, 150
brain tumors in, 134-135
central auditory processing disorders (CAPD) in, 208-212, 224-
234, 237, 238
cochlear disorders in, 133-134
cochlear implants for, 284-288, 289-303
eighth nerve disorders in, 134
middle-ear effusion in, 126-129
middle latency response in, 155
otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) of, 184-186, 194-200
static-acoustic immittance in, 116-117
Children's Auditory Processing Performance Scale (CHAPPS), 226
Children's Hospital of Michigan, 264, 273-276

China, incidence of ototoxic hearing loss in, 7
Cholesteatoma, 108, 129-130
Chorionic villus, testing of, 19
Chouard, C., 277
Chronic medical diseases, of mothers, 21
Chronic otitis, 27. See also Otitis media
 

Page 437
Chronologic age, 155
Churchill, Winston, 32
CID (Central Institute for the Deaf), 55
Cigarette smoking, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Ciliary dyskinesia, 36
Cis-platinum, ototoxicity of, 7
CIS (continuous interleaved sampling) strategy, 307
Clark, G., 277
Classroom acoustics, 324-327
Cleft palate, 160, 333
Clemens, Samuel, 32
Click-evoked otoacoustic emissions (CEOAEs), 177-183, 184-185,
195-200
Clinical Evaluation of Language FundamentalsRevised, 215
Clinton, Bill, 355, 356, 358, 365
Closed set tests, for word recognition, 86, 93-94, 295-296
CMV infection. See Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
CNV (contingent negative variation) response, 149
Cocaine
auditory brainstem response latency associated with exposure to,
161

influence on intrauterine development, 22
Cochlear disorders
and acoustic immittance, 132-134
malformations, 285
ossification, 284-285
and peripheral hearing sensitivity, 217
Cochlear emissions, evoked and/or spontaneous, 51
Cochlear function, evaluation of, 174, 201
Cochlear implants
for children, 284-288, 289-303
coding of, 280-283, 306
description of, 277, 278-280, 279
fitting of, 303-305
future of, 306-307
history of, 277
for neonates and infants, 288-289
opposition to, xiv, 305-306, 336
preoperative selection criteria, 284 , 284-286
surgical procedure for, 279
Cockayne syndrome, 19
Collagen disorders, of mothers, 21
Collapsed ear canal, 105, 123, 189

Columbia Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, 316, 317
Common Phrases test, 298
Communication, prevention of secondary impairment of, 316. See
also American Sign Language (ASL); Bilingualism; Speech and
language acquisition
Competing Environmental Sounds (CES) test, 215 , 234
Competing Sentence (CS) test, 228, 232
Comprehension, of sound, 85, 97
Comprehensive Service Personnel Development (CSPD) plan, 319
Compressed speech tests, 215 , 228
Computerized axial tomography (CAT) scans, 43, 49, 52 , 214, 284
Conceptual age, 155
Conference of Educational Administrators Serving the Deaf
(CEASD), Committee on Ethnic and Multicultural Concerns, 337
Congenital aural atresia, 159-160
Congenital (early childhood) hearing loss
causes of, 4-10
definition of, 4-5
delayed expression of, 10-11
detection of, 4
epidemiology of, 3-14
genetic, 10-11, 22
incidence of, 4

prevalence of, 4, 5
Congenital ossicular fixation, 108, 129
Congenital syphilis infection, 6-7
Connected disourse, 85, 95
Consanguineous marriage, and incidence of hereditary hearing loss,
10, 40, 41
Constitution, U.S., 321-322
Contingent negative variation (CNV) response, 149
Continuous flow adapter (C.F.A.), for hearing aids, 262
Continuous interleaved sampling (CIS) strategy, 307
Coping mechanisms, 349-350
Cortical evoked potentials, 50, 51 , 56
Cortisone, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Council for Exceptional Children (CEC), 324
Council on Education of the Deaf (CED), 187, 361, 364
Counseling
for families of hearing-impaired children, 315, 316, 343-351
for families of hyperactive children, 32
genetic, 11
for use of hearing aids, 268-269
Craig Lipreading Inventory-Word Recognition test, 297
Cranial abnormalities, 28
Craniofacial malformations, 155, 160

 

Page 438
Cretinism, and prenatal hearing loss, 7
CROS type hearing aids, 257-258
CSPD (Comprehensive Service Personnel Development) plan, 319
CS (Competing Sentence) test, 228, 232
CUB DIS (otoacoustic analyzer), 181-183, 187
Cued speech, 328
Cultural diversity. See Multiculturalism
Culture. See Deaf culture; Multiculturalism
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
as cause of hearing loss, 5-6, 20, 21, 40, 41-42, 173
urine testing for, 53
D
DAT (Discrimination after Training) test, 96, 291
Davis, Adrian, xiv
Daycare programs, 365
Deaf community
definition of, xiv
opposition to cochlear implants, 305-306
Deaf culture, 306, 315, 329, 336
Deaf Education Initiatives Project (OSERS), 364
Deafness, definition of, 314. See also Hearing impairment

Deaf personality, 335-336
Deaf speech, 332-333
Denmark, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Denver Auditory Phoneme Sequencing Test, 215
Department of Education, U.S., 359, 364
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), U.S., 355, 365
Depression
and grieving, 347-348
neonatal, 20
Derived band response, 164
Detection
of auditory evoked responses, 149-152
of sound, 85, 90-91, 297
Developed countries. See Industrialized countries
Developing countries
incidence of congenital CMV infection in, 6
incidence of measles in, 9
incidence of ototoxic hearing loss in, 7
Developmental age
influence on behavioral observation audiometry, 73, 76-77
influence on visual reinforcement audiometry, 66
Developmentally disabled children, 28

Diabetes
family history of, 36
influence on intrauterine development, 21
Diagnosis
importance of early, 16, 55-56
informing patient of, 344-345
intrauterine, 19
Diagnostic tools. See Auditory brainstem response (ABR)
audiometry; Behavioral observation audiometry (BOA); Central
auditory processing tests; Family history; Interviews; Otoacoustic
emissions (OAE) screening; Patient history; Pediatric otolaryngic
assess-ment; Pure tone audiometric testing; Speech audiometry;
Speech perception testing; Testing; Tympanometry; Urine testing;
Vision testing; Visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA)
Dichotic Chords test, 215
Dichotic CVs test, 215 , 231, 232
Dichotic digits test, 215 , 228, 231, 232
Dichotic listening, 207, 217, 231
Dichotic Sentence Identification (DSI) test, 215
Dichotic speech tests, 216, 230-232
Digital signal processing (DSP), 179, 280, 307
Dilantin, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Diplococcus pneumoliae, 9
DIP (Discrimination in Pictures) test, 94

Directors of Speech and Hearing Programs in State Health and
Welfare Agencies, 361
Disabled Children Early Education Assistance Act (PL 90-538), 317
Disabled Infants and Toddlers Program, 317, 319, 320
Disabled population
definition of, 321
education of, 56, 220, 316-322
insurance for hearing aids for, 259-260
Discrimination, of sound, 85, 211, 297
Discrimination after Training (DAT) test, 96, 291
Discrimination in Pictures (DIP) test, 94
Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs), 177, 178-183,
185, 192-194, 195-200
Diuretics, ototoxicity of, 7
Djourno, A., 277
Douek, E., 277
Down syndrome, 29, 66, 161
DPOAEs (distortion-product otoacoustic emissions), 177, 178-183,
185, 192-194, 195-200
Drug abuse, influence on intrauterine development, 22
DSI (Dichotic Sentence Identification) test, 215
DSL, for ear measurement, 263
DSP (digital signal processing), 179, 280, 307

Duration Pattern Perception (test), 215
Dyslexia, and central auditory processing, 214, 215
 

Page 439
E
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Program
(EPSDT), 356
Early auditory response. See Middle latency response (MLR)
Early Childhood Amendments Act of 1991 (PL 102-119), 317-318
Early Language Milestone Scale (ELMS), 44-45
Earmolds. See Hearing aids
Earphones (TDH-49 or TDH-50), 62-63
Earphone testing, 98
Ears
assessment of, 37, 38
cleaning of, 260-261
and collapsed ear canal, 105, 123, 189
congenital anomalies of, 20
examination of, 45-47, 46 , 47 , 355-356
measurement of, 262-263
Earspeaker (BP1712), 179
Edison, Thomas, 32
Education, of hearing-impaired children, 271, 288, 304-305, 314-342.
See also Auditory training
Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975 (PL 94-142),
220, 317, 318, 322-323

Education of the Deaf Act of 1986, 316
Education of the Handicapped Act (PL 91-230), 318
Amendments of 1986 (PL 99-457), 220, 317, 319-320
Education reform, 358-360
Efferent effect, measurement of, 178
Eighth nerve disorders
and acoustic immittance, 134-135
as contraindication to cochlear implantation, 285
Einstein, Albert, 32
Einstein Neonatal Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale (ENNBAS), 77,
78
Electrocardiogram, 53
Electrocochleogram (ECochG), 146
Electronystagmographic analysis, 51
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965 (PL 89-
10), and amendments, 317, 318
ELMS (Early Language Milestone Scale), 44-45
Endocrine system, assessment of, 37, 38
Endocrinopathology, 19
Endogenous potentials, 149
ENNBAS (Einstein Neonatal Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale), 77,
78
EOAEs. See Evoked otoacoustic emissions (EOAEs)

EPI (Expanded Program of Immunization), 9
Epidemiology
of congenital (early childhood) hearing loss, 3-14
definition of, 3
objectives of, 3
Epileptic disorders, diagnosis of, 214
EPSDT (Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment
Program), 356
Erythoblastosis fetalis, as cause of perinatal hearing loss, 8
ESEA (Elementary and Secondary Education Act) of 1965 (PL 89-
10), and amendments, 317, 318
Eskimos (Alaskan), middle ear disease among, 28
Estrogen, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Etymotic hooks, 265
Etymotic Research (Elk Grove Village, IL.), 181
Eustachian tube
blockage of, 117
measurement of dysfunction in, 125-126
measurement of function in, 50
Evoked otoacoustic emissions (EOAEs), 177, 362
click- (CEOAEs), 177-183, 184-185, 195-200
distortion-product (DPOAEs), 177, 178-183, 185, 192-194, 195-
200

limitations of, 57
stimulus-frequency (SFOAEs), 177
transient- (TEOAEs), 177, 179, 184-185, 220
Exchange transfusions, and prevention of perinatal hearing loss, 8
Exogenous potentials, 149
Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI), 9
External auditory canal, examination of, 46, 48
External auditory meatus (EAM), development of, 152
External otitis, and acoustic immittance, 122, 125
Eyes. See also Vision testing assessment of, 37, 38
examination of, 48
Eyries, C., 277
F
Face
and craniofacial malformations, 155, 160
examination of, 48
facial nerve pathology, 135
Family
clinician's support for, 350-351
and parent-infant programs, 289
support for cochlear implant patients within, 288
support for hearing-impaired children within, 315

Family history
for diagnosis and risk assessment, 1 7, 19-20, 27, 36-39, 51 , 52 ,
187, 211
 

Page 440
diagramming of a family tree in, 40, 40, 41
FAPE (free and appropriate public education) policy, 359
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), U.S., 288, 305-306
Female Turner syndrome, 22
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 22
Fetal heart rate, 22-23
Fetal metabolic acidemia, 22
Fetal tissue, testing of, 19
FIM (Functional Independence Measure), 357
Fingerspelling (Rochester method), 327, 328
Finland, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Fisch, L., 277
Fisher's Auditory Problems Checklist, 226
Fistula testing, 42-43, 49, 51
Florida, deaf and dumb asylums in, 316
Flowers' Auditory Test of Selective Attention, 215
Flowers-Costello Test of Auditory Abilities, 215
FM amplification, 258, 268, 326, 364
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), U.S., 288, 305-306
France, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Free and appropriate public education (FAPE) policy, 359

Friedreich ataxia, 161
Functional Independence Measure (FIM), 357
G
GAEL (Grammatical Analysis of Elicited Language) test, 287
Gallaudet University (formerly Gallaudet College), 316, 329-330, 337
GASP (Glendonald Auditory Screening Procedure), 96, 295-296, 297-
298, 301, 304
Gated tone pips, 164
Gatekeepers, medical, 15, 16-17
Genetic congenital (early childhood) hearing loss
incidence of, 10
patterns of inheritance of, 10, 22
prevention of, 11
syndromic versus nonsyndromic, 10-11
timing of expression of, 10-11, 19
types of, 10
Genetic counseling, 11
Genetic history. See Family history
Genitourinary system, assessment of, 37, 38 , 53
Germany, incidence of genetic congenital hearing loss in, 10
Gestational age, 24, 26, 155
Glendonald Auditory Screening Procedure (GASP), 96, 295-296, 297-
298, 301, 304

Goals 2000: Educate America Act of 1993, 352, 358
Goiter, 7, 26
Goldman-Fristoe-Woodcock Auditory Skills Test Battery, 215
Grammatical Analysis of Elicited Language (GAEL) test, 287
Great Britain. See United Kingdom
Grieving process, description of, 345-350
H
Haemophilus influenzae, 9
Hair, examination of, 48
Hal-Hen Company (Long Island, NY), 275
Halogen lights, 30
Handicapped population. See Disabled population
Hawaii, universal screening program in, 188
HCFA (Health Care Financing Administration), 356
HCMV (human cytomegalovirus) infection, 41-42
Head
assessment of, 37, 38
congenital anomalies of, 20, 28
malformation of, 187
physical examination of, 47, 48 , 49-50
Head injuries, as cause of postnatal hearing loss, 9, 37, 42
Headstart, 365

Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), 356
Healthcare providers
conferences with, 50-54
as gatekeepers, 15
Healthcare reform, 355-358
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), 356-357
Health Security Act of 1993, 355, 364
"Healthy People 2000" initiative, 57, 201, 362-363
Hearing aids
assessing efficacy of, 50
attachment of, 266-267
attitudes about, 258, 267-268, 274
care and maintenance of, 269, 273-275
caregiver training for, 266, 273-275
earmolds in, 255, 260-266
as educational tool, 359
fitting of, 163-165, 257-258, 266
follow-up for, 267
in infants, xi
influence of parents and caregivers on patients, 268-271, 273-276
insurance for, 259-260
opposition to, 336

purpose of, 255, 256
in school programs, 268
selection of, 254-258, 265
types of, 258-259
Hearing impairment
definition of, 314-315
prevalence of, 4, 5, 318
 

Page 441
psychosocial attributes of, 335-336
Hearing International, 354
Hearing loss
classification of, 3
congenital (early childhood)
causes of, 4-10
definition of, 4-5
delayed expression of, 10-11
detection of, 4
epidemiology of, 3-14
incidence of, 4
prevalence of, 4, 5
prevention of, 11
genetic congenital (early childhood), 10-11, 19, 22
perinatal causes of, 8, 21, 40-42
postnatal causes of, 8-10
prenatal (intrauterine), 5-7, 19, 20-21, 40
progressive, 42
Heart (cardiac system), assessment of, 37, 38
Heart disease, family history of, 36
Hematological disorders, family history of, 36

Hemopoietic system, assessment of, 37
Herpes virus infection, 5-6, 20
High-risk infants
in early childhood, 27
genetic factors affecting, 22
influence of maternal smoking and drug abuse on, 22
intrauterine development of, 20-21
labeling of, 20
in neonatal period, 26-27
as newborns, 23-26
obstetrical factors affecting, 22-23
perinatal infections in, 21
HIV infection, in children, 36
HMOs (health maintenance organizations), 356-357
Hochmair, E., 277
Hochmair-Desoyer, L., 277
Homeopathy, 17
Hoosier Auditory Visual Enhancement test, 298
Hot tubs, influence on intrauterine development, 22
House, A., 277
House Ear Institute (Los Angeles), xiii
House of Representatives Education and Labor Subcommittee, 364

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, 41-42. See also
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
Hydrocephalus, 160, 162
Hyperactivity, 31. See also Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD)
Hyperbilirubinemia, 8, 20, 162, 187
Hyperkinetic syndrome, 31
Hypertension, of mothers, 20
Hyperthermia, of neonates, 25
Hypothermia, of neonates, 26
Hypothyroidism
and auditory brainstem response, 162
as cause of prenatal hearing loss, 7
of neonates, 26
Hypoxemia
of mothers, 21
of neonates, 22
I
IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) of 1991 (PL 101-
476), 56, 317, 318-319, 320, 330, 358-359, 364-365
Identification, of sound, 85, 91-92
IEP (individualized education program), 318, 324, 359
IFSP (individual family service plan), 315, 319, 320, 365

IHIIP (infant hearing impairment identification programs), 363
ILO (Institute of Laryngology and Otology), 179
Immune profile, of patient, 53
Immune system, assessment of, 37, 38
Inclusion paradigm, for education, 323, 324, 359
India
incidence of ototoxic hearing loss in, 7
incidence of recessive hereditary hearing loss in, 10
prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 4, 5
Indian Council of Medical Research (New Delhi), 4
Individual educational planning (IEP), 318, 324, 359
Individual family service plan (IFSP), 315, 319, 320, 365
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) of 1991 (PL 101-
476), 56, 317, 318-319, 320, 330, 358-359, 364-365
Industrialized countries
detection of congenital hearing loss in, 4
incidence of congenital CMV infection in, 6
incidence of ototoxic hearing loss in, 7
Infant hearing impairment identification programs (IHIIP), 363. See
also Neonates
Infants. See Neonates
Infant scales, predictive validity of, 222
Infections

family history of exposure to, 19, 36
identified as cause of congenital hearing loss, 5-7, 8-10, 20, 21, 28
patient history of, 36
Inner language (speech), 334
Institute of Laryngology and Otology (ILO), 179
Insulin, influence on intrauterine development, 22
International Society of Audiology, 354
 

Page 442
Intervention. See also Cochlear implants; Counseling; Education;
Hearing aids; Schools and communication alternatives, 327-331
educational models for, 322-327
importance of early, 16, 315-316
legal support for, 316-322
speech and language development following, 331-334
Interviews, for diagnosis and risk assessment, 17-19, 35-36
In-the-canal (ITC) hearing aids, 259
In-the-ear (ITE) hearing aids, 259
Intrauterine development, 20-21
Intrauterine diagnosis, 19
Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), 20-21
Iodine deficiency, 7
Iowa Medial Consonant test, 298
Iowa Sentence Understanding With and Without Context test, 298
Iowa Vowel test, 298
Ireland, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Isolettes, sound-treated, 191 - 192
Isophonemic Word Lists (AB Lists), 87, 95
Israel, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Italy, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
ITC (in-the-canal) hearing aids, 259

ITE (in-the-ear) hearing aids, 259
IUGR (intrauterine growth retardation), 20-21
J
Jaundice, 8
JCIH (Joint Committee on Infant Hearing), 55-56, 187, 360-361
John Tracy Clinic, 270, 276
Joint Committee on Newborn Hearing Screening (now Joint
Committee on Infant Hearing, JCIH), 55-56, 187, 360-361
K
Kartagener syndrome, 36
Keller, Helen, 336
Kentucky, deaf and dumb asylums in, 316
Kernicterus, 41
Knowles 1843 microphone, 179
L
Language acquisition. See Speech and language acquisition
Language Processing Test, 215
LAR (late auditory response), 148, 149, 153
Large for gestational age (LGA), 24
Laryngoscopy, 47-49
Larynx
assessment of, 37, 38 , 54

examination of, 47-49
Late auditory response (LAR), 148, 149, 153
Late cortical (V) potential, 55
Late-latency (evoked) response (LLR), 215 , 223, 228
Latency intensity function, 155
LD. See Learning disabilities (LD)
LDL (loudness discomfort level), 164-165
LEA (local education agency), 317, 318
Learning disabilities (LD)
and central auditory processing disorders, 207-208, 212-215 , 219,
226, 231
classification of, 318
and inclusive education, 324
Least restrictive environment (LRE), 318, 322, 359
Leopard syndrome, 19
Leukemia, hearing loss due to ototoxic chemotherapy for, 10
LGA (large for gestational age), 24
Ling Five Sound Test, 91, 264, 265
Ling Phonetic Level Speech Evaluation, 287
Ling Phonologic Level Speech Evaluation, 287
Listening, and message resolution, 208
LLR (late-latency response), 215 , 223, 228
Local education agency (LEA), 317, 318

Localization response, 58, 64, 65, 66, 78
Loudness, target levels of, 164-165, 263-264
Loudness discomfort level (LDL), 164-165
Low birth weight
and auditory function, 72, 77, 80
genetic factors affecting, 22
influence of toxoplasmosis on, 21
influence on early onset hearing impairment, 21
influence on perinatal hearing loss, 8, 24
and morbidity, 26-27
and mother's age, 24
Low brainstem disorders, and acoustic immittance, 134-135
Low-pass filtered speech, 229
LRE (least restrictive environment), 318, 322, 359
LSD, influence on intrauterine development, 22
M
MAC (Minimal Auditory Capabilities) Battery, 95, 97, 298
Madsen ZO-73 acoustic-impedance meter, 109
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 52 , 214, 284
Mainstreaming, of hearing-impaired students, 322-323, 336
Malabsorption syndromes, of mothers, 21
Malnutrition, 9, 21

Manual (signed) communication, 304, 323, 327-328, 337
Manual English (ME), 330
Masking level differences (MLD), 215 , 216, 218, 219, 234-235
Mastoiditis, 28
Maturation effects
on acoustic-reflex thresholds, 113-115
on auditory brainstem response, 152-153
 

Page 443
on central auditory processing, 208-209, 233, 237-238
on middle latency response morphology, 155
on otoacoustic emissions, 184-186
on static-acoustic immittance, 115-117
on tympanometric amplitude and shape, 117
on tympanometric gradient and width, 118
on tympanometric peak pressure, 117
MCL (most comfortable loudness level), 164, 263
ME (Manual English), 330
Measles, as cause of postnatal hearing loss, 9
Medial olivocochlear bundle pathway, 174
Medicaid, 356
Memory, and cerebral metabolism, 31
Ménière's disease, 173
Meningitis
as cause of hearing loss, 8, 20, 21, 28, 39, 42, 284
influence on acoustic immittance, 134
and risk of hearing loss, 187
Meningococcal meningitis. See Meningitis
Meningomyelocele, 160
Mensa Society, 31

Mental retardation, 7, 26, 73, 317, 318, 333
Metabolic problems, as cause of hearing loss, 7, 19
Metalinguistic skills, 210-211, 219, 237
Michelson, R., 277
Middle ear, acoustic reactance of, 104
Middle-ear effusion (MEE)
and acoustic immittance, 126-129, 135-137
in children, 27, 28, 29, 126-129
detection of, 135-137
in developmentally disabled children, 28
influence on tympanic membrane, 47
and language acquisition, 27, 29
in neonates, 113, 129
and tympanosclerosis, 125
Middle-ear pathology
and acoustic immittance, 124-125
assessment of, 286
hearing loss associated with, 27, 28
influence on measurement of otoacoustic emissions, 183-184, 189,
195, 197-200
malformations associated with Apert syndrome, 159
in neonates, 28, 183-184, 189
prevalence in young-patient populations, 183-184

and reading skills, 31
and speech regression, 29-30
Middle latency (evoked) response (MLR), 146-148, 149, 153, 155-
158, 214, 215 , 223, 228, 285-286
Mines, Art, 271
Minimal Auditory Capabilities (MAC) Battery, 95, 97, 298
Minimal Pairs test, 298
Minimum auditory response level (MRL), 63
Mismatched negativity (MMN) response, 148
MLD (masking level differences), 215 , 216, 218, 219, 234-235
MLR (middle latency response), 146-148, 149, 153, 155-158, 214,
215, 223, 228, 285-286
Model Secondary School for the Deaf Act (PL 89-694), 317
Monaural functioning, evaluation of, 98
Monaural hearing aids, 257-258
Monaural low-redundancy speech tests, 216, 229-230
Mondini dysplasia, 285
Monoacetyldiaminodiphenyl sulphone (MADDS), 162
Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee (MTS) test, 96, 294-295, 297, 299-
300
Morphogenesis, 26
Most comfortable loudness level (MCL), 164, 263
Mothers, influence on intrauterine development, 20-21, 22, 24, 40,

211
Motor skills, problems with, 28, 42
Mouth, assessment of, 38 , 53-54
MPEAK (Multipeak) coding strategy, 281-282, 307
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), 52 , 214, 284
MRL (minimum auditory response level), 63
MTS (Monosyllable, Trochee, Spondee) test, 96, 294-295, 297, 299-
300
Mucopolysaccharides diseases (MPS), 19
Multiculturalism, 316, 336-338, 352, 353-354
Multipeak (MPEAK) coding strategy, 281-282, 307
Multiple dysmorphic abnormalities, 28
Mumps, as cause of postnatal hearing loss, 9
Musculoskeletal system, assessment of, 37, 38
Mutagenic agents, exposure to, 19
Myelomeningocele, infected, 21
Myopia (nearsightedness), 30
N
NAD (National Association for the Deaf), 305-306
NAL-R formula, for ear measurement, 263
Narcotics, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Nasal aspiration, 29
NASDSE (National Association of State Directors of Special

Education), 364
National Association for the Deaf (NAD), 305-306
National Association of State Directors of Special Education
(NASDSE), 364
National Button-Battery Ingestion Hotline, 275
 

Page 444
National Center in Educational Media for the Disabled (PL 91-61),
317
National Council on Disability, 322
National Education Goals Panel, 358
National Eye Institute, 317
National Fund for Medical Education (NFME), 357
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
(NIDCD), 362
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development Panel
(Conference), 23, 187, 361-362
National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities, 324
National Technical Institute for the Deaf, 316, 317
Native Americans, middle ear disease among, 28
NBAS (Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale), Brazelton's, 24, 77,
221
Neck
congenital anomalies of, 20
examination of, 47, 54
malformation of, 187
Neisseria meningitidis, 9
Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (NBAS), Brazelton's, 24, 77,
221
Neonatal depression, 20

Neonatal Environment for Sensitivity Testing (NEST), 78
Neonatal intensive care units (NICUs)
auditory brainstem response audiometry in, 153-155
influence on infant mortality, 26
prevalence of hearing loss in, 72, 153, 155, 184
stay recorded in patient history, 40-41
Neonates
acoustic reflex in, 111-114, 140, 222-223
auditory brainstem response morphology changes in, 153
auditory brainstem response of, 153-155, 220, 223, 361, 362
auditory evoked response in, 152
auditory skill development in, 289
central auditory processing disorders in, 28, 220-223, 238
cochlear disorders in, 133
cochlear implants for, 288-289
middle-ear effusion in, 129
middle latency response in, 155, 157
morbidity of, 26
mortality of, 26
otoacoustic emissions of, 23, 184-186, 187-194, 223, 361, 362
perceptual competence of, 23
prediction of hearing impairment in, 113

prevention of hearing loss in, 27-30
screening and observation of, 23-26, 55, 56
static-acoustic immittance in, 115-116
temperature instability of, 24, 25-26
Neoplastic disorders, diagnosis of, 214
NEST (Neonatal Environment for Sensitivity Testing), 78
Netherlands, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
Neural tube defects, and genetic hearing loss, 22
Neuroblastoma, hearing loss due to ototoxic chemotherapy for, 10
Neurodegenerative diseases, 19
Neurofibromatosis. See Von Recklinghausen disease
Neurological diseases, family history of, 36
Neurological handicaps, of neonates, 26
Neuropsychological evaluation, 211
Neurosyphilis, 134
Newborns. See Neonates
NFME (National Fund for Medical Education), 357
NICUs. See Neonatal intensive care units (NICUs)
NIDCD (National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders), 362
Nigeria. See West Africa
NIH (National Institutes of Health) Consensus Development Panel
(Conference), 23, 187, 361-362

Noise trauma, as cause of hearing loss, 9, 173, 365
Northern Illinois University, 364
Northwestern University Children's Perception of Speech (NU-
CHIPS) test, 88, 93, 94-95, 229, 230, 295, 297, 299-300
Northwestern University No. 6 (NU #6) Monosyllabic Word test, 298
Nose and paranasal sinuses
assessment of, 38
examination of, 48
Notch noise masking, 164
NU-CHIPS (Northwestern University Children's Perception of
Speech) test, 88, 93, 94-95, 229, 230, 295, 297, 299-300
Nucleus 22 Channel Cochlear Implant System, 278-279, 279, 280-
283, 303, 306, 307
Numbers, identification of, 93
O
OBRA (Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) of 1989, 356
Observer bias, 70, 76, 78, 220
Obstetrical (delivery) problems. See Birth trauma
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS),
U.S. Department of Education, 364
 

Page 445
Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP), 359
Oligohydramnios, 20
Olivocochlear bundle, 209-210
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1989, 356
Open set tests, for word recognition, 86, 94-95, 295-296, 297-298
Ophthalmological assessment, 51
Oppositional behavior (ADDO), 31-32
Oral communication, 327, 337
Organ of Corti, 285
OSEP (Office of Special Education Programs), 359
OSERS (Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services),
U.S. Department of Education, 364
Ossicular chain, erosion of, 108
Ossicular disarticulation (discontinuity), 108, 130-132
Ossicular fixation, congenital, 108, 129-130
Otalgia (ear pain), 135
Otitis media
associated with Apert syndrome, 159
avoidance of, 29
as cause of postnatal hearing loss, 9, 27, 28, 108
and cochlear implants, 286
influence on acoustic immittance, 218

influence on language acquisition, 30, 31
influence on otoacoustic emissions, 197
prevalence of, 286
and risk of central auditory processing disorder, 226
and screening for potential hearing loss, 17
Otitis media with effusion (OME), 28, 42.
See also Middle-ear effusion (MEE)
Otoacoustic Analyser (model ILO92), 179, 181-183
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs)
and central auditory processing, 174, 178, 223, 238
and child development, 184-186
definition of, 173
of neonates, 23, 184-186, 187-194, 223, 361
Otoacoustic emissions (OAE) screening
advantages of, 174-176
assessment of outer hair cell function with, 50, 173, 174-175, 197
of children, 184-186, 194-200
clinical applications of, 186-189
factors affecting measurement in, 183-184
future of, 175, 200-201
of neonates, 23, 184-186, 187-194, 361, 362
recording methods in, 178-183

types of, 176-178
Otoacoustic Emissions Test Instrument model 330
(Virtual Corp.), 181-183, 182 , 187
Otodynamic Analyser (model ILO88), 179-181, 180, 186, 188
Otodynamics, Ltd. (United Kingdom), 179, 181, 186
Otoferm cream, 262
Otorrhea (ear discharge), 135
Otosclerosis, as cause of nonsyndromic genetic hearing loss, 10-11,
19, 107-108
Otoscopic examination, 45
Ototoxicity
as cause of postnatal hearing loss, 9-10, 37, 41
as cause of prenatal hearing loss, 7, 20
of neonatal life-saving procedures, 184
and risk of hearing loss, 187
vulnerability of outer hair cells to, 173
Outer hair cells (OHCs), 50, 173, 174-175, 197
P
Pan American Society of Audiology, 354
Parabiosis, 21
Parent-Infant Communication: A Program of Clinical and Home
Training for Parents and Hearing-Impaired Infants (Schuyler et al.),
270-271

Patient history
and assessment of risk, 187, 211-212
in otolaryngic assessment, 35, 36-39, 53
PBK (Phonetically Balanced Kindergarten) word lists, 95, 97, 229,
297-298, 301
PB-PI functions, 98
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised, 288
Pediatricians
diagnosis and intervention by, 16
as healthcare providers, 15, 16
Pediatric neurological assessment, 52
Pediatric otolaryngic assessment
audiometric evaluation in, 35-36
language examination in, 43-45
methods of, 35
patient and family histories in, 35, 36-39
physical examination in, 45-50, 46 , 47 , 48
and present illness, 39 , 39-43
purpose of, 35
review of biological systems in, 37 , 38
tympanograms in, 35
''work-up'' studies for, 49-50, 51-54
Pediatric Speech Intelligibility (PSI) test, 94, 215 , 227-228, 230, 232

Pendred syndrome (disease), 7, 19, 26
Perilymphatic fistulae (PLFs), 42-43, 49
Perinatal hearing loss, causes of, 8, 21, 40-42
Peripheral hearing sensitivity (impairment), 217-218, 220
PET (positron-emission tomography), 214
Pew Health Professions Commission, 357-358
 

Page 446
Pharynx
assessment of, 37, 38
examination of, 47-49
Phonation, 331, 333
Phoneme testing, 85
Phonemic synthesis, 210
Phonemic Synthesis test, 215
Phonetically Balanced Kindergarten (PBK) word lists, 95, 97, 229,
297-298, 301
Phototherapy, and prevention of perinatal hearing loss, 8
Physical deformities, development of, 26
Physical examination, 45-50, 46 , 47 , 48
Pinnae
examination of, 46, 48
and hearing aid placement, 261
Pitch Patterns Sequence (PPS) test, 215 , 228, 232, 236
PKU, 19
Pneumatic otoscopy, 27, 30, 47
Pneumonia, 36
Pneumonococcal meningitis. See Meningitis
POGO, for ear measurement, 263
Polyhydramnios, 20

Positron-emission tomography (PET), 214
Posterior fossa, tumors in, 135
Postnatal hearing loss, causes of, 8-10
PPOs (preferred provider organizations), 356-357
PPS (Pitch Patterns Sequence) test, 215 , 228, 232, 236
Prader-Willi syndrome, 23
Pragmatics, 331
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs), 356-357
Preinformation bias, of examiners, 75
Premature birth, influence on perinatal hearing loss, 8, 20, 21, 24
Presbycusis, as cause of hearing loss, 19
Preschool education, 322
Preschool Grant Program, 317, 319, 320
Preschool screening programs, for vision, 30
Present illness, information about, 39 , 39-43
Prevention
of attention deficit disorders, 31 -32
of genetic congenital hearing loss, 11
of neonatal and infant hearing loss, 27-30
of perinatal hearing loss, 8
of preschool and school-age hearing loss, 30-31
of secondary communication impairment, 316

Primary Care 2000, 357
Profound hearing loss, tests for, 95-97
Progressive renal insufficiency. See Alport syndrome
Project Headstart, 365
PSI (Pediatric Speech Intelligibility) test, 94, 215 , 227-228, 230, 232
Psychological evaluation, prior to cochlear implantation, 288
Psychological support groups, 345
Psychosocial behavior, 335-336
PTA (pure tone average) threshold, 314
P300 (P3) response, 148, 211, 215 , 228
Public health programs, for prevention and treatment, 16
Public Law (PL) 19-8 (1827), 316
Public Law (PL) 29-1 (1847), 316
Public Law (PL) 34-36 (1857), 316
Public Law (PL) 83-420 (1954), 316
Public Law (PL) 89-10 (1965), 317, 318
Public Law (PL) 89-258 (1960), 317
Public Law (PL) 89-313, 317
Public Law (PL) 89-333, 317, 330
Public Law (PL) 89-694, 317
Public Law (PL) 90-538, 317
Public Law (PL) 91-61, 317

Public Law (PL) 91-230, 318
Public Law (PL) 94-142 (1975), 220, 317, 318, 322-323
Public Law (PL) 99-457 (1986), 220, 317, 319-320
Public Law (PL) 101-366 (1990), 321-322
Public Law (PL) 101-476 (1991), 56, 317, 320, 330, 358-359, 364-
365
Public Law (PL) 102-119 (1991), 317-318
Public Law (PL) 102-421 (1992), 316
Pure tone audiometric testing, 28, 84, 86, 89, 126, 136, 195, 201, 286
Pure tone average (PTA) threshold, 314
Pure Tone Thresholds (test), 215
R
Rapidly alternating speech perception (RASP) tests, 235
Rapin, Isabel, xiii
RASP (rapidly alternating speech perception) tests, 235
Reading skills, 31, 334-335
Reflex decay. See Acoustic-reflex adaptation (ARA)
Reflex testing, 28
Reform movements
economics of, 355
in education, 358-360
in healthcare, 355-358
Renal abnormalities, 28

Renal disease
and assessment of renal function/dysfunction, 37, 53
family history of, 36
of mothers, 21
Repetition Test (Tallal), 215
 

Page 447
Reserpine, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Resonance, 332
Respiration, 332
Respiration audiometry, 56
Response cuing, 70
Retinitis pigmentosa, 11, 19
Retrolental fibroplasia, 26-27
Rett syndrome, 163
Reverberation time (RT), 325, 327
Revised Token Test, 215
Rh-incompatibility, 8
Rhode Island Hearing Assessment Project, 188-189
Rhode Island Test of Language Structures (RITLS), 287
Risk assessment, tools for. See Family history; Interviews; Patient
history; Testing
RITLS (Rhode Island Test of Language Structures), 287
Rochester (NY) School for the Deaf, 328
RT (reverberation time), 325, 327
Rubella infection, 5, 20, 21, 40
S
SAAT (Selective Auditory Attention Test), 215 , 224-225, 226, 230
Sancho, Jane, xiv

SAT (speech awareness thresholds), 90-91
SCAN: A Screening Test for Auditory Processing Disorders, 215 ,
2Avl 225-226, 229, 230, 232
Schools, audiology programs in, 268, 288, 304-305
Screening. See Testing
Screening Test for Auditory Processing Disorders (SCAN), 215 , 224,
225-226, 229, 230, 232
SDT (speech detection thresholds), 90-91
SEA (state education agency), 317
Seeing Essential English 1 (SEE 1), 330
Select-A-Vent (hearing aid pressure vent), 262
Selective attention, 207, 219, 224
Selective Auditory Attention Test (SAAT), 215 , 224-225, 226, 230
Seminars in Hearing, 188
Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, 364
Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL)
demographics of, 71
diagnosis of, 173
prediction of, 137-141
progressive, 37, 42
VRA audiogram of, 70, 71
Sensory-motor problems, 28, 42
Sentence testing, 95

Sequenced Inventory of Communication Development-Revised
(SICD-R), 222
Service delivery models, 15, 16-17, 352-353, 356, 360
Severe hearing loss, tests for, 95-97
Sex chromosomes. See X-linked genes
SFOAEs (stimulus-frequency otoacoustic emissions), 177
SGA (small for gestational age), 21, 22, 24
SICD-R (Sequenced Inventory of Communication Development-
Revised), 222
Sickle cell disease (anemia), 19, 36, 163
Siglish (Signed-English), 330
Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios, 325-327
Signed (manual) communication, 304, 323, 327-328, 337
Signed-English (Siglish), 330
Signing Exact English 2 (SEE 2), 330-331
Simmons, F. B., 277
Single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT), 214
Sleep, middle latency response during, 158
Small for gestational age (SGA), 21, 22, 24
Smoking, influence on intrauterine development, 22
SMSP (Spectral Maxima Sound Processing), 282-283
SNHL. See Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL)
SOAEs (spontaneous otoacoustic emissions), 176-177, 185-186

Socioeconomic status (SES)
associated with neonatal mortality and morbidity, 24
correlated to language performance, 37-39
Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP), 159
Sound blending, 207, 210
Soundfield evaluation, 98-99
SPAC (Speech Patterns Contrast) test, 94, 97
SPEAK (Spectral Peak) coding stategy, 283, 307
Special populations
behavioral observation audiometry of, 73-74
education of, 316, 319
SPECT (single-photon-emission computed tomography), 214
Spectral Maxima Sound Processing (SMSP), 282-283
Spectral Peak (SPEAK) coding stategy, 283, 307
Speech and language acquisition
assessment of, 43-45, 50, 52, 287-288
correlated to socioeconomic status, 37-39
in hearing-impaired individuals, 331-334
influence of central auditory processing disorders on, 206, 207-208
influence of hearing on, 164, 332
problems in, 28, 31-32
Speech audiometry

factors in selecting appropriate tests, 86-89
purposes of, 84-86
 

Page 448
Speech audiometry (continued)
test conditions for, 98-100
threshold speech tests in, 89-92
word recognition tests in, 84, 85, 86-88, 92-101
Speech awareness thresholds (SAT), 90-91
Speech detection thresholds (SDT), 90-91
Speech-in-noise testing, 215 , 230
Speech-language pathologists, 15, 210, 270, 287, 354
Speech Patterns Contrast (SPAC) test, 94, 97
Speech perception
affected by central auditory processing disorders, 206, 207-208
normal, 213
Speech Perception in Noise (SPIN) test, 215
Speech perception testing
in adults, 210
factors in selecting appropriate tests, 86-89
purpose of, 84, 85-86
test conditions for, 98-100, 212
Speech reading, 327
Speech reception thresholds (SRT), 91-92
Speech Recognition Performance Intensity Functions (test), 215

Speech regression, associated with middle ear disease, 29-30
Spielberg, Steven, 32
Spina bifida, 160
Spina bifida cystica, 22
SPIN (Speech Perception in Noise) test, 215
Spiral ganglion cell degeneration, 285
Spondee words, 92
Spontaneous otoacoustic emissions (SOAEs), 176-177, 185-186
SRT (speech reception thresholds), 91-92
SSEP (somatosensory evoked potential), 159
SSI (Synthetic Sentence Identification) test, 215 , 230, 232, 234
SSW (Staggered Spondaic Word) test, 215 , 218, 228, 232-233
Stanford Achievement Test scores, 328
Stapedial muscle pathology, 135
Startle reflex, 221
State education agency (SEA), 317
Static-acoustic middle-ear admittance
in children, 116-117
in neonates and infants, 115-116
tympanometry of, 107-111
Stimulus-frequency otoacoustic emissions (SFOAEs), 177
Sudden idiopathic sensorineural hearing loss, 175

Swallowing disorders, 49
Sweden, prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
"Swinging speech test," 235
Synthetic Sentence Identification (SSI) test, 215 , 230, 232, 234
Syphilis, 6-7, 21
T
TAC (Test of Auditory Comphrehension), 97
Tactaid 7 (Audiological Engineering Corporation), 289
Tactile devices, 289, 290
TAPS (Test of Auditory-Perceptual Skills), 215
Tay-Sachs disease (syndrome), 19, 22
TBI (traumatic brain injury), 317, 320
TC (Total communication) model, 304, 323, 328, 331
TC (Time-Compressed Speech) test, 215, 229-230
Teenagers, interviewing of, 17-18
Temporal processing, 207, 216-217, 228, 235-237
Tensor veli palatini, 117
TEOAEs (transient-evoked otoacoustic emissions), 177, 179, 184-
185, 220
Testing, developing child-appropriate, 17
Test of Auditory Comphrehension (TAC), 97
Test of Auditory-Perceptual Skills (TAPS), 215
Test of Language Competence, 215

Test of Word Knowledge, 215
Thallasemia, 19
3M/House single-channel cochlear implant, 291
Threshold by the Identification of Pictures (TIP) test, 92
Thyroid problems, 19. See also Hypothyroidism
Thyroid suppressants, influence on intrauterine development, 22
Thyroxine therapy, 162
Time-Compressed Speech (TC) test, 215 , 229-230
TIP (Threshold by the Identification of Pictures) test, 92
Title I program (PL 89-313), 317
TORCH titers, assessment of, 53
Total communication (TC) model, 304, 323, 328, 331
Total quality management (TQM), 352
Toxoplasmosis, 20, 21
Toxoplasmosis Gondi (parasite) infection, 6
Transient-evoked otoacoustic emissions (TEOAEs), 177, 179, 184-
185, 220
Transsynaptic degeneration, 218
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 317, 320
Trisomy, 23
Trisomy 21, 161
Twins, parabiosis in, 21

Tympanic membrane
examination of, 46-47, 48
flaccid, 125, 129
perforation of, 124
 

Page 449
scar tissue on, 125
Tympanometry
of acoustic immittance, 106-113, 117-118, 121-122
assessment of, 50, 51
of neonates, 27-28
in the office, 30
reviewed in patient history, 42
Tympanosclerosis, 125
Tympanostomy tubes, 36, 195, 200
U
UCL (uncomfortable loudness level), 263
Ultrasound, 53
Umbilical cord problems, 21
Uncomfortable loudness level (UCL), 263
United Kingdom
and British Sign Language, 329
prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
prevalence of genetic congenital hearing loss in, 10
United States
age of identification of hearing loss in, 23, 56, 57, 187, 320, 360-
363
incidence of genetic congenital hearing loss in, 10

incidence of infectious causes of hearing loss in, 6-7, 9
incidence of ototoxic hearing loss in, 7
insurance for hearing aids in, 259
prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 5
prevalence of hearing impairment in, 314
Universal screening programs, 188-189, 362
Urinary tract, examination of, 46, 52
Urine testing
of neonates, 41
pediatric, 52 , 53
U.S. Attorney General, 322
U.S. Bureau of Health Professions, 358
U.S. Constitution
Eleventh Amendment, 322
Fourteenth Amendment, 321-322
U.S. Department of Education, 359
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS),
364
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), 355
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, 365
U.S. House of Representatives Education and Labor Subcommittee,
364
U.S. Public Health Service (PHS), 7, 362-363

U.S. Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, 364
Usher syndrome, 11
V
Vaginal bleeding, influence on intrauterine development, 20
VEP (visual evoked potential), 159
Vestibular dysfunction, assessment of, 42, 51
Viral meningitis. See Meningitis
Virtual Corporation (Portland, OR), 181, 187
Vision, and speech perception, 88-89
Vision testing, 30-31
Visual evoked potential (VEP), 159
Visually Reinforced Infant Speech Discrimination (VRISD)
paradigm, 97, 221
Visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA), 57
conditioning in, 59, 63-65, 68
and developmental age, 66
efficiency of, 70-71
operant behavior in, 58-59
personnel and equipment for, 59-62, 60 , 61 , 62
and real ear measurements, 264
reinforcement in, 58, 59, 59 , 66-71
threshold acquisition during, 63, 68-69, 70

transducers in, 62-63
Vocabulary age, influence on word recognition testing, 86
Vocational Rehabilitation Act (PL 89-333), 317, 330
Von Recklinghausen disease (neurofibromatosis), 134-135, 162-163
VRA. See Visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA)
VRISD (Visually Reinforced Infant Speech Discrimination)
paradigm, 97, 221
"Vulnerable child syndrome," 25
W
Waardenburg syndrome, 11, 19
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R), 288
Wechsler Performance Scale, 288
Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI), 288
Wepman Auditory Discrimination test, 215
West Africa
incidence of meningitis in, 8
incidence of postnatal hearing loss in, 8
prevalence of congenital hearing loss in, 4, 5
Willeford's Central Auditory Test Battery, 229, 236-237
Wilson disease, 19
WIPI (Word Intelligibility by Picture Identification) test, 93-95, 97,
224, 229, 297
WISC-R (Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised), 288

Women-Infants-Children (WIC) program, 21
Word Intelligibility by Picture Identification (WIPI) test, 93-95, 97,
224, 229, 297
Word recognition tests, 84, 85, 86-88, 92-101
Word Test, 215
World Health Organization (WHO)
Division for the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment,
3-4
 

