

THE
HOLOTROPIC MIND
The Three Levels of Human Consciousness
and How They Shape Our Lives
Stanislav Grof, M.D.
with Hal Zina Bennett, Ph.D.

To Christina, my mother Maria, and my brother Paul

Contents
v
Acknowledgments
1
Part I: Challenging the Newtonian Universe
3
1. Breakthroughs to New Dimensions of Consciousness
31
Part II: The Perinatal Matrices—Influences That Shape
Human Consciousness from Prenatal Life Through Birth
33
2. Wholeness and the Amniotic Universe—BPM I
45
3. Expulsion from Paradise—BPM II
57
4. The Death-Rebirth Struggle—BPM III
69
5. The Death and Rebirth Experience—BPM IV
81
Part III: The Transpersonal Paradigm
83
6. An Overview of the Transpersonal Paradigm
89
7. Journeys Beyond Physical Boundaries
113
8. Across the Borders of Time
141
9. Beyond a Shared Reality
173
10. Experiences of a Psychoid Nature
199
Part IV: Implications for a New Psychology of Being
201
11. New Perspectives on Reality and Human Nature
223
Notes
227
Recommended Reading
231
Index
Other Books by Stanislav Grof

Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book is based on experiences, observations, and insights from thirty-
five years of systematic exploration of the value of non-ordinary states of
consciousness. During this time, I have received invaluable help and support
from many people who have played important roles in my personal and
professional life. I would like to use this opportunity to briefly acknowledge
at least a few of them.
Joseph Campbell, who was for many years my dear friend as well as an
important teacher, taught me much about the relevance of mythology for
psychology, religion, and human life in general. His brilliant intellect, en-
cyclopedic memory, and amazing capacity for creative synthesis brought
unusual clarity into many areas that had been in the past misunderstood
and confused by traditional science, religion, and philosophy.
Gregory Bateson, a “generalist” whose inquisitive mind explored many
disciplines in search of knowledge, was the most original thinker I have
known. I had the privilege of almost daily contact with him during the last
two and a half years of his life when we both were Scholars-in-Residence
at the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California. By his incisive critique of the
errors and inadequacies of the Newtonian-Cartesian paradigm, he helped
me to trust my own findings, which were often in conflict with mainstream
psychiatry and traditional Western science.
I have received inestimable additional encouragement and support of a
similar kind from several of my physicist friends who have done important
pioneering work exploring the philosophical implications of quantum-re-
lativistic physics and who have made significant contributions to the new
worldview emerging in Western science. I am particularly grateful for my
long friendship and cooperation with Fritjof Capra, and I appreciate deeply
what I have learned from Fred Wolf, Nick Herbert, David Peat, Saul-Paul
Siraque, and others.
One of the most significant intellectual events of my life was the discovery
of holography and of the holonomic thinking in science, which provided
a conceptual framework for a variety of otherwise incomprehensible and
puzzling findings of modern consciousness research. Here I feel deeply
v

indebted to the genius of Denis Gabor for the discovery of the principles
of optical holography, to David Bohm for his holographic model of the
universe and the theory of holomovement, and to Karl Pribram for his
holographic model of the brain.
I remember with great affection two dear friends, Abraham Maslow and
Anthony Sutich, the founders of humanistic psychology. They invited me
in the late 1960s to participate in brainstorming sessions that gave birth to
transpersonal psychology. The development of this new discipline, which
brings together the ancient wisdom of the great spiritual systems of the
world and the pragmatism of Western science, has become the passion of
my life.
The work in the challenging and controversial field of transpersonal
psychology and consciousness research would not have been possible
without emotional and intellectual support of like-minded individuals. I
have been extremely fortunate to have as my close personal friends many
of the pioneers of the new thinking in psychology. These very special people
have been for many years a source of encouragement and inspiration to
me, to my wife, Christina, and to each other. My special thanks for this
crucial role in our lives goes to Angeles Arrien, Michael and Sandy Harner,
Jack and Liana Kornfield, John Perry, Ram Dass, June Singer, Rick and
Heather Tarnas, Frances Vaughan, and Roger Walsh.
I reserve my deepest appreciation for the members of my immediate
family to whom I have dedicated this book. My mother, Maria, and my
brother, Paul, who is himself a psychiatrist and shares many of my interests,
have been all through my life sources of great emotional and moral support.
My wife, Christina, has been for the last sixteen years my most intimate
friend, colleague, and fellow seeker. As we have shared many highs and
lows of our joint life, I have learned to admire very much the courage and
integrity she has shown during her stormy personal journey. Being an in-
tegral part of it has taught me many extraordinary and invaluable lessons
that only life can provide.
In closing I would like to thank Harper San Francisco Publishers and
particularly my editor Mark Salzwedel for making the publication of this
book possible. Last, but not least, I feel deep gratitude to Hal Zina Bennett,
who has brought to this project a rare combination of talents, including the
writing skills and imagination of an accomplished author and an unusual
understanding of non-ordinary states of consciousness. He helped me
greatly to describe the findings of my research in simple and easily under-
standable language, making the information available to a
vi
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

broad spectrum of readers. Thanks to Hal’s unusual personal qualities,
sharing the work on this project—a task that had its challenges and prob-
lems—has been very rewarding and brought us closer together.
Those whose contributions to this book were critical and essential have
to remain anonymous. I feel great appreciation for thousands of people in
Europe, North and South America, Australia, and Asia—clients, trainees,
friends, and participants in workshops and various research projects—who
have with extraordinary courage explored the depths and heights of their
psyches and shared with me the results of their unconventional quest:
without them this book could not have been written.
Stanislav Grof, M.D.
Mill Valley, August 1991
vii
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


I
CHALLENGING THE NEWTONIAN
UNIVERSE
The subject matter…is not that collection of solid, static objects
extended in space but the life that is lived in the scene that it composes;
and so reality is not that external scene but the life that is lived in it.
Reality is things as they are.
—Wallace Stevens


1
BREAKTHROUGHS TO NEW DIMENSIONS OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
There is one spectacle grander than the sea, that is the sky; there
is one spectacle grander than the sky, that is the interior of the
soul.
—Victor Hugo, “Fantine,” Le Misèrables
Within the past three decades, modern science has presented us with new
challenges and new discoveries that suggest human capabilities quite
beyond anything we previously even imagined. In response to these chal-
lenges and discoveries, the collective efforts of researchers from every
profession and discipline are providing us with a completely new picture
of human existence, and most particularly of the nature of human conscious-
ness.
Just as the world of Copernicus’s time was turned upside down by his
discovery that our Earth was not the center of the universe, so our newest
revelations, from researchers all over the world, are forcing us to take a
closer look at who we are physically, mentally, and spiritually. We are
seeing the emergence of a new image of the psyche, and with it an extraor-
dinary worldview that combines breakthroughs at the cutting edge of sci-
ence with the wisdom of the most ancient societies. As a result of the ad-
vances that are coming forth we are having to reassess literally all our
viewpoints, just as with the response to Copernicus’s discoveries nearly
five hundred years ago.
3

The Universe as a Machine: Newton and Western Science
At the core of this dramatic shift in thought that has occurred in the course
of the twentieth century is a complete overhaul of our understanding of
the physical world. Prior to Einstein’s theory of relativity and quantum
physics we held a firm conviction that the universe was composed of solid
matter. We believed that the basic building blocks of this material universe
were atoms, which we perceived as compact and indestructible. The atoms
existed in three-dimensional space and their movements followed certain
fixed laws. Accordingly, matter evolved in an orderly way, moving from
the past, through the present, into the future. Within this secure, determin-
istic viewpoint we saw the universe as a gigantic machine, and we were
confident the day would come when we would discover all the rules gov-
erning this machine, so that we could accurately reconstruct everything
that had happened in the past and predict everything that would happen
in the future. Once we had discovered the rules, we would have mastery
over all we beheld. Some even dreamed that we would one day be able to
produce life by mixing appropriate chemicals in a test tube.
Within this image of the universe developed by Newtonian science, life,
consciousness, human beings, and creative intelligence were seen as acci-
dental by-products that evolved from a dazzling array of matter. As com-
plex and fascinating as we might be, we humans were nevertheless seen
as being essentially material objects—little more than highly developed
animals or biological thinking machines. Our boundaries were defined by
the surface of our skin, and consciousness was seen as nothing more than
the product of that thinking organ known as the brain. Everything we
thought and felt and knew was based on information that we collected
with the aid of our sensory organs. Following the logic of this materialistic
model, human consciousness, intelligence, ethics, art, religion, and science
itself were seen as by-products of material processes that occur within the
brain.
The belief that consciousness and all that it has produced had its origins
in the brain was not, of course, entirely arbitrary. Countless clinical and
experimental observations indicate close connections between consciousness
and certain neurophysiological and pathological conditions such as infec-
tions, traumas, intoxications, tumors, or strokes. Clearly, these are typically
associated with dramatic changes in consciousness. In the case of localized
tumors of the brain, the impairment of function—loss of speech, loss of
motor control, and so on—can be used to help us diagnose exactly where
the brain damage has occurred.
4
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

These observations prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that our mental
functions are linked to biological processes in our brains. However, this
does not necessarily mean that consciousness originates in or is produced
by our brains. This conclusion made by Western science is a metaphysical
assumption rather than a scientific fact, and it is certainly possible to come
up with other interpretations of the same data. To draw an analogy: A good
television repair person can look at the particular distortion of the picture
or sound of a television set and tell us exactly what is wrong with it and
which parts must be replaced to make the set work properly again. No one
would see this as proof that the set itself was responsible for the programs
we see when we turn it on. Yet, this is precisely the kind of argument
mechanistic science offers for “proof” that consciousness is produced by
the brain.
Traditional science holds the belief that organic matter and life grew
from the chemical ooze of the primeval ocean solely through the random
interactions of atoms and molecules. Similarly, it is argued that matter was
organized into living cells, and cells into complex multicellular organisms
with central nervous systems, solely by accident and “natural selection.”
And somehow, along with these explanations, the assumption that con-
sciousness is a by-product of material processes occurring in the brain has
become one of the most important metaphysical tenets of the Western
worldview.
As modern science discovers the profound interactions between creative
intelligence and all levels of reality, this simplistic image of the universe
becomes increasingly untenable. The probability that human consciousness
and our infinitely complex universe could have come into existence through
the random interactions of inert matter has aptly been compared to that of
a tornado blowing through a junkyard and accidentally assembling a 747
jumbo jet.
Up to now, Newtonian science has been responsible for creating a very
limited view of human beings and their potentials. For over two hundred
years the Newtonian perspective has dictated the criteria for what is an
acceptable or unacceptable experience of reality. Accordingly, a “normally
functioning” person is one who is capable of accurately mirroring back the
objective external world that Newtonian science describes. Within that
perspective, our mental functions are limited to taking in information from
our sensory organs, storing it in our “mental computer banks,” and then
perhaps recombining sensory data to create something new. Any significant
departure from this perception of “objective reality”—actually consensus
reality or what the general population believes to be true—
5
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

would have to be dismissed as the product of an overactive imagination
or a mental disorder.
Modern consciousness research indicates an urgent need to drastically
revise and expand this limited view of the nature and dimensions of the
human psyche. The main objective of this book is to explore these new
observations and the radically different view of our lives that they imply.
It is important to point out that even though these new findings are incom-
patible with traditional Newtonian science, they are fully congruent with
revolutionary developments in modern physics and other scientific discip-
lines. All of these new insights are profoundly transforming the Newtonian
worldview that we once took so much for granted. There is emerging an
exciting new vision of the cosmos and human nature that has far-reaching
implications for our lives on an individual as well as collective scale.
Consciousness and Cosmos: Science Discovers Mind in Nature
As modern physicists refined their explorations of the very small and the
very large—the subatomic realms of the microworld and the astrophysical
realms of the macroworld—they soon realized that some of the basic
Newtonian principles had serious limits and flaws. In the mid-twentieth
century, the atoms that Newtonian physics once defined as the indestruct-
ible, most elementary building blocks of the material world were found to
be made of even smaller and more elementary parts—protons, neutrons,
and electrons. Later research detected literally hundreds of subatomic
particles.
The newly discovered subatomic particles exhibited strange behavior
that challenged Newtonian principles. In some experiments they behaved
as if they were material entities; in other experiments they appeared to
have wavelike properties. This became known as the “wave-particle para-
dox.” On a subatomic level, our old definitions of matter were replaced by
statistical probabilities that described its “tendency to exist,” and ultimately
the old definitions of matter disappeared into what the physicists call
“dynamic vacuum.” The exploration of the microworld soon revealed that
the universe of everyday life, which appears to us to be composed of solid,
discrete objects, is actually a complex web of unified events and relation-
ships. Within this new context, consciousness does not just passively reflect
the objective material world; it plays an active role in creating reality itself.
6
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

The scientists’ explorations of the astrophysical realm is responsible for
equally startling revelations. In Einstein’s theory of relativity, for example,
space is not three-dimensional, time is not linear, and space and time are
not separate entities. Rather, they are integrated into a four-dimensional
continuum known as “space-time.” Within this perspective of the universe,
what we once perceived as the boundaries between objects and the distinc-
tions between matter and empty space are now replaced by something
new. Instead of there being discrete objects and empty spaces between
them the entire universe is seen as one continuous field of varying density.
In modern physics matter becomes interchangeable with energy. Within
this new worldview, consciousness is seen as an integral part of the univer-
sal fabric, certainly not limited to the activities contained inside our skulls.
As British astronomer James Jeans said some sixty years ago, the universe
of the modern physicist looks far more like a great thought than like a giant
super-machine.
So we now have a universe that is an infinitely complex system of vibrat-
ory phenomena rather than an agglomerate of Newtonian objects. These
vibratory systems have properties and possibilities undreamed of in
Newtonian science. One of the most interesting of these is described in
terms of holography.
Holography and the Implicate Order
Holography is a photographic process that uses laser-coherent light of the
same wave-length to produce three-dimensional images in space. A holo-
gram—which might be compared to a photographic slide from which we
project a picture—is a record of an interference pattern of two halves of a
laser beam. After a beam of light is split by a partially silvered mirror, half
of it (called the reference beam) is directed to the emulsion of the hologram;
the other half (called the working beam) is reflected to the film from the
object being photographed. Information from these two beams, required
for reproducing a three-dimensional image, is “enfolded” in the hologram
in such a way that it is distributed throughout. As a result, when the
hologram is illuminated by the laser, the complete three-dimensional image
can be “unfolded” from any fraction of the hologram. We can cut the
hologram into many pieces and each part will still be capable of reproducing
an image of the whole.
7
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Figure 1. A hologram is produced when a single laser light is split
into two separate beams. The first beam is bounced off
the object to be photographed, in this case an apple.
Then the second beam is allowed to collide with the reflected light of the first, and
the resulting interference pattern is recorded on film.
The discovery of the holographic principles has become an important
part of the scientific worldview. For example, David Bohm, a prominent
theoretical physicist and former coworker of Einstein’s, was inspired by
holography to create a model of the universe that could incorporate the
many paradoxes of quantum physics. He suggests that the world we per-
ceive through our senses and nervous systems, with or without the help
of scientific instruments, represents only a tiny fragment of reality. He calls
what we perceive the “unfolded” or “explicate order.” These perceptions
have emerged as special forms from a much larger matrix. He calls the
latter the “enfolded” or “implicate order.” In other words, that which we
perceive as reality is like a projected holographic image. The larger matrix
from which that image is projected can be compared to the hologram.
However, Bohm’s picture of the implicate order (analogous to the holo-
8
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Figure 2. Unlike normal photographs, every portion
of a piece of holographic film contains all the information of the
whole. Thus if a holographic plate is broken into fragments,
each piece can still be used to reconstruct the entire image.
gram) describes a level of reality that is not accessible to our senses or direct
scientific scrutiny.
In his book Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Bohm devotes two chapters
to the relationship between consciousness and matter as seen through the
eyes of the modern physicist. He describes reality as an unbroken, coherent
whole that is involved in an unending process of change—called holomove-
ment. Within this perspective all stable structures in the
9
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

universe are nothing but abstractions. We might invest all kinds of effort
in describing objects, entities, or events but we must ultimately concede
that they are all derived from an indefinable and unknowable whole. In
this world where everything is in flux, always moving, the use of nouns
to describe what is happening can only mislead us.
For Bohm, holographic theory illustrates his idea that energy, light, and
matter are composed of interference patterns that carry information about
all of the other waves of light, energy, and matter that they have directly
or indirectly contacted. Thus, each part of energy and matter represents a
microcosm that enfolds the whole. Life can no longer be understood in
terms of inanimate matter. Matter and life are both abstractions that have
been extracted from the holomovement, that is, the undivided whole, but
neither can be separated from that whole. Similarly, matter and conscious-
ness are both aspects of the same undivided whole.
Bohm reminds us that even the process of abstraction, by which we create
our illusions of separation from the whole, are themselves expressions of
the holomovement. We ultimately come to the realization that all percep-
tions and knowledge—including scientific work—are not objective recon-
structions of reality; instead, they are creative activities comparable to
artistic expressions. We cannot measure true reality; in fact, the very essence
of reality is its immeasurability.1
The holographic model offers revolutionary possibilities for a new un-
derstanding of the relationships between the parts and the whole. No longer
confined to the limited logic of traditional thought, the part ceases to be
just a fragment of the whole but, under certain circumstances, reflects and
contains the whole. As individual human beings we are not isolated and
insignificant Newtonian entities; rather, as integral fields of the holomove-
ment each of us is also a microcosm that reflects and contains the macro-
cosm. If this is true, then we each hold the potential for having direct and
immediate experiential access to virtually every aspect of the universe,
extending our capacities well beyond the reach of our senses.
There are indeed many interesting parallels between David Bohm’s work
in physics and Karl Pribram’s work in neurophysiology. After decades of
intensive research and experimentation, this world-renown neuroscientist
has concluded that only the presence of holographic principles at work in
the brain can explain the otherwise puzzling and paradoxical observations
relating to brain function. Pribram’s revolutionary model of the brain and
Bohm’s theory of holomovement have far-reaching implications for our
understanding of human consciousness that we have only begun to translate
to the personal level.
10
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

In Search of the Hidden Order
Nature is full of genius,
full of the divinity,
so that not a snowflake escapes
its fashioning hand.
—Henry David Thoreau
Revelations concerning the limits of Newtonian science and the urgent
need for a more expansive worldview have emerged from virtually every
discipline. For example, Gregory Bateson, one of the most original theoreti-
cians of our time, challenged traditional thinking by demonstrating that
all boundaries in the world are illusory and that mental functioning that
we usually attribute exclusively to humans occurs throughout nature, in-
cluding animals, plants, and even inorganic systems. In his highly creative
synthesis of cybernetics, information and systems theory, anthropology,
psychology, and other fields, he showed that the mind and nature form an
indivisible unity.
British biologist Rupert Sheldrake has offered an incisive critique of tra-
ditional science, approaching the problem from still another angle. He
pointed out that in its single-minded pursuit of “energetic causation,”
Western science neglected the problem of form in nature. He pointed out
that our study of substance alone cannot explain why there is order, pattern,
and meaning in nature any more than the examination of the building
materials in a cathedral, castle, or tenement house can explain the particular
forms those architectural structures have taken. No matter how sophistic-
ated our study of the materials, we will not be able to explain the creative
forces that guided the designs of these structures. Sheldrake suggests that
forms in nature are governed by what he calls “morphogenic fields,” which
cannot be detected or measured by contemporary science. This would mean
that all scientific efforts of the past have totally neglected a dimension that
is absolutely critical for understanding the nature of reality.2
The common denominator of all these and other recent theories that offer
alternatives to Newtonian thinking is that they see consciousness and cre-
ative intelligence not as derivatives of matter—more specifically of the
neurophysiological activities in the brain—but as important primary attrib-
utes of all existence. The study of consciousness, once seen as the poor
cousin of the physical sciences, is rapidly becoming the center of attention
in science.
11
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

The Revolution in Consciousness and the New Scientific
Worldview
Our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call
it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted
from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of conscious-
ness entirely different…. No account of the universe in its totality can
be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disreg-
arded.
—William James
Modern depth-psychology and consciousness research owe a great debt
to the Swiss psychiatrist C. G. Jung. In a lifetime of systematic clinical work,
Jung demonstrated that the Freudian model of the human psyche was too
narrow and limited. He amassed convincing evidence showing that we
must look much farther than personal biography and the individual uncon-
scious if we are to even begin to grasp the true nature of the psyche.
Among Jung’s best known contributions is the concept of the “collective
unconscious,” an immense pool of information about human history and
culture that is available to all of us in the depth of our psyches. Jung also
identified the basic dynamic patterns or primordial organizing principles
operating in the collective unconscious, as well as in the universe at large.
He called them “archetypes” and described their effects on us as individuals
and on human society as a whole.
Of special interest are Jung’s studies of synchronicity that we will later
explore in more detail. He discovered that individualized psychological
events, such as dreams and visions, often form patterns of meaningful co-
incidence with various aspects of consensus reality that can not be explained
in terms of cause and effect. This suggested that the world of the psyche
and the material world are not two separate entities, but that they are in-
timately interwoven. Jung’s ideas thus challenge not only psychology but
the Newtonian worldview of reality and the Western philosophy of science.
They show that consciousness and matter are in constant interplay, inform-
ing and shaping each other in a way that the poet William Butler Yeats
must have had in mind when he spoke of those events where “you cannot
tell the dancer from the dance.”
At about the same time that we were beginning to have major break-
throughs in physics, the discovery of LSD and subsequent psychedelic re-
search opened up new revolutionary avenues in the study of human con-
sciousness. The 1950s and 1960s saw a major explosion of interest in
12
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Eastern spiritual philosophies and practices, shamanism, mysticism, exper-
iential psychotherapies, and other deep explorations of the human psyche.
The study of death and dying brought some extraordinary data about the
relationships between consciousness and the brain. In addition, there was
a resurgence of interest in parapsychology, particularly around the research
of extrasensory perception (ESP). New information about the human psyche
was also being generated by laboratories experimenting with modern mind-
altering techniques, such as sensory deprivation and biofeedback.
The common denominator of all this research was its focus on non-ordin-
ary states of consciousness, an area that in the past had been grossly neg-
lected not just by traditional science, but by the entire Western culture. In
our emphasis on rationality and logic, we have put great value on the
everyday sober state of mind and relegated all other states of consciousness
into the realm of useless pathology.
In this respect, we have a very unique position in human history. All the
ancient and pre-industrial cultures have held non-ordinary states of con-
sciousness in high esteem. They valued them as powerful means for con-
necting with sacred realities, nature, and each other, and they used these
states for identifying diseases and healing. Altered states were also seen
as important sources of artistic inspiration and a gateway to intuition and
extrasensory perception. All other cultures have spent considerable time
and energy developing various mind-altering techniques and have used
them regularly in a variety of ritual contexts.
Michael Harner, a well-known anthropologist who also underwent a
shamanic initiation in South America, pointed out that from a cross-cultural
perspective, the traditional Western understanding of the human psyche
is significantly flawed. It is ethnocentric in the sense that Western scientists
view their own particular approach to reality and psychological phenomena
as superior and “proven beyond a shadow of doubt,” while judging the
perspectives of other cultures as inferior, naive, and primitive. Second, the
traditional academic approach is also what Harner calls “cogni-centric,”
meaning that it takes into consideration only those observations and exper-
iences that are mediated by the five senses in an ordinary state of conscious-
ness.3
The main focus of this book is to describe and explore the radical changes
in our understanding of consciousness, the human psyche, and the nature
of reality itself that become necessary when we pay attention to the testi-
mony of non-ordinary states, as all other cultures before us. For this pur-
pose, it does not make much difference whether the trigger of these
13
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

states is the practice of meditation, a session in experiential psychotherapy,
an episode of spontaneous psychospiritual crisis (“spiritual emergency”),
a near-death situation, or ingestion of a psychedelic substance. Although
these techniques and experiences may vary in some specific characteristics,
they all represent different gateways into the deep territories of the human
psyche, areas uncharted by traditional psychology. The thanatologist
Kenneth Ring acknowledged this fact by coining for them the collective
term Omega experiences.
Since we are interested here in exploring the most general implications
of modern consciousness research for our understanding of ourselves and
the universe, the examples that I use in this book are drawn from a variety
of situations. Some come from sessions with Holotropic Breathwork™ or
from psychedelic therapy, others from shamanic rituals, hypnotic regression,
near-death situations, or spontaneous episodes of spiritual emergency.
What they all have in common is that they represent a critical challenge to
traditional ways of thinking and suggest an entirely new way of looking
at reality and our existence.
The Adventure Begins: Throwing Open the Gates Beyond
Everyday Reality
There are many different paths to our new understanding of consciousness.
My own path started in Prague, the capitol of Czechoslovakia, soon after
I finished high school in the late 1940s. At that time, a friend had loaned
me Sigmund Freud’s Introductory Lectures to Psychoanalysis. I was deeply
impressed by Freud’s penetrating mind and his ability to decode the obscure
language of the unconscious mind. Within a few days after finishing Freud’s
book I made the decision to apply to medical school, which was a necessary
prerequisite to becoming a psychoanalyst.
During my medical school years I joined a small psychoanalytic group,
led by three psychoanalysts who were members of the International Psy-
choanalytic Association, and volunteered my time at the psychiatric depart-
ment of the Charles University School of Medicine. Later, I also underwent
a training analysis by the former president of the Czechoslovakian Psycho-
analytic Association.
The better acquainted I became with psychoanalysis, the more disillu-
sioned I became. Everything I had read of Freud and his followers had
offered what seemed to be convincing explanations of mental life. But these
insights did not seem to carry over into the clinical work. I could not un-
derstand why this brilliant conceptual system did not offer equally impress-
ive
14
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

clinical results. Medical school had taught me that if I only understood a
problem, I would be able to do something effective about it, or in the case
of incurable diseases, see clearly the reason for my therapeutic limitations.
But now I was being asked to believe that, even though we had a complete
intellectual grasp of the psychopathology we were working with, we could
do relatively little about it—even over an extremely long period of time.
About the same time that I was struggling with this dilemma, a package
arrived at the department where I was working. It was from the Sandoz
Pharmaceutical Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland and contained samples
of an experimental substance called LSD-25, which was said to have remark-
able psychoactive properties. The Sandoz company was making the sub-
stance available to psychiatric researchers the world over who would study
its effects and possible uses in psychiatry. In 1956 I became one of the early
experimental subjects of this drug.
My first LSD session radically changed both my personal and professional
life. I experienced an extraordinary encounter with my unconscious, and
this experience instantly overshadowed all my previous interest in Freudian
psychoanalysis. I was treated to a fantastic display of colorful visions, some
abstract and geometrical, others filled with symbolic meaning. I felt an array
of emotions of an intensity I had never dreamed possible.
This first experience with LSD-25 included undergoing special tests by
a faculty member who was studying the effect of flashing lights on the
brain. Prior to taking the psychedelic, I agreed to have my brain waves
monitored by an electroencephalograph while lights of various frequencies
were flashed before me.
During this phase of the experiment, I was hit by a radiance that seemed
comparable to the light at the epicenter of an atomic explosion, or possibly
to the supernatural light described in Oriental scriptures that appears at
the moment of death. This thunderbolt of light catapulted me from my
body. I lost all awareness of the research assistant, the laboratory, and any
detail about my life as a student in Prague. My consciousness seemed to
explode into cosmic dimensions.
I found myself thrust into the middle of a cosmic drama that previously
had been far beyond even my wildest imaginings. I experienced the Big
Bang, raced through black holes and white holes in the universe, my con-
sciousness becoming what could have been exploding super-novas, pulsars,
quasars, and other cosmic events.
There was no doubt in my mind that what I was experiencing was very
close to experiences of “cosmic consciousness” I had read about in the
15
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

great mystical scriptures of the world. In psychiatric handbooks such states
were defined as manifestations of severe pathology. In the midst of it I
knew that the experience was not the result of a psychosis brought on by
the drug but a glimpse into a world beyond ordinary reality.
Even in the most dramatic and convincing depths of the experience I
saw the irony and paradox of the situation. The Divine had manifested itself
and had taken over my life in a modern laboratory in the middle of a serious
scientific experiment conducted in a Communist country with a substance
produced in the test tube of a twentieth-century chemist.
I emerged from this experience moved to the core. At that time I did not
believe as I do today, that the potential for mystical experience is the
birthright of all humans. I attributed everything I experienced to the drug
itself. But there was no doubt in my mind that this substance was the
“royal road into the unconscious.” I felt strongly that this drug could heal
the gap between the theoretical brilliance of psychoanalysis and its lack of
effectiveness as a therapeutic tool. It seemed that LSD-assisted analysis
could deepen, intensify, and accelerate the therapeutic process.
In the following years, starting with my appointment to a position at the
Psychiatric Research Institute in Prague, I was able to study the effects of
LSD on patients with various emotional disorders, as well as on mental-
health professionals, artists, scientists, and philosophers who had demon-
strated serious motivations for such an experience. The research led to a
deeper understanding of the human psyche, the enhancement of creativity,
and the facilitation of problem solving.
During the early period of my research, I found my worldview under-
mined by daily exposure to experiences that could not be explained in
terms of my old belief system. Under the unrelenting influx of incontrovert-
ible evidence, my understanding of the world was gradually shifting from
a basically atheistic position to a mystical one. What was first foreshadowed
in my experience of cosmic consciousness had come to full fruition through
careful daily examination of the research data.
In sessions of LSD-assisted psychotherapy, we witnessed a rather pecu-
liar pattern. With low to medium dosages, subjects usually limited their
experiences to reliving scenes from infancy and childhood. However, when
the doses were increased or the sessions were repeated, each client sooner
or later moved far beyond the realms described by Freud. Many of the ex-
periences reported were remarkably like those described in ancient spiritual
texts from Eastern traditions. I found this particularly interesting because
most people reporting these experiences had no previous knowledge of
the
16
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Eastern spiritual philosophies, and I certainly had not anticipated that such
extraordinary experiential domains would become accessible in this way.
My clients experienced psychological death and rebirth, feelings of one-
ness with all humanity, nature, and the cosmos. They reported visions of
deities and demons from cultures different from their own, or visits to
mythological realms. Some reported “past life” experiences whose histor-
ical accuracy could later be confirmed. During their deepest sessions they
were experiencing people, places, and things that they had never before
touched with their physical senses. That is, they had not read, seen pictures
of, or heard anyone talk of such things—yet they now experienced them
as if they were happening in the present.
This research was a source of an endless array of surprises. Having
studied comparative religions, I had intellectual knowledge about some of
the experiences people were reporting. However, I had never suspected
that the ancient spiritual systems had actually charted, with amazing accur-
acy, different levels and types of experiences that occur in non-ordinary
states of consciousness. I was astonished by their emotional power, authen-
ticity, and potential for transforming people’s views of their lives. Frankly,
there were times that I felt deep discomfort and fear when confronted with
facts for which I had no rational explanation and that were undermining
my belief system and scientific worldview.
Then, as the experiences became more familiar to me, it became clear
that what I was witnessing were normal and natural manifestations of the
deepest domains of the human psyche. When the process moved beyond
the biographical material from infancy and childhood and the experiences
began to reveal the greater depths of the human psyche, with all its mystical
overtones, the therapeutic results exceeded anything I had previously
known. Symptoms that had resisted months or even years of other treatment
often vanished after patients had experiences such as psychological death
and rebirth, feelings of cosmic unity, archetypal visions, and sequences of
what clients described as past-life memories.
At the Cutting Edge
Over three decades of systematic studies of the human consciousness have
led me to conclusions that many traditional psychiatrists and psychologists
might find implausible if not downright incredible. I now firmly believe
that consciousness is more than an accidental by-product of the neuro-
physiological and biochemical processes taking place in the human brain.
I see
17
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

consciousness and the human psyche as expressions and reflections of a
cosmic intelligence that permeates the entire universe and all of existence.
We are not just highly evolved animals with biological computers embedded
inside our skulls; we are also fields of consciousness without limits, tran-
scending time, space, matter, and linear causality.
As a result of observing literally thousands of people experiencing non-
ordinary states of consciousness, I am now convinced that our individual
consciousnesses connect us directly not only with our immediate environ-
ment and with various periods of our own past, but also with events that
are far beyond the reach of our physical senses, extending into other histor-
ical times, into nature, and into the cosmos. I can no longer deny the evid-
ence that we have the capacity to relive the emotions and physical sensations
we had during our passage through the birth canal and that we can re-ex-
perience episodes that took place when we were fetuses in our mothers’
wombs. In non-ordinary states of consciousness, our psyches can reproduce
these situations in vivid detail.
On occasion, we can reach far back in time and witness sequences from
the lives of our human and animal ancestors, as well as events that involved
people from other historical periods and cultures with whom we have no
genetic connection whatsoever. Through our consciousnesses, we can
transcend time and space, cross boundaries separating us from various
animal species, experience processes in the botanical kingdom and in the
inorganic world, and even explore mythological and other realities that
we previously did not know existed. We might discover that experiences
of this kind will profoundly influence our life philosophy and worldview.
We will very likely find it increasingly difficult to share the belief system
dominating the industrial cultures and the philosophical assumptions of
traditional Western science.
Having started this research as a convinced materialist and atheist, I had
to open myself to the fact that the spiritual dimension is a key factor in the
human psyche and in the universal scheme of things. I feel strongly that
becoming aware of this dimension of our lives and cultivating it is an es-
sential and desirable part of our existence; it might even be a critical factor
for our survival on this planet.
An important lesson I have learned from the study of non-ordinary states
of consciousness is the recognition that many conditions mainstream psy-
chiatry considers bizarre and pathological are actually natural manifesta-
tions of the deep dynamics of the human psyche. In many instances, the
emergence of these elements into consciousness may be the organism’s
18
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

effort to free itself from the bonds of various traumatic imprints and limit-
ations, heal itself, and reach a more harmonious way of functioning.
Above all, consciousness research over the past three decades has con-
vinced me that our current scientific models of the human psyche cannot
account for many of the new facts and observations in science. They repres-
ent a conceptual straitjacket and render many of our theoretical and prac-
tical efforts ineffective and, in many instances, even counterproductive.
Openness to new data challenging traditional beliefs and dogmas has al-
ways been an important characteristic of the best of science and a moving
force of progress. A true scientist does not confuse theory with reality and
does not try to dictate what nature should be like. It is not up to us to decide
what the human psyche can do and what it can not do to fit our neatly or-
ganized preconceived ideas. If we are ever to discover how we can best
cooperate with the psyche, we have to allow it to reveal its true nature to
us.
It is clear to me that we need a new psychology, one that is more in
alignment with the findings of modern consciousness research, one that
complements the image of the cosmos we are beginning to envision through
the most recent discoveries in the physical sciences. To investigate the new
frontiers of consciousness, it is necessary to go beyond the traditional verbal
methods for collecting relevant psychological data. Many experiences ori-
ginating in farther domains of the psyche, such as mystical states, do not
lend themselves to verbal descriptions; throughout the ages, the spiritual
traditions have referred to them as “ineffable.” So it stands to reason that
one has to use approaches that allow people to access deeper levels of their
psyches without having to depend on language. One of the reasons for this
strategy is that much of what we experience in the deeper recesses of our
minds are events that occurred before we developed our verbal skills—in
the womb, at birth, and in early infancy—or are non-verbal by their very
nature. All of this suggests the need to develop brand new research projects,
exploratory tools, and methodologies for discovering the deepest nature
of the human psyche and the nature of reality.
The information in this book is drawn from many thousands of non-or-
dinary experiences of various kinds. Most of them were holotropic and
psychedelic sessions I have conducted and witnessed in the United States,
Czechoslovakia, and during my travels; others were sessions run by col-
leagues who shared their observations with me. In addition, I have also
worked with people in psychospiritual crises and have, over the years,
personally experienced a number of non-ordinary states of consciousness
in experiential psychotherapy, psychedelic sessions, shamanic rituals, and
19
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

meditation. During the month-long seminars that my wife, Christina, and
I conducted at the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California, we had an ex-
tremely rich exchange with anthropologists, parapsychologists, thanatolo-
gists, psychics, shamans, and spiritual teachers, many of whom are now
close friends of ours. They have helped me enormously to see my own
findings in a broad interdisciplinary and cross-cultural context.
The key experiential approach I now use to induce non-ordinary states
of consciousness and gain access to the unconscious and superconscious
psyche is Holotropic Breathwork™, which I have developed jointly with
Christina over the last fifteen years. This seemingly simple process, com-
bining breathing, evocative music and other forms of sound, body work,
and artistic expression, has an extraordinary potential for opening the way
for exploring the entire spectrum of the inner world. We are currently
conducting a comprehensive training program and have certified several
hundreds of practitioners who are now offering workshops in different
parts of the world. Those readers who will become seriously interested in
the avenues described in this book should thus have no difficulty in finding
opportunities to explore them experientially in a safe context and under
expert guidance.
My material is drawn from over 20,000 Holotropic Breathwork™ sessions
with people from different countries and from all walks of life, as well as
4,000 psychedelic sessions that I conducted in the earlier phases of my re-
search. Systematic study of non-ordinary states has shown me, beyond any
doubt, that the traditional understanding of the human personality, limited
to postnatal biography and to the Freudian individual unconscious, is
painfully narrow and superficial. To account for all the extraordinary new
observations, it became necessary to create a radically expanded model of
the human psyche and a new way of thinking about mental health and
disease.
In the following chapters, I will describe the cartography of the human
psyche that has emerged from my study of non-ordinary states of conscious-
ness and that I have found very useful in my everyday work. In this carto-
graphy I map out paths through various types and levels of experience
that have become available in certain special states of mind and that seem
to be normal expressions of the psyche. Besides the traditional biographical
level containing material related to our infancy, childhood, and later life,
this map of the inner space includes two additional important domains:
(1) The perinatal level of the psyche, which, as its name indicates, is related
to our experiences associated with the trauma of biological birth, and (2)
the
20
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

transpersonal level, which reaches far beyond the ordinary limits of our
body and ego. This level represents a direct connection between our indi-
vidual psyches, the Jungian collective unconscious, and the universe at
large.
When I initially became aware of these territories during my early re-
search, I thought I was creating a new map of the psyche that was made
possible by the discovery of a revolutionary tool, LSD. As this work contin-
ued, it became very clear to me that the emerging map was not new at all.
I realized that I was rediscovering ancient knowledge of human consciousness
that has been around for centuries or even millennia. I started seeing im-
portant parallels with shamanism, with the great spiritual philosophies of
the East, such as different systems of yoga, various schools of Buddhism
or Taoism, with the mystical branches of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam,
and with many other esoteric traditions of all ages.
These parallels between my research and ancient traditions provided a
convincing modern validation of the timeless wisdom that philosopher
and writer Aldous Huxley called “perennial philosophy.” I saw that
Western science, which in its juvenile hubris rejected and ridiculed what
the ancients had to offer, must now revise its premature judgment in view
of these new discoveries. I hope that the old/new cartography described
in this book will prove useful as a guide for those who decide to venture
into the farther reaches of the human psyche and explore the frontiers of
consciousness. Although each inner journey is unique and varies in details,
all of them also show significant similarities and certain general landmarks.
It can be useful and comforting as we are entering territories that are new
and potentially terrifying to find out that many other people have safely
traveled through them before.
Unveiling the Mysteries of Infancy and Childhood
The realm of the psyche that is usually the first to emerge in experiential
therapy is the recollective or biographical level, where we find memories
from our infancy and childhood. It is generally accepted in modern depth
psychology that our present emotional life is, to a great extent, shaped by
events from the “formative” years of our lives, that is, the years before we
learned how to articulate our thoughts and feelings. The quality of mother-
ing we received, the family dynamics, the traumatic and nourishing exper-
iences we had at that time, play important roles in shaping our personalities.
The biographical realm is generally the easiest part of the psyche to access,
and it is certainly the part with which we are most familiar.
21
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

However, not all the important events from our early lives can be reached
by everyday methods of recall. It may be easy to remember happy times,
but the traumas at the roots of our fears and self-doubts have a way of
eluding us. They sink deep into the region of our psyches that has come to
be known as the “individual unconscious” and are hidden from us by a
process that Sigmund Freud called “repression.” Freud’s pioneering work
revealed that it was possible to gain access to the unconscious and free
ourselves from repressed emotional material through the systematic ana-
lysis of dreams, fantasies, neurotic symptoms, slips of the tongue, daily
behaviors, and other aspects of our lives.
Freud and his followers probed the unconscious mind through “free as-
sociation.” This is a technique with which most people are familiar. We are
asked to say whatever comes to mind for us, allowing words, mental im-
ages, and memories to flow freely, without censoring them in any way.
This technique, as well as other exclusively verbal approaches, proved to
be a relatively weak exploratory tool. Then, in the middle of this century,
a new discipline, called “humanistic psychology,” produced a variety of
therapies that utilized “body work” and encouraged the full expression of
emotions within the safety of a therapeutic setting. These “experiential”
approaches increased the effectiveness of the exploration of biographical
material. However, like earlier verbal techniques these new approaches
were conducted in ordinary states of consciousness.
The therapeutic use of non-ordinary states, which we explore in this
book, sheds new light on biographical material. While this work with non-
ordinary states confirms much that is already known through traditional
psychotherapy, it swings open the gates to vast new possibilities, providing
us with information about the nature of our lives that is quite revolutionary.
In psychoanalysis and related approaches, core memories that have been
repressed from infancy and childhood may take months or even years to
reach. In work with non-ordinary states, such as that in Holotropic
Breathwork™, significant biographical material from our earliest years
frequently starts coming to the surface in the first few sessions. Not only
do people gain access to memories of their childhood and infancy, they
often vividly connect with their births and their lives within the womb and
begin venturing into a realm of experience even beyond these.
There is an additional advantage to this work. Instead of simply remem-
bering early events in our lives, or reconstructing them from bits and pieces
of dreams and memories, in non-ordinary states of consciousness we can
literally relive early events from our lives. We can be two months old,
22
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

or even younger, once again experiencing all the sensory, emotional, and
physical qualities as we first knew them. We experience our bodies as in-
fants, and our perceptions of the circumstances are primitive, naive, and
childlike. We see it all with unusual vividness and clarity. There is good
reason to believe that these experiences reach all the way back to the cellular
level.
During experiential sessions in Holotropic Breathwork™, it is amazing
to witness the depth to which people are able to go as they relive the
earliest experiences of their lives. It is not unusual to see them change in
appearance and demeanor in a way that is age-appropriate for the period
they are experiencing. People who regress to infancy typically adopt facial
expressions, body postures, gestures, and behavior of small children. In
early infancy experiences this includes salivation and automatic sucking
movements. What is even more remarkable is that they usually manifest
neurological reflexes that are also age-appropriate. They might show a
sucking reflex to a light touch of the lips and other so-called axial reflexes
that characterize the normal neurological responses of infants.
One of the most dramatic findings was a positive Babinski sign occurring
in people regressed to early childhood states. To elicit this reflex, which is
part of the pediatrician’s neurological test, the sole of the foot is touched
with a sharp object. In infants the toes fan out in response to this stimulus;
in older children they curl in. The same adults who showed a fanning out
reaction to this test during the time that they were regressed to infancy
reacted normally while reliving periods of later childhood. And, as expected,
the same people displayed normal Babinski responses when they returned
to normal consciousness states.
There is another important difference between exploring the psyche in
non-ordinary states and doing so in ordinary states. In non-ordinary states
there is an automatic selection of the most relevant and emotionally charged
material from the person’s unconscious. It is as if an “inner radar” system
scans the psyche and the body for the most important issues and makes
them available to our conscious minds. This is invaluable for therapist and
client alike, saving us the task of having to make a decision about which
issues that arise from our unconscious are important and which are not.
Such decisions are typically biased because they are often influenced by
our personal belief systems and training in one of the many schools of
psychotherapy, which disagree with one another.
This radar function found in non-ordinary states of consciousness has
revealed aspects of the biographical realm that had previously eluded us
in
23
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

our exploration of human consciousness. One of these discoveries involves
the impact of early physical trauma on our emotional development. We
found that the radar system brings to the surface not only memories of
emotional traumas, but also memories of events where the survival or in-
tegrity of the physical body was threatened. The release of emotions and
patterns of tension that were still being stored in the body as a result of
these early traumas proved to be one of the most immediate and valuable
benefits derived from this work. Problems associated with breathing, such
as diphtheria, whooping cough, pneumonia, or near drowning, played
particularly critical roles.
Traditional psychiatry sees physical traumas such as these as potentially
contributing to organic brain damage, but it fails to acknowledge their
immense impact on an emotional level. People who experientially relive
memories of serious physical traumas come to fully recognize the scars
these events left on their psyches. They also recognize the powerful contri-
bution of these traumas to present difficulties with psychosomatic diseases
such as asthma, migraine headaches, depression, phobias, or even sadomas-
ochistic tendencies. In turn, reliving these early traumas and working them
through frequently has a therapeutic effect, bringing either temporary or
permanent relief from symptoms and a sense of well-being that the person
never dreamed was possible.
COEX Systems—Keys to Our Destiny
Another important discovery of our research was that memories of emo-
tional and physical experiences are stored in the psyche not as isolated bits
and pieces but in the form of complex constellations, which I call COEX
systems (for “systems of condensed experience”). Each COEX system consists
of emotionally charged memories from different periods of our lives; the
common denominator that brings them together is that they share the same
emotional quality or physical sensation. Each COEX may have many layers,
each permeated by its central theme, sensations, and emotional qualities.
Many times we can identify individual layers according to the different
periods of the person’s life.
Each COEX has a theme that characterizes it. For example, a single COEX
constellation can contain all major memories of events that were humiliat-
ing, degrading, or shameful. The common denominator of another COEX
might be the terror of experiences that involved claustrophobia, suffocation,
and feelings associated with oppressing and confining circum-
24
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

stances. Rejection and emotional deprivation leading to our distrust of
other people is another very common COEX motif. Of particular importance
are systems involving life-threatening experiences or memories where our
physical well-being was clearly at risk.
It is easy to jump to the conclusion that COEX systems always contain
painful material. However, a COEX system can just as well contain constel-
lations of positive experiences, experiences of tremendous peace, bliss, or
ecstasy that have also helped to mold our psyches.
In the earliest stages of my research, I believed that COEX systems
primarily governed that aspect of the psyche known as the individual un-
conscious. At that time I was still working under a premise I had learned
in my training as a psychiatrist—that the psyche was entirely the product
of our upbringing, that is, of the biographical material we stored within
our minds. As my experiences with non-ordinary states expanded, becom-
ing richer and more extensive, I realized that the roots of COEX systems
reached much deeper than I ever could have imagined.
Each COEX constellation appears to be superimposed over and anchored
into a very particular aspect of the birth experience. As we will explore in
the next chapters of the book, the experiences of birth, so rich and complex
in physical sensations and emotions, contain the elementary themes for
every conceivable COEX system. In addition to these perinatal components,
typical COEX systems can have even deeper roots. They can reach farther
into prenatal life and into the realm of transpersonal phenomena such as
past life experiences, archetypes of the “collective unconscious,” and
identification with other life forms and universal processes. My research
experience with COEX systems has convinced me that they serve to organize
not only the individual unconscious, as I originally believed, but the entire
human psyche itself.
COEX systems affect every area of our emotional lives. They can influence
the way we perceive ourselves, other people, and the world around us.
They are the dynamic forces behind our emotional and psychosomatic
symptoms, setting the stage for the difficulties we have relating to ourselves
and other people. There is a constant interplay between the COEX systems
of our inner world and events in the external world. External events can
activate corresponding COEX systems within us. Conversely, COEX systems
help shape our perceptions of the world, and through these perceptions
we act in ways that bring about situations in the external world that echo
patterns in our COEX systems. Put another way, our inner perceptions can
function like complex scripts through
25
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

which we re-create core themes of our own COEX systems in the external
world.
The function of COEX systems in our lives can best be illustrated through
the story of a man I will call Peter, a thirty-seven-year-old tutor who was
intermittently treated at our department in Prague without success prior
to his undergoing psychedelic therapy. His experiences, growing out of a
very dark period in world history, are dramatic, graphic, and bizarre. For
this reason the reader may find the example unpleasant. However, his story
is valuable in the context of our present discussion because it so clearly
reveals the dynamics of COEX systems and how it is possible to emotionally
liberate ourselves from those systems that cause us pain and suffering.
At the time we began with the experiential sessions, Peter could hardly
function in his everyday life. He was obsessed with the idea of finding a
man of a certain physical appearance, preferably clad in black. He wanted
to befriend this man and tell him of his urgent desire to be locked in a dark
cellar and exposed to physical and mental torture. Often unable to concen-
trate on anything else, he wandered aimlessly through the city, visiting
public parks, lavatories, bars, and railroad stations in search of the “right
man.”
He succeeded on several occasions in persuading or bribing men who
met his criteria to carry out his wishes. Having a special gift for finding
people with sadistic traits, he was twice almost killed, seriously hurt several
times, and once robbed of all his money. On those occasions when he was
successful in achieving the experience he craved, he was extremely
frightened and genuinely disliked the torture he underwent. Peter suffered
from suicidal depressions, sexual impotence, and occasional epileptic
seizures.
As we went over his personal history, I discovered that his problems
started at the time of his compulsory employment in Germany during
World War II. As the citizen of a Nazi occupied territory, he was forced
into what amounted to slave labor, performing very dangerous work.
During this period of his life, two SS officers forced him at gunpoint to
engage in their homosexual practices. When the war was over and Peter
was finally released, he found that he continued to seek homosexual inter-
course in the passive role. This eventually included fetishism for black
clothes and finally evolved into the full scenario of the obsession already
described.
In his effort to come to terms with his problem, Peter underwent fifteen
consecutive sessions in psychedelic therapy. In the process an impor-
26
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

tant COEX system surfaced, providing us with the key for an eventual
resolution. In the most superficial layers of this particular COEX, we pre-
dictably discovered Peter’s more recent traumatic experiences with his
sadistic partners.
A deeper layer of the same COEX system contained Peter’s memories
from the Third Reich. In his experiential sessions he relived his terrifying
ordeals with the SS officers and was able to begin resolving the many
complex feelings surrounding those events. In addition, he relived other
traumatic memories of the war and dealt with the entire oppressive atmos-
phere of that horrible period in history. He had visions of pompous Nazi
military parades and rallies, banners with swastikas, ominous giant eagle
emblems, and scenes from concentration camps, to name just a few.
Following these revelations, Peter entered an even deeper layer of this
COEX system where he began re-experiencing scenes from his childhood.
He had often been brutally punished by his parents, particularly by his al-
coholic father who became violent when he was drunk, often beating Peter
with a large leather strap. His mother often punished him by locking him
in a dark cellar without food or water for hours at a time. Peter could not
remember her wearing anything but black dresses. At this point, he recog-
nized the pattern of his obsession—he seemed to crave all the elements of
punishment that had been inflicted on him by his parents.
Peter’s experiential exploration of his key COEX system continued. He
relived his own birth trauma. Vivid memories of this time—once again
focused on biological brutality—revealed themselves to him as the basic
pattern, or model, for all those elements of sadistic experience that seemed
to predominate in his life thereafter. His attention was clearly focused on
dark enclosed spaces, confinement and restriction of his body, and exposure
to extreme physical and emotional torture.
As Peter relived his birth trauma he began to experience freedom from
his obsessions, as if having finally located the primary source of this partic-
ular COEX system he could begin to dismantle it. He eventually was able
to enjoy relief from his difficult symptoms and begin functioning in his
life.
While the discovery of the psychological importance of physical traumas
has added important new dimensions to the broad biographical realm of
the psyche, this work is still addressed primarily to a territory that is accep-
ted and well known in traditional psychology and psychiatry. But my own
as well as others’ research with non-ordinary states of consciousness has
led us into vast new territories of the psyche that Western science and
27
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

traditional psychology have only begun to explore. The open-minded,
systematic exploration of these realms could have far-reaching consequences
not only for human consciousness research and psychiatry but also for the
philosophy of science and the entire Western culture.4
Journeys Inward: Farther Reaches of Consciousness
When working in non-ordinary states of consciousness the amount of time
that people spend exploring early childhood varies greatly. However, if
they continue to work in non-ordinary states, they sooner or later leave the
arena of individual history following birth and move to entirely new territ-
ories. While these new territories have not yet been recognized by Western
academic psychiatry, they are not, by any means, unknown to humanity.
On the contrary, they have been systematically studied and held in high
esteem by ancient and pre-industrial cultures since the dawn of human
history.
As we venture beyond the biographical events of early childhood, we
enter into a realm of experience associated with the trauma of biological
birth. Entering this new territory, we start experiencing emotions and
physical sensations of great intensity, often surpassing anything we might
consider humanly possible. Here we encounter emotions at two polar ex-
tremes, a strange intertwining of birth and death, as if these two aspects
of the human experience were somehow one. Along with a sense of life-
threatening confinement comes a determined struggle to free oneself and
survive.
Because most people identify this experience with biological birth trauma,
I refer to it as the perinatal realm of the psyche. This term is a Greek-Latin
word composed of the prefix peri- meaning “near” or “around,” and the
root word natalis, “pertaining to childbirth.” The word perinatal is commonly
used in medicine to describe biological processes occurring shortly before,
during, and immediately after birth. However, since traditional medicine
denies that the child has the capacity to record the experiences of birth in
its memory, this term is not used in traditional psychiatry. The use of the
term perinatal in connection with consciousness reflects my own findings
and is entirely new.
Exploration in non-ordinary states of consciousness has provided con-
vincing evidence that we do store memories of perinatal experiences in
our psyches, often at a deep cellular level. People with no intellectual
knowledge of their births have been able to relive, with extraordinary detail,
facts
28
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

concerning their births, such as the use of forceps, breech delivery, and the
mother’s earliest responses to the infant. Time and time again, details such
as these have been objectively confirmed by questioning hospital records
or adults who were present at the delivery.
Perinatal experiences involve primitive emotions and sensations such
as anxiety, biological fury, physical pain, and suffocation, typically associ-
ated with the birth process. People reliving birth experiences also usually
manifest the appropriate physical movements, positioning their arms and
legs, and twisting their bodies in ways that accurately re-create the mech-
anics of a particular type of delivery. We can observe this even with people
who have neither studied nor observed the birth process in their adult
lives. Also, bruises, swellings, and other vascular changes can unexpectedly
appear on the skin in the places where forceps were applied, where the
wall of the birth canal was pressing on the head, or where the umbilical
cord was constricting the throat. All these details can be confirmed if good
birth records or reliable personal witnesses are available.
These early perinatal experiences are not limited to the delivery process
of childbirth. Deep perinatal memories can also provide us with a doorway
into what Jung called the collective unconscious. While reliving the ordeal
of passing through the birth canal we may identify with those same events
experienced by people of other times and other cultures, or even identify
with the birth process experienced by animals or mythological figures. We
can also feel a deep link with all those who have been abused, imprisoned,
tortured, or victimized in some other way. It is as if our own connection
with the universal experience of the fetus struggling to be born provides
us with an intimate, almost mystical connection with all beings who are
now or ever have been in similar circumstances.
Perinatal phenomena occur in four distinct experiential patterns, which
I call the Basic Perinatal Matrices (BPMs). Each of the four matrices is closely
related to one of the four consecutive periods of biological delivery. At
each of these stages, the baby undergoes experiences that are characterized
by specific emotions and physical feelings; each of these stages also seems
to be associated with specific symbolic images. These come to represent
highly individualized psychospiritual blueprints that guide the way we
experience our lives. They may be reflected in individual and social psy-
chopathology or in religion, art, philosophy, politics, and other areas of
life. And, of course, we can gain access to these psychospiritual blueprints
through non-ordinary states of consciousness, which allow us to see the
guiding forces of our lives much more clearly.
29
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

The first matrix, BPM I, which can be called the “Amniotic Universe,”
refers to our experiences in the womb prior to the onset of delivery. The
second matrix, BPM II, or “Cosmic Engulfment and No Exit,” pertains to
our experiences when contractions begin but before the cervix opens. The
third matrix, BPM III, the “Death and Rebirth Struggle,” reflects our exper-
iences as we move through the birth canal. The fourth and final matrix,
BPM IV, which we can refer to as “Death and Rebirth,” is related to our
experiences when we actually leave the mother’s body. Each perinatal
matrix has its specific biological, psychological, archetypal, and spiritual
aspects.
In the following four chapters, we will explore the perinatal matrices as
they would naturally unfold during childbirth. Each chapter begins with
a personal narrative describing experiences that are characteristic of that
matrix, then discusses the biological basis for the experience, how that ex-
perience becomes translated into a specific symbolism within our psyches,
and how that symbolism affects our lives.
It should probably be noted that in experiential self-exploration, we do
not necessarily experience the individual matrices in their natural order.
Instead, perinatal material is selected by our own inner radar systems,
making the order in which each person accesses this material highly indi-
vidualized. Nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity it is useful to think
about them in the order of the following four chapters.
30
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

II
THE PERINATAL
MATRICES—INFLUENCES THAT
SHAPE HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS FROM
PRENATAL
LIFE THROUGH BIRTH
The dream is the small hidden door in the deepest and most intimate
sanctum of the soul, which opens into that primeval cosmic night that
was soul long before there was a conscious ego and will be soul far
beyond what a conscious ego could ever reach.
—Carl Gustav Jung, Memories,
Dreams, Reflections


2
WHOLENESS AND THE AMNIOTIC
UNIVERSE—BPM I
Deep peace on the running wave to you
Deep peace on the flowing air to you
Deep peace on the quiet earth to you
Deep peace of the shining stars to you
Deep peace on the gentle night to you
Moon and stars pour their healing light on you
Deep peace to you
—Traditional Gaelic blessing
Assisted by the therapist and a trained nurse, the man, a psychiatrist in his
mid-thirties, was guided into an altered state, where he moved slowly but
profoundly into a world that existed in the deepest recesses of his conscious-
ness. At first he did not notice any great perceptual or emotional changes,
only subtle physical symptoms that made him think he might be getting
the flu. He experienced malaise, chills, a strange and unpleasant taste in
his mouth, slight nausea, and intestinal discomfort. Waves of mild tremors
and twitches rippled through various muscles of his body, and he began
to sweat.
He grew impatient, convinced that nothing was happening and disturbed
that he had apparently caught a flu bug. Perhaps, he reasoned, he had
chosen the wrong time to do this work since he seemed to be coming down
with an illness. He decided to close his eyes and more carefully observe
what was happening to him.
The instant he closed his eyes, he felt himself move into a totally different
and deeper level of consciousness, a level that was entirely new to him. He
had the odd sensation of shrinking in size, his head considerably larger
than the rest of his body and extremities. And then he realized that what
he had at first feared might be the flu coming on had now become a
33

whole complex of toxic insults on him—not as an adult but as a fetus! He
felt himself suspended in a liquid that contained some harmful substances
that were coming into his body through the umbilical cord, and he was
certain all these were noxious and hostile. He could taste the offending
substances, a strange combination of iodine and decomposing blood or
stale bouillon.
As all this was happening, the adult part of him, the part that had been
medically trained and had always prided itself in its disciplined scientific
perspective, observed the fetus from an objective distance. The medical
scientist in him knew that the toxic attacks in this highly vulnerable stage
of his life were coming from his mother’s body. Occasionally he was able
to distinguish one of these noxious substances from another—now it seemed
to be spices or some other food ingredients not appropriate for a fetus,
another time elements of cigarette smoke his mother must have inhaled,
and yet another time a touch of alcohol. He also became aware of his
mother’s emotions—a sort of chemical essence of her anxiety at one moment,
anger the next, feelings about the pregnancy at another time, and even
sexual arousal.
The idea that a functioning consciousness could exist in a fetus was in
conflict with everything he had been taught in medical school. But even
more than that, the possibility that he could be aware of subtle nuances in
the interactions between himself and his mother during this period of his
life astonished him. Still, he could not deny the concrete nature of these
experiences. All of it presented the scientist in him with a very serious
conflict; everything he was experiencing went against everything he
“knew.” Then a solution to the conflict presented itself to him and
everything became very clear: It was necessary to revise his present scientific
beliefs—something that he knew had happened many times to others in
the course of history—rather than to question the relevance of his own ex-
perience.
After a period of considerable struggle, he gave up his analytical thinking
and accepted all that was happening to him. His flu symptoms and indi-
gestion vanished. It seemed now that he was connecting with the memories
of the undisturbed periods of his intrauterine life. His visual field was
clearing and brightening and he was becoming increasingly ecstatic. It was
as if multiple layers of thick, dirty cobwebs were being magically stripped
away and dissolved. The scenery before him opened up and he found
himself enveloped in brilliant light and energy that streamed in subtle vi-
brations through his entire being.
34
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

On one level, he was still a fetus experiencing the ultimate perfection
and bliss of a good womb or of a newborn fusing with the nourishing, life-
giving breast. On another level, he became the entire universe. He was
witnessing the spectacle of the macrocosm, with countless pulsating galax-
ies. Sometimes he stood outside, watching these things as a spectator; at
other times he became them. These radiant and breathtaking cosmic vistas
were intertwined with experiences of an equally miraculous microcosm—a
dance of atoms and molecules, then the emergence of the biochemical world
and the unfolding of the origins of life and individual cells. He felt that for
the first time in his life he was experiencing the universe for what it really
is—an unfathomable mystery, a divine play of energy.
This rich and complex experience lasted for what seemed an eternity.
He found himself vacillating between experiencing himself in the state of
a distressed, sickened fetus and the state of blissful and serene intrauterine
existence. At times, noxious influences took the form of archetypal demons
or malevolent creatures from a fairy tale world. He began receiving a flood
of insights concerning the reasons children are so fascinated by mythic
stories and their characters. Some of these insights were of a much broader
relevance. The yearning for a state of total fulfillment, such as that which
can be experienced in a good womb or in a mystical rapture, appeared to
be the ultimate motivating force of every human being. He saw this theme
of yearning expressed in the unfolding of the fairy tales toward a happy
ending. He saw it in the revolutionary’s dream of a Utopian future. He saw
it in the artist’s drive for acceptance and acclamation. And he saw it in
ambitions for possessions, status, and fame. It became very clear to him
that here was the answer to humanity’s most fundamental dilemma. The
craving and need behind these drives could never be satisfied by even the
most spectacular achievements in the external world. The only way the
yearning could be satisfied was to reconnect with this place in one’s own
unconscious. He suddenly understood the message of so many spiritual
teachers that the only revolution that can work is the inner transformation
of every human being.
During episodes when he was reliving positive memories of his fetal
existence, he experienced feelings of oneness with all the universe. Here
was the Tao, the Beyond that is Within, and the Tat tvam asi (Thou art That)
of the Upanishads. He lost his sense of individuality. His ego dissolved
and he became all of existence. Sometimes this experience was intangible
and without content; sometimes it was accompanied by many beautiful
visions—archetypal images of Paradise, the ultimate cornucopia, the golden
35
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

age, or virginal nature. He became fish swimming in crystal-clear waters,
butterflies floating in mountain meadows, and seagulls swooping down
to skim the surface of the ocean. He became ocean, animals, plants,
clouds—sometimes one, sometimes another, sometimes all of them at the
same time.
Nothing concrete happened after that except that he began feeling at one
with nature and the universe, bathed in golden light that was slowly de-
creasing in intensity. He gave up this experience and returned to his
everyday state of consciousness reluctantly. As he did so, he felt certain
that something extremely important had happened to him and that he
would never again be quite the same. He reached a new feeling of harmony
and self-acceptance, along with a global understanding of existence that
he could not find words to describe.
For hours after this experience he felt absolutely convinced that he was
composed of pure energy and spirit, finding it difficult to fully accept his
old beliefs in his physical existence. Late in the evening of that day, he had
the profound sense of being healed and whole, coming back into a perfectly
functioning body.
For the psychiatrist who experienced all this, more questions than an-
swers came forth in the months ahead. It might have been easy to dismiss
much of what he had experienced if his experience had only been intellec-
tual. Intellectual understanding could have come from books or films. But
something more than this had occurred. More than anything else his exper-
iences had been sensual—extraordinary physical sensations, filled with
feelings of strange textures, the light and the dark of life. He had felt the
sickness caused by the toxins that had bombarded him in the womb, and
then the inexplicable clearing.
Granted, some information about this realm might have come from books
he had read or films he had seen, but what was the source of his minutely
detailed sensations? How could he have known the feelings of the fetal
period of his life? Clearly, his consciousness was providing him with
amazingly detailed, complex, and concrete information that he had never
dreamed possible. He had felt the oneness with the universe, the Tao. He
had experienced the dissolution of his ego and a merging with all of exist-
ence. But if all this was true, he had to abandon what he had believed up
to that point, that our minds could only provide us with the memories of
events we had experienced first-hand in the period following our births.
How do I know so much about the questions that went through this
psychiatrist’s mind? I know because the experiences described above are
36
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

my own. Yet, I have also found that these experiences are neither unique
nor unusual in deep consciousness research. On the contrary, my own
narrative represents a particular set of human experiences that has appeared
in many hundreds of similar sessions of other people I have witnessed over
the past thirty years.
Biological and Psychological Features of BPM I
The central features of this matrix, as well as the images that flow from it,
reflect the natural symbiosis that exists between the mother and child
during this period of our lives. It is important to remember that during this
time we are so intimately connected with the mother, both biologically and
emotionally, that we are almost like an organ in her body. During the
periods of undisturbed intrauterine life, the conditions for the baby are
close to ideal. The oxygen and nutrients needed for growth are continuously
supplied by the placenta, which also disposes of all the waste products.
The fetus is protected from loud noises and concussions by the amniotic
fluid, and the mother’s body and the temperature in the womb is kept rel-
atively steady. There is security, protection, and instant, effortless gratific-
ation of all needs.
This picture of life in the womb might look very wonderful and rosy,
but it is not consistently so. In the best situations, optimal conditions are
disturbed only rarely and for short duration. For example, the mother might
occasionally eat foods that cause the fetus distress, have an alcoholic drink,
or smoke a cigarette. She might spend some time in a very noisy environ-
ment or cause the baby and herself some discomfort by driving in a car on
a bumpy road. Like anybody else, she might catch a cold or a flu. Added
to this, sexual activity, especially in the later months of pregnancy, may
also be experienced at some level by the fetus.
In the worst situations, life in the womb can be exceedingly uncomfort-
able. The infant’s existence might be affected by the mother’s suffering a
serious infection, an endocrinal or metabolic disease, or severe toxicosis.
We can even talk about “toxic emotions,” such as intense anxiety, tension,
or violent outbursts of anger. The quality of pregnancy can be influenced
by work stress, chronic intoxications, addiction, or by the cruel treatment
of the mother. The situation can be so bad that spontaneous miscarriage is
imminent. In deep experiential work, people have even discovered well-
kept family secrets, such as the fact that they were unwanted and that the
mother had tried to abort them in the earliest stages of their lives.
37
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

In modern obstetrics our negative experiences during the fetal period
are considered important only from a physical point of view, that is, only
as a potential source of biological damage to the body. If there are effects
on the psychological development of the child, it is held that these came
about only as the result of some organic impairment of the brain. However,
experiences described by people who are able to re-experience this level
in non-ordinary states of consciousness leave little doubt that the child’s
consciousness may be affected by a wide range of noxious influences even
in the earliest stages of the embryonal life. If this is the case, we would have
to assume that just as there is a “good” or “bad breast,” so there is also a
“good” or “bad womb.” In this respect, positive experiences in the womb
seem to play a role in the child’s development that is at least as important
as a positive nursing experience.
During non-ordinary states of consciousness, many people report their
intrauterine experiences in extremely vivid terms. They experience them-
selves as very small, with a characteristically large head in relationship to
their body. They can feel the surrounding amniotic fluid and sometimes
even the presence of the umbilical cord. If one connects with the periods
of fetal life where there were no disturbances, the experiences are associated
with a blissful state of consciousness where there is no sense of duality
between subject and object. It is an “oceanic” state without any boundaries
where we do not differentiate between ourselves and the maternal organism
or ourselves and the external world.
This fetal experience can develop in several different directions. The
oceanic aspect of embryonal life can foster an identification with various
aquatic life forms such as whales, dolphins, fish, jelly-fish, or even kelp.
The sense of being without boundaries that we experience in the womb
can also mediate a sense of being “at one” with the cosmos. One may
identify with interstellar space, various celestial bodies, an entire galaxy,
or the universe in its totality. Some people also identify with the experience
of astronauts floating weightlessly in space, attached to the “mother ship”
with the life-giving umbilical pipeline.
The fact that a good womb fulfills the fetus’s needs unconditionally is
the basis for symbolism such as the endless bounties of “Mother
Nature”—an entity that is beautiful, safe, and nourishing. When we are
reliving fetal experiences in non-ordinary states, those experiences can
suddenly change into gorgeous sceneries portraying luscious tropical is-
lands, fruit-bearing orchards, fields of ripening corn, or the opulent veget-
able gardens of the Andean terraces. Another possibility is that the fetal
experience opens into
38
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

the archetypal realms of the collective unconscious and instead of the
heavens of the astronomers or the nature of the biologists we encounter
celestial realms and Gardens of Paradise from the mythologies of a variety
of the world’s cultures. The symbolism of BPM I thus weaves together, in
an intimate and logical way, various fetal, oceanic, cosmic, natural, para-
disean, and celestial elements.
The State of Ecstasy and Cosmic Unity
The experiences of BPM I typically have strong mystical overtones; they
feel sacred or holy. More precise, perhaps, would be the term numinous,
which C. G. Jung used to avoid religious jargon. When we have experiences
of this kind, we feel that we have encountered dimensions of reality that
belong to a superior order. There is an important spiritual aspect of BPM
I, often described as a profound feeling of cosmic unity and ecstasy, closely
associated with experiences we might have in a good womb—peace, tran-
quillity, serenity, joy, and bliss. Our everyday perceptions of space and
time seem to fade away and we become “pure being.” Language fails to
convey the essence of this state, prompting most to remark only that it is
“indescribable” or “ineffable.”
Descriptions of cosmic unity are often filled with paradoxes that violate
Aristotelian logic. For example, in everyday life, we assume that things we
encounter cannot simultaneously be themselves and not be themselves, or
that they cannot be something other than what they are. “A” cannot be
“non-A” or “B.” Yet, an experience of cosmic unity might be “without
content, yet embracing all there is.” Or we might feel that we are “without
ego” at the same time that our consciousness has expanded to include the
entire universe. We can feel humbled and awed by our own insignificance,
yet simultaneously have a sense of enormous achievement and importance,
sometimes to the extent of identifying ourselves with God. We can perceive
ourselves as existing and yet not existing and see all material objects as
being empty while emptiness itself appears filled with form.
In this state of cosmic unity, we feel that we have direct, immediate, and
unlimited access to knowledge and wisdom of universal significance. This
usually does not mean concrete information with technical details that
could be practically applied; rather, it involves complex revelatory insights
into the nature of existence. These are typically accompanied by a sense of
certainty that this knowledge is ultimately more relevant and “real” than
the perceptions and beliefs we share in everyday life. The
39
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

ancient Indian Upanishads talk about this profound insight into the ultimate
secrets of existence as “knowing That, the knowledge of which gives the
knowledge of everything.”
The rapture associated with BPM I can be referred to as “oceanic ecstasy.”
Later in this book, in the section on BPM III, we will encounter a very dif-
ferent form of rapture associated with the death-rebirth process. I have
coined for it the term volcanic ecstasy. It is wild, Dionysian, with seemingly
insatiable amounts of explosive energy and a strong drive toward hectic
activity. In contrast, the oceanic energy of BPM I could be called Apollonian;
it involves a peaceful melting of all boundaries, along with serenity, and
tranquillity. With our eyes closed and the rest of the world shut out, it
manifests as an independent inner experience that has the features I have
already described. When we open our eyes, it changes into a sense of
merging, or “becoming one with” everything that we perceive around us.
In the oceanic state, the world appears to manifest indescribable radiance
and beauty. The need for reasoning is dramatically reduced and the universe
becomes “a mystery to be experienced, not a riddle to be solved.” It becomes
virtually impossible to find anything negative about existence; everything
seems absolutely perfect. This sense of perfection has a built-in contradic-
tion, one that Ram Dass once captured very succinctly by a statement he
had heard from his Himalayan guru: “The world is absolutely perfect, in-
cluding your own dissatisfaction with it, and everything you are trying to
do to change it.” While experiencing the oceanic ecstasy, the entire world
appears as a friendly place where we can safely and securely assume a
childlike, passive-dependent attitude. In this state, evil seems ephemeral,
irrelevant, or even non-existent.
The feelings of oceanic ecstasy are closely related to Abraham Maslow’s
“peak experience.” He characterized it as: feeling whole, unified, and integ-
rated; effortless and at ease; completely yourself; utilizing your capacities
to the fullest; free of blocks, inhibitions, and fears; spontaneous and express-
ive; in the here and now; being pure psyche and spirit; with no wants and
needs; simultaneously childlike and mature; and graced in a way that is
beyond words. While my observations of oceanic ecstasy grew primarily
out of the experiences encountered in regressive experiential work,
Maslow’s descriptions reflect his study of spontaneous peak experiences
in adult life. The strong parallels between these two areas suggest that the
roots of some of our most powerful motivating forces reach much further
back in our lives than psychologists originally considered possible.
40
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

The Agonies of the “Bad Womb”
So far we have explored the complex symbolism that is associated with the
“good womb” or undisturbed intrauterine experiences. Prenatal disturb-
ances have their own distinct experiential characteristics; unless they are
extreme, such as imminent miscarriage, attempted abortion, or severe
toxic states, their symptoms are relatively subtle. They can usually be easily
differentiated from the more dramatic unpleasant manifestations associated
with the birth process, such as images of wars, sadomasochistic scenes,
feelings of suffocation, agonizing pains and pressures, violent shaking, and
spastic contractions of large muscles. Since most of the intrauterine assaults
are based on chemical changes, the predominant themes are polluted or
dangerous nature, poisoning, and insidious evil influences.
The clear oceanic atmosphere can become dark, murky, and ominous
and may seem to be filled with hidden aquatic dangers. Some of these
dangers might seem to be grotesque creatures of nature, others creepy,
treacherous, and malevolent demonic presences. One can identify with fish
and other aquatic life forms threatened by industrial pollution of rivers
and oceans or chicken embryos before hatching threatened by their own
waste products. Similarly, the vision of a star-filled sky, characteristic for
good womb experiences, can suddenly become blurred with an ugly film
or fog. The visual disturbances resemble distorted pictures of malfunction-
ing television sets.
Scenes of industrial waste polluting the air, chemical warfare, toxic
dumps, as well as identification with prisoners dying in the gas chambers
of concentration camps, belong to typical experiences of the bad womb.
One can also sense the almost tangible presence of malevolent entities, ex-
traterrestrial influences, and astrological fields. The dissolution of bound-
aries that creates a sense of mystical union with the world during undis-
turbed episodes of intrauterine life now becomes responsible for a sense
of confusion and being threatened. We may feel open and vulnerable to
evil attacks; in the extreme this experience leads to paranoid distortion in
our perceptions of the world.
Gateway to the Transpersonal Experience
As we saw in the narrative that opened this chapter, the prenatal world of
BPM I often serves as a gateway into the transpersonal domain of the
psyche, which we will be describing in detail later. While identifying with
41
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

either the good or bad womb experiences we can also experience specific
transpersonal phenomena that share emotions and physical sensations
with these states. Sometimes these experiences can reach far back in time,
portraying episodes from the lives of our human or animal ancestors; there
also may be karmic sequences and flashbacks from other periods of human
history. At other times, we may transcend the boundaries that make us feel
separate from the rest of the world and have a sense of merging with other
people, groups of people, animals and plants, or even inorganic processes.
Of special interest among these experiences are powerful encounters
with various archetypal beings, particularly blissful and wrathful deities.
The states of oceanic ecstasy are often accompanied by visions of bliss-be-
stowing deities, such as the Earth Mother Goddess and various other Great
Mother Goddesses, the Buddha, Apollo, and others. As mentioned above,
intrauterine disturbances are often experienced in conjunction with demons
from different cultures. In advanced experiential work, participants have
often had revelations that brought about an integration of good womb and
bad womb experiences with dramatic insights that allowed them to see the
purpose of all deities in the cosmic order.
The integration of good and bad womb experiences can be illustrated
through an excerpt from a session in which one man, Ben, while reliving
episodes from his intrauterine life, reported encounters with archetypal
beings. These experiences led him to some remarkable insights into the
deities and demons of the Indian and Tibetan pantheon. He suddenly saw
a striking relationship between the state of the Buddha sitting on a lotus
in deep meditation and that of an embryo in a good womb. The peace,
tranquillity, and satisfaction of the Buddha, although not identical with
the embryonal bliss, seemed to share with it some important characteristics,
as if it were its “higher octave.” The demons surrounding the Buddha and
potentially threatening his peace, as depicted in Indian and Tibetan paint-
ings, appeared to Ben as also representing the disturbances associated with
BPM I.
Ben was able to distinguish among the demons two different kinds:
bloodthirsty, openly aggressive, ferocious demons with fangs, daggers and
spears symbolized the pains and dangers of the biological birth process;
creepy, insidious, and treacherous ones represented noxious influences of
the intrauterine life. On a different level, Ben also experienced what he was
convinced were memories from his past incarnations. It seemed to him that
elements of his “bad karma” had entered his life in the form of embryonal
disturbances, the trauma of birth, and negative experiences associated
42
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

with nursing. He saw the experiences of the “bad womb,” of the trauma
of birth, and the “bad breast,” as points of transformation through which
the karmic influences were entering his present life.1
The psychological and spiritual aspects of BPM I are typically accompan-
ied by characteristic physical symptoms. While good womb experiences
convey a deep sense of health and physiological well-being, the reliving
of intrauterine traumas involves a variety of unpleasant physical manifest-
ations. The most common of these are symptoms that resemble a bad cold
or flu—muscular pains and aches, chills, fine tremors, and a sense of gen-
eral malaise. Equally frequent are symptoms that we associate with a
hangover, such as headache, nausea, intestinal rumblings, and gas. This
may be accompanied by an unpleasant taste in the mouth that people de-
scribe variously as decomposed blood, iodine, metallic flavor, or simply
“poison.” In our efforts to validate these experiences, we frequently discover
that during pregnancy the mother was ill, had poor dietary habits, worked
or lived in toxic environments, or was a habitual user of alcohol or other
drugs.
Where Adult and Perinatal Experiences Merge
In addition to all the above aspects, BPM I also has very interesting associ-
ations with memories from postnatal life. The positive aspects of this matrix
represent a natural basis for recording all experiences of satisfaction from
our lives (positive COEX systems). During systematic experiential work,
people often discover deep connections between the oceanic ecstasy of
BPM I and memories of happy periods of infancy and childhood, such as
carefree and joyful play with peers or harmonious episodes from family
life. Satisfying romances and love relationships with intense emotional and
sexual gratification also become associated with positive fetal periods. In
deep experiential work, people frequently compare the oceanic ecstasy of
a good womb with certain forms of rapture that we can experience as adults.
Many experiences associated with this matrix can be triggered by natural
scenery of great beauty, such as the splendor of a gorgeous sunrise or
sunset, the peaceful majesty of the ocean, the breath-taking grandeur of a
snow-capped mountain range, or the mystique of the northern lights.
Similarly, pondering the unfathomable mystery of the star-filled sky,
standing beside a giant Sequoia tree thousands of years old, or witnessing
the exotic beauty of tropical islands can evoke feelings that are very close
to BPM I. Similar states of mind can also be initiated by human creations
of unusual aesthetic and artistic value, such as inspired music, great
43
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

paintings, or spectacular architecture of an ancient palace, cathedral, or
pyramid. Images such as these often spontaneously emerge in sessions
governed by the first perinatal matrix. While positive experiences in our
adult life can bring us in touch with the memories of the good womb,
negative experiences are capable of putting us in touch with intrauterine
distress. Here, for example, we might find the experiences of gastrointest-
inal discomfort of food poisoning or a hangover, or the malaise associated
with a viral infection. Polluted air and water, as well as ingestion of various
forms of intoxicants, are additional factors. Indirectly, images of spoiled
and contaminated nature, industrial dumps, and junkyards, can have the
same effect. Experiences of scuba diving represent a very powerful reminder
of the situation in the womb. The innocent beauty of a coral reef with
thousands of colorful tropical fish can reawaken the feelings of the oceanic
ecstasy of the womb. In the same way, diving in murky and polluted water
and encounters with undersea dangers can re-create the psychological
situation in the bad womb. Judged from this perspective, we have certainly
succeeded in the last few decades to shift the entire biosphere of our planet
considerably in the direction of the bad womb.
A New Phase Begins
Whatever the experiences in the womb, the time arrives when this situation
must come to an end. The fetus must undergo the phenomenal transition
from a symbiotic aquatic organism to an entirely different form of existence.
Even with the smoothest deliveries, this has to be viewed as a major ordeal,
a true heroic journey, associated with considerable emotional and physical
challenges. As the delivery begins, the child’s universe within the womb
is severely disturbed. The first signs of this disturbance are fairly subtle,
coming in the form of hormonal influences. However, they become increas-
ingly dramatic and mechanical with the onset of uterine contractions. The
fetus begins to experience intense physical discomfort and a situation of
extreme emergency. With the early signals of the beginning of the birth
process, the fetal consciousness is introduced to an entirely new set of ex-
periences quite different from what it has known up to this time. These are
the experiences that are associated with BPM II—the loss of the amniotic
universe and the engagement in the birth process. This phase of the early
drama of life is the subject of the next chapter.
44
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

3
EXPULSION FROM PARADISE—BPM II
My bodily sufferings were so intolerable that, though in my life I have
endured the severest sufferings of this kind, none of them is of the smallest
account by comparison with what I felt then, to say nothing of the know-
ledge that they would be endless and never ceasing. And even these are
nothing by comparison with the agony of my soul, an oppression, a suffoc-
ation, and an affliction so deeply felt, and accompanied by such hopeless
and distressing misery, that I cannot too forcibly describe it.
—St. Teresa of Avila, Life
Soon after the session began, he found himself entering the carefree world
of a satisfied infant. All his perceptions, feelings, and sensations were in-
fantile. The experience was incredibly real and authentic; he was even sal-
ivating and burping and his lips were making involuntary sucking move-
ments. Every once in a while, this was interspersed with scenes from the
world of adults, most of which were full of tension and conflict. The contrast
between the simple world of the child and the difficulties of the adult age
was painful, and it seemed to connect him with a deep craving to return
to his primal infantile happiness. He saw images of religious and political
gatherings with throngs of people seeking comfort in various organizations
and ideologies. He suddenly understood what they were really seeking;
they were following an inner longing, the same craving he felt in relation
to the primal experience of oceanic ecstasy that he had known in the womb
and on his mother’s breast.
45

The atmosphere seemed increasingly ominous and fraught with hidden
danger. It seemed that the entire room started to turn and he felt drawn
into the very center of a threatening whirlpool. He had to think about Edgar
Alan Poe’s chilling description of a similar situation in “A Descent into the
Maelstrom.” As the objects in the room seemed to be flying around him in
a rotating motion, another image from literature emerged in his mind—the
cyclone that in Frank Baum’s Wonderful Wizard of Oz sweeps Dorothy away
from the monotony of her life in Kansas and sends her on a strange journey
of adventure. There was no doubt in his mind that his experience also had
something to do with entering the rabbit hole in Alice in Wonderland, and
he awaited with great trepidation what world he would find on the other
side of the looking glass. The entire universe seemed to be closing in on
him and there was nothing he could do to stop this apocalyptic engulfment.
As he was sinking deeper and deeper into the labyrinth of his own un-
conscious, he felt an onslaught of anxiety, turning to panic. Everything
became dark, oppressive, and terrifying. It was as if the weight of the whole
world was encroaching on him, an incredible hydraulic pressure that
threatened to crack his skull and reduce his body to a tiny compact ball.
The discomfort he felt turned to pain and the pain increased to agony; the
torture intensified to the point where every cell in his body felt like it was
being bored open with a diabolic dentist’s drill.1
The Engulfing Womb
The above account illustrates how an adult might relive the onset of the
birth process. It also shows how the memory of being expulsed from the
womb and sent out to face the difficulties of the birth canal might merge
with adult situations that share with it certain important qualities. The
biological basis for BPM II is the termination of life in the womb and the
encounter with uterine contractions. Initially, the changes are predominantly
chemical; later they take on a mechanical character. The delivery is heralded
by hormonal signals and other chemical shifts in the organism of the
mother and child; these are soon followed by the intense muscular activities
of the uterus.
The same womb that throughout the normal pregnancy was relatively
peaceful and predictable, is now engaging in strong periodic contractions.
The entire world of the fetus is closing in and crushing it, causing anxiety
and great physical discomfort. Each contraction compresses the uterine
46
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

arteries and interferes with the flow of blood between the mother and the
fetus. This is a very alarming situation for the fetus, since it means interrup-
tion of the supply of the life-giving oxygen and nourishment, as well as
the severing of meaningful connections with the maternal organism. At
this time, the uterine cervix is still closed. The contractions, closed cervix,
and the unfavorable chemical changes combine to create a painful and life-
threatening environment from which the fetus can sense no possibility of
escape. It is no wonder that death and birth are so closely related in this
matrix.
The time spent in this difficult, no exit situation varies widely from person
to person. For some it might be minutes, for others many hours. Feeling
stuck is a normal occurrence before the cervix is open, but occasionally the
birth process can get arrested in later stages and does not proceed as it
should. There are any number of reasons for this to happen. The mother’s
pelvis might be too narrow, the uterine contractions ineffective, or the
placenta can block the uterine opening. On occasion, the child is excessively
large or lies in an abnormal position that is not conducive to a smooth birth.
All these circumstances make birth longer and more difficult; this clearly
has a more traumatic impact on the infant than an easy, normal delivery.
And, of course, all these factors will find a direct expression in experiential
sessions, during which a person relives his or her birth.
The biological events are not the only factors that determine our experi-
ence of this matrix. Reports from people in therapy sessions and workshops
indicate that we may also relive the fear and confusion of an inexperienced
mother or the mother’s negative or strongly ambivalent attitude toward
the child; these can make this phase more difficult for both mother and
child. It seems that the mother’s conflicting emotions can disturb the
physiological interplay between the uterine contractions and the opening
of the cervix. This can interfere with the delivery, prolong it, and introduce
a variety of complications into the natural dynamics of the birth process.
Caged in a Hostile World
Subjectively, reliving the onset of delivery brings intense anxiety and a
sense of imminent and vital threat. It seems as if our entire universe is in
danger, but the source of this menace remains mysterious, eluding our ef-
forts to identify it. Because the initial changes are chemical in nature, they
may feel like a disease or intoxication. In the extreme, the person may feel
47
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

paranoid or under some insidious attack. In an effort to find an explanation,
he or she might attribute the ominous feelings to poisons, electromagnetic
radiation, evil forces, secret organizations, or even extraterrestrial influences.
The spontaneous emergence of memories involving intrauterine disturb-
ances or of the onset of the delivery from the womb, seems to be among
important causes of paranoid states.
As these threatening experiences continue and deepen, the person may
have a vision of a gigantic whirlpool and feel in the middle of it, being
drawn relentlessly to its center. It might also seem that the earth has cracked
open and is swallowing the involuntary adventurer into the dark labyrinths
of a terrifying underworld. Another variation of the same feelings may
come as a sense of being devoured by an archetypal monster or entangled
by a fantastic octopus or a huge tarantula. The experience can have fantastic
proportions, as if not just a single individual, but the entire world were
being engulfed. The general atmosphere is that of an apocalyptic event that
destroys the peaceful intrauterine world and changes the oceanic and cosmic
freedom of the fetus into agonizing entrapment and a sense of being over-
whelmed by unknown external forces.
A person experiencing a fully developed BPM II feels caged, caught in
a claustrophobic, nightmarish world. The visual field is dark and ominous
and the general atmosphere is that of unbearable emotional and physical
torture. At the same time, the connection with linear time is completely
lost and whatever is happening seems eternal, as if it will never end. Under
the influence of BPM II, one is tuned selectively into the worst and most
hopeless aspects of human existence; one’s psyche becomes acutely aware
of and preoccupied with the darkest, ugliest, and most evil aspects of the
universe. Our entire planet appears to be an apocalyptic place, filled with
terror, suffering, wars, epidemics, accidents, and natural disasters. At the
same time, it is impossible to see any positive aspects of human life, such
as love and friendship, artistic and scientific achievements, or natural
beauty. In this state, one sees beautiful children playing with each other
and thinks of them as growing old and dying, or is shown a magnificent
rose and imagines how within several days it would wilt.
BPM II connects people in an almost mystical sense with the suffering
of the world and makes them feel identified with the victimized, downtrod-
den, and oppressed. In deep non-ordinary states governed by this matrix,
we can actually experience ourselves as the thousands of young men and
women who died in all the wars in human history. We may identify with
all the prisoners who ever suffered or died in the dungeons, torture
chambers,
48
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

concentration camps, or insane asylums of the world. Among frequent
themes associated with this matrix are scenes of starvation and famine, as
well as the discomfort and danger that come from freezing cold, ice, and
snow. This seems to be related to the fact that the contractions interrupt
the blood supply to the child—the blood that means nourishment and
warmth. Another typical aspect of BPM II is the atmosphere of the dehu-
manized, grotesque, and bizarre world of automata, robots, and mechanical
gadgets. The images of human monstrosities and sideshow freaks, as well
as the meaningless cardboard world of the honky-tonk also belong to the
characteristic symbolism of the second matrix.
BPM II is accompanied by very distinct physical manifestations. These
involve tension throughout the body and a posture that expresses a sense
of being stuck and/or of futile struggle. One can feel extreme pressures on
the head and body, heaviness on the chest, and different combinations of
intense physical pains. The head is bent forward with the jaws locked and
chin pressed into the chest, the arms are often folded on the breasts, with
hands clenched firmly into fists. Often the knees are bent and the legs flexed
completing the picture of a fetal position. There can be congestion of blood
in the skin capillaries and red blotches can appear in different parts of the
body.
Where the Beginning and the End Become One
People who are especially tuned in to BPM II tend to see human existence
as utterly futile. They may feel that because everything is impermanent,
life is in a very fundamental way bereft of any meaning; any goal-oriented
striving is a naive, empty, and ultimately self-deceptive folly. From this
perspective, any effort, ambition, or dream for the future is simply doomed
to failure. In extreme cases, humans appear to be nothing but pitiful peren-
nial victims, who fight a quixotic battle against forces greater than them-
selves, in which they do not have the least chance of victory.
At birth, we are thrown into this world with no choice in the matter and
the only certainty we can find in all of it is that one day we will die. The
old Latin saying expresses the human predicament very succinctly: Mors
certa, hora incerta (Death is certain, the hour uncertain). The specter of our
mortality hangs over our heads, constantly reminding us of the imperman-
ence of all things. We come into this world naked, without any possessions,
in pain, and in anguish; and this is very much the way we will leave it.
Whatever we do in our life or with our life does not change
49
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

this basic equation. This is the most cruel and discouraging message of
BPM II.
The experiences of this matrix typically reveal the deep link between the
agony of birth and that of death. Seeing the similarity between these two
situations usually leads to a sense of profound nihilism and existential
crisis. This is often depicted in visions showing the meaninglessness and
absurdity of life and the futility of any effort to change it. We can encounter
images showing the lives and the deaths of powerful kings, illustrious
military leaders, glamorous film stars, and other people who have achieved
extraordinary fame and fortune. When death comes, these people are no
different than anybody else. This profound existential revelation that one
realizes through reliving this matrix often makes one understand the
deepest meaning of such expressions as “Thou art dust and to dust shalt
thou return” or “Thus vanishes the glory of the world.”
Individual Emotions and Cultural Reflections of BPM II
It is fascinating to note the deep parallels between the perceptions and
sensitivities imprinted on human consciousness in the no exit stage of birth
and the philosophy and art of existential writers such as Søren Kirkegaard,
Albert Camus, and Jean Paul Sartre. These philosophers painfully felt and
vividly expressed the primary themes of this matrix without being able to
see the only possible solution—spiritual opening and transcendence. Many
people who have confronted elements of BPM II within their own psyches
have felt a deep connection with existential philosophy, which masterfully
portrays the hopelessness and absurdity of this state. Sartre even used the
title No Exit for one of his most famous plays. It is worth mentioning that
an important influence in Sartre’s life was a difficult and poorly resolved
session with the psychedelic substance mescaline, the active alkaloid from
the Mexican cactus peyote used as a sacrament by the native people. Sartre’s
personal notes indicated that his session was focused on experiences that
were clearly associated with BPM II.
People suffering symptoms such as deep depression, loss of initiative, a
sense of meaninglessness, a lack of interest in life, and an inability to enjoy
anything, are generally found to be strongly influenced by this aspect of
the unconscious. Even those of us who have not experienced clinical de-
pression know similar feelings associated with separation, alienation,
helplessness, hopelessness, and even metaphysical loneliness. And most
of us have known a sense of inferiority and guilt when circumstances in
our lives
50
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

seemed to confirm that we were useless, worthless, or simply bad. These
feelings are often quite out of proportion to the events that precipitated
them—a realization that comes only when enough time has passed to
provide us with a measure of objectivity. And yet, at the time when we are
experiencing these emotions, we are convinced that they are appropriate
and justified, even if they reach the metaphysical dimensions of the original
sin described in the Bible. The possibility that these feelings might have
their roots in the early imprints of BPM II on our consciousness does not
occur to us.
Experiences of BPM II are best characterized by the triad: fear of death,
fear of never coming back, and fear of going crazy. I have already discussed
the predominance of the theme of death; this often includes the sense that
one’s own life is seriously threatened. Once this feeling is present, the mind
is capable of fabricating any number of stories that provide a rational “ex-
planation” of why this is happening—an impending heart attack or stroke,
an “overdose” when a psychedelic drug is involved, or many others. The
cellular memory of birth can emerge into present consciousness with such
a force that the person believes beyond any doubt that real biological death
is possible and actually imminent.
Characteristically, the loss of any sense of linear time that is associated
with this matrix can lead to the conviction that this unbearable moment
will last forever. This conclusion involves the same error that we find in
mainstream religions in relation to the understanding of eternity as an in-
terval of clock time rather than an experience of timelessness, that is, of
having escaped the boundaries of time entirely. In BPM II, the sense of utter
hopelessness and concern about “never coming back” simply belong to
the experiential characteristics of this state and have no predictive value
in relation to the outcome of the experience. Paradoxically, the fastest way
out of this situation is to fully accept the hopelessness of the predicament,
which really means conscious acceptance of the original feelings of the
fetus.
The world of BPM II—with its all-pervasive sense of danger, cosmic en-
gulfment, absurd and grotesque perceptions of the world, and the loss of
linear time—is so different from our everyday reality that we may feel we
are on the verge of insanity when we encounter it. We may feel that we
have lost all mental control or that we have slipped over the edge and are
in serious danger of becoming permanently psychotic. The insight that the
extreme form of this experience only reflects the trauma of the initial stages
of birth might or might not help us to cope with this situation. A
51
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

milder version of this state is the belief that through the experience of BPM
II we have gained an accurate and ultimate insight into the total absurdity
of existence and that we will never be able to return to the merciful self-
deception required to operate effectively in this world.
Spiritual Imagery and Insights Associated with BPM II
Like the first perinatal matrix, BPM II has a rich spiritual and mythological
dimension. Archetypal images expressing the quality of experiences belong-
ing to this category are found throughout the cultures of the world. The
motif of unbearable emotional and physical suffering that will never end,
finds its fullest expression in the images of hell and the underworld found
in most cultures. Although the specifics of these images may differ from
one cultural group to another, most of them have important similarities.
They represent negative counterparts and polar opposites of the different
paradises that we discussed under BPM I. The atmosphere of these dark,
underworld environments is oppressive, with no nature or with nature
that is spoiled, contaminated, and dangerous—swamps and stinking rivers,
infernal spike trees with poisonous fruit, icy regions, lakes of fire, and rivers
of blood. One may witness or endure tortures involving sharp pains inflicted
by demons using daggers, spears, and pitchforks; boiling in cauldrons or
freezing in cold regions; strangling; and crushing. In hell, there are only
negative emotions—fear, despair, hopelessness, guilt, chaos, and confusion.
Poignant archetypal figures represent eternal damnation and torture.
The ancient Greeks seemed in particularly close contact with this dimension.
Their tragedies, built around themes of irreconcilable curses, guilt that
passes from one generation to the next, and the inescapability of one’s fate,
accurately depict the atmosphere of BPM II. The Greek mythological figures,
symbolizing eternal tortures, reach heroic proportions. Sisyphus in the
deepest pit of hades is portrayed in his futile efforts to push a large boulder
up the mountain, losing it each time he feels even the smallest hint that he
might be making progress. Ixion is fixed on a burning wheel that whirls
through the underworld for eternity. Tantalus is vexed by agonizing thirst
and hunger while standing in a clear pond of water with luscious grapes
above his head. And Prometheus suffers, chained to a rock and tortured
by an eagle who feeds on his liver.
In Christian literature, BPM II is echoed in the “dark night of the soul,”
envisioned by mystics such as St. John of the Cross, who saw it as an im-
portant stage in one’s spiritual development. Particularly relevant is the
52
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

story of Adam and Eve—in their expulsion from Paradise and the origin
of primal sin. In Genesis, God links this situation specifically to birth and
labor pain when he announces to Eve: “In pain and sorrow shalt thou bring
forth children.” The loss of the celestial realm is described in the story of
the Fall of the Angels that leads to the creation of the polarity between
heaven and hell. Christian descriptions of hell show specific connections
to the experiences of BPM II.
In non-ordinary states many people have the insight that religious
teachings about hell resonate with the experiences of BPM II, which gives
a ring of truth to the theological concepts that might otherwise seem im-
plausible. This link with these early unconscious memories could explain
why the images of hell and the underworld have such a powerful impact
on children as well as adults. In the Bible, the description of Job’s excruci-
ating trial and Christ’s torture, despair, humiliation, and crucifixion are
closely related to BPM II.
In Buddhist spiritual literature, the symbolism of BPM II is found in the
story of the “Four Passing Sights” from the life of the Buddha. These refer
to four influential events that precipitated Gautama Buddha’s decision to
leave his family and his life at the royal palace to go in search of enlighten-
ment. During his journeys outside the city, he encountered four scenes that
made an indelible impression on him. The first was his encounter with a
decrepit old man who had broken teeth, gray hair, and a crooked body,
which represented Gautama Buddha’s confrontation with the fact of aging.
The second was his encounter with a person lying in the ditch by the road,
his body racked with disease, which represented his confrontation with
illness. The third was his encounter with a human corpse, which represented
his full realization of the existence of death and impermanence. The last
sight was his encounter with a monk with a shaven head, clad in an ocher
robe, who radiated something that seemed to transcend all the suffering
that flesh is heir to. It was the sudden awareness of the impermanence of
life, the fact of death and the existence of suffering that gave Gautama
Buddha the impulse to renounce the world and embark on his spiritual
journey.
In experiential work with BPM II, people often encounter similar crises
to those encountered by the Buddha in the “Four Passing Sights.” During
such episodes, the person’s own unconscious provides the images of old
age, sickness, death, and impermanence that ultimately precipitate the ex-
istential crisis. She or he sees the futility of life without spirituality, limited
to superficial pleasures and worldly goals. That revelation is an important
53
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

step toward a spiritual opening that starts as the cervix opens and the no
exit situation of BPM II changes.
Artistic Expressions of BPM II
People often make references to Dante’s Inferno as a dramatic description
of BPM II. They see the entire Divine Comedy as an account of the transform-
ational journey and spiritual opening. Additional pieces of art that convey
the atmosphere of this domain are Franz Kafka’s novels and stories reflect-
ing abysmal guilt and anguish, Fyodor Dostoyevski’s works, filled with
emotional suffering, insanity, and senseless brutality, and passages from
Emile Zola’s writings describing the darkest and most repulsive aspects
of human nature. Edgar Alan Poe’s tales of horror often portray elements
of the second matrix as well, as exemplified in “The Pit and the Pendulum.”
The curse of the flying Dutchman and of the Eternal Jew Ahasuerus, con-
demned to live and walk around until the end of the world, are additional
relevant examples from the world of the arts.
Paintings depicting the atmosphere of BPM II include the images of hell
in Christian, Moslem, and Buddhist art, as well as representations of the
Ecce homo scene, the Way of the Cross, and the crucifixion of Jesus.
Hieronymus Bosch’s world of bizarre, nightmarish creatures, Francisco
Goya’s images of the horrors of war, and many surrealist images certainly
belong in this category. Especially powerful are the paintings by Hansruedi
Giger, a Swiss artist who is a true genius of the perinatal realm. His imagery
alternates between BPM II and BPM III (discussed in the next chapter),
representing the symbolism of the perinatal matrices in a strikingly explicit
and easily recognizable form. Giger was awarded a Golden Oscar for his
macabre artistic designs for the film The Alien, all of which have dramatic
perinatal features. For the sequel of this film, Aliens, he created a fantastic
archetypal image of the Devouring Mother—a terrifying spiderlike extra-
terrestrial female with her diabolic hatchery. Many perinatal themes can
also be found in the movies by Frederico Fellini, Ingmar Bergman, George
Lucas, Steven Spielberg, and many others.
BPM II and the Victim Role in Everyday Life
Like BPM I, this matrix links up with memories from later life whose
qualities are similar to the experiences encountered here. The events recor-
ded
54
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

in the memory in close connection with BPM II are various unpleasant
situations where we feel threatened and hopeless, where an overwhelmingly
destructive force imposes itself on us, and our roles as helpless victims are
emphasized. Especially significant are memories of incidents where phys-
ical well-being and survival were at risk, be it through surgical intervention,
physical abuse, an automobile accident, or maiming in war. Because of
their similarity to certain aspects of the birth trauma, these memories tend
to be recorded in memory in such a way that they are connected and
overlap with BPM II.
When we experience such traumatic events in our lives, the event in the
present carries us back to the corresponding perinatal material, reactivating
our old emotional and physical pain. We are then responding not only to
the present situation but also to an early, fundamental trauma of our lives.
This can explain the depth of the psychological damage—and the lasting
negative effects—following wars, natural catastrophes, time in concentration
camps, or kidnapping by terrorists. These situations are not only traumatic
in themselves, which is serious enough, but they also strip the victims of
defenses that ordinarily protect them from the painful elements of the un-
conscious material they are harboring in their psyches. To work effectively
with these states, one has to create a supportive environment and use
techniques that allow these people to relive and work through not just the
relatively recent adult traumas but also the underlying primary memories
of victimization associated with BPM II.
On a subtler level, the second matrix can also involve memories of severe
psychological frustrations, particularly abandonment, rejection, deprivation,
emotionally threatening events, and confining or oppressive situations in
the nuclear family and later in life. Thus being in the role of victim in the
family of origin, in the classroom, in intimate relationships, in the work-
place, and in society at large will reinforce and perpetuate the memory of
the no exit stage of birth and make it more psychologically relevant and
available for conscious experience. BPM II is also related to a variety of
unpleasant sensations and tensions in the areas of the body that Freud
called erogenous, or pleasure-producing, zones. On the oral level, these
sensations may be thirst and/or hunger; in the anal area, uncomfortable
sensations in the colon and rectum associated with constipation, colitis, or
hemorrhoids; in the genito-urinary tract, sexual frustration or pain associ-
ated with infections or surgical interventions, as well as painful retention
of urine.
55
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Passage from Hell to Purgatory
Each uterine contraction in this stage of the birth experience pulls the cervix
over the head of the infant and dilates the cervical opening. When the cervix
is finally open and the head descends into the pelvis, there is a great change
not only in the biological but also the psychological experience of the deliv-
ery. The no exit situation of BPM II changes into a slow passage through
the birth canal, characterizing BPM III. In the next chapter we will explore
the rich and colorful world of BPM III and its implications for our lives
individually as well as collectively.
56
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

4
THE DEATH-REBIRTH STRUGGLE—BPM III
Are you willing to be sponged out, erased, canceled,
made nothing?
Are you willing to be made nothing?
dipped into oblivion?
If not, you will never really change.
—D. H. Lawrence, Phoenix
Although he never really clearly saw the birth canal, he felt its crushing
pressure on his head and all over, and he knew with every cell of his body
that he was involved in a birth process. The tension was reaching dimen-
sions that he had not imagined were humanly possible. He felt an unrelent-
ing pressure on his forehead, temples, and occiput, as if he were caught in
the steel jaws of a vise. The tensions in his body also had a brutally mech-
anical quality; he imagined himself passing through a monstrous meat
grinder or a giant press full of cogs and cylinders. The image of Charlie
Chaplin victimized by the world of technology in Modern Times briefly
flashed through his mind. Incredible amounts of energy seemed to be
flowing through his entire body, condensing and releasing in explosive
discharges.
He felt an amazing mixture of feelings; he was suffocated, frightened,
and helpless, but also furious and strangely sexually aroused. Another
important aspect of his experience was a sense of utter confusion. While
he felt like an infant involved in a vicious struggle for survival and realized
that what was about to happen was his birth, he was also experiencing
himself as his delivering mother. He knew intellectually that being a man
he could never give birth, yet he felt that he was somehow crossing that
barrier and that the impossible was becoming a reality. There was no
question that
57

he was connecting with something primordial—an ancient feminine arche-
type, that of the delivering mother. His body image included a large preg-
nant belly and female genitals with all the nuances of biological sensations.
He felt frustrated by not being able to surrender to this elemental
process—to give birth and be born, to let go and to let the baby out.
An enormous reservoir of murderous aggression emerged from the un-
derworld of his psyche; it was as if an abscess of evil had suddenly been
punctured by the cut of a cosmic surgeon. A werewolf or a berserk was
taking him over; Dr. Jekyll was turning into Mr. Hyde. There were many
images of the murderer and the victim as one person, just as earlier he
could not distinguish between the child who was being born and the deliv-
ering mother. He was a merciless tyrant, the dictator exposing the subor-
dinates to unimaginable cruelties, and he was also the revolutionary,
leading the furious mob to overthrow the tyrant. He became the mobster
who murders in cold blood and the policeman who kills the criminal in
the name of law. At one point, he experienced the horrors of the Nazi
concentration camps. When he opened his eyes, he saw himself as an SS
officer. He had a profound sense that he, the Nazi, and he, the Jew, were
the same person. He could feel the Hitler and the Stalin in him and felt
fully responsible for the atrocities in human history. He saw that humanity’s
problem is not the existence of vicious dictators, but this Hidden Killer that
we each find within our own psyches, if we look deep enough.
Then the quality of the experience changed and reached mythological
proportions; instead of the evil of human history, he sensed the atmosphere
of witchcraft and the presence of demonic elements. His teeth were trans-
formed into long fangs filled with some mysterious poison, and he found
himself flying on large bat wings through the night like an ominous vam-
pire. This changed soon into wild, intoxicating scenes of a witches’ Sabbath.
In this dark, sensuous ritual, all the usually forbidden and repressed im-
pulses seemed to surface and were experienced and acted out. While the
demonic quality gradually disappeared from his experience, he still felt
tremendously erotic and was engaged in endless sequences of the most
fantastic orgies and sexual fantasies, in which he played all roles. All
through these experiences, he continued being simultaneously the child
struggling through the birth canal and the mother delivering it. It became
very clear to him that sex and birth were deeply connected and also that
satanic forces had important links with the situation in the birth canal.
He struggled and fought in many different roles and against many dif-
ferent enemies. Sometimes he wondered if there would ever be an end to
58
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

his misery. Then a new element entered his experience. His entire body
was covered by some biological filth, which was slimy and slippery. He
could not tell if it was the amniotic fluid, mucus, blood, or vaginal secre-
tions. The same stuff seemed to be in his mouth and even in his lungs. He
was choking, gagging, making faces, and spitting, trying to get it out of his
system and off his skin. At the same time, he was getting a message that
he did not have to fight; the process had its own rhythm and all he had to
do was surrender to it. He remembered many situations from his life, where
he felt the need to fight and struggle and in retrospect that too felt unneces-
sary. It was as if he had been somehow programmed by his birth to see life
as much more complicated and dangerous than it actually is. It seemed to
him that this experience could open his eyes in this regard and make his
life much easier and more playful than before.1
The Hazardous Passage Begins
As we see from the above example of experiences associated with BPM III,
this matrix is extremely dynamic and rich in both positive and negative
imagery. On the biological level, it shares certain characteristics with BPM
II, particularly the continuation of uterine contractions and the overall
sense of confinement and constriction. As in the previous stage, each con-
traction interferes with the fetus’s oxygen supply. Complications such as
the umbilical cord being twisted around the neck or being squeezed between
the head and the pelvic wall, can be additional sources of suffocation.
While there are certain parallels between this matrix and the previous
one, there are significant differences that should be carefully noted. In the
previous matrix, the cervix was closed; now it is open, allowing the fetus
to move through the birth canal. Although the fight for survival continues,
there is now a sense of hope, a belief that there will be an end to the struggle.
At this stage, the infant’s head is wedged into the pelvic opening, which
is so narrow that, even under normal circumstances, the passage is slow
and tedious. The musculature of the uterus is very strong and the power
of its contractions oscillates between 50 and 100 pounds. This creates an
atmosphere of conflicting and clashing energies and a strong hydraulic
pressure. The organism of the mother and that of the child are still very
intimately interconnected on many levels; for that reason, there may be a
strong identification between the two, as the above narrative illustrates. In
the memory record of this matrix, we have no sense of a boundary between
ourself and our mother. Neither the physical nor the psychological
59
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

separation has occurred. Mother and child are still of one consciousness.
Thus, it is possible to experience all the feelings and sensations of the infant,
to identify fully with the delivering mother, and to connect with the arche-
type of the delivering woman.
The Birth Experience and Sexuality
In addition to experiencing intense physical pains, anxiety, aggression, a
strange sense of excitement, and a driving energy, this matrix is character-
ized by sexual arousal, undoubtedly the most unexpected aspect of the
entire birth process. Clearly this deserves an explanation, especially since
it has important implications for understanding what otherwise could be
very puzzling forms of human sexual behavior. It is not difficult to see that
because of the intense involvement of the genital area, the mother’s exper-
ience would have a sexual component. Moreover, the build-up and release
of tension as the process takes place follows a natural cycle very similar to
sexual orgasm. Many women who deliver their babies under ideal circum-
stances often describe it as the most powerful sexual experience of their
lives. But it is much more difficult to understand or even believe that birth
could trigger sexual feelings in the baby as well.
Sigmund Freud once shocked the world when he announced his discov-
ery that sexuality does not begin in puberty but in early infancy. Here we
are asked to stretch our imaginations even further and accept that we have
sexual feelings even before we are born! Observations of people who exper-
ience BPM III in non-ordinary states provide us with clear indications that
this is true. The evidence suggests that the human body harbors a mechan-
ism that translates extreme suffering, particularly if it is associated with
suffocation, into a form of excitement that resembles sexual arousal. This
mechanism has been reported by patients in sadomasochistic relationships,
by prisoners of war tortured by the enemy, and by people who make un-
successful attempts to hang themselves and live to tell the story. In all these
situations, agony can be intimately associated with ecstasy, even leading
to an experience of transcendence, as is the case with flagellants and reli-
gious martyrs.
What does all this mean in terms of everyday reality? To begin with, it
is important to understand that our first experience of sexuality occurs in
a precarious life-threatening context. Along the way, there is also the exper-
ience of suffering and inflicting pain, as well as feeling anxiety and blind
aggression. In addition, during the passage through the birth canal, the
child
60
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

is in contact with various biological products, including mucus, blood, and
possibly even urine and feces. This connection combined with other events,
forms a natural basis for the development of a variety of sexual disorders
and deviations later in life. Reinforced by traumatic experiences in infancy
and childhood, the experiences of BPM III can give rise to sexual dysfunc-
tions, as well as the practice of bondage and sadomasochism, the association
of urine and feces with sexuality, and even criminal sexuality.
The Titanic Dimension of the Third Matrix
As with the other matrices, BPM III has its own symbolism that includes
secular, mythological, and spiritual themes. These fall into five distinct
categories: the titanic, the aggressive and sadomasochistic, the sexual, the
demonic, and the scatological. However, all these share a common theme
as well: the encounter with death and the struggle to be born. Most fre-
quently, experiences associated with the third matrix are a mixture of birth-
related sensations and emotions, along with archetypal symbolism, as we
saw in the narrative at the beginning of this chapter.
Perhaps the most striking aspect of this matrix is the atmosphere of titanic
struggle, frequently of catastrophic proportions. It clearly reflects the
enormous conflicting energies involved in this stage of the birth process
that we are seeking to discharge. The experiences can reach a painful in-
tensity that exceeds by far what it seems any human could possibly bear.
One may experience sequences in which the energy is tremendously con-
centrated and focused, streaming through the body like high voltage elec-
trical current. This energy might jam, or short circuit, creating enormous
tensions in different parts of the body, which may then be explosively
discharged. For many people, this is associated with images of modern
technology and man-made disasters—giant power plants, high voltage
cables, nuclear explosions, the launching of rockets, artillery combat, air-
raids, and other war scenes.
Others connect experientially with devastating natural disasters, such
as exploding volcanoes, bone-shattering earthquakes, raging hurricanes
and tornadoes, spectacular electrical storms, comets or meteors, and cosmic
cataclysms. We have heard references to such catastrophes as the last days
of Pompeii or the eruption of Krakatau. Less frequently, these images depict
destruction by water; here belong scenes of ominous ocean storms, great
tidal waves, river floods, or the breaking of dams followed by the massive
inundation of whole towns. Some people have described mythological
61
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

images such as the annihilation of Atlantis, the end of Sodom and Gomor-
rah, or even Armageddon.
Perinatal Roots of Violence
The aggressive and sadomasochistic aspects of the third matrix seem to be
logical products of the situation the child faces in the birth canal. The out-
ward-directed aggression reflects the biological fury of the organism whose
survival is threatened by suffocation. It cannot be explained psychologically
nor does it have any ethical meaning. It is comparable to a state of mind
any of us would manifest if our head were held under water and we were
not able to breathe. When this aspect of the matrix is activated in non-or-
dinary states it finds its expression in numerous images of wars, revolutions,
massacres, slaughters, tortures, and abuses of various kinds in which we
play the active role.
There is also a form of inward-directed aggression associated with this
matrix that has a self-destructive quality. This aggression, expressed in
self-destructive fantasies and impulses, seems to be the internalization of
forces that were originally imposed on us from the outside—the uterine
contractions and the resistance within the birth canal. The memory of this
experience survives in us as a sense of emotional and physical confinement
and the inability to enjoy our lives fully. It sometimes takes the form of a
cruel inner judge demanding punishment, a savage part of the superego
that can drive the person to extremes of self-destructiveness.
I would like to note here some important differences between the exper-
iences associated with the second and third matrices. While we are exclus-
ively victims in BPM II, in BPM III we can alternately identify with the
victim and the perpetrator. In addition, we can sometimes be an observer
watching the scenes from the outside. This is expressed in the above nar-
rative by the person experiencing himself as both the Jewish victim and
the Nazi persecutor. People who get in touch with this aspect of the birth
process often say that through it they can actually identify and empathize
with cruel military leaders and tyrants, such as Genghis Khan, Hitler, or
Stalin, or with even more contemporary mass murderers.
The sadomasochistic associations of this matrix mirror the relationships
between causing and inflicting pain, suffering, and sexual arousal, discussed
in the paragraphs above. This accounts for the intertwining of sexual feel-
ings and pain that is characteristic of sadomasochism. Sadism and mas-
ochism never exist as purely separate phenomena; instead, they are
62
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

interconnected in the human psyche, representing two sides of the same
coin. As one might guess, the images associated with the sadomasochistic
experiences involve scenes of rapes, sexual murders, and sadomasochistic
practices of inflicting or receiving painful treatment.
The Agony and the Ecstasy of Birth
As the intensity of experiences associated with this matrix increase, the
emotions and sensations that were originally polar opposites (pain versus
pleasure, for example) begin to converge. They may eventually merge into
a single undifferentiated state of mind, containing all possible dimensions
of human experience. Intense suffering and exquisite pleasure become the
same; caustic heat feels like freezing cold; murderous aggression and pas-
sionate love become one; and the agony of death becomes the ecstasy of
birth. When the suffering reaches its absolute apex, the situation oddly
ceases to have the quality of suffering and agony. Instead, the very intensity
of the experience is transformed into wild, ecstatic rapture that can be de-
scribed as “Dionysian” or “volcanic ecstasy.”
This volcanic ecstasy or rapture can go even further until it reaches
transcendental proportions. In contrast to the oceanic ecstasy associated
with BPM I, this volcanic type involves enormous explosive tension with
both aggressive and self-destructive elements. This form of rapture can be
experienced in childbirth, in accidents, or in rituals using physically painful
procedures, such as the practice of the flagellants or the Native American
Sun Dance, in which the person voluntarily undergoes intense physical
pain for a prolonged period of time. A certain level of volcanic ecstasy can
be reached in aboriginal ceremonies that involve wild dancing and loud
intoxicating music, or even in their modern counterparts, certain rock
concerts.
The sexual aspect of BPM III is usually experienced as a generalized
eroticism, felt throughout the body, rather than felt only in the genitals.
Many people describe a rapture similar to the beginning phase of sexual
orgasm, though multiplied a thousand times. However, in this case, these
sensations may go on for a prolonged period of time, accompanied by
outrageous erotic imagery. Sexuality portrayed here is characterized by
the enormous intensity of the instinctual drive and has no particular goal,
or objective. It is certainly not the eroticism we experience in a romance,
with deep mutual respect, understanding, and feelings of love that culmin-
ate in sexual union. Here the emphasis is on egotistic satisfaction of prim-
itive
63
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

sexual urges, often of a deviant nature, in any way possible, with little re-
gard for the partner.
The imagery and experiences of BPM III often have pornographic features
or link sex to danger and filth. During these sequences, a person might
identify with harem owners, pimps and prostitutes, or with any of a wide
range of historical and legendary sexual figures, such as Casanova,
Rasputin, Don Juan, or Maria Theresa. They may find themselves witnessing
and participating in scenes from Soho, Pigalle, and other famous red light
districts. Since this matrix also has a dynamic spiritual component, we may
occasionally encounter seemingly contradictory experiences linking sex
and transcendence. Here we might find visions of fertility rites, phallic
worship, and temple prostitution.
What is perhaps most curious about BPM III experiences is the emotional
proximity of death and sexuality. One would think that the threat of death
would erase any libidinal feelings. However, where this matrix is concerned
the opposite seems to be true. Observations from clinical psychiatry, exper-
iences of people who had been tortured in concentration and prison camps,
and the files of Amnesty International attest to the fact that there are strong
interrelationships between the ecstatic rapture of sex, childbirth, and ex-
treme threat to body integrity and survival. In the death-rebirth process,
motifs related to all three of these areas alternate or even coexist in various
combinations.
Encounters with the Grotesque, Satanic, and Scatological
Sometimes the sexual aspects of BPM III are experienced in a carnival at-
mosphere, filled with bright colors, exotic costumes, and seductive music.
The characteristic combination of the motifs of death, of the macabre, and
of the grotesque, with the joyful and the festive is a very appropriate sym-
bolic expression for the state of mind immediately preceding rebirth. At
this stage, long repressed sexual and aggressive energies are unleashed
and the memory of a vital threat loses its grip on the body and the psyche.
The popularity of Mardi Gras and similar events might well be due to the
fact that besides providing amusement and a context for the release of pent-
up tensions, they also allow us to connect with the archetype of rebirth in
the depth of our psyches.
Experiences occurring in the final stages of the death-rebirth process also
offer interesting insights into certain forms of witchcraft and satanic prac-
tices. The struggle in the birth canal can be associated with visions
64
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

reminiscent of Black Mass rituals and the witches’ Sabbath. The intrusion
of the satanic element at this particular time seems to be related to the fact
that BPM III shares with these rituals a strange combination of emotions
and physical sensations. The struggle in the birth canal involves extreme
pain, an encounter with blood and bodily excretions, along with excitement
and sexual arousal. It can bring the child close to death, but holds also the
promise of liberation and transcendence. All these elements are intimately
interwoven with the imagery of “serving the Dark God.” The connection
between such practices and the perinatal level of the unconscious should
be taken into consideration in any serious study of satanic cult abuse, a
phenomenon that seems to be attracting the increasing attention of profes-
sionals as well as of the general public. Another important experience in
the same category is the temptation by evil forces, a motif that can be found
in spiritual literature of many religions of the world.
Because of the newborn’s close contact with bodily fluids, and occasion-
ally urine and feces in the final stages of delivery, scatological impressions
are an integral part of BPM III. In the death-rebirth process, scatological
encounters can be greatly exaggerated to include all the least acceptable
products that biology has to offer. While there might have been minimum
contact with such materials at birth, the person reliving this aspect may
have images of crawling through sewage systems, and literally wallowing
in filth, drinking blood, or indulging in scenes of decay and putrefaction.
Mythological and Spiritual Themes
The mythological and spiritual aspects of this matrix are particularly rich
and variegated. The titanic aspect can be expressed in the archetypal images
of confrontation between the forces of good and evil or of the destruction
and creation of the world. Another form of the struggle to find balance
between good and evil is the archetype of the Divine Judgment. The ag-
gressive sequences are often associated with images of destructive deities,
such as Kali, Shiva, Satan, Coatlicue, or Mars. Particularly characteristic is
a close identification with mythological figures representing death and
rebirth that can be found in every major culture—Osiris, Dionysus,
Persephone, Wotan, Balder, and many others. Our own culture’s variety
of this theme is the story of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Frequently, people facing BPM III have visions of crucifixion or they feel
fully identified with Jesus on the cross. Scenes of sacrifice and self-sacrifice
65
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

accompanied by the corresponding deities, particularly Aztec and Mayan,
also abound in this stage.
There can be images of male and female deities associated with sexuality
and procreation, along with visions of Bacchanalian sequences. I have
already mentioned the motifs combining spirituality and sexuality, such
as fertility rites, phallic worship, temple prostitution, ritual rape, and abori-
ginal rituals with emphasis on the sensual and sexual. The scatological is
expressed mythologically by images such as Hercules cleaning the unima-
ginable filth of the stables of King Augias, or Tlacolteutl, Devourer of Filth,
the Aztec goddess of childbirth and carnal lust.
The transition between BPM III and IV is often associated with visions
of consuming fires. These flames destroy everything that is corrupt or rotten
in our lives, preparing us for renewal and rebirth. It is interesting that in
the corresponding stage of delivery many mothers feel that their entire
genital areas are on fire. Reliving this stage in a passive role, people might
feel that their bodies are burning or that they are passing through flames
or purification. This is particularly well expressed in the phoenix myth,
the fabulous bird of Egyptian legend who at the age of 500 years burns itself
on a pyre. Then from its ashes another phoenix arises. The purifying fire
is also characteristic for the religious images of purgatory.
BPM III and Art
Perhaps since the dawn of human history, the experiences of BPM III have
been an infinite source of inspiration for artists of many different genres.
The examples are so manifold that one can offer only a meager selection:
the atmosphere of intense emotions bordering on insanity that are master-
fully portrayed in the novels of Fyodor Dostoyevski and in many of William
Shakespeare’s plays, particularly Hamlet, Macbeth, and King Lear; the Di-
onysian element and the thirst for power in the philosophical works of
Friedrich Nietzsche. Leonardo da Vinci’s designs of diabolical war ma-
chines; the nightmarish visions of Francisco Goya; the macabre art of
Hansruedi Giger; and the whole school of surrealist painting, are superb
visual representations of the atmosphere of BPM III. Similarly, Richard
Wagner’s operas abound with powerful sequences capturing the atmos-
phere of this matrix. Among them are the orgiastic Venusberg scenes from
Tannhäuser, the magic fire sequence from Walküre, and particularly the
immolation of Siegfried and the burning of Valhalla in the final scene of
Götterdämmerung. The combination of high drama, sex, and violence,
66
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

characteristic of this matrix, is the magic formula for much of modern
filmmaking.
The Link with Postnatal Experiences
As with the other perinatal matrices, BPM III has specific connections with
memories from postnatal life. For people who have witnessed or particip-
ated in war, memories of the real horrors become entangled with the titanic,
aggressive, and scatological aspects of this matrix. Conversely, a real life
war experience can activate corresponding perinatal elements in the uncon-
scious, which can later lead to serious emotional problems common to
soldiers who have seen much combat. The specific form of excitement,
mixed with fear and danger, links BPM III to thrilling but precarious situ-
ations, such as sky diving, car racing, roller-coaster rides, exotic hunting
adventures, boxing, and wrestling. The erotic aspects of BPM III are con-
nected with COEX systems involving intense sexual experiences under
hazardous circumstances, as exemplified by rape, adultery, and other
sexual adventures associated with high risk, or visits to red light districts.
The scatological facet is associated with forceful toilet training, childhood
mishaps involving urinary or anal incontinence, visits to junkyards, dumps,
and other unhygienic places, and witnessing scenes of putrefaction or dis-
embowelment in war and automobile accidents.
Experiences of BPM III are also accompanied by specific manifestations
in the Freudian erogenous zones. These are related to a wide range of
activities that bring sudden relief, pleasure, and relaxation after prolonged
tension or stress. On the oral level, these activities include biting, chewing
up, and swallowing food, as well as catharsis by vomiting. In the anal area,
they involve the natural processes of defecation and passing gas; in the
urethral region, the urination after a long retention. And finally, the corres-
ponding genital phenomenon is the build-up toward sexual orgasm and,
in women, the feelings encountered in the second clinical stage of labor.
The third matrix represents an enormous pool of problematic emotions
and difficult sensations that can, in combination with later events in infancy
and childhood, contribute to the development of a variety of disorders.
Among them are certain forms of depression and conditions that involve
aggression and violent self-destructive behaviors. Also sexual disorders
and aberrations, obsessive-compulsive neuroses, phobias, and hysterical
manifestations seem to have important roots in this matrix. Which of the
many possible forms of emotional disorders would actually manifest
67
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

seems to be co-determined by the nature of later biographical experiences
that can selectively reinforce the aggressive, self-destructive, sexual, or
scatological aspects of BPM III.
The Struggle Ends
As the agonizing struggle to escape from the birth canal nears the end,
tension and suffering reach an apex. This is followed by an explosive release
as the infant suddenly breaks free from the pelvic opening and takes its
first breath. In general, this moment holds the promise of tremendous re-
laxation, but the degree to which this actually happens depends on specific
circumstances surrounding the birth, such as the opportunity for loving
contact with the mother, bonding through eye contact, and other factors.
The experiential aspects of this transition are the focus of the next chapter.
68
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

5
THE DEATH AND REBIRTH EXPERIENCE—BPM IV
The soul sees and tastes abundance, inestimable riches, finds all the rest
and recreation that it desires, and understands strange kinds of secrets of
God…. It feels likewise in God an awful power and strength which tran-
scends all other power and strength: it tastes a marvelous sweetness and
spiritual delight, finds true rest and Divine light and has lofty experiences
of the knowledge of God….
—St. John of the Cross, Canticle
He started to experience considerable confusion; waves of heat passed over
him and he began to perspire. He started trembling and began to feel
nauseated. Quite suddenly he was at the top of a roller coaster, gradually
being drawn to the precipice, then losing control and plunging downward.
An analogy came to his mind; it was like swallowing a keg of dynamite
with the fuse already lit. The keg would soon explode and there was
nothing he could do about it. It was completely out of his control.
The last thing he could remember hearing as his roller coaster slid over
the precipice was the roar of music that sounded as if it came from a million
earphones. His head was enormous and he felt as if he had a thousand
ears, each one bringing in different music. This was the greatest confusion
he had ever known in his life. He was dying right there, and there was
nothing he could do about it. The only thing to do was to go toward it. The
words trust and obey came through to him, and in what seemed like a flash
69

he was no longer lying on the couch and did not have his usual identity.
Several scenes began to take place all at once.
In the first scene he was plunging down into a swamp filled with hideous
creatures. These creatures were moving toward him, but they were unable
to reach him. The best way he could describe this roller coaster ride,
plunging into a complete loss of control, was to compare it to walking on
an extremely slippery surface. There would be some firm surfaces at first,
then nothing was firm, everything slippery, nothing to hold on to, and then
he was falling, spinning farther and farther into oblivion. He was dying.
But suddenly he was standing in the middle of the square in a medieval
town. The square was surrounded by the façades of Gothic cathedrals. He
saw all the gargoyles, eaves animals, people, animal-human creatures,
devils, and spirits—all of them, he thought, like figures in a Hieronymus
Bosch painting—coming down from their niches in the cathedrals. They
were marching toward him!
As all these creatures pressed in upon him he began to experience intense
agony and pain, panic, terror, and horror. There was a line of pressure
between his temples, and he was dying. He was absolutely certain he was
dying. And then he died. His death was completed when the pressures in
his head finally overwhelmed him and he was expelled in a great rush into
another world.
The new world he encountered was nothing like the previous ones. Now
the panic and the terror were gone. There was a new anguish, but he was
not alone in this anguish. He was somehow participating in the deaths of
all people. He began experiencing the passion of Jesus. He was Jesus but
he was also Everyone and they were all making their way in a dirge-like
procession toward Golgotha. At this time in his experience there was no
longer any confusion. His visions were perfectly clear.
The sorrow he felt was just agonizing. Then he became aware of a tear
of blood forming in God’s eye. He did not actually see God’s eye, but he
saw the tear and it began to flow out over the whole world as God himself
participated in the death and suffering of all people who had ever lived.
The procession moved toward Golgotha, and there he was crucified with
Christ, and with all people, on the cross. He was Christ; he was all people.
He was crucified and he died.
Immediately after everyone died he heard the most heavenly music he
had ever heard in his entire life. He heard the voices of angels singing, and
all the people who had died began to slowly rise. This was like birth; the
death on the Cross happened, and then there was a swishing sound as the
70
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

wind rushed from the Cross into another world. Everyone around him
began rising and the crowds of people became great processions in
enormous cathedrals, surrounded by candles and light and gold and in-
cense. He had no sense of a separate identity at this time. He was in all the
processions, and all of the processions were in him. He was every man and
every woman.
Along with everyone around him he began rising toward a light, higher
and higher, past majestic white marble pillars. The crowds left behind the
blues, the greens, the reds, the purples, and the gold of the cathedrals and
all the colors in the garb of the people. They rose into whiteness, moving
between great pure white columns. The music soared, everyone was singing,
and then there occurred a vision. This vision was unlike anything that had
happened so far; it had a special quality that convinced him that he had
been given a vision. The resurrection garment of Christ touched him. Yet,
it did not touch just him; rather, it touched all people and yet in touching
all it touched him.
When the garment touched him, several things happened all at once. He
became very small, as small as a cell, as tiny as an atom. All the people
became very humble and they bowed down. He was filled with peace and
feelings of joy and love. He loved God completely. While this was happen-
ing the touch of the garment was like a high voltage wire. Everything ex-
ploded, and it exploded the people into the highest place there is—the
place of absolute light. Suddenly there was silence. The music ceased. All
sound ceased. It was like being at the absolute center of the energy source.
It was like being in God—not just in God’s presence but in God, participating
in God.
This did not last for a long time—though he became aware that time
meant nothing at all during this experience—and they began the descent.
The world into which they were now descending was like no other he had
ever known before, a world of great beauty. Majestic choirs were singing
and during the Sanctus, the Glorias, and the Hosannas an Oracle’s voice
could be heard: “Want nothing, want nothing,” and “Seek nothing, seek
nothing.”
During this period many other visions occurred. One major vision in-
volved looking down through the earth to the foundations of the universe.
He went down into the depths and discovered the secret that God is praised
from the depths as well as from the heights. Also, in the depths of the
universe the light can be seen. In the depths of the universe are many
prison cells. As he went through these cells their doors opened and the
prisoners came forth praising God.
71
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Another powerful vision in this session was that of a figure walking in
a wide, beautiful river, in a deep, broad valley. Easter lilies grew up through
the river’s surface and the river flowed gently and quietly. The valley was
surrounded by very high mountains with many, many watersheds coming
down into the valley floor. Into this scene came a voice: “The river of life
flows toward the mouth of God.” He wanted very much to be in the river
and could not tell whether he was walking in the river or if he was the
river. The river moved and as it moved toward the mouth of God, hoards
of people and animals—all of creation—came down the watersheds and
poured into the main stream of the river of life.
As this session came to an end, and he once again felt himself oriented
in the therapy room where he had started, he continued to feel filled with
awe, humility, peace, blessedness, and joy. He had the distinct conviction
that he had been with God in the energy center of the universe. He still
had the strong feeling that all life is one and the river of life does in fact
flow into God and that there are no distinctions between people—friends
or enemies, black or white, male or female: all are one.1
The above is the narrative of a clergyman describing a deep experiential
session in which he confronted the fourth perinatal matrix. While his im-
agery and symbolism are decidedly Christian, the same essential themes
of these experiences occur again and again with people of all religious and
ethnic backgrounds while reliving BPM IV. The theme of death and rebirth
is prominent here, as are the confrontations with wrathful demons and
divine beings, the identification with all human suffering, and revelations
concerning the nature of the universe itself. Like the other matrices, BPM
IV is a combination of memories of the most basic biological events associ-
ated with birth and their spiritual and mythological parallels.
Biological Realities
The biological basis for BPM IV is the culmination of the struggle in the
birth canal, the moment of birth itself, and the situation immediately fol-
lowing delivery. As the journey through the birth canal approaches its end,
head and shoulders emerge, and then the body is born. (In a breech birth,
of course, the feet emerge first.) All that remains from the original union
with the mother is the connection through the umbilical cord. Finally, the
umbilical cord is cut, which severs forever the biological link—unity with
the maternal organism.
72
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

When we take our first breath, our lungs and respiratory pathways open
and unfold; the blood that had been oxygenated, supplied with nourish-
ment, and cleansed from toxic products by the mother’s body is now redir-
ected to our own lungs, gastrointestinal system, and kidneys. With these
major physical acts of separation completed, we begin our existence as
anatomically separate individuals.
Once physiological balance is reestablished, this new situation is a signi-
ficant improvement over the previous two stages, BPM II and BPM III.
However, compared to how things were before the birth process began
(BPM I), some conditions are worse. Biological needs that were automatic-
ally satisfied while we were still in complete union with our mother’s body
are no longer taken care of on a continuous basis. During the prenatal
period, the womb provided security all the time; after we are born the
protective figure of the mother is not always present. No longer are we al-
ways shielded from temperature extremes, disturbing noises, changes in
light intensity, or unpleasant tactile sensations. Our well-being is critically
dependent on the quality of mothering, but even the best mother cannot
reproduce the conditions of a good womb.
Death, Rebirth, and the Ego
As with the other three matrices, people reliving this last one often get in
touch with very accurate details about their original birth experiences.
Without previous intellectual knowledge of the circumstances of their de-
livery, people can discover that they were born with a forceps, or in the
breech position, or with the umbilical cord wrapped around their neck.
They can often recognize the type of anesthesia that was used during the
delivery. And not infrequently, they can relive in detail specific events that
happened after they were born. In many instances, we have had the oppor-
tunity to verify the accuracy of such reports.
BPM IV also has a distinct symbolic and spiritual dimension. Psycholo-
gically, the reliving of the moment of birth takes the form of the death-re-
birth experience. The suffering and agony faced in BPM II and BPM III
now culminate with “ego death,” an experience of total annihilation on all
levels—physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual.
According to Freudian psychology, the ego is that part of us that allows
us to correctly perceive external reality and function well in everyday life.
People who have this concept of the ego frequently look upon the ego death
as a frightening and tremendously negative event—as the loss of ability to
73
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

operate in the world. However, what really dies in this process is that part
of us that holds a basically paranoid view of ourselves and of the world
around us. Alan Watts called this aspect, which involves a sense of absolute
separateness from everything else, the “skin-encapsulated ego.” It is made
up of the internal perceptions of our lives that we learned during the
struggle in the birth canal and during various painful encounters after
birth.
In these early situations, the world seemed hostile to us, closing in around
us, expelling us from the only life we had yet known, and causing us
emotional and physical pain. These experiences forged in us a “false ego”
that continues to perceive the world as dangerous and carries this attitude
over into future situations even when the circumstances are radically dif-
ferent. The ego that dies in the fourth matrix is identified with a compulsion
to be always strong and in control and to be constantly prepared for all
possible dangers, even those we could never foresee and those that are
purely imaginary. It makes us feel that circumstances are never right and
nothing is enough and that we have to pursue various grandiose projects
to prove something to ourselves and to others. The elimination of the false
ego thus helps us to develop a more realistic image of the world and to
build strategies of approaching it that are more appropriate and rewarding.
The experience of the ego death, marking the transition between BPM
III and BPM IV, is usually dramatic and catastrophic. We might be bom-
barded with images from the past and present and in evaluating them we
may feel that we have never done anything right and that we are absolute
failures. We are convinced that we are pitiful and powerless and that
nothing we might think or do would change our desperate situation. Our
entire world seems to collapse and we lose all meaningful reference points
in our lives—personal accomplishments, loved ones, support systems,
hopes, and dreams all seem for naught. The route to freedom from the
despair and helplessness we feel is through surrender—the very thing our
egos are fighting. The experience of total personal surrender is a necessary
prerequisite for connecting with a transpersonal source. Recovering alco-
holics and addicts know this place as the moment where one admits com-
plete powerlessness and discovers the Higher Power.
After we have hit bottom, we are suddenly struck by visions of blinding
white or golden light of supernatural radiance and beauty. There is the
feeling of space expanding around us, and we are filled to overflowing
with a sense of liberation, redemption, salvation, and forgiveness. We feel
purged as if we have just been released from all heaviness in our
lives—guilt, aggression, anxiety, and other forms of difficult emotions seem
to fall away. We may feel overwhelming love for our fellow humans, deep
appreciation
74
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

for the warmth of human contact, solidarity with all life, and a sense of
oneness with nature and the universe. The arrogance and defensiveness
tend to fade away as we discover the power of humility, perhaps prompting
us to be of service to others. Exaggerated ambition, as well as cravings for
material wealth, status, and power suddenly seem childish, absurd, and
useless vanities.
The Mythology of Death and Rebirth
When we confront BPM IV as adults in regression therapy, psychospiritual
crisis, or intense meditation, it is not usually limited to the reliving of the
biological and emotional aspects of birth. The death-rebirth theme includes
many other types of experiences that share with it the same quality of
emotions and sensations. Typically, we see a combination of the original
birth memories, symbolic images of birth, scenes from human history,
identification with various animals, and mythological sequences. All these
might be interspersed with memories of later events that reflect the parallels
between BPM IV and certain types of experiences in our lives.
The spiritual and mythological symbolism associated with BPM IV is
abundant and varied and, as with the other matrices, the imagery can draw
from virtually any cultural tradition. The ego death can be experienced as
being sacrificed to the terrifying Indian goddess Kali or to the Aztec sun
god Huitzilopochtli. Or one may also feel identified with a baby thrown
by its mother into the devouring flames of the biblical Moloch, together
with other children who have met their death in this immolation ritual. I
have already mentioned the legendary bird Phoenix as an ancient symbol
of rebirth; visions of this mythological bird or identification with it are
frequent occurrences in non-ordinary states. One can also experience spir-
itual rebirth as a union with specific deities, for example, the Aztec Quet-
zalcoatl, the Egyptian Osiris, or Adonis, Attis, and Dionysus from the Greek
tradition. Identification with the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ is
among the most frequent experiential forms related to BPM IV, as illustrated
by the narrative that opened this chapter. The bliss of this unexpected
spiritual opening abounding in astonishing insights can be referred to as
Promethean ecstasy.
Celebrating the Mystery of the Journey
A person who has overcome the enormous trials of the second and third
matrices and is enjoying the experience of rebirth associated with the
75
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

fourth matrix usually has triumphant feelings. These can be embodied by
heroic figures from mythology, such as St. George slaying the dragon,
Theseus defeating the Minotaur, or baby Hercules finishing off the danger-
ous constrictor snakes that attacked him at birth. Many people report visions
of brilliant light with a supernatural quality radiating divine intelligence
or experience God as pure spiritual energy permeating all. Others describe
a translucent, heavenly blue haze, beautiful rainbows, or spectacular dis-
plays of intricate patterns resembling peacock feathers. There can be glori-
ous images of divine epiphany featuring angels and other celestial beings.
This is also a very appropriate time for the appearance of the Great Mother
Goddesses of different cultures, radiating love and protection—Virgin
Mary, Isis, Cybele, or Lakshmi.
Occasionally, spiritual rebirth can be associated with a very special form
of experience—the Atman-Brahman union described in ancient Hindu
texts. Here the person feels a deep connection with the innermost spiritual
core of his or her being. The illusion of the individual self (jiva) fades away
and the person enjoys reunion with his or her divine Self (Atman), which
is also the Universal Self (Brahman), the cosmic source of all existence. This
is a direct and immediate contact with the Beyond Within, with God, or
with what the Upanishads refer to as Tat tvam asi (“Thou art That”). This
realization of the fundamental identity of the individual consciousness
with the creative principle of the universe is one of the most profound ex-
periences a human being can have. Spiritual rebirth, as experienced through
BPM IV, can re-open the gateway to the oceanic ecstasy of BPM I, and
through it we experience cosmic unity.
The symbiotic union with the mother that typically follows the experience
of rebirth (“good breast”) is very close to that of the undisturbed intrauterine
existence (“good womb”); they sometimes alternate or even coexist. The
experience of BPM IV can be accompanied by feelings of merging with the
rest of the world, thus resembling the experience of unity that we discussed
in the context of BPM I. In this state, the reality surrounding us has a nu-
minous quality. As we feel united with everything that is, the appreciation
for natural beauty and simple, uncomplicated life takes precedence over
most other concerns. The wisdom of teachers and systems of thought em-
phasizing these values—the philosophies of Jean Jacques Rousseau, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau, or the teachings of Taoism
and Zen Buddhism—seem self-evident and indisputable.
Under the most ideal circumstances, the ego death and rebirth can have
far-reaching and often lasting consequences. It frees us from the
76
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

paranoid, defensive posture toward the world that we may have as the
result of certain aspects of our birth and painful experiences thereafter. It
is as if we have been stripped of the filters and distorting lenses that ordin-
arily limit our perception of ourselves and the world. With the experience
of rebirth, all our sensory pathways are suddenly wide open. Sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and tactile sensations all appear to be unimaginably more
intense, vivid, and pleasurable. We may feel that we are really seeing the
world for the first time in our lives. Everything around us, even the most
ordinary and familiar scenes, seems unusually exciting and stimulating.
People report entirely new ways of appreciating and enjoying their loved
ones, the sound of music, the beauties of nature, and the endless pleasures
that the world provides for our senses.
Higher motivating forces, such as the pursuit of justice, the appreciation
for harmony and beauty and the desire to create it, a new tolerance and
respect for others, as well as feelings of love, become increasingly important
in our lives. What is more, we perceive these as direct, natural, and logical
expressions of our true nature and of the universal order. They cannot be
explained in terms of psychological defenses, such as the Freudian “reaction
formation” (appearing to be loving when we are actually feeling aggression
and hatred), or the “sublimation” of primitive instinctual drives (spending
long hours helping others as a way to cope with our sexual tensions.) Inter-
estingly, there are striking parallels between these new awarenesses and
what Abraham Maslow called “metavalues” and “metamotivations.” He
observed changes of this kind regularly in people who had spontaneous
mystical or “peak experiences.” Positive aftereffects of this kind are most
intense during the days or weeks immediately following spiritual break-
throughs and tend to weaken with time; however, on a more subtle level,
they leave the person permanently transformed.
The individual who has successfully completed the death-rebirth se-
quence feels a sense of deep relaxation, quiet excitement, serenity, and inner
peace. However, on occasion, the process does not run its full course and
results in a temporary state resembling mania. The individual involved
may feel overly excited, hyperactive, and euphoric to the point of a painful
caricature. For example, after an incomplete breakthrough into BPM IV
and the first onslaught of cosmic insights, some people run around loudly
proclaiming their revelations, attempting to share them indiscriminately
with those around them. One might see them proselytize, ask for special
honors, try to arrange big celebrations, and make grandiose plans for
changing the world.
77
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

This frequently happens in spontaneous psychospiritual crises where
understanding, support, and guidance are usually not available. When the
discovery of one’s divinity remains attached to the body ego, it can take
the form of a psychotic delusion of grandeur instead of a genuine mystical
insight. This kind of behavior indicates that this person has not fully con-
nected with BPM IV and has to work through and integrate some problem-
atic elements from BPM III. After these residual negative aspects of BPM
III are fully resolved, rebirth is experienced in its pure form, as quiet rapture
with serenity and tranquility. This state is completely satisfactory and self-
fulfilling and does not require any immediate action in the world.
Where the Present Links Up with the Past
The common denominators linking memories from later life with the ex-
periences associated with BPM IV include elements of major victory, success
in difficult projects, and fortuitous escape from dangerous situations. We
have repeatedly seen that while reliving the moment of birth, many people
experience a memory replay of the end of a war or revolution, survival of
an accident, or the overcoming of a major challenge. On a different level,
they may also recall the termination of a difficult marriage and the begin-
ning of a new love relationship. Occasionally, an entire series of later suc-
cesses in life can occur in the form of a condensed review.
Uncomplicated birth seems to be the blueprint for coping with all later
difficult situations in life. Various complications, such as prolonged and
debilitating delivery, the use of forceps, or heavy anesthesia appear to be
correlated to specific problems in dealing with future projects of all kinds.
The same is true for induced birth, premature delivery, and Caesarean
section.
In terms of Freudian erogenous zones, BPM IV is associated with pleasure
and satisfaction following the release of tension. Thus, on the oral level,
the physical aspect of this state would resemble the satiation of thirst and
hunger or the relief we feel when we terminate intense gastric discomfort
by vomiting. On the anal and urethral level, it is the satisfaction brought
about by defecation or urination after painful retention. On the genital
level, this state corresponds to the pleasure and relaxation after a good
sexual orgasm. And for women in labor it would be the orgastic release
that can be experienced immediately after delivery.
78
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Other Worlds, Other Realities
The area of the unconscious that we associate with these four perinatal
matrices represents an interface between our individual psyches and what
Jung called the collective unconscious. As we have seen, the experiences
related to the different matrices often combine memories of various aspects
of biological birth with sequences from human history or mythology and
identification with various animals. These elements belong to the
transpersonal domain, a realm of a new cartography that lies beyond the
biographical and perinatal realms. This is the most controversial area
presently being studied in modern consciousness research.
Transpersonal experiences challenge the belief that human consciousness
is limited by the range of our senses and by the environment we entered
at birth. While traditional psychology believes that our mental functioning
and experience is the direct result of our brain’s ability to sort out, assign
meaning to, and store the information gathered by our senses, transpersonal
researchers offer evidence that under certain circumstances we have access
to virtually unlimited sources of information about the universe that may
or may not have complements in the physical world. We will be exploring
this fascinating area in the next section of the book.
79
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


III
THE TRANSPERSONAL PARADIGM
The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is the
source of all true art and science.
—Albert Einstein


6
AN OVERVIEW OF THE TRANSPERSONAL
PARADIGM
Consciousness cannot be confined to egocentric self-concepts. Existential
identity is practical in terms of coping with the ordinary tasks of living
in the world, just as Newtonian physics is practical for building bridges.
However, exclusive identification with the existential self as an independent
entity makes no sense in view of states of consciousness that transcend
ordinary space/time limitations and operate in a reality that is more aptly
described in the language of subatomic physics.
—Frances Vaughan, The Inward Arc
To understand the transpersonal realm we must begin thinking of conscious-
ness in an entirely new way. It is here that we begin to free ourselves from
the preconception that consciousness is something created within the human
brain and thus contained in the box represented by the bony structure of
our heads. It is here that we look beyond the belief that consciousness exists
only as the result of our individual lives. As we come to terms with the
concept of the transpersonal realm, we begin thinking of consciousness as
something that exists outside and independent of us, something that in its
essence is not bound to matter. Contrary to our everyday experience, it is
independent of our physical senses, although it is mediated by them in our
everyday perception of life.
Transpersonal consciousness is infinite, rather than finite, stretching
beyond the limits of time and space. To grasp the full dimensions of the
transpersonal realm is perhaps as much a challenge for our everyday minds
83

as lying out under the stars on a clear night and attempting to grasp the
breadth and width of the vast unfathomable space where the heavenly
bodies reside. Here under the cosmic umbrella of the night sky, we begin
to recognize that the limits we perceive are in our minds, not out there in
the vast, unlimited universe. And what is true for the outer space of astro-
nomers is equally applicable to the inner space of the human psyche. It is
difficult to avoid feeling anchored to our deeply ingrained beliefs that the
universe must be finite and that each of our consciousnesses is separate
from all others and confined within our brains. We also have great difficulty
acknowledging that mind and consciousness might not be exclusive priv-
ileges of the human species but that they permeate all of nature, existing
in the most elemental to the most complex forms. Struggle as we might,
we seem unable to free ourselves from preconceptions imposed on us by
our culture and by what we believe to be common sense. However, if we
are to maintain these illusions it becomes necessary to ignore a vast body
of observations and information coming from modern consciousness re-
search and from a variety of other scientific disciplines. From all these
sources comes evidence strongly suggesting that the universe and the hu-
man psyche have no boundaries or limits. Each of us is connected with and
is an expression of all of existence.
The acceptance of the transpersonal nature of consciousness challenges
many fundamental concepts in our society, concepts that affect us all at
deeply personal levels. If we are to accept this new view of consciousness,
it means accepting, also, that our lives are not shaped only by the immediate
environmental influences since the day of our birth but, of at least equal
importance, they are shaped by ancestral, cultural, spiritual, and cosmic
influences far beyond the scope of what we can perceive with our physical
senses.
Historical Precedents
It is only in the past twenty years that transpersonal consciousness has
been acknowledged to be a subject for serious scientific investigation. Pre-
viously, transpersonal experiences were discussed in the context of the
spiritual, mystical, religious, magical, or paranormal. This was not the do-
main of scientists but of priests and mystics. In spite of modern day preju-
dices against opening the transpersonal realm to serious research, there
have been a large number of pioneers in human consciousness who have
dedicated their lives to it. One of the most articulate and outspoken of these
was the highly esteemed Swiss psychiatrist C. G. Jung.
84
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Near the end of his life, Jung said that all his most mature work had
grown out of transpersonal experiences he reported in Septem Sermones ad
Mortuos (Seven Sermons to the Dead), which was first published, in a limited
edition, in 1916. In this book he described how he had broken through the
barriers of everyday consciousness to enter a world that he had previously
not even imagined could exist. In that world, he began communicating
with an entity who called himself “Basilides.” When Jung asked him about
his origin, Basilides answered that he had lived in the city of Alexandria,
centuries before Jung was born. It was Basilides who spoke to Jung about
the “Pleroma,” a transpersonal concept later echoed in Jung’s concept of
the “collective unconscious.”
The pleroma is both beginning and end of created beings. It pervadeth
them, as the light of the sun everywhere pervadeth the air…. We are,
however, the pleroma itself, for we are a part of the eternal and infin-
ite…. Even in the smallest point is the pleroma endless, eternal, and
entire, since small and great are qualities what are contained in it. It
is that nothingness which is everywhere whole and continuous.1
While Jung learned much from his communications with his inner guide
Basilides, it was his association with a second entity, which he encountered
at the transpersonal level, that would ultimately have a more profound
influence on his work. This second figure, a “spirit figure” who called
himself Philemon, provided Jung with counsel and guidance in his work
throughout the rest of his life. Indeed, at the end of his life Jung credited
much of his most successful and creative work to his association with
Philemon.
Another precedent in support of transpersonal levels of experience can
be found in Abraham Maslow’s lifetime work on peak experiences. He
urged that there was a need to “depathologize” the psyche, that is, to look
upon the “inner core” of our being not as the source of metaphysical
darkness or illness but as the source of health and as the wellspring of hu-
man creativity. It was his belief that Western civilization had obscured the
importance of this inner core by approaching it more as a superstition than
as a reality, or by treating it as the source of evil, dangerous, neurotic, or
psychotic impulses—something to be suppressed or repressed.
Maslow demonstrated throughout his work with people who were highly
“self-actualized” that one’s full potential could be realized not by suppress-
ing signals from the inner core but, on the contrary, by learning to
85
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

listen to them. His research indicated that while the “voices and impulses”
from this inner core (like Jung’s Philemon) might be “weak, subtle and
delicate, very easily drowned out by learning, by cultural expectations, by
fear of disapproval,” it was nevertheless true that: “Authentic selfhood can
be defined in part as being able to hear these impulse-voices within one-
self….” He said: “No psychological health is possible unless this essential
core of the person is fundamentally accepted, loved and respected.”2
Nearly a hundred years ago, William James, one of the fathers of modern
psychological research, reflected on how we ourselves set up arbitrary
boundaries that in effect fence in our psyches. Like Jung and Maslow, he
made urgent pleas to open ourselves up to the vast possibilities inherent
there.
Most people live…in a very restricted circle of their potential being.
They make use of a very small portion of their possible consciousness,
and of their soul’s resources in general, much like a man who, out of
his whole bodily organism, should get into a habit of using and
moving only his little finger.3
Exploring and Mapping the Transpersonal World
In our ordinary, or what we think of as normal, states of consciousness, we
experience our lives as taking place only within that range of awareness
we experience with the five senses. Here, in our normal consciousness state,
we define reality by the sights, sounds, textures, tastes, and smells of the
world around us. Our perception of the world is also limited to the present
moment and the present location. We can recall the past, of course, or we
can fantasize about what may occur for us in the future. We can also be
aware of various things that are happening outside the range of our senses.
However, we do not have the feeling that we are directly experiencing the
past, future, or remote events; we clearly have the sense that these other
times and other places exist only in our imaginations. We are creating them,
as a novelist creates the characters and landscapes in his or her book.
When we enter the realm of transpersonal experience, we burst through
barriers that we take completely for granted in our everyday lives. At this
point various historical events, moments that belong to the future, and
elements of the world that we would normally consider to be outside the
range of our consciousness, appear to be as real and authentic as anything
we have
86
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

ever experienced. We can no longer assume that what we encounter here
are products of our imaginations. The world of the transpersonal exists
quite independent of us. Jung observed this in his earliest meetings with
his spirit guide Philemon, stating that it was clearly the guide and not Jung
who spoke. Philemon explained how Jung treated thoughts as though they
were generated by himself, while for Philemon “thoughts were like animals
in the forest, or people in a room, or birds in the air.” Jung concluded that
Philemon taught him “psychic objectivity, the reality of the psyche.” This
helped Jung to understand “that there is something in me which can say
things that I do not know and do not intend.”4
In the transpersonal realm, we experience an expansion or extension of
our consciousness far beyond the usual boundaries of both our bodies and
our egos, as well as beyond the physical limits of our everyday lives. The
more I have explored this realm in my own research, the more I am con-
vinced that experiences in transpersonal consciousness can include the
entire spectrum of existence itself.
As with entering any new territory, it is important to study the
transpersonal domain with a certain degree of caution and at least some
degree of apprehension. Our apprehension grows from realizing we are
entering the unknown. Our caution comes from recognizing that it is a pi-
oneering venture into uncharted terrain and changes may be required of
us as we move forward. Those who have already made their way into this
new territory have a responsibility to others to map out the new region so
that others might be encouraged to join them. Mapping out human con-
sciousness is not like mapping out a geographic region, to be sure, but there
are guidelines and markers we can make along the way to help others re-
cognize where they are and what to expect.
In mapping out the transpersonal realm, I found it useful to think in
terms of the following three experiential regions: (1) an expansion or exten-
sion of consciousness within the everyday concept of time and space; (2)
an expansion or extension of consciousness beyond the everyday concept
of time and space; and (3) “psychoid” experiences.
This list represents the types of transpersonal experiences that I have
witnessed in my own research and that have been described repeatedly by
various respected authorities in the field. Although we will discuss the
different types of transpersonal phenomena separately, in practice they
often occur in various combinations with each other or with perinatal and
biographical experiences. So, for example, karmic experiences, and figures
of
87
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

various archetypal deities, often emerge for the first time in connection
with basic perinatal matrices. Similarly, embryonal experiences can appear
in combination with phylogenetic memories, with an experience of cosmic
unity, or with visions of various blissful deities and demons.
In the following chapters, we will be exploring the three key categories
on this list in greater detail, beginning with the expansion of consciousness
within everyday concepts of time and space, then moving on beyond space-
time and to the psychoid experiences that we find at the further edges of
transpersonal consciousness.
88
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

7
JOURNEYS BEYOND PHYSICAL BOUNDARIES
The psyche at times functions outside of the spatio-temporal law of caus-
ality. This indicates that our conceptions of space and time, and therefore
of causality also, are incomplete. A complete picture of the world would
require the addition of still another dimension….
—C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections
In our everyday lives, most of us think of the world in which we live as
being made up of highly individualized physical bodies—some animate,
others inanimate—each possessing its own fixed and absolute boundaries.
All of our senses—sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch—seem to tell us
that we are, at least physically, separate from all we survey. There is a dif-
ference between ourselves and other people and between ourselves and
the rest of the universe that seems to indicate that we are each sovereign,
autonomous, and singular. However, consciousness research of the past
few years has begun to show us that our physical boundaries may be much
more illusory than real. Like the proverbial mirage of a cool, bubbling
spring seen by the thirsty desert traveler, the boundaries we perceive
between ourselves and the rest of the universe may best be understood as
products of our minds.
At the outermost reaches of human consciousness research we discover
that science has taken us full circle to a vision of our lives as being very
much like that described by the wise elders of ancient and Oriental cultures.
Sri Aurobindo tells us:
We have to see all becomings as developments of the movement in
our true self and this self as one inhabiting all bodies and not
89

our body only. We have to be consciously, in our relationships with
this world, what we really are—this one self becoming everything
that we observe. All the movement, all energies, all forms, all happen-
ings we must see as those of our one and real self in many existences.
Similarly, we see the above theme reflected in the words of Albert Einstein:
A human being is a part of the whole, called by us “Universe”—a
part limited in time and space. He experiences himself, his thoughts
and feelings as something separated from the rest—a kind of optical
delusion of consciousness.
There are few people who have not, under certain circumstances, exper-
ienced the extension of their everyday boundaries. At such times, our illu-
sions of separateness blur and fade like the last rays of the sun at the end
of the day. For fleeting moments in the afterglow we find ourselves merging
with other people, identifying with how they experience the world. Or we
find ourselves tuning into the consciousness of an entire group of people,
identifying with the griefs or joys of a whole society, race, or all of humanity.
In a similar vein, we can lose ourselves in nature, perhaps during a trek in
the mountains or deep in a redwood forest, and then we leap beyond the
limits of our exclusively human existence, to vividly experience the lives
of plants, animals, or even inorganic objects or processes. The following
inspired passage from Eugene O’Neill’s play Long Day’s Journey into Night,
where Edmund describes his night cruise on a sailboat, is a beautiful ex-
ample of a transpersonal state that transcends ordinary limits of human
experience.
I lay on the bowsprit, facing astern, with the water foaming into spume
under me, the masts with every sail white in the moonlight, towering
high above me. I became drunk with the beauty and singing rhythm
of it, and for a moment I lost myself—actually lost my life. I was set
free! I dissolved into the sea, became white sails and flying spray,
became beauty and rhythm, became moonlight and the ship and the
high dim-starred sky! I belonged without past or future, within peace
and unity and wild joy, within something greater than my own life,
or the Life of Man, to Life itself! To God, if you want to put it that
way…like the veil of things as they seem drawn back by an unseen
hand. For a second, there is meaning.1
90
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

In altered states of consciousness this new perception of the world be-
comes dominant and compelling. It completely overrides the everyday il-
lusion of Newtonian reality, where we seem to be “skin-encapsulated egos”
existing in a world of separate beings and objects. In the extreme forms of
transpersonal perception we can experience ourselves as the whole bio-
sphere of our planet or the entire material universe.
Identification with Other People
Perhaps the most familiar transpersonal experience for many of us happens
in our relationships with the people closest to us. During love making, or
while sharing other ecstatic moments, the demarcations between I and thou
seem to flee. We suddenly become aware that consciousness is quite separ-
ate from our bodies. Our two consciousnesses blend together, becoming
one, challenging the physical boundaries we usually take so much for
granted. While this is happening we might also feel unified with the creative
source from which we came and of which we are each a part.
The form of transpersonal connection we feel with another person can
be referred to as “dual unity.” Such experiences can occur during the
practice of spiritual disciplines, particularly Tantric yoga, during periods
of great emotional shocks or extraordinary joys, such as the death of a loved
one or the birth of a child, or after ingesting psychoactive substances. They
are also common between mothers and infants throughout pregnancy and
nursing. In the experiences of dual unity, we have a sense of completely
merging and becoming one with another person, yet also maintaining the
sense of our own identity.
In clinical situations I have witnessed various forms of this dual unity
literally hundreds of times. A particularly interesting example was a client
of mine, Jenna, who experienced herself merging with her mother while
reliving the intrauterine and nursing periods of her life.
During the session, she curled up into a fetal position, characteristic of
a person who is in a deeply regressed state. Every wrinkle on her face
seemed to disappear and she took on the qualities of a tiny infant. In a
small voice, she described how close she felt to her mother now. She had
a wonderful sense of actually becoming a part of her, merging with her,
until there was no difference between her mother’s feelings and her own.
She felt that she could shift back and forth between being herself and being
her mother. Sometimes she was an infant in the womb, sometimes a baby
nursing at her mother’s breast. Then she would switch roles, becoming her
91
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

pregnant or her nursing mother. She could experience being both her
mother and herself as an infant simultaneously, as if the two of them were
a continuum, a single organism, or a single mind.
At one point, as she was experiencing this dual unity, symbiotically
merging with her mother, she opened her eyes. As she looked at me she
seemed very surprised. She explained that she felt she could read my
thoughts and know what I was feeling, as if all boundaries between us had
been dissolved. When she in fact described my thoughts she proved to be
quite accurate.2
This was, incidentally, a breakthrough moment for Jenna. As she exper-
ienced dual unity with her mother, then with me, she gained a new per-
spective on her early life, and she allowed herself to establish a deeper level
of trust and communication with me. It is often this experience of dual
unity that can help us establish deeper trust or understanding of others in
our relationships with family and loved ones. It is safe to speculate, as well,
that this aspect of the human consciousness may be the basis for what we
call empathy.
Closely related to the dual unity experience is the experience of complete
identification with another person. This occurs when we identify so fully with
another person that we lose our own sense of identity and become them.
A vivid example of this kind of identification occurred for my wife Christina
while we were living at the Esalen Institute at Big Sur.
At the time Christina was lying in bed recovering from a viral infection.
One of our friends, also living at Esalen, was the late anthropologist and
generalist Gregory Bateson. During an exploratory operation surgeons had
found in his lungs a malignant tumor the size of a grapefruit. The doctors
told Gregory it was inoperable and that he had four weeks to live. While
living at Esalen, he received many alternative treatments and actually lived
more than two and a half years longer than the doctors predicted. During
those years, Christina and I spent a great deal of time with Gregory and
his family and become close friends.
On this particular morning, as she lay in bed, Christina had an overwhelm-
ing feeling that she was becoming Gregory. She had his giant body and his
enormous hands, his thoughts, and his staunch British humor. She felt
connected to the pain of his cancer and somehow knew with every cell of
her body that he was dying. This surprised her because it did not reflect
her conscious assessment of his situation.
Later that same day, Christina saw our friend Dr. Carl Simonton, who
was visiting Esalen. Carl had spent the morning working with Gregory,
92
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

using a method of visualization he had developed in conjunction with his
work as an oncologist and radiologist. Carl told Christina what had tran-
spired in his session with Gregory that morning. In the middle of the ses-
sion, Gregory had suddenly announced: “I do not want to do this any more.
I want to die.” They immediately called Gregory’s wife, Lois, and started
talking about dying instead of fighting the cancer. The timing of this episode
exactly coincided with Christina’s experience of identification with Gregory.
This merging of individual boundaries can extend much farther, to in-
volve an entire group of people who have something in common; they
might belong to the same race, be of the same nationality or culture, or
share a certain belief system, professional background, or predicament.
Fleeting and superficial forms of such identification with the consciousness of
a group can occur without profound or lasting change in consciousness.
For example, people visiting Auschwitz, where millions of Jews were tor-
tured and slain, often experience an overwhelming sense of sharing the
terror, grief, and cruel deprivation suffered by all those who were im-
prisoned and died there. Similarly, people visiting the Vietnam War Me-
morial in Washington, D.C., find themselves sharing, if only for a moment,
the suffering of all the young men and women who lost their lives in that
war.
In altered states of consciousness, transpersonal experiences such as
these can be very profound, vivid, and graphic, lasting for only seconds or
for hours. It is possible, for example, to become all the mothers of the world
who have lost their children to wars, all the soldiers who ever died on
battlefields, or all of human history’s fugitives and outcasts. Although it
may be difficult to imagine for a person who has never had these experi-
ences, one can have under these circumstances an absolutely convincing
feeling of becoming all those individuals at the same time. One becomes a
single consciousness that contains hundreds or even millions of individuals.
Visionary experiences of this kind have been described again and again
in sacred scriptures and the mystical literature of all ages. However, such
experiences are not the exclusive privilege of the great figures of religious
history—nor are they, as skeptics sometimes allege, the fanciful inventions
of scheming priesthoods seeking ways to manipulate gullible crowds. One
of the most surprising revelations of modern consciousness research has
been the discovery that under certain circumstances, such as extraordinary
states of mind, such visionary experiences can become available to virtually
every one of us. They are afforded us by the transpersonal potentials of
human consciousness.
93
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

The following is a contemporary example of the visionary experience of
a mental health professional who visited the ancient Mayan ruins of
Palenque in Mexico. This rather long report also involves transcendence
of time and contains an account of an encounter with archetypal entities,
which we have not as yet discussed. However, I have left the report intact
because it is a particularly poignant example of the kinds of visionary
capabilities available to us through transpersonal consciousness.
I found it increasingly difficult to relate to the ruins surrounding me
simply as an admiring tourist. I felt waves of deep anxiety permeating
my whole being and an almost metaphysical sense of oppression. My
perceptual field was becoming darker and darker, and I started noti-
cing that the objects around me were endowed with awesome energy
and started to move in a most ominous fashion.
I realized that Palenque was a place where thousands of human
sacrifices had taken place and felt that all the suffering of the ages
somehow still hung around as a heavy cloud. I sensed the presence
of wrathful deities and their thirst for blood. They obviously craved
for more sacrifice and seemed to assume that I would be their next
sacrificial victim. As convincing as this feeling was, I had enough
critical insight to realize that this was an inner symbolic experience
and that my life was not really in danger.
I closed my eyes to find out what was happening inside my psyche.
All of a sudden, it seemed that history came alive; I saw Palenque not
as ruins but as a thriving sacred city at the height of its glory. I wit-
nessed a sacrificial ritual in incredible detail; however, I was not
simply an observer, but also the sacrificial victim. This was immedi-
ately followed by another similar scene, and yet another. As I was
getting amazing insights into Pre-Columbian religion and the role
that sacrifice played in this system, my individual boundaries seemed
to have completely disappeared and I felt increasingly connected to
all those who had died in Palenque over the centuries to such an extent
that I became them.
I experienced myself as an immense pool of emotions they had felt;
it contained a whole spectrum of feelings—regret over the loss of
young life, anxious anticipation, and strange ambivalence toward
their executioners, but also peculiar surrender to their fate and even
excitement and curious expectation about
94
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

what was going to come. I had a strong sense that the preparation for
the ritual involved the administration of some mind-altering drugs
that raised the experience to another level.
He was fascinated by the dimensions of the experience and by the rich-
ness of insights that it entailed. He climbed the hill and lay down by the
Temple of the Sun so that he could better concentrate on what was happen-
ing. Scenes from the past kept bombarding his consciousness with extraor-
dinary force. His fascination was rapidly replaced by deep metaphysical
fear. A message seemed to come to him, loud and clear: “You are not here
as a tourist eavesdropping on history but as a sacrificial victim, like all the
others who were sacrificed in the past. You will not leave here alive.” He
felt the overpowering presence of the deities demanding sacrifice, and even
the walls of the buildings seemed to be thirsting for more blood—his. He
continues:
I had experienced altered states of consciousness before in my psyche-
delic sessions and knew that the worst fears in these experiences do
not reflect objectively existing danger and usually dissipate as soon
as consciousness returns to normal. As convincing as the experience
was, I wanted to believe that it was “just another one of those.” But
the feelings of impending doom became increasingly real. I opened
my eyes and a feeling of bloodcurdling panic took over my entire
being. My body was covered with giant ants and my skin was
erupting into hundreds of red bumps. This was not just in my mind;
this was really happening.
I realized that this unexpected complication provided an element
that was previously missing to make my fears absolutely convincing.
I had doubted that the experience alone could kill me, but now I was
not sure what large amounts of the toxin of hundreds of giant Mexican
ants unknown to me could do to one in an altered state of conscious-
ness. I decided to run, to escape the ruins, removing myself from the
influence of the deities. However, the time seemed to have slowed
down almost to the point of stopping and my whole body felt
enormously heavy, as if it were made of lead.
I desperately tried to run as fast as I could but it seemed that I was
progressing as if in a slow motion movie. I felt as if I were caught in
a tractor beam; the deities and the walls of the ruins had a firm grip
on me and were holding me under their spell. As this
95
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

was happening, images of the entire history of Palenque were still
flashing through my mind. I could see the parking lot full of cars,
separated from the ruins by a heavy chain. There was the predictable
rational world of my everyday reality. I set my mind on the task of
getting there, feeling that this would somehow save my life. At the
time, I saw the chains as a boundary where the influence of the magic
world of ancient gods ended. Has not our modern world conquered
and discredited the empires based on beliefs in mythical realities?3
His expectations turned out to be correct. After what seemed like eternity,
and with enormous effort, he reached the parking lot. At that moment, it
was as if a heavy weight—physical, psychological, and spiritual—was lifted
from his being. He felt light, ecstatic, reborn and pulsing with exuberant
life energy. His senses felt cleansed and wide open; the glorious sunset
during his return trip from Palenque, the dinner in a small restaurant in
Villa-hermosa where he watched the pulse of life in the streets, and the
tasting of fruit juices in the local jugerias were truly ecstatic experiences
for him. However, he spent much of the night taking cold showers to alle-
viate the pain and itching from his many ant bites.
Several years later, an anthropologist friend of his, who had studied the
Mayan culture extensively told him that the ants played an important role
in Mayan mythology and were deeply connected with the earth goddess
and the rebirth process.
The extreme form of group consciousness is the identification with all of
humanity, where no boundaries seem to be found in the experiential pool
of the human species. In ancient literature, there are many examples of
this, such as Christ’s experience in the Garden of Gethsemane. However,
I will use instead an example that comes from the world of modern techno-
logy, a transpersonal experience reported in Rusty Schweickart’s account
of the flight of Apollo 9, whose mission was to test the lunar module for
future, manned landings on the moon.
As his spaceship was orbiting the Earth, crossing various geographic
and political boundaries at tremendous speed, Rusty found it increasingly
difficult to identify himself as belonging to any particular nation. He saw
the Mediterranean far below him and reflected that this cradle of civilization
had for many centuries represented the entire known world. He imagined
that the surface of the blue, green, and white globe that he was circling
every hour and a half held everything that had ever meant anything
96
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

to him—history, music, art, war, death, love, tears, games, and joys. His
consciousness was undergoing a profound transformation.
When you go around the earth in an hour and a half, you begin to
recognize that your identity is with that whole thing. That makes a
change. You look down and you cannot imagine how many borders
and boundaries you cross…. Hundreds of people killing each other
over some imaginary line that you are not even aware of, you cannot
even see it. From where you are, the planet is a whole and it is so
beautiful and you wish you could take each individual by the hand
and say: “Look at it from this perspective. Look at what is important!”
During his walk in space these revelations suddenly exploded into a
profound mystical experience. The camera designed to document his
activities malfunctioned and for several minutes he had nothing to do but
float in space, allowing the spectacle of the Earth, the cosmos, and all exist-
ence to bombard his consciousness. Very quickly he found it impossible
to maintain his individual boundaries and instead identified himself as all
of humanity.
You think about what you are experiencing and why. Do you deserve
this, this fantastic experience? Have you earned this in some way?
Are you selected to be touched by God, to have some special experi-
ence that other men cannot have? You know the answer is no, there
is nothing you have done to deserve this. It is not a special thing for
you. You know very well at that moment—and it comes to you so
powerfully—that you are the sensing element for man.
You look down and you see the surface of the globe that you have
lived on all this time and you know all those people down there. They
are like you, they are you, you represent them. You are up there as
the sensing element, that point out on the end…. Somehow you recog-
nize that you are a piece of this total life and you are out in the fore-
front and you have to bring that back.
It becomes a rather special responsibility and it tells you something
about your relationship with this thing we call life. That is a change,
that is something new and when you come back, there is a difference
in that world now. There is a difference in that relationship between
you and that planet and you and all
97
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

those other forms of life on that planet, because you have had that
kind of experience and it is so precious.4
Since his return from the Apollo 9 mission, Rusty has dedicated much
of his life to bringing his vision to other people, sharing his transformation
of consciousness. He has remained vitally interested and highly motivated
in bringing peace and ecological harmony to our planet Earth and to hu-
manity, with which he has become so deeply identified.
Bridging the Chasms Between Species
In the transpersonal realm it becomes possible to have experiential insight
into the sensations of a mountain lion tracking its prey through a rocky
canyon, the primal impulses of a giant reptile as it encounters a member
of the opposite sex, or the powerful flight of an eagle. People have reported
that after identification with animals they have obtained a profound organ-
ismic understanding of drives completely foreign to humans, such as the
feelings that propel the eel or the sockeye salmon on their heroic upstream
journeys, or the structural instincts of a spider spinning its web, or the
mysterious experience of a gypsy moth’s metamorphosis from egg to
caterpillar to chrysalis to butterfly.
Our transpersonal experiences of entering the consciousness of animals
can be extremely convincing. These can include feeling that we have adop-
ted the body image, or that we are having sensations and instinctual drives
unique to that animal’s perceptions in their native environments. The nature
and the specific features of these experiences often transcend the scope of
human fantasy and imagination.
In Bruxelles, a Belgian woman attending our workshop on Holotropic
Breathwork™ had the following experience that brought her some remark-
able insights into the behavior of whales, knowledge that she had not pre-
viously read or heard about.
After a powerful sequence of being born with triumphant emergence
into light, things started to quiet down. I was feeling more and more
peaceful and calm, and my experience seemed to acquire incredible
depth and breadth. I had an increasing sense that my consciousness
had a distinctly oceanic quality until I felt that I actually became what
can best be described as the consciousness of the ocean. I became
aware of the presence of several large bodies and realized that it was
a pod of whales.
98
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

At one point, I felt cold air streaming through my head and had a
taste of salty water in my mouth. A variety of sensations and feelings
that were alien and definitely not human imperceptibly took over my
consciousness. A new, gigantic body image started to form out of the
primordial connection to the other large bodies around me and I
realized I had become one of them. Inside my belly I sensed another
life form and knew it was my baby. There was no doubt in my mind
that I was a pregnant whale cow.
And then came another wave of the birth process. However, this
time it had a different quality than the previous episodes. It had gar-
gantuan proportions, as if the ocean were stirred from its very depth;
at the same time it was surprisingly easy and natural. I experienced
my genitals in the most intimate way, with all the nuances of these
birthing activities associated with profound visceral understanding
of how whales give birth. What I found most amazing was how they
use water to expel the baby by sucking it into their genitals and
working with hydraulic pressure. It seemed significant that the baby
was born with its tail first.5
I described this woman’s experiences to a workshop we were giving
much later in California. One member of the group happened to be a
marine biologist. He described how whales give birth to their young and
fully confirmed that the insights of the young Belgian woman had been
accurate. This is just one of hundreds of confirmations of extraordinary
insights that people have received while in altered states. I have been re-
peatedly surprised by the voracity of these insights, which often involve
highly specific and detailed information even with people who had no
previous knowledge, interest, or experience in the subject.
Another experience of animal consciousness that comes to mind is that
of a person who had been engaged for several years in serious self-explor-
ation. He described how he had experienced being an eagle. He soared on
the air currents, skillfully using changes of the positions of his wings. He
scanned the area far below him with his eyes, noting that everything on
the ground seemed magnified as if seen through powerful binoculars, al-
lowing him to recognize the tiniest details in the terrain. When he spotted
movement, it was as if his eyes froze and zoomed in. He described his new
visual ability as being something like tunnel vision, looking through a long,
narrow tube. He said: “The feeling that this experience accurately repres-
ented the mechanism of vision in raptor birds—something I had never
thought about or had been interested in—was so convincing and
99
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

compelling that I decided to go to the library to study the anatomy and
physiology of their optical system.”
The experiences of animal consciousness are not limited to species that
stand higher on the evolutionary ladder, such as primates, cetaceans, birds,
or reptiles. They can reach the level of insects, worms, snails, and even
coelenterates; such experiences involving lower life forms can also provide
amazing new insights and information. I remember in particular a Holo-
tropic Breathwork™ session in which a person identified with a caterpillar
and experienced, on a very basic level, how it perceived the world, moved,
and consumed leaves.
The experience culminated with the formation of a cocoon and with a
specific state of consciousness associated with that stage of its life cycle.
This person then witnessed at a subcellular level in his own body the miracle
of metamorphosis. Following his experience he commented on how sur-
prised he was to discover that the process of metamorphosis involved a
complete disintegration of the caterpillar’s body inside the cocoon, to then
emerge from this amorphous ooze in its completely new form as a butterfly.
After the emergence from the cocoon he experienced the process of drying
and stretching his wet and folded wings, and then the triumph of his first
flight.
This person had no previous knowledge of the metamorphosis process,
whereby the caterpillar’s body is completely dissolved and liquefied by
proteolytic enzymes in the cocoon. He had no previous interest in entomo-
logy or biology in general; it was his transpersonal experience that
awakened him to one of the great mysteries of nature—that of the
morphogenetic fields that provide an energetic template for teasing out
the form of a butterfly from the liquefied body of the caterpillar.
Our potential for voyaging into the consciousness of other species does
not stop with animals. No matter how fantastic and absurd it might seem
to traditional researchers, and no matter how it may stretch the limits of
common sense, it is not possible to completely dismiss reports of people
who claim to have experienced the consciousness of plants and botanical pro-
cesses. Over the years I have observed hundreds of just such experiences
and have even had several such experiences myself. This made it possible
for me to recognize how amazingly authentic they are and how much they
offer in terms of helping us unravel the alchemical mysteries of the botan-
ical kingdom.
Experiences of plant consciousness cover a wide range, from bacteria,
ocean plankton, and mushrooms, to Venus fly traps, orchids, and Sequoia
100
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

trees. These experiences can offer interesting insights into the process of
photosynthesis, pollination, the function of the growth hormone auxine,
the exchange of water and minerals in the root system, and many other
physiological functions of various plants. To illustrate this type of experi-
ence I have chosen a description of identification with a Sequoia tree, repor-
ted by a person during a holotropic session. These magnificent trees, I
might add, often appear in non-ordinary states of consciousness, and their
appearance never fails to evoke philosophical and metaphysical speculation.
I would have never considered seriously the possibility that there
could be anything like plant consciousness. I have read some accounts
of experiments pointing to the “secret life of plants” and claims that
consciousness of the gardener can influence the harvest. I always
considered such stuff to be unsubstantiated and flaky New Age lore.
But here I was, completely transformed into a giant Sequoia tree and
it was absolutely clear to me that what I was experiencing actually
occurs in nature, that I was now discovering dimensions of the cosmos
that are usually hidden to our senses and intellects.
The most superficial level of my experience seemed to be very
physical and involved things that Western scientists have described,
only seen from an entirely new angle—as consciousness processes
guided by cosmic intelligence, rather than mechanical happenings in
organic or unconscious matter. My body actually had the shape of
the Sequoia tree, it was the Sequoia. I could feel the circulation of sap
through an intricate system of capillaries under my bark. My con-
sciousness followed the flow to the finest branches and needles and
witnessed the mystery of communion of life with the sun—the pho-
tosynthesis. My awareness reached all the way into the root system.
Even the exchange of water and nourishment from the earth was not
a mechanical but a conscious, intelligent process.
However, the experience had deeper levels that were mythical and
mystical, and these dimensions were intertwined with the physical
aspects of Nature. Thus, photosynthesis was not just an amazing al-
chemical process, it was also direct contact with God, who was
manifest through the rays of the sun. The natural processes such as
rain, wind, and fire had mythical dimensions and I
101
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

could easily perceive these as deities, the way they were perceived
by most aboriginal cultures.
It is interesting to note here that while identifying with the consciousness
of the tree, this person perceived relationships and beings that were
uniquely associated with that consciousness.
I had a love-hate relationship with Fire, who was an enemy as well
as a helper, cracking open my seed pods for sprouting and burning
out other vegetation on the forest floor that might compete with my
new growth. Earth itself was a goddess, the Great Mother, Mother
Nature, and her soil was permeated by gnomelike beings, fairy-like
creatures, and elementals. The philosophy of the Findhorn community
in Scotland, where these entities are parts of a shared belief system,
suddenly did not appear strange or alien to me.
The deepest level of the experience was purely spiritual. The con-
sciousness of the Sequoia was a state of profound meditation. I felt
amazing tranquility and serenity, as a quiet, unperturbed witness of
the centuries. At one point my image of the Sequoia merged with that
of a giant Buddha figure immersed in profound meditation, while
the folly of the world passed me by. I thought about the transversal
cuts through giant tree trunks that I had seen in the Sequoia National
Park. On the mandala made of nearly four thousand annual rings,
various distances close to the surface, carry markers such as “French
Revolution” or “Columbus discovers America” and another halfway
to the center marks the year of Christ’s Crucifixion. All the commotion
of the world history meant very little to a being who had reached this
state of consciousness.6
It is very common for people who experience the consciousness of plants
to sense the strong spiritual dimensions of this state of being. Following
such experiences they often remark that they see plants as models for life,
examples of a highly spiritual way of being in the world. Unlike humans,
most plants never kill or lead predatory lives. They live on what is given
them by nature—nourished from the soil, irrigated by the rains, and in
direct contact with the sun, the life-giving force of this planet and the most
immediate expression of cosmic creative energy. While not killing, hurting,
or exploiting other living things, the plants serve as food for others.
102
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

To humans they also provide materials for building, clothing, producing
paper, and making tools, as well as supplying fuel, medicines, and beauty.
The reports of non-ordinary states like the one above lead us to speculate
that our capacity to identify with the consciousness of plants undoubtedly
contributed to the fact that many cultures hold certain plants to be sacred.
In many Native American cultures corn and other crops were revered as
gods. For the Pueblo peoples of the Southwest, for example, the Corn God,
the Sustainer of Life, was extolled as a major deity. Similarly, the banyan
tree is considered sacred in India, and many important saints have allegedly
achieved enlightenment while meditating under its canopy. The water lily
or lotus has been an important spiritual symbol in Egypt, India, Mesopot-
amia, and Central America, while mistletoe was sacred to the Druids. Lo-
gically enough, plants with psychedelic properties that offer direct access
to transpersonal experiences, such as certain mushrooms, peyote, or yaje,
have been incorporated into the religions of many cultures and are con-
sidered deities, or the “flesh of the gods.”
Experiencing the Consciousness of the Biosphere
In some rare instances, people experience themselves expanding into a
consciousness that encompasses all life on our planet—embracing all hu-
manity and the entire world of flora and fauna, from viruses to the largest
animals and plants. Instead of identifying with a single plant or animal
species, they experience the totality of life. This experience could be described
as identification with life as a cosmic phenomenon, as an entity or force in
and of itself.
Transpersonal experiences often lead to a deepened understanding of
the role of primal forces in nature, an enhanced awareness of the laws that
govern our lives, and an appreciation for the extraordinary intelligence
that underlies all life processes. Experiences of this kind typically result in
an intensified concern for the natural environment. In some cases, the
person’s experiences have focused on a single aspect of life, such as the
power of the sexual drive, or the maternal instinct.
The following passage was recorded by a physician who vividly experi-
enced identification with the totality of life on this planet.
I seemed to have connected in a very profound way with life on this
planet. At first, I went through a whole series of identifications with
various species, but later the experience was more and more encom-
passing. My identity spread not only horizontally in
103
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

space to include all living forms but also vertically in time. I became
the Darwinian evolutionary tree in all its ramifications. I was the to-
tality of life!
I sensed the cosmic quality of the energies and experiences involved
in the world of living forms, the endless curiosity and experimentation
characterizing life, and the drive for self-expression operating on
many different levels. The crucial question I seemed to be dealing
with was whether life on this planet would survive. Is it a viable and
constructive phenomenon, or a malignant growth on the face of the
Earth that contains some fatal flaw in its blueprint condemning it to
self-destruction? Is it possible that some basic error occurred when
the design for the evolution of organic forms was originally laid
down? Can creators of universes make mistakes as humans do? It
seemed at that moment a plausible, but very frightening idea, some-
thing I had never considered before.
Identifying with life, I experienced and explored an entire spectrum
of destructive forces operating in nature and in human beings and
saw their dangerous extensions and projections in modern technolo-
gical society—internecine warfare, prisoners in concentration camps
dying in gas chambers, fish poisoned in polluted streams, plants killed
by herbicides, and insects sprayed by chemicals.7
These experiences alternated with moving experiences of smiling infants,
charming children playing in the sand, newborn animals, and newly
hatched birds in carefully built nests, wise dolphins and whales cruising
the crystal-clear waters of the ocean, and images of beautiful pastures and
forests. He felt a profound empathy with life, a strong ecological awareness,
and a real determination to join the pro-life forces on this planet.
Probing the Consciousness of Inanimate Matter and Inorganic
Processes
In addition to the transpersonal extension of consciousness to other people,
groups of people, all of humanity, plants, animals, and the totality of life,
people have reported experiencing identification with the water in rivers
and oceans, with fire, with the soil of the earth, with mountains, or with
forces unleashed in natural catastrophes such as electrical storms,
104
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

earthquakes, tornadoes, or volcanic eruptions. Other times, this identifica-
tion involved specific minerals and metals, such as diamonds and other
precious stones, quartz crystals, amber, steel, quicksilver, gold, and many
others. These experiences can extend into the microworld, involving the
dynamic structure of molecules and atoms, electromagnetic forces, and the
“lives” of subatomic particles. Experiences of this kind are very common
in the reports of altered states of consciousness of modern people. They
probably also represent an important source of the animistic worldview
of some aboriginal cultures. The Zuni peoples, for example, recorded ex-
periences of strong identification with natural phenomena, such as lighten-
ing, wind, and fire. Their spiritual lore is filled with rich descriptions re-
flecting on the metaphysical nature of these elements and how to use the
wisdom gleaned from their awareness of them in healing.
People have even reported identification with highly sophisticated
products of modern technology, such as jets, spaceships, lasers, and com-
puters. During these experiences their body images take on the character-
istic shapes of these objects, and they might feel themselves assuming the
qualities of the materials and processes upon which they have focused their
attention.
Experiences of this kind suggest that there is a constant interplay between
the inanimate objects we generally associate with the material world, the
world of consciousness, and creative intelligence. Rather than being from
two distinctly different realms with discrete boundaries, consciousness
and matter are engaged in a constant dance, their interplay forming the
entire fabric of existence. This is a notion that is being confirmed by research
in modern physics, biology, thermodynamics, information and systems
theory, and other branches of science. Observations of the transpersonal
realm are beginning to suggest that consciousness is involved in the so-
called material world in ways previously unimagined.
Experiential identification with various aspects of the inorganic world
can bring to us new information about the micro- and macroworld of
matter that is congruent with findings of modern science. However,
transpersonal states of this kind also have other fascinating dimensions;
they are typically associated with philosophical, mythological, and spiritual
insights and experiences. For example, they provide interesting new under-
standings about the animistic religions of many aboriginal cultures who
consider all of nature—mountains, lakes, rivers, rocks—to be alive. Simil-
arly, medieval alchemy and homeopathic medicine, which see deep con-
nections between material substances and psychospiritual states, can
105
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

suddenly be seen in a new light. For people who have experienced contact
with inorganic matter in non-ordinary states of consciousness, these systems
of thought are based not on naive speculation but on direct experience and
intuitive insight.
During experiential sessions in non-ordinary states of consciousness,
two natural forces appear again and again: water and fire. It is interesting
to note here that these elements also appear repeatedly in spiritual literature,
each having apparently universal symbolic meanings.
In spiritual literature, water is often used as a metaphor to describe
mystical states of consciousness. The parallels drawn often derive from the
pure, fluid, pristine qualities of water in its natural state and its lack of
boundaries. It seeks the lowest position in the world, and it has quiet, un-
assuming strength. It has great purifying and cleansing capacities, sharing
with consciousness the paradoxical combination of immutability underlying
endless change and transformation.
In a similar vein, fire is both an awesome force in the natural world and
a powerful spiritual symbol. It has the potential to create and destroy; it
can nourish and comfort or threaten and hurt. It can give light and it can
blind. Under its influence objects are transformed, giving up their solid
forms and turning into pure energy. In its most powerful manifestation—the
sun—fire is a cosmic principle without which life would cease to exist. On
the archetypal and mythological level, fire is seen as playing roles similar
to those it plays in the physical world—the sustainer of life and a transform-
ational force. Since time immemorial it has been worshiped in all its forms,
from the humblest flicker of a candle to the fiery eruptions of volcanoes to
the mysterious cosmic furnaces of the sun. In spiritual literature, fire and
light are often used as metaphors for the creative source of the universe
itself. In non-ordinary states of consciousness fire, like water, appears to
represent those same cosmic forces that it symbolizes throughout spiritual
literature.
Consciousness research also provides us with new insights about the
sacred stature of various metals and stones, such as diamonds, emeralds,
gold, and silver, and why these are frequently used to adorn sacred objects.
Descriptions of paradise in many mythologies describe environments that
abound with precious metals and stones. And the sacred scriptures of many
traditions have used the stones or metals themselves as symbols of high
spiritual experiences. In non-ordinary states in which people identify with
these precious stones or metals, they repeatedly report that these states of
consciousness have a brilliant, numinous, mystical quality.
106
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Writer and philosopher Aldous Huxley had a deep intuitive understand-
ing of the connection between precious metals and stones and spiritual
states of consciousness. In his famous lecture “The Visionary Experience,”
he addressed the question of why precious stones are precious, and why
a pragmatic culture like our own is willing to pay exorbitant prices for
objects that have little or no practical value. He speculated that we do so
because such objects serve as surrogates for the mystical experiences that
our lives lack. In the lives we live they represent the closest we can come
to the visionary experience, offering radiance, luster, ultimate purity, clarity,
timelessness, and incorruptibility.
The following is an account of one person’s identification with amber,
quartz crystal, and a diamond, successively. It illustrates the nature and
complexity of experiences involving the inorganic world.
At this point of the session time seemed to have stopped. It suddenly
came to my mind that I was experiencing what seemed to be the es-
sence of amber. My visual field showed a homogeneous yellowish
glow and I had a sense of peace, tranquility, and eternity. In spite of
its transcendental nature, this state seemed to be related to life; it had
a certain organic quality that is difficult to describe. I realized that
the same is true for amber, which is a kind of organic time capsule.
It is mineralized organic material—a resin that often contains organ-
isms such as insects and plants, and preserves them in an unchanged
form for millions of years.
Then the experience began to change and my visual environment
was progressively clearer and clearer. I had a sense that instead of
experiencing myself as amber I was now connecting with a state of
consciousness related to a quartz crystal. It was a very powerful state,
which somehow seemed to represent a condensation of some element-
ary forces of nature. I suddenly understood why crystals have such
an important role in aboriginal cultures as shamanic power objects
and why shamans consider crystals to be solidified light.
He thought about the Mitchell-Hedges skull, a perfect life-size replica
of a human skull, a pre-Columbian ritual object found in the Guatemalan
jungle, that has the reputation of having caused profound alterations of
consciousness in many people who came in contact with it. It also made
perfect sense to him that the first radio transmissions were mediated by
107
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

crystals and that crystals play an important part in modern laser technology.
He continued:
My state of consciousness underwent another process of purification
and became absolutely pristine and radiant. I recognized that this
was consciousness of a diamond. I realized that diamond is chemically
pure carbon, an element on which all life as we know it is based. It
seemed meaningful and important that it is created by extremely high
temperatures and pressures. I had a very convincing sense that the
diamond somehow contains all the information about nature and life
in an absolutely pure, condensed, and abstract form, like the ultimate
cosmic computer.
All the other physical properties of the diamond seemed to be
pointing to its metaphysical significance—beauty, transparence, luster,
permanence, unchangeability, and the capacity to transform white
light into an amazing spectrum of colors. I felt that I understood why
Tibetan Buddhism is called Vajrayana (vajra meaning “diamond” or
“thunderbolt” and yana meaning “vehicle”); the only way I could
describe this state of ultimate cosmic ecstasy was to refer to it as
“diamond consciousness.” Here seemed to be all the creative intelli-
gence and energy of the universe as pure consciousness existing
beyond time and space. It was entirely abstract yet containing all the
forms of creation.8
We can see from this description why transpersonal states of conscious-
ness involving inorganic materials can provide such profound insights into
ancient and aboriginal spiritual systems that include precious stones and
metals in their mythologies. Similarly, if you have ever had the experience
of identifying with water you will understand why this element has been
so important in Taoism. If you have had transpersonal experiences with
fire you will find it easy to comprehend why the Parsees saw it as sacred,
why a variety of cultures worshiped volcanoes, and why the Sun is per-
ceived as a supreme deity by so many peoples and religious groups.
Through experiential identification with granite, it is easy to see why the
Hindus perceive the Himalayas as a gigantic reclining Shiva. One can get
an entirely different sense of why various cultures have created colossal
granite sculptures of their deities. These objects not only represent divine
figures, they are the deities themselves since the materials from which they
are shaped are intimately associated with vast, undifferentiated,
108
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

imperturbable, and immutable consciousness of the cosmic creative prin-
ciple in nature.
Gaia: The Experience of Planetary Consciousness
In a rare form of transpersonal experience, consciousness expands to include
the Earth in its totality. People who have these experiences are deeply
moved by the notion of our planet as a cosmic unity. They perceive the
different aspects of our planet—geological, biological, psychological, cul-
tural, and technological—as manifestations of a sustained effort to reach
a higher level of evolution and self-actualization. It becomes clear that the
processes on Earth are guided by a superior intelligence that far exceeds
all human capacities, and that this intelligence deserves to be respected
and trusted. We should be extremely cautious about our efforts to manip-
ulate or control it from our limited human perspective. I am reminded here
of the words of Lewis Thomas (from Lives of the Cell).
Viewed from the distance of the Moon, the astonishing thing about
the Earth, catching the breath, is that it is alive…. Aloft, floating free
beneath the moist, gleaming membrane of bright blue sky, is the rising
Earth, the only exuberant thing in this part of the cosmos. If you could
look long enough, you would see the swirling of the great drifts of
white cloud, covering and uncovering the half-hidden masses of land.
If you had been looking for a very long, geologic time, you could have
seen the continents themselves in motion, drifting apart on their
crustal plates, held aloft by the fire beneath. It has the organized, self-
contained look of a live creature, full of information, marvelously
skilled in handling the Sun.
The transpersonal experiences revealing the Earth as an intelligent, con-
scious entity are corroborated by scientific evidence. Gregory Bateson, who
created a brilliant synthesis of cybernetics, information and systems theory,
the theory of evolution, anthropology, and psychology came to the conclu-
sion that it was logically inevitable to assume that mental processes occurred
at all levels in any system or natural phenomenon of sufficient complexity.
He believed that mental processes are present in cells, organs, tissues, or-
ganisms, animal and human groups, eco-systems, and even the earth and
universe as a whole.
Another writer-scientist, physicist J. E. Lovelock, hired by NASA to es-
tablish criteria for deciding whether or not there might be life forms in
109
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

areas of the universe where they (NASA) were considering sending space
probes, examined the information and decided that the Earth was itself a
living, breathing organism. According to his findings, our planet behaves
very much like a living cell. He showed that it metabolizes, and that it is
“a self-regulating entity” with highly sophisticated homeostatic capabilities.
He called the Earth an “intelligent being.” His evidence for this was based
on his observations of the homeostatic functions.
Much of the routine operation of homeostasis, whether it be for the
cell, the animal, or the entire biosphere, takes place automatically,
and yet it must be recognized that some form of intelligence is re-
quired even within an automatic process, to interpret correctly inform-
ation received about the environment…. If Gaia (the living, breathing,
intelligent Earth) exists, then she is without doubt intelligent in this
limited sense at least.9
While the objective evidence for the Gaia theory might not be sufficient
to convince hardcore scientists, it is certainly supported by the existence
of transpersonal experiences that are fully congruent with it. For example,
in one of our five-day workshops in Holotropic Breathwork™, a young
German woman had a persuasive experience of becoming the archetypal
Great Mother Goddess. Then the experience developed further and she
felt herself becoming planet Earth (Mother Earth). She reported that she
felt no question at all that she had merged with and had become the con-
sciousness of the Earth. She experienced herself as the Earth, as a living,
breathing organism with an intelligence, an organism that was evolving
toward a still higher level of awareness.
As the Earth consciousness she felt that the metals and minerals that
were a part of her, constituted her skeleton. Similarly, the biosphere, all
forms of life, was her flesh. She experienced within herself the circulation
of water from the oceans to the clouds, from there into creeks and rivers
and finally to the great seas. The water system was her blood and the
meteorological changes, such as evaporation, air currents, and rainfall,
ensured its circulation, the transport of nourishment, and cleansing. The
communication between all living things, large and small, constituted her
nervous system and brain.
Immediately after the experience, she described how important the
healing rituals of primitive peoples had been to her in her experience as
the Earth. She told how human activities had affected her, especially how
dances, songs, and prayers performed by aborigines had brought great
110
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

comfort. Once having returned to her everyday state of being, she found
it difficult to imagine that the rituals had really been important, though in
the state of identifying so closely with the Earth she was absolutely con-
vinced of their importance to her overall welfare.
From Dissolving Physical Boundaries to Dissolving the Boundaries
of Time
As we experience the spatial boundaries of our world dissolving in the
transpersonal realm, we begin to also experience the dissolution of the
temporal boundaries upon which we have come to depend in our everyday
lives. Just as we can leap beyond physical boundaries, we can leap backward
and forward through the years; we can visit our own lives, or the lives of
others, as if all time existed only in a single moment.
While our perceptions of time and space are intertwined, there are subtle
differences to look for as we experience these boundaries fading. Let us go
forward now to explore some of these differences.
111
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


8
ACROSS THE BORDERS OF TIME
Time present and time past
Are both perhaps present in time future,
And time future contained in time past.
—T. S. Eliot, Four Quartets
As described by the poet, transpersonal consciousness allows us to experi-
ence past and future, leaping across boundaries that clocks, calendars, and
the aging of our own bodies seem to make so real and so inexorable. Here
we enter a world where we might experience ourselves as an embryo in
the earliest stages of our intrauterine development or, even further back,
the fertilizing sperm or fertilized ovum at the moment of conception.
Many people who have experienced the transcendence of linear time
have gone even further back than the time spans of their own lives, connect-
ing with ancestral memories, or drawing upon the memory banks of the
collective unconscious, that vast sea of awareness that we have shared with
all of humankind since the beginning of time. Such experiences, from
various periods of history and from different countries, are often associated
with a vivid sense of a personal memory of our spiritual rather than biolo-
gical history; we can talk here about karmic or past life recall. On occasion
people have reported memories of specific animal ancestors in the evolu-
tionary pedigree. However, consciousness does not seem to be limited to
human history or the history of living organisms. It is in principle possible
to experience the history of the Earth before the appearance of Homo
sapiens and even prior to the beginning of life on the Earth. Our conscious-
ness seems to have the amazing capacity to directly access the earliest his-
tory of
113

the universe—witnessing dramatic sequences of the Big Bang, the formation
of the galaxies, the birth of the solar system, and the early geophysical
processes that occurred on this planet billions of years ago.
For our purposes here, let us begin at the smallest scale of human life
and move to the larger. For a variety of reasons, it is useful to first explore
our ability to experience, through the transpersonal consciousness, the
earliest stages of our own lives.
Embryonal and Fetal Experiences
The experiences people report for the embryonal and fetal stages of their
lives cover a wide range, indicating that the quality of our experiences in
these earliest phases of life is anything but universal. At the most positive
end of the spectrum, people report that in their intrauterine life they exper-
ienced feelings of “oceanic ecstasy.” They felt a powerful mystical connec-
tion with all of life and the cosmic creative force that made it all possible.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, people experience intense crises, with
dominant feelings of anguish, paranoia, physical distress, and the sense of
being attacked by demonic forces. Many but not all embryonal memories
are associated with phylogenetic, karmic, and archetypal experiences, and
with organ, tissue, and cellular consciousness.
Reports of embryonal and fetal experiences suggest that it is possible to
experience not only gross disturbances during this period—such as the
threat of abortion, the danger of natural miscarriage, intense mechanical
concussions and vibrations, loud sounds, toxic influences, and physical
diseases of the mother—but also the mother’s feelings. It is quite common
to experience the mother’s emotional shocks, anxiety attacks, outbursts of
hate or aggression, depression, sexual arousal, as well as feelings of relax-
ation, satisfaction, happiness, and love.
The exchange of information between the fetus and the mother can in-
clude many nuances of feeling as well as the transfer of complex thoughts
and images. While reliving early life in the womb, many people have repor-
ted how keenly aware they were of thoughts and feelings that their mothers
never verbalized in their everyday lives. For example, the person recalling
intrauterine life might suddenly get in touch with the mother’s sense of
conflict or resentment over her pregnancy or, conversely, might feel the
mother’s happiness with the pregnancy and her joyous anticipation of the
birth.
Having witnessed countless episodes of people moving back through
time to re-experience their lives in the embryonal and fetal stages of life,
114
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

and having experienced such episodes myself, I find it impossible to dismiss
them as fanciful products of our imaginations. In many cases, the experi-
ences recounted were verified against information provided by the mother,
relatives, obstetricians, and medical records. We have also compared
layperson’s descriptions of their fetal and embryonal life and development
with information provided by medical handbooks. The result is that we
have discovered amazing correlations between the objective information
gathered from outside sources and the experiences people described. The
following account of a training session of a psychiatrist is an excellent ex-
ample of the complexities of embryonal experiences. It provides us with
detailed descriptions of the earliest stages of our lives, even back to the
moment of conception.
My consciousness became less and less differentiated, and I started
experiencing a strange excitement that was dissimilar to anything I
have ever felt in my life. The middle part of my back was generating
rhythmical pulses, and I had the feeling of being propelled through
space and time toward some unknown goal; I had a very vague sense
of what the final destination might be, but the mission appeared to
be one of utmost importance.
After some time, I was able to recognize to my great surprise that
I was a spermatozoid and that the regular explosive pulses were the
beats of a biological pacemaker that were transmitted to my long
flagella, which was flashing in vibratory movements. I was involved
in a hectic super-race toward the source of some chemical messages
that had an enticing and irresistible quality. By then I realized (using
the information I had as an educated human adult) that the goal was
to reach, penetrate, and fertilize the egg. In spite of the fact that this
whole scene seemed absurd and ridiculous to my scientific mind, I
could not resist getting involved in this strange race with all serious-
ness and great expenditure of energy.
Experiencing myself as a spermatozoid competing for the egg, I
was conscious of all the processes involved. What was happening
had the basic characteristics of the physiological event as it is taught
in medical schools. However, there were many additional dimensions
that were far beyond anything that my fantasy could conjure up in
the ordinary state of consciousness. The cellular consciousness of this
spermatozoid was a whole autonomous microcosm, a universe of its
own. I had a clear awareness of the
115
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

complexity of the biochemical processes in the nucleoplasm and a
nebulous sense of the chromosomes, genes, and molecules of DNA.
As he was perceiving these physiochemical configurations, the psychiat-
rist in the above narrative was also in touch with elements of ancestral
memories, imprints from animal ancestors, mythological motifs, and arche-
typal forms. Genetics, biochemistry, mythology, and evolutionary history
seemed to him to be inextricably interwoven, being different aspects of the
same phenomenon. He said he had the sense that this microworld of the
spermatozoid was, at that time, influenced and governed by primordial
forces that were modifying and determining the outcome of the race. He
described these forces as having “the form of karmic, cosmo-biological,
and astrological forcefields.” He continued:
The excitement of this race was growing every second and the hectic
pace seemed to increase to such a degree that it felt like the flight of
a spaceship approaching the speed of light. Then came the culmination
in the form of a triumphant implosion and ecstatic fusion with the
egg. Shortly before the moment of conception, my consciousness was
alternating between the speeding sperm and the egg experiencing
strong excitement and expectation of a vaguely defined, but over-
whelming event. At the moment of conception, the two units of con-
sciousness merged and I became both of these germinal cells at once.
After the fusion, the experience continued, still at a fast pace. In a
condensed and accelerated way, I experienced the development of
the embryo following the conception with full conscious awareness
of tissue growth, cellular divisions, and even biochemical processes.
There were numerous tasks to be met, occasional challenges, and
critical periods to overcome. I was witnessing the differentiation of
tissues and formation of new organs; I became the pulsating fetal
heart, the columns of liver cells, and the epithelium of the intestinal
mucous membrane. An enormous release of energy and light accom-
panied the embryonal development. I felt that this blinding golden
glow had something to do with the biochemical energy involved in
the precipitous growth of cells and tissues.1
At one point, he had a very definite sense of having completed the crit-
ical parts of his fetal development. He experienced this as a great
116
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

accomplishment—both from his own point of view and in terms of the
creative force of Nature. As he was returning to his ordinary state of con-
sciousness, he was able to describe what he called “a strong feeling that
this session will have a lasting effect on my self-esteem. No matter what
my future will be like, I started my life with two great accomplishments,
being the sole victor in the multi-million competition of the sperm race and
having successfully completed embryogenesis.” Although the scientist in
him reacted to these ideas with a certain degree of skepticism, if not humor,
the emotions behind the experience were powerful and convincing.
The following example comes from records of therapy sessions with
Richard, a man who had been suffering from chronic suicidal depressions.
In one of his sessions, he felt immersed in fetal liquid and fixed to the pla-
centa by the umbilical cord. He was aware of nourishment streaming into
his body through the navel area and experienced wonderful feelings of
symbiotic unity with his mother. They were connected with each other
through the placentary circulation of blood that seemed to be a magical
life-giving fluid.
Richard heard two sets of heart sounds with different frequencies that
were merging into one undulating pattern. This was accompanied by pe-
culiar hollow and roaring noises that Richard identified after some hesita-
tion as those produced by the blood gushing through the pelvic arteries
and by movements of gas and liquid during the peristaltic movements of
the intestines adjacent to the uterus. He was fully aware of his body image
and recognized it was very different from his adult one. He was small and
his head was disproportionately larger than his body and extremities. On
the basis of various experiential clues and with the use of adult judgment,
he was able to identify himself as being a mature fetus just before delivery.
In this state, he suddenly heard strange noises coming from the outside
world. They had a very unusual echoing quality, as if they were resounding
in a large hall or coming through a layer of water. The resulting effect re-
minded him of the sound quality that music technicians achieve through
electronic means in modern recordings. He finally concluded that the ab-
dominal and uterine walls and the fetal liquid were responsible for this
effect and that this was the form in which external sounds reached the
fetus.
He then tried to identify what produced these sounds and where they
were coming from. After some time, he could recognize human voices that
were yelling and laughing and what seemed to be sounds of carnival
trumpets. Suddenly, the idea came to him that these had to be the sounds
of a
117
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

fair, held annually in his native village two days prior to his birthday. After
having put together the above pieces of information, he concluded that his
mother must have attended this fair at the advanced stages of pregnancy.
When we asked Richard’s mother independently about the circumstances
of his birth, without telling her about his LSD experience, she volunteered
among other things the following story: In the relatively dull life of the
village, the annual fair was an event providing rare excitement. Although
she was in a late stage of pregnancy, she would not have missed this op-
portunity for anything in the world. In spite of strong objections and
warnings from her own mother, she left home to participate in the festivities.
According to her relatives, the noisy environment and turmoil of the mart
precipitated Richard’s delivery. Richard denied ever having heard this
story and his mother did not remember ever having told him about this
event.2
The Time-Machine of Consciousness
While the possibility of cellular memory from the earliest stages of our
lives may stretch the boundaries of our imaginations, it is by no means the
greatest challenge posed by transpersonal experience. It is not unusual for
people in non-ordinary states of mind to accurately portray material that
precedes their conception or to explore the world of their parents, their
ancestors, and of the human race. Particularly interesting are “past life”
experiences, which suggest that individual consciousness might maintain
continuity from one lifetime to another.
Probing the Childhoods of Our Parents
On many occasions, people in non-ordinary states have reported that they
experienced episodes occurring long before their own conceptions. For
example, many report being able to enter the consciousness of their parents
during their mother’s or father’s childhoods and to experience through
their parents’ consciousness events from that time. These sequences bring
to mind Steven Spielberg’s movie Back to the Future, in which the characters
race back and forth in time.
I recall the experience of a young Finnish woman who attended one of
our workshops in Sweden. Inga experienced herself as a young soldier
during World War II, a full fourteen years before her conception. The soldier
she became was her father, and she was in the midst of a battle, experiencing
it all through his senses and nervous system. She fully identified with
118
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

him, reliving how his body had felt and the sharpness of the high adrenalin
emotions he was undergoing at the time. She was acutely aware of
everything that was happening in the area around her. While hiding behind
a birch tree, a bullet whistled past and grazed his-her cheek and ear.
Inga’s experience was extremely vivid and compelling to her. She could
not even imagine where such a memory could have come from. She did
know that her father had fought in the Russo-Finnish war, but she was
certain he had never told her of anything like the experience that had come
to her mind. She decided to call her father on the phone and ask him about
her experience.
After speaking with him for some time she reported back to the rest of
the workshop group. As she spoke, she grew more and more excited, awed
by her discovery. When she described what she had experienced to her
father he had been absolutely astonished. Everything she described to him
had actually occurred! Her descriptions of the battlefield and his thoughts
and feelings that day were absolutely correct, down to the detailed descrip-
tions of a birch tree forest where the event happened. He also assured her
that he had never spoken to anyone about his experience because he had
never considered it serious or interesting enough to tell. Though he had
never verbalized it, the experience had somehow been passed along to his
daughter.3
Early in our LSD research, psychiatrists and psychologists who wished
to work with these drugs had to undergo extensive training, which included
firsthand experiences with the drug, carefully monitored by trained ther-
apists. In many cases, highly sophisticated and well-educated men and
women, who had previously been quite skeptical of even relatively well-
founded concepts such as Jung’s “collective unconscious,” found them-
selves, nevertheless, moving across both physical and temporal boundaries
in their consciousnesses. In one case, for example, a fifty-year-old psycho-
logist, Nadja, experienced a vivid and convincing identification with her
mother. This episode reaches even farther back than Inga’s since it depicts
an episode from Nadja’s mother’s early childhood.
Nadja reported that she experienced a sense of a dramatic shift in her
ego identity. Suddenly she was her mother at the age of three or four. The
year was 1902 and she was dressed in a starched, fussy dress, though she
found herself in a very peculiar and unlikely place, which was especially
puzzling because of the way she was dressed. She was hiding under a
staircase. She felt frightened and lonely, painfully aware that something
terrible had just happened. She realized that only moments before she had
said
119
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

something very bad, had been reprimanded, and someone had roughly
put a hand over her mouth.
From her hiding place, Nadja could see her relatives—aunts, uncles, and
cousins—sitting on the porch of a large frame house, dressed in old-fash-
ioned clothes characteristic of that time. Everyone was talking, unaware
of her or her unhappiness. She was filled with a sense of failure, over-
whelmed by the unfathomable demands of the adults—to be good, to be-
have herself, to talk properly, to keep herself clean. It seemed impossible
to please them. She felt alienated and ashamed.
As with all such cases, we urged Nadja to attempt to verify this experi-
ence, to see if it connected with any objective reality. Soon after the event,
Nadja spoke with her mother. She did not want to admit to her mother
that she had taken LSD, since she knew her mother would not have ap-
proved. Instead, she told her mother that she had dreamed about being
her as a little girl, hiding under the steps, deeply ashamed, peaking out at
the adults on the porch who were so unmindful of her. No sooner had she
begun than her mother interrupted, filling in the details just exactly as
Nadja had experienced them. Her mother’s detailed descriptions of the
event matched Nadja’s LSD experience exactly, including details of the
large porch and the steps leading up to it, as well as the descriptions of the
peoples’ clothes, and even the dress she herself had been wearing, covered
by a starched white pinafore.4
Exploring the World of Our Ancestors
Sometimes the experiential exploration of our ancestry takes us into the
lives of grandparents now dead or even into the lives of relatives who lived
centuries before us. These distant ancestral experiences are characterized
by a sense of being wholly convinced that the person or persons with whom
we are identifying belong to our own bloodline. This sense of a genetic
connection is often described by those who experience it as “primordial,”
something that cannot be conveyed with words but must be experienced.
True ancestral experiences of this kind are always congruent with the
racial, cultural, and historical backgrounds of the person through whose
eyes we are seeing. In a few instances, apparent discrepancies—such as a
person of Anglo Saxon descent having Native American or African ancestral
experiences—were cleared up when closer examination of the family
genealogy confirmed the accuracy of the experience. Very often, the ances-
tral
120
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

memories contain objective data, allowing us to verify them; this might
include information about customs, habits, belief systems, family traditions,
idiosyncrasies, prejudices, and superstitions known to be held or practiced
by the ancestor in question.
Additional support for the authenticity of ancestral experiences can come
from observing the people having these experiences. Very often, in both
workshops and private therapy sessions we have noted dramatic changes
in the person’s physical appearance and behavior. For example, a person’s
facial expressions, physical posture, gestures, emotional reactions, and
thought processes may all take on characteristics of the ancestor in question.
Sometimes ancestral experiences can be vivid, with complete and very
specific details that can be easily verified. At other times, they can be vague
and diffuse, revealing only impressions and emotional atmospheres con-
cerning attributes such as the quality of relationships between members
of a certain family, tribe, or clan. As a psychiatrist, I have been particularly
interested to see how often these ancestral experiences yield insights into
personal problems we may be having in the present. I am convinced that
these glimpses into the lives of our parents, grandparents, and even more
distant relatives, can help us better understand, and often resolve, conflicts
in our present lives.
The following example illustrates the rich and accurate historical inform-
ation that we can assemble from some ancestral experiences, providing us
with valuable insights concerning periods that might otherwise be lost to
history. This particular experience is interesting because it was eventually
confirmed not only by focused historical research but by an unexpected
synchronistic event.
In systematic LSD therapy, a young woman, whom I will call Renata,
being treated for a complex neurosis, experienced many scenes that took
place in Prague in the seventeenth century. During that period, which was
just before the Thirty Years’ War in Europe, Bohemia, part of today’s
Czechoslovakia, came under the rule of the Habsburg dynasty. In an effort
to destroy feelings of national pride, the Habsburgs captured and beheaded
twenty-seven members of the Czech nobility in a public execution at the
Old Town Square in Prague.
During her sessions with me, Renata described many images and insights
concerning the architecture of the period, typical garments that people
were wearing, as well as weapons and utensils used in everyday life. She
was able to describe complex relationships between the royal family
121
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

and the vassals. All these things came to her in great detail and with pro-
found understanding, though she had never studied this historical period.
(In validating many of the details she reported, I had to consult scholarly
resources.)
Many of Renata’s experiences related particularly to a specific nobleman
who was executed by the Habsburgs. In a dramatic sequence, Renata relived
the actual details of this man’s execution, experienced as if she was inside
his body. As a witness to Renata’s reliving of this personal drama, I must
admit that I shared her bewilderment and confusion. In an effort to under-
stand what was happening, I chose two different approaches. In one, I
spent considerable time verifying the historical information she was report-
ing, and I found an astonishing amount of objective evidence linking her
story to this piece of seventeenth-century history. In the other, I applied
all my psychoanalytic skills, hoping to uncover any evidence that might
suggest that her historical experiences were actually disguised childhood
conflicts or emotional struggles in her present life. But try as I might I could
not explain her transpersonal experiences from the psychological problems
she was harboring.
Two years after my work with Renata, after I had moved to the United
States, I received a long letter from her. She told how she had recently
happened to meet her father, whom she had not seen since she was three
years old, when her parents divorced. She had dinner with him in his home
and afterward he showed her the product of his favorite hobby, which was
a genealogical graph tracing the family history back through the centuries.
To her amazement, she found that her father and she were descendants of
one of the noblemen executed by the Habsburgs that fateful day in the
early 1600s. This information only confirmed her previous suspicion, that
certain emotionally charged memories can be imprinted in the genetic code
and transmitted through the centuries to future generations.5
After overcoming my initial shock I realized there was a flaw in Renata’s
interpretation. Even if it were true that memories could be passed along
through the genetic code, death would naturally cut off the route of trans-
mission that would make this possible. In other words, since the nobleman
had been executed he would not have genetically passed along the experi-
ence of his death to Renata. Even as I thought about this, I found myself
unable to ignore the remarkable correlation between Renata’s experiences
and her father’s genealogical findings. Was all this just an incredible but
meaningless coincidence or do such incidents deserve more serious atten-
tion?
122
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

I decided that the amazing synchronicity of Renata’s experience being
followed by her meeting with her father, who then presented her with the
genealogical information that seemed to support her experience, could not
be written off as an accident. But what could explain these events? Did the
information about the nobleman’s death reach Renata’s psyche through a
telepathic connection with her father, whom she did not even know? If so,
how could it have been translated from raw genealogical information into
vivid experiential sequences that were so rich in historical detail?
I theorized that it might have been possible for a survivor of the noble-
man’s family, say a son or a daughter, to have genetically passed this in-
formation along to Renata. The witness, in this case, would have had to
experience his or her father’s execution while in a transpersonal state of
“dual unity,” sharing the actual emotions and sensations of the executed
man from his own vantage point. Or could it be that the universe is, in the
final analysis, just a divine play of consciousness where all natural laws
are ultimately arbitrary, and where any one of us, at any time, can somehow
access any material that ever existed or will exist for anyone, anywhere,
unfettered by the illusions of matter, space, and time? One thing seems
sure: There are principles at work in the universe that are far beyond the
capacities of the human imagination. Certainly there are phenomena whose
reality cannot be explained by the belief systems imposed on our culture
by Newtonian science.
Racial and Collective Experiences
Racial and collective experiences go a step beyond ancestral memories.
Racial experiences can involve people outside one’s immediate family or
blood line, extending out to any members of the same race. This process
can reach beyond racial lines to other racial groups and to collective
memories of humanity as a whole. I mentioned earlier that psychiatry tra-
ditionally looks upon our psyches as being affected only by what we have
experienced first hand, through our physical senses or as a result of our
own interpretations of these experiences. However, our observations of
hundreds of people who have reported ancestral, racial, and collective ex-
periences support Carl Gustav Jung’s assertion that our psyches are also
deeply affected by a collective unconscious that gives us access to a vast
warehouse of memories encompassing all of human experience from the
beginning of time.
During a holotropic training we conducted in California, a European
psychiatrist reported the experience which follows. As you read this
123
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

description, bear in mind that this woman had absolutely no intellectual
knowledge of Native American history. Yet, her experience was strikingly
reminiscent of the Cherokee Tear Trail and other events in the lives of
American Indians during the Indian Removal Act. Here is what she repor-
ted.
Suddenly everything seemed cold, abysmal, and hopeless. I felt an
enormous force moving me far beyond the boundaries of my present
life, to a remote historical period. My ordinary self seemed to have
shrunk to the size of a photon and then temporarily vanished. I be-
came another person—an old, small, and incredibly wrinkled Indian
woman with rich braids of greasy hair.
I saw a vast open plane and on it an assembly of thousands of Indi-
ans. They sat in groups or clans, surrounding a circle of their elders,
who were calm, determined, and motionless. They expected from
their people an answer: if they choose Death or the Journey. Those
who had chosen death receded into radially arranged long and low
cottages. When the decision process had ended, the elders imparted
death on their brothers and sisters using poisoned darts. These accep-
ted it calmly as if it were a sacred fulfillment of their lives. When the
last of them had died, the women got up and danced the dance of
reconciliation with death; it included sowing and sprouting of kernels.
Following this, the men stood up and performed the dance of strength,
peace, and reconciliation with death.
Having completed the rituals described above, those who participated
in the dance of reconciliation got up and began to leave. The woman who
had this experience said that her “entire being was permeated by sadness
and grief for which there are no words.” With slow rocking movements,
she started chanting, a quiet, monotonous chant that expressed what she
was feeling. She continued:
Inside, I cried and wept over the death of thousands of my
people—children, old ones, and men and women of all ages. I saw a
long procession of them, walking over the mountains, exhausted,
starved, desperate, hopeless, and dying on the way. While being an
old, internally empty Indian woman, I also felt like an ancient barren
mountain. Completely motionless, I followed them until they disap-
peared from my sight; however, in some sense, I was still with
124
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

them, in their endless journey forward and nowhere, in life and
death.6
People experiencing racial and/or collective episodes may find them-
selves participating in dramatic though usually brief sequences that take
place in more or less remote historical periods, cultures, and countries.
These are typically associated with specific insights concerning relationships
between people, the social structure, religious practices, moral codes, art,
and the technology of the historical periods involved. Sometimes we observe
complex gestures, postures, and symbolic movements of the person who
is having racial or collective experiences. Time and time again, objective
observers with a knowledge of the countries or peoples the subject is exper-
iencing will confirm that these movement patterns are appropriate and
characteristic of the peoples and times being experienced.
In both therapy and workshop sessions, we have seen people assume
complex postures (asanas) and gestures (mudras) from ancient Yogic tradi-
tions even though they have had no prior knowledge or experience with
this spiritual practice. In many instances, people experienced themselves
participating in practices belonging to cultures that were, in their ordinary
states of consciousness, completely unknown to them. With no previous
knowledge or training they engaged in movements characteristic of the!
Kung Bushman trance dance, the whirling of the dervishes from the Sufi
tradition, ritual dances performed in Java or Bali, and symbolic gestures
of the Indian Kathakali that express themes from Hindu mythology, as
they are performed along the Malabar coast.
On occasion, people experiencing other lives speak in languages—some-
times obscure, archaic ones—of which they have no knowledge in their
ordinary lives. In some instances, the authenticity of the languages used
has been confirmed through audio recordings made of sessions where this
phenomenon occurred. In other cases, the vocal performances had all the
elements of a language, but we were unable to decipher what was being
said. This does not necessarily mean that the vocal production was not an
authentic language of some ethnic group. Linguists agree that it is extremely
difficult to identify all of the thousands of languages and dialects spoken
on this planet. However, the fact that we have been able to positively con-
firm a large number of such instances dispels doubt about the authenticity
of this phenomenon. Occasionally, however, the sounds are quite clearly
inarticulate gibberish or what is known in certain groups as “speaking in
tongues.”
125
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Ancestral and racial experiences often bring deeper insight into the
symbolic meanings of cultural practices, even when the people involved
had no previous interest or knowledge of them. Our follow-up research to
verify the accuracy of such experiences has time and again shown them to
be accurate, though they often involve information that would be available
only to scholars and other committed specialists.
I have witnessed, for example, a person who had no background what-
soever in ancient cultures describe details of Egyptian funeral practices,
based on his vivid past life experiences. He has passed along, in great detail,
information such as the esoteric meaning and form of special amulets and
sepulchral boxes, the meaning of the colors chosen for funeral cones, the
technology of embalmment, and the purpose of specific ritualized practices.
Having experienced himself as an embalmer in ancient Egypt, he was able
to describe the size and quality of the mummy bandages, materials used
in preparing the mummy cloth, and the shape and symbolism of the four
Canopic jars used to hold specific organs taken from the body. Our follow-
up research revealed that details he had reported about the symbolic figures
on each jar, as well as the specific contents of each, were found to be accur-
ate, though this was not knowledge that was generally available to the
public.7
The Mystery of Karma and Reincarnation
For most of us born and raised in the Western European traditions, the
notion of past lives and karma seems alien, if not bizarre and childish.
However it is difficult to overlook the fact that for thousands of years reli-
gious writings from a great many societies have discussed past lives, rein-
carnation, and karma and have described the impact of these on our present
lives. From the viewpoint of these writings, none of us comes into life with
a “clean slate.” Rather our present lives are part of a continuum that can
extend far back into many previous lifetimes, and will most likely extend
forward into many more. In non-ordinary states of consciousness memories
of past lives are woven into a tapestry of experience that includes present
life memories around birth, infancy, childhood, adolescence, and adulthood.
We are well aware that contemporary Christianity and traditional science
denounce or even ridicule such beliefs. However, research in transpersonal
psychology continues to provide ample evidence that this area of study is
a veritable treasure trove of insights into the nature of the human
126
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

psyche. So convincing is the evidence in favor of past life influences that
one can only conclude that those who refuse to consider this to be an area
worthy of serious study must be either uninformed or excessively narrow-
minded.
Over the years my observation of people who have had past life experi-
ences while in non-ordinary states of consciousness has convinced me of
the validity of this fascinating area of research. I would like to share with
you some examples that both convince us that past life phenomena are
extremely relevant and that our knowledge of them can help us resolve
conflicts and live better lives in the present.
In the mid-1960s, while heading a psychedelic research and treatment
program for cancer patients at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center
in Baltimore, I had the opportunity to work with an unskilled laborer whom
I will call Jesse. He was admitted to our program with an advanced skin
cancer that had spread to his internal organs. Jesse was virtually illiterate
and had no knowledge whatsoever of karma, reincarnation, or any other
beliefs associated with Eastern thought. In fact, under normal circumstances
it might have been assumed that his strict Catholic upbringing would have
made these subjects taboo for him.
Jesse had been losing his struggle against cancer, knew he was going to
die, and was deeply troubled and anxious as a result. He agreed to undergo
psychedelic therapy as a way of attempting to come to terms with his
anxieties. In the beginning his focus was on his guilt about the way he had
lived his life. He had been raised as a Catholic, had married and divorced,
and for the past several years had lived out of wedlock with another wo-
man. He firmly believed in the Church doctrine that in the eyes of God he
would always be married to his first wife, making his present situation
adulterous and sinful.
In his sessions he had visions of war scenes and monsters, of great
junkyards strewn with corpses, skeletons, rotting offal, and garbage
spreading foul odors. His own body lay there, wrapped in stinking band-
ages, eaten away by cancer. Then a gigantic ball of fire appeared and all
this mess was dumped onto the purifying flames where it was rapidly
consumed. Though Jesse’s flesh was destroyed, he realized that his soul
survived and he found himself at the judgment of the dead, with God
weighing his good and evil deeds. In the end, Jesse’s positive deeds out-
weighed the negative ones and he felt tremendously freed of his burdens.
At this point he heard celestial music and started to understand the
meaning of his experience.
He became aware of a powerful message flowing through him, through
nonverbal channels that seemed to permeate his entire being. The message
127
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

was: “When you die, your body will be destroyed, but you will be saved;
your soul will be with you all the time. You will come back to earth, you
will be living again, but you do not know what you will be on the next
earth.”
As a result of this experience Jesse’s pain was greatly alleviated and the
acute anxiety he had been suffering disappeared. He emerged with a deep
belief in the possibility of reincarnation, a concept that was in conflict with
his own religious tradition. Jesse died peacefully five days later, perhaps
a little earlier than he otherwise would have. It was as if his mind had been
freed to surrender in his struggle against his inevitable death. It was almost
as if he was hurrying to go on to what he had called “the next earth.”
In Jesse’s work with me, there had never been any discussion of reincarn-
ation or the survival of the soul after physical death. On his own, or with
a little help from sources that neither he nor I had previously recognized,
he had come up with a rather complex view of what occurs after death, a
vision that gave him profound security in the last days of his life.8
While Jesse’s experience might be dismissed as a wishful fantasy, others
contain remarkable details that might be verified. Although I have had a
number of my own past life experiences, none was more vivid or more
convincing than one that was associated with my first tour of Russia. This
experience illustrates how these past events can be interwoven with our
most recent individual history and how we might employ the extraordinary
healing potentials of these memories.
In 1961 I took part in an organized group tour of Leningrad, Moscow,
and Kiev. We were assigned official Intourist guides and all our sight-seeing
was closely supervised; unsupervised sight-seeing was strictly prohibited.
Just before our departure, I had learned about Pechorskaya Lavra, a Russian
Orthodox monastery in Kiev located in ancient catacombs inside a moun-
tain. This place was the spiritual center of the Ukraine and I had heard that
the Bolsheviks had spared it because they feared a civilian uprising. When
I first heard about this place I felt a strange and powerful emotional attrac-
tion to it and a desire to visit it.
In Kiev I learned that Pechorskaya Lavra was not on our itinerary, and
I felt myself becoming very restless. Recognizing that I was doing so at
great risk, I decided to visit Pechorskaya Lavra on my own. I spoke fluent
Russian so I was able to get a cab, which took me to the monastery. I walked
through a maze of catacombs lined with the mummies of all the monks
who had lived and died there for several centuries. Their skinny hands,
128
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

covered with skin that the years had turned to brown parchment, were
clasped as if in prayer. Narrow corridors opened out into caves, decorated
with powerful icons and dimly illuminated by candle light. Through clouds
of heavy smoke, fragrant with incense, I saw groups of chanting monks
with long beards, who appeared to be deep in trance.
As I made my way slowly through the catacombs, I was myself in an
unusual state of consciousness; I had the distinct feeling that I knew this
place intimately. I could anticipate every turn, every new encounter. Then
I came upon a mummy whose hands were in a strange position; they were
not clasped in prayer like the others. I experienced a wave of emotion that
came from the depth of my being. I had never before felt anything even
remotely similar to what I was feeling at that time. I ended my excursion
and returned to my hotel, relieved to find that my absence had gone un-
noticed by my Intourist guides.
Following my return from Russia, I continued to be preoccupied with
memories of the catacombs, especially with my strange reactions to the
mummy I had seen there with the unclasped hands. However, I quickly
became immersed in my research and somehow the experience faded from
my memory. Then, many years later, when I was working at the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center in Baltimore, the director of the institute
brought in Joan Grant and her husband Dennys Kelsey, a European couple
known for their innovative hypnotic therapy. During their four-week visit
to our center our staff members had the opportunity to experience personal
sessions with the couple.
Joan, a French woman, had the ability to put herself into a hypnotic
trance and experience episodes from other times and places that had the
quality of past life memories. She was the author of several books based
on this extraordinary ability. Dennys was a British psychiatrist and hypnot-
ist. In their work together they hypnotized the clients and asked them to
go as far back in memory as they needed to go to resolve the source of their
problem. Often people found the original source of their conflicts in past
lives. Joan had the ability to tune into the clients’ experiences with them
and guide them to resolutions of their problems.
The issue I wanted to work on with them had to do with a conflict I
sometimes felt between sensuality and spirituality. In general, I had great
zest for life and enjoyed all the pleasures that human existence offers. But
occasionally I experienced a compelling desire to withdraw from the world,
to dedicate my life wholly to spiritual practice. Dennys hypnotized me and
instructed me to go back in time to the place where this problem began.
129
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Suddenly I was a Russian boy standing in a large garden and facing a
palatial house, which I realized was my home. I heard Joan speaking to
me, as if from a great distance: “Look at the balcony!” Without wondering
how she knew I was looking at a house with a balcony at that moment, I
did just as she said. I saw an old woman with crippled and contorted hands
sitting on the balcony in a rocking chair. I knew that this was my grand-
mother, and I felt a wave of love and compassion for her.
Suddenly the scene shifted. I was in the street of a nearby village, feeling
that the simple but colorful peasant life of the moujiks was an exciting es-
cape from the rigid lifestyle of my wealthy family. I realized that I had
come to this place on numerous occasions. Then I saw myself in the dark,
primitive workshop of a blacksmith. A giant, muscular man, half-naked
and covered with hair, stood in front of a glowing furnace. He was
pounding with a huge hammer on a piece of red-hot iron, which he was
shaping on the anvil. All of a sudden I felt a sharp pain in my eye. My entire
face contorted in a painful spasm and tears poured down my cheeks. With
horror, I realized that I had been hit in the face by a piece of red-hot iron
and that I was badly burned.
I experienced the emotional pain of a ghastly disfigured adolescent, with
the agony of sexual longings that could not be satisfied and the sting of
repeated rejection as a result of my repugnant scars. In despair, I made the
decision to become a monk, ending up at Pechorskaya Lavra. Over the
years my hands became severely disfigured. Was this the result of arthritis
or a hysterical reaction modeled after my beloved grandmother’s disease?
The last scene I remembered from this session was my own death and
somehow being aware that I was placed in a coffin by the wall of the cata-
combs. My crippled hands could not be clasped together in prayer, indic-
ating a successful closure of my monastic life, which even to my death
represented a bitter retreat from the more sensual life for which I had
longed.
As the session neared its end I began to sob, overwhelmed by a mixture
of anger, grief, and self-pity. I then became aware of Joan massaging my
hands. Slowly I felt them relaxing, no longer spastic and contorted as they
had been. Finally, she took my hands in hers and brought them together
in the universal gesture of prayer. Instantly, there swept over me a sense
of resolution, as if something deep within me had healed. Since that mo-
ment, I have never again experienced the conflict between sensuality and
spirituality that had troubled me.
In the process of experiencing episodes from past lives, people often heal
emotional and physical symptoms that they suffer from in their
130
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

present lives. For example, I have seen chronic depression, psychogenic
asthma, a variety of phobias, severe migraines, psychosomatic pain, and
similar symptoms reduced or completely eradicated following a past life
experience. Had this been all there was to it, one could explain the healings
that come out of past life experiences as the result of symbolic resolutions,
constructed by the psyche. However, these healings often involve another
dimension of reality, suggesting that something more than symbolic pro-
cesses are operating here.
My own past life experience, which I related above, involved the healing
of an inner conflict I had felt; the healing did not directly involve other
people and could have been symbolic in nature. However, past life experi-
ences often include other people, and the healings that come about can in-
volve an interesting level of synchronicity. For example, I once worked
with a person who was involved in a very difficult adversarial relationship
of long standing. During a past life experience he saw this adversary as his
murderer in a lifetime they had shared long before. After going into the
past and forgiving that crime, the client instantly changed his present life
feeling toward this person. Old animosities and fears instantly faded and
he saw the person in a new light. As this was occurring, his one-time enemy
was simultaneously but independently undergoing a similar personal ex-
perience halfway around the world that transformed him in the same dir-
ection. Within approximately the same time period, both people had exper-
iences that changed their basic perspectives, healing their relationship,
which had been so filled with animosity. Though the incidents that changed
the two people seemed at the time to be entirely unrelated, they nevertheless
had the effect of reuniting them.
This particular example, though extraordinary, is not unusual in my
work. Again and again I have seen karmic partners experience dramatic
changes that released them from the past and allowed them to heal old
wounds, which had existed for many, many years. These changes of attitude
occurred within minutes of each other, even though the people involved
were often separated by thousands of miles and had no direct communic-
ation between them.
Have We Lived Before?
What I have thus far described concerning past life experiences raises im-
portant questions for any serious consideration of reincarnation. We might
ask, does the existence of karmic experiences necessarily prove that we
have lived before? Does it mean that we had a series of lifetimes preceding
this one? And does it mean that we continue to be accountable for our
131
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

actions from one lifetime to another? To answer these questions it can be
useful not only to examine evidence refuting or supporting these beliefs
but also to take a historical look at our own beliefs and prejudices on this
subject. All too often it is what we have been taught to believe rather than our
fair examination of more objective evidence, that determines our judgments
about phenomena that cannot be directly verified through our physical
senses or mathematics.
We have to remind ourselves that reincarnation and karma represent
the very cornerstones of the major religions of India: Hinduism, Buddhism,
Jainism, Sikhism, and Zoroastrianism. Reincarnation and karma are also
integral to Tibetan Vajrayana, Japanese esoteric Buddhism, and a number
of South Asian Buddhist sects.
In ancient Greece, several important schools of thought embraced a belief
in reincarnation; these included the Pythagoreans, the Orphics, and the
Platonists. The same doctrine was adopted by the Essenes, the Pharisees,
the Karaites, and other Jewish and semi-Jewish groups. It was also held by
the Neoplatonists and Gnostics and formed an important part of the kab-
balistic theology of medieval Jewry. Similar ideas can be found in such
historically, geographically, and culturally diverse groups as various African
tribes, the Jamaican Rastafarians, American Indians, Pre-Columbian cul-
tures, the Polynesian kahunas, practitioners of the Brazilian umbanda, the
Gauls, and the Druids.
In our modern Western society, reincarnation has been accepted by the
Theosophists, Anthroposophists, and certain spiritualists. At first glance,
it would appear that a belief in reincarnation is alien to, or even incompat-
ible with, the Christian faith. However, this has not always been so; beliefs
in reincarnation were part of early mystical Christianity. According to St.
Jerome, a saint living in the fourth and fifth centuries A.D., the subject of
reincarnation was given an esoteric interpretation that was accessible to
only the elite of the Church.
The most famous Christian thinker speculating about the existence of
souls returning to earth was Origen, one of the greatest Church Fathers of
all times. His works, written in the third century A.D. (particularly his book
entitled On First Principles), were condemned by the Second Council of
Constantinople, convened by Emperor Justinian in 553 A.D. This verdict
read: “If anyone assert the fabulous pre-existence of souls and shall submit
to the monstrous doctrine that follows from it, let him be anathema!” Al-
though this edict certainly helped establish reincarnation as heretical, reli-
gious scholars find traces of similar ideas in the writings of St. Augustine,
St. Gregory, and St. Francis of Assisi.
132
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

In the past three centuries, these negative attitudes toward reincarnation
in Western culture have been clearly supported by Newtonian science. The
prevalent bias of the modern industrialized world is one of excluding all
forms of spirituality as erroneous and misleading. Thus we see that the
world seems to be divided between those who firmly believe in reincarna-
tion, those who are neutral or simply not interested, and those who reject
it entirely.
Keeping this perspective in mind regarding our beliefs and prejudices
about reincarnation, let us again return to our original question. Is there
anything modern consciousness research can contribute to the problem?
The most important contribution is the realization that it is neither correct
nor helpful to speak of reincarnation as a “belief,” that is, as an opinion.
Let me explain.
The reincarnation doctrine is not a matter of belief but a serious effort to
conceptualize very concrete and specific experiences and observations re-
lated to past lives. While the existence of the experiences is a fact that can
be confirmed by any serious researcher familiar with non-ordinary states
of consciousness, there are various ways to interpret the same data. This
is not so different from any other scientific question. After all, the theory
of gravitation is not the same as gravity itself. Similarly, while we might
refuse to take seriously past life experiences because we do not like the
theories of reincarnation, we would not think of applying the same thinking
to gravity, that is, denying that objects are falling because we do not like
the theories that explain it.
There are observable facts about reincarnation. We know, for example,
that vivid past life experiences occur spontaneously in non-ordinary states
of consciousness. These require no programming or previous knowledge
about the subject. In many instances, these experiences contain accurate
information about periods before our own that can be objectively verified.
Therapeutic work has shown that many emotional disorders have their
roots in past life experiences rather than in the present life, and the symp-
toms resulting from those disorders disappear or are alleviated after the
person is allowed to relive the past life experience that underlies it. Syn-
chronicities associated with these experiences also suggest that past life
phenomena deserve serious attention. Ian Stevenson’s research involving
children who claimed to remember incidents from past lives also provides
us with further supportive evidence for the importance of this area.
The belief that individual consciousness survives the death of the phys-
ical body is one way to explain these observations. But it is a mistake to
confuse this with final “proof.” It is important to remind ourselves that
science never “proves” anything; it only “disproves” and “improves” ex-
isting
133
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

theories. The history of science itself teaches us that no single theory ex-
plains all aspects of any phenomenon, and there is always more than a
single theory that claims to account for the observable facts. It should be
possible, then, to honor past life experiences and come up with alternative
explanations that do not include the theory that souls survive death or that
there is a continuity of individual consciousness from one lifetime to anoth-
er.
Actually, we do find at least two alternative explanations in spiritual
literature. In the Hindu mystical tradition, for example, the literal belief in
reincarnation is considered to be an inferior interpretation of karma. This
theory suggests that all boundaries and divisions in the universe are arbit-
rary. In the final analysis, only the creative principle of Cosmic Conscious-
ness exists. Only it incarnates, that is, takes physical form. From this point
of view, the entire universe is a divine play (lila) of one Supreme Being
(Brahman). Anyone who grasps this concept will see that karmic appearances
are just another level of illusion.
Another explanation is that the entity that incarnates is the entire field
of human consciousness. This field, which can be called the Oversoul, in-
cludes all human life; spread over the entire planet, and all time, it assumes
individual identities in order to explore and learn about itself. After the
death of an individual, the unassimilated portions of that life experience
return to the Oversoul, where they become building blocks for future in-
carnations. Like the image of the multi-chambered Nautilus shell, the theory
of Oversoul incorporates the concepts of separation and continuity in a
way that transcends both.
Extra-Sensory Perception and Parapsychology
The interest in transpersonal phenomena is not new to Western science,
nor is it limited to the field of psychology. For many decades parapsycho-
logy, admittedly a highly controversial discipline among more respected
fields of science, has been studying ways that we might access information
without using our sensory organs. Parapsychology has explored various
forms of extra-sensory perception (ESP), that is, the ability to transcend
spatial boundaries, distances, and the limitations of linear time. These
abilities could thus have been included in our previous discussions but I
have chosen to describe them in a separate section because of the interest
they have received from parapsychologists.
The ESP phenomena characterized by transcendence of spatial boundaries
include out-of-body experiences, the ability to experience remote
134
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

events, and telepathy. ESP phenomena characterized by transcendence of
the time barriers include precognition (knowledge about events that are
yet to happen) clairvoyance (seeing past and future events) and psycho-
metry (extrasensory access to the history of objects).
Experiences of consciousness detaching from one’s body, or out-of-body
experiences (OOBE), occur in a variety of forms and degrees. They can take
the form of isolated episodes throughout one’s life, or they can occur in
clusters or strings of events that are part of the process of transpersonal
crisis or psychic opening.
This type of experience can be triggered in a variety of ways, such as
through life-threatening emergencies, near-death situations and experiences
of clinical death, sessions of deep experiential therapy, psychospiritual
crises, and the ingestion of certain psychoactive substances. Some of the
most noteworthy experiences of this kind are described in the Tibetan Book
of the Dead. These ancient descriptions were not taken seriously by scientists
until recently, when modern research in experimental psychiatry and
thanatology confirmed their authenticity.
We can experience consciousness leaving our bodies, detaching from it,
and then looking back at the body; in more advanced forms we can leave
our bodies and fly off to various remote locations.
Many years ago, not long after my arrival in the United States, I had a
supervised LSD session as part of a training program for mental health
professionals. During that session I suddenly felt a strange mixture of
serenity and bliss. I felt I had entered an amazing world, like that of the
early Christians, where miracles were possible, acceptable, and understand-
able. I started thinking about the problems of time and space and the insol-
uble paradoxes of infinity and eternity that baffle our reasoning minds in
ordinary states of consciousness. I could not understand how I could have
let myself be brainwashed into accepting the simple-minded concept of
one-dimensional time and three-dimensional space as being mandatory
and as existing in objective reality. In the state I was in, it appeared to me
rather obvious that there could be no such limits in the realm of the spirit,
since time and space were nothing more than mental constructs.
In the transpersonal realm of consciousness, any number of spaces and
times could be created and experienced. In this world a single second was
freely interchangeable with an eternity. In this situation, it occurred to me
that I did not have to be bound by the limitations of time and space. I could
travel in the space-time continuum without restrictions. I was so convinced
this was true that I decided to try traveling in this way to Prague,
135
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

the city of my birth, many thousand miles away. I set myself in motion and
had the sensation of flying through space at a tremendous speed. But to
my great disappointment, and contrary to my expectations, I was getting
nowhere.
Immediately I realized that I was still under the influence of my old
concepts of space and time and was thinking in terms of directions and
distances. It occurred to me that the proper approach would be to make
myself believe that the place of the session was identical with the place of
my destination. When I approached my task in this way, I experienced
some very bizarre sensations. I found myself in a strange, rather congested
place full of vacuum tubes, wires, resistors, and condensers. After a short
period of confusion, I realized I was trapped in a television set located in
an apartment in Prague where I had spent my childhood. I was trying,
somehow, to use the speakers of the television set for hearing and the
television tube for seeing. It became clear to me that I was facing the last
conceptual obstacle, since the means by which I was overcoming the illusion
of distance had somehow been modeled after modern electronics.
As soon as I accepted that there are no limits for consciousness, I broke
through the television screen and found myself walking around in my
parents’ apartment. The experience was as sober and real as any other ex-
perience of my life. I walked to the window and looked at the clock on the
street corner. It showed a six-hour time difference from the place I had left
back in the States. In spite of the fact that this reading correctly reflected
the time difference of the two time zones, I did not find it convincing
evidence. I knew the time difference intellectually and, of course, my mind
could easily have fabricated this experience.
I wanted more convincing proof that what I was experiencing was “ob-
jectively real” in the usual sense. I finally decided to set up a test. I would
remove a picture from the wall and later check with my parents to see if
they had noticed anything unusual in the apartment. I reached for the
picture but was overcome by an unpleasant feeling that what I was about
to do was a dangerous undertaking. I felt myself immersed in an uncanny
atmosphere that was suggestive of evil forces and black magic. It seemed
as if I was gambling with my own soul. I instantly stopped what I was
doing to reflect on the consequences of my actions.
Images of world-famous casinos filled my mind’s eye. I saw roulette
balls spiraling at intoxicating speeds, the mechanical movements of slot
machines, dice jolting on gambling tables, scenes of gamblers playing
baccarat, and the flickering lights of the keno panels. This was followed by
136
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

images of eavesdropping on secret meetings of politicians, army officials,
and scientists. I realized that I had not yet overcome my egocentrism and
would not be able to resist the temptation to use my psychic powers for
my own selfish needs. If I could, in fact, have control over time and space,
I could have an unlimited supply of money by knowing ahead of time the
outcomes of races and games. No secrets would exist. I could eavesdrop
on summit meetings, and have access to top-secret discoveries in science
and the military. This would open undreamed-of possibilities for controlling
the course of history throughout the world.
I started understanding the dangers involved in my experiment. I re-
membered passages from different books warning against toying with
these powers before overcoming the selfish drives of one’s own ego. I found
that I was extremely ambivalent about carrying through with the test of
my apparent powers. If I could confirm that it was possible to manipulate
the physical environment from a distance of several thousand miles, my
whole universe would collapse and I would find myself in a state of utter
metaphysical confusion. The world I knew would no longer exist.
In the end I could not bring myself to carry through with the intended
experiment. This made it possible for me to continue toying with the idea
that perhaps I had, in that session, conquered time and space. The moment
I gave up the experiment, I found myself back in the States in the room
where the session had begun.
To this day there are times when I deeply regret that I wasted such a
unique opportunity to test my ability to manipulate space-time. However,
the memory of the metaphysical horror involved makes me doubt that I
would be more courageous if given another opportunity to follow through
with a similar test. Fortunately, the authenticity of out-of-body experiences
can be tested in a different way. In the past two decades this fascinating
area has been systematically explored by a young scientific discipline called
“thanatology,” which specifically focuses on experiences related to death
and dying.
Raymond Moody, Kenneth Ring, Michael Sabom, Elisabeth Kubler-Ross,
and other highly respected researchers, have repeatedly confirmed that
people in near-death situations have had out-of-body-experiences (OOBEs),
during which they were able to witness events happening in other rooms
or even distant places. These accounts have been objectively verified by
independent observers. The ultimate challenge to Newtonian science in
this area of research has been the discovery that clinically blind people
experiencing OOBEs describe scenes that are visually accurate,
137
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

though after recovering from the disease or trauma that caused the near-
death experience they are not able to see. Our observations about near-
death experiences confirms passages from the Tibetan Book of the Dead,
which suggest that immediately following death we assume a “bardo body”
that can transcend the usual limitations of time and space and travel quite
freely around the earth.
During the period of time when I was actively involved in thanatological
work, I visited a hospital in Miami. A physician there had just verified an
unusual near-death experience of a Cuban immigrant woman. During
cardiac arrest she had an OOBE in which she found herself back in Cuba.
She was in a house where she had once lived but had not visited for many
years. She recovered from the heart attack, but she was very upset by what
she had seen during her OOBE. She reported that the people who now
lived in the house had made some changes that she did not like. They had
moved things around, had exchanged some pieces of furniture, and had
painted the fence a shade of green that she found appalling. Her attending
physician had been able to verify that she had accurately described the
changes that had occurred in the house during her absence—including the
fact that the fence had been painted an unusual shade of green.
Our ability to leave our physical bodies and travel to other places has
been demonstrated in controlled laboratory experiments by researchers
with good academic credentials. These include Charles Tart at the University
of California in Davis, and Russell Targ and Harold Puthoff at the Stanford
Research Institute. Russell Targ’s research of “remote viewing” involves
two people. The “viewer” stays in a carefully controlled laboratory envir-
onment while a “beacon” person is located somewhere outside that vicinity.
A computer then selects a location that is unknown to the viewer.
The beacon person is secretly notified where he or she is to go, based on
the computer’s random selection of a site. After the beacon person gets to
the site, the viewer is asked to describe what the beacon person is seeing.
The distance between the beacon person and the viewer appears to have
no significant effect on the viewer’s ability to accurately describe the site;
the distance between them can be a few blocks or many thousand miles.
In several successful attempts, a Soviet psychic not only accurately described
the location of Targ’s associate Keith Harary who acted as a beacon, he also
described what Harary would see at the next computer-selected site—even
before he got there or knew what he would see!
138
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

While the early research of remote viewing involved men and women
who had been chosen because of their psychic abilities, it was soon learned
that virtually anyone could be trained to perform this task. Most researchers
have been convinced that remote viewing and other telepathic abilities are
normal human capacities. After experiencing remote viewing for them-
selves, many people report that the process of developing this skill does
not involve new learning so much as it involves “unlearning” negative
conditioning that claims these abilities are not “real.”
Good clairvoyants are able to access information about their clients’ pasts
or the history of a physical object with no visual or verbal clues. I have re-
peatedly witnessed psychics Anne Armstrong and Jack Schwarz access
complex, detailed information of this kind. The ability to obtain information
in this way suggests that memory may exist independent of the physical
body, maintaining a cogent form that can be recognized by human faculties
other than the five senses. Rather than being like a railroad track with a
narrow route extending out into the distance in two directions (past and
future), time may be more like an endless sea, every drop of which we can
instantly access, regardless of where we might be standing.
As a researcher of human consciousness, it is very clear to me that along
with our experiences of extraordinary perception there often comes a deep
metaphysical fear, just as I experienced when confronted with the possib-
ility of projecting myself through space and time to my parents’ apartment.
This fear is rooted in the fact that such experiences challenge and undermine
fundamental beliefs about the nature of reality. When this fear occurs, it
so threatens the basic assumptions by which we operate in our daily lives
that it is usually much easier to deny the existence of the perception than
it is to embrace and trust what we have experienced. In other words, when
confronted with a choice between accepting a new worldview and quelling
our fears, we often choose the latter.
Beyond Space and Time to a Mythological World
In this and the previous chapter, we have explored how transpersonal
consciousness allows us to investigate experiences that transcend the
boundaries of space and time. Even within this realm of experiences,
however, the people we see and the events we encounter resemble “real”
people or events, though perceived in entirely new ways than we know
them in our everyday lives. However, transpersonal consciousness allows
us to go further
139
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

than this. We may also encounter entities, situations, and places that bear
little or no resemblance to the realities we know in our day-to-day lives. It
is here that we go beyond more familiar experiences and enter the world
known to shamans and seers, the world of deities, demons, and suprahuman
beings known from myths and fairy tales.
140
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

9
BEYOND A SHARED REALITY
Myths do not come from a concept system; they come from a life system;
they come out of a deeper center. We must not confuse mythology with
ideology. Myths come from where the heart is, and where the experience
is, even as the mind may wonder why people believe these things. The
myth does not point to a fact; the myth points beyond facts to something
that informs the fact.
—Joseph Campbell, An Open Life: In Conversation with Michael Toms
There is a large category of transpersonal experiences that goes beyond
both the time-space continuum and the reality we know in our everyday
lives. Here we experience the world of myth, apparitions, communication
with the dead, and the ability to see auras, chakras, or other subtle energies
not generally recognized or verified by modern scientific methods. Here
we might also experience meetings with spirit guides, “power animals,”
and various superhuman or subhuman entities, or we might go on fantastic
journeys to universes other than our own.
The late Aldous Huxley made the observation that the extraordinary
world we encounter here is not to be too quickly dismissed as purely
mental fabrications with no particular purpose. He said:
Like the giraffe and the duck-billed platypus, the creatures inhabiting
these remoter regions of the mind are exceedingly improbable. Nev-
ertheless they exist, they are facts of observation; and as such, they
cannot be ignored by anyone who is honestly trying to understand
the world in which he lives.1
141

In this chapter we will be exploring these remoter regions of conscious-
ness in some detail, drawing from descriptions of experiential sessions by
a variety of people. We will begin with one of the more controversial areas
in this realm—communication with the dead.
Spiritualistic and Mediumistic Experiences
In this category we include spiritualistic seances, research into the possib-
ility of survival of consciousness after death, telepathic communication
with deceased relatives and friends, contacts with discarnate entities, and
experiences in the astral realm. In the simplest form, people see apparitions
of deceased people and receive messages from them. For example, the day
following her husband’s death a woman saw her deceased husband sitting
in his favorite chair in the living room. He greeted her and asked how she
was doing. She answered that she was okay. Then he told her where to
find some legal papers she would need for finalizing his estate. She had
not known of their whereabouts and the information he gave her was
useful, saving her many hours of searching. Experiences of this kind have
been reported by clients in experiential psychotherapy, and psychedelic
sessions, in the work of psychics, and by people who have had near-death
experiences (NDEs).
In a more complex form of these experiences, a medium goes into a deep
trance and in the process undergoes grotesque changes in his or her phys-
ical appearance. The medium’s postures, gestures, and facial expressions
can appear quite alien, while the voice may undergo changes in inflection,
accent, tonal quality, and cadence. I have witnessed people in these states
speak in languages they did not know, and could not remember ever having
heard or spoken in their normal, non-trance states. I have heard people
speak in tongues, seen them do automatic writing, paint elaborate pictures,
and produce obscure hieroglyphic designs. Intriguing examples of this can
be observed in the Spiritist Church in the Philippines and Brazil, inspired
by the teachings of Allen Kardec.
The Brazilian psychologist and psychic Luiz Antonio Gasparetto, closely
related to the Spiritist Church, is capable of painting in a light trance in the
style of a wide variety of painters of different countries of the world. Sev-
eral years ago I had the opportunity to observe him closely during a month-
long seminar at the Esalen Institute. What impressed me as much as his
ability to produce paintings that captured the essence of the masters, was
the tremendous speed with which he worked as he “channeled” the
142
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

dead masters. During the periods in which he worked he produced as
many as twenty-five canvasses per hour.
Gasparetto is able to work in complete darkness or in a red light that
makes it virtually impossible to distinguish one color from another. Many
times I watched as he executed two paintings at a time, one with each hand.
He occasionally painted with his feet under the table and hidden from his
own view, nevertheless producing paintings that were aesthetically pleasing
and with the subtlety of color, style, form, and composition of one of the
deceased masters.
If all communication with discarnate entities involved only visions and
a vague, subjective sense of interaction with them, we could easily dismiss
these experiences as figments of imagination or wishful thinking. But the
situation is not quite that simple. There is often information given by the
“discarnate being” that can later be verified. The following is a typical ex-
ample of this, from the transcript of an experiential session of a young de-
pressed patient whom I quoted in chapter 8 and have called Richard.
Richard experienced being in a space that had the characteristics of the
astral realm. He reported seeing an eerie luminescence that was filled with
discarnate beings. These beings were trying to communicate with him in
a very urgent manner. He could not see or hear them, but he sensed their
presence and was receiving telepathic messages from them. One of these
messages was so concrete and specific that I decided to write it down.
He received a request to communicate with a couple in the Moravian
city of Krom  íž. He was to let them know that their son Ladislav was doing
all right and was being well cared for. The message included the couple’s
name, their street address, and their telephone number. There was no way
that these data could have been known to either me or my client. The ex-
perience was extremely puzzling in terms of Richard’s biographical back-
ground and the therapy themes he was working on. He seemed unable to
make a connection between his communications with the entities and
anything in his own life.
After some hesitation, I finally decided to do what certainly could have
made me the target of my colleagues’ jokes had they known. I went to the
telephone and dialed the number in Krom  íž. A woman answered and I
asked her if I could speak with Ladislav. To my astonishment she began
to cry. When she calmed down she finally managed to tell me: “Our son
is not with us any more. He passed away. We lost him three weeks ago.”2
A second example illustrating this realm of experience involved my close
friend and former colleague Walter N. Pahnke. In 1971 he, his wife
143
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Eva, and their children went for a vacation in Maine. One day he went
scuba-diving in the ocean by himself, close to the cabin where they were
staying. He did not return. An extensive search failed to turn up either his
body or any part of his diving equipment. Under these circumstances Eva
found it extremely difficult to accept his death and complete the mourning
process that normally helps people bring some closure to their grief. It
seemed virtually impossible for her to believe that Walter was no longer
a part of her life. Her last memory of him was as he left the cabin, full of
energy and in perfect health. Unable to confirm his death she could not
start the next chapter of her life without him.
Being a psychologist herself, Eva was qualified for an LSD training session
offered through our institute for mental health professionals. She signed
up for the training with the hope of gaining insight into how she might
find closure and complete her grief over her husband’s death. In the second
half of the session, she had a particularly vivid vision of Walter, during
which she entered into a long and meaningful dialogue with him. He spoke
to her about each of their three children and released her to start a new life
of her own, unencumbered by a sense of commitment to his memory. At
the end of the session, Eva felt profoundly liberated.
Just as Eva had begun to question whether she had perhaps just fabricated
this dialogue with Walter in order to fulfill her own wishes, Walter appeared
again, with a specific telepathic request. “I forgot one thing,” he told her.
“Would you please do me a favor and return a book that I borrowed from
a friend of mine. It is in my study in the attic.” He proceeded to give her
the name of the friend and to tell her exactly where the book was located
on the shelf. After completing the training session, Eva went home and
followed the instructions Walter had given her concerning the book. She
was able to find and return that book to its owner, in spite of the fact that
she had had no previous knowledge of it.3
Through her work in transpersonal consciousness Eva was able to bring
closure to her husband’s death in a way that even months and months of
therapy in the biographical realm might have only partially accomplished.
As I thought about it later, it certainly seemed to me that it was com-
pletely in character for Walter to provide Eva with some way to verify her
experiences. He had been a close friend of Eileen Garrett, a famous psychic
and president of the American Parapsychological Association. Before her
death, Walter had discussed with her the possibility of conducting an ex-
periment after her death that would prove the existence of the Beyond.
144
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

One of the psychologists participating in our three year professional
training had witnessed a wide variety of transpersonal experiences during
the Holotropic Breathwork™ sessions of his colleagues, and he had a few
of them himself. However, he continued to be very skeptical about the
authenticity of these phenomena, constantly questioning whether or not
they deserved any special attention. Then, in one of his holotropic sessions,
he experienced an unusual synchronicity that convinced him that he might
have been too conservative in his approach to human consciousness.
In one of his sessions he had a vivid experience of encountering his
grandmother, who had been dead for many years. He had been very close
to her in his childhood and he was deeply moved by the possibility that
he might be really communicating with her again. In spite of a deep emo-
tional involvement in the experience, this man continued to maintain a
posture of professional skepticism about the encounter. He knew that
during her lifetime he had many real interactions with her and theorized
that from old memories he could easily have created a great variety of
imaginary encounters.
However, this encounter with his dead grandmother was so emotionally
profound and convincing that he simply could not dismiss it as a wishful
fantasy. He decided to seek proof that the experience was real, not just his
imagination. He asked his dead grandmother for some form of confirmation
and received the following message: “Go to aunt Anna and look for cut
roses.” Still skeptical, he decided on the following weekend to visit his aunt
Anna’s home and see what would happen. Upon his arrival, he found his
aunt in the garden, surrounded by cut roses. He was astonished. The day
of his visit just happened to be the one day of the year that his aunt had
decided to do some radical pruning of her roses.4
Experiences of this kind, though certainly far from being definitive proof
of the existence of astral realms and discarnate beings, clearly suggest that
this fascinating area deserves the serious attention of consciousness research-
ers.
Energetic Phenomena of the Subtle Body
In non-ordinary states of consciousness it is possible to see and experience
energy fields that have been described in the mystical traditions of the East
but have not been objectively verified by Western science. I am speaking
here of “auras,” “subtle bodies,” “acupuncture meridians,” “nadis,”
“chakras,” and the like. When considering these energy fields it is important
145
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

to keep in mind that, even in the traditions from which these concepts
evolved, it has always been thought that such experiences are associated
with the subtle rather than gross physical worlds.
It came as a great surprise to me, many years ago, when Westerners who
were totally unfamiliar with these systems, described experiencing such
subtle energetic phenomena in great, accurate detail. Some saw energy
fields represented by colors around other people, matching the descriptions
of auras in ancient esoteric texts. Others experienced in their bodies a flow
of energy along conduits that exactly corresponded with diagrams of nadis
and chakras from ancient Indian Tantric scriptures or acupuncture meridi-
ans from ancient Chinese medical texts.
The ability to see auras, and even to diagnose people’s general condition
by them, has been practiced for thousands of years. And the work with
subtle energies of the body is one of the ancient healing traditions. In this
country, I have witnessed the work of Jack Schwarz who is able to use
auras to “read” people’s past medical histories and diagnose current dis-
eases. His abilities have been tested and documented again and again by
medical researchers, under quite rigorous conditions. Schwarz’s credentials,
overall, are impressive indeed.
Among the various systems employing subtle energies is the concept of
Serpent Power, or Kundalini. According to the Hindu and Buddhist Tantric
traditions, Kundalini is perceived as the creative energy of the universe. It
is believed that this energy ordinarily lies in a dormant state at the base of
the human spine. It can be activated by spiritual practices or contact with
a guru, or it may ascend spontaneously, triggered by unknown factors.
When it is awakened, it rises in the form of active energy, or Shakti, up
through conduits in the person’s subtle body (nadis); along the way, it opens
up and activates the psychic centers (chakras) of the body, of which there
are seven, located from the base of the spine to the crown of the head.
During a Kundalini experience, there are often powerful sensations of
heat and energy that seem to stream up the spine. Along with this rising
energy the person may experience intense emotions, tremors, spasms, viol-
ent shaking, complex twisting movements, and a wide spectrum of
transpersonal phenomena.
My wife, Christina, had such an experience during her first marriage,
with the birth of her son—an experience that would ultimately trigger her
own quest into the meaning of the transpersonal realm. In preparation for
natural childbirth, she had learned to use the Lamaze breathing to help the
process. In the final stages of the delivery, she had the following experience.
146
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

I felt an abrupt snap somewhere inside of me as powerful and unfa-
miliar energies were released unexpectedly and began streaming
through my body. I started to shake uncontrollably. Enormous elec-
trical tremors coursed from my toes up my legs and spine to the top
of my head. Brilliant mosaics of white light exploded in my head, and
instead of continuing the Lamaze panting, I felt strange, involuntary
breathing rhythms taking over.
It was as though I had just been hit by some miraculous but
frightening force, and I was both excited and terrified; the shaking,
the visions, and the spontaneous breathing were certainly not what
I had expected from all of my months of childbirth preparation.5
During the birth of her second child, Sarah, she began to have similar
sensations and experiences, but this time the doctors administered tranquil-
izers to suppress what she was feeling. Some years later, a friend invited
her to meet Swami Muktananda. Although Christina had little interest in
spiritual matters at that time of her life, she used the opportunity to take
a weekend off from her responsibilities as a wife and mother.
During the retreat, she sat with others and learned to meditate. Swami
Muktananda lectured them from time to time, and his appearance made
an important impact on her. Then, on the second day of the retreat, she
had an unexpected experience.
During a meditation period, he first looked at me and then, with some
force, slapped me several times on the forehead with his hand. The
impact of that seemingly simple event blew the lid off the experiences,
emotions, and energies I had been holding down since Sarah’s birth.
Suddenly I felt as though I had been plugged into a high-voltage
socket as I started to shake uncontrollably. My breathing fell into an
automatic, rapid rhythm that seemed beyond my control, and a
multitude of visions flooded my consciousness. I wept as I felt myself
being born; I experienced death; I plunged into pain and ecstasy,
strength and gentleness, love and fear, depths and heights. I was on
an experiential roller coaster, and I knew I could no longer contain
it. The genie was out of the bottle.6
During Kundalini experiences such as this, the person may begin
laughing or crying involuntarily. They may start chanting songs or mantras,
speaking in tongues, emitting animal sounds, and assuming spontaneous
yogic
147
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

gestures and postures. To the uninitiated observer the person having such
an experience may appear to have completely lost their senses. And for the
person undergoing the experience without proper preparation, there may
be fear that they are going crazy. However, when one approaches the
Kundalini experience within the yogic traditions it is seen as an increased
awareness of what we call the transpersonal realm, and a dramatic opening
to spiritual life.
Contact with Animal Spirits
In earlier discussions of animal consciousness, we explored transpersonal
experiences involving full identification with the physical forms of various
species. However, it is also possible to experience spiritual aspects of a
particular species or its archetypal essence.
Experiences of animal spirits or “power animals” play an important role
in shamanism, the oldest religion and healing art of humanity. Shamans
of various aboriginal traditions make contact with animal spirits during
non-ordinary states of consciousness, achieved either spontaneously or
through deliberate trance-inducing techniques. They use their connections
with these animal spirits for many different purposes, from locating prey
for tribal hunters to diagnosing and healing diseases.
Through his or her guardian spirit or power animal, a shaman might
connect with the powers of the animal world and other forces of nature.
Within shamanic traditions, animal spirit guides can represent the powers
of the entire species, which the shaman draws upon for additional know-
ledge or energy for healing, hunting, or bringing about change that is re-
quired within his or her tribe. Techniques for contacting these spirits or
powers vary from one culture to another. The Zuni peoples (the Ashiwi)
of New Mexico, for example, use small stone carvings of animals, called
“fetishes”; through these they call up the spirit of the animal, who either
communicates with them directly or acts as a mediator between humans
and higher spiritual forms of the natural world.
In shamanic cultures, power animals are seen as sources of personal vi-
tality, health, and the ability to live a joyful existence in harmony with
nature. Many of the dances, chants, prayers, and other aspects of ritual life
in these cultures revolve around power animals—communicating with
them, adopting aspects of their wisdom or power, and re-establishing links
with them when the connection has been lost through negligence or lack
of reverence, or by offending either the animal spirits or one of the greater
spirits of the natural world.
148
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

During my research, I have been surprised to discover that experiences
with animal spirits are by no means limited to people from aboriginal cul-
tures. In work with non-ordinary states these same kinds of experiences
are very common with people from even the most modern, technologically
oriented urban societies. Communications with power animals occur reg-
ularly in holotropic and psychedelic sessions, shamanic workshops, and
in spontaneous psychospiritual crises (spiritual emergencies). I have often
witnessed situations in which the power animal experiences were so con-
vincing that they triggered, in previously skeptical Westerners, a deep and
genuine interest in shamanism. In a surprising number of cases, people
have been so transformed that they eventually pursued further systematic
study of shamanism with experienced shamans or anthropologists.
Experiences with animals take many different forms and it is important
to distinguish between them. Sometimes the animal appears in a dream or
vision and can simply be a symbolic expression of the language of the un-
conscious mind. The meaning of these images can usually be deciphered
through dream analysis, such as Freudian psychotherapy or other ap-
proaches to dream interpretation. In dreams or visions, animals may rep-
resent a cryptic message revealing something about the experiencer’s own
feelings and personal qualities. Thus the image of a tiger or panther might
be deciphered as an expression of intensely aggressive feelings in the
dreamer, while a stallion, bull, or goat might symbolize that person’s strong
sexual drive.
Symbolic images of this kind need to be differentiated from transpersonal
identification with various animals. With the latter, people report that the
experience is unusually vivid and authentic, and there is no confusion
about the animal having an identity that is quite independent of the person
who envisions it. The independent identity of the animal is often confirmed
by the fact that the experience reveals information about the animal that
the experiencer could not have previously known.
The person who has a truly transpersonal experience with an animal
presence usually resists any efforts to assign symbolic meanings to the ex-
perience; it is what it is—an experience of being or communicating with
an animal—and there is nothing to interpret or analyze.
In addition to identifying with an individual animal, it is also possible
to identify with the “soul” of an entire species, composed of the collective
experiences of all members of this group. The existence of an entity such
as the soul of a species has been seriously explored in Western science.
Biologist Rupert Sheldrake believes that the memories and wisdom of
various species
149
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

are stored in what he calls “morphogenetic fields,” which are not accessible
to the methods of contemporary science but apparently are accessible
through shamanic techniques. Gregory Bateson also discussed this in his
pursuit of the role of mind in nature.
The experience of animal spirits or power animals is very different from
symbolic experiences of animals or transpersonal identification with indi-
vidual animals and the species. Symbolic experiences are creations of the
unconscious mind, and identification with individual animals, or the soul
of various species, deals with phenomena that reflect the physical world.
By contrast, power animals belong to the realm of archetypal reality. They
have extraordinary characteristics that differentiate them from animals we
might encounter in nature. They radiate unusual energy, have the ability
to communicate in the language of humans, and may even manifest by al-
ternating between taking animal and human form. Sometimes they function
in uncharacteristic environments. For instance, a serpent might fly in the
air, with or without the help of wings. These incongruous features show
that the spirit animal transcends the usual roles of similar animals in nature.
The following is an excellent example of experiencing animal conscious-
ness and communicating with animal spirits reported by consultant and
writer Hal Zina Bennett, who first began working with Zuni fetishes nearly
twenty years ago. In this Native American system, the shaman communic-
ates with the animal spirit through a small stone figure of the animal in
question.
As instructed by my guide I held the little stone figure (a Mountain
Lion carved from stone) in my right hand and addressed it by its role
in traditional Zuni thought, that is, “Guardian of the North.” The
communication was very powerful and very direct—I would say
visceral rather than verbal—as if I could connect with every cell of
the animal’s body, occasionally being that body rather than observing
it. In a moment I received a clear mental picture of a beautiful, sleek,
very dignified lioness standing almost hidden in a clump of high
grasses at the edge of a canyon.
Mountain Lion approached me cautiously, pacing back and forth
in a relaxed zig zag pattern as she came. Her eyes seemed to regard
me lazily, yet I was aware of what I can only describe as an energetic
connection between us. If I moved or even had any aggressive
thoughts or feelings about her she would sense a shift in this energetic
connection and instantly bolt. I was aware of feeling fear and respect
for her but something within told me I was safe in
150
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

her presence as long as I maintained my present state of mind, which
was simply to learn from her.
When there was no more than six or eight feet between Hal and the an-
imal, the mountain lion stopped, looked directly at him, and suddenly
grew tense, every muscle in her body alert and ready. She stared at him,
and it seemed to him that “she was targeting my very soul.” For perhaps
as long as a minute he sat transfixed, fearful that she would spring at him
at any moment, and he imagined her tearing him to shreds with her sharp
claws. Hal continues:
She suddenly thrust her neck forward, bared her teeth and shrieked
at me, a deafening, bloodchilling howl that sent tingling, electric
waves up my spine. Then she stopped and I was flooded with feelings
of love and appreciation for her, no longer fearful but in absolute awe
of her. Then she lay down, groomed herself briefly, then turned her
head and seemed to be gazing past me, as if it was of no concern to
her whether I was there or not.
I heard a wonderful rumbling sound from deep in her body and it
took me a moment to realize she was purring, as a domestic cat might
do except with greater volume, a deep, rumbling tone that resonated
in the trunk of my body in an almost sexual way.
As I say, there were no words between us, yet in that moment we
were together I received a new perspective on maintaining individual
boundaries and territories, as well as a reverence for hunting and a
deep, sacred respect and love for the spirit of your prey. Mountain
Lion had a profound understanding of nature and related to it not as
a place but as an awesome force within which every individual took
part, be they hunter or hunted or be they creatures who somehow
lived outside that system of animal life.
For several days in a row, Hal returned to this place in his mind, each
time learning more about the mountain lion and her perspective on life.
She has since become his main spirit counselor when issues involving
personal boundaries or the right use of power arise.
Encounters with Spirit Guides and Suprahuman Beings
Perhaps one of the most rewarding experiences in the transpersonal realm
is meeting spirit guides. The guides are perceived as suprahuman beings
who exist on higher planes of consciousness and higher energy levels. They
151
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

may appear in recognizably human forms, speaking to us as a person might
speak to us in a dream, as radiant light, or a powerful energy field. Only
rarely do these guides communicate to us with words. Instead, information
is conveyed telepathically through channels other than our five senses.
Many people who have spirit guides that assist them in their lives say
they appeared quite spontaneously. They may emerge suddenly during a
period of inner crisis, during a serious illness, after a physical injury, or
through spiritual practices. Some spirit guides introduce themselves by
name; others remain anonymous.
Spirit guides offer many different kinds of assistance. They may intervene
and provide advice in the face of danger, or offer their counsel to us when
we are going through difficult periods of psychological or spiritual growth.
After they have served us through a crisis or emergency they may never
appear again, or they may continue to serve us in our everyday affairs.
There is a wonderful story about spirit guides that C. G. Jung relates in
Memories, Dreams, Reflections. One day Jung received a visitor from India.
The visitor was a spiritual leader in India, and because Jung was very in-
terested in Indian thought, they had a long conversation. When Jung asked
the man the name of his spiritual teacher his visitor replied that it was
“Shankaracharya.” This name was familiar to Jung as Shankaracharya had
been a great Vedas commentator. However, Jung thought it impossible
that his visitor could have had this same man as a teacher since Shank-
aracharya had been dead for centuries. Wanting to clear up this question,
Jung asked his visitor if the Shankaracharya he was speaking of was the
one who had been dead for several hundred years.
“Yes, I mean him,” the man replied, to Jung’s amazement.
“Then you are referring to a spirit?” Jung asked.
“Of course it was his spirit,” the man replied. “There are ghostly gurus,
too. Most people have living gurus. But there are always some who have
a spirit for a teacher.”7
Throughout the ages, people have received information from suprahuman
entities and spirit guides. Sometimes the recipients keep the information
for their own use; at other times they act as mediators, sharing the commu-
nications with others. In recent times, such shared communication has been
referred to as “channeling.” In some cases, communications of this kind
have become meaningful for millions of people the world over. It is gener-
ally accepted that the Vedas, which belong to the oldest religious scriptures
of the world, were based on revelations channeled by ancient Indian sages
and seers. Similarly, according to the Moslem faith, the Koran
152
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

was channeled by Mohammed in visionary states. In the United States, the
influential Church of the Latter Day Saints, or Mormons, has as its source
revelations channeled by Joseph Smith during the beginning of the nine-
teenth century.
Those who have read the works of Alice Bailey will know that many
books that bear her name actually came to her through an entity who called
himself “The Tibetan.” Bailey herself acknowledged this spirit guide as the
true author of a number of her writings. The highly esteemed psychologist
Roberto Assagioli communicated with the same entity, crediting him with
the key principles of the system of personal growth he called “psychosyn-
thesis.” In some instances, spirit guides provide a pragmatic, useful service,
such as directing the channel to passages in books that provide necessary
information about a specific subject.
During his lifetime, C. G. Jung had many powerful transpersonal exper-
iences. I have already mentioned a dramatic episode in which he channeled
his famous text Seven Sermons for the Dead: the entity that inspired this
channeling introduced himself as the Gnostic Basilides. Jung also had ex-
periences with his spirit guide Philemon who taught him much about the
dynamics of the human psyche. Upon reflecting on this channeled material
in the last years of his life, Jung said that most of his work had been derived
from information he received in this way, and he was doubtful that his
personal achievements in the study of the human psyche would have been
possible had he limited himself to information he acquired by more tradi-
tional means.
In the past two decades, channeling has become popular and has attracted
the attention of large audiences. Jane Robert’s popular series of writings
received from an entity called “Seth” is among the books based on
channeled information from spirit guides. There are also Pat Rodegast’s
Emmanuel’s Books, Yarbo’s Messages from Michael, and David Spangler’s
New Age Transformations: Revelations. One of the best known of the channeled
texts is the best-selling book A Course in Miracles. It is very highly acclaimed
by many lay people as well as nationally recognized professionals, such
as Hugh Prather and Gerald G. Jampolsky, M.D., who use it as a basis for
their lectures and seminars. The original work was channeled by Helen
Schucman, a traditionally trained psychologist, atheist, and disbeliever in
the paranormal with a solid university position and excellent professional
credentials.
Contacts with spirit guides, or channeling, belong to the wide spectrum
of transpersonal experiences that can occur in non-ordinary states of
153
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

consciousness. The following example is an account by a philosophy pro-
fessor’s experiences during a consultation with an entire group of spirit
guides whom he perceived as a council of cosmic elders. It occurred during
a session in which he entered a non-ordinary state of consciousness.
The intelligence that brought our universe into existence is enormously
sophisticated and the workings of this intelligence are far beyond
human comprehension. If you want access to its knowledge, this in-
telligence has to teach you how to receive it. Since this intelligence is
nothing other than your own being, it is a matter of learning how to
be awake at more and more levels of “your” own being, or Being itself.
Today, I was given a number of visions of the universe and instruction
in how to take in these visions. It was mediated by a council of elders.
The elders were the guardians of knowledge, the knowledge of
what has been going on in the universe for billions and billions of
years. Because I sought this knowledge, I was brought before the
council of elders to get it. This knowledge is not just given to you,
you have to work for it. You first have to reach this level of awareness
and then you have to work to sustain the concentration necessary to
receive the knowledge that they can make available to you.
I was sitting with the council of elders at the primal core of the
universe, the bowels of the earth where the guardians of physical
existence conjure and make things happen. I wanted to understand,
I wanted to know things. When an idea of something that I wanted
to understand would come into my mind, the council immediately
knew it and accepted it as a formal request. The head of the council
bellowed a thundering chant: “He wants to know that”; then the
others joined in and started an invocation. They chanted to gather
power which is necessary to gain access to knowledge.
According to the philosophy professor who had this experience, the
council of elders gave him access to “experiential knowing” and allowed
him to “see many pieces of how the universe works.” He felt that he could
“know anything” he wanted to know, if he had the strength to endure it.
However, he felt that to endure it, he had to be able to “go flat out with
existence,” that is, to expand to the size of the reality he wished to know.
Somehow his being able to see the universe in this way answered a longing
154
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

so deep in him that he knew “it had been driving me for thousands and
thousands of years.” He continues:
Sometimes I would make a mistake; I would get distracted while the
elders were chanting. When this happened something would grab
me right down to my bones and say: “Listen! Listen! Will you grow
up?! Listen! That’s not what this is about. Now pay attention!” Those
big monks came grinding at me: “Listen! All of these things have their
place. But if you want to understand the structure of the universe,
you’ve got to be able to take it on at deep levels. You’ve got to be able
to experience it!”8
Visits to Other Dimensions and Parallel Universes
On occasion, transpersonal adventures seem to occur in alien environments,
worlds with realities very different from our own. Often these worlds seem
to be located on planes of reality that are parallel to, and which coexist
with, our own. The entities that inhabit these other realms tend to possess
bizarre forms, unlike anything we know in our physical reality; they often
operate according to laws that are equally strange to us. Although many
of these entities are intelligent creatures, they may have emotional and in-
tellectual processes that bear little or no resemblance to our own.
People describing their adventures in these other universes often liken
them to ingenious science fiction stories, such as George Lucas’s Star Wars
movies or the most fantastic sequences from the American television series
“Star Trek.” The adventures themselves may be perceived as dangerous,
sometimes owing to the hostile nature of the creatures involved, at other
times owing to fear or uncertainty about the unknown. When the situation
seems dangerous, it is because the visitor finds him- or herself in an envir-
onment that is completely foreign, a world in which one false move seems
to promise disaster.
In this category of transpersonal experience, the boundaries between
objective reality and the mythical realm of the collective unconscious are
particularly blurred. One can be quite unsure whether one’s experience is
an actual visit to a remote planet within our cosmos, interdimensional
travel to a parallel universe, or a visionary state involving the collective
unconscious. The same problem of interpretation can exist with experiences
involving UFO visitations from worlds outside our own and encounters
155
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

with alien intelligences. As you will see in the discussion of UFO phenom-
ena, experiences of this kind have an unusual quality that places them into
a twilight zone between consensus reality and the world of consciousness
and archetypes.
Journeys into Mythic Realities
Most of us think of myths as fictitious, made up stories about adventures
experienced by imaginary heroes in non-existent countries—the products
of fantasy and imagination. However, the pioneering work of C. G. Jung
and mythologist Joseph Campbell, to name just two, has shown that this
understanding of mythology is superficial and incorrect. They have dem-
onstrated that true myths are manifestations of fundamental organizing
principles that exist within the cosmos, affecting all our lives. Jung called
them archetypes.
These archetypes express themselves through our individual psyches,
but they are not human creations. In a sense archetypes are supraordinated
to our psyches and represent universal governing principles at work
within our individual lives. According to Jung, powerful archetypes can
influence not only our individual processes and behavior but large cultural
and historical events as well. Archetypes are universal and they cross his-
torical, geographical, and cultural boundaries, though they may appear
under different names or show variations from culture to culture. Since
myths involve archetypes, they can truly be said to have autonomy, and
they are in no way dependent on us to create them. They exist in that vast
sea of human knowledge that Jung referred to as the “collective uncon-
scious,” as real as the birds that fly in the sky or the marine life that swims
in our oceans.
Modern research of non-ordinary states of consciousness has confirmed
Jung’s position on archetypes and has added another important dimension.
In non-ordinary states, the boundary we ordinarily see between myths and
the material world tends to dissolve. While the solid material world disin-
tegrates into dynamic patterns of energy, the world of archetypal realities
becomes increasingly real and palpable. Under these circumstances,
mythological figures literally come alive and assume independent exist-
ences. The same is true about the landscapes and structures that make up
the mythic world. The resulting experiential world is at least as concrete
and convincing as our everyday reality.
In their most elemental and profound forms, archetypes are cosmic
principles that are completely abstract and beyond the capacities of human
156
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

perception. However, in non-ordinary states, they may also appear in forms
that we perceive through inner sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, or the
virtually palpable sense of a presence. Some archetypes are universal, with
various expressions of them being found in all cultures of the world. There
are also archetypal variations that are much more individualized. Thus the
universal archetypes of Mother or Father epitomize all the essential char-
acteristics of these roles without regard to race, color, culture, or specific
circumstances. More specific and narrower archetypes are the Good Father
and Good Mother or their negative counterparts, Tyrant Father and Terrible
Mother. Other examples of universal archetypes would be the Wise Old
Man or Woman, the Lover, the Martyr, the Trickster, and the Outcast.
Jung, who made a lifelong study of archetypes, recognized three key
archetypes in his approach to human personality and behavior: (1) the
Anima, or personification of the feminine aspects in a man’s unconscious;
(2) the Animus, or the embodiment of the masculine elements in a woman’s
unconscious; and (3) the Shadow, which is the unknown, dark, and
repressed part of our personalities. These three aspects of our psyches are
ordinarily hidden and unknown to us, yet they exert strong influences on
the choices we make in life and thus help shape our behavior and our life
experiences, until we bring them into consciousness and get to know them.
Some time ago I had the opportunity of becoming acquainted with these
archetypes during a psychedelic session of my own. This personal experi-
ence has contributed greatly to my understanding of this fascinating aspect
of our psyches.
Toward the end of a session, in which I had been experiencing remark-
able visions depicting the Apocalypse, I suddenly saw a large stage.
It seemed to be located in the middle of nowhere, suspended in cosmic
space and outside of time. There was a magnificent parade of the
personified universal principles (the archetypes) that through a
complex interplay create the illusion of the phenomenal world, the
divine play of cosmic consciousness that the Hindus call lila. This
scene had a majesty and grandeur about it that is beyond my abilities
to describe.
The archetypes I saw were protean figures with many facets, levels,
and dimensions of meaning. It was impossible to focus on any partic-
ular aspect of them, since as I was observing them, they kept changing
in unbelievably intricate holographic interpenetration. Each of them
seemed to represent the essence of his or her
157
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

function and simultaneously all the concrete manifestations of this
principle in the phenomenal world. While they were clearly individual
entities, they comprised an enormous number of other beings and
situations from all times and places in history.
I saw Maya, a mysterious ethereal principle symbolizing the illusion
that creates the world of matter. There was an anima-like figure who
was the embodiment of the eternal feminine principle or force. I saw
a horrifying Mars-like figure who seemed to be the principle respons-
ible for wars, all down through human history. There were the royal
figure of the Ruler, the withdrawn Hermit, the elusive Trickster, and
the Lovers, representing all the sexual dramas throughout ages. They
all bowed in my direction, as if expecting appreciation for their stellar
performances in the Divine Play of the universe. They seemed to ac-
tually enjoy my great admiration for them.
While there are the universal archetypal figures, as I have described
above, there are also universal archetypal motifs or themes that we may
encounter in transpersonal states of consciousness. These can be expressed
as plots, parables, or stories whose conflicts and resolutions employ the
archetypal figures. Many of these themes find their expression in human
sexual and social life with which we are all familiar. As inner experiences,
they may be identified as the source of biographical difficulties, that is,
emotional conflicts that were set in motion early in our lives. An excellent
example of this is the theme of the son’s hatred for his father and affection
for his mother, which Sigmund Freud popularized in his famous work
with the Oedipus complex, a theme taken from Sophocles’ play Oedipus
Rex, written over 2,000 years before. The counterpart of this archetypal
theme is the Electra complex, the daughter’s love for the father and hostility
toward the mother.
The theme of the evil brother and the good brother was immortalized in
the Bible story of Cain and Abel. Similarly, fairy tales and legends often
express archetypal themes of this kind. “Snow White” and “Cinderella”
describe painful conflicts between the girl and her bad mother or stepmoth-
er. “Hansel and Gretel” portrays the drama of two loving siblings en-
dangered by the evil mother figure. Many stories from world literature are
variations on the theme of the Lovers: Tristan and Isolde, Romeo and Juliet,
Abelard and Heloise are but a few of the famous lovers. Other extreme
forms of archetypal conflicts involve the Torturer and the Victim, the Killer
and the Killed, the Tyrant and the Oppressed, and the Imprisoned and the
158
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Liberator. Freud said these myths have their source in biosocial conflicts
that we experience in our everyday lives. From this point of view, the myth
of Oedipus is an artistic creation inspired by the universal psychological
conflicts that young boys experience at a certain age.
My own observations with non-ordinary states of consciousness strongly
support Jung’s belief that the archetypal world has an independent exist-
ence. This world is supraordinated to our everyday reality and represents
its moving force. For example, Jung’s understanding was that our actual
conflicts with our fathers (if we are male) have universal roots; those con-
flicts are expressions of the Oedipus myth, which exists independent of us
and our everyday reality. Joseph Campbell made this point very clear in
his Myths to Life By. The same idea is expressed in Jean Shinoda Bolen’s
Goddesses in Every Woman and Gods in Every Man.
It is very difficult to explain to a person who has not experienced unusual
states of consciousness how it is possible to experience oneself as a universal
archetype such as the Great Mother, who represents the essence of mother-
hood and the qualities of all mothers of the world throughout all of human
history. Perhaps the best way to do that is to imagine a single, three dimen-
sional figure. It is constructed in such a way that as you walk around it,
viewing it from a new angle each time, you are presented with still another
aspect of that figure—though all aspects seem to be just another view of
the whole. This has actually been demonstrated in holography. Several
years ago a composite hologram was exhibited in Honolulu. It was called
“The Child of Hawaii,” which was a collection of individual faces of many
Hawaiian children co-existing in a single holographic image. Though it
actually contained scores of faces, they were all superimposed into what
appeared to be a single figure but which changed, revealing a new face
each time you changed your viewing angle or position.
Some mythological figures and motifs, though variations on universal
archetypes, are specific to a particular culture or religion. For example: Jesus
Christ and the Virgin Mary have specific meanings for Christians; the
Bodhisattvas Avalokiteshvara and Kuan Yin are uniquely Buddhist; and
the Rainbow Serpent belongs to the Dreamtime world of the Australian
Aborigines. Regardless of their universality or specificity, deities appearing
in the transpersonal realm fall into two distinct categories: the first associ-
ated with forces of light and good, such as Christ, Apollo, Isis, or Krishna;
the second associated with darkness and evil, such as Satan, Hades, Set,
and Ahriman. In many instances, a single deity may embody both the light
and the dark, the good and the evil. This is particularly characteristic for
159
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Oriental deities, while the mythology of the Western world tends to be
strictly dichotomized. Examples of such deities that transcend polarities
are the Hindu Brahma or the five Buddhas described in the Tibetan Book of
the Dead.
The World of Archetypes
Many people on spiritual paths first encounter archetypal deities in the
context of the death-rebirth process. In part I of this book we explored some
of the ways in which various aspects of our biological histories merge with
archetypes from the collective unconscious. Here the encounter with these
seemingly horrifying, wrathful deities is a very important part of the death-
rebirth process. For a person on a spiritual path, they are carriers of a
symbolic death of the ego, a step that is necessary for spiritual opening. It
is also at this point that the blissful archetypes are first encountered at the
moment of rebirth or in the oceanic bliss of the womb.
The archetypal figures of both the blissful and wrathful deities are en-
dowed with great energy and numinous power. When we encounter them,
the experience is usually associated with strong emotions. The quality of
the response depends on the nature of the deity; it can be anything from
rapture and supreme bliss to metaphysical terror, overwhelming physical
or emotional pain, and feelings of losing one’s mind. However, as powerful
as these confrontations may be one does not have the sense of confronting
the Supreme Being or ultimate force in the universe. These deities—blissful
or wrathful—are themselves creations of the higher force, personifications
of key universal principles. Joseph Campbell referred to this fact in many
of his lectures, especially in the context of religious worship. He emphasized
that individual deities should not be worshiped for themselves but should
be seen as concrete expressions of the supreme creative force that transcends
any form. In his words, they should be seen as “transparent to the tran-
scendent of which they are expressions.”9
Many years of research have demonstrated that in non-ordinary states
of consciousness we can not only witness mythic and archetypal realities,
we can actually become these archetypes. We can completely identify with
Sisyphus rolling his rock up the steep hill in the depths of hades. We can
become Theseus slaying the Minotaur in the dark Labyrinth. We can radiate
with the beauty of Aphrodite or shine in the glory of Helius and Apollo.
We can take on the body image and the inner experiences of such mythic
creatures as Cerberus, Cyclops, or Centaurus.
160
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

It has been remarkable to find that people raised in one culture, or be-
longing to a particular race, are not limited to the archetypes of that culture
or race. In our research we have seen, for example, that white, urban, middle
class Americans can have meaningful encounters while in non-ordinary
states of consciousness with such legendary heroes as the Polynesian Maui
or Shango, the Bantu god of sex and war. Over the years I have, on many
occasions, witnessed European and American women who became the
Hindu goddess Kali, taking on the traditional facial expressions of that
figure, with the tongue stretched far out of their mouth, even though they
had no previous knowledge about that figure. Conversely, during work-
shops in Japan and India, we witnessed several participants, born and
raised in those traditions, who had powerful identifications with Christ.
Occasionally, even the world of fairy tales comes alive, and we meet or
identify with mermaids, elves, fairies, gnomes, or trolls. It is particularly
interesting to note that in many cases, where people had no previous
knowledge of certain mythological figures, they were not only able to ex-
perience them accurately and with great detail but they were able to draw
pictures with details that perfectly matched ancient descriptions of those
figures. After one has seen literally thousands of pieces of evidence of this
kind, it becomes quite clear that everyone has access to the archetypal
themes of all times and all cultures, not just the cultures of our present
biological birth.
Our research involving non-ordinary states of consciousness thus sup-
ports the concepts of C. G. Jung, who suggested that in our dreams and
visions we can experience myths that are not from our own cultures and
that were previously unknown to us from our readings, viewing of art, or
conversations with others. This is the world of the “collective unconscious,”
an infinite ocean of knowledge from which we can each draw. In this age
of advanced technology, we might compare the collective unconscious to
a transmitting station that constantly broadcasts every bit of program ma-
terial and information ever transmitted by radio and television. At any
time we can “switch channels,” changing from the channel of everyday
life to which we normally stay tuned, to an infinite number of other chan-
nels, crossing the boundaries of time, space, and even species. It is virtually
impossible to imagine that we are always surrounded by this information
and that we are able to tap into it whenever we wish. But our analogy of
the radio waves gives us an approximation of the immensity of information
we can access through the collective unconscious.
161
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Intuitive Deciphering of Universal Symbols
Since Freud’s classic work on the interpretation of dreams, the study of
psychological symbols has been an important part of depth psychology.
According to Freud, symbols represent something that we already know
but that we find objectionable and unacceptable. In our dreams such
problematic material—usually sexual in nature—is replaced by the corres-
ponding symbol; thus, for example, a train rushing through a tunnel might
express a person’s frustrated sexual desires. Freud spend many years trying
to identify all the symbols that represent the male and female sexual organs,
intercourse, and other aspects of instinctual life.
Jung strongly disagreed with Freud’s symbolic interpretations. According
to him what Freud was talking about should be referred to as “signs”; they
were simply other ways of representing a known reality, not unlike the
pictograms used on traffic signs along our highways. Jung suggested that
true symbols are not cryptic statements about biological functions but were
references to complex transcendental realities.
For centuries, universal symbols have played important roles in many
religions. The Indo-Iranian swastika, for instance, an armed cross pointing
counterclockwise, is an ancient symbol of peace and well-being related to
the solar disc. (In its clockwise form it became the infamous Hackenkreuz,
symbol of the German Nazi Party.) The centuries-old Hindu symbols of
Shiva lingam and yoni have multiple meanings, ranging from the male
and female sexual organs and generative functions to static and dynamic
forces of existence—pure consciousness and the energy of creation. The
cross, a symbol of prehistoric origin, has deep universal meanings in many
different cultures. In its most ancient connotation, it points to the sun and
through the sun to the creative power of the universe. To others it symbol-
izes all of existence because it represents the four cardinal points or direc-
tions and the center. In the mainstream Christian tradition it symbolizes
the historical crucifixion of Jesus, while in esoteric mystical Christianity it
refers to different aspects of incarnation, spiritual death, and rebirth. Its
Egyptian variety, the Nile cross or ankh, was the most sacred symbol of the
mysteries of Isis and Osiris, where the neophytes discovered their immor-
tality and eternal life.
The six-pointed star—two overlapping triangles pointing in opposite
directions—has many different meanings, depending on the period and
culture. In ancient and medieval alchemy, it portrayed the union of the
four elements—earth, water, fire, and air. In the Kabbalah, it is called the
“Star of David” and represents an illuminated person in whom the lower
162
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

consciousness (upward pointing triangle) strives to reach higher levels and
the higher consciousness (downward oriented triangle) tries to make itself
effective and functional in the physical world. In the Tantric tradition, the
six-pointed star represents the union of male and female principles.
The famous Taoist yin-yang symbol represents the dynamic interplay
of feminine and masculine principles, or passive and active aspects of the
Tao, the creative principle of the cosmos. Similarly, the lotus played an
important role in the spiritual symbolism of many cultures, including those
of ancient Egypt, India, and Central America; in all it was a symbol of hu-
man spiritual potential.
It continues to amaze me that many people in transpersonal states of
mind not only spontaneously envision such symbols but are also able to
decipher their deeper esoteric meaning—even when they hold no previous
intellectual knowledge of the spiritual traditions from which these designs
came. This strongly suggests that these are not logos designed by humans
for religious purposes but are elements of a symbolic language belonging
to the collective unconscious.
Experience of the Creator and of Cosmic Consciousness
In the most dramatic and all-encompassing transpersonal experiences,
boundaries seem to dissolve and distinctions between ourselves and other
people, objects, or forces disappear. We experience oneness and encounter,
or even fully identify with, the creative principle of the universe. Depending
on the extent to which we still maintain the sense of our everyday identity,
we can experience this encounter either as an awed witness or as the creative
force itself. This creative principle may take a variety of forms. Sometimes
it appears as a personified Demiurge, or creator, an archetype of high order
that has power over all others. I have encountered instances where people
experienced more than one Creator, for example, male and female deities
working jointly, as they sometimes appear in the mythologies of many
cultures, or even a hierarchy of universes and creators. More frequently,
the creative force of the universe is perceived as something beyond any
form—pure consciousness endowed with supreme intelligence and the
capacity to create any and all experiential worlds, seen and unseen, phys-
ical or etheric.
Experiences of cosmic consciousness have been described in many reli-
gious scriptures throughout history. The ultimate creative principle has
been known by many names—Brahman in Hinduism, Dharmakaya in
163
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Mahayana Buddhism, the Tao in Taoism, Pneuma in Christian mysticism,
Allah in Sufism, and Kether in the Kabbalah. The basic message in the
mystical traditions has been that not only can we experientially connect
with the creative principle but each of us, in a sense, is the creative principle.
This is possible because all boundaries in the universe are ultimately illus-
ory, arbitrary, and can therefore be transcended. The best known expression
of this perennial wisdom is the famous statement Tat tvam asi (or “Thou
art That,” you are the Godhead) found in the ancient Indian Upanishads.
Modern research in non-ordinary states of consciousness has brought strong
support for this understanding of human nature, since it shows beyond
any doubt that transcendent states of consciousness can be reached by a
variety of consciousness-expanding methods.
When we experience identification with the cosmic consciousness, we
have the feeling of enfolding the totality of existence within us, and of
comprehending the Reality that underlies all realities. We have a profound
sense that we are in connection with the supreme and ultimate principle
of all Being. In this state, it is absolutely clear that this principle is the ulti-
mate and the only mystery; once its existence is accepted, everything else
can be understood from it and explained. The experience of cosmic con-
sciousness is boundless, unfathomable, and beyond expression. Yet, even
a short experiential exposure to it satisfies fully our craving for understand-
ing. All questions about the mysteries of life seem to be answered and there
is no need to go any further. Communicating this to those who have not
had this experience is neither possible nor necessary. It becomes a self-
validating and deeply personal experience.
Probably the most famous statement about the futility of attempting to
capture the essence of the cosmic source in thought or language comes
from Lao-tsu, a Chinese sage who lived in the fourth century B.C.:
The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.
The name that can be named is not the eternal name.
The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.
The named is the mother of ten thousand things.10
The languages of cultures with ancient spiritual traditions that are based
on experiential self-exploration (such as Chinese, Tibetan, or Sanskrit) have
a rich and sophisticated vocabulary describing various mystical states of
consciousness. However, even then the terms adequately convey the
meaning only if we can relate them to a personal experience. In Indian
spiritual and philosophical scriptures, there is the concept of
164
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Saccidananda, which describes the experience of cosmic consciousness.
This composite word is made up of three roots: sat, meaning existence; chit,
meaning awareness or intelligence; and ananda, meaning bliss. Thus, Sacci-
dananda suggests “blissful intelligent awareness of existence.” It is an ex-
perience devoid of any concrete content, yet the being it represents possesses
the capacity for creating infinite experiential worlds.
If the experience of encountering the ultimate creative force cannot be
described in everyday language, poetry perhaps comes closer to doing it
justice, though even poetry falls far short. The spiritual poetry of Rumi,
Omar Khayyam, Kabir, Kahlil Gibran, Sri Aurobindo, or Saint Hildegard
von Bingen comes closest to expressing this experience.
The following description of cosmic consciousness is by a person who
has been involved in systematic self-exploration for a number of years. I
offer it here because it provides us with at least a hint of the feelings,
thoughts, and insights that arise in the process.
The experience then changed into an extremely powerful and moving
experience of the Cosmic Tree. The unified field of cosmic energy that
I had experienced before now became a massive tree of radiant energy
suspended in space. Larger than the largest galaxy, it was composed
entirely of light. The core of the tree was lost to the brilliant display
but limbs and leaves were visible around its edges. I experienced
myself as one of the leaves; the lives of my family and close friends
were leaves clustered around me on a small branch. All of our distin-
guishing characteristics, what made us the individuals we were, ap-
peared from this perspective to be quite minor, almost arbitrary
variations of this fundamental energy.
I was taken around the tree and shown how to move from one
person’s experience to another and it was ridiculously easy. Different
lives around the globe were simply different experiences the tree was
having. Choice governed all experience; different beings who were
all parts of Being Itself had simply chosen these manifold experiences.
At this point, I was the tree. Not that I was having the full range of
its experience, but I knew myself to be this single, encompassing
Consciousness. I knew that Its identity was my true identity.
Though I had taken monism to heart years before, I was now actu-
ally experiencing the seamless flow of consciousness into
165
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

crystallizations of embodiment. I was experiencing how consciousness
manifests itself in separate forms while remaining unified. I knew
that fundamentally there was only One Consciousness in the universe.
From this perspective my individual identity and everybody else’s
appeared temporary and almost trivial. To experience my true Identity
filled me with a profound sense of numinous encounter.
For the next several hours, this Consciousness took him on an extraordi-
nary tour of the universe. It was as if it wanted to show him its work. He
was convinced that this consciousness was the Creator of our entire phys-
ical universe. It would take him somewhere, or open him up to experiences,
and he would eventually come to understand the hidden workings of the
cosmos. Over and over again, he was overwhelmed at the magnitude, the
subtlety, and the intelligence of what he was witnessing. The beauty of the
design was such that he was constantly left breathless by what he was
seeing. He continues:
This tour was the most extraordinary journey of my life. The vistas
of intelligent design repeatedly swept me into cognitive ecstasy.
Though these experiences were amazing in their own right, the most
poignant aspect of today’s session for me was not the discovered di-
mensions of the universe themselves, but what my seeing and under-
standing them meant to the Consciousness I was with. It was so happy
to have someone to show its work to. I felt that it had been waiting
for billions of years for embodied consciousness to evolve to the point
that someone could at last see, understand, and appreciate what it
had accomplished.
I felt the loneliness of this Intelligence having created such a mas-
terpiece and having no one to appreciate its work, and I wept. I wept
for its isolation and in awe of the profound love that had accepted
this isolation as part of a greater plan. Behind creation, I felt a Love
of extraordinary proportions. All of existence is an expression of Love.
The intelligence of the universe’s design is equally matched by the
depth of Love that inspired it.
Somewhere in here I realized that I was not going to be able to take
back with me the knowledge I had gathered on this journey. The In-
telligence I was with also knew this, making our few hours of contact
all the more precious to it. There was nothing I was going to be able
to do with this knowledge, except experience
166
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

it now. My greatest service was simply to appreciate what I was see-
ing. It seemed extremely important to mirror existence back to its
Creator in loving appreciation. To see, to understand, and to appreci-
ate.11
In this type of experience we can get profound insights into the process
of creation and even feel the forces and impulses involved. We can sense
an impelling abundance of creative energy, immense love and compassion,
an irresistible artistic impulse, boundless curiosity, and a passion for exper-
imentation. This identification with the creative energy of the cosmos often
inspires a new attitude toward life and becomes the foundation for a new
understanding of existence. Most people feel exalted as they discover their
real cosmic status and gain an entirely new perspective on their daily
problems. Many leave behind all feelings of being victimized by their
everyday trials and tribulations, or even by such global problems as eco-
nomic strife and war, knowing that on another level they are active parti-
cipants in the creation of a universal drama.
Occasionally, people can have negative reactions to cosmic insights of
this kind. Some find it difficult to return to their everyday consciousnesses
and assume roles that seem trivial in light of what they have just experi-
enced. Others may feel disappointed because of a realization that as human
beings they are just actors in a predetermined cosmic play and they resist
awakening to that fact. Peoples’ reactions and insights to this experience
can range from feeling disappointed to feeling that they have an important
role to play in the continuing evolution of consciousness. There do not
seem to be simple answers to the questions that arise as a result of the ex-
perience of cosmic consciousness; ultimately the answer we get is that our
own individualized search for answers is an integral part of the evolution
of cosmic consciousness.
The experience of cosmic consciousness provides important insights for
deepening our understanding of the highest forms of creativity. The liter-
ature on creativity is filled with examples of extraordinary artistic, scientific,
philosophical, and religious inspiration that came from a transpersonal
source and that occurred in non-ordinary states of consciousness. Even the
shortest “flashes” of mystical insight often trigger extraordinary results.
The degree to which people participate in these moments of insight and
discovery vary greatly from one individual to another. In general, the
mechanisms involved fall into three large categories.
167
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

In the most superficial form of creative inspiration, the person struggles
for months or years with a difficult problem and is unable to find an answer.
Then, quite suddenly, unexpectedly, and often in a single burst, the person
finds his or her solution. This usually comes while that person is in a non-
ordinary state of consciousness—while dreaming, during a period of grave
physical exhaustion, in a hallucination caused by high fever, or during
meditation. The often quoted example of this is the case of Friedrich August
von Kekule, who had a sudden vision of the chemical formula for ben-
zene—an insight that gave birth to modern organic chemistry—while
gazing into his fireplace coals. Similarly, the Russian chemist Dimitri
Mendeleev envisioned his famous periodic table of elements while he was
lying in bed exhausted after a long struggle to categorize these elements
according to their atomic weight. A long series of similar situations includes
Niels Bohr’s planetary model of the atom, Heisenberg’s formulation of the
basic principles of quantum physics, and the discovery of chemical trans-
mission of neuronal impulses for which Otto Loewi received a Nobel Prize.
In a second form of creative inspiration, an idea may suddenly emerge
long before its time has come. In this case, we might experience an “inspir-
ational flash” from the transpersonal realm years or even centuries before
the development of a scientific base that would justify or make sense of it.
Examples of this are the atomistic theory of Leukippus and Democritus
twenty-four hundred years before modern physicists had developed the
technology for proving the existence of atoms, or the idea that life evolved
from the ocean, formulated by the Ionic philosopher Anaximander over
two thousand years before Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution. In recent
decades, after centuries of domination by Newtonian mechanics, scientific
understanding of time, space, and matter has converged with visions of
the universe expressed in Eastern religious texts that are thousands of years
old. This convergence of modern Western science and ancient Eastern
philosophy has been discussed by Fritjof Capra in his book The Tao of
Physics, as well as by other noted physicists. It is now generally accepted
in modern philosophy of science that intuitive insights of this kind represent
an integral and important part of the scientific exploration of nature.
The third and highest form of transpersonal inspiration is the Promethean
impulse. This occurs when the scientist, inventor, artist, philosopher, or
spiritual visionary has a sudden revelation during which he or she envisions
an entire product in a completed form. The fact that a genius draws from
transpersonal sources is reflected even in everyday
168
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

language when we refer to such extraordinary achievements as “Divine
Inspiration” or a “gift from God.” Perhaps the most famous example of
the Promethean impulse is Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity, whose
principles came to him in the form of kinesthetic sensations in his muscles.
Another example is Nicola Tesla’s construction of the first fully functioning
alternating current generator whose complete design appeared to him in
a vision. Tesla had similar visions from which he constructed working
models for wireless power transmission, solar generators, generators that
produce power from ocean waves, and finally a wide range of robotics.
The Promethean impulse even occurs in mathematics, a discipline we
usually associate with pure reason and logic. An outstanding example of
this is the eighteenth-century mathematician and astronomer Karl Friedrich
Gauss, who made many important contributions to the theory of numbers,
the geometry of curved surfaces, and to the application of mathematics to
electricity and magnetism. He was able to perform extremely complex
calculations almost instantly, and he described his scientific and mathem-
atical insights as coming to him with the speed of a lightning bolt—by
“God’s grace.” In more recent times, an uneducated young man by the
name of Srinivas Ramanujan, who had grown up in a small village in India,
astonished top-ranking mathematicians at Cambridge with his amazing
solutions of highly complex mathematical problems. According to
Ramanujan, a goddess whom he called Namagiri imparted this mathemat-
ical wisdom to him in a series of revelatory dreams.
Promethean inspiration is particularly common in the arts and religion.
The English poet William Blake said of his work Milton: “I have written
this poem from immediate dictation, twelve or sometimes twenty or thirty
lines at a time, without premeditation, and even against my will.” The
German writer Maria Rilke’s Sonnets to Orpheus were channeled in their
complete form and required no corrections. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
claimed that he often found his symphonies in his head, in their complete
and finished form, while Richard Wagner heard his music emanating from
his “inner ear” as he composed. Johannes Brahms captured the Promethean
inspiration very clearly in describing his creative process: “Straightaway
the ideas flow in upon me, directly from God, and not only do I see distinct
themes in my mind’s eye, but they are clothed in the right forms, harmonies,
and orchestration. Measure by measure the finished product is revealed
to me when I am in those rare inspired moods.” Even more explicit are the
words of Giacomo Puccini in his description of the process he experienced
in the writing of the opera Madame Butterfly: “The
169
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

music of this opera was dictated to me by God; I was merely instrumental
in putting it on paper and communicating it to the public.”12
The fates of nations and the lives of billions of people have been pro-
foundly affected by the divine illuminations of spiritual prophets. We have
only to remember the revelations of Buddha under the Bo tree, Moses on
Mount Sinai, Jesus in the desert, Paul on the road to Damascus, and Mo-
hammed during his visionary night journey for evidence of this. The sacred
scriptures of the great religions—the Vedas, the Torah, the Bible, the Kor-
an—are inspired writings that were channeled to their authors during non-
ordinary states of consciousness.
In light of the overwhelming evidence we have regarding visionary ex-
periences in virtually every area of life, it is remarkable to think that tradi-
tional Western science continues to ignore this crucial force in human his-
tory. The paradox is that René Descartes’ Discourse on Method, the book
that reformed the entire structure of Western knowledge and that provided
the foundations for modern science, came to its author in three visionary
dreams and a dream within a dream, which provided the key for interpret-
ing the larger dream. What an irony it is that the entire edifice of rational,
reductionist, positivist science, which today rejects “subjective knowledge”
was originally inspired by a revelation in a non-ordinary state of conscious-
ness!
The Supracosmic and Metacosmic Void
One of the most enigmatic of all transpersonal phenomena is the experience
of the Void, the encounter with primordial Emptiness, Nothingness, and
Silence. This extraordinary spiritual experience is of a highly paradoxical
nature. The Void exists beyond form of any kind. While being a source of
everything it cannot itself be derived from anything else. It is beyond space
and time. While we can perceive nothing concrete in the Void there is also
the profound sense that nothing is missing. This absolute emptiness is
simultaneously pregnant with all of existence since it contains everything
in a potential form.
The Void transcends all ordinary concepts of causality. People who have
experienced it become acutely aware of the fact that various forms can
emerge from this Void and take on an existence either in the phenomenal
world or as an archetype, and that they can do so without any apparent
cause or reason. While the idea that something could occur or take form
for no reason at all may seem incomprehensible to us from our everyday
170
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

state of consciousness, that same idea does not surprise us in the least when
we experience the Void. As in the quantum wave theories of modern
physics, the Void may be perceived as being made up of an infinite number
of “quanta,” that is, bits and pieces that make up complete sets of possibil-
ities for virtually anything to occur. By choosing a particular reality, that
reality is created in consciousness.
171
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


10
EXPERIENCES OF A PSYCHOID NATURE
The archetype when manifesting in a synchronistic phenomenon, is truly
awesome if not outright miraculous—an uncanny dweller on the threshold.
At once psychical and physical, it might be likened to the two-faced god
Janus. The two faces of the archetype are joined in the common head of
meaning.
—Stephan A. Holler, The Gnostic Jung
Of all the experiences in the transpersonal realm, those of a psychoid nature
represent the greatest challenge to our everyday perception of reality. The
term psychoid was first used by C. G. Jung in relation to archetypes of the
collective unconscious. Jung found that archetypes were shared by most
or all of humanity, and in this sense they were transindividual, that is, not
created by any one individual’s history or experience. However, he origin-
ally believed that they were inborn psychological predispositions, similar
to instincts, and thus had their representations in our brains.
In his original formulation, Jung also described the archetypes as operat-
ing within the psyche but not possessing consciousnesses independent of
us. Later, Jung revised his position. He came to believe that archetypes had
consciousnesses quite separate from our own, and were able to think and
act on their own. So they were not, in this view, like fictional characters
created and controlled by their authors. In Memories, Dreams, Reflections,
Jung himself described them as: “higher things than the ego’s will.” He
believed it was important to see them as beings that “I do not produce, but
which produce themselves and have their own life.” He revised his earlier
view of archetypes because it did not explain some of the important char-
acteristics
173

of archetypes, particularly as they related to the phenomenon Jung called
synchronicity. He observed that there were many instances when archetypes
interacted with events in the external world in ways that were meaningful
and coherent, suggesting relationships between inner and outer realities
that we cannot explain in terms of causality, which is one of the keys of
traditional Western science.
It was Jung’s recognition of phenomena that exist outside cause and effect
that led him to define synchronicity as an “acausal connecting principle.”
Meaningful coincidences between the inner world—the world of visions
and dreams—and the outer world of “objective reality” suggested to Jung
that the two worlds were not as clearly separated as we might think. He
began referring to archetypes as having a “psychoid” nature, that is they
belonged neither to the realm of the psyche nor to the realm of material
reality. Instead they existed within a strange twilight zone between con-
sciousness and matter.1
The blurring of boundaries between consciousness and matter challenges
everything we are taught in traditional Western thinking. From a very early
age we are urged by our parents, teachers, and religious leaders to draw
clear lines between the “subjective” and the “objective,” the “real” and the
“unreal,” the existent and the non-existent, or the tangible and the intan-
gible. However, a reality that is very similar to Jung’s acausal universe is
becoming recognized in modern science, notably in quantum-relativistic
physics. For this reason, the study of psychoid phenomena lies at the
frontiers of human knowledge. Unfortunately, a serious scientific approach
to this area is exceptionally difficult.
Not only does this category of experiences represent the most radical
challenge to the traditional scientific worldview, but by nature it is strangely
elusive and can have a capricious, almost trickster-like quality. This is fur-
ther confounded by the fact that many experiences that belong to this cat-
egory have been widely popularized in movies and novels. We have grown
accustomed to assigning the existence of ghosts, poltergeists, UFOs, and
psychokinesis to the imaginary world of horror movies and fictional stories.
This popularization, while encouraging us to think about such matters, at
least in an entertaining way, also has a tendency to trivialize, to condition
us to thinking of them as “only make-believe.”
Since Jung’s death, modern consciousness research and the study of non-
ordinary states have brought considerable support for his ideas concerning
psychoid phenomena. At this point there can be no doubt that this is an
area that deserves much more attention than it has received in the
174
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

past. In this chapter we explore several types of transpersonal experiences
that have psychoid characteristics. Their common denominator is that they
are more than products of fantasy and imagination, yet they may be missing
certain characteristics that would allow them to be defined as unequivocally
“real” in the everyday sense of the word. In the following discussion, I
apply the term psychoid in a way that extends beyond Jung’s use of this
word, which he originally reserved for archetypes.
As I will be using the term here, psychoid experiences can be divided
into three basic categories. The first category contains the most common
psychoid phenomena—synchronicities, in the Jungian sense. It is here that
we would place inner experiences that are synchronistic with events in the
material world. Neither the inner experiences nor the external events are
necessarily unusual in themselves; rather, it is the acausal link between
them that is striking. The existence of synchronicities of this kind suggests
that psyche and matter are not independent of one another but that they
can enter into playful interactions where boundaries between them fade
or dissolve altogether.
A second category represents an important step beyond the first. Here
we would place events in the external world that are associated with inner
experiences and that traditional science would deem impossible. Typical
examples of events that belong to this category include manifestations
witnessed by participants in spiritistic seances and the so-called Poltergeist
phenomena occurring around certain individuals. These two types of ex-
periences have been thoroughly researched by many outstanding parapsy-
chologists. Similarly, spiritual literature describes “supernatural luminosity”
around the bodies of certain saints, while modern athletes occasionally re-
port events that fall into the realm of the physically impossible. Another
phenomenon that belongs here is the twilight zone of UFO encounters,
which also has distinct psychoid features.
A third category is reserved for the forms of psychoid experiences where
mental activity is used to deliberately manipulate consensus reality. This
includes psychokinesis, ceremonial magic, healing and hexing by aboriginal
people, and supernatural feats of the yogis (called siddhis).
Synchronicity: Worlds Beyond Cause
Newtonian-Cartesian science describes the universe as an infinitely complex
system of mechanical events that are strictly deterministic, governed by
the principle of cause and effect. Every process in the world has its
175
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

specific causes and, in turn, causes other things to happen. In spite of the
uncomfortable paradox that it entails—the problem of defining the original
cause of all causes—this understanding of reality continues to be the basic
credo of traditional scientists. Thinking in causal terms has been so success-
ful in Western science that it has been hard to even imagine processes that
would not be subjected to the dictate of cause and effect—except, of course
the beginning of the universe itself.
Because of this deeply ingrained belief in causality as a central law of
nature, Jung hesitated for many years to publish his observations of events
that refused to fit into this mold. He postponed publication of his work on
this subject until he and others had collected literally hundreds of convin-
cing examples of synchronicity, making him absolutely sure that he had
something valid to report. In his famous work, Synchronicity: An Acausal
Connecting Principle, Jung expressed his view that rather than being an ab-
solute law of nature, causality is a statistical phenomenon. Furthermore,
he made the point that there are many instances where this “law” does not
apply.
Most of us have encountered strange coincidences that defy ordinary
explanation. The Austrian biologist Paul Kammerer, one of the first to be
interested in the scientific implications of this phenomenon, reported a
situation where his tram ticket bore the same number as the theater ticket
that he bought immediately afterward; later that evening the same sequence
of digits was given to him as a telephone number.2 The astronomer Flam-
marion cited an amusing story of a triple coincidence involving a certain
Mr. Deschamps and a special kind of plum pudding. As a boy, Deschamps
was given a piece of this pudding by a Mr. de Fortgibu. Ten years later, he
saw the same pudding on the menu of a Paris restaurant and asked the
waiter for a serving. However, it turned out that the last piece of the pud-
ding was already ordered—by Mr. de Fortgibu, who just happened to be
in the restaurant at that moment. Many years later, Mr. Deschamps was
invited to a party where this pudding was to be served as a special rarity.
While he was eating it, he remarked that the only thing lacking was Mr.
de Fortgibu. At that moment the door opened and an old man walked in.
It was Mr. de Fortgibu who burst in on the party by mistake because he
had been given a wrong address for the place he was supposed to go.3
As interesting as the collections of similar events might have been, Jung
was primarily interested in those coincidences where various external
events were meaningfully connected with inner experiences. This was the
variety of apparent coincidences that he referred to as synchronicities;
176
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

these involve a “simultaneous occurrence of a psychic state with one or
more external events which appear as meaningful parallels to the moment-
ary subjective state.” Among the many instances of synchronicity in Jung’s
own life, one is particularly famous; it occurred during a therapy session
with one of his patients. This patient was very resistant to treatment and
up to the time of this particular event little or no progress had been made.
She had a dream in which she was given a golden scarab. During the ana-
lysis of this dream Jung heard a sound at the window. Upon opening it he
found a scarab-like rose-chafer beetle on the windowsill trying to get inside.
It was a very rare specimen, the nearest analogy to a golden scarab that
can be found in that latitude. Nothing like that had ever happened to Jung
before. He opened the window, brought the beetle inside, and showed it
to the client. This amazing synchronicity had a profound impact on her
process and marked the beginning of a psychological renewal.4
My wife and I have both observed many extraordinary synchronicities
in our work and have experienced them repeatedly in our own lives outside
our work. One in particular is still vivid in my memory. As I have men-
tioned elsewhere, my wife, Christina, went through a psychospiritual crisis
that lasted twelve years and involved spontaneously occurring episodes
of non-ordinary states of consciousness. At a certain period, one particular
symbol appeared repeatedly in her visions: a white swan. In the evening
after a day when she had a particularly significant experience involving
the vision of the swan, we both participated in a shamanic session with
anthropologist-shaman Michael Harner, whom we were hosting at our
month-long seminar at the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California. Michael
was staging a healing ceremony of the Salish Indians involving a “spirit
canoe.” In this ceremony the shaman goes on a visionary trip to the under-
world to retrieve the soul of a client who has come to him for help. During
this inner journey the shaman has three encounters with an animal, which
is thereafter identified as the client’s guardian spirit or power animal. In
this particular session, Christina volunteered to be the client. Michael went
on his visionary journey to the underworld, and when he returned he
whispered into Christina’s ear: “Your spirit animal is a white swan.” After
this she danced the swan dance in front of the group.
It is important to note here that Michael Harner had no prior knowledge
of Christina’s inner processes nor did he know of her previous visions of
the swan. The next day, Christina received a letter from a person who had
attended a workshop we had given several months before. She opened it
and found a photograph of her spiritual teacher Swami Muktananda. In
177
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

the photo he was sitting in a garden near a large flower pot shaped like a
white swan; he had a mischievous expression on his face and his right
thumb and index finger were held together forming the universal “okay”
sign, indicating approval. Although there were no causal connections
between any of these events, they clearly formed a meaningful psycholo-
gical pattern.
Synchronistic events such as these can be linked with many other forms
of transpersonal experiences and occasionally also with perinatal sequences.
Time and time again I have seen highly improbable accumulations of
mishaps and accidents in the lives of people who in their inner processes
were approaching the experience of ego death. As they completed this
process and experienced spiritual rebirth, these threats ceased, almost as
if by magic. As Christina’s experience illustrates, when a person connects
with an animal spirit guide through shamanic or other inner work, this
animal tends to appear again and again in that person’s life. Similarly, at
the time of inner confrontation with archetypal images such as the Animus,
the Anima, the Great Mother Goddess, the Goddess of Love, and others,
we frequently find ourselves coming into contact with people in our
everyday lives who ideally represent these archetypes. When this occurs,
the only cause we can find for these synchronicities is the capricious inter-
play between our inner worlds and the physical world outside us.
The concept of synchronicity has important implications for the practice
of psychotherapy. In a mechanical universe where everything is linked by
cause and effect, there is no place for “meaningful coincidences” in the
Jungian sense. In the practice of traditional psychiatry, when a person
perceives meaningful coincidences, he or she is, at best, diagnosed as pro-
jecting special meaning into purely accidental events; at worst he or she is
diagnosed as suffering from hallucinations or delusions. Traditional psy-
chiatrists either do not know about the existence of true synchronicities or
they prefer to ignore the concept. As a result they may wrongly diagnose
“meaningful coincidences” as the result of serious pathology (delusions of
reference). In many cases of spiritual emergencies, where valid synchron-
icities were reported, people have all too often been hospitalized unneces-
sarily. Had those experiences been correctly understood and treated as
manifestations of psycho-spiritual crisis those same people might have
been quickly helped through approaches supporting spiritual emergence,
rather than undergoing all the problems that unnecessary hospitalization
entails.
Jung himself was fully aware of the fact that the concept of synchronicity
was incompatible with traditional science and he followed with great
178
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

interest the revolutionary new worldview that was emerging from devel-
opments in modern physics. He maintained a friendship with Wolfgang
Pauli, one of the founders of quantum physics, and the two of them had a
very fruitful exchange of ideas. Similarly, in personal communications
between Jung and Albert Einstein, the latter explicitly encouraged him to
pursue the concept of synchronicity because it was fully compatible with
the new thinking in physics.5 Sadly, however, mainstream psychologists
and psychiatrists have still not caught up with the revolutionary develop-
ments in modern physics and Jungian psychology.
Pushing Past the Boundaries of Material Reality
Many experiences in the psychoid realm involve physical events in the
external world that seem to violate what we believe to be the laws of nature.
These events can be limited to the perception of one person or observed
by many, and thus they have the usual characteristics of consensus reality.
Traditional psychiatry has been aware of the existence of such situations
but it unfortunately relegates them to the realm of pathology.
In psychiatry, a reality that does not conform to the Newtonian-Cartesian
worldview but that is nevertheless shared by two people, is labeled a folie
a deux—meaning, in effect, a craziness shared by two people. When an
entire family shares a reality that seems to violate the beliefs of Newtonian-
Cartesian science, as was the case with C. G. Jung’s experiences that led to
his Seven Sermons for the Dead, the corresponding traditional term is folie a
famille. When large numbers of people are similarly involved, their collective
experience is called “mass hallucination.” However, closer examination
shows that the phenomena so labeled may deserve serious attention and
should not be discarded quite so easily. They have been observed and re-
corded throughout the ages in many different parts of the world. Deeper
understanding of the mechanisms involved could radically change our
view of reality.
Some psychoid phenomena involve dramatic changes of the human body
and its functions. Religious and mystical literature abounds with descrip-
tions of spectacular physiological changes in people as they experienced
transpersonal states of consciousness. For example, people in the presence
of saints and spiritual teachers such as St. Ignatius of Loyola or Sri Ramana
Maharishi, frequently described how their physical bodies took on an ex-
traordinary luminosity. Similarly, it has been documented many times over
that certain Christian mystics and contemplatives while in ecstatic
179
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

raptures wherein they transpersonally identified with Jesus Christ, have
manifest bleeding wounds (stigmata) on their hands and feet, apparent
lance wounds in their abdomens, or puncture marks around the crowns
of their heads, where Christ wore his crown of thorns. It is generally thought
that St. Francis of Assisi was the first to exhibit these changes; since his
time, over 300 stigmatics are known to have borne these marks of crucifix-
ion. Related to stigmata is the “token of espousal,” a ring-shaped ridge of
flesh that forms around the finger of certain nuns as a symbol of betrothal
to Christ.
Another physical manifestation that can accompany transpersonal states
of consciousness is extreme body heat. In the Christian literature, this is
called the Fire of Love (incendium amoris); the most famous modern case is
that of Padre Pio of Foggia, Italy, whose doctors occasionally found his
temperature to be 112 degrees Fahrenheit. In the Sufi tradition, this same
phenomenon is known as the “Fire of Separation”; in Tibetan Buddhism
as Tum-mo, the “Inner Fire.” There are documented cases involving extreme
forms of this phenomenon, in which the person explodes or bursts into
flames, apparently through some form of spontaneous combustion. Equally
incredible are reports involving the capacity of certain re-nunciates to live
without food. A close friend of ours, the late Tantric scholar Ajit Mookerjee,
told us that he was personally acquainted with Himalayan hermits who
did not need any food whatsoever, who lived on—of all things!—a few
drops of mercury each year.
According to the Tibetan literature, backed up by reports of Tibetan
teachers with whom we have had extensive personal contact, the bodies
of masters involved in certain secret practices actually dematerialize follow-
ing their physical deaths. This contrasts with reports about the apparent
incorruptibility of the bodies of other saints, such as St. Bernadette of
Lourdes and Paramahansa Yogananda, that allegedly did not decompose.
Another phenomenon that stretches the credulity of educated Westerners,
but which has been repeatedly mentioned in spiritual literature, is the act
of levitation. It has been described by personal witnesses who observed
certain Christian saints, including St. Teresa of Avila, various Indian yogis,
and Tibetan lamas, as well as mediums such as Daniel Douglas Home and
Eusapia Palladino. Although I have not personally witnessed any of the
extreme phenomena described here, I keep an open mind because these
events have been reported repeatedly by credible witnesses and they are
closely related to occurrences that I have observed first hand in my work.
Michael Murphy’s book The Future of the Body offers an
180
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

amazing review of meticulously documented supernormal occurrences
throughout the ages.
The Psychic Side of Sports
In modern life, extraordinary events of the kind described above occur
most often where one might least expect them—in sports. We tend to attrib-
ute stellar performances in various athletic activities to a combination of
inborn disposition, psychological perseverance, and down-to-earth physical
training. However, the inside story, from some of the world’s greatest
athletes, reveals that the players themselves often see it quite differently.
Many report that at the time of their peak performances they were in states
that resembled mystical rapture. Their experience in the psychoid realm,
such as the radical alteration of time and space, to them bordered on the
miraculous. The book The Psychic Side of Sports, by Michael Murphy and
Rhea White, is a gold mine of just such examples, reported by athletes in
virtually every sport. Moreover, Murphy and White’s research uncovered
many instances in which the extraordinary inner experiences of the athletes
were matched by corresponding perceptions of the onlookers.
Football players, race car drivers, Olympic divers, and others have de-
scribed an extreme slowing of subjective time, so that they felt they had all
the time in the world to perform what they had to do. Golfers, football
players, ocean divers, sky divers, and mountain climbers reported drastic
changes in body image; sometimes these changes were perceived by on-
lookers as actual changes in body shape and size. Football players have
described how they seemed to have penetrated the solid wall of a defensive
line by dematerializing and rematerializing on the other side. Runners felt
inexhaustible sources of energy and had a sense of moving without real
effort and without actually touching the ground. The great soccer player
Pele confided that on a day when everything was going right, he felt a
strange calmness, euphoria, and endless energy. He was absolutely confid-
ent that he could dribble through the opponent’s defense and pass through
them physically. Scores of reliable witnesses have testified that Morehei
Uyeshiba, the inventor of aikido, appeared to transcend physical laws when
he demonstrated his abilities. Facing as many as six attackers with knives,
who were well-trained in martial arts, he appeared to change his shape
and size and was able to disappear for instants, then reappear in other
places. Some of these feats are evident in a documentary movie showing
his artistry; his followers swear the film was never edited or in any way
tampered with, though
181
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

the master at times seems to disappear before our eyes as if photographic
tricks are involved. Witnesses to the actual filming reported experiencing
the same miraculous events that the film recorded.
The World of Parapsychology: Science, Fraud, and Fiction
Another large category of psychoid experiences, traditionally studied by
parapsychologists, is that of spiritistic manifestations and Poltergeist phe-
nomena. We have already explored transpersonal experiences that involve
discarnate entities and spirits. These are often associated with various
physical events that are synchronistic with inner events, or that can be ob-
served and confirmed by numbers of people. Thus, for example, certain
places in the world are considered “haunted” because many visitors to that
place independently experience the same kinds of unusual events.
In various spiritistic seances participants often shared certain strange
experiences, such as raps and bangs on walls and floors, touches from in-
visible hands, voices speaking from nowhere, the playing of musical instru-
ments, and gusts of cold air. In some cases, this also involved apparitions
of deceased persons or voices of such persons coming through the medium.
In certain cases, participants were able to witness telekinesis and material-
izations, levitation of objects and people, movement of objects through the
air, manifestation of ectoplasmic formations, and the appearance of writings
or small objects without explanation (so-called apports). The famous
American parapsychologist R. B. Rhine called this “physical mediumship.”
Such events were particularly frequent in the seances with certain mediums,
such as Eusapia Palladino and Daniel Douglas Home. These sessions were
repeatedly studied by teams of experienced researchers.
There is no question that at the time when spiritism enjoyed its greatest
popularity, around the turn of the century, many participants were victims
of cunning swindlers. Even famous mediums, including Eusapia Palladino,
were occasionally caught cheating. However, we should not throw the
baby out with the bathwater and conclude that this entire area is nothing
but fraud. It is difficult to imagine that so many outstanding researchers
would have invested so much time and energy in a field with no real phe-
nomena to observe. There exists hardly any other realm where the expert
testimony of so many witnesses of the highest caliber has been discounted
as stupidity and gullibility and thus written off. We have to realize that
among serious researchers were many people with outstanding credentials,
such as, the famous physicist Sir William Crookes, the Nobel Prize-
182
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

winning physician and physiologist Charles Richet, and Sir Oliver Lodge,
a Fellow of the Royal Society in England.
The Tapping Sprite
Another interesting phenomenon studied by the parapsychologists has
been popularized by Hollywood in recent years. It is the phenomenon
known by its German name Poltergeist, meaning “the tapping sprite”; the
technical term for it is recurrent spontaneous psychokinesis (RSPK). RSPK
refers to a wide range of bizarre events that can start happening spontan-
eously and for which there is no reasonable explanation. Objects are seen
flying through the air, catching on fire, or falling and breaking. Articles are
mysteriously teleported in and out of locked rooms and closed drawers or
cabinets. An entire room or building can be filled with sounds such as raps,
bangs, scratching, whistling, or even human voices. Investigations of Pol-
tergeist cases typically result in the discovery of one person, often an ad-
olescent, who seems to be the source of the unusual events. When a conflict
with that person is resolved, or the person is removed from the vicinity,
the Poltergeist phenomena tend to cease.
It is interesting to note that patterns of psychoid manifestations seem to
be changing with time. While physical mediumship has virtually disap-
peared in modern times, Poltergeist cases continue to be recorded and
studied by highly credible parapsychological researchers of our times. In
the past, the person causing Poltergeist phenomena was usually found to
be a young woman whose average age was sixteen; present day phenomena
of this kind reveals both sexes to be equally implicated, with the average
age having risen to twenty.
Aware of the extremely controversial nature of recurrent spontaneous
psychokinesis, the best investigators have subjected their cases to unusually
meticulous scrutiny. Probably the most extensive research in this area has
been conducted in Germany, at the Institute for the Study of the Frontiers
of Psychology and Psychohygiene, under the meticulous direction of Hans
Bender.
One of the best documented cases of RSPK is one that was witnessed by
over forty people, most of them highly qualified technicians, physicists,
and other professionals. The Poltergeist events began in November 1967
at a law office in the Bavarian town of Rosenheim. It started as problems
with the lighting fixtures that could not be explained or corrected by trained
electricians. There were reports of loud sounds from unknown sources, of
183
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

copy machine breaking down, and of the entire office phone system mal-
functioning. Telephone monitoring devices were registering calls that were
never made and the company’s telephone bill skyrocketed. Pictures on the
walls moved spontaneously, often a full 360 degrees. Fluorescent tubes fell
from ceiling fixtures, endangering employees.
Investigators included highly qualified physicists who were unable to
identify the causes of the problems. They concluded, for example, that for
the phone calls that had been registered to have been placed without the
usual mechanical movements of the phone dials, it would require almost
supernatural intelligence and technical knowledge, as well as the ability
to judge time intervals in the range of milliseconds. Technicians replaced
the fluorescent tubes with incandescent fixtures only to have bulbs explode
in the latter. The disturbances became such a serious threat for the staff
and clients that the law firm filed a suit with the criminal court against
“Unknown Precipitators,” thus protecting themselves from possible suits.
Hans Bender was eventually able to trace the disturbances to a nineteen-
year-old girl, Annemarie, an employee of the firm who had a strong emo-
tional interest in her boss. When she was transferred to another job, the
phenomena immediately ceased.6
The elusive nature of psychoid phenomena and the problems inherent
in their study are illustrated in another famous Poltergeist case investigated
in 1967 by the American researchers William Roll and Gaither Pratt. This
case involved a nineteen-year-old bookkeeper. In connection with his job,
this young man had to go regularly to a warehouse. Whenever he went
there, objects flew off the shelves, some of them more frequently than others.
The researchers were able to arrange experimental situations, wherein they
could observe the objects moving. On many occasions, at least one of them
had his eyes on the young man when the objects were moving. However,
at no time were they able to see the objects at the exact moment they were
falling; they fell either immediately before they intended to watch or imme-
diately after they had been doing so. One can speculate from this that the
same consciousness source that moved the objects was also aware of the
intentions of the observers; anticipating their actions in ways that were
quite extraordinary.
Unidentified Flying Objects
Among the most controversial psychoid experiences in modern times we
must include UFOs. Since 1947 when they were first reported by civilian
184
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

pilot Kenneth Arnold near Mount Rainier, countless people have reported
seeing UFOs throughout the world. Some reported sighting them in the
light of day, while others reported strange lights in the dark of night. Some
have claimed to observe the landings of alien spacecrafts. Others have
spoken of interacting with aliens or being taken aboard spacecraft where
they underwent scientific investigation.
Public interest in UFO reports was sufficient to prompt the U.S. Air Force
to undertake extensive studies, headed by a special committee at the Uni-
versity of Columbia. The conclusion of these studies was negative, attrib-
uting most UFO reports to people with mental disorders or to “misinter-
pretations” of easily explained causes, such as weather balloons, meteors,
flocks of birds, and unusual light reflections. This research failed to satisfy
serious researchers or the public. Government records attest to the fact that
the main goal of these studies was to prevent public panic at the possibility
of visitation by extraterrestrials. Other material shows that the Air Force
has, on occasion, started its own UFO rumors to cover up crashes of top-
secret experimental spacecraft of their own.
While many sightings of UFOs have been shown to be hoaxes, misper-
ceptions of more easily explained events, or cover-ups of secret research,
there continue to be sightings by people who are reliable witnesses—well
educated, highly trained, emotionally stable, intelligent, and articulate.
There are enough reports such as these to convince us that the UFO contro-
versy is far from being closed and that it deserves further research.
Discussion in this area is usually limited to the question of whether or
not our planet has been visited by actual physical spacecraft from other
parts of the universe. However, it seems that the situation is more complic-
ated than that. Many UFO experiences seem to have a psychoid quality,
meaning that they are not merely hallucinations, nor are they “real” in the
ordinary sense of the word. It is quite possible that they represent strange
hybrid phenomena, combining elements of mental life and the physical
world. This would, of course, make these experiences extremely difficult
to study by traditional scientific methods, which depend on sharp distinc-
tions between real and unreal or material and psychological events. A
comprehensive study of these possibilities would have to involve a simul-
taneous examination of both physical evidence and the psychological per-
spectives that have emerged from modern consciousness research and the
new physics.
As we have previously noted, encounters with alien beings, visions of
physical or metaphysical spacecrafts, and extraterrestrial journeying have
185
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

been reported throughout history. C. G. Jung, who was very interested in
UFOs wrote a fascinating book entitled Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of
Things Seen in the Skies. This work was based on careful historical analysis
of legends about flying discs and apparitions throughout the ages, many
of which caused mass hysteria. He came to the conclusion that the UFO
phenomena might be archetypal visions originating in the collective uncon-
scious.
The majority of UFO sightings are associated with visions of lights with
supernatural radiance, similar to mystical raptures. The descriptions of the
extraterrestrial visitors, alien cities, and spacecrafts certainly have parallels
in world mythology and thus could easily be explained as belonging to the
collective unconscious. However, that is only one aspect of the story. What
interests us in our present context is the fact that in many instances UFOs
have left physical evidence behind, thus relegating them to consensus
reality. It is this aspect that gives modern UFO phenomena a clear psychoid
quality. The nature of the evidence is often ambiguous and is thus left open
to a variety of interpretations. However, this capricious, almost trickster-
like quality of some UFO sightings seems to be characteristic for psychoid
phenomena, rather than being an argument against their existence.
Many readers will remember a report, some years ago, of the UFO
sightings by the captain and crew of a Japanese jumbo jet over Alaska. The
entire crew saw a spaceship following them. At exactly the same time, a
ground-based radar station registered an unidentified object in the location
indicated by the crew. Later, when this sensational news made headlines
all over the world, the embarrassed radar operator changed his report and
announced that closer scrutiny revealed the image of the unidentified flying
object to be a technical artifact. This strange error of an expert operator and
its uncanny synchronicity with the sighting by a trained crew is character-
istic of psychoid events. The confusion surrounding UFOs is also reflected
in the approach of the news media, including the Soviet news agency
“Tass,” that alternates between reporting sightings and debunking them.
The controversial physical evidence for the existence of UFOs includes
impressions in the ground, burnt soil at reported landing sites, materials
that cannot be identified by chemical analysis, photographs and amateur
movies, stigmata-like marks on the bodies of people who have reportedly
been abducted, mysterious cattle mutilations, and others.
In comparing reports from people who claim to have been abducted by
UFOs, there has been astonishing agreement in the abductees’ descriptions
186
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

of the alien life forms and certain symbols encountered during the contacts.
Rather remarkable similarities have been discovered, even in abduction
reports where the people involved had no knowledge of or interest in UFOs
before their abductions. In follow-up research, people who have experienced
close encounters have been hypnotized and examined by psychiatrists.
The hypnosis has been used to clear the amnesia that many abductees seem
to suffer. In many instances, independent reports of several witnesses to
the same event fully concurred and were congruent with each other.
One of the best documented cases of this kind is the study of the Andre-
asson family described in Raymond Fowler’s book The Andreasson Affair.
The investigation was conducted at the recommendation of the late UFO
expert Dr. Allen Hynek. An investigative team was assembled that included
Raymond Fowler, former member of the Security Service of the U.S. Air
Force and Dr. Harold Edelstein, director of the New England Institute of
Hypnosis. The comprehensive inquiry employed regressive hypnosis,
psychiatric examinations, character checks, analysis of weather reports,
and electronic stress analysis tests (lie detector tests). The investigators
compared independent reports of the principal protagonist, Betty Andre-
asson, her eldest daughter Becky, and several other family members. The
conclusion of the 528-page report that was the result of this investigation
was that the witnesses were telling the truth about their experiences.
According to the report, the UFO sighting occurred on a dark January
night in 1967. At that time a pulsating light enveloped the backyard of the
Andreasson house. Several three-foot tall humanoid creatures with outsized
pear-shaped heads, mongoloid features, and large wraparound catlike eyes
entered the house. After a brief telepathic exchange, Betty was transported
by a suction mechanism to the inside of the spaceship. There she was sub-
jected to a painful examination that included insertion of long silver needles
into her nostrils and her peritoneal cavity. Later, she was taken to an alien
world with strange architecture and landscape. The culmination of this
experience was an encounter with a giant archetypal figure of a bird sur-
rounded by flames, resembling the legendary phoenix. One particularly
interesting aspect of the report is that Betty had artistic skills and was able
to produce drawings depicting the aliens, the interior of the spaceship,
structures in the alien world, and the phoenix that she saw.7
Jacques Vallée, a trained astrophysicist and UFO researcher, has been
studying and writing about this subject for nearly two decades. His own
187
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

opinion about the nature of these phenomena has evolved out of his own
first-hand experiences, beginning with a sighting at an observatory in
France where he was employed at the time, his examination of photos by
others, and his own interviews with people who have reported close en-
counters. His conclusions support a belief that most UFO sightings conform
to what we are here calling psychoid experiences.
Based on many years of intensive research, Vallée has recently concluded
that at least some UFOs have a physical reality but these are simultaneously
tied in with unusual inner experiences on the part of those who report the
sightings. He concludes that the spaceships come from “other dimensions”
of space and time that coexist with our own universe and may not be “ex-
traterrestrial” in the usual sense of the word. Vallée speculates that the
alien intelligences that produce and control the UFOs might be able to
manipulate space and time in ways that are completely beyond our present
ability to even imagine. It is possible that the observer’s state of conscious-
ness makes it possible for the UFOs to enter his or her dimension of space
and time and become visible. However, the UFOs are not products of the
observer’s imagination; like Jung’s spirit guides they exist quite independent
of our consciousnesses. In other words, rather than being fabrications of
our own imaginations, the “extraterrestrials” are using our consciousnesses
as doorways into our everyday level of reality.
In the study of UFO phenomena even the most serious researchers are
confronted with investigative problems that perhaps have no solutions in
our present state of knowledge. First of all, based on our present knowledge
it seems highly unlikely that intelligent life exists on other planets in our
solar system; thus, extraterrestrials would have to be coming from distances
of many light years away. They would have to be in command of a techno-
logy that we can not even imagine. Either their spaceships would have to
achieve velocities greater than the speed of light (transluminal travel), or
they would have to be able to escape the dimensions of space-time as we
know it and travel through hyperspace, or they would have to come from
other dimensions of time and space altogether(interdimensional travel). If
there exists a civilization out in space that commands such control of the
universe, we might also assume that they would have the technology to
use both individual and transpersonal consciousnesses in ways completely
unknown to us. If all this were true, it is quite possible that their visits to
our own dimensions of reality would very likely appear to us as fantasies,
archetypal occurrences, or visionary experiences. We could even assume
that if they have reason to mask their visitations they have the technology
188
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

to exploit humans’ deliberate efforts to perpetuate UFO hoaxes to create
confusion or disbelief.
All this poses a fascinating problem for us. If UFOs do exist and are the
products of the advanced technology we describe here, we are brought
face to face with the convergence of two areas that we have always viewed
as polar opposites: the rational world of advanced technology and the irra-
tional world of fantasy. From our present vantage point we would no longer
be able to distinguish between the two. Interplanetary travel of this scope
would indicate the ultimate triumph of rationality and science—an aston-
ishing achievement for any intelligent life form. At the same time, however,
we would experience the results of this achievement as phenomena that
we usually associate with the world of the magical and mythical—the pre-
rational thought processes of primitive cultures, the creative imaginations
of artists, and the hallucinations of the insane. It would seem that in these
experiences a circle is closing where consciousness, having reached the
ultimate frontier of material evolution, is returning to its primal source.
Mind Over Matter: Intentional Psychokinesis
With some psychoid phenomena, changes in consensus reality appear to
be the result of the conscious intention of individuals, or groups of indi-
viduals, to manipulate events in the physical world. It is important to em-
phasize that this form of psychoid phenomena called “intentional psychokin-
esis” operates with no physical intervention; instead, physical changes occur
simply by wishing them to happen, or sometimes by performing symbolic
or ritualistic acts that have no commonly understood causal relationship
with the outcome. Ritual activities aimed at influencing external events
have been conducted in pre-industrial cultures for centuries, and descrip-
tions of mind over matter phenomena abound in spiritual and occult liter-
ature of all times. However, the potential for human consciousness to dir-
ectly influence matter has been refuted and systematically debunked by
traditional science—in spite of significant supportive evidence from modern
parapsychological research and from quantum physics.
Anthropologists and Ceremonial Magic
Anthropologists studying aboriginal cultures have observed and described
elaborate ceremonies for bringing rain, ensuring successful hunts or good
189
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

harvest, and for achieving other practical ends. These anthropologists often
expressed puzzlement when they found that these peoples exhibited
“double logic”; they showed high intelligence, knowledge, and ingenuity
in hunting, fishing, or agriculture, yet they felt the necessity for conducting
rituals that seemed to Westerners to be unnecessary, superstitious, and
childish. Only those who had sufficient exposure to non-ordinary states of
consciousness understand that this “double logic” is related to two different
levels of reality: making tools and learning specific skills applies to the
material world, while ceremonial life acknowledges and addresses the ar-
chetypal dynamics of the transpersonal realm. The nature of these two
domains and their mutual interrelationships is far from being clearly un-
derstood by modern science, in spite of concerted efforts by both scientists
and philosophers. In his book The Passion of the Western Mind, Richard
Tarnas amassed convincing evidence that this problem has been the main
focus of European philosophy for the last two and a half thousand years.
The idea of drumming, chanting, and dancing to make rain seems at first
glance preposterous to most Westerners. Yet those of us who have actually
had first-hand experiences with such rituals have been repeatedly amazed
by the results. The late Joseph Campbell, a man of superior intelligence
and education, often told a story about his attendance at a Native American
rain ceremony in the Southwest United States. When the ceremony began,
he felt amused and somewhat cynical, as the sky was clear and blue and
there was not a single cloud in sight. To his amazement, during the cere-
mony heavy clouds covered the entire sky and the day ended with a
cloudburst. The Indians did not seem to be at all surprised; because of their
past experiences with such rituals, they expected the ceremony to be suc-
cessful.
During a two-year period of catastrophic drought in California, my wife
and I conducted a month long seminar at the Esalen Institute at Big Sur.
At the request of the group, the centenarian Huichol shaman Don Jose
Matsuwa from Mexico, who was among our guest faculty, agreed to conduct
a rain ceremony. At the conclusion of the all night ritual it started to drizzle.
We were astounded by this unexpected outcome, but Don Jose did not
show any signs of surprise. He smiled and said: “It is kupuri (the blessing
of the gods); it always happens.” As we walked down to the ocean to do
the final offering, the drizzle developed into a heavy downpour that lasted
six hours. This does not necessarily mean that Don Jose caused the rain,
but similar strange synchronicities must accompany a substantial number
of such ceremonies. It is unthinkable that so many cultures would continue
190
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

conducting rain ceremonies for centuries without some statistically signi-
ficant success rate. It would also be difficult for a shaman to maintain his
or her reputation for a very long time against a series of failures.
The same is true for spiritual healing. Western professionals usually do
not take seriously anthropological reports about the therapeutic successes
of healing ceremonies and practices conducted in pre-industrial cultures.
They attribute alleged improvements to magical thinking, suggestion, and
the gullibility of the natives. However, controlled comparative studies of
the therapeutic effects of Western medicine and various indigenous healing
ceremonies have brought some interesting results. For example, in the
southern United States, particularly in Florida, studies of Cuban and other
Latin American immigrants have shown that ancient Caribbean healing
systems produced, in many cases, better results than Western psychiatry
and medicine. In addition, the curanderos (shamanic healers) seemed to
know the limits of the indigenous healing procedures and referred clients
with certain kinds of problems to American physicians.
Although one might expect successful results only in people with emo-
tional and psychosomatic disorders, some spiritual approaches seem to
extend to serious medical problems. I have had close personal contact with
researchers who clearly possessed good academic credentials—people like
Walter Pahnke, Andrija Puharich, and Stanley Krippner—who studied and
recorded on film the work of psychic surgeons in Brazil and the Philippines
and were deeply impressed by what they saw. The uneducated Brazilian
peasant Arrigo, also called the “surgeon of the rusty knife,” performed
hundreds of successful operations daily without disinfection and anesthesia,
closing incisions simply by bringing together the edges of the wounds with
his fingers. While operating or prescribing medicines, of which he had no
intellectual knowledge, he felt guided by the spirit of “Fritz,” a deceased
German doctor from Heidelberg.
Tony Agpoa and other psychic surgeons in the Philippines have been
known to conduct surgical interventions without instruments of any kind,
simply reaching into a person’s body with their hands. These operations
have been witnessed by many people at a time and they have been re-
peatedly filmed. Detailed frame-by-frame studies of the films revealed no
sleight of hand or fraud. In some instances, successful results were con-
firmed by university hospitals, including a case of a tumor of the pituitary
gland in a person I know. At the same time, in full accord with the trickster
nature of psychoid phenomena, laboratory analysis of tissue samples al-
legedly removed from people’s bodies during these operations showed
191
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

them to be from animals. The fact that documented healings have occurred
in this field suggest, if nothing else, that there are links between conscious-
ness and the physical world that we have only begun to explore and under-
stand.
On the opposite end of the scale, the negative effects of hexing and
“casting spells” have been documented by anthropologists and Western-
trained physicians. It is well known among anthropologists, for example,
that individuals in native cultures who are hexed by witchdoctors tend to
get seriously sick or even die. There have been cases where people hexed
in this way died in spite of being removed from their cultural milieu and
placed into Western hospitals. Some of these cases have been published in
Australia and Africa, where native and Western influences intermingle.
One Western researcher, Walter B. Cannon, who has received world-wide
attention for his pioneering studies of stress, discussed and accepted as
worthy of serious research the fact that serious disease and even death can
be produced by hexing or through other purely psychological processes.
Probably the most interesting report involving hexing was published in
the Johns Hopkins Medical Journal in the late 1960s. The article described a
young woman from Florida who had been hexed at her birth by her mid-
wife. On the day of this woman’s birth the midwife had delivered three
girls and predicted they would all die before reaching their nineteenth,
twenty-first, and twenty-third birthdays, respectively. When the first young
woman actually died in a car accident before reaching her birthday as
predicted, the second one spent the day before her twenty-first birthday
locked in her home to be absolutely safe. In the evening, reassured that she
was safe, she went to a bar to celebrate. She was accidentally killed by a
ricocheting bullet. Scared by the uncanny fulfillment of the first two
prophecies, the third woman began feeling ill; she was admitted to the
Johns Hopkins university hospital. There she died before her twenty-third
birthday in spite of all the effort of the staff to save her life; the autopsy
failed to show sufficient medical justification for her death.
Another interesting phenomenon documented by anthropologists is the
apparent invulnerability of participants in certain kinds of trance states.
For example, a movie shot by Elda Hartley in Bali shows ecstatics rolling
in piles of broken glass and climbing ladders with sharp swords for rungs
without suffering any harm to their bodies.8 I took part in a Brazilian um-
banda ceremony in Rio de Janeiro in which participants consumed several
quarts of hard liquor (aquavit) while they experienced possession by the
deities and showed absolutely no signs of drunkenness when, minutes
later, they
192
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

came out of the trance. This is one of the things that regularly happens in
voodoo-type rituals in South America and the Caribbean. Phenomena
similar to those described above have been observed in many other cultures
throughout the world.
In recent years, one phenomenon of this kind has been demythologized
for the Western mind. Descriptions of ceremonies in which participants
walked barefoot across several yards of glowing embers, with temperatures
reaching 1200 to 1400 degrees Fahrenheit, were once debunked in the West
as unsubstantiated fairy tales. However, in the late 1980s firewalking was
brought to the United States from Indonesia and quickly became a New
Age fad. Since that time, tens of thousands of people in this country have
been able to replicate this feat and burns of any kind have been exceptions
rather than the rule. Whether or not firewalking can be explained naturally,
this example clearly indicates that our culture’s understanding about what
is and is not possible has plenty of room for expansion.
Supernatural Feats of the Yogis
Oriental spiritual literature, particularly Hindu, Buddhist, and Taoist,
suggests that in advanced stages of their spiritual practice adepts often
develop extraordinary abilities, some of them clearly belonging to the realm
of the supernatural and miraculous. Among these capacities is an extraor-
dinary mastery of physiological functions that are normally governed by
the autonomic nervous system and believed by Western neurophysiologists
to be quite beyond our conscious control. Indian yogis have been able to
interrupt arterial and venous bleeding, stop their hearts, live without food,
and even survive without oxygen. Himalayan hermits have been able to
meditate for prolonged periods of time while sitting naked in ice and snow.
The Tibetan Tantric exercise known as Tum-mo can produce within a short
time span an astonishing increase of body temperature. A practitioner of
this method can sit in ice and snow and develop so much body heat that
it is sufficient to dry wet sheets.
Like the reports about firewalking, descriptions of similar feats used to
be taken with a grain of salt by Western scientists, in spite of the fact that
Indian researchers had published studies confirming many of these claims.
In the last two decades, however, important experiments in this area were
conducted in the West and reported by scientists with impressive creden-
tials. Some of the best studies of this kind originated in the laboratories of
193
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

the prestigious Menninger Foundation in Topeka, Kansas. In the early
1970s, doctors Elmer and Alyce Green working at Menninger’s began to
examine these ancient claims and to measure and document the effects of
spiritual practices. Their research represents a unique combination of deep
knowledge of the transpersonal realm, sophisticated electronic equipment,
and rigorous Western research techniques.
One of the first subjects of the Greens was an Indian yogi Swami Rama.
He was able to produce within a few minutes and under laboratory condi-
tions a temperature difference of eleven degrees Fahrenheit between two
thermistors attached to the left and right sides of his palm. In other tests
focusing on his cardiovascular system, Swami Rama was able to slow his
heart rate from 93 beats per minute down to the low 60s in a matter of
seconds. In a particularly dramatic test, he actually stopped the flow of
blood through his heart by producing an atrial flutter of about 306 beats
per minute, lasting for sixteen seconds. Immediately after the experiment,
the Swami’s heart rate returned to normal and he was fully alert, laughing
and joking with the researchers. In addition to controlling the heart rate,
blood flow, and body temperature at will, Swami Rama performed a
number of other feats for the Greens’s research staff.
In one highly controlled experiment, where he was draped and masked
so that there could be no question of his using his breath to accomplish this
feat, he was able to move a compass-like device that was several feet away
from him by using only the power of his mind. He repeated this experiment
twice, moving the object ten degrees on its axis every time. Swami Rama
was also able to produce cysts in the large muscles of his body within a
matter of seconds and have them disappear in about the same time. One
of them was excised and medically validated. The Swami claimed that the
“soft tissue” of the body was very easy to manipulate and that tumors
could be produced and made to disappear by the power of the mind. At a
demonstration in Chicago, he was able to make the subtle energy of his
chakras visible to the audience; several Polaroid photos by observers doc-
umented this phenomenon.
The Greens’s research at the Menninger Foundation has continued over
the past two decades and has by now included hundreds of subjects, ran-
ging from Indian medicine men like Rolling Thunder to a number of Eastern
spiritual teachers. The “Western yogi” Jack Schwarz from Oregon, besides
demonstrating his ability to accurately diagnose medical conditions by
reading the patients’ auras, showed an amazing capacity to control his
brain wave activity, blood flow, and healing processes. The Greens’s
194
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

investigations in this area contributed to the development of biofeedback
techniques that have helped thousands of people get permanent relief from
migraine headaches, certain types of disorders of the circulatory system
including high blood pressure, and even epilepsy.
The possibility of controlling many involuntary functions (in medicine
it is now called biofeedback training) has now been accepted by Western
science. As a result, scientists no longer think of this phenomenon as im-
possible but discuss it in the context of the medical model—with the excep-
tion of some extreme forms, such as living without food and oxygen, where
the skepticism remains. However, other claims of supernatural powers
(siddhis) exercised by the yogis continue to challenge traditional science.
These include the ability to materialize and dematerialize various objects
and even one’s own body, move physical objects by the power of one’s
mind, project oneself to remote locations at will, appear in two places at
the same time (bilocation), and levitation. The existence of such seemingly
impossible phenomena remains to be confirmed or refuted by future re-
search. However, in view of the discoveries in quantum physics concerning
the relationship between consciousness and matter, even these no longer
appear to be as preposterous as they once were.
Laboratory Research of Psychokinesis
There is a growing body of data, drawn from modern scientifically validated
experimentation, that supports the existence of psychokinesis; however,
these findings continue to be controversial. The reason for this is that even
the most careful and meticulous research of our day is met with great res-
istance if it seems to support a “supernormal” reality, that is, one that does
not conform to the Newtonian model. Psychokinesis has been documented
in numerous laboratory experiments with methodology ranging from
simple dice-throwing devices to designs using emission of electrons in ra-
dioactive decay, sophisticated electronic gadgets, and modern computers.
There have been even successful experiments with living targets, for ex-
ample attempts to psychokinetically heal animals, plants, tissue cultures,
and enzymes, and even to stop and reactivate the heart of a frog that had
been removed from its body.
Of special interest has been the work with exceptionally gifted individuals
such as Nina Kulagina, a Soviet psychic. Under laboratory conditions she
has demonstrated the ability to move macroscopic objects by simply con-
centrating on them.9 In another laboratory demonstration, an American
by
195
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

the name of Ted Serios was able to project his mental pictures on the film
inside a camera, which was later developed, producing clear photographs
of scenes he had held in his mind.10 One of the most controversial phenom-
ena of this kind has been the psychokinetic bending of spoons and other
metal objects, introduced into the United States by the Israeli psychic Uri
Geller. The events surrounding his performances seem to demonstrate
particularly well the trickster quality of psychoid experiences that I dis-
cussed earlier. While capable of the most astonishing feats in some seances,
he was caught cheating in others. There are many stories describing how
electronic instruments used by the laboratory to record experimental data
often failed in the most critical moments or how significant things tended
to happen outside of the reach of video cameras set up to document his
work. While Uri’s own psychokinetic abilities were seriously questioned,
children in the United States, Europe, and Japan, inspired by his television
demonstrations were able to master the art of spoon-bending. In spite of
all the confusion that surrounds him, it is difficult to imagine that everything
associated with Uri Geller’s case has been a product of trickery and sleight
of hand.
I would like to mention here a story that illustrates the sorts of problems
researchers face in their efforts to document phenomena of this kind. My
brother Paul, who is a psychiatrist living in Canada, was working at Mc-
Masters University in Hamilton. He was asked to be present as a profes-
sional witness in Uri Geller’s meeting with Canadian journalists. At one
point, Geller was asked to guess and reproduce simple drawings that
journalists had drawn on small pieces of paper and then concealed in sealed
envelopes. Although he tried, Uri himself was unable to perform this feat.
However, at that moment my brother began having vivid mental images
and he was able to perform the task in his stead. I have to emphasize that
my brother does not think of himself as a psychic. He never did anything
of this kind before or after the Uri Geller meeting. He himself felt as if some
kind of energy field was transferred from Uri to him.
The Unexplored Territory
We can conclude this section on psychoid experiences by stating that refer-
ences in the mystical literature, observations from modern consciousness
research, as well as laboratory data amassed in the United States, Soviet
Union, Czechoslovakia, and elsewhere, strongly suggest the existence of
connections between individual consciousness and the world of matter
that seriously challenge our culture’s view of reality. I believe that system-
atic
196
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

and unbiased study of psychoid phenomena and transpersonal experiences
will eventually lead to a revision of our view of reality that will be equal
in scope to the Copernican revolution or the shift from Newtonian to
quantum-relativistic thinking in physics.
197
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


IV
IMPLICATIONS FOR A NEW
PSYCHOLOGY OF BEING
There are seasons, in human affairs, of inward and outward revelation,
when new depths seem to be broken up in the soul, when new wants
are unfolded in multitudes, and a new and undefined good is thirsted
for. There are periods when…to dare, is the highest wisdom.
—William Ellery Channing


11
NEW PERSPECTIVES ON REALITY
AND HUMAN NATURE
Man, unlike any other thing organic or inorganic in the universe, grows
beyond his work, walks up the stairs of his concepts, emerges ahead of his
accomplishments.
—John Steinbeck
The new vision of the psyche described in this book has far-reaching im-
plications not only for each of us as individuals but for professionals in
psychiatry, psychology, psychotherapy, and medicine. It can also help open
up vast new territories in the study of history, comparative religion, anthro-
pology, philosophy, and even politics. An in-depth study of the impact of
this work on virtually every area of human exploration would, of course,
require many volumes. But it is possible to briefly outline some of the most
important areas affected by our new understanding of human conscious-
ness. For the sake of simplicity, we can look at those implications in terms
of the following four categories:
1.
Human consciousness and its relationship to matter
2.
The nature of emotional and psychosomatic disorders
3.
Psychotherapy and the healing practices
4.
The roots of human violence and the current global crisis
Human Consciousness and Its Relationship to Matter
Newtonian-Cartesian science views matter as the foundation of the universe.
Scientists who adhere to this system of thought portray consciousness
201

as a product of physiological processes taking place in the brain. From such
a perspective, each of our consciousnesses is confined to the inside of our
skulls, absolutely separated from the consciousnesses of other people.
Traditional science also looks upon consciousness as an exclusively human
phenomenon and tends to treat even the highest non-human life forms as
little more than unconscious machines. However, careful study of the ex-
periences that become available to us through non-ordinary states of con-
sciousness, particularly those of a transpersonal nature, offer convincing
evidence that these old definitions of consciousness are incomplete and
incorrect.
While the picture we have here of human consciousness boxed up inside
the skull might appear to be true where everyday states of consciousness
are concerned, it ceases to explain what happens when we enter non-ordin-
ary consciousness states such as trance states, and spontaneous psychospir-
itual crises, or those states achieved through meditation, hypnosis, psyche-
delic sessions, and experiential psychotherapy. The amazingly broad
spectrum of experiences that become available under these circumstances
clearly suggests that the human psyche has the potential for transcending
what we ordinarily consider the limitations of space and time. Modern
consciousness research reveals that our psyches have no real and absolute
boundaries; on the contrary, we are part of an infinite field of consciousness
that encompasses all there is—beyond space-time and into realities we
have yet to explore.
Our most current research reveals that consciousness and the human
experience are mediated by the brain, but they do not originate there, nor
are they absolutely dependent on the brain. Consciousness clearly can do
things that the brain and the sensory organs cannot. A suspicion that this
might be so is not limited to transpersonal psychology and actually was
expressed by one of the fathers of modern brain research, neurosurgeon
Wilder Penfield. Toward the end of his life, Penfield wrote the book The
Mystery of Mind, in which he summarized his observations concerning the
relationship between the human brain and consciousness. He stated that
it was his opinion as a neurosurgeon that consciousness does not have its
source in the brain. Later research, and particularly thanatology in its
studies of near-death experiences, have added convincing evidence for
Penfield’s position.
New scientific findings are beginning to support beliefs of cultures
thousands of years old, showing that our individual psyches are, in the
last analysis, a manifestation of cosmic consciousness and intelligence that
202
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

flows through all of existence. We never completely lose contact with this
cosmic consciousness because we are never fully separated from it. This is
a concept found independently in mystical traditions throughout the world;
Aldous Huxley called it the “perennial philosophy.”
The new approach to the human psyche that our most advanced research
suggests closes the gap between traditional Western science and the wisdom
of spiritual systems that are based on centuries of systematic observations
of consciousness. When we take into consideration the new cartography
described in this book, important cultural phenomena such as shamanism,
the Eastern spiritual systems, and the mystical traditions of the world
suddenly become normal and understandable forms of human endeavor,
rather than psychopathological aberrations or fly-by-night fads.
In view of the new cartography of human consciousness, we begin to
look upon studies by anthropologists and historians in a new light.
Equipped with this knowledge of perinatal experiences, transpersonal ex-
periences, and psychoid phenomena, we find new meanings in ancient
rites of passage, healing ceremonies, and the ancient mysteries of death
and rebirth. We can take as an example the rites of passage, ceremonies
that were so much a part of human life before the Industrial Age; they
marked and aided the progress of important biological or social transitions,
such as the birth of a child, circumcision, puberty, marriage, death, or tribal
migration. Most of these ceremonies involved non-ordinary states of con-
sciousness induced by any of a number of techniques. Initiates taking part
in these rituals often experienced death and rebirth, as well as profound
connections in the transpersonal realm. Various healing ceremonies, for
individuals, entire tribes, or even the entire cosmos, also typically used
mind-altering techniques, through which links were made between parti-
cipants and higher powers in nature or the universe.
In many advanced cultures, people were able to have similar experiences
by exploring the sacred mysteries of death and rebirth. These were trans-
formation rites based on specific mythologies and representing important
elements of life in ancient civilizations. In Babylonia, for example, death
and rebirth rites were held in the name of Ishtar and Tammuz; in Egypt
they were performed in the name of Isis and Osiris. Ancient Greece and
Asia Minor had the Eleusinian mysteries, the Dionysian rites, the mysteries
of Attis and Adonis, and others. In antiquity, many important cultural and
political figures were initiates of these mysteries. This included the philo-
sophers Plato and Aristotle, the playwright Euripides, and military leader
Alcibiades. In all these traditions, participants had the experience of
203
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

transcending everyday realities and exploring realities quite outside the
realm of ordinary consciousness.
Traditional psychiatry has never adequately explained these forms of
experience, their universality, and their cultural as well as psychological
importance. The opportunity to scientifically observe non-ordinary states
of consciousness with people from our own culture has provided us with
some brand new clues into the meaning of the ancient journeys into other
realities. It is now clear that these ancient practices were neither patholo-
gical phenomena nor the products of primitive superstition; rather, they
were legitimate and highly sophisticated spiritual practices that acknow-
ledged and paid homage to a much broader view of consciousness than
has been held by those who adhere to the Newtonian-Cartesian model of
reality. What is more, when the non-ordinary states are opened up to them,
even scientifically cautious, and highly intelligent people of our own time
and culture, find these experiences deeply moving and personally mean-
ingful, providing them with dramatic breakthroughs in their beliefs.
One of the most important changes most people experience through non-
ordinary states of consciousness involves a new appreciation for the role
of spirituality in the universal scheme of things. Within the present century,
academic psychology and psychiatry dismissed spirituality as a product
of superstition, primitive magical thinking, and outright pathology. How-
ever, in the emerging understanding provided us by modern consciousness
research over the past two decades, we are beginning to see that spirituality
is inspired and sustained by perinatal and transpersonal experiences that
originate in the deepest recesses of the human mind. These visionary ex-
periences have a primary numinous quality, as C. G. Jung called it; they
were the original sources of all great religions. Moreover, it has become
obvious that human beings have a profound need for transpersonal exper-
iences and for states in which they transcend their individual identities to
feel their place in a larger whole that is timeless. This spiritual craving
seems to be more basic and compelling than the sexual drive, and if it is
not satisfied it can result in serious psychological disturbances.
The Nature of Emotional and Psychosomatic Disorders
New observations of human consciousness are also bringing about radical
shifts in our views of mental health. Through specific historical develop-
ments, psychiatry became a medical discipline. This process was set in
motion in the last century, when biological causes, such as infections, tu-
mors,
204
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

deficiencies, and degenerative diseases of the brain, were found for
some—but by no means all—mental disorders. Although further scientific
studies failed to prove the existence of biological causes for most neuroses,
depressions, psychosomatic diseases, and psychotic states, medicine con-
tinued to dominate psychiatry because it was able to control the symptoms
of many mental disorders.
At the present time, the medical model continues to play a paramount
role in psychiatric theory, clinical practice, the education of physicians, and
forensics. The term mental disease is loosely applied to many conditions
where no organic basis has been found. As in medicine, the symptoms are
seen as manifestations of a pathological process, and the intensity of
symptoms is viewed as a direct measure of the seriousness of the disorder.
Much of mainstream psychiatry focuses its efforts on suppressing symp-
toms. This practice equates the alleviation of symptoms with “improve-
ment” and intensification of the same with a “worsening” of the clinical
condition.
Another legacy of medicine in psychiatry is the emphasis placed on as-
signing diagnostic labels. However, while it is possible in purely physical
illness to establish relatively accurate diagnostic labels based on clinical
observation and laboratory tests, diagnostic labels in psychiatry are far
more elusive. In addition, unlike the diagnoses of physical illness, the dia-
gnostic labels in psychiatry do not provide physicians with clearly defined
courses of treatment. In psychiatry, personal philosophy and beliefs, includ-
ing the human relationships one establishes with patients, often play im-
portant roles in determining the course of treatment for most patients. For
example, organically oriented psychiatrists may prescribe electroshock
therapy for neurotics, while psychologically oriented psychiatrists may
use psychotherapy with psychotics.
Work with people in non-ordinary states of consciousness has brought
about remarkable changes in understanding and profound new insights
about emotional and psychosomatic disorders that have no clearly defined
organic cause. This work has shown that we all carry internal records of
physical and emotional traumas, some of them biographical or perinatal
in origin, others transpersonal in nature. Some people can reach perinatal
and transpersonal experiences through meditation techniques, while others
get results only through extensive experiential psychotherapy or psyche-
delic sessions. Some people whose psychological defenses are not so vigor-
ous, may have such unconscious material surface spontaneously in the
middle of their everyday activities.
205
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

When we start experiencing symptoms of a disorder that is emotional
rather than organic in nature, it is important to realize that this is not the
beginning of a “disease” but the emergence into our consciousness of ma-
terial that was previously buried in the unconscious parts of our being.
When this process is completed, the symptoms associated with the uncon-
scious material are permanently resolved and they tend to disappear. Thus,
the emergence of symptoms is not the onset of disease but the beginning
of its resolution. Similarly, the intensity of symptoms should not be taken
as a measure of the seriousness of the disease so much as an indication of
the rate of the healing process. Clinical psychiatrists have known for decades
that the patients with the most dramatic symptoms tend to have a much
better prognosis than those with a few slowly and insidiously developing
ones. And yet, the traditional treatment of choice is to suppress symp-
toms—preventing them from fully surfacing—a practice that, ironically,
is known to prolong emotional illness.
Non-ordinary states of consciousness tend to work like an inner radar
system, seeking out the most powerful emotional charges and bringing the
material associated with them into consciousness where they can be re-
solved. In this process, already existing symptoms are exaggerated and the
previously hidden, “unconscious material” that supports them comes to
the surface. This process of the exaggeration of symptoms, followed by
their resolution, parallels the principles of the healing system called
homeopathy. Rather than defining symptoms as the problem, homeopathy
sees symptoms as manifestations of the healing process. This, of course,
runs contrary to the theories of modern medicine.
The research dealing with non-ordinary states of consciousness, has also
given us new insights into the relative importance of postnatal biographical
material. In mainstream psychiatry, we consider traumatic experiences in
early childhood, along with more recent events in a client’s life, to be the
key sources of neuroses and many psychosomatic disorders. With a few
exceptions, psychiatric theoreticians feel that psychotic disturbances cannot
be understood in purely psychological terms but must be caused by brain
pathology not yet identified. However, our most recent research challenges
both these assumptions.
Through observing clients in non-ordinary states we discover that their
neurotic or psychosomatic symptoms often involve more than the biograph-
ical level of the psyche. Initially, we may find that the symptoms are con-
nected to traumatic events that the person suffered in infancy or childhood,
206
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

just as described in traditional psychology. However, when the process
continues and the experiences deepen, the same symptoms are found to
be also related to particular aspects of the birth trauma. Additional roots
of the same issue can then be traced even further to transpersonal sources,
for example, an experience in a past life, an unresolved archetypal theme,
or the person’s identification with a specific animal.
Thus a person suffering from psychogenic asthma might first relive one
or more childhood events involving suffocation, such as a near-drowning,
suffering from whooping cough, or a bout of diphtheria. A deeper source
of the same problem can be the near-suffocation of this person while in the
birth canal. On the transpersonal level, the asthmatic symptoms might be
related to past life experiences of being strangled or hanged, or even to
elements of animal consciousness, such as identification with an animal
victim smothered by a boa constrictor. For a complete resolution of this
form of asthma, it is important to confront and integrate all the different
experiences connected with the problem.
Deep experiential work has revealed similar multilevel structures in
other conditions treated by psychiatrists. The perinatal levels of the uncon-
scious, which we explored in the first chapters of this book, are important
repositories of difficult emotions and sensations and are frequently found
to be the source of anxiety, depression, feelings of hopelessness and inferi-
ority, as well as aggression and violent impulses. Reinforced by later trau-
mas from infancy and childhood, this emotional material can lead to various
phobias, depressions, sadomasochistic tendencies, criminal behavior, and
hysterical symptoms. The muscular tensions, pains, and other forms of
physical discomfort that are a natural part of the birth trauma can later
develop into psychosomatic problems such as asthma, migraine headaches,
peptic ulcers, and colitis.
In our exploration of the third perinatal matrix (BPM III), we described
how our experience could be associated with strong libidinal arousal. Thus,
it is safe to assume that our first encounter with sexual feelings is associated
with anxiety, pain, and aggression. Furthermore, it is here that we also
encounter blood, mucus, and possibly even urine and feces. These associ-
ations would seem to be natural bases for the development of sexual devi-
ations and perversions, even those as extreme as sexual murder. Sigmund
Freud shook the world when he announced that sexuality does not begin
in puberty but exists in infancy. Our newest observations suggest that we
all experienced sexual feelings long before puberty or infancy—in fact,
before we
207
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

even came into this world. As much as this idea might stretch our sense of
credulity, it provides a very plausible explanation for the sources of sexual
pathology, particularly in its most extreme and bizarre expressions.
Additional observations suggest that suicidal tendencies, alcoholism,
and drug addiction also have perinatal roots. Of special significance seems
to be liberal use of anesthesia during childbirth; certain substances used
to ease the mother’s pain teach the newborn on a cellular level to see the
drug state as a natural escape route from pain and difficult emotions. These
findings were recently confirmed by clinical studies, linking various forms
of suicidal behavior to specific aspects of biological birth, among them: the
choice of drugs to kill oneself was linked to anesthesia use during childbirth;
the choice of hanging to strangulation at birth; and the choice of violent
suicidal means to violent birth. As in the above example of psychogenic
asthma, additional roots for all these problems can be found in the
transpersonal domain: suicide attempts by hanging related to suffocation
or being hanged in past lives; suicide by an overdose of drugs related to
past life experiences with drugs; and suicide by violent means such as de-
liberately crashing an automobile, related to a past life event where a person
underwent an experience with similar characteristics.
Our new understanding of emotional difficulties is not limited to neuroses
and psychosomatic disorders. It can be extended to many extreme psycho-
logical disturbances known as psychoses. Traditional efforts to explain
various psychotic symptoms psychologically have not been very convincing,
particularly when clinicians attempted to interpret them only in terms of
biographical events experienced from infancy through childhood.
Psychotic states often involve extreme emotions and physical sensations,
such as abysmal despair, profound metaphysical loneliness, hellish phys-
ical torture, murderous aggression or, conversely, oneness with the universe,
ecstatic rapture, and heavenly bliss. During a psychotic episode a person
might experience his own death and rebirth, or even the destruction and
recreation of the entire world. The content of such episodes is often fantastic
and exotic, featuring various mythological beings, infernal and paradisean
landscapes, events from other countries and cultures, and extraterrestrial
encounters. Neither the intensity of the emotions and sensations nor the
extraordinary content of psychotic states can be reasonably explained in
terms of early biographical traumas, such as hunger, emotional deprivation,
or other frustrations of an infant.
If we expand the cartography of the psyche in the ways described in this
book, many states traditionally attributed to some unknown pathological
208
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

process in the brain suddenly appear in an entirely new light. The trauma
of birth, which constitutes an important aspect of the unconscious, is a very
painful and potentially life-threatening event that typically lasts many
hours. It is thus certainly a much more plausible source of extreme emotions
and sensations than most events in childhood. Furthermore, the mytholo-
gical dimensions of many psychotic experiences represent a normal and
natural characteristic of the transpersonal domain of the psyche, as sugges-
ted by Jung’s concept of the collective unconscious and its archetypes.
Moreover, the emergence of these deep elements from the unconscious can
be seen as the psyche’s attempt to get rid of traumatic imprints and simplify
its functioning.
All these observations led my wife, Christina, and me to the conclusion
that many states currently diagnosed as mental diseases, and treated
routinely by suppressive medication, are actually psychospiritual crises,
or “spiritual emergencies,” as we call them. If properly understood and
supported, they can result in healing and personal transformation.
Throughout centuries, episodes of this kind have been described in the
mystical literature as important aspects of the spiritual journey. They have
occurred in the lives of shamans, founders of the great religions, saints,
prophets, re-nunciates, and initiates in sacred mysteries of all ages. In 1980,
Christina founded the Spiritual Emergence Network (SEN)—a worldwide
organization of people offering support and guidance to individuals in
such psychospiritual crises—as an alternative to traditional treatment.
Today the SEN mailing list contains thousands of addresses of people from
the United States and many other countries of the world.
Psychotherapy and the Healing Practices
In most existing psychotherapy systems, the goal is to understand how the
psyche works and why emotional disorders develop. Their goal in therapy
is to use the theories they develop to change the way clients think, feel,
behave, and make life decisions. Even in the most non-directive forms of
psychotherapy, the therapist is considered to be the key vehicle for the
healing process because he or she possesses knowledge and training super-
ior to the client. This, then, is seen as sufficient qualification for the therapist
to guide the client’s self-exploration through appropriate questions and
interpretations.
The problem is that few schools of therapy agree about the most funda-
mental issues concerning the mysteries of the human psyche, the nature
209
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

of psychopathology, or even therapeutic techniques. The approach to the
same disorder differs according to the personal belief system of the therapist
and to the school he or she belongs to. There have been no conclusive
studies showing that certain schools are superior to others in getting
therapeutic results. It is known that “good therapists” of different schools
get good results and “bad therapists” get poor results. Moreover, the res-
ulting changes in clients seem to have very little to do with what the ther-
apists believe they are doing. It has been suggested that the success of
psychotherapy might have nothing to do with the therapist’s technique
and the content of verbal interpretations, but depend on factors such as
the quality of the relationship in the therapeutic setting, the degree of em-
pathy, or the client’s feelings of being understood and supported.
In traditional verbal psychotherapies, clients are expected to provide
information about their present and past problems, and possibly describe
their dreams, which are thought to provide insights into the unconscious.
It is then up to the therapist to decide what is psychologically relevant.
Thus Freudian analysts focus on sexual issues, Adlerian analysts emphasize
material related to inferiority feelings and the pursuit of power, and so on.
By contrast, the work with non-ordinary states of consciousness bypasses
the problems of the theoretical differences between various schools and
the therapist’s role as interpreter of psychological material. As you will
recall, in non-ordinary states, the material with the strongest emotional
charge is automatically selected and brought into consciousness. These
non-ordinary states also provide necessary insights and mobilize our own
inner healing forces with all their inherent wisdom and power. Try as we
might to duplicate these natural healing processes, no school of psychology
has even come close.
The most important requirement for the therapist employing non-ordin-
ary states of consciousness is not to master specific techniques and steer
the client in the desired direction, but to accept and trust the spontaneous
unfolding of the process. It is essential to do this unconditionally, even if
at times the therapist does not intellectually understand what is happening.
This task challenges most professionals who depend on the theoretical
guidance of their particular school of thought. With no effort on the part
of the therapist, symptoms clear and personal transformations occur as a
result of the unfolding of an unpredictable array of experiences—which
may be biographical, perinatal, transpersonal, or all three. In Holotropic
Breathwork™, in the work with spiritual emergencies, and in thousands
of psychedelic therapy sessions in my earliest research, I have seen many
210
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

dramatic healings and positive personality changes, which have completely
eluded all my efforts at rational understanding.
In work with non-ordinary states of consciousness, the roles of therapist
and client are quite different from those in traditional psychotherapy. The
therapist is not the active agent who causes the changes in the client by
specific interventions, but is somebody who intelligently cooperates with
the inner healing forces of the client. This understanding of the role of the
therapist is in congruence with the original meaning of the Greek word
therapeutes, which means “the person who assists in the healing process.”
It is also in agreement with C. G. Jung’s approach to psychotherapy, wherein
it is believed that the task of the therapist is to mediate for the client a
contact and exchange with his or her inner self, which then guides the
process of transformation and individuation. The wisdom for change and
healing comes from the collective unconscious and surpasses by far the
knowledge that is intellectually available to the therapist.
While both therapist and client may occasionally feel frustrated because
of the lack of rational understanding in the healing process, the dramatic
positive changes that clients achieve, in relatively short periods of time,
are more than sufficient compensation. In this kind of work, it becomes
clear that it is impossible to use a rigid conceptual framework that forces
clients’ issues into preconceived pigeonholes. As Jung suggested, there is
no guarantee that what we observe in a particular therapeutic session has
already been seen before and can be understood in terms of existing schools.
The psyche is without boundaries and has seemingly infinite resources
and creativity. For this reason, it is possible that in any therapeutic en-
counter we may very well witness or experience phenomena that have
never before been observed. This makes therapeutic work an exciting on-
going adventure, filled with discovery and new learning at every turn.
The Roots of Human Violence and the Current Global Crisis
Among the most important implications of the new model of the psyche
are insights of sociopolitical nature. Traditional science’s attempts to offer
plausible explanations for the atrocities that characterize much of human
history have been generally unconvincing, leaving much to be desired. The
image of man as the “naked ape” who harbors murderous instincts that
are a heritage from his animal past, fails to account for what the psychoana-
lyst Erich Fromm called “malignant aggression,” which is uniquely human.
While animals fight for food, sexual opportunity, and territorial concerns,
211
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

no animal in nature comes even close to duplicating the senseless cruelties
committed by human beings. Psychological efforts to explain our violence
in terms of the biographical model of human consciousness have been
equally frustrating and inadequate.
Just as we recognized the failure to account for individual psychopatho-
logy in terms of the traditional biographically oriented model, the inad-
equacy of these same methods becomes even more obvious when applied
to the mass psychopathology of bloody wars, revolutions, cruelties of total-
itarian regimes, the bestiality of concentration camps, and genocide. As
with extremely violent behaviors of individuals, emotional pain experienced
in infancy and childhood simply does not account for aberrant behavior
of such proportions.
Psychological traumas associated with experiences shaping our psyches
after our births are not sufficient to explain the horrors of Nazism, the atro-
cities of a Stalin regime, or the monstrous behavior associated with
Apartheid. But when we add the perinatal and transpersonal perspectives
that we find expressed in non-ordinary states of consciousness, events such
as these begin to be more understandable. The trauma of birth involves a
life-and-death struggle, with a potential for becoming the basis for many
extremes of emotion. As an event that we all share, it has the potential for
bringing about mass scale psychological aberrations, with perhaps hundreds
of thousands of people sharing a common experience of tremendous un-
conscious rage. The archetypes of the collective unconscious could also be
sources of mass psychopathology, since they are endowed by extraordinary
psychological power, cutting across all individual boundaries.
War is complex, of course, and involves many factors, including histor-
ical, political, economic, as well as psychological roots. We should not as-
sume that war can be reduced to psychological factors only. However,
while the more tangible aspects of the conflicts existing between nations
have been receiving much attention, the psychological dimensions and
roots of these crises have been ignored. Here modern consciousness research
offers some interesting insights and clues. In non-ordinary states, the ma-
terial that emerges from the unconscious frequently includes themes of
war, totalitarian regimes, revolutions, the horrors of concentration camps,
and genocide. Scenes expressing these themes can be extremely intense,
experienced with a full range of emotions and physical sensations of both
the victims and perpetrators.
When the sessions are dominated by BPM II, the person connects with
the feelings of the child who is stuck in the birth canal before the cervix
212
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

opens. This is often accompanied by scenes from human history experienced
in the role of the victim. Such experiences involve identification with the
population oppressed by a totalitarian regime, with civilians suffering in
a war, with inmates of concentration camps, and with the downtrodden
of all ages. Sequences of this kind occur even in sessions of people who
have never personally experienced these situations in real life; and yet,
their unconscious has intimate knowledge of all the emotions and sensations
involved.
When the process moves to BPM III, the person identifies with the child
struggling to escape from the birth canal after the cervix opens. At this
point, the nature of the accompanying sociopolitical experiences changes
dramatically. There are still scenes of violence but now the individual also
identifies with the role of the aggressor. The process oscillates between
identification with the victim and perpetrator; occasionally, one can also
become an external observer. The predominant theme here is revolution;
the oppression has become intolerable and the tyrant has to be overthrown.
The goal is to attain freedom where one can “breathe” again. The experi-
ences involve scenes from the French or the Bolshevik revolutions, the
American Civil War, and other fights for freedom. And the actual moment
of birth is often accompanied by scenes depicting the victories in various
revolutions or the ends of wars.
The rich and comprehensive nature of emotions and sensations involved
in these experiences suggest that they are not individually fabricated from
sources such as adventure books, movies, and television shows. After
witnessing thousands of therapy sessions in which material of this kind
was involved I am thoroughly convinced that it originates in the collective
unconscious. When, in our inner exploration, we reach the memory of the
trauma of birth, this seems to open the gates into the collective unconscious
where we access experiences of people who underwent similar predica-
ments in real life.
The Tyranny of the Shadow Self
After examining material of this kind for more than twenty years, I have
been inevitably drawn to the very real possibility that the perinatal level
of our unconscious, the part of our psyches that “knows” so intimately the
history of human violence, may actually be partially responsible for wars,
revolutions, and similar atrocities. Let me bring in another piece of evidence
that does not come from modern consciousness research, but from careful
historical research.
213
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Following the publication of my first book, Realms of the Human Uncon-
scious, I received a letter from Lloyd de Mause, a New York psychoanalyst
and journalist. De Mause is one of the founders of psychohistory, a discip-
line that applies the findings of depth psychology to history and political
science. Psychohistorians study such issues as the relationship between
the childhood history of political leaders and their system of values and
decision-making processes. They also try to establish links between child-
rearing practices of a particular time and the nature of wars and revolutions.
Lloyd de Mause was very interested in my findings concerning the trauma
of birth and its possible sociopolitical implications, because they supported
his own research.
For many years, de Mause had been studying the psychological aspects
of the periods preceding wars and revolutions; it interested him how mil-
itary leaders can successfully mobilize masses of peaceful civilians and
transform them into killing machines. His approach was very original and
creative—in addition to the analysis of historical sources, he drew data of
great psychological importance from popular caricatures, jokes, dreams,
personal imagery, slips of the tongue, side comments of speakers, and even
doodles and scribbles on the edge of the rough drafts of political documents.
By the time he contacted me, he had analyzed in this way seventeen situ-
ations preceding the outbreak of wars and revolutionary upheavals, span-
ning many centuries—from antiquity to most recent times.
He was struck by the extraordinary abundance of figures of speech,
metaphors, and images related to biological birth that he found in this
historical material. Military leaders and politicians describing critical situ-
ations and making declarations of war typically use terms that apply equally
well to perinatal distress. They accuse the enemy as “choking and strangling
us,” of “squeezing the last breath out of our lungs,” of “confining” us, and
“not giving us enough space to live” (Hitler’s Lebensraum). Equally frequent
are allusions to dark caves, tunnels, and confusing labyrinths, dangerous
abysses into which we might be pushed, and the threat of engulfment or
drowning. Similarly, the promise of resolution comes in the form of peri-
natal images: leaders promise to guide us to the “light on the other end of
the tunnel,” to “lead us out of the labyrinth,” and guarantee that after the
oppressor is overcome, everybody will again “breathe freely.”
The subjects of Lloyd de Mause’s research included Alexander the Great,
Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm II, Adolph Hitler, Khrushchev, and Kennedy.
He also found birth symbolism in the statements of Admiral
214
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Shimada and Ambassador Kurassa before the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Particularly chilling was the use of perinatal language in connection with
the explosion of the atomic bomb in Hiroshima. The airplane was given
the name of the pilot’s mother, Enola Bay; the bomb had been nicknamed
“The Little Boy,” which was painted on its side; and the code sent to
Washington to signal its successful detonation was “The baby was born.”
Since the time of our correspondence, Lloyd de Mause has collected many
additional historical examples and refined his thesis that our memories of
perinatal trauma play an important role in violent social activity.
Further support for these ideas can be found in Sam Keen’s excellent
book The Faces of the Enemy. Keen brought together an outstanding collection
of war posters, cartoons, and caricatures from many different historical
periods and cultures. He demonstrated that the way the enemy is described
and portrayed during a war or revolution is a stereotype that shows very
little variation and has very little to do with the actual characteristics of the
culture involved. According to Keen, the alleged images of the enemy are
essentially projections of the repressed and unacknowledged shadow aspects of
our own unconscious minds.1 Although we would certainly find in human
history instances of “just wars,” those who initiate warring activities are
typically substituting external targets for elements in their own psyches
that should be properly faced in personal self-exploration.
Sam Keen’s theoretical framework does not specifically include the
perinatal domain of the unconscious. However, the analysis of his material
reveals a preponderance of symbolic images that are characteristic for BPM
II and BPM III. The enemy is typically depicted as a dangerous octopus, a
vicious dragon, a multiheaded hydra, a giant venomous tarantula, or an
engulfing Leviathan. Other frequently used symbols include vicious
predatory felines or birds, monstrous sharks, and ominous snakes, partic-
ularly vipers and boa constrictors. Scenes depicting strangulation or
crushing, ominous whirlpools, and treacherous quicksands also abound
in pictures from the time of wars, revolutions, and political crises. The
juxtaposition of paintings from non-ordinary states of consciousness that
depict perinatal experiences with the historical pictorial documentation
collected by Lloyd de Mause and Sam Keen offer strong evidence for the
perinatal roots of human violence.
According to the insights provided jointly by observations from non-
ordinary states of consciousness and the findings of psychohistorians, we
all carry in our deep unconscious powerful energies and emotions associ-
ated
215
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

with the trauma of birth that we have not adequately mastered and assim-
ilated. For some of us, these aspects of our psyches can be completely un-
conscious, while others can have varying degrees of awareness about their
influence. When material of this kind is activated from within, or by real
events in the external world, it can lead to bizarre individual psychopath-
ology, including violence for which there seems to be no visible cause. It
seems that, for unknown reasons, the awareness of the perinatal elements
can increase simultaneously in a large number of people; this creates an
atmosphere of tension, anxiety, and anticipation. A leader such as Hitler
is perhaps more strongly influenced by perinatal energies than others in
his culture while at the same time having the power to manipulate the
collective behavior of an entire nation. With these two factors aligned it is
easy for him to disown his unacceptable (and unconscious) feelings (the
“Shadow self” in Jung’s terminology) and project them onto an external
situation. The collective discomfort is blamed on the enemy and military
intervention is offered as a solution.
War provides the opportunity to abandon psychological defenses that
ordinarily keep the dangerous perinatal tendencies in check. Freud’s
superego, a psychological force that demands restraint and civilized beha-
vior, is replaced by the “war superego”: we now receive praise for the same
behaviors that are unacceptable or even criminal in peacetime—murder,
indiscriminate destruction, and pillaging. Once war erupts, the destructive
and self-destructive impulses can be given free rein. The perinatal elements
that we normally encounter in a certain stage of the process of inner explor-
ation and transformation (BPM II and BPM III) are now manifest in real
situations outside us, either in hand-to-hand combat on the battlefield or
in the form of television news. Various no exit situations, sadomasochistic
orgies, sexual violence, bestial and demonic behavior, explosive energy
releases, and scatology—which we ordinarily associate with perinatal im-
agery—are all enacted in wars and revolutions with extraordinary vividness
and power.
Acting out unconscious impulses—whether these occur individually, in
self-destructive behavior or interpersonal conflict, or collectively, through
wars and revolutions—does not result in transformation, as would occur
by bringing the same material to full consciousness, since insight and
therapeutic intention are missing. Even when violent behavior results in
victory, the goal of the unconscious birth memory—which was the driving
force behind such events—is not achieved. The most triumphant external
victory does not deliver what the unconscious expected or hoped for: an
inner sense of emotional liberation and spiritual rebirth. Immediately fol-
lowing
216
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

the initial intoxication of triumph comes a sober awakening followed by
bitter disappointment. And it usually does not take long before a carbon
copy of the previous oppressive system emerges from the ruins, since the
same unconscious forces continue to operate in the individual and collective
unconscious of the people. When we look carefully at history, we see this
same cycle occurring again and again, whether the events involved are
called the French Revolution, the Bolshevik Revolution, or World War II.
For many years, at the time when Czechoslovakia had a Marxist regime,
I conducted deep experiential work in Prague. During this period, I collected
a great deal of fascinating material concerning the psychological dynamics
of Communism. Issues related to Communist ideology typically emerged
while my clients were struggling with perinatal energies and emotions. It
became obvious that the passion revolutionaries feel toward their oppress-
ors receives powerful psychological reinforcement from their revolt against
the inner prisons of their perinatal experiences. And, conversely, the need
to coerce and dominate others was expressed time and time again as an
effort to overcome the fear of being overwhelmed by one’s own uncon-
scious. The murderous entanglement of oppressor and revolutionary thus
seems to be an externalized expression of the turmoil experienced in the
birth canal. This is not to say that there existed no external political problems
to overcome; the point is that perinatal themes, felt with incredible intensity,
dictated the ways in which these conflicts were perceived and acted out.
The Communist vision contains elements of psychological truth that
make it appealing to large numbers of people. The basic notion that a dra-
matic experience of revolutionary proportions must occur before suffering
and oppression will end, and that this upheaval will bring greater harmony,
is correct in terms of the process of psychological death and rebirth and
inner transformation. However, it is dangerously false when projected to
the external world as a political ideology. The basic fallacy lies in the fact
that what is essentially an archetypal pattern of spiritual death and rebirth
is being given the form of an atheistic and antispiritual program.
It is interesting to note that while Communist revolutions have been ex-
tremely successful in their destructive phase, the promised brotherhood
and harmony their victories promised have not come. Instead, the new
orders have bred regimes where oppression, cruelty, and injustice ruled
supreme. If the above observations are correct, no external interventions
have a chance to create a better world, unless they are associated with a
profound transformation of human consciousness.
217
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Echoes and Reflections of Hell
The perinatal dynamics can also help us understand otherwise incompre-
hensible phenomena, such as the Nazi concentration camps. Professor
Bastians from Leyden, Holland, who has had extensive experience in the
treatment of the so-called concentration camp syndrome—emotional
problems that develop decades after incarceration—pointed out that the
concentration camp is in the last analysis a product of the human mind.
The fact that the mental image of such an institution must have preceded
its material existence suggests that there is a corresponding area in the
unconscious psyche. Bastians expressed this quite succinctly: “Before there
was man in the concentration camp, there was the concentration camp in
man.”2 I have described earlier that the imagery involving Nazi concentra-
tion camps, Stalin’s labor camps, and other similar themes spontaneously
emerge in the experiences of people confronting the perinatal level of their
unconscious. Closer examination of the general and specific conditions in
the Nazi concentration camps reveal that they are a realistic enactment of
the nightmarish atmosphere of BPM II and BPM III.
Consider the barbed wire barriers, high-voltage fences, watch towers
with machine guns, mine fields, and packs of trained dogs. All these cer-
tainly helped to created a hellish, archetypal image of the no exit situation
so characteristic of BPM II. The elements of violence, bestiality, and sadism
contributed to the atmosphere of insanity and horror that is so familiar to
people who have relived their births. The sexual abuse of women and men,
including rape and sadistic practices, existed on the individual level, as
well as in the “houses of dolls,” the institutions that provided “entertain-
ment” for the officers and offered an outlet for their most violent uncon-
scious perinatal impulses.
One of the most astonishing aspects of the concentration camp practices
was the violation of the basic hygienic precautions and the indulgence in
scatology. Since this was in sharp contrast with the meticulous German
sense of cleanliness and involved a disregard for the danger of mass epi-
demics, this clearly indicates that irrational unconscious forces were in-
volved. Among the favorite jokes of the Nazi officers was to throw the
eating bowls of the prisoners into the latrines and order them to retrieve
them. At other times, they kicked inmates into the excrement as they
squatted down to relieve themselves. As a result, many prisoners actually
drowned in human waste.
Suffocation in gas chambers and the fires in the ovens of the crematoria
were additional elements in the hellish, nightmare environment of the
218
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

camps. All these are themes that people in non-ordinary states of conscious-
ness often encounter in their inner experiences in the context of BPM III.
In peacetime, atrocities similar to these have been perpetrated during
prison uprisings; apparently overcrowding and the abuse of prisoners
tends to activate unconscious perinatal elements, and eventually erupts in
violent uprising and rebellion.
Significant roots for major sociopolitical upheavals can also be found on
the transpersonal level. C. G. Jung believed that the archetypes of the col-
lective unconscious not only influence behavior of individuals, they also
govern large historical movements. From this point of view, entire nations
and cultural groups are capable of acting out mythological themes. For
example, in the decade preceding the outbreak of World War II, Jung found
in the dreams of his German patients many elements from the Nordic myth
about “Ragnarok,” the twilight of the gods. He concluded from this that
this archetype was emerging in the collective psyche of the German nation;
he predicted that it would lead to a major world catastrophe that would
ultimately turn out to be self-destructive for the German people. In many
instances, clever leaders specifically use archetypal images to achieve their
political goals. Thus Hitler exploited the mythological motifs of the suprem-
acy of the Nordic race and of the millennial empire, as well as the ancient
Aryan symbols of the swastika and the eagle. Ayatollah Khomeini and
Saddam Hussein have ignited the imaginations of their Moslem followers
by references to jihad, that is, the holy war against the infidels.
Although it is not an easy task to establish conclusive proof in this area,
our full consideration of the perinatal and transpersonal levels of the psyche
promises new and exciting possibilities for the study and understanding
of human history and culture. Probably the most intriguing among the
new insights are those related to the current global crisis. We all have the
dubious privilege of living in an era when the world drama is reaching its
culmination. The violence, greed, and acquisitiveness that have shaped
human history in the past centuries have reached such proportions that
they could easily lead not only to complete annihilation of the human
species, but to extermination of all life on this planet. The various diplomat-
ic, political, military, economic, and ecological efforts to correct the present
course all seem to make matters worse rather than better.
Does it not seem possible that our efforts at peace fail because none of
our present approaches have addressed that dimension which seems to be
at the center of the global crisis: the human psyche? There is enough wealth
in the world to guarantee a good living standard for everyone on the face
of the earth. Similarly, it is not necessary for millions of people to die
219
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

of diseases for which contemporary medicine has effective remedies.
Modern science has the know-how to develop clean and renewable sources
of energy and prevent the deterioration of our physical environment. The
main obstacle we face as a species is found in the present evolutionary level
of our consciousness. That is the primary cause of the senseless plundering
of natural resources, the pollution of our water, air, and soil, and the
shameful waste of unimaginable amounts of money and energy in the in-
sanity of the arms race. For this reason, it is important to learn as much as
we can about the psychological and spiritual dimensions of the predicament
we are all facing.
In our modern world we have externalized many of the essential elements
of BPM III. When working to achieve transformation on an individual level,
we know that we must face and come to terms with these themes. The same
elements that we would encounter in the process of psychological death
and rebirth in our visionary experiences appear today as stories on our
evening news. We see the unleashing of enormous aggressive impulses in
wars and revolutionary upheavals throughout the world, in the rising
criminality, in terrorism, and in race riots. Sexual experiences and behaviors
are taking unprecedented forms, manifested as sexual freedom for
youngsters, promiscuity, open marriages, gay liberation, sadomasochistic
parlors, overtly sexual books, plays, movies, and many others. The demonic
element is also becoming increasingly manifest in the modern world. The
rising interest in satanic cults and witchcraft, the increasing popularity of
books and horror movies with occult themes, and satanic crimes attest to
that fact. The scatological dimension is evident in the progressive industrial
pollution, accumulation of waste products on a global scale, and rapidly
deteriorating hygienic conditions in large cities.
Many people with whom we have worked have volunteered very inter-
esting insights into this situation. Over the past few years hundreds of
people have expressed the belief that humanity is at a crossroads, facing
either collective annihilation or an evolutionary jump in consciousness of
unprecedented proportions. It seems that we are all involved in a process
that parallels the psychological death and rebirth that so many people have
experienced individually in non-ordinary states of consciousness. If we
continue to act out the destructive tendencies from our deep unconscious,
we will undoubtedly destroy ourselves and all life on our planet. However,
if we succeed in internalizing this process on a large enough scale, it might
result in evolutionary progress that can take us as far beyond our present
condition as we now are from the primates.
220
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

As utopian as this might seem on the surface, it might very well be our
only real chance. Over the years I have seen profound transformations in
people who have been involved with serious and systematic inner quests.
Some of them were meditators and had a regular spiritual practice. Others
had spontaneous episodes of psychospiritual crises or participated in
various forms of experiential psychotherapy and self-exploration. As their
level of aggression decreased, they became more peaceful, more comfortable
with themselves, and more tolerant of others. Their ability to enjoy life,
particularly the simple pleasures of everyday existence, increased consid-
erably.
Deep reverence for life and ecological awareness are among the most
frequent consequences of the psychospiritual transformation that accom-
panies responsible work with non-ordinary states of consciousness. The
same has been true for spiritual emergence of a mystical nature that is
based on personal experience. It is my belief that a movement in the direc-
tion of a fuller awareness of our unconscious minds will vastly increase
our chances for planetary survival. I hope that this book will make a con-
tribution toward those ends, offering assistance and guidance for those
who will choose this path or are walking it already.
221
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


NOTES
Chapter 1: Breakthroughs to New Dimensions of Consciousness
1. David Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1980).
2. Rupert Sheldrake, A New Science of Life (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1981).
3. Michael Harner, The Way of the Shaman (New York: Harper & Row, 1980).
4. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Peter excerpted from Realms of the Human Uncon-
scious: Observations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
Chapter 2: Wholeness and the Amniotic Universe—BPM I
1. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Ben excerpted from Realms of the Human Uncon-
scious: Observations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
Chapter 3: Expulsion from Paradise—BPM II
1. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from Realms of the Human Unconscious: Ob-
servations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
Chapter 4: The Death-Rebirth Struggle—BPM III
1. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from Realms of the Human Unconscious: Ob-
servations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
Chapter 5: The Death and Rebirth Experience—BPM IV
1. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from Realms of the Human Unconscious: Ob-
servations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
223

Chapter 6: An Overview of the Transpersonal Paradigm
1. C. G. Jung, Septem Sermones ad Mortuos in S. Hoeller, The Gnostic Jung and the
Seven Sermons to the Dead (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1982).
2. Abraham Maslow, Religions, Values and Peak Experiences (Cleveland: State Univ.
of Ohio, 1964).
3. William James, Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Collier, 1961).
4. C. G. Jung, Septem Sermones ad Mortuos in S. Hoeller, The Gnostic Jung and the
Seven Sermons to the Dead (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1982).
Chapter 7: Journeys Beyond Physical Boundaries
1. Eugene O’Neill, Long Day’s Journey into Night (New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press,
1956), Act 4, 153.
2. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Jenna excerpted from The Adventure of Self-Dis-
covery (Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
3. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
4. Rusty Schweickart, “Space-Age and Planetary Awareness: A Personal Experience”
in Human Survival and Consciousness Evolution, edited by Stanislav Grof (Albany:
State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
5. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
6. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
7. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from The Adventure of Self-Discovery (Albany:
State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
8. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from The Adventure of Self-Discovery (Albany:
State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
9. J. E. Lovelock, Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (New York: Oxford Univ. Press,
1979).
Chapter 8: Across the Borders of Time
1. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from Realms of the Human Unconscious: Ob-
servations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
2. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Richard excerpted from Realms of the Human
Unconscious: Observations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
224
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

3. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Inga excerpted from The Adventure of Self-Discov-
ery (Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
4. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Nadja excerpted from Realms of the Human Un-
conscious: Observations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
5. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Renata excerpted from Realms of the Human
Unconscious: Observations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
6. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
7. Stanislav Grof, case study excerpted from Realms of the Human Unconscious: Ob-
servations from LSD Research (New York: Viking Penguin, 1975).
8. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Jesse from The Human Encounter with Death.
Chapter 9: Beyond a Shared Reality
1. Aldous Huxley, Heaven and Hell (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books,
1971).
2. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Richard excerpted from The Adventure of Self-
Discovery (Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
3. Stanislav Grof, the case study of Eva Pahnke excerpted from The Adventure of
Self-Discovery (Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1988).
4. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
5. Christina Grof and Stanislav Grof, The Stormy Search for the Self (Los Angeles:
Jeremy P. Tarcher, 1990).
6. Christina Grof and Stanislav Grof, The Stormy Search for the Self (Los Angeles:
Jeremy P. Tarcher, 1990).
7. C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections (New York: Pantheon Books, 1961).
8. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
9. Joseph Campbell, from lecture at the Esalen Institute, Big Sur, CA, 1984.
10. Lao-tsu, Tao Te Ching (New York: Vintage Books, 1972).
11. Stanislav Grof, unpublished case study.
12. William Blake, Johannes Brahms, and Giacomo Puccini in Higher Creativity by
W. Harman and H. Rheingold (Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarcher, 1984), 46.
Chapter 10: Experiences of a Psychoid Nature
1. C. G. Jung, “On the Nature of the Psyche” in The Structure and Dynamics of the
Psyche, collected works, vol. 8, Bollingen Series XX (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ.
Press, 1960).
225
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

2. Paul Kammerer, Das Gesetz der Serie (The Law of the Series) (Stuttgart and Berlin,
1919).
3. Camille Flammarion, The Unknown (London and New York, 1900), 191ff.
4. C. G. Jung, Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle, Vol. 8, Bollingen Series
XX (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1973).
5. C. G. Jung, Letter to Carl Selig, February 25, 1953, in Letters: Nineteen Fifty-One
to Nineteen Sixty-One, Vol. 2, Bollingen Series XCV (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ.
Press, 1973).
6. Hans Bender, Telepathie Hellsehen und Psychokinese (Freiburg im Breisgau, Ger-
many: Aurum Verlag, 1984).
7. Raymond E. Fowler, The Andreasson Affair (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1979).
8. Elda Hartley, Sacred Trance in Bali and Java, a documentary film.
9. Stanley Krippner, Human Possibilities (Garden City, NY: Anchor Press/ Doubleday,
1980).
10. Jules Eisenbud, the World of Ted Serios (New York: William Morrow, 1967).
Chapter 11: New Perspectives on Reality and Human Nature
1. Sam Keen, The Faces of the Enemy (New York: Harper & Row, 1986).
2. A. Bastians, “Der Mann im Konzentrationslager und der Konzentrationslager
im Mann,” mimeographed manuscript, n.d.
226
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

RECOMMENDED READING
Bache, C. Lifecycles: Reincarnation and the Web of Life. New York: Paragon House,
1990.
Bateson, G. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979.
Bateson, G., and Bateson, M.C. Angels Fear: Towards An Epistomology of the Sacred.
New York: Macmillan, 1987.
Bohm, D. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1980.
Bohm, D., and Peat, D. Science, Order, and Creativity. New York: Bantam, 1987.
Briggs, J., and Peat, D. Looking Glass Universe: The Emerging Science of Wholeness.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984.
___. Turbulent Mirror: An Illustrated Guide to Chaos Theory and the Science of Wholeness.
New York: Harper and Row, 1989.
Bucke, R. Cosmic Consciousness. New York: Dutton, 1923.
Campbell, J. Hero With A Thousand Faces. Cleveland, Ohio: World Publishing, 1970.
___. The Way of the Animal Powers. New York: Harper and Row, 1984.
Campbell, J., with Moyers, B. The Power of Myth. New York: Doubleday, 1988.
Capra, F. The Tao of Physics. Berkeley: Shambhala, 1975.
___. The Turning Point. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982.
Davies, P. P. God and the New Physics. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983.
Gleick, J. Chaos: Making A New Science. New York: Penguin, 1987.
Grof, C., and Grof, S. The Stormy Search for the Self. Los Angeles, California: J. P.
Tarcher, 1990.
Grof, S. Beyond the Brain: Birth, Death, and Transcendence in Psychotherapy. Albany:
State University New York Press, 1985.
___. The Adventure of Self-Discovery. Albany: State University New York Press, 1988.
Harner, M. The Way of the Shaman. New York: Harper and Row, 1980.
Hastings, A. With the Tongues of Men and Angels: A Study in Channeling. San Francisco:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1990.
Herbert, N. Quantum Reality: Beyond the New Physics. Garden City, New York: Anchor
Press/Doubleday, 1985.
James, W. Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Collier, 1961.
Jantsch, E. The Self-Organizing Universe. New York: Pergamon Press, 1980.
227

Jung, C. G. Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle. In Collected Works, Volume
8, Bollingen Series XX. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960.
___. Memories, Dreams, Reflections. New York: Pantheon, 1961.
___. Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies. In Collected Works,
Volume 10, Bollingen Series XX. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964.
___. Man and His Symbols. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1972
Klimo, J. Channeling: Investigations On Receiving Information from Paranormal Sources.
Los Angeles, CA: J. P. Tarcher, 1987.
Lovelock, J. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. New York: Oxford University Press,
1979.
Maslow, A. Toward a Psychology of Being. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1962.
___. Religions, Values, and Peak Experiences. Cleveland: State University of Ohio,
1964.
Monroe, R. Journeys Out of the Body. New York: Doubleday, 1971.
Moody, R. Life After Life. Atlanta, GA: Mockingbird Books, 1975.
Mookerjee, A. Kundalini: Arousal of Inner Energy. London: Thames and Hudson,
1982.
Murphy, M., and White, R. The Psychic Side of Sports. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-
Wesley, 1978.
Murphy, M. The Future of the Body. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1992.
Peat, F. D. Synchronicity: The Bridge Between Matter and Mind. New York: Bantam,
1987.
Peerbolte, L. Prenatal Dynamics and Psychic Energy. Pomona, CA: Hunter House,
1975.
Perry, J. The Far Side of Madness. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974.
Pietsch, H. Shufflebrain. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.
Prigogine, I., and Stenger, I. Order Out of Chaos: Man’s Dialogue with Nature. New
York: Bantam, 1984.
Rank, O. The Trauma of Birth. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1929.
Ring, K. Heading Toward Omega. New York: Morrow, 1984.
Russell, P. The Global Brain: Speculations on the Evolutionary Leap to Planetary Con-
sciousness. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1983.
Sabom, M. Recollections of Death. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982.
Sannella, L. The Kundalini Experience: Psychosis or Transcendence? Lower Lake, CA:
Integral Publishing, 1987.
Sheldrake, R. A New Science of Life: The Hypothesis of Formative Creation. Los Angeles:
J. P. Tarcher, 1981.
___. The Presence of the Past: Morphic Resonance and the Habits of Nature. New York:
Random House, 1988.
228
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Singer, J. Boundaries of the Soul: The Practice of Jung’s Psychology. New York:
Doubleday, 1972.
___. Seeing Through the Visible World: Jung, Gnosis, and Chaos. San Francisco: Harper
San Francisco, 1990.
Stevenson, I. Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation. Charlottesville: University of
Virginia Press, 1966.
Talbot, M. The Holographic Universe. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Targ, R., and Puthoff, H. Mind Reach: Scientists Look at Psychic Ability. New York:
Delta Books, 1978.
Targ, R., and Harary, K. The Mind Race: Understanding and Using Psychic Abilities.
New York: Villard Books, 1984.
Tarnas, R. The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas That Have Shaped
Our World View. New York: Harmony Books, 1991.
Tart, C. States of Consciousness. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1975.
___. PSI: Scientific Studies of the Psychic Realm. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1977.
Thompson, K. Angels and Aliens. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1991.
Vaughan, F. The Inward Arc: Healing and Wholeness in Psychotherapy and Spirituality.
Boston: Shambhala, 1985.
Walsh, R. The Spirit of Shamanism. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1990.
Walsh, R., and Vaughan, F. Beyond Ego: Transpersonal Dimensions in Psychology. Los
Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980.
Wilber, K. The Spectrum of Consciousness. Wheaton, IL: The Theosophical Publication
House, 1977.
___. The Atman Project: A Transpersonal View of Human Development. Wheaton, IL:
The Theosophical Publication House, 1980.
Wolf, F. A. Taking the Quantum Leap: The New Physics for Non-Scientists. San Francisco:
Harper and Row, 1981.
___. Parallel Universes: The Search for Other Worlds. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1988.
Young, A. The Reflexive Universe: Evolution of Consciousness. New York: Delacorte,
1976.
Zukav, G. The Dancing Wu Li Masters. New York: Morrow, 1979.
229
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


INDEX
Abandonment, 55
Aboriginal cultures, 105, 107, 108, 159; and animal spirits, 148, 149; and
ceremonial magic, 189–93; healing rites of, 110–11, 175; and hexing, 175
Abortion, 37, 114
Abstraction, 10
Acupuncture meridians, 145, 146
Aggression, 58, 62, 63, 67, 207, 208, 211, 220, 221
Agony and ecstasy, and birth, 60, 63–64
Agpoa, Tony, 191
Air, 162
Alcohol, 43
Alcoholism, 74, 208
Aliens (film), 54
Allah, 164
Altered states, 13, 18, 20, 22, 23, 156; and group identification, 93–96
Amber, 107
Ancestors, experience of and identification with, 120–23
Andreasson family, 187
Anima, 157, 158, 178
Animal(s), 18, 79; ancestors, 116; and birth process, 29; identification with,
98–100, 149–50; power, 141, 148, 150, 177; spirit guides, 148–51
Animus, 157, 178
Ankh, 162
Anthropology, 11, 20, 189–93, 201, 203
Anthroposophists, 132
Apollo, 42
Apollo 9 space mission, 96–98
Apparitions, 141, 182
Archetypes and archetypal experience, 42, 48, 52, 114, 156–60, 173;
consciousness of, 173; deities, 88; encountered during death-rebirth, 160
and group identification, 94–96; religious, 159–60; universal examples
of, 157–59; wrathful vs. blissful, 160. See also Mythology
Aristotle, 203
Arms race, 220
231

Armstrong, Anne, 139
Arnold, Kenneth, 185
Arrigo (psychic surgeon), 191
Art, 43–44, 169–70; perinatal themes in, 54, 66–67
Artistic impulse and inspiration, 167, 169–70. See also Creative principle
Assagioli, Roberto, 153
Asthma, 24, 207
Astral realm, 142, 143
Astrophysics, 6, 17
Atheism, 18
Athletes, 175, 181–82
Atoms, 4, 5, 6, 105, 168
Auras, 141, 145, 146
Automatic writing, 142
Babinski response, 23
Babylonia, 203
Bailey, Alice, 153
Bardo body, 138
Basic Perinatal Matrice (BPM), 28–30
Basic Perinatal Matrice I (BPM I), 30, 33–44; author’s experience of, 33–37;
biological and psychological features of, 37–39; and bad womb, 38, 41,
42, 43, 44; ecstasy and cosmic unity in, 39–40; good womb, 38, 39, 42, 43,
44; and postnatal life, 43; and transpersonal experience, 41–43
Basic Perinatal Matrice II (BPM II), 45–56, 212–13, 218; artistic expression
of, 54; spiritual and religious imagery of, 52–54; and victim role, 54–55
Basic Perinatal Matrice III (BPM III), 57–207, 213, 218, 220; and art, 66–67;
link with postnatal experience, 67–68; mythological and spiritual themes
of, 65–66; and roots of violence, 62–63, 67; scatological impressions of,
61, 65, 67; and sexuality, 60–61, 63–64, 67; titanic themes of, 61–62, 67
Basic Perinatal Matrice IV (BPM IV), 69–79; biological realities of, 72–73;
ego death and rebirth, 73–78; mythology of death and rebirth, 75; religious
and mythical symbolism in, 75–76
Bateson, Gregory, 11, 92–93, 109, 150
Bender, Hans, 183, 184
Bennett, Hal Zina, 150–51
Beyond that is Within, 75, 76
Bible, the, 53, 158, 170
Big Bang theory, 114
Bilocation, 195
232
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Biofeedback, 13, 195
Biographical realm and material, 21–24, 25, 206
Biosphere, consciousness of, 103—4
Birth, process and experience, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 27, 45–79; agony and ecstasy
of, 60, 63–64; anesthesia during, 208; breech, 72, 73; caesarean section,
78; difficult, 47, 78, 208; and dual unity, 91; induced, 78; and Kundalini
experience, 146–47; moment of, 69–73; premature, 78; and sexual arousal,
57, 60, 67; uncomplicated, 78; universal experience of, 29. See also Basic
Perinatal Matrices; Pregnancy; Womb
Birth trauma, 42–44, 207, 209; and human violence, 212—15
Blood pressure, 195
Body: Bardo, 138; heat, 180; work, 22
Bohm, David, 8–10
Bolen, Jean Shinoda, 159
Botanical processes, identification with, 100–103
BPMs. See Basic Perinatal Matrices
Brahma, 160
Brain, 4–5, 10, 11, 13, 79, 83, 202, 206
Brazil, 142, 191
Breast: bad, 43; good, 76
Breathing: infant’s first, 73; problems with, 24
Buddha, 42, 53, 160, 170
Buddhism, 21, 132, 146, 159, 164, 180, 193
Caesarean section, 78
Cain and Abel, 158
Campbell, Joseph, 141, 156, 159, 160, 190
Camus, Albert, 50
Cannon, Walter B., 192
Caribbean, 193
Catholicism, 127
Causality, 12, 89, 174–78
Cells, 5
Central nervous system, 5
Chakras, 141, 145, 146
Channeling, 152—55; artistic, 169; of literature, 152–53, 169
Chanting, 147, 148, 190
Childbirth. See Birth
Childhood, 16, 20, 21–24, 28, 43, 214; of parents, identification with, 118–20
Chinese medicine, 146
233
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Christ, 53, 54, 65, 70, 75, 96, 159, 161, 162, 170, 180
Christianity, 21, 162; and birth process, 52–53; and reincarnation, 126,
132–33; symbolism of, 70–72
Christian mysticism, 179–80
Church of Latter Day Saints, 153
Circumcision, 203
Clairvoyance, 135, 139
COEX systems, 24–28
Collective experience, 123–26
Collective unconscious, 12, 21, 25, 29, 79, 85, 113, 119, 123, 155, 156, 161,
173; and UFOs, 186
Communism, 217
Concentration camp syndrome, 218–19
Conception, 115–16
Consciousness, 3–6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17; cosmic, 15, 18, 134, 163–70, 202–3;
expansion beyond everyday concept of time and space, 87, 88;
non-ordinary states of consciousness, 13, 18, 20, 22, 23, 93–96, 156;
research, 11, 12, 19, 84, 89, 156, 202
Cosmic consciousness, 15, 18, 134, 163–70, 202–3
Cosmic unity, 17, 88; in BPM I, 39–40; planet as, 109–11
Course in Miracles, A (Schucman), 153
Creative principle, 11, 16, 163–70
Creator, 163, 166, 167. See also God
Crime, 220
Criminal behavior, 207, 216
Crisis, psychospiritual, 14, 19, 78, 135, 149, 178, 209, 221
Crucifixion, 65, 70, 75, 162
Crystals, 107–8
Curanderos, 191
Cybernetics, 11, 109
Dancing, 125, 148, 190
Darkness, 159–60. See also Evil
Dead, communication with, 141–45
Death, 49, 53; and dying, 13; ego, 73–74, 75, 160, 178; linked with birth, 47,
50, 51; return from clinical, 135;; and sexuality, 64. See also Near-death
experiences
Death and rebirth, psychological, 17, 72–76, 203, 217, 220; archetypal beings
encountered during, 160
Deities, 65, 66, 72, 75, 159. See also Goddesses; Gods
234
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Delusions, 178
De Mause, Lloyd, 214–15
Demons, 42, 72
Depression, 24, 50, 131, 205, 207
Depth psychology, 12, 162, 214
Descartes, René, 170
Diamonds, 106, 107, 108
Diptheria, 24
Discarnate entities, 143
Discourse on Method (Descartes), 170
Disease: and animal spirits, 148; auras used to diagnose, 146. See aslo
Emotional disorders; Symptoms
Divine Beings, 72, 76
Dreams, 12, 149, 161, 174; analysis of, 149, 162, 210
Dreamtime World, 159
Drug addiction, 74, 208
Drumming, 190
Dual unity, 91, 92, 114, 117, 123
Earth, 162; consciousness of, 109–11; experience of pre-human history of,
113
Eastern spiritual philosophy, 13, 16, 17, 21, 168, 203. See aslo specific names
Ecology, 219, 220, 221
Ecstasy, 43, 208; and agony in birth, 60, 63–64; and BPM I, 39–44;
identification during, 91; oceanic, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45; religious, 179–80;
volcanic, 40, 63
Ectoplasmic formations, 182
Edelstein, Harold, 187
Ego, 21, 31, 36, 87; death, 73–74, 75, 160, 178; false, 74; skin-encapsulated,
91
Egypt, ancient, 126
Einstein, Albert, 4, 7, 8, 90, 169, 179
Electra complex, 158
Electrons, 6
Electroshock therapy, 205
Eleusinian mysteries, 203
Embryonal experience, 114—16. See aslo Fetal experience
Emmanuel’s Books (Rodegast), 153
Emotional: life, 25; shocks, 91
Emotional disorders, 204–9, 218; roots of, in past lives, 133
235
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Empathy, 92
Emptiness, 170–71
Energy, 7, 10
Energy fields of subtle body, 145–48
Energy resources, 220
Epilepsy, 195
Erogenous zones, 55, 67, 78
Esalen Institute, 20, 92, 142, 177
ESP (extra-sensory perception), 13, 134–39
Evil, 40, 41, 48, 58, 65, 159–60
Existentialism, 50
Experience, non-verbal, 19
Experiential psychotherapy, 13, 14, 19, 22, 30, 42, 43, 135, 202, 205, 207
Explicate order, 8
Extraterrestrials, 48, 185–88
Faces of the Enemy, The (Keen), 215
Fairy tales, 158, 161
Family, 21, 43, 55. See aslo Ancestors
Father, 157; identification with, 118–19
Fear, 22
Feminine principles, 163
Fertility rites, 64, 66
Fetal experience, 33–44, 114–18; ecstasy in, 39–44; and unity with mother,
91, 92, 114, 117. See aslo Basic Perinatal Matrices; Birth; Womb
Fetishes, 148, 150
Fire, 102, 162; consciousness of, 104, 106; as purifying, 66; as sacred, 108
Fire of Love, 180
Firewalking, 193
Free-association, 22
Freud, Sigmund, 14, 16, 22, 60, 67, 158, 159, 207; and dream analysis, 162
Freudian analysis, 12, 20, 73, 210
Fromm, Erich, 211
Gaia theory, 109–11
Garrett, Eileen, 144
Gasparetto, Luiz Antonio, 142, 143
Geller, Uri, 196
Genetic code, ancestral memories imprinted on, 122–23
Genocide, 212
236
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Ghosts, 174
Giger, Hansreudi, 54, 66
Global crisis, 219–20
God. 70, 71, 72, 76, 169, 170
Goddesses, 76, 102, 159, 161, 178
Goddesses in Every Woman (Bolen), 159
Gods, 75, 161; inanimate objects of, 108; plant, 103
Gods in Every Man (Bolen), 159
Good, 65
Grant, Joan, 129
Great Mother Goddesses, 42, 76, 102, 110, 159, 178
Greece, ancient, 52, 75, 132
Green, Elmer and Alyce, 194–95
Grof, Christina, 20, 92–93, 146–47, 177–78
Guardian spirits, 148–51, 177
Hades, 159
Hallucinations, 178; mass, 179
Harary, Keith, 138
Harner, Michael, 13, 177
Hauntings, 182
Healers, spiritual, 191
Healing: by aboriginals, 110–11, 175; ceremonies, 191, 203; of inner self,
210; and past-life experience, 130–31; psychokinetic, 195; rituals, 110–11
Hell, 53
Hexing, 175, 192
Higher Power, 74
Himalayan hermits, 180, 193
Hinduism, 108, 132, 134, 146, 157, 161, 162, 163, 193
Hiroshima, bombing of, 215
Hitler, Adolph, 214, 216, 219
Holograms, 7, 8, 9
Holography, 7–10
Holomovement, 9, 10
Holotropic Breathwork, 14, 20, 22, 23
Home, Daniel Douglas, 180, 182
Homeopathy, 105, 206
Humanistic psychology, 22
Humanity, identification with all of, 96–98
Hussein, Saddam, 219
237
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Huxley, Aldous, 21, 107, 141, 203
Hynek, Allen, 187
Hyperspace, 188
Hypnosis, 187, 202; regression, 14; therapy, 129
Hysteria, 67, 207
Identification, 91–98; with all of humanity, 96–98; with all of life, 103–4; in
altered states, 93; with ancestors, 120–23; with animals, 98–100, 207; with
archetypes, 160–61; and dual unity, 91–92; with group consciousness,
93–96; with inanimate matter and inorganic processes, 104–9; with
parents’ childhood, 118–20
Implicate order, 8, 9
Inanimate matter, 104–9
India, and reincarnation, 132; scripture of, 146
Individual consciousness, 22, 25
Infancy, 16, 19, 20, 21–24, 43
Inner core, 85–86
Inspiration. See Creative principle
Institute for the Study of the Frontiers of Psychology and Psychohygiene,
183
International Psychoanalytic Association, 14
Intrauterine experience. See Fetal experience; Womb
Isis, 76, 159, 162, 203
Islam, 21
Jainism, 132
James, William, 86
Jeans, James, 7
Judaism, 21
Jung, C.G., 12, 21, 29, 31, 39, 79, 84–87, 119, 123, 152, 153, 161, 204, 211, 219;
and archetypes, 156, 157; and synchronicities, 173–75, 176, 177, 178–79;
and UFOs, 186; and universal symbols, 162
Kabbalah, 162, 164
Kali, 161
Kammerer, Paul, 176
Kardec, Allen, 142
Karmic experience, 42, 43, 87, 113, 114, 126, 131, 134
Keen, Sam, 215
Kelsey, Dennys, 129
238
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Kennedy, John F., 214
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 219
Kirkegaard, Søren, 50
Koran, 152–53
Kubler-Ross, Elisabeth, 137
Kulagina, Nina, 195
Kundalini experience, 146–48
Languages: and experience of other lives, 125; and mystical terms, 164
Lao-tsu, 164
Laser, 7
Legends, 158
Levitation, 180, 182, 195
Life, 10; evolution of, 5; -threatening experience, 25
Light, 10, 74, 76, 159–60; and crystals, 107; at moment of death, 15
Lila, 157
Literature: channeled, 152–53, 169; perinatal themes in, 54, 66; religious
and spiritual, 132–33, 134
Logic, 13; double, 190
Love, 91, 166, 167
Lovelock, J. E., 109–10
Lovers, archetype, 157, 158
LSD, 12, 15, 21, 119; author’s experience with, 15–16; therapy using, 16–17,
118, 120, 121, 135, 144
Luminosity, of body, 175, 179
Magic, ceremonial, 175
Mahayan Buddhism, 164
Manifestations, 175, 179–80, 182–84
Mantras, 147
Marriage, 203, 220
Masculine principles, 163
Maslow, Abraham, 40, 77, 85–86
Mass psychopathology, 212
Materialism, 4, 75, 219
Materializations, 182
Matsuwa, Don Jose, 190
Matter, 4–12, 83, 201; identification with inanimate, 104–9; relationship to
human consciousness, 201–4
Maya, 94–96, 158
239
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Medicine, 201, 205, 206
Medicine men, 194. See aslo Shamans
Meditation, 14, 147, 202, 205
Mediums, 142–45, 180, 182, 183
Memories. See COEX systems
Memories, Dreams, Reflections (Jung), 89, 152, 173
Memory, 139
Mendeleev, Dmitri, 168
Menninger Foundation, 194
Mental disease, 205, 209
Mental health, 204–9
Mescaline, 50
Messages from Michael (Yarbo), 153
Metals, 106, 110; as sacred objects, 106–8
Metamorphosis, 100
Migraine headaches, 24, 131, 195, 207
Military leaders, 214–17
Miscarriage, 37, 114
Mohammed, 153, 170
Molecules, 5, 105
Moody, Raymond, 137
Mormons, 153
Morphogenetic fields, 11, 150
Moses, 170
Moslems, 152
Mother(s), 73; archetypal, 57–58, 60, 157; good, 157
Mother and child, unity between, during pregnancy, 37, 59–60, 91, 92, 118,
119–20
Mother Goddesses, 42, 76, 102, 110, 159, 178
Movies, perinatal themes in, 54, 66–67
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 169
Muktananda, Swami, 147, 177
Murphy, Michael, 180, 181
Mushrooms, 103
Music, 77; perinatal themes in, 66
Musical inspiration, 169–70
Mystical: experience, 16, 19, 77, 164; literature, 93
Mysticism, 13, 203; Christian, 179–80
Mythic realities, 156–60
240
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Mythology, 17, 18, 35, 39, 79, 116, 141; archetypes of, 156–60; and behaviour
of nations, 219; and birth process, 29, 65–66; of death and rebirth, 75;
Greek, 52; motifs and themes of, 61–62, 219
Myths to Live By (Campbell), 159
Nadis, 145, 146
NASA, 109–10
Native Americans, 103, 105, 123–24, 148, 150, 190, 194
Nature: form in, 11; identification with, 104–9
Near-death experiences (NDEs), 14, 24, 135, 137, 138, 142, 202
Neurophysiology, 10, 11
Neurosis, 206
Neurotics, 205
Neutrons, 6
New Age Transformations: Revelations (Spangler), 153
Newtonian science, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 91, 133, 168, 175, 179, 197, 201, 204
Numinous experience, 39, 166, 204
Nursing of baby, 43, 45; and dual unity, 91, 92
Obsessive-compulsive neurosis, 67
Occult, 109, 220
Oceanic ecstasy, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 63, 114
Oedipus complex, 158, 159
Omega experience, 14
O’Neill, Eugene, 90
Orgasm, 67
Origen, 132
Osiris, 162, 203
Out-of-body experiences (OOBEs), 134–39
Oversoul, 134
Pahnke, Walter N., 143–44, 191
Palladino, Eusapia, 180, 182
Paradise, 35, 39, 106
Parallel universes, 155
Paramahansa Yogananda, 180
Parapsychology, 13, 20, 134–39
Parents, identification with childhood of, 118–20
Past life experiences, 25, 42, 113, 126–34, 207; and healing, 130–31; and LSD,
17
241
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Peak experience, 40, 77, 85
Pearl Harbor, attack on. 214–15
Pechorskaya Lavra, 128–30
Penfield, Wilder, 202
Perceptions: inner, 25, 77; world, 25, 77, 86
Perinatal experience, 28–30, 33–44, 178, 207, 212; and human violence,
212–17. See aslo Basic Perinatal Matrices; Birth
Peyote, 103
Phallic worship, 64, 66
Philippines, 142, 191
Philosophy, 50, 76, 201, 203
Phobias, 24, 67, 131, 207
Photosynthesis, 101, 102
Phylogenetic experience, 114
Physics, 179, 189, 195
Pio, Padre, 180
Plant(s), 18; gods, 103; identification with, 100–103; psychedelic, 103
Plato, 203
Pleroma, 85
Pneumonia, 24
Poetry, spiritual, 165
Political science, 214
Pollution, 220
Poltergeists, 174, 175, 182, 183–84
Pornography, 64
Power, 75
Power animals, 141, 148, 149, 150, 177
Pratt, Gaither, 184
Precognition, 135
Pregnancy, 33–44, 114–18; and dual unity, 91, 92, 114, 117; ecstasy during,
39–44. See aslo Basic Perinatal Matrices;
Pribam, Karl, 10
Promethean impulse, 168–70
Prophets, 170, 209
Prostitution, temple, 64, 66, 67
Protons, 6
Psyche: cartography of, 20–21; transpersonal domain of, 41
Psychedelic(s), 14, 103; research, 12, 202; therapy, 14, 19, 26, 50, 205
Psychiatric Research Institute, Prague, 16
242
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Psychiatry: mainstream, 18, 27, 28, 178, 179, 201, 204, 205, 206; as medical
discipline, 204
Psychics, 20, 142, 195–96
Psychic Side of Sports, The (Murphy; White), 181
Psychic surgery, 191–92
Psychoactive substances, 91, 103, 135
Psychoanalysis, 14, 16, 22
Psychohistory, 214–15
Psychoid, defined, 173
Psychoid experiences, 87, 88, 173–97; physical manifestations, 175, 179–89;
psychokinesis, 189–95; synchronicities, 175–79; three categories of, 175.
See aslo Poltergeists; UFOs
Psychokinesis, 174, 175, 189–95; research on, 195–96
Psychology, 11, 12, 201, 204; depth, 12, 162, 214; traditional, 27–28, 79, 179
Psychopathology, 212, 216
Psychosis, 208
Psychosomatic disorders, 24, 25, 131, 204–9
Psychosynthesis, 153
Psychotherapy, 22, 178, 201, 205, 209–11; and non-ordinary states of
consciousness, 210–11
Psychotics, 205, 206
Puthoff, Harold, 138
Quantum physics, 8, 174, 179, 189, 195, 197
Racial experiences, 123–26
Rain ceremonies, 189, 190, 191
Rape, 63, 66, 67, 218
Rationality, 13
Reality, 8–10; consensus, 5; explicate and implicate orders of, 8; nature of,
13, 139
Rebirth, spiritual, 72–76. See aslo Death and rebirth
Reincarnation, 126, 127, 128, 131–34
Relativity, theory of, 4, 17, 169
Religions, world, 17, 76, 152–53, 170, 201, 204; archetypes of, 159—60; creator
and cosmic conciousness in, 163–64; and reincarnation, 126, 127, 132–33
Religious scriptures, 65, 93, 106, 170, 179; channeled, 152–53
Remote viewing, 138–39
Repression, 22
Resurrection, 70–71, 75
243
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Revolutions, 213–17, 220
Rhine, R. B., 182
Ring, Kenneth, 14, 137
Rites of passage, 203
Rituals, 190
Roberts, Jane, 153
Roll, William, 184
RSPK (recurrent spontaneous psychokinesis), 183–84
Sabom, Michael, 137
Sadomasochism, 24, 60, 207, 216; and birth process, 61, 62–63
St. Bernadette of Lourdes, 180
St. Francis of Assisi, 132, 180
Saint Hildegard von Bingen, 165
St. Paul, 170
St. Theresa of Avila, 180
Saints, 179–80, 209
Sartre, Jean Paul, 50
Satan, 159
Satanic practices, 58, 64–65
Scatology, 61, 65, 67, 216, 218, 220
Schucman, Helen, 153
Schwarz, Jack, 139, 146, 194
Schweickart, Rusty, 96–98
Science, traditional Western, 11, 12, 13, 18, 21, 170, 174, 176, 178, 202
Scriptures. See Religious scriptures
Seances, 175, 182
Self, 90; divine, 76, 78; inner core, 85–86; as part of universe, 90
Self-destructive behavior, 62, 63, 67, 216
Senses, physical, 4, 5, 13, 18, 83, 84, 86, 89, 202
Serios, Ted, 196
“Seth” books, 153
Seven Sermons for the Dead (Jung), 85, 153, 179
Sex(ual), 37, 220; abuse, 216, 218; deviations and disorders, 61, 67, 207;
linked to birth, 58, 67; symbols, 162
Sexual arousal: associated with pain and aggression, 207; and birth process,
57, 60, 67
Sexuality: beginnings of, 207–8; and birth experience, 60–61, 63–64, 67; and
death, 64; and transcendence, 64
Shadow of the self, 157, 213–17, 157
244
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Shakti, 146
Shamanism, 13, 14, 19, 21, 148, 149, 150, 203
Shamans, 20, 107, 177, 190, 191, 209
Sheldrake, Rupert, 11, 149
Shiva, 108, 162
Siddhis, 175, 195
Sikhism, 132
Simonton, Carl, 92–93
Smith, Joseph, 153
Societies: violence in, 211–19
Solar system, 114
Space, 7, 87, 135–36, 137
Space-time, 7, 202; and UFOs, 188
Speaking in tongues, 125, 142, 147
Spell casting, 192
Spirit guides, 141, 151–55
Spiritist Church, 142
Spiritual Emergence Network (SEN), 209
Spiritual Emergency. See Crisis Spiritualistic experiences, 142–45
Spirituality, 13, 52–54, 204
Spiritual literature, 93, 106, 132–33, 134, 164, 170, 175, 179, 189
Spiritual systems, 16; ancient, 17, 19, 21
Sports: psychoid experiences in, 175, 181–82
Stars: as symbol, 162–63
“Star Trek” (TV series), 155
Star Wars (films), 155
Stevenson, Ian, 133
Stigmata, 180
Stones, 106, 110; as sacred objects, 106–8
Sublimation, 77
Subtle bodies, 145
Suffocation, 59, 60
Sufism, 164, 180
Suicidal behavior, 208
Sun: as deity, 108
Superego, 62, 216
Superstition, 204
Suprahuman beings, 151–55
Supreme Being, 160
Surgery: psychic, 191–92
245
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.

Surrender, 74
Swastika, 162, 219
Symbolic experiences, 149, 150
Symbolism, 219; deciphering universal, 162–63
Symptoms: of disease and/or healing, 205–6
Synchronicity, 12, 133, 174, 175–79
Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle (Jung), 176
Tantric traditions, 91, 163, 193
Tao, 135, 136, 164
Taoism, 21, 76, 108, 163, 164, 193
Targ, Russell, 138
Tart, Charles, 138
Tat tvam asi, 35, 76, 164
Telekinesis, 91
Telepathy, 135; communication with dead, 142
Tesla, Nicola, 169
Thanatology, 14, 20, 135, 137, 202
Theosophists, 132
Thomas, Lewis, 109
Tibetan Book of the Dead, 135, 138, 160
Tibetan Buddhism, 108, 180
Tibetan Vajrayana, 132
Time, 7, 18, 87, 135–37; and ESP, 134; linear, 45, 51; transcendence of, 94–96,
113–39
Toilet training, 67
Token of espousal, 180
Torah, 170
Trance states, 192, 202
Transcendence, 64; of time, 94–96, 113–39
Transformation, 87–88, 216, 217, 221
Transpersonal consciousness, 79, 83—88; exploring and mapping, 86—88
Trauma, 21, 22, 206, 207; physical, 24, 26–27. See aslo Birth trauma
UFOs (unidentified flying objects), 155–56, 174, 175, 184–89
Umbilical cord, 72, 73
Unconscious: individual, 22, 25; mind, 14, 16. See aslo Collective unconscious
Universal symbols, 162–63
Universe, 4, 5, 7; at one with, 35, 36, 38, 39; experiencing pre-human history
of, 114; parallel, 155; self as part of, 90
246
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND

Upanishads, 35, 40, 76, 164
U.S. Air Force, 185, 187
Uterus, 59
Uyeshiba, Morehei, 181–82
Vallee, Jacques, 187–88
Vedas, 152, 170
Verbal skills, 19
Victim role, 54–55, 62
Violence, 218, 219; and birth process, 62–63, 67; history of human, 211–19;
sexual, 216
Virgin Mary, 76, 159
“The Visionary Experience” (Huxley), 107
Visions, 12, 17, 42, 93, 149, 161, 169, 170, 174
Void, cosmic, 170–71
Voodoo rituals, 193
Wars, 67, 212–17, 220
Water, 110, 162; consciousness of, 104, 106
Watts, Alan, 74
Wholeness and the Implicate Order (Bohm), 9
Whooping cough, 24
Witchcraft, 58, 64–65, 220
Witchdoctors, 192
Womb, 46–47; bad, 38, 41, 42, 43, 44; good, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 76. See aslo
Basic Perinatal Matrices; Pregnancy
World War II, 217–19
Yeats, William Butler, 12
Yin-yang symbol, 163
Yoga, 21, 91, 125, 148–49
Yogis, 180; supernatural feats of, 175, 193–95
Zen Buddhism, 76
Zoroastrianism, 132
Zuni people, 105, 148, 150
247
STANISLAV GROF, M.D. WITH HAL ZINA BENNETT, PH.D.


Other books by Stanislav Grof:
The Adventure of Self-Discovery
Ancient Wisdom and Modern Science (editor)
Beyond Death (with Christina Grof)
Beyond the Brain
The Human Encounter with Death
Human Survival and Consciousness Evolution (editor)
LSD Psychotherapy
Realms of the Human Unconscious
Spiritual Emergency (edited with Christina Grof)
The Stormy Search for the Self (with Christina Grof)

Copyright
THE HOLOTROPIC MIND. Copyright © 1993 by Stanislav Grof, with Hal
Zina Bennett. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have
been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and
read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be
reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered,
or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical,
now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader January 2008
ISBN 978-0-06-166131-0
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Australia 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
Canada 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
New Zealand 
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
Auckland, New Zealand 
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 
10 East 53rd Street 
About the Publisher 
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 
P.O. Box 1 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com 
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 

