

More Praise for
the invisible gorilla
“Should be required reading by every judge and jury member in our crimi-
nal justice system, along with every battleﬁ eld commander, corporate CEO, 
member of Congress, and, well, you and me . . . because the mental illusions 
so wonderfully explicated in this book can fool every one of us.”
—Michael Shermer, publisher of Skeptic magazine, monthly columnist for 
Scientiﬁ c American, and author of Why People Believe Weird Things
“A breathtaking and insightful journey through the illusions that inﬂ u-
ence every moment of our lives.”
—Richard Wiseman, author of Quirkology: 
How We Discover the Big Truths in Small Things
“Not just witty and engaging but also insightful. . . . Reading this book 
won’t cure you of all these limitations, but it will at least help you recognize 
and compensate for them.”
—Thomas W. Malone, author of The Future of Work and 
founder of the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence
“Everyday illusions trick us into thinking that we see—and know—more than 
we really do, and that we can predict the future when we can’t. The Invisible 
Gorilla teaches us exactly why, and it does so in an incredibly engaging way. 
Chabris and Simons provide terriﬁ c tips on how to cast off our illusions 
and get things right. Whether you’re a driver wanting to steer clear of on-
coming motorcycles, a radiologist hoping to spot every tumor, or just an aver-
age person curious about how your mind really works, this is a must-read.”
—Elizabeth Loftus, PhD, Distinguished Professor, University of 
California–Irvine, and author of Memory and Eyewitness Testimony

“An eye-opening book. After reading The Invisible Gorilla you will look at 
yourself and the world around you differently. Like its authors, the book is 
both funny and smart, ﬁ lled with insights into the everyday illusions that 
we all walk around with. No matter what your job is or what you do in life, 
you will learn something from this book.”
—Joseph T. Hallinan, Pulitzer Prize–winning 
author of Why We Make Mistakes
“Cognitive scientists Chris Chabris and Dan Simons deliver an entertaining 
tour of the many ways our brains mislead us every day. The Invisible Gorilla 
is engaging, accurate, and packed with real-world examples—some of 
which made me laugh out loud. Read it to ﬁ nd out why weathermen might 
make good money managers, and what Homer Simpson can teach you about 
thinking clearly.”
—Sandra Aamodt, PhD, coauthor of Welcome to Your Brain 
and former editor, Nature Neuroscience
“Wonderfully refreshing . . . The Invisible Gorilla makes us smarter by 
reminding us how little we know. Through a lively tour of the brain’s blind 
spots, this book will change the way you drive your car, hire your employees, 
and invest your money.”
—Amanda Ripley, senior writer, Time magazine, 
and author of The Unthinkable

the invisible gorilla


Christopher Chabris 
and Daniel Simons
c r o w n
New York
the invisible gorilla
And Other Ways Our Intuitions Deceive Us

Copyright © 2010 by Christopher F. Chabris and Daniel J. Simons
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Publishers, an imprint of the Crown 
Publishing Group, a division of Random  House, Inc., New York.
 www .crownpublishing .com
CROWN and the Crown colophon are registered trademarks of Random  House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Chabris, Christopher F.
 The invisible gorilla : and other ways our intuitions deceive us / Christopher F. 
Chabris and Daniel J. Simons.
   p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1. Perception. 2. Memory. 3. Thought and thinking. I. Simons, Daniel J. 
II. Title.
 BF321.C43 2010
 153.7'4—dc22
2009045325
ISBN 978- 0- 307- 45965- 7
Printed in the United States of America
Design by Ralph Fowler / rlf design
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
First Edition

C O N T E N T S
Introduction: Everyday Illusions ix
1. “I Think I Would Have Seen That” 1
2. The Coach Who Choked 43
3.  What Smart Chess Players and Stupid Criminals 
Have in Common 80
4.  Should You Be More Like a Weather Forecaster 
or a Hedge Fund Manager? 116
5. Jumping to Conclusions 150
6. Get Smart Quick! 185
Conclusion: The Myth of Intuition 224
Ac know ledg ments 243
Notes 247
Index 291


I N T R O D U C T I O N
everyday illusions
“There are three things extremely hard: steel, 
a diamond, and to know one’s self.”
—Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard’s Almanack (1750)
A
bout twelve years ago, we conducted a simple experiment
 with the students in a psychology course we  were teaching at 
Harvard University. To our surprise, it has become one of the best- 
known experiments in psychology. It appears in textbooks and is taught 
in introductory psychology courses throughout the world. It has been 
featured in magazines such as Newsweek and The New Yorker and on 
tele vi sion programs, including Dateline NBC. It has even been exhib-
ited in the Exploratorium in San Francisco and in other museums. The 
experiment is pop u lar because it reveals, in a humorous way, something 
unexpected and deep about how we see our world— and about what we 
don’t see.
You’ll read about our experiment in the ﬁ rst chapter of this book. As 
 we’ve thought about it over the years,  we’ve realized that it illustrates a 
broader principle about how the mind works. We all believe that we are 

x  INTRODUCTION
capable of seeing what’s in front of us, of accurately remembering im-
portant events from our past, of understanding the limits of our knowl-
edge, of properly determining cause and effect. But these intuitive 
beliefs are often mistaken ones that mask critically important limita-
tions on our cognitive abilities.
We must be reminded not to judge a book by its cover because we 
take outward appearances to be accurate advertisements of inner, un-
seen qualities. We need to be told that a penny saved is a penny earned 
because we think about cash coming in differently from money we al-
ready have. Aphorisms like these exist largely to help us avoid the mis-
takes that intuition can cause. Likewise, Benjamin Franklin’s observation 
about extremely hard things suggests that we should question the intui-
tive belief that we understand ourselves well. As we go through life, we 
act as though we know how our minds work and why we behave the 
way we do. It is surprising how often we really have no clue.
The Invisible Gorilla is a book about six everyday illusions that pro-
foundly inﬂ uence our lives: the illusions of attention, memory, conﬁ -
dence, knowledge, cause, and potential. These are distorted beliefs we 
hold about our minds that are not just wrong, but wrong in dangerous 
ways. We will explore when and why these illusions affect us, the conse-
quences they have for human affairs, and how we can overcome or min-
imize their impact.
We use the word “illusions” as a deliberate analogy to visual illusions 
like M. C. Escher’s famous never- ending staircase: Even after you realize 
that something about the picture as a  whole is not right, you still  can’t 
stop yourself from seeing each individual segment as a proper staircase. 
Everyday illusions are similarly per sis tent: Even after we know how our 
beliefs and intuitions are ﬂ awed, they remain stubbornly resistant to 
change. We call them everyday illusions because they affect our behav-
ior literally every day. Every time we talk on a cell phone while driving, 
believing  we’re still paying enough attention to the road,  we’ve been af-
fected by one of these illusions. Every time we assume that someone who 
misremembers their past must be lying,  we’ve succumbed to an illusion. 
Every time we pick a leader for a team because that person expresses the 

INTRODUCTION  xi
most conﬁ dence,  we’ve been inﬂ uenced by an illusion. Every time we 
start a new project convinced that we know how long it will take to com-
plete, we are under an illusion. Indeed, virtually no realm of human be-
havior is untouched by everyday illusions.
As professors who design and run psychology experiments for a living, 
 we’ve found that the more we study the nature of the mind, the more we 
see the impact of these illusions in our own lives. You can develop the 
same sort of x-ray vision into the workings of your own mind. When you 
ﬁ nish this book, you will be able to glimpse the man behind the curtain 
and some of the tiny gears and pulleys that govern your thoughts and be-
liefs. Once you know about everyday illusions, you will view the world 
differently and think about it more clearly. You will see how illusions 
affect your own thoughts and actions, as well as the behavior of every-
one around you. And you will recognize when journalists, managers, 
advertisers, and politicians— intentionally or accidentally— take advan-
tage of illusions in an attempt to obfuscate or persuade. Understanding 
everyday illusions will lead you to recalibrate the way you approach your 
life to account for the limitations— and the true strengths— of your 
mind. You might even come up with ways to exploit these insights for 
fun and proﬁ t. Ultimately, seeing through the veils that distort how we 
perceive ourselves and the world will connect you— for perhaps the ﬁ rst 
time— with reality.


the invisible gorilla


1
C H A P T E R
“ i think i would have
seen that”
A
round two  o’clock on the cold, overcast morning of January
 25, 1995, a group of four black men left the scene of a shooting 
at a hamburger restaurant in the Grove Hall section of Boston.1 As they 
drove away in a gold Lexus, the police radio erroneously announced that 
the victim was a cop, leading ofﬁ cers from several districts to join in a 
ten- mile high- speed chase. In the ﬁ fteen to twenty minutes of mayhem 
that ensued, one police car veered off the road and crashed into a parked 
van. Eventually the Lexus skidded to a stop in a cul- de- sac on Wood-
ruff Way in the Mattapan neighborhood. The suspects ﬂ ed the car and 
ran in different directions.
One suspect, Robert “Smut” Brown III, age twenty- four, wearing a 
dark leather jacket, exited the back passenger side of the car and sprinted 
toward a chain- link fence on the side of the cul- de- sac. The ﬁ rst car in 
pursuit, an unmarked police vehicle, stopped to the left of the Lexus. 
Michael Cox, a decorated ofﬁ cer from the police antigang unit who’d 
grown up in the nearby Roxbury area, got out of the passenger seat and 
took off after Brown. Cox, who also is black, was in plainclothes that 
night; he wore jeans, a black hoodie, and a parka.2

2  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Cox got to the fence just after Smut Brown. As Brown scrambled 
over the top, his jacket got stuck on the metal. Cox reached for Brown 
and tried to pull him back, but Brown managed to fall to the other side. 
Cox prepared to scale the fence in pursuit, but just as he was starting to 
climb, his head was struck from behind by a blunt object, perhaps a 
baton or a ﬂ ashlight. He fell to the ground. Another police ofﬁ cer had 
mistaken him for a suspect, and several ofﬁ cers then beat up Cox, kick-
ing him in the head, back, face, and mouth. After a few moments, some-
one yelled, “Stop, stop, he’s a cop, he’s a cop.” At that point, the ofﬁ cers 
ﬂ ed, leaving Cox lying unconscious on the ground with facial wounds, 
a concussion, and kidney damage.3
Meanwhile, the pursuit of the suspects continued as more cops ar-
rived. Early on the scene was Kenny Conley, a large, athletic man from 
South Boston who had joined the police force four years earlier, not long 
after graduating from high school. Conley’s cruiser came to a stop about 
forty feet away from the gold Lexus. Conley saw Smut Brown scale the 
fence, drop to the other side, and run. Conley followed Brown over the 
fence, chased him on foot for about a mile, and eventually captured him 
at gunpoint and handcuffed him in a parking lot on River Street. Conley 
 wasn’t involved in the assault on Ofﬁ cer Cox, but he began his pursuit of 
Brown right as Cox was being pulled from the fence, and he scaled the 
fence right next to where the beating was happening.
Although the other murder suspects  were caught and that case was 
considered solved, the assault on Ofﬁ cer Cox remained wide open. For 
the next two years, internal police investigators and a grand jury sought 
answers about what happened at the cul- de- sac. Which cops beat Cox? 
Why did they beat him? Did they simply mistake their black colleague 
for one of the black suspects? If so, why did they ﬂ ee rather than seek 
medical help? Little headway was made, and in 1997, the local prose-
cutors handed the matter over to federal authorities so they could 
 investigate possible civil rights violations.
Cox named three ofﬁ cers whom he said had attacked him that night, 
but all of them denied knowing anything about the assault. Initial po-
lice reports said that Cox sustained his injuries when he slipped on a 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  3
patch of ice and fell against the back of one of the police cars. Although 
many of the nearly sixty cops who  were on the scene must have known 
what happened to Cox, none admitted knowing anything about the 
beating.  Here, for example, is what Kenny Conley, who apprehended 
Smut Brown, said under oath:
Q: So your testimony is that you went over the fence within 
seconds of seeing him go over the fence?
A: Yeah.
Q: And in that time, you did not see any black plainclothes police 
ofﬁ cer chasing him?
A: No, I did not.
Q: In fact, no black plainclothes ofﬁ cer was chasing him, accord-
ing to your testimony?
A: I did not see any black plainclothes ofﬁ cer chasing him.
Q: And if he was chasing him, you would have seen it?
A: I should have.
Q: And if he was holding the suspect as the suspect was at the 
top of the fence, he was lunging at him, you would have seen 
that, too?
A: I should have.
When asked directly if he would have seen Cox trying to pull Smut 
Brown from the fence, he responded, “I think I would have seen that.” 
Conley’s terse replies suggested a reluctant witness who had been advised 
by lawyers to stick to yes or no answers and not volunteer information. 
Since he was the cop who had taken up the chase, he was in an ideal posi-
tion to know what happened. His per sis tent refusal to admit to having seen 
Cox effectively blocked the federal prosecutors’ attempt to indict the ofﬁ -
cers involved in the attack, and no one was ever charged with the assault.

4  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
The only person ever charged with a crime in the case was Kenny 
Conley himself. He was indicted in 1997 for perjury and obstruction of 
justice. The prosecutors  were convinced that Conley was “testilying”— 
outlandishly claiming, under oath, not to have seen what was going on 
right before his eyes. According to this theory, just like the ofﬁ cers who 
ﬁ led reports denying any knowledge of the beating, Conley  wouldn’t 
rat out his fellow cops. Indeed, shortly after Conley’s indictment, prom-
inent Boston- area investigative journalist Dick Lehr wrote that “the 
Cox scandal shows a Boston police code of silence . . .  a tight inner circle 
of ofﬁ cers protecting themselves with false stories.”4
Kenny Conley stuck with his story, and his case went to trial. Smut 
Brown testiﬁ ed that Conley was the cop who arrested him. He also said 
that after he dropped over the fence, he looked back and saw a tall white 
cop standing near the beating. Another police ofﬁ cer also testiﬁ ed that 
Conley was there. The jurors  were incredulous at the notion that Conley 
could have run to the fence in pursuit of Brown without noticing the 
beating, or even seeing Ofﬁ cer Cox. After the trial, one juror explained, 
“It was hard for me to believe that, even with all the chaos, he didn’t see 
something.” Juror Burgess Nichols said that another juror had told him 
that his father and uncle had been police ofﬁ cers, and ofﬁ cers are taught 
“to observe everything” because they are “trained professionals.”5
Unable to reconcile their own expectations—and Conley’s—with 
Conley’s testimony that he didn’t see Cox, the jury convicted him. 
Kenny Conley was found guilty of one count each of perjury and ob-
struction of justice, and he was sentenced to thirty- four months in jail.6 
In 2000, after the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear his case, he was 
ﬁ red from the Boston police force. While his lawyers kept him out of 
jail with new appeals, Conley took up a new career as a carpenter.7
Dick Lehr, the journalist who reported on the Cox case and the 
“blue wall of silence,” never actually met with Kenny Conley until the 
summer of 2001. After this interview, Lehr began to wonder whether 
Conley might actually be telling the truth about what he saw and expe-
rienced during his pursuit of Smut Brown. That’s when Lehr brought 
the former cop to visit Dan’s laboratory at Harvard.

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  5
Gorillas in Our Midst
The two of us met over a de cade ago when Chris was a graduate student 
in the Harvard University psychology department and Dan had just 
arrived as a new assistant professor. Chris’s ofﬁ ce was down the hall 
from Dan’s lab, and we soon discovered our mutual interest in how we 
perceive, remember, and think about our visual world. The Kenny 
Conley case was in full swing when Dan taught an undergraduate 
course in research methods with Chris as his teaching assistant. As part 
of their classwork, the students assisted us in conducting some experi-
ments, one of which has become famous. It was based on an ingenious 
series of studies of visual attention and awareness conducted by the pio-
neering cognitive psychologist Ulric Neisser in the 1970s. Neisser had 
moved to Cornell University when Dan was in his ﬁ nal year of graduate 
school there, and their many conversations inspired Dan to build on 
Neisser’s earlier, groundbreaking research.
With our students as actors and a temporarily vacant ﬂ oor of the psy-
chology building as a set, we made a short ﬁ lm of two teams of people 
moving around and passing basketballs. One team wore white shirts and 
the other wore black. Dan manned the camera and directed. Chris co-
ordinated the action and kept track of which scenes we needed to shoot. 
We then digitally edited the ﬁ lm and copied it to videotapes, and our 
students fanned out across the Harvard campus to run the experiment.8
They asked volunteers to silently count the number of passes made 
by the players wearing white while ignoring any passes by the players 
wearing black. The video lasted less than a minute. If you want to try the 
task yourself, stop reading now and go to the website for our book,  www .
theinvisiblegorilla .com, where we provide links to many of the experi-
ments we discuss, including a short version of the basketball-passing 
video. Watch the video carefully, and be sure to include both aerial 
passes and bounce passes in your count.
Immediately after the video ended, our students asked the subjects to 
report how many passes they’d counted. In the full-length version, the 
correct answer was thirty- four—or maybe thirty- ﬁ ve. To be honest, it 

6  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 doesn’t matter. The pass- counting task was intended to keep people en-
gaged in doing something that demanded attention to the action on the 
screen, but we  weren’t really interested in pass- counting ability. We  were 
actually testing something  else: Halfway through the video, a female stu-
dent wearing a full- body gorilla suit walked into the scene, stopped in the 
middle of the players, faced the camera, thumped her chest, and then 
walked off, spending about nine seconds onscreen. After asking subjects 
about the passes, we asked the more important questions:
Q: Did you notice anything unusual while you  were doing the 
counting task?
A: No.
Q: Did you notice anything other than the players?
A: Well, there  were some elevators, and S’s painted on the wall. 
I don’t know what the S’s  were there for.
Q: Did you notice anyone other than the players?
A: No.
Q: Did you notice a gorilla?
A: A what?!?
Amazingly, roughly half of the subjects in our study did not notice the 
gorilla! Since then the experiment has been repeated many times, under 
different conditions, with diverse audiences, and in multiple countries, 
but the results are always the same: About half the people fail to see the 
gorilla. How could people not see a gorilla walk directly in front of them, 
turn to face them, beat its chest, and walk away? What made the gorilla 
invisible? This error of perception results from a lack of attention to an 
unexpected object, so it goes by the scientiﬁ c name “inattentional blind-
ness.” This name distinguishes it from forms of blindness resulting from 
a damaged visual system;  here, people don’t see the gorilla, but not be-
cause of a problem with their eyes. When people devote their attention to 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  7
a par tic u lar area or aspect of their visual world, they tend not to notice 
unexpected objects, even when those unexpected objects are salient, po-
tentially important, and appear right where they are looking.9 In other 
words, the subjects were concentrating so hard on counting the passes 
that they were “blind” to the gorilla right in front of their eyes.
What prompted us to write this book, however, was not inattentional 
blindness in general or the gorilla study in par tic u lar. The fact that people 
miss things is important, but what impressed us even more was the sur-
prise people showed when they realized what they had missed. When 
they watched the video again, this time without counting passes, they all 
saw the gorilla easily, and they were shocked. Some spontaneously said, “I 
missed that?!” or “No way!” A man who was tested later by the producers 
of Dateline NBC for their report on this research said, “I know that 
 gorilla didn’t come through there the ﬁ rst time.” Other subjects accused 
us of switching the tape while they weren’t looking.
The gorilla study illustrates, perhaps more dramatically than any 
other, the powerful and pervasive inﬂ uence of the illusion of attention: We 
experience far less of our visual world than we think we do. If we 
 were fully aware of the limits to attention, the illusion would vanish. 
While writing this book we hired the polling ﬁ rm SurveyUSA to contact 
a representative sample of American adults and ask them a series of 
questions about how they think the mind works. We found that more 
than 75 percent of people agreed that they would notice such unexpected 
events, even when they were focused on something  else.10 (We’ll talk 
about other ﬁ ndings of this survey throughout the book.)
It’s true that we vividly experience some aspects of our world, par-
ticularly those that are the focus of our attention. But this rich experi-
ence inevitably leads to the erroneous belief that we pro cess all of the 
detailed information around us. In essence, we know how vividly we 
see some aspects of our world, but we are completely unaware of those 
aspects of our world that fall outside of that current focus of attention. 
Our vivid visual experience masks a striking mental blindness— we as-
sume that visually distinctive or unusual objects will draw our atten-
tion, but in reality they often go completely unnoticed.11

8  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Since our experiment was published in the journal Perception in 1999, 
under the title “Gorillas in Our Midst,”12 it has become one of the most 
widely demonstrated and discussed studies in all of psychology. It earned 
us an Ig Nobel Prize in 2004 (awarded for “achievements that ﬁ rst make 
people laugh, and then make them think”) and was even discussed by 
characters in an episode of the television drama CSI.13  And we’ve lost 
count of the number of times people have asked us whether we have seen 
the video with the basketball players and the gorilla.
Kenny Conley’s Invisible Gorilla
Dick Lehr brought Kenny Conley to Dan’s laboratory because he had 
heard about our gorilla experiment, and he wanted to see how Conley 
would do in it. Conley was physically imposing, but stoic and taciturn; 
Lehr did most of the talking that day. Dan led them to a small, window-
less room in his laboratory and showed Conley the gorilla video, asking 
him to count the passes by the players wearing white. In advance, there 
was no way to know whether or not Conley would notice the unex-
pected gorilla— about half of the people who watch the video see the 
gorilla. Moreover, Conley’s success or failure in noticing the gorilla 
would not tell us whether or not he saw Michael Cox being beaten on 
Woodruff Way six years earlier. (These are both important points, and 
we will return to them shortly.) But Dan was still curious about how 
Conley would react when he heard about the science.
Conley counted the passes accurately and saw the gorilla. As is usual 
for people who do see the gorilla, he seemed genuinely surprised that 
anyone  else could possibly miss it. Even when Dan explained that people 
often miss unexpected events when their attention is otherwise en-
gaged, Conley still had trouble accepting that anyone  else could miss 
what seemed so obvious to him.
The illusion of attention is so ingrained and pervasive that everyone 
involved in the case of Kenny Conley was operating under a false no-
tion of how the mind works: the mistaken belief that we pay attention 
to— and therefore should notice and remember— much more of the 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  9
world around us than we actually do. Conley himself testiﬁ ed that he 
should have seen the brutal beating of Michael Cox had he actually run 
right past it. In their appeal of his conviction, Conley’s lawyers tried to 
show that he hadn’t run past the beating, that the testimony about his 
presence near the beating was wrong, and that descriptions of the inci-
dent from other police ofﬁ cers  were inaccurate. All of these arguments 
 were founded on the assumption that Conley could only be telling the 
truth if he didn’t have the opportunity to see the beating. But what if, 
instead, in the cul- de- sac on Woodruff Way, Conley found himself in a 
real- life version of our gorilla experiment? He could have been right 
next to the beating of Cox, and even focused his eyes on it, without ever 
actually seeing it.
Conley was worried about Smut Brown scaling the fence and escap-
ing, and he pursued his suspect with a single- minded focus that he de-
scribed as “tunnel vision.” Conley’s prosecutor ridiculed this idea, saying 
that what prevented Conley from seeing the beating was not tunnel vision 
but video editing—“a deliberate cropping of Cox out of the picture.”14
But if Conley was sufﬁ ciently focused on Brown, in the way our sub-
jects  were focused on counting the basketball passes, it is entirely possible 
that he ran right past the assault and still failed to see it. If so, the only 
inaccurate part of Conley’s testimony was his stated belief that he should 
have seen Cox. What is most striking about this case is that Conley’s own 
testimony was the primary evidence that put him near the beating, and 
that evidence, combined with a misunderstanding of how the mind works, 
and the blue wall of silence erected by the other cops, led prosecutors to 
charge him with perjury and obstruction of justice. They, and the jury 
that convicted him, assumed that he too was protecting his comrades.
Kenny Conley’s conviction was eventually overturned on appeal and 
set aside in July 2005. But Conley prevailed not because the prosecutors 
or a judge  were convinced that he actually was telling the truth. Instead, 
the appeals court in Boston ruled that he had been denied a fair trial be-
cause the prosecution didn’t tell his defense attorneys about an FBI memo 
that cast doubt on the credibility of one of the government’s witnesses.15 
When the government decided not to retry him in September 2005, 

10  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 Conley’s legal troubles were ﬁ nally over. On May 19, 2006, more than 
eleven years after the original incident on Woodruff Way that changed his 
life, Conley was reinstated as a Boston police ofﬁ cer— but only after being 
forced to redo, at age thirty- seven, the same police academy training a 
new recruit has to endure.16 He was granted $647,000 in back pay for the 
years he was off the force,17 and in 2007 he was promoted to detective.18
Throughout this book, we will present many examples and anec-
dotes, like the story of Kenny Conley, that show how everyday illusions 
can have tremendous inﬂ uence on our lives. However, two important 
caveats are in order. First, as Robert Pirsig writes in Zen and the Art of 
Motorcycle Maintenance, “The real purpose of scientiﬁ c method is to 
make sure Nature hasn’t misled you into thinking you know something 
that you actually don’t.”19 But science can only go so far, and although 
it can tell us in general how galaxies form, how DNA is transcribed into 
proteins, and how our minds perceive and remember our world, it is 
nearly impotent to explain a single event or individual case. The nature 
of everyday illusions almost never allows for proof that any par tic u lar 
incident was caused entirely by a speciﬁ c mental mistake. There is no 
certainty that Conley missed the beating because of inattentional blind-
ness, nor is there even certainty that he missed it at all (he could have 
seen it and then consistently lied). Without doing a study of attention 
under the same conditions Conley faced (at night, running after some-
one climbing a fence, the danger in chasing a murder suspect, the unfa-
miliar surroundings, and a gang of men attacking someone), we cannot 
estimate the probability that Conley missed what he said he missed.
We can, however, say that the intuitions of the people who condemned 
and convicted him  were way off the mark. What is certain is that the 
police investigators, the prosecutors, and the jurors, and to some extent 
Kenny Conley himself,  were all operating under the illusion of atten-
tion and failed to consider the possibility— which we argue is a strong 
possibility— that Conley could have been telling the truth about both 
where he was and what he didn’t see on that January night in Boston.
The second important point to keep in mind is this: We use stories 
and anecdotes to convey our arguments because narratives are compel-

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  11
ling, memorable, and easily understood. But people tend to believe con-
vincing, retrospective stories about why something happened even when 
there is no conclusive evidence of the event’s true causes. For that reason, 
we try to back up all of our examples with scientiﬁ c research of the high-
est quality, using endnotes to document our sources and provide addi-
tional information along the way.
Our goals are to show you how everyday illusions inﬂ uence our 
thoughts, decisions, and actions, and to convince you that they have large 
effects on our lives. We believe that once you have considered our argu-
ments and evidence, you will agree, and that you will think about your 
own mind and your own behavior much differently. We hope that you 
will then act accordingly. So as you read on, read critically, keeping your 
mind open to the possibility that it  doesn’t work the way you think it does.
The Nuclear Submarine and the Fishing Boat
Do you remember the ﬁ rst major international incident of George W. 
Bush’s presidency? It happened less than a month after he took ofﬁ ce, on 
February 9, 2001.20 At approximately 1:40 p.m., Commander Scott 
Waddle, captaining the nuclear submarine USS Greene ville near Ha-
waii, ordered a surprise maneuver known as an “emergency deep,” in 
which the submarine suddenly dives. He followed this with an “emer-
gency main ballast tank blow,” in which high- pressure air forces water 
from the main ballasts, causing the submarine to surface as fast as it 
can. In this kind of maneuver, shown in movies like The Hunt for Red 
October, the bow of the submarine actually heaves out of the water. 
As the Greeneville zoomed toward the surface, the crew and passengers 
heard a loud noise, and the entire ship shook. “Jesus!” said Waddle. 
“What the hell was that?”
His ship had surfaced, at high speed, directly under a Japa nese ﬁ sh-
ing vessel, the Ehime Maru. The Greeneville’s rudder, which had been 
specially reinforced for penetrating ice packs in the Arctic, sliced the 
ﬁ shing boat’s hull from one side to the other. Diesel fuel began to leak 
and the Ehime Maru took on water. Within minutes, it tipped up and 

12  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
sank by its stern as the people onboard scrambled forward toward the 
bow. Many of them reached the three lifeboats and  were rescued, but 
three crew members and six passengers died. The Greeneville received 
only minor damage, and no one onboard was injured.
What went wrong? How could a modern, technologically advanced 
submarine, equipped with state- of- the- art sonar and manned by an 
experienced crew, not detect a nearly two- hundred- foot- long ﬁ shing 
boat so close by? In attempting to explain this accident, the National 
Transportation Safety Board’s ﬁ fty- nine- page report exhaustively doc-
uments all of the ways in which the ofﬁ cers failed to follow procedure, 
all of the distractions they faced in accommodating a delegation of 
 civilian visitors, all of the errors they made along the way, and all of 
the miscommunication that contributed to poor tracking of the Ehime 
Maru’s actual position. It contains no evidence of alcohol, drugs, 
 mental illness, fatigue, or personality conﬂ icts inﬂ uencing the crew’s ac-
tions. The report is most interesting, however, for the crucial issue it 
does not even attempt to resolve: why Commander Waddle and the of-
ﬁ cer of the deck failed to see the Ehime Maru when they looked through 
the periscope.
Before a submarine performs an emergency deep maneuver, it re-
turns to periscope depth so the commander can make sure no other 
ships are in the vicinity. The Ehime Maru should have been visible 
through the periscope, and Commander Waddle looked right toward 
it, but he still missed it. Why? The NTSB report emphasized the brevity 
of the periscope scan, as did Dateline NBC correspondent Stone Phillips: 
“. . . had Waddle stayed on the periscope longer, or raised it higher, he 
might have seen the Ehime Maru. He says there is no doubt he was look-
ing in the right direction.” None of these reports consider any other 
reasons why Waddle could have failed to see the nearby vessel— a failure 
that surprised Waddle himself. But the results of our gorilla experiment 
tell us that the USS Greeneville’s commanding ofﬁ cer, with all his expe-
rience and expertise, could indeed have looked right at another ship and 
just not have seen it. The key lies in what he thought he would see when 
he looked: As he said later, “I  wasn’t looking for it, nor did I expect it.”21

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  13
Submarines rarely surface into other ships, so don’t lose sleep over 
the prospect on your next boat trip. But this kind of “looked but failed 
to see” accident is quite common on land. Perhaps you have had the 
experience of starting to turn out of a parking lot or a side road and 
then having to stop suddenly to avoid hitting a car you hadn’t seen be-
fore that moment. After accidents, drivers regularly claim, “I was look-
ing right there and they came out of nowhere . . .  I never saw them.”22 
These situations are especially troubling because they run counter to 
our intuitions about the mental pro cesses involved in attention and per-
ception. We think we should see anything in front of us, but in fact we 
are aware of only a small portion of our visual world at any moment. 
The idea that we can look but not see is ﬂ atly incompatible with how 
we understand our own minds, and this mistaken understanding can 
lead to incautious or overconﬁ dent decisions.
In this chapter, when we talk about looking, as in “looking without 
seeing,” we don’t mean anything abstract or vague or meta phorical. We 
literally mean looking right at something. We truly are arguing that 
directing our eyes at something does not guarantee that we will con-
sciously see it. A skeptic might question whether a subject in the gorilla 
experiment or an ofﬁ cer chasing a suspect or a submarine commander 
bringing his ship to the surface actually looked right at the unexpected 
object or event. To perform these tasks, though (to count the passes, 
pursue a suspect, or sweep the area for ships), they needed to look right 
where the unexpected object appeared. It turns out that there is a way, 
in a laboratory situation at least, to mea sure exactly where on a screen a 
person ﬁ xates their eyes (a technical way of saying “where they are look-
ing”) at any moment. This technique, which uses a device called an 
“eye tracker,” can provide a continuous trace showing where and for 
how long a subject is looking during any period of time— such as the 
time of watching the gorilla video. Sports scientist Daniel Memmert of 
Heidelberg University ran our gorilla experiment using his eye tracker 
and found that the subjects who failed to notice the gorilla had spent, 
on average, a full second looking right at it— the same amount of time 
as those who did see it!23

14  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Ben Roethlisberger’s Worst Interception
In February 2006, at the age of twenty- three and in just his second 
season as a professional football player, Ben Roethlisberger became the 
youn gest quarterback in NFL history to win a Super Bowl. During the 
off- season, on June 12 of that same year, he was riding his black 2005 
Suzuki motorcycle heading outbound from downtown Pittsburgh on 
Second Avenue.24 As he neared the intersection at Tenth Street, a 
Chrysler New Yorker driven by Martha Fleishman approached in the 
opposite direction on Second Avenue. Both vehicles had green lights 
when Fleishman then turned left onto Tenth Street, cutting off Roeth-
lisberger’s motorcycle. According to witnesses, Roethlisberger was 
thrown from his motorcycle, hit the Chrysler’s windshield, tumbled 
over the roof and off the trunk, and ﬁ nally landed on the street. His jaw 
and nose  were broken, many of his teeth  were knocked out, and he re-
ceived a large laceration on the back of his head, as well as a number of 
other minor injuries. He required seven hours of emergency surgery, 
but considering that he  wasn’t wearing a helmet, he was lucky to survive 
the crash at all. Fleishman had a nearly perfect driving record— the 
only mark against her was a speeding ticket nine years earlier. Roeth-
lisberger was cited for not wearing a helmet and for driving without the 
right type of license; Fleishman was cited and ﬁ ned for failing to yield. 
Roethlisberger eventually made a full recovery from the accident and 
was ready to resume his role as the starting quarterback by the season 
opener in September.
Accidents like this one are unfortunately common. More than half 
of all motorcycle accidents are collisions with another vehicle. Nearly 
65 percent of those happen much like Roethlisberger’s— a car violates 
the motorcycle’s right-of-way, turning left in front of the motorcyclist 
(or turning right in countries where cars drive on the left side of the 
road).25 In some cases, the car turns across oncoming trafﬁ c onto a side 
street. In others, the car turns across a lane of trafﬁ c onto the main 
street. In the typical accident of this sort, the driver of the car often says 
something like, “I signaled to turn left, and started out when it was 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  15
clear. Then something hit my car and I later saw the motorcycle and the 
guy lying in the street. I never saw him!” The motorcyclist in such ac-
cidents says, “All of a sudden this car pulled out in front of me. The 
driver was looking right at me.” This experience leads some motor-
cyclists to assume that car drivers violate their right- of- way intentionally— 
that they see the motorcyclist and turn anyway.
Why do drivers turn in front of motorcyclists? We favor, at least for 
some cases, an explanation that appeals to the illusion of attention. 
People don’t see the motorcyclists because they aren’t looking for motor-
cyclists. If you are trying to make a difﬁ cult left turn across trafﬁ c, most 
of the vehicles blocking your path are cars, not motorcycles (or bicycles, 
or  horses, or rickshaws . . .  ). To some extent, then, motorcycles are un-
expected. Much like the subjects in our gorilla experiment, drivers often 
fail to notice unexpected events, even ones that are important. Criti-
cally, though, they assume they will notice— that as long as they are 
looking in the right direction, unexpected objects and events will grab 
their attention.
How can we remedy this situation? Motorcycle safety advocates pro-
pose a number of solutions, most of which we think are doomed to fail. 
Posting signs that implore people to “look for motorcycles” might lead 
drivers to adjust their expectations and become more likely to notice a 
motorcycle appearing shortly after the sign. Yet, after a few minutes of 
not seeing any motorcycles, their visual expectations will reset, leading 
them to again expect what they see most commonly— cars. Such adver-
tising campaigns assume that the mechanisms of attention are perme-
able, subject to inﬂ uence from our intentions and thoughts. Yet, the 
wiring of our visual expectations is almost entirely insulated from our 
conscious control. As we will discuss extensively in Chapter 4, our 
brains are built to detect patterns automatically, and the pattern we ex-
perience when driving features a preponderance of cars and a dearth of 
motorcycles. In other words, the ad campaign itself falls prey to the il-
lusion of attention.
Suppose that one morning, we told you to watch for gorillas. Then, 
at some point a week later, you participated in our gorilla experiment. 

16  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Do you think our warning would have any effect? Most likely not; in 
the time between the warning and the experiment, your expectations 
would have been reset by your daily experience of seeing no gorillas. 
The warning would only be useful if we gave it shortly before showing 
you the video.
Only when people regularly look for and expect motorcycles will 
they be more likely to notice. In fact, a detailed analysis of sixty- two 
accident reports involving cars and motorcycles found that none of the 
car drivers had any experience riding motorcycles themselves.26 Perhaps 
the experience of riding a motorcycle can mitigate the effects of inat-
tentional blindness for motorcycles. Or, put another way, the experi-
ence of being unexpected yourself might make you better able to notice 
similar unexpected events.
Another common recommendation to improve the safety of motor-
cycles is for riders to wear bright clothing rather than the typical attire 
of leather jacket, dark pants, and boots. The intuition seems right: A 
yellow jumpsuit should make the rider more visually distinctive and 
easier to notice. But as  we’ve noted, looking is not the same as seeing. 
You can look right at the gorilla— or at a motorcycle— without seeing 
it. If the gorilla or motorcycle were physically imperceptible, that would 
be trivially true—nobody would be surprised if you failed to see a 
 gorilla that was perfectly camouﬂ aged in a scene. What makes the evi-
dence for inattentional blindness important and counterintuitive is that 
the gorilla is so obvious once you know it is there. So looking is neces-
sary for seeing— if you don’t look at it, you  can’t possibly see it. But 
looking is not sufﬁ cient for seeing— looking at something  doesn’t guar-
antee that you will notice it. Wearing conspicuous clothing and riding 
a brightly colored motorcycle will increase your visibility, making it easier 
for people who are looking for you to see you. Such bright clothing  doesn’t 
guarantee that you will be noticed, though.
We did not always realize this ourselves. When we ﬁ rst designed the 
gorilla experiment, we assumed that making the “gorilla” more distinc-
tive would lead to greater detection— of course people would notice a 
bright red gorilla. Given the rarity of red gorilla suits, we and our col-

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  17
leagues Steve Most (then a graduate student in Dan’s lab and now a 
professor at the University of Delaware) and Brian Scholl (then a post-
doctoral fellow in the psychology department and now a professor at 
Yale) created a computerized version of the “gorilla” video in which the 
players  were replaced by letters and the gorilla was replaced by a red 
cross (+) that unexpectedly traversed the display.27 Subjects counted 
how many times the white letters touched the sides of the display win-
dow while ignoring the black letters.
Even jaded researchers like us  were surprised by the result: 30 per-
cent of viewers missed the bright red cross, even though it was the only 
cross, the only colored object, and the only object that moved in a 
straight path through the display. We thought the gorilla had gone un-
noticed, at least in part, because it didn’t really stand out: It was dark- 
colored, like the players wearing black. Our belief that a distinctive 
object should “pop out” overrode our knowledge of the phenomenon of 
inattentional blindness. This “red gorilla” experiment shows that when 
something is unexpected, distinctiveness does not at all guarantee that 
we will notice it.
Reﬂ ective clothing helps increase visibility for motorcyclists, but it 
 doesn’t override our expectations. Motorcyclists are analogous to the 
cross in this experiment. People fail to see them, but not just because 
they are smaller or less distinctive than the other vehicles on the road. 
They fail to see the motorcycles precisely because they stand out. Wear-
ing highly visible clothing is better than wearing invisible clothing (and 
less of a technological challenge), but increasing the visual distinctive-
ness of the rider might be of limited use in helping drivers notice motor-
cyclists. Ironically, what likely would work to increase detection of 
motorcycles is to make them look more like cars. For example, giving 
motorcycles two headlights separated as much as possible, to resemble the 
visual pattern of a car’s headlights, could well increase their detectability.
There is one proven way to eliminate inattentional blindness, though: 
Make the unexpected object or event less unexpected. Accidents with 
bicyclists and pedestrians are much like motorcycle accidents in that 
car drivers often hit the bikers or walkers without ever seeing them. 

18  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Peter Jacobsen, a public health con sul tant in California, examined the 
rates of accidents involving cars and either pedestrians or bicyclists 
across a range of cities in California and in a number of Eu ro pe an 
countries.28 For each city, he collected data on the number of injuries or 
fatalities per million kilometers people traveled by biking and by walk-
ing in the year 2000. The pattern was clear, and surprising: Walking 
and biking  were the least dangerous in the cities where they  were 
done the most, and the most dangerous where they  were done the least.
Why are motorists less likely to hit pedestrians or bicyclists where 
there are more people bicycling or walking? Because they are more used 
to seeing pedestrians. Think of it this way: Would you be safer cross-
ing the pedestrian- clogged streets of London, where drivers are used to 
seeing people swarm around cars, or the wide, almost suburban boule-
vards of Los Angeles, where drivers are less accustomed to people pop-
ping up right in front of their cars without warning? Jacobsen’s data 
show that if you  were to move to a town with twice as many pedestri-
ans, you would reduce your chance of being hit by a car while walking 
by one- third.
In one of the most striking demonstrations of the power of expecta-
tions,29 Steve Most, who led the “red gorilla” study, and his colleague 
Robert Astur of the Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center in Hart-
ford, Connecticut, conducted an experiment using a driving simulator. 
Just before arriving at each intersection, subjects looked for a blue arrow 
that indicated which way they should turn, and they ignored yellow ar-
rows. Just as subjects entered one of the intersections, a motorcycle un-
expectedly drove right into their path and stopped. When the motorcycle 
was blue, the same color as the attended direction arrows, almost all of 
the drivers noticed it. When it was yellow, matching the ignored direc-
tion arrows, 36 percent of them hit the motorcycle, and two of them 
failed to apply their brakes at all! Your moment- to- moment expecta-
tions, more than the visual distinctiveness of the object, determine what 
you see— and what you miss.
Of course, not every automobile- versus- motorcycle collision is en-
tirely the fault of the person driving the car. In the Ben Roethlisberger 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  19
accident, the driver and the rider both had green lights, but Roethlis-
berger was going straight and had the right-of-way. A witness at the 
scene quoted Martha Fleishman, the driver of the car, as saying, “I was 
watching him approach but he was not looking at me.”30 Roethlisberger 
might never have seen Fleishman’s car, even though it was right in front 
of him. Had he seen it, he might have been able to avoid the accident.
A Hard Landing
NASA research scientist Richard Haines spent much of his career at 
Ames Research Center, a space and aeronautics think tank in northern 
California. He is best known publicly for his attempts to document 
UFO experiences. But in the late 1970s and early 1980s, he and his col-
leagues Edith Fischer and Toni Price conducted a pioneering study on 
pi lots and information display technologies using a ﬂ ight simulator.31 
Their experiment is important because it is one of the most dramatic 
demonstrations of looking without seeing. They tested commercial air-
line pi lots who  were rated to ﬂ y the Boeing 727, one of the most com-
mon planes of the time. Commercial airline pi lots tend to be among the 
most experienced and expert pilots— many ﬂ ew in the military for 
years, and only the top pi lots get to ﬂ y the larger commercial planes, 
where they have responsibility for hundreds of passengers on every 
ﬂ ight. The subjects in this study  were either ﬁ rst ofﬁ cers or captains 
who had ﬂ own 727s commercially for over one thousand hours.
During the experiment, the pi lots underwent extensive training on 
the use of a “head- up display.” This technology, which was relatively 
new at the time, displayed much of the critical instrumentation needed 
to ﬂ y and land the simulated 727— altitude, bearing, speed, fuel status, 
and so on— in video form directly on the windshield in front of the pi-
lots, rather than below or around it as in an ordinary cockpit. Over the 
course of multiple sessions, the pi lots ﬂ ew a number of simulated land-
ings under a wide range of weather conditions, either with or without 
the head- up display. Once they  were practiced with the simulator, 
Haines inserted a surprise into one of the landing trials. As the pi lots 

20  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
broke through the cloud ceiling and the runway came into view, they 
prepared for landing as they had on all of the previous trials, monitor-
ing their instruments and the weather conditions to decide whether or 
not to abort. In this case, however, some of them never saw the large jet 
on the ground turning onto the runway right in front of them.
Such “runway incursions”—which happen when planes enter run-
ways when they shouldn’t—are among the more common causes of air-
plane accidents. More than half of the incursions result from pi lot 
error— a pi lot taxis into the path of another aircraft. Just as the USS 
Greeneville was exceptionally unlikely to surface into another ship, 
most runway incursions present little or no risk of a collision. In ﬁ scal 
year 2007, the Federal Aviation Administration recorded a total of 370 
runway incursions at American airports. In only 24 of them was there a 
signiﬁ cant potential for a collision, and only 8 of those involved com-
mercial ﬂ ights. Over the four years from 2004 through 2007, there 
 were a total of 1,353 runway incursions in the United States, 112 of 
which  were classiﬁ ed as serious, and only 1 of which resulted in a colli-
sion. That said, the single worst accident in aviation history involved a 
runway incursion. In 1977, in the Canary Islands, KLM ﬂ ight 4805 
took off down the runway and collided at full speed with Pan Am ﬂ ight 
1736, which was taxiing in the other direction on the same runway. 
The collision of these two Boeing 747s resulted in 583 deaths.
Although runway incursions are relatively common compared with 
other aviation accidents, airplane collisions of every sort are exception-
ally rare. With only eight runway incursions out of more than 25 million 
ﬂ ights in 2007, you would need to take an average of one commercial 
round- trip ﬂ ight every day for about three thousand years to have a 
more than even chance of encountering a serious runway incursion. 
These incidents are relatively common, with the key word being “rela-
tively.” They are still exceedingly rare— and consequently, they are un-
expected.32
What’s surprising about Haines’s ﬂ ight simulator experiment is that 
the head-up display should—or at least our intuition suggests that it 
should—have kept the pilots’ attention on the place where the parked 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  21
plane was going to appear. They never had to look away from the run-
way to see their instruments. But two of the pi lots using the head- up 
display would have plowed right through the plane on the runway had 
the experimenter not aborted the trial. The plane was clearly visible just 
seconds after the pi lots cleared the clouds, and they had about seven 
more seconds to safely abort their landing. The pi lots using the head- up 
display  were also slower to respond, and when they tried to execute a 
“missed approach” (by pulling up to go around and make a new land-
ing attempt), they  were late in doing so. The two who didn’t manage to 
abort their landings in time  were both rated either good or excellent in 
their simulator ﬂ ying per for mance. When the trial was over, Haines 
asked them whether they saw anything, and both said no. After the 
experiment, Haines showed the pi lots a videotape of the landing with 
the airplane stationed in their path, and both expressed surprise and 
concern that they had missed something so obvious. One said, “If I 
didn’t see [the tape], I  wouldn’t believe it. I honestly didn’t see anything 
on that runway.”33 The plane on the runway was their invisible gorilla— 
they didn’t expect it to be there, so they never saw it.
Now that we understand that looking is not seeing, we can see that 
the intuition that a head- up display will enhance our ability to detect 
unexpected events is wrong. Head- up displays can help in some re-
spects: Pi lots get faster access to relevant information from their instru-
ments and need to spend less time searching for that information. In 
fact, ﬂ ight per for mance can be somewhat better with a well- designed 
head- up display than without one. Using a so- called conformational 
display, which superimposes a graphical indication of the runway on 
top of the physical runway visible through the windshield, pi lots can 
ﬂ y more precisely.34 Although the head- up display helps pi lots perform 
the task they are trying to accomplish (like landing a plane), it  doesn’t 
help them see what they are not expecting to see, and it might even im-
pair their ability to notice important events in the world around them.
How is it possible that spending more time with the world in view 
actually reduces our ability to see what is right in front of us? The 
answer, it seems, stems from our mistaken beliefs about how attention 

22  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
works. Although the plane on the runway was right in front of the pi lots, 
fully in view, the pi lots  were focusing their attention on the task of 
landing the plane and not on the possibility of objects on the runway. 
Unless pi lots inspect the runway to see if there are any obstructions, 
they are unlikely to see something unexpected, such as a plane taxiing 
onto their landing strip. Air trafﬁ c controllers are, after all, supposed to 
control the trafﬁ c to make sure that this  doesn’t happen. If a failure to 
inspect the runway  were the only factor in play, though, a head- up dis-
play would be no worse than looking away at your instruments and 
then back to the windshield. After all, in both cases, you could spend 
the same amount of time ignoring the runway. You either focus attention 
on the readings on the windshield or focus attention on the instruments 
surrounding the windshield. But as Haines’s study showed, pi lots are 
slower to notice unexpected events when they are using a head- up dis-
play. The problem has to do not as much with the limits on attention— 
which are in effect regardless of whether the readings are displayed 
on the windshield or around it— as with our mistaken beliefs about 
 attention.
Hold All Calls, Please
Imagine that you are driving home from work, thinking about what 
you will do when you get there and everything you left unﬁ nished at 
the ofﬁ ce. Just as you begin to make a left turn across a lane of oncom-
ing trafﬁ c, a boy chases a ball into the road in front of you. Would you 
notice him? Maybe not, you should now be thinking. What if, rather 
than being lost in thought while you  were driving, you  were talking on 
a cell phone? Would you notice then? Most people believe that as long 
as their eyes are on the road and their hands are on the wheel, they will 
see and react appropriately to any contingency. Yet extensive research 
has documented the dangers of driving while talking on a phone. Both 
experimental and epidemiological studies show that the driving impair-
ments caused by talking on a cell phone are comparable to the effects of 
driving while legally intoxicated.35 When talking on a cell phone, drivers 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  23
react more slowly to stoplights, take longer to initiate evasive maneu-
vers, and suffer from generally reduced awareness of their surroundings. 
In most cases, neither drunk driving nor driving while talking on a cell 
phone lead to accidents. In part, that is because most driving is predict-
able and lawful, and even if you aren’t driving perfectly, the other driv-
ers are trying not to hit you. The situations in which such impairments 
are catastrophic, though, are those that require an emergency reaction 
to an unexpected event. A slight delay in braking might make the dif-
ference between stopping short of the boy in the street and running 
him over.
For the most part, people are at least familiar with the dangers of 
talking on a cell phone while driving.  We’ve all seen distracted drivers 
run a stop sign, obliviously veer into another lane, or drive at 30 mph 
in a 45 mph zone. As columnist Ellen Goodman wrote, “The very same 
people who use cell phones . . .  are convinced that they should be taken 
out of the hands of (other) idiots who use them.”36
The realization that (other) people are unable to drive safely while 
talking on the phone led to a movement to regulate the use of handheld 
cell phones while driving. New York was one of the ﬁ rst states to pass 
such legislation. The law banned the use of handheld phones while 
driving, based on the intuition that taking our hands off the wheel to 
use the phone is the main danger posed by talking while driving. In 
fact, the New York legislation provided for tickets to be waived if drivers 
could prove that they subsequently purchased a hands- free headset. Not 
surprisingly, the telecommunications industry supported the New York 
bill and regularly promotes the safety and advantages of hands- free 
headsets. A ﬂ ier from AT&T Wireless proclaims, “If you use your wire-
less phone while driving, you can keep both hands on the wheel,” and a 
similar brochure from Nokia ranks using a hands- free device whenever 
possible as second on their list of ten safety recommendations. In our 
survey, 77 percent of Americans agreed with the statement, “While 
driving, it’s safer to talk on a hands- free phone than a handheld phone.” 
The assumption underlying these beliefs and claims as well as most 
laws on distracted driving— that as long as you are looking at the road, 

24  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
you will notice unexpected events— is precisely the illusion of attention. 
Given what you now know about the gorilla experiment, you can prob-
ably guess what we will say next.
The problem isn’t with our eyes or our hands. We can drive just 
ﬁ ne with one hand on the wheel, and we can look at the road while 
holding a phone. Indeed, the acts of holding a phone and turning a 
steering wheel place little demand on our cognitive capacities. These 
motor- control pro cesses are almost entirely automatic and unconscious; 
as an experienced driver, you don’t have to think about how to move 
your arms to make the car turn left or to keep the phone up to your ear. 
The problem is not with limitations on motor control, but with limita-
tions on attentional resources and awareness. In fact, there are few if 
any differences between the distracting effects of handheld phones and 
hands- free phones. Both distract in the same way, and to the same ex-
tent.37 Driving a car and having a conversation on a cell phone, despite 
being well- practiced and seemingly effortless tasks, both draw upon the 
mind’s limited stock of attention resources. They require multitasking, 
and despite what you may have heard or may think, the more attention- 
demanding tasks your brain does, the worse it does each one.
In a second part of our original gorilla experiment, we tested the 
limits of attention by making the task of the subjects (counting basket-
ball passes) more difﬁ cult. Rather than just a single count of the total 
number of passes made by the white team, we asked people to keep two 
separate mental counts, one of aerial passes and one of bounce passes 
(but still focusing on the white team). As we predicted, this increased 
by 20 percent the number of people missing an unexpected event.38 
Making the counting task harder requires people to devote more atten-
tion to it, leaving fewer mental resources available to see the gorilla. As 
we use more of our limited attention, we are that much less likely to 
notice the unexpected. The problem is with consuming a limited cog-
nitive resource, not with holding the phone. And most important, as 
the incredulous reactions of our study participants demonstrate, most 
of us are utterly unaware of this limit on our awareness. Experiment 
after experiment has shown no beneﬁ t whatsoever for hands- free phones 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  25
over handheld ones. In fact, legislation banning the use of handheld 
phones might even have the ironic effect of making people more conﬁ -
dent that they can safely use a hands- free phone while driving.
One could argue that our gorilla experiment isn’t really comparable to 
the scenario of driving while talking on a cell phone. That is, increasing 
the difﬁ culty of the counting task as we did might increase the burden 
on attention more than a cell phone conversation would. There’s an 
easy way to account for this possibility, though: Do an experiment! To 
explore the effects of cell phone conversations on inattention directly, 
Brian Scholl and his students at Yale used a variant of the “red gorilla” 
computerized task described earlier and compared a group who per-
formed the task as usual with one that performed it while simultane-
ously carry ing on a cell phone conversation.39 In their par tic u lar variant 
of the task, about 30 percent of the participants missed the unex-
pected object when they  were just doing the tracking task. However, 
participants who performed the task while talking on a phone missed 
the unexpected object 90 percent of the time! Simply having a conver-
sation on a phone tripled the chances that they would fail to see some-
thing unexpected.
This sobering ﬁ nding shows that cell phone conversations dramati-
cally impair visual perception and awareness. These impairments are 
due to the limits of attention and not due to the nature of the phone; 
even though both tasks seem effortless, both demand our attention. 
Intriguingly, the cell phone conversation didn’t impair the subjects’ 
ability to do the tracking task— it just decreased their chances of notic-
ing something unexpected. This ﬁ nding may explain why people falsely 
think that cell phones have no effect on their driving: People are lulled 
into thinking that they drive just ﬁ ne because they can still perform the 
primary task (staying on the road) properly. The problem is that they’re 
much less likely to notice rare, unexpected, potentially catastrophic 
events, and our daily experience gives us little feedback about such 
events.
If you’re like many people who have heard us speak about inatten-
tion, cell phones, and driving, you may wonder why talking to someone 

26  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
on a phone should be any more dangerous than talking to the person in 
the passenger seat, which  doesn’t seem objectionable. (Or, if you have 
responded enthusiastically to our arguments— and thank you for doing 
so— you may be getting ready for a campaign to make “driving while 
talking” illegal, no matter whom you are talking to.) It may come as 
a surprise, then, to learn that talking to a passenger in your car is not 
nearly as disruptive as talking on a cell phone. In fact, most of the evi-
dence suggests that talking to a passenger has little or no effect on driv-
ing ability.40
Talking to a passenger could be less problematic for several reasons. 
First, it’s simply easier to hear and understand someone right next to you 
than someone on a phone, so you don’t need to exert as much effort just 
to keep up with the conversation. Second, the person sitting next to you 
provides another set of eyes— a passenger might notice something unex-
pected on the road and alert you, a ser vice your cell- phone conversation 
partner  can’t provide. The most interesting reason for this difference 
between cell- phone conversation partners and passengers has to do with 
the social demands of conversations. When you converse with the other 
people in your car, they are aware of the environment you are in. Conse-
quently, if you enter a challenging driving situation and stop speaking, 
your passengers will quickly deduce the reason for your silence. There’s 
no social demand for you to keep speaking because the driving context 
adjusts the expectations of everyone in the car about social interaction. 
When talking on a cell phone, though, you feel a strong social demand 
to continue the conversation despite difﬁ cult driving conditions because 
your conversation partner has no reason to expect you to suddenly stop 
and start speaking. These three factors, in combination, help to explain 
why talking on a cell phone is particularly dangerous when driving, 
more so than many other forms of distraction.
For Whom Does Bell Toil?
All of the examples we have discussed so far show how we can fail to see 
what is right in front of us: A submarine captain fails to see a ﬁ shing 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  27
vessel, a driver fails to notice a motorcyclist, a pi lot fails to see a runway 
obstruction, and a Boston cop fails to see a beating. Such failures of 
awareness and the illusion of attention aren’t limited to the visual sense, 
though. People can experience inattentional deafness as well.41
In 2008, the Pulitzer Prize for Feature Writing went to Gene Wein-
garten for his Washington Post cover story describing a social “experi-
ment” he conducted with the help of virtuoso violinist Joshua Bell.42 As 
a four- year- old in Indiana, Bell impressed his parents, both psycholo-
gists, by using rubber bands to pluck out songs he had heard. They en-
gaged a series of music teachers and by age seventeen Bell had played 
Carnegie Hall. He was on his way to repeatedly topping the classical 
music charts, receiving numerous awards for his per for mances, and ap-
pearing on Sesame Street. The ofﬁ cial biography on his website begins 
with these words: “Joshua Bell has captured the public’s attention like 
no other classical violinist of his time.”
On a Friday morning at rush hour, Bell took his Stradivarius violin, 
for which he’d paid more than $3 million, to the L’Enfant Plaza subway 
stop in Washington, D.C. He set up shop between an entrance and an 
escalator, opened his violin case to take donations, seeded it with some 
cash of his own, and began to perform several complex classical pieces. 
Over the course of his forty- three- minute per for mance, more than one 
thousand people passed within a few feet of him, but only seven stopped 
to listen. And not counting a donation of $20 from a passerby who 
recognized him, Bell made only $32.17 for his work.
Weingarten’s article bemoaned the lack of appreciation for beauty 
and art in modern society. Reading it, you can sense the pain and 
disappointment he must have felt while watching the people go past 
Bell:
It was all videotaped by a hidden camera. You can play the re-
cording once or 15 times, and it never gets any easier to watch. 
Try speeding it up, and it becomes one of those herky- jerky 
World War I– era silent newsreels. The people scurry by in comi-
cal little hops and starts, cups of coffee in their hands, cellphones 

28  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
at their ears, ID tags slapping at their bellies, a grim danse maca-
bre to indifference, inertia and the dingy, gray rush of modernity.
Fellow staffers at the Washington Post magazine apparently expected 
a different result. According to Weingarten’s story, they had been wor-
ried that the per for mance might cause a riot:
In a demographic as sophisticated as Washington, the thinking 
went, several people would surely recognize Bell. Ner vous 
“what- if” scenarios abounded. As people gathered, what if 
others stopped just to see what the attraction was? Word would 
spread through the crowd. Cameras would ﬂ ash. More people 
ﬂ ock to the scene; rush- hour pedestrian trafﬁ c backs up; 
tempers ﬂ are; the National Guard is called; tear gas, rubber 
bullets,  etc.
After the stunt was over, Weingarten asked famous conductor 
Leonard Slatkin, who directs the National Symphony Orchestra, to 
 predict how a professional performer would do as a subway artist. 
Slatkin was convinced a crowd would gather: “Maybe 75 to 100 will 
stop and spend some time listening.” During the actual performance, 
less than one- tenth that number stopped, and the National Guard did 
not mobilize.
Weingarten, his editors, Slatkin, and perhaps the Pulitzer committee 
members fell prey to the illusion of attention. Even Bell, when he saw 
the video of his per for mance, was “surprised at the number of people 
who don’t pay attention at all, as if I’m invisible. Because, you know 
what? I’m makin’ a lot of noise!”43 Now that you’ve read about invisible 
gorillas, neglected ﬁ shing vessels, and unseen motorcycles, you can 
likely guess one reason why Bell went unrecognized for the great musi-
cian he is. People  weren’t looking (or listening) for a virtuoso violinist. 
They  were trying to get to work. The one person interviewed for the 
story who correctly understood the minimal response to Bell was Edna 
Souza, who shines shoes in the area and ﬁ nds buskers distracting. She 
 wasn’t surprised that people would rush by without listening: “People 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  29
walk up the escalator, they look straight ahead. Mind your own busi-
ness, eyes forward.”
Under the conditions Weingarten established, commuters  were already 
engaged in the distracting task of rushing to get to work, making them 
unlikely to notice Bell at all, let alone focus enough attention on his play-
ing to distinguish him from a run- of- the- mill street musician. And that is 
the key. Weingarten’s choice of time and location for the stunt nearly 
guaranteed that nobody would devote much attention to the quality of 
Bell’s music. Weingarten is concerned that “if we  can’t take the time out 
of our lives to stay a moment and listen to one of the best musicians on 
Earth play some of the best music ever written; if the surge of modern life 
so overpowers us that we are deaf and blind to something like that— then 
what  else are we missing?” Probably a lot, but this stunt provides no evi-
dence for a lack of aesthetic appreciation. A more plausible explanation is 
that when people are focusing attention (visual and auditory) on one 
task— getting to work— they are unlikely to notice something unex-
pected— a brilliant violinist  along the way.
If we  were designing an experiment to test whether or not Washing-
tonians are willing to stop and appreciate beauty, we would ﬁ rst pick 
a time and location where an average street performer would attract an 
average number of listeners. We would then randomly place either a 
typical street performer or Joshua Bell there on several different days to 
see who earned more money. In other words, to show that people don’t 
appreciate beautiful music, you ﬁ rst have to show that at least some 
people are listening to it and then show that they reward it no more 
than they do average music. Weingarten  wouldn’t have won a Pulitzer 
had he stationed Bell next to a jackhammer. Under those conditions, 
nobody would be surprised by the lack of attention to the musician— 
the deafening sound would have drowned out the violin. Placing Bell 
next to a subway station escalator during rush hour had the same effect, 
but for a different reason. People physically could have heard Bell play-
ing, but because their attention was diverted by their morning com-
mute, they suffered from inattentional deafness.
Other factors worked against Bell as well— he was performing 

30  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 relatively unfamiliar classical pieces rather than music that most com-
muters would know. If Bell had played The Four Seasons or other better- 
known classical pieces, he might have done better. By doing so, a far 
less talented musician could have taken in more money than Bell did. 
When Dan lived in Boston, he occasionally walked from downtown to 
the North End to get Italian food. At least half a dozen times, he walked 
past an accordion player who stationed himself at one end of an en-
closed walkway that ran past a highway— a perfect place to attract lis-
teners with time on their hands, walking to restaurants that they’d 
probably have to wait to get into anyhow. For street artists, like for real 
estate, location is everything. The accordionist played with gusto, 
showing an emotional attachment to his instrument and his art. Yet, 
Dan only ever heard him play one song: the theme from The Godfather. 
He played it when Dan walked to dinner and when Dan walked back 
from dinner, every time Dan made that trip. Either he spotted Dan 
before he was within earshot and instantly started playing the God-
father theme as some odd sort of joke or warning (Dan has yet to wake 
up with a bloody  horse’s head at his feet), or he simply recognized the 
appeal to his audience of playing what may be the most familiar accor-
dion piece. Our bet is that he did quite well. Had Bell performed on a 
Saturday afternoon, he likely would have attracted more listeners. Had 
he played shorter pieces on a subway platform rather than extended 
pieces next to the exit escalator, he might have attracted more listeners 
who had to wait for trains. And had he played the theme from The 
Godfather on his three- hundred- year- old violin, who knows.
Who Notices the Unexpected?
Chris once demonstrated the gorilla experiment to students in a semi-
nar he was teaching. One of them told him the next week that she’d 
shown the video to her family, and that her parents had both missed the 
gorilla but her older sister had seen it. The sister then proceeded to 
crow about her triumph in this gorilla- noticing competition, claiming 
that it showed how smart she was. Dan regularly receives e-mails from 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  31
people he’s never met asking why they missed the gorilla but their chil-
dren saw it, or whether girls always notice but boys never do. A hedge 
fund manager found out about our study and had the people in her of-
ﬁ ce do it. She tracked Chris down through a chain of acquaintances 
and interrogated him about the differences between people who notice 
the gorilla and people who don’t.
Many people who have experienced the gorilla experiment see it as a 
sort of intelligence or ability test. The effect is so striking— and the bal-
ance so even between the number who notice and the number who 
don’t— that people often assume that some important aspect of your 
personality determines whether or not you notice the gorilla. When Dan 
was working with Dateline NBC to create demonstrations, the show’s 
producers speculated that employees in detail- oriented occupations 
would be more likely to notice the gorilla, and they asked most of their 
“subjects” what their jobs  were. They assumed that how you perform on 
the task depends on what kind of person you are: a “noticer” or a “misser.” 
This is the question of individual differences. If we could ﬁ gure out 
whether some people consistently notice the gorilla and other unex-
pected events in laboratory tasks, then we could ﬁ gure out whether they 
are immune to inattentional blindness more generally, and potentially 
train the missers to become noticers.
Despite the intuitive appeal of the gorilla video as a  Rosetta stone for 
personality types, there is almost no evidence that individual differ-
ences in attention or other abilities affect inattentional blindness. In 
theory, people could differ in the total attentional resources they have 
available, and those with more resources (perhaps those with higher 
IQs) might have enough “left over” after allocating some to the pri-
mary task to be better at detecting unexpected objects. One argument 
against this possibility, though, is the consistency in the pattern of re-
sults we obtain with the gorilla demonstration. We conducted the orig-
inal experiment on Harvard undergraduates— a fairly elite group— but 
the experiment works just as well at less prestigious institutions and 
with subjects who aren’t students. In all cases, about half of the subjects 
see the gorilla and half don’t. According to an online survey by Nokia, 

32  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
60 percent of women and men think that women are better at multi-
tasking. If you agree, you might also think that women would be more 
likely to notice the gorilla. Unfortunately, there is little experimental 
evidence to support the pop u lar belief about multitasking, and we 
 haven’t found any evidence that men are more prone than women to 
miss the gorilla. In fact, the main conclusion from studies of multitask-
ing is that virtually nobody does it well: As a rule, it is more efﬁ cient to 
do tasks one at a time rather than simultaneously.44
It’s still possible— even reasonable— to suspect that people differ in 
their ability to focus attention on a primary task, but that this ability 
isn’t related to general intelligence or educational achievement. If indi-
vidual differences in the ability to focus attention lead to differences in 
noticing unexpected objects, then people for whom the counting task is 
easier should be more likely to notice the gorilla—they are devoting 
fewer resources to the counting task and have more left over.
Dan and his graduate student Melinda Jensen recently conducted an 
experiment to test exactly this hypothesis. They ﬁ rst mea sured how well 
people could do a computer- based tracking task like the one we used in 
the “red gorilla” experiment and then looked to see whether those who 
performed the task well  were more likely to notice an unexpected object. 
They  weren’t. Apparently, whether you detect unexpected objects and 
events  doesn’t depend on your capacity for attention. Consistent with 
this conclusion, Dan and sports scientist Daniel Memmert, the re-
searcher who tracked children’s eye movements while they watched the 
gorilla video, found that who noticed and who missed an unexpected 
object was unrelated to several basic mea sures of attention capacity. 
These ﬁ ndings have an important practical implication: Training people 
to improve their attention abilities may do nothing to help them detect 
unexpected objects. If an object is truly unexpected, people are unlikely 
to notice it no matter how good (or bad) they are at focusing attention.
As far as we can tell, there are no such people as “noticers” and 
“missers”— at least, no people who consistently notice or consistently 
miss unexpected events in a variety of contexts and situations. There 
is one way, however, to predict how likely a person is to see the un-

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  33
expected. But it is not a simple trait of the individual or a quality of the 
event; it is the combination of a fact about the individual and a fact 
about the situation in which the unexpected event occurs. Only seven 
people out of more than one thousand stopped to listen to Joshua Bell 
playing in the L’Enfant Plaza subway station. One had been to a con-
cert Bell had given just three weeks earlier. Two of the remaining six 
 were musicians themselves. Their expertise helped them recognize his 
skill— and the pieces he was playing— through the din. One, George 
Tindley, worked in a nearby Au Bon Pain restaurant. “You could tell in 
one second that this guy was good, that he was clearly a professional,” 
he told Weingarten. The other, John Picarello, said, “This was a superb 
violinist. I’ve never heard anyone of that caliber. He was technically 
proﬁ cient, with very good phrasing. He had a good ﬁ ddle, too, with a 
big, lush sound.”
Experiments support this observation. Experienced basketball play-
ers are more likely to notice the gorilla in the original basketball- passing 
video than are novice basketball players. In contrast, team handball 
players are no more likely to notice unexpected objects even though 
they are experts in a team sport that places demands on attention com-
parable to those of basketball.45 Expertise helps you notice unexpected 
events, but only when the event happens in the context of your exper-
tise. Put experts in a situation where they have no special skill, and they 
are ordinary novices, taxing their attention just to keep up with the 
primary task. And no matter what the situation, experts are not im-
mune to the illusory belief that people notice far more than they do. 
Gene Weingarten described John  Picarello’s behavior as he watched 
Bell play: “On the video, you can see Picarello look around him now 
and then, almost bewildered. ‘Yeah, other people just  were not getting 
it. It just  wasn’t registering. That was bafﬂ ing to me.’ ”
How Many Doctors Does It Take . . .  
Even within their ﬁ eld of specialty, experts are not immune to inatten-
tional blindness or the illusion of attention. Radio logists are medical 

34  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
specialists responsible for reading x-rays, CT scans, MRIs, and other 
images in order to detect and diagnose tumors and other abnormali-
ties. Radiologists perform this visual detection task under controlled 
conditions every day of their careers. In the United States, their train-
ing involves four years of medical school, followed by up to ﬁ ve years in 
residency at a teaching hospital. Those who specialize in speciﬁ c body 
systems spend another year or two in fellowship training. In total, they 
often have more than ten years of post-undergraduate training, followed 
by on- the- job experience in studying dozens of ﬁ lms each day. Despite 
their extensive training, radiologists can still miss subtle problems when 
they “read” medical images.
Consider a recent case described by Frank Zwemer and his colleagues 
at the University of Rochester School of Medicine.46 An ambulance 
brought a woman in her forties to the emergency room with severe vag-
inal bleeding. Doctors attempted to insert an intravenous line in a pe-
ripheral vein, but failed, so they instead inserted a central line via a 
catheter in the femoral vein, the largest vein in the groin. Getting the 
line in correctly requires also inserting a guidewire, which is removed 
once the line is in place.
The line was introduced successfully, but due to an oversight, the 
physician neglected to remove the guidewire.47 To address her blood 
loss, the patient was given transfusions, but she then developed difﬁ -
culty breathing due to pulmonary edema (a swelling or ﬂ uid buildup in 
the lungs). She was intubated for respiratory support, and a chest x-ray 
was taken to conﬁ rm the diagnosis and make sure that the breathing 
tube was placed correctly. The ER doctor and the attending radiologist 
agreed on the diagnosis, but neither of them noticed the guidewire. 
The patient went next to the intensive care unit for several days of 
treatment, and after she improved she went to a standard unit. There 
she developed shortness of breath, which was caused by pulmonary 
embolism— a blood clot in her lung. During this time she received two 
more x-rays, as well as an echocardiogram and a CT scan. Only on the 
ﬁ fth day of her stay in the hospital did a physician happen to notice 
and remove the guidewire while performing a procedure to correct 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  35
the pulmonary embolism. The patient then made a full recovery. (It was 
determined later that the guidewire probably didn’t cause the embolism 
because it was constructed of so- called nonthrombogenic material spe-
ciﬁ cally intended not to promote blood clotting.)
When the various medical images  were examined afterward, the 
guidewire was clearly visible on all three x-rays and on the CT, but none 
of the many doctors on the case noticed it. Their failure to see the anom-
alous guidewire illustrates yet again the dangers of inattentional blind-
ness. The radiologists and other physicians who reviewed the chest 
images looked at them carefully, but they did not see the guidewire 
because they did not expect to see it.
Radiologists have a tremendously difﬁ cult task. They often review 
a large number of images at a time, typically looking for a speciﬁ c 
problem— a broken bone, a tumor, and so on. They  can’t take in every-
thing in the image, so they focus their attention on the critical aspects 
of the image, just as the subjects in the gorilla study focused on counting 
the passes of one team of players. Due to the limits of attention, radiolo-
gists are unlikely to notice aspects of the image that are unexpected, like 
the presence of a guidewire. But people assume that radiologists should 
notice any problem in a medical image regardless of whether it is ex-
pected; any failure to do so must therefore be the result of the doctor’s 
negligence. Radiologists are regularly sued for missing small tumors 
or other problems.48 These lawsuits are often based on the illusion of 
attention— people assume that radiologists will notice anything anom-
alous in an image, when in reality they, like the rest of us, tend to see 
best what they are looking for in the image. If you tell radiologists to 
ﬁ nd the guidewire in a chest x-ray, they will expect to see one and will 
notice it. But if you tell them to ﬁ nd a pulmonary embolism, they may 
not notice the guidewire. (It’s also possible that when searching for the 
guidewire, they will miss more pulmonary embolisms.) An unexpected 
tumor that was missed during the original reading might seem obvious 
in hindsight.
Unfortunately, people often confuse what is easily noticed when it is 
expected with what should be noticed when it is unexpected. Moreover, 

36  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the procedures frequently used in hospitals when reviewing radiographs 
are affected by the illusion of attention; doctors themselves also assume 
that they will notice unexpected problems in an image, even when they 
are looking for something  else. To reduce the effects of inattentional 
blindness, one can deliberately reexamine the same images with an eye 
toward the unexpected. When participants in our studies know that 
something unexpected might happen, they consistently see the gorilla— 
the unexpected has become the target of focused attention. Devoting 
attention to the unexpected is not a cure- all, however. We have limited 
attention resources, and devoting some attention to unexpected events 
means that we have less attention available for our primary task. It would 
be imprudent to ask radiologists to take time and resources away from 
detecting the expected problem in an x-ray (“Doctor, can you conﬁ rm 
that this patient has a pulmonary embolism so that we can begin treat-
ment?”) to focus instead on things that are unlikely to be there (“Doctor, 
can you tell us whether we left anything behind in this patient’s body?”). 
A more effective strategy would be for a second radiologist, unfamiliar 
with the case and the tentative diagnosis, to examine the images and to 
look for secondary problems that might not have been noticed the ﬁ rst 
time through.
So it turns out that even experts with a de cade of training in their 
medical specialty can miss unexpected objects in their domain of ex-
pertise. Although radiologists are better able than laypeople to detect 
unusual aspects of radiographs, they suffer from the same limits on at-
tention as everyone  else. Their expertise lies not in greater attention, but 
in more precise expectations formed by their experience and training in 
perceiving the important features of the images. Experience guides 
them to look for common problems rather than rare anomalies, and in 
most cases, that strategy is wise.
What Can We Do About the Illusion of Attention?
If this illusion of attention is so pervasive, how has our species survived 
to write about it? Why  weren’t our would- be ancestors all eaten by un-

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  37
noticed predators? In part, inattentional blindness and the accompany-
ing illusion of attention are a consequence of modern society. Although 
our ancestors must have had similar limitations on awareness, in a less 
complex world there was less to be aware of. And few objects or events 
needed immediate attention. In contrast, the advance of technology has 
given us devices that require greater amounts of attention, more and 
more often, with shorter and shorter lead times. Our neurological cir-
cuits for vision and attention are built for pedestrian speeds, not for 
driving speeds. When you are walking, a delay of a few seconds in no-
ticing an unexpected event is likely inconsequential. When you are 
driving, though, a delay of even one-tenth of a second in noticing an 
unexpected event can kill you (or someone else). The effects of inatten-
tion are ampliﬁ ed at high speeds, since any delay in noticing happens at 
the highest speed.
The effects of inattention are further ampliﬁ ed by any device or ac-
tivity that takes attention away from what we are trying to do. Such 
devices and activities  were rare in the BlackBerryless, iPhone- free, pre- 
GPS past, but they’re common today. Fortunately, accidents are still 
rare, because most of the time, nothing unexpected happens. But it is 
those rare unexpected events that matter. People are conﬁ dent that they 
can drive and talk on the phone simultaneously precisely because they 
almost never encounter evidence that they cannot. And by “evidence” 
we don’t mean a news story about accident rates or a safety institute’s 
latest report, or even a story of a friend who zoned out while driving 
and almost hit something. We mean a personal experience, like a colli-
sion or a near miss, that was unambiguously caused by a depletion of 
attention and that cannot be explained away as the other person’s fault 
(a rationalization we are as good at making as we are at overestimating 
our own levels of attention). We will almost never be aware of the more 
subtle evidence of our distraction. Drivers who make mistakes usually 
don’t notice them; after all, they’re distracted. 
The problem is that we lack positive evidence for our lack of attention. 
That is the basis of the illusion of attention. We are aware only of the un-
expected objects we do notice, not the ones we have missed. Consequently, 

38  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
all the evidence we have is for good perception of our world. It takes an 
experience like missing the chest- thumping gorilla, which is hard to ex-
plain away (and which we have little incentive to explain away), to show us 
how much of the world around us we must be missing.
If the mechanisms of attention are opaque to us, how can we elimi-
nate inattentional blindness so that we can be sure to spot the gorilla? 
The answer isn’t simple. In order to eliminate inattentional blindness, 
we would effectively have to eliminate focused attention. We would have 
to watch the gorilla video without bothering to focus on counting passes 
or even to focus on what we found interesting in the display. We would 
have to watch the display without expectations and without goals. But 
for the human mind, expectations and goals are inextricably intertwined 
with the most basic pro cesses of perception and are not readily extin-
guished. Expectations are based on our prior experiences of the world, 
and perception builds on that experience. Our experience and expecta-
tions help us to make sense of what we see, and without them, the visual 
world would just be an unstructured array of light, a “blooming, buzz-
ing confusion” in the classic words of William James.49
For the human brain, attention is essentially a zero- sum game: If we 
pay more attention to one place, object, or event, we necessarily pay less 
attention to others. Inattentional blindness is thus a necessary, if unfor-
tunate, by- product of the normal operation of attention and perception. 
If we are right that inattentional blindness results from inherent limits 
on the capacity of visual attention, it might be impossible to reduce or 
eliminate it in general. In essence, trying to eliminate inattentional 
blindness would be equivalent to asking people to try ﬂ ying by ﬂ apping 
their arms really rapidly. The structure of the human body  doesn’t per-
mit us to ﬂ y, just as the structure of the mind  doesn’t permit us to con-
sciously perceive everything around us.
The issue of how best to allocate our limited attention relates to a 
larger principle of attention. For the most part, inattentional blindness 
isn’t a problem. In fact, it is a consequence of the way attention works; 
it is the cost of our exceptional— and exceptionally useful— ability to 
focus our minds. Focused attention allows us to avoid distraction and 
use our limited resources more effectively; we don’t want to be distracted 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  39
by everything  else around us. Most drivers follow the rules of the road, 
most doctors don’t leave guidewires in patients, most ﬁ shing vessels 
aren’t ﬂ oating right above submarines, most planes aren’t guided in to 
land right on top of other planes, most cops don’t viciously beat suspects, 
and most world- class violinists don’t play in the subway. And gorillas 
rarely saunter through basketball games. Unexpected events are unex-
pected for a good reason: They are rare. More important, in most cases, 
failing to spot the unexpected has little consequence. 
Attention Writ Large
The illusion of attention affects us all in both mundane and potentially 
life- threatening ways— it truly is an everyday illusion. It contributes to 
everything from trafﬁ c accidents and airplane cockpit displays to cell 
phones, medicine, and even subway busking. As the gorilla experiment 
has become more widely known, it has been used to explain countless 
failures of awareness, from the concrete to the abstract, in diverse do-
mains. It’s not just limited to visual attention, but applies equally well to 
all of our senses and even to broader patterns in the world around us. The 
gorilla experiment is powerful because it forces people to confront the il-
lusion of attention. It provides an effective meta phor precisely because the 
illusion of attention has such broad reach.  Here are some examples:50
• A trainer uses it to show people how they can miss safety in-
fractions that are right in front of them.
• A Harvard professor uses it to explain how discriminatory 
practices in the workplace can go unnoticed even by intelli-
gent, fair- minded individuals.
• Antiterrorism experts cited it to explain how Australian intel-
ligence ofﬁ cials could have missed the presence in their own 
country of the Jemaah Islamiyah group, which was responsible 
for the 2002 Bali bombings that killed 202 people.
• A weight- loss website compares the unseen gorilla to an un-
planned snack that can ruin your diet.

40  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
• Promoter of the paranormal Dean Radin likens the inatten-
tional blindness of our subjects to the failure of scientists to 
see the “reality” of ESP and other extrasensory phenomena.
• A high school principal uses inattentional blindness to explain 
how teachers and administrators often fail to notice bullying.
• An Episcopal priest used it in a sermon to explain how easily 
people can miss evidence of God all around them.
• A British ad campaign encouraged drivers to watch for bi-
cyclists by creating a tele vi sion and viral Web advertisement 
based on our video, with the chest- thumping gorilla  replaced 
by a moonwalking bear.
Within the realm of visual perception, noticing suffers from even 
more limitations than the ones we have discussed so far. For example, 
it is hard to look for multiple things at once, to distinguish similar-
looking objects, and to remain vigilant over long periods of time per-
forming the same task. Our underappreciation of these constraints can 
have dire consequences for our safety and security. We expect airport 
baggage scanners to spot weapons in luggage, but they regularly fail to 
notice contraband items planted by authorities during tests of security 
procedures. The task of security scanners is much like the task of 
radio logists (though the training is, shall we say, much less extensive), 
and it is difﬁ cult if not impossible to see everything in a brieﬂ y viewed 
image. That’s especially true given that the things being searched for 
are rare.51
Similarly, we expect lifeguards at swimming pools to notice anyone 
in danger of drowning, but this is a false sense of safety brought on by 
the illusion of attention. Lifeguards have the nearly impossible task of 
scanning a large expanse of water and detecting the rare event of some-
one drowning.52 The difﬁ culty of their task is exacerbated because 
swimmers regularly do things that look like drowning but aren’t, such 
as swimming under water, lying on the bottom of the pool, splashing 
frantically, and so on. Lifeguards take regular breaks, change their 

“I THINK I WOULD HAVE SEEN THAT”  41
viewing stations repeatedly during shifts, and take many other steps to 
maintain their vigilance, but vigilance, besides being subject to its own 
limitations, cannot eliminate inattentional blindness. The lifeguards 
simply cannot see everything, but the illusion of attention makes us 
believe they will.
Only becoming aware of the illusion of attention can help us to take 
steps to avoid missing what we need to see. In some cases, like lifeguard-
ing, technological innovations such as automated scanning could help. 
Without awareness of our limitations, though, technological interven-
tion can hurt. Head- up displays might improve our ability to navigate 
and to keep our eyes on the road, but they might impair our ability to 
detect unexpected events. Similarly, in- car GPS navigation systems 
might help us ﬁ nd our way, but when trusted implicitly, they can lead us 
to drive without noticing where we are going.53 A driver in Germany fol-
lowed his navigation instructions despite several “closed for construc-
tion” signs and barricades, eventually barreling his Mercedes into a pile 
of sand. Twice in 2008, drivers in New York State blindly followed their 
GPS instructions and turned onto a set of train tracks in front of an on-
coming train (neither was injured, fortunately). A driver in Britain caused 
a train crash after unwittingly driving onto the Newcastle- Carlisle rail 
line tracks.
A more common problem in Britain occurs when truck drivers fol-
low their GPS commands onto streets that are too small for their trucks. 
In one case, a driver wedged his truck so ﬁ rmly into a country lane that 
he  couldn’t move backward, move forward, or even open his door. He 
had to sleep in his cab for three days before being towed out by a trac-
tor. The problem, of course, is that the navigation system  doesn’t know 
or take account of the size of the vehicle—and some of us don’t know 
that it doesn’t know. Our favorite example of GPS- induced blindness 
comes from the British town of Luckington. In April 2006, rising 
waters made a ford through the start of the Avon River temporarily 
impassable, so it was closed and markers  were put on both sides. Every 
day during the two weeks following the closure, one or two cars drove 
right past the warning signs and into the river. These drivers apparently 

42  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 were so focused on their navigation displays that they didn’t see what 
was right in front of them.
Technology can help us to overcome the limits on our abilities, but 
only if we recognize that any technological aid will have limits too. If 
we misunderstand the limits of the technology, these aids can actually 
make us less likely to notice what is around us. In a sense, we tend to 
generalize our illusion of attention to the aids we use to overcome the 
limits on our attention. In the next chapter, we will consider this ques-
tion: If we successfully pay attention to something and notice it, will 
it then be remembered? Most people think yes, but we will argue that 
this too is an illusion— the illusion of memory.

2
C H A P T E R
the coach who choked
B
efore retiring from coaching college basketball in 
2008, Bobby Knight led his teams to victory in more than nine 
hundred college games, more than any other Division I coach. He was a 
four- time national coach of the year, led the 1984 Olympic gold medal 
basketball team that featured future NBA stars Michael Jordan and Pat-
rick Ewing, and won three national collegiate titles as the coach of the 
 Indiana University Hoosiers. He was famous for running a “clean” basket-
ball operation: His organizations  were never accused of the sorts of re-
cruiting violations that plague many top- tier basketball programs, and the 
majority of his players completed their college degrees. He was a coaching 
innovator whom many of his former players credit for their personal and 
professional successes. Despite this unparalleled record of achievement, 
Bobby Knight was ﬁ red from Indiana University in September 2000 after 
an undergraduate yelled “Hey, Knight, what’s up?” and Knight responded 
by grabbing the student’s arm and lecturing him on being respectful.
That Knight’s dismissal was triggered by a lecture on respect is 
ironic. Throughout his coaching career, Knight had a national reputa-
tion for a volatile temper, crass behavior, and a disdainful attitude to-
ward the press and others. He regularly berated referees and journalists, 

44  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
and on occasion, he even threw chairs onto the court. He was the sub-
ject of a Saturday Night Live parody in which Jim Belushi played a high 
school chess coach who knocked over an opponent’s pieces and yelled at 
his own player, “Move it! Move it! Move the bishop!” Compared with 
other events in his career, the “what’s up” incident was actually small 
beer. It was considered a ﬁ ring offense only because of a report published 
earlier that year that had led the university to adopt a zero- tolerance 
policy for his future indiscretions.
In March 2000, CNN and Sports Illustrated ran a story about why 
several top recruits had left the Indiana program. It focused on an inci-
dent described by Neil Reed, one of Knight’s former players. Reed was 
a star recruit, a high school All- American who scored an average of 
about ten points per game during his three years at Indiana. During a 
practice in 1997, Knight confronted Reed for failing to call out a team-
mate’s name when making a pass, but Reed stood his ground against 
Knight, claiming he had in fact yelled the name. According to Reed, 
Knight then physically attacked him:
At that point coach thrust right at me, just came right at me, 
 wasn’t far away enough to where I  couldn’t see it coming, was 
close enough to come at me and reach and put his hand around 
my throat. He came at me with two hands but grabbed me with 
one hand. People came in and separated us like we  were in a 
school yard to ﬁ ght. . . .  He had me by the throat for I would 
probably say that little situation lasted about 5 seconds. I grabbed 
his wrist and started walking back and by this time people, 
coaches Dan Dakich, Felling grabbed coach Knight and pulled 
him away.
The national reporting of this incident caused a sensation and led 
Indiana ofﬁ cials to shorten their coach’s leash. Reed’s account vividly 
conﬁ rmed Knight’s stormy reputation and put it in an even darker 
light. But shortly after the Sports Illustrated report, other people present 
at the time told a different story. Knight’s former assistant Dan Dakich 
said, “His allegation that I had to separate him from coach Knight is 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  45
totally false.” Another player who had been on the team at the time 
said, “The statement that he was choked by coach Knight is totally ri-
diculous.” Christopher Simpson, a vice president of the university who 
attended many practices, was quoted as saying about Reed’s statements, 
“. . . I question anything Neil Reed says.” The team’s trainer at the 
time, Tim Garl, stated baldly, “The choking thing never happened . . . 
give me a lie detector.” Bobby Knight himself said, “I might have 
grabbed him by the back of the neck. I might have grabbed the guy and 
moved him over. I mean, if you choke a guy, I would think he would 
need hospitalization.” Everyone involved believed that their memories 
had accurately recorded what had happened, but their recollections 
 were contradictory.1
How We Think About Memory
This chapter is about this illusion of memory: the disconnect between 
how we think memory works and how it actually works. But how, ex-
actly, do we think it works? Before answering this question, we’d like 
you to try a brief memory test. Read through the following list of words: 
bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, snooze, blanket, doze, slumber, snore, 
nap, peace, yawn, drowsy. We’ll get back to them in a few paragraphs.
Most of us cannot remember a ﬁ fteen- digit number, and we know that 
we cannot, so we do not even try. We all sometimes forget where we put 
our car keys (or our car), we fail to recall a friend’s name, or we neglect 
to pick up the dry cleaning on the way home from work. And we know 
that we often make these mistakes— our intuitive beliefs about such 
everyday memory failures are reasonably accurate. Our intuitions about 
the per sis tence and detail of memory are a different story.
In the national survey of ﬁ fteen hundred people we commissioned in 
2009, we included several questions designed to probe how people think 
memory works. Nearly half (47%) of the respondents believed that 
“once you have experienced an event and formed a memory of it, that 
memory  doesn’t change.” An even greater percentage (63%) believed 
that “human memory works like a video camera, accurately recording 

46  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the events we see and hear so that we can review and inspect them later.” 
People who agreed with both statements apparently think that memories 
of all our experiences are stored permanently in our brains in an im-
mutable form, even if we  can’t access them. It is impossible to disprove 
this belief— the memories could in principle be stored somewhere— but 
most experts on human memory ﬁ nd it implausible that the brain 
would devote energy and space to storing every detail of our lives (espe-
cially if that information could never be accessed).2
Just as the illusion of attention leads us to think that important and 
distinctive events capture our attention when they don’t, the illusion of 
memory reﬂ ects a basic contrast between what we think we remember 
and what we actually remember. Why do people easily grasp the limita-
tions of short- term memory, but misunderstand the nature of long- term 
memory? This chapter is about how our memories can mislead us and 
how our beliefs about the workings of memory are mistaken. The illu-
sion of attention happens when what we notice is different from what we 
think we notice. The illusion of memory happens when what we remem-
ber is different from what we think we remember.
Now we’d like you to try to recall all of the words from the list you 
read. Do your best to recall as many as you can. Write them down on a 
piece of paper before you continue reading.
What could be simpler than recalling a list of words that you read 
only moments ago? Not much, but even a task as simple as this reveals 
systematic distortions in memory. Look at the list you wrote down. How 
do you think you did? Most likely, you didn’t recall all ﬁ fteen words. 
When we use this task as a classroom demonstration, most students 
recall a few words from the beginning of the list and a few from the end 
of the list.3 They often recall fewer than half of the words from the 
middle of the list, though, and on average, they tend to recall only about 
seven or eight of the ﬁ fteen words correctly. Stop to think about this for 
a moment. Those words  were all utterly common and familiar, you 
 were not under any special stress (we hope) when you read them, and 
there was no time pressure when you had to recall them. Computers 
built in the 1950s  were able to perfectly store ﬁ fteen words in memory, 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  47
but despite our magniﬁ cent cognitive abilities, we cannot remember 
with precision what we read just minutes ago.
If you ask a small child to remember a short list of words for a few 
minutes, you will notice that as late as age four kids still don’t appear 
to realize that they need to exert special effort to keep the words in 
memory. As adults, though, we have learned that there are limits to how 
much we can maintain in memory for a short time. When we have to 
remember a phone number long enough to dial it, we repeat it to our-
selves, either silently or out loud, as long as necessary. Once an arbitrary 
list is longer than the “magic number” of about seven items, most people 
have trouble holding it in their short- term memories.4 That is why li-
cense plates have only about seven letters and numbers and why phone 
numbers historically only required seven numbers (and why the three- 
digit preﬁ x often began with the ﬁ rst two letters of the town or neighbor-
hood’s name; where Chris grew up, in Armonk, New York, some old 
signs and advertisements still listed the numbers of local businesses as 
starting with AR- 3 instead of 273). When we have to remember any-
thing more than this, we use memory crutches (notepads, voice recorders, 
and so on) to help.
The reason your difﬁ culty recalling all ﬁ fteen words in our list illus-
trates the illusion of memory is not that it reveals limits on how much we 
can remember. People generally understand those limits. It reﬂ ects the 
illusion of memory because it highlights how we remember what we do. 
Take a look at the list of words you recalled. Does it contain the word 
“sleep”? About 40 percent of the people reading this book will recall 
having seen the word “sleep.” If you are one of those people, you are 
probably as conﬁ dent about having seen “sleep” as you are about any of 
the other words you remembered. You might even have a distinct recol-
lection of seeing it on the list— but it  wasn’t there. You fabricated it.
Memory depends both on what actually happened and on how we 
made sense of what happened. The list you read was designed to produce 
just this type of false memory. All of the words are closely associated 
with the missing word “sleep.” As you read the words on the list, your 
mind made sense of them, automatically pro cessing the connections 

48  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
among them. At some level, you knew that they  were all related to sleep, 
but you didn’t take special note of the fact that “sleep” was not on the 
list. Then, when you recalled the words, your mind reconstructed the list 
as best it could, based on both your speciﬁ c memory for the words you 
saw and on your knowledge of how the words  were generally related.
When we perceive something, we extract the meaning from what 
we see (or hear, or smell . . . ) rather than encode everything in perfect 
detail. It would be an uncharacteristic waste of energy and other re-
sources for evolution to have designed a brain that took in every possible 
stimulus with equal ﬁ delity when there is little for an organism to gain 
from such a strategy. Likewise, memory  doesn’t store everything we 
perceive, but instead takes what we have seen or heard and associates it 
with what we already know. These associations help us to discern what 
is important and to recall details about what  we’ve seen. They provide 
“retrieval cues” that make our memories more ﬂ uent. In most cases, 
such cues are helpful. But these associations can also lead us astray, pre-
cisely because they lead to an inﬂ ated sense of the precision of memory. 
We cannot easily distinguish between what we recall verbatim and 
what we construct based on associations and knowledge. The word- list 
example, originally devised in the 1950s by psychologist James Deese 
and then studied extensively by Henry Roediger and Kathleen Mc-
Dermott in the 1990s,5 is a simple way to demonstrate this principle, 
but memory distortions and the illusion of memory extend well beyond 
arbitrary lists of words.
Just as the gorilla experiment showed that people see what they 
expect to see, people often remember what they expect to remember. 
They make sense of a scene, and that interpretation colors— or even 
determines— what they remember about it. In a dramatic demonstra-
tion of this principle, psychologists William Brewer and James Trey-
ens conducted a clever experiment using a simple ruse.6 Subjects in 
their study  were led to a graduate student ofﬁ ce and asked to wait 
there for a minute while the experimenter made sure the previous 
subject was ﬁ nished. About thirty seconds later, the experimenter re-
turned and led the subjects to another room, where they unexpect-

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  49
edly  were asked to write down a list of everything that they had seen 
in the waiting room. In most respects, the waiting room was a typical 
graduate student ofﬁ ce, with a desk, chairs, shelves, and so on. Almost 
all of the subjects recalled such common objects. Thirty percent of 
them also recalled seeing books, and 10 percent recalled seeing a ﬁ le 
cabinet. But this ofﬁ ce was unusual— it contained no books or ﬁ le 
cabinets.
In the same way that people tended to recall having seen the word 
“sleep” when remembering a list of words associated with sleep, their 
memory reconstructed the contents of the room based both on what 
actually was there and on what should have been there. (If you look at a 
picture of the ofﬁ ce, it will probably seem perfectly normal until some-
one points out what’s missing, and then it will suddenly start to look 
strange.) What is stored in memory is not an exact replica of reality, but 
a re- creation of it. We cannot play back our memories like a DVD— 
each time we recall a memory, we integrate what ever details we do re-
member with our expectations for what we should remember.
Memories in Conﬂ ict
Neil Reed recalled Coach Knight choking him during a practice. He 
remembered Assistant Coach Dan Dakich having to pull Knight off 
him, but Dakich claimed it never happened. One of them had a dis-
torted memory for the event, but which one? In most cases of disputed 
memory like this, there’s no deﬁ nitive way to determine who was right 
and who was wrong. What makes this example particularly interesting 
is that well after Reed, Dakich, and others went public with their ac-
cusations and memories, a videotape of the practice surfaced. It showed 
Knight approach Reed, grab him by the front of the neck with one 
hand for several seconds, and push him backward. Other coaches and 
players stopped what they  were doing and watched. Nobody came to 
rescue Reed. No assistant coaches separated them. Reed correctly re-
called that Knight had grabbed him by the throat, at least momentarily, 
but over time, in his mind, the memory was elaborated and distorted. It 

50  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
was made consistent with what plausibly might have happened rather 
than what did happen. And, to Reed, his totally false memory of being 
forcibly separated from Coach Knight was just as real as his more ac-
curate memory of being choked. After viewing the video for a follow- up 
CNN/Sports Illustrated report, Reed said:
I know what happened and that [tape] proves what happened. 
I think the moment after something like that, especially a 
20- year- old kid being in that situation, I don’t think you can ﬁ nd 
fault in a little bit of . . .  I mean . . .  I’m not lying. That’s how I 
remember the thing happening and [former assistant coach Ron] 
Felling’s ﬁ ve feet from me. As far as people coming in between, 
I remember people coming between us.7
Why did Reed remember an embellished event while Knight re-
membered nothing at all? Before the tape surfaced, Knight told HBO’s 
Frank Deford that he didn’t remember choking Reed, and added, 
“There isn’t anything that I have done with one kid that I  haven’t done 
with a lot of other kids.”8 For Knight, this was an unremarkable event— it 
was business as usual. His memory for the event was distorted to be-
come consistent with his broader beliefs and expectations for what hap-
pens at practices: Coaches grab kids and move them around, showing 
them where to stand and what to do. Physical contact, for Knight, is a 
regular part of coaching. He misremembered the event as being less con-
sequential than it was, distorting it to be more consistent with his own 
beliefs about typical coaching situations. For Reed, this event likely was 
far more consequential. As he noted, he was a “twenty- year- old kid” at 
the time and he probably hadn’t been grabbed by the neck often in 
practice. To him, it was a jarring and unusual event, one that he stored 
in his memory as “coach choked me.” He remembered the event based 
on the ways that it was salient to him, and as a result, it was distorted in 
the opposite direction from Knight’s version, becoming traumatic rather 
than trivial. For Knight, the incident was just like another arbitrary 
word in a list. For Reed, the incident had a powerful meaning, and the 
details  were ﬁ lled in accordingly.

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  51
People involved in the case of Neil Reed and Bobby Knight had 
sharply different recollections of what happened, but by the time they 
told their stories to the media in 2000, several years had already passed 
since the incident. It’s not unreasonable to think that memories can 
fade and morph over the years, and that they can be inﬂ uenced by the 
motives and goals of the rememberer. But what if two people witness 
the exact same incident, and the delay before they have to describe 
it is no more than the length of time spent on hold waiting for a 911 
operator?9
Leslie Meltzer and Tyce Palmaffy, a young couple who had met as 
undergraduates at the University of Virginia,  were on their way home 
from dinner on a summer night in 2002 in Washington, D.C. They 
drove their Camry north on Fourteenth Street and stopped at a traf-
ﬁ c light at the intersection of Rhode Island Avenue.10 Today, it costs 
upward of $300,000 to buy a small apartment near the  Whole Foods 
supermarket in this area, but then, the neighborhood was still recov-
ering from the effects of race riots and arson that took place in the 
1960s. Tyce, a writer on education policy, was driving. His wife, 
 Leslie, who had recently earned a law degree at Yale, was in the pas-
senger seat. To her right, Leslie saw a man riding a bicycle down the 
sidewalk in their direction. Suddenly, seemingly out of nowhere, 
 another man approached the cyclist, pulled him off the bicycle, and 
began stabbing him repeatedly. Leslie heard the victim scream. She 
grabbed her cell phone and dialed 911, only to be greeted by a voice 
saying, “You have reached the emergency 911 ser vice, all lines are busy, 
please hold.”
By the time the 911 operator got on the line, less than a minute had 
passed, but the assault was over and the light had turned green. Leslie 
described what she saw as they continued driving with the trafﬁ c down 
Fourteenth Street. The victim was a man in his twenties or thirties rid-
ing a bicycle. What about the assailant? He was dressed in jeans, she 
said. Overhearing her, Tyce interrupted to say that he was wearing 
sweatpants. They also disagreed about the kind of shirt he was wearing, 
how tall he was, and even whether he was black or Hispanic. They soon 

52  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
realized that they could agree only on the attacker’s age (twenties), on 
his weapon (a knife), and on the fact that they  were not painting the 
clearest picture for the operator.
It is rare to witness exactly the same event, from the same vantage 
point as someone  else, and then try to recall it in the presence of the 
other witness so soon afterward. Normally, when we observe an event, 
we store some memory of it. When we later recall the event, we do our 
best to retrieve our memory and report its contents. The memory 
seems vivid to us, and we typically lack any speciﬁ c reason to doubt its 
accuracy. Had Tyce not been there to hear and correct— or at least 
contradict— Leslie’s report to the 911 operator, neither would have dis-
covered the stark contradictions between their separate memories. 
Both  were surprised by the extent of the differences. Tyce later recalled 
realizing right after the unnerving experience “how unbelievably un-
trustworthy witnesses must be,” an issue we’ll return to later in this 
book.
Didn’t They Just Shoot Up His Windshield?
In a famous scene in the movie Pretty Woman, Julia Roberts is having 
breakfast with Richard Gere in his hotel room. She picks up a croissant 
but then takes a bite out of a pancake. In Jagged Edge, Glenn Close’s out-
ﬁ t changes three times during a single courtroom scene. In The God-
father, Sonny’s car is riddled with bullets at a tollbooth, but seconds later 
its windshield is miraculously repaired. Did you know about these mis-
takes or others like them? These inadvertent changes, known as conti-
nuity errors, are common in movies, in part because of how movies are 
created. Rarely are movies shot in sequence and in real time from start 
to ﬁ nish. They are completed piecemeal, with scenes ﬁ lmed in an order 
determined by the actors’ schedules, the availability of physical locations 
for ﬁ lming, the cost of hiring the crew at different times, the weather 
conditions, and many other factors. Each scene is ﬁ lmed from many 
different angles, and the ﬁ nal movie is spliced together and put in order 
in the editing room.

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  53
Just one person on the set is responsible for making sure that every-
thing in each scene matches from one shot to the next.11 That person, 
known as the script supervisor, is charged with remembering all of the 
details: what people  were wearing, where they  were standing, which 
foot was forward, whether a hand was on a waist or in a pocket, whether 
an actress was eating a croissant or a pancake, and whether the wind-
shield should be intact or bullet- ridden. If the script supervisor makes a 
mistake during ﬁ lming, it’s often impossible to go back and reshoot the 
scene. And the editor may decide to ignore the error because other as-
pects of the shot are more important. As a result, some mistakes almost 
inevitably make it into the ﬁ nal product. That’s why some of the slaves 
in Spartacus, set during the Roman Empire, can occasionally be seen 
wearing wristwatches.
Dozens of books and websites are devoted to cata loging such errors for 
the curious and obsessed.12 For The Godfather, one site lists forty- two 
separate continuity errors (plus dozens of other mistakes and anomalies). 
In part, such lists appeal because of the irony involved: Hollywood, de-
spite spending tens of millions of dollars on a movie, makes clear mistakes 
that anyone can see. Finding such errors gives the amateur continuity 
sleuth a feeling of superiority— the ﬁ lmmakers must have been sloppy 
not to notice what I can see clearly. And indeed, when you see an error in 
a movie, it suddenly seems obvious.
Several years ago, Dateline NBC ran a story on ﬁ lm ﬂ ubs in movies 
like Shakespeare in Love and Saving Private Ryan, which had both won 
Academy Awards and been acclaimed for their editing. Correspondent 
Josh Mankiewicz revealed an error in Saving Private Ryan in which 
eight soldiers walked across a ﬁ eld in the distance, even though one had 
been killed a few minutes earlier in the ﬁ lm, so by then there should 
have been only seven soldiers. In a disbelieving voice, he said, “This 
is Steven Spielberg, one of the most talented and most careful movie-
makers out there. You’ve got to ﬁ gure he watched the ﬁ lm several times 
before it actually got to the theaters. And he didn’t see it?” Later, 
Mankiewicz asked, “What is it about ﬁ lmmakers that they can shoot so 
carefully, many takes, and still miss something so obvious, something 

54  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the audience can see clearly?” The questions are nearly perfect illustra-
tions of how the illusion of memory operates. Mankiewicz (and his pro-
ducers) assumed that people have an accurate memory of everything 
that has happened and that they will automatically notice any discrep-
ancies.13
When they  were in graduate school together at Cornell, Dan and his 
friend Daniel Levin (now a professor at Vanderbilt University) decided 
to explore experimentally how well people actually notice such errors in 
movies.14 With this project “the two Dans” began a long, productive, 
and ongoing collaboration. For their ﬁ rst study, they made a brief movie 
of a conversation between two friends, Sabina and Andrea, about a sur-
prise party for their mutual friend Jerome. Sabina sat at a table when 
Andrea entered the scene. As they talked about the party, the camera 
cut back and forth between them, sometimes showing a close- up of one 
of them, and other times showing both of them. After about a minute, 
the conversation ended and the screen faded to black.
Imagine being a subject in their experiment. You come to a labora-
tory room and are told that before you do another task, the experiment-
ers would like you to watch a brief movie and then to answer some 
detailed questions about it. They advise you to pay close attention and 
they start the movie. As soon as the movie ends, they hand you a piece 
of paper that asks, “Did you notice any unusual differences from one 
shot to the next where objects, body positions, or clothing suddenly 
changed?” If you are like almost all of the subjects in this experiment, 
you would answer no— you would not have noticed any of the nine 
editing mistakes the two Dans intentionally made!15
These “errors,” which  were of the same type that end up in books 
and websites on ﬁ lm ﬂ ubs, included plates on the table changing color 
and a scarf disappearing and reappearing. They  were much more 
 obvious than the ones Josh Mankiewicz disparaged in his Dateline re-
port. Yet even when subjects watched the ﬁ lm a second time, now look-
ing for changes, they still noticed, on average, just two of the deliberate 
errors. This phenomenon, the surprising failure to notice seemingly 
obvious changes from one moment to the next, is now known as change 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  55
blindness— people are “blind” to the changes between what was in view 
moments before and what is in view now.16 This phenomenon is related 
to the inattentional blindness we discussed in the last chapter, but it is 
not the same. Inattentional blindness usually happens when we fail to 
notice the appearance of something we  weren’t expecting to see. The 
thing we miss, such as a gorilla, is fully visible, right in front of us the 
entire time. For change blindness, unless we remember that Julia Roberts 
was eating a croissant, the fact that she is now eating a pancake is unre-
markable. Change blindness occurs when we fail to compare what’s 
there now with what was there before. Of course, in the real world, 
objects don’t abruptly change into other objects, so checking all the vi-
sual details from moment to moment to make sure they  haven’t changed 
would be a spectacular waste of brainpower.
What is in some ways even more important than a failure to notice 
changes is the mistaken belief that we should notice them. Daniel Levin 
cheekily named this misbelief change blindness blindness, because people 
are blind to the extent of their own change blindness. In one experi-
ment, Levin showed photographs from the Sabina/Andrea conversation 
to a group of undergraduates, described the ﬁ lm, and pointed out that 
the plates  were red in one shot and white in another. That is, rather than 
run the change blindness experiment, he explained everything about it, 
including the intentional “ﬂ ub.” He then asked these subjects to decide 
whether or not they would have noticed the change if they had just 
watched the ﬁ lm without being alerted to its presence. More than 70 
percent conﬁ dently said that they would have spotted the change, even 
though in the original study no one actually did! For the disappearing 
scarf, more than 90 percent said they would have noticed, when again, 
in the original experiment, no one actually did.17 This is the illusion of 
memory at work: Most people ﬁ rmly believe that they will notice unex-
pected changes, when in fact almost nobody does.
Now imagine you are in another experiment conducted by the two 
Dans. You come to the lab and again you are asked to watch a brief silent 
movie. You are warned that it is really short and that you should pay close 
attention. The movie shows a person sitting at a desk who gets up and 

56  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
walks toward the camera. The shot then cuts to the hallway and shows 
a person exiting the door and answering a phone on the wall. He stands 
still, holding the phone to his ear and facing the camera for about ﬁ ve 
seconds before the scene fades to black. As soon as the movie ends, you 
are asked to write a detailed description of what you saw.
Having just read about the Sabina/Andrea ﬁ lm, you’ve probably 
guessed that there’s more to this one than just the simple action of an-
swering a phone. When the camera cut from a view of the actor walk-
ing toward the doorway to a shot of the actor entering the hall and 
answering the phone, the original actor was replaced by a different per-
son!  Wouldn’t you notice the only actor in a scene being replaced by a 
different person wearing different clothes, parting his hair the opposite 
way, and wearing different glasses?
If you answered yes, you’re still under the illusion of memory.  Here is 
what two subjects wrote after seeing the ﬁ lm:
Subject 1: A young man with slightly long blond hair and large 
glasses turned around from the chair at a desk, got up, walked 
past the camera to a phone in the hallway, spoke into the phone 
and listened and looked at the camera.
Subject 2: There was a blond guy with glasses sitting at a 
desk . . .  not too cluttered but not exactly neat. He looked at the 
camera,  rose, and walked out to the front right of the screen, his 
blue shirt billowing out a bit on his right over his white with 
light pattern tee- shirt . . .  went into hallway, picked up phone, 
said something that didn’t seem to be “hello,” and then stood 
there looking kind of foolish for a bit.18
Not a single subject who viewed this video spontaneously reported 
anything different before and after the change. Even when prompted 
more speciﬁ cally with the question, “Did you notice anything unusual 
about the video?” no subjects reported the change in the actor’s identity 
or even his clothes from the ﬁ rst shot to the second. In a separate ex-
periment, subjects watched the same video, but with the person- change 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  57
pointed out to them. They  were then asked whether they would have 
noticed the change had they viewed the video without the warning; 70 
percent said they would have, compared with 0 percent who actually 
did. In this case, when people know about the change in advance, it 
becomes obvious and they all see it.19 But when they don’t expect the 
change, they completely miss it.
Professional Change Detectors
In most cases, we have almost no feedback about the limits on our abil-
ity to spot changes. We are aware only of the changes we do detect, and, 
by deﬁ nition, changes we don’t notice cannot modify our beliefs about 
our change- detection acumen. One group, though, has extensive expe-
rience looking for changes to scenes: script supervisors, the profession-
als responsible for detecting continuity errors when making movies.20 
Are they immune to change blindness? If not, do they at least have 
above- average awareness of the limits on their ability to retain and com-
pare visual information from one moment to the next?
Trudy Ramirez has been a Hollywood script supervisor for nearly 
thirty years. She got her start working on commercials and quickly 
moved up to feature ﬁ lms. She has been the script supervisor on doz-
ens of major movies and tele vi sion programs, including Total Recall, 
Basic Instinct, Terminator 2, and Spider-Man 3. Dan spoke with Trudy 
Ramirez while she was working on the set of Iron Man 2.21 “I have a 
very good visual memory, but I also take copious notes,” she said. “I 
know that writing something down that I want to remember will often 
cement it into my memory.” The key, according to Ramirez, is that 
script supervisors realize they don’t need to remember everything. They 
focus on those details and aspects of a scene that matter, and ignore the 
rest.
“Most of the time, I will remember what is important to the scene,” 
she continued. “We know what to look for. We know how to look.” 
Everyone on a ﬁ lm set has their own area of focus when watching a 
scene, but script supervisors are trained to look for those aspects of the 

58  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
scene that are central to facilitating the editing of the ﬁ lm. Ramirez 
noted, “There are points in the action of a scene where you know the 
editor will most likely cut: when someone sits or stands up, when some-
one turns around, or when someone comes into or goes out of a room. . . . 
You start to develop a sense of how things will cut together, and there-
fore what is important to notice.” Script supervisors also learn what is 
important from experience, often painfully: “Over time, we all make 
tragic continuity errors which train us what to look for— whatever you 
didn’t notice that you later wished you had trains you to notice that 
thing or action next time.”22
So script supervisors are not immune to change blindness. The differ-
ence between them and everyone  else is that script supervisors get direct 
feedback that they can and do miss changes. Through their experience 
of searching for errors and learning about their mistakes, they become 
less prone to the illusion that they can notice and retain everything 
around them. Ramirez said, “The one thing this has taught me is that 
my memory is very fallible. It’s shockingly fallible. You  wouldn’t neces-
sarily have any reason to think about how your memory was working 
unless you  were doing something such as script supervising where it’s 
such an important part of it.” Critically, though, she knows that other 
people have similar limits. “When I am watching a movie, the more into 
the story I am, the less I notice things that are out of continuity. If I’m 
being swept along by the story and I’m involved with the characters, I 
am much less apt to notice something out of visual continuity. If you’re 
really into the story, huge continuity errors will go right by you— you’re 
not looking for those kinds of details. . . .  You can get away with a lot.”
What does that say about people who make a habit of searching for 
continuity errors? If people spot continuity errors when watching a 
ﬁ lm, then the movie may have a bigger problem: It  doesn’t engage view-
ers’ attention enough to keep them from searching for minor changes! 
Of course, some people will watch a movie multiple times just to look 
for errors. And if they do that, they are likely to ﬁ nd some. The impos-
sibility of noticing everything is what guarantees the business prospects 
for books and websites on ﬁ lm ﬂ ubs.

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  59
Do You Have Any Idea Who You’re Talking To?
Professor Ulric Neisser, whose research inspired our gorilla experiment, 
watched the change blindness demonstration in which an actor changed 
into another person while answering a phone, and he pointed out a pos-
sible limitation of all of these studies: They all used videos. He com-
mented that watching video is an inherently passive activity: The action 
unfolds in front of us, but we do not actively engage with it the way 
we do when we interact socially with other people. Neisser argued that 
change blindness might not occur if a person  were changed in the 
middle of a real- world encounter rather than across a cut in a passively 
viewed motion picture. The two Dans thought Neisser probably was 
right, that people would notice such a change in the real world, but they 
decided to run an experiment to test Neisser’s prediction anyway.
Imagine you are strolling across a college campus and up ahead of you, 
you see a man holding a map and looking lost. The man approaches you 
and asks directions to the library. You start giving him directions, and 
as you’re pointing to the map, a couple of people behind you abruptly say 
“Excuse me, coming through,” and they rudely carry a big wooden door 
right between you and the lost pedestrian. Once they pass, you ﬁ nish 
giving directions. Would you notice if the original lost pedestrian  were 
replaced by a different person as the workers carried the door through? 
What if the two people wore different clothes, differed in height by 
about three inches, had different builds, and had noticeably different 
voices? You would have to be pretty oblivious to miss the change. After 
all, you  were in the middle of a conversation with the man, and you had 
plenty of time to look at him. That’s certainly what the two Dans and 
Ulric Neisser thought.
That’s also what more than 95 percent of undergraduates thought 
when asked whether they would notice.23 And they  were all wrong. All 
of us, undergraduates as well as scientists familiar with all of the re-
search leading up to these experiments, fell prey to the illusion of mem-
ory. All  were convinced that only the rare, unusually oblivious person 
could possibly miss the change. Yet nearly 50 percent of the people in 

60  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the original experiment did not notice that they  were talking to differ-
ent people before and after the interruption!24
Serendipitously, one day several years later when we  were conducting a 
follow up experiment at Harvard, many of the undergraduate psychology 
students  were attending a lecture in the basement of the building. During 
the lecture, Professor Stephen Kosslyn (Chris’s graduate school mentor 
and longtime collaborator) happened to describe the “door” study in de-
tail as an example of research being conducted by other faculty members 
in the department. When they left the lecture, several students  were over-
heard making comments like, “There’s no way I would have missed that 
change.” Our recruiter asked them if they would like to be in an experi-
ment and sent them to the eighth ﬂ oor. As they stood at a counter after 
ﬁ lling out a form, the experimenter who had been talking to them ducked 
down behind the counter— ostensibly to ﬁ le away some papers— and a 
different person stood up. All of the students missed the change!25
Change blindness is a surprisingly pervasive phenomenon consider-
ing that it has only been studied intensely since the 1990s. It occurs for 
simple shapes on a computer display, for photographs of scenes, and for 
people in the middle of a real- world interaction.26 And the illusion of 
memory leads people to believe that they’re great at change detection 
even though they’re lousy. This illusion is so powerful that even change 
blindness researchers regularly experience it. We only came to recognize 
the limits of our intuitions about memories when our own data repeat-
edly showed us how wrong we could be. Similarly, ﬁ lmmakers learn 
about the illusion of memory the hard way, by seeing evidence of their 
own mistakes on the big screen. Trudy Ramirez, the Hollywood script 
supervisor, has experienced this many times: “The way you remember 
something, how your memory shapes what you think you saw, as sure as 
you think you are . . .  often it’s different if you can actually look back at 
it. There  were times when I would have staked my life on something and 
later on realized I was wrong.”
There are limits to change blindness, of course. When we spoke pub-
licly about the early person- change studies, we  were often asked whether 
people would notice if a man changed into a woman. “Of course they 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  61
would,” we thought, but of course our certainty was another reﬂ ection 
of the illusion of memory. The only way to ﬁ nd out was to try it. Later 
experiments in Dan’s lab showed that people do in fact notice when you 
change a man into a woman or when you change the race of an actor in 
a movie. And people are more likely to notice a change to the identity 
of a person who is a member of their own social group.27 But most 
other changes often go undetected.
Even when subjects notice the person swap in these real- world experi-
ments, they’re far from perfect in picking the original experimenter from 
a photographic lineup. And people who miss the change do no better 
with the lineup than they would have done by just guessing randomly.28 
In a brief encounter, we appear to store so little information about an-
other person that we not only fail to see changes, but we also  can’t even 
identify the person we saw just minutes earlier. When you interact brieﬂ y 
with a stranger, there are only a few pieces of general information you 
can be certain of retaining: sex, race, and social group (student, blue-
collar worker, businessperson, and so on). Most of the rest of what you 
perceive about the person probably won’t make it into memory at all.
Recall Leslie Meltzer and Tyce Palmaffy, who witnessed a knife at-
tack from their car but recalled it differently just moments later. In light 
of the evidence that people sometimes fail to notice that a person has 
almost instantaneously been replaced by someone completely different, 
Leslie and Tyce’s discrepant eyewitness memories are unsurprising. 
After all, they  were just observing the person from a distance, not 
standing face- to- face with him and giving him directions.
“I Sat Next to Captain Picard”
About ten years ago at a party Dan hosted, a colleague of ours named 
Ken Norman told us a funny story about sitting next to the actor Pat-
rick Stewart (best known for his roles as Captain Jean- Luc Picard of 
Star Trek and Charles Xavier in the X-Men ﬁ lms) at a Legal Sea Food 
restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The story was prompted 
when Chris noticed that Dan had a small ﬁ gurine of Captain Picard 

62  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
perched next to his tele vi sion screen. “Can I buy your Captain Picard?” 
asked Chris. Dan said that it was not for sale. Chris offered ﬁ ve, then 
ten dollars. Dan refused. Chris eventually raised his bid to ﬁ fty dollars— 
for reasons that escape him now— but Dan still refused. (Neither of us 
remembers why Dan refused, but to this day, Picard has not left his 
place amid Dan’s electronics.)
At this point Ken told us that at Legal Sea Food, Patrick Stewart had 
been dining with an attractive younger woman who, based on snippets 
of overheard conversation, appeared to be a publicist or agent. For des-
sert Stewart ordered Baked Alaska— a choice that stood out in memory 
because it appears rarely on restaurant menus. Toward the end of his 
meal, another distinctive event happened: Two members of the kitchen 
staff came out to Stewart’s table and asked for his autograph, which he 
readily granted. Moments later, a manager appeared and apologized, 
explaining that the “Trekkie” cooks’ action was against restaurant policy. 
Stewart shrugged off the supposed offense, and he and his companion 
 were soon on their way.
The only problem with the story was that it had actually happened 
not to Ken, but to Chris. Ken had heard Chris tell the story some 
time before and had incorporated it into his own memory. In fact, 
Ken felt so strongly that the memory was his, and had so completely 
forgotten that Chris was the original raconteur, that even Chris’s pres-
ence when Ken retold the story did not jog his memory of the way in 
which he had actually “encountered” Captain Picard. But when Chris 
pointed out the error, Ken quickly realized that this memory was not 
his own. This anecdote illustrates another aspect of the illusion of 
memory: When we retrieve a memory, we can falsely believe that we 
are fetching a record of something that happened to us rather than 
someone  else.
Although we believe that our memories contain precise accounts of 
what we see and hear, in reality these rec ords can be remarkably scanty. 
What we retrieve often is ﬁ lled in based on gist, inference, and other 
inﬂ uences; it is more like an improvised riff on a familiar melody than 
a digital recording of an original performance. We mistakenly believe 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  63
that our memories are accurate and precise, and we cannot readily sepa-
rate those aspects of our memory that accurately reﬂ ect what happened 
from those that  were introduced later. That’s how Ken appropriated 
Chris’s story— he had a vivid memory for the event, but mistakenly at-
tributed it to his own experience. In the scientiﬁ c literature, this type of 
distortion is known as a failure of source memory. He forgot the source of 
his memory, but because it was so vivid, he assumed that it came from his 
own experience.
Source memory failures contribute to many cases of unintentional 
plagiarism. In the classes we teach, we occasionally encounter inten-
tional plagiarism (or a gross misunderstanding of the right way to do 
research) when a student copies sections of a paper from Wikipedia or 
other sources. Unintentional plagiarism refers to cases in which people 
are convinced that an idea was their own when they actually learned 
about it from someone  else. Recently, bestselling spiritual author Neale 
Donald Walsch was caught plagiarizing a story originally written by 
Candy Chand that had circulated on spirituality websites and blogs 
for more than a de cade.29 The story describes a group of students who 
 were using placards to spell out “Christmas Love” in a winter pageant 
rehearsal. One student accidentally held her letter “m” upside  down, 
resulting in the phrase “Christ was Love.” Walsch posted the story to 
Beliefnet .com in December 2008 as if it had happened to his son 
Nicholas. But it actually happened to Chand’s son, who also is named 
Nicholas, twenty years earlier— before Walsch’s son was even born. 
In this case, it is clear that Walsch appropriated someone  else’s story. 
The question, though, is whether he was plagiarizing intentionally or 
whether he merely misappropriated the memory. In acknowledging a 
“serious error,” Walsch stated:
I am truly mystiﬁ ed and taken aback by this. . . .  Someone must 
have sent it to me over the internet ten years or so ago. . . .  
Finding it utterly charming and its message indelible, I must 
have clipped and pasted it into my ﬁ le of “stories to tell that have 
a message I want to share.” I have told the story verbally so many 

64  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
times over the years that I had it memorized . . .  and then, some-
where along the way, internalized it as my own experience.
This case bears all the hallmarks of a failure of source memory. 
Walsch remembered the story, having read and retold it many times. 
The fact that the child in the story had the same name as his son made 
it easier for him to come to believe that the memory was his. (Our friend 
Ken Norman probably picked up Chris’s story more readily because he 
had dined at the same Legal Sea Food restaurant.) Walsch kept a record 
of the story in his ﬁ le and came to believe that he had written it. In his 
interview with the New York Times, Walsch said, “I am chagrined and 
astonished that my mind could play such a trick on me.” Chand, how-
ever, thinks the theft was intentional: “If he knew this was wrong, he 
should have known it was wrong before he got caught . . .  quite frankly, 
I’m not buying it.” Both Chand’s indignation and Walsch’s astonish-
ment are entirely consistent with the illusion of memory. Walsch  doesn’t 
understand how he could have mistakenly appropriated another person’s 
memory, and Chand  doesn’t believe that he could have done so inno-
cently. They both think that memory must be more faithful to experi-
ence than it really is.
Just as we cannot be certain that Kenny Conley suffered from inat-
tentional blindness when he reported not seeing Michael Cox being 
beaten, we cannot say for certain whether Walsch’s plagiarism was inten-
tional or accidental. What we can say, though, is that it is possible that 
Walsch internalized someone  else’s memory and lost track of the source 
of the story. Such source memory failures are common, and they even can 
be created in the laboratory. In a clever study, psychologists Kimberly 
Wade, Maryanne Garry, Don Read, and Stephen Lindsay asked subjects 
to view a doctored photograph showing the subject enjoying a hot air 
balloon  ride as a child.30 The subjects  were each interviewed several times, 
and  were asked each time to recall the event, or if they could not recall it, 
to imagine that it had happened to themselves. Although none of the 
subjects had ever taken a hot air balloon  ride, the photograph and at-
tempts to recall it led some of them to incorporate information about the 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  65
image into their personal narrative memories. Half the subjects created a 
false memory about the balloon  ride, some embellishing their memories 
substantially beyond what was shown in the photograph.
The ability to change memories using doctored photographs has 
 Orwellian ramiﬁ cations. If we can induce false memories simply by ed-
iting images, it might be possible to literally revise history, changing the 
past by doctoring it. Using a similar approach, Dario Sacchi, Franca 
Agnoli, and Elizabeth Loftus showed subjects an edited version of the 
famous photograph of a single person standing in front of a column of 
tanks during the 1989 protests at Tiananmen Square in Beijing.31 In 
the original version of the photograph, only the lone protester was 
visible on the wide road. The doctored version shows crowds of people 
lining a narrower road on both sides of the tanks. When they  were 
quizzed about the historical facts of Tiananmen Square only moments 
later, those who viewed the doctored photograph believed that far 
more people had been at the protest.
Forgetting a Life- and- Death Matter
Memory distortions are not limited to irrelevant details like whether or 
not books  were in an ofﬁ ce or par tic u lar words  were part of a list. In fact, 
they can apply to life- and- death decisions, even those that you yourself 
have made. Australian psychologist Stefanie Sharman and her colleagues 
conducted an experiment that calls to mind the classic Seinfeld episode 
in which Kramer asks Elaine to help him and his lawyer work through 
a long list to decide the medical circumstances under which he would be 
willing to carry on living. (Lawyer: “OK. One lung, blind and you’re 
eating through a tube.” Kramer: “Naw, that’s not my style.” Elaine: 
“Borrrr- ing.”) The researchers interviewed adults and asked them to 
make (more realistic) decisions about which life- sustaining treatments 
they’d want if they  were seriously ill.32 For example, would they want 
only CPR performed, or would they also want to be fed artiﬁ cially if 
necessary? They interviewed the same people twelve months later using 
the same questions.

66  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Overall, 23 percent of all their decisions changed between the initial 
interview and the follow- up, meaning that people who said during the 
ﬁ rst interview that they would want a life- extending treatment said 
during the second interview that they  wouldn’t want it (or vice versa). 
That people would change their preferences is not terribly surprising. 
Perhaps they had discussed the possibilities with friends, relatives, or 
doctors in the interim; maybe they encountered news stories about end- 
of- life issues. What is striking is that 75 percent of the people who 
changed their minds  were unaware that they had done so! They thought 
that the decision they reported in the second interview was the same as 
their decision in the ﬁ rst interview. Their memory for what they had 
said earlier was rewritten to match their current beliefs.
The illusion of memory leads us to assume— unless we receive direct 
evidence to the contrary— that our memories, beliefs, and actions are 
mutually consistent and stable over time. Amid the national grief after 
President Kennedy was assassinated, a poll showed that two- thirds of 
people claimed they had voted for him in the 50/50 squeaker election 
of 1960.33 At least some of them must have revised their memories of 
how they voted three years earlier, probably to make them consistent 
with the positive feelings they had about their fallen leader. More 
broadly, we tend to assume that everything in our world is stable and 
unchanging unless something draws our attention to a discrepancy. 
When our beliefs change, though, our memories can change along with 
them. A living will you produced a few years ago may not reﬂ ect your 
current preferences— but you are likely to misremember its contents 
and assume that it expresses what you want today. If you become seri-
ously ill and are unable to communicate, doctors will rely on this docu-
ment and may inadvertently take actions that contradict your wishes.
Where  Were You on 9/11?
Try to recall exactly where you  were when you ﬁ rst heard about the at-
tacks of September 11, 2001. If you’re like us, you have a vivid memory 
of how you learned about the attacks, where you  were, who  else was 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  67
with you, what you  were doing immediately beforehand, and what you 
did immediately afterward. Chris recalls waking up late that morning, 
after the ﬁ rst plane had hit the World Trade Center. He listened to the 
Howard Stern Show on the radio until it ended around noon, at which 
point he turned on the TV. He got in touch with an Israeli colleague, 
who told him it was already obvious who the perpetrators must be, and 
he received an e-mail update from a friend who was living in Brooklyn, 
watching the events safely from her rooftop. He received another e-mail 
from the manager of his ofﬁ ce building at Harvard, William James 
Hall, recommending evacuation.
Dan recalls working in his ofﬁ ce that morning when his graduate 
student Stephen Mitroff came in to tell him that a plane hit the ﬁ rst 
tower. He spent the next few minutes seeking information online, and 
when the second plane hit, he turned on the tele vi sion in his lab and he 
and his three graduate students watched the towers collapse. He then 
spent a few frantic minutes on the phone trying to reach his brother 
David’s girlfriend because David was traveling back from New York to 
Boston that morning (he was sitting on a plane waiting to take off from 
LaGuardia Airport when the attacks happened). Dan remembers be-
coming concerned that the ﬁ fteen- story building he was in might also 
be a target. He left before noon to pick up his wife in downtown Boston 
and they went home together and watched the tele vi sion coverage for 
the rest of the day.
Neither of us has any idea what we  were doing or whom we talked to 
the day before 9/11. We suspect that the same is true for you. Your 
memories of 9/11 are more vivid, detailed, and emotional than your 
memories of more ordinary events from that time period. Memories of 
dramatic events of personal or national importance often are recalled in 
greater detail. Some signiﬁ cant events appear to be imprinted in our 
minds in a way that lets us play them back in video- like detail, perfectly 
preserved despite the passage of time. This intuition is powerful and 
pervasive. It is also wrong.
Such detailed memories for a signiﬁ cant event  were ﬁ rst studied 
systematically in 1899 by Frederick Colgrove as part of his doctoral 

68  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
research at Clark University. Colgrove asked 179 middle- aged and older 
adults where they  were when they heard about the assassination of 
Abraham Lincoln.34 Even though he asked people to recall events that 
happened more than thirty years earlier, 70 percent remembered where 
they  were and how they heard about it, and some provided exceptional 
amounts of detail.
Nearly eighty years later, social psychologists Roger Brown and James 
Kulik coined the term ﬂ ashbulb memories to characterize these vivid, 
detailed memories for surprising and important events.35 The name, by 
analogy to photography, reﬂ ects the idea that the details surrounding 
surprising and emotionally signiﬁ cant events are preserved in the in-
stant they occur: Events meriting permanent storage are imprinted in 
the brain just as a scene is imprinted onto ﬁ lm. According to Brown 
and Kulik, the memory is “very like a photograph that indiscriminately 
preserves the scene in which each of us found himself when the ﬂ ash-
bulb was ﬁ red.”
In their study, Brown and Kulik surveyed eighty Americans (forty 
black and forty white) about a variety of events, most of which involved 
assassinations or attempted assassinations in the United States during 
the 1960s and 1970s. Much as Colgrove did before them, Brown and 
Kulik documented that all but one of their subjects had a ﬂ ashbulb 
memory for the Kennedy assassination. Majorities had ﬂ ashbulb mem-
ories for the assassinations of Bobby Kennedy and Martin Luther King, 
and many had ﬂ ashbulb memories for other similar events.
In their research papers, Colgrove and Brown and Kulik provided 
vivid examples from their own memories to go along with the detailed, 
emotionally charged recollections their subjects had for these po liti cal 
assassinations. We all have such ﬂ ashbulb experiences, and we can re-
trieve them with ease and ﬂ uency. Recounting or asking about a ﬂ ash-
bulb memory can start a conversation that goes on for hours; try it the 
next time you’re at a boring dinner party. It is the richness of these par-
tic u lar recollected experiences that leads us to believe so strongly in 
their accuracy. Ironically, the conclusions drawn from the initial re-
search on ﬂ ashbulb memories  were based entirely on the illusion of 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  69
memory. The recollections of their subjects  were so vivid and detailed 
that the researchers assumed they must be accurate.
After writing down his personal recollection of 9/11 for this book, 
Dan e-mailed his former students and asked them to send him their 
own for comparison. The ﬁ rst to respond was Stephen Mitroff, now a 
professor at Duke University:
I got an email from my girlfriend saying a plane hit the World 
Trade Center. I did a quick look at CNN and then went into 
your ofﬁ ce where you and Michael Silverman  were chatting. I 
told you. We went back to my ofﬁ ce and we  were looking at the 
images on Steve Franconeri’s computer. You surmised it must 
have been a small plane and the pi lot lost control. We saw a 
 picture of a huge commercial plane right next to the tower and 
you thought it must be a Photoshopped pic. We looked at various 
websites, including airline sites to look at the status updates of 
the ﬂ ights that  were being reported as hijacked. After more web 
searching, you hooked up the TV in our testing room and lots of 
people watched more in there. I think we witnessed one of the 
towers collapse, but I am not conﬁ dent in that. We deﬁ nitely 
 were watching during one of the key events. We all started to feel 
an unwarranted uneasiness over being in the tallest building in 
town and left before lunch time. Michael and I walked back to 
Boston . . .  
Dan’s other two graduate students at the time both reported being 
away from the lab that morning, so they could not have followed the 
news reports with Dan. Mitroff remembered Michael Silverman— 
Dan’s postdoctoral fellow at the time, now a professor at Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine— being in Dan’s ofﬁ ce but Dan did not. Dan 
e-mailed Silverman the same question he had asked the three Steves. 
The following report came back:
I was standing in your ofﬁ ce discussing something with you. The 
radio on your bookshelf was on. Mitroff yelled from his ofﬁ ce 

70  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
something to the extent that CNN was reporting that a plane 
just ﬂ ew into the World Trade Center. I went to his ofﬁ ce to see 
but the page was loading very slowly. I mentioned that little 
planes ﬂ y the Hudson corridor regularly, so I guessed it was 
 possible. The page loaded and it showed a large plane ﬂ ying to-
ward the WTC. I said something to the extent that putting up a 
Photoshopped image like that was disgusting— I was still con-
vinced that only a small plane had crashed. The next information 
we received came from your radio (CNN was slow and not load-
ing anything additional). We heard that not one but two planes 
had hit. I then went to my ofﬁ ce and tried to call my wife. She 
was also trying to call me. Neither of us could get through. . . .  
When I left my ofﬁ ce, someone had turned on a tele vi sion in 
the testing room. The picture was noisy. It showed that one 
tower had already dropped and we watched the second one fall. 
(I’m not sure if the second tower falling was live, but I suspect 
it  wasn’t.) You made the decision for us to leave and go home 
around 11:00. Mitroff and I walked to his apartment and then 
I walked home.
There are interesting similarities and differences among these ac-
counts. First the similarities: Everyone agrees that Dan heard about the 
attack from Steve Mitroff, they spent some time searching online for 
information, and then Dan turned on the tele vi sion in the lab where he 
and Mitroff watched footage of a tower collapsing. Now for the differ-
ences: Dan did not recall Michael Silverman being present and he mis-
takenly remembered his other graduate students being there. All three 
remember Mitroff coming into Dan’s ofﬁ ce, but Silverman remembers 
Mitroff yelling from his ofﬁ ce ﬁ rst. Dan recalled nothing about a dis-
cussion of the image of a plane next to the tower; Mitroff recalled Dan 
commenting that the plane was small and that the image of a larger plane 
was edited; and Silverman recalls making those comments himself.
Three cognitive psychologists had vivid memories for what they ex-
perienced on 9/11, but their memories conﬂ icted in several ways. If 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  71
memory worked like a video recording, all three reports about 9/11 
would be identical. In fact, there is no way to verify which of the ac-
counts is most accurate. The best we can do is to assume that two in de-
pen dent and mutually consistent recollections are more likely to be 
correct than one recollection that conﬂ icts with both. Many cases of 
memory failure are just like this, in that there is no documentary evi-
dence to establish the ground truth of what actually happened.
In some cases, like Neil Reed’s confrontation with Bobby Knight, it is 
possible to compare people’s recollections to documentary evidence of 
what actually happened. President George W. Bush experienced a simi-
lar distortion to his memory of how he ﬁ rst learned about the attacks on 
the morning of 9/11. You might recall the video footage of Bush read-
ing the story “The Pet Goat” to an elementary school class in Florida 
when his chief of staff, Andrew Card, walked in and whispered in his 
ear. His stunned reaction provided fodder for comics and commenta-
tors alike. That moment, caught on video, was how he heard about the 
plane hitting the second tower. It was his moment of realization that the 
United States was under attack. He’d already heard about the ﬁ rst plane 
before entering the classroom, but like many in the media, he believed 
that crash to have been a small aircraft accidentally veering into the tower.
On at least two occasions, Bush publicly recalled having seen the 
ﬁ rst plane hit the tower on tele vi sion before entering the classroom. For 
example, on December 4, 2001, in response to a question from a young 
boy, he recalled, “I was sitting outside the classroom waiting to go in, 
and I saw an airplane hit the tower— the TV was obviously on, and I 
use[d] to ﬂ y myself, and I said, ‘There’s one terrible pi lot.’ And I said, ‘It 
must have been a horrible accident.’ ” The problem is that the only 
video footage broadcast the day of the attacks was of the second plane. 
There was no video footage of the ﬁ rst plane’s impact available until 
long afterward.36 Bush’s memory, although plausible, could not have 
been right. He correctly recalled Andrew Card entering the classroom 
following the crash of the second plane and telling him that America 
was under attack, but his memory of how and when he ﬁ rst heard about 
the attacks mixed up these details in a plausible but inaccurate way.

72  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
There was nothing necessarily malicious in Bush’s false memory— 
details sometimes shift in memory from one time to another or from one 
event to another. Yet conspiracy theorists, suffering from the illusion of 
memory (among other things), decided that Bush’s false recollections 
 were not false at all, but Freudian slips that revealed a hidden truth. He 
said that he saw the ﬁ rst plane crash on tele vi sion, so he must have seen 
it. And if he saw it, whoever shot that secret footage must have known 
where to point a camera in advance, so Bush must have known the at-
tack was going to happen before it did. The illusion of memory made 
some people jump to the conclusion that the government deliberately 
permitted or possibly even planned the attacks, skipping right over the 
more plausible (but less intuitive) explanation that Bush simply con-
ﬂ ated some aspects of his memory for the ﬁ rst and second plane impacts 
in the attack.37
Experiments building on Brown and Kulik’s article on ﬂ ashbulb mem-
ories have sought ways to verify the accuracy of these memories, often 
by obtaining recollections immediately after some tragic event and then 
testing the same people months or even years later. These studies con-
sistently ﬁ nd that ﬂ ashbulb memories, although richer and more vivid, 
are subject to the same sorts of distortions as regular memories. On the 
morning of January 28, 1986, the space shuttle Challenger exploded 
shortly after takeoff. The very next morning, psychologists Ulric Neisser 
and Nicole Harsch asked a class of Emory University undergraduates to 
write a description of how they heard about the explosion, and then 
to answer a set of detailed questions about the disaster: what time they 
heard about it, what they  were doing, who told them, who  else was there, 
how they felt about it, and so on.38 Reports like these, written as soon as 
practicable after the event, provide the best possible documentation of 
what actually happened, just as the video of Bobby Knight and Neil 
Reed recorded the reality of the choking incident.
Two and a half years later, Neisser and Harsch asked the same stu-
dents to ﬁ ll out a similar questionnaire about the Challenger explosion. 
The memories the students reported had changed dramatically over 
time, incorporating elements that plausibly ﬁ t with how they could 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  73
have learned about the events, but that never actually happened. For 
example, one subject reported returning to his dormitory after class and 
hearing a commotion in the hall. Someone named X told him what 
happened and he turned on the tele vi sion to watch replays of the explo-
sion. He recalled the time as 11:30 a.m., the place as his dorm, the ac-
tivity as returning to his room, and that nobody  else was present. Yet 
the morning after the event, he reported having been told by an ac-
quaintance from Switzerland named Y to turn on his TV. He reported 
that he heard about it at 1:10 p.m., that he worried about how he was 
going to start his car, and that his friend Z was present. That is, years 
after the event, some of them remembered hearing about it from differ-
ent people, at a different time, and in different company.
Despite all these errors, subjects  were strikingly conﬁ dent in the ac-
curacy of their memories years after the event, because their memories 
 were so vivid— the illusion of memory at work again. During a ﬁ nal 
interview conducted after the subjects completed the questionnaire the 
second time, Neisser and Harsch showed the subjects their own hand-
written answers to the questionnaire from the day after the Challenger 
explosion. Many  were shocked at the discrepancy between their origi-
nal reports and their memories of what happened. In fact, when con-
fronted with their original reports, rather than suddenly realizing that 
they had misremembered, they often persisted in believing their current 
“memory.”
Those rich details you remember are quite often wrong— but they 
feel right. As Neil Reed said about his memory of being choked by 
Bobby Knight, after seeing the videotape of what really happened: “As 
far as people coming in between, I remember people coming between 
us.”39 A memory can be so strong that even documentary evidence that 
it never happened  doesn’t change what we remember.
Memories That Are Too Good to Be True
At a Thanksgiving dinner during the time we  were writing this book, 
Chris’s father, who served in the U.S. Army during World War II, 

74  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 recounted some of his memories of famous events. These included how 
he learned of Germany’s invasion of Poland in 1939 (he was in summer 
camp at the time) and of the Japa nese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 
(he and a friend  were listening to a football game on the radio when the 
broadcast was interrupted by a news bulletin). Chris asked his father 
what he remembered of 9/11. He said that he was trying to travel from 
Connecticut to New York City that morning, and that he left home 
before hearing any of the news. He had to change trains at New Haven, 
but he was turned back with the news of the plane crashes and a state-
ment that no trains  were being permitted to enter the city. He decided 
to take a taxi home, for which he negotiated a ﬁ xed rate rather than the 
metered charge. The driver was listening to a call- in show on the radio, 
but none of the calls  were about the morning’s news. He was wearing 
something like a turban on his head and appeared to be an Arab.40
This detail, that his taxi driver on the morning of 9/11 was of the 
same ethnicity or religion as the terrorists who attacked his destination, 
is a striking coincidence. We tend to put more trust in memories that 
include this sort of detail than we do in vague or generic recollections, 
especially when the detail has such a neat relationship to the rest of the 
story. Had Chris not been present, Ken Norman would have gotten 
away with his Captain Picard story in part because of the distinctive-
ness of the Baked Alaska, autograph- seeking cooks, and embarrassed 
manager. But as we have seen, these deceptively vivid details can be 
telltale traces of the pro cesses of distortion and reconstruction that op-
erate on memories after they are formed. Could the detail about the 
taxi driver be accurate? Certainly. Might Chris’s father have fabricated 
the Arab driver out of  whole cloth? Possibly. Could he have inadvertently 
combined two separate memories, one of going home by taxi on 9/11 
and another of having an Arab taxi driver (a common experience for 
someone living in the New York area)? Absolutely. The ironic ﬁ nal twist 
does make for a more compelling story— which is exactly what our 
memory systems are constantly, unbeknownst to us, striving to do.
Let’s revisit the story of Leslie and Tyce, the couple who witnessed a 
stabbing and  were put on hold by 911. Within a minute of the event, 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  75
they realized that they already disagreed about what they had seen. De-
spite recounting this story many times over the six years between the 
incident itself and their interviews with Chris, their memories have only 
diverged further: Leslie reported honking their horn to draw attention 
to the crime scene; when told of this, Tyce said “Really?” Leslie remem-
bered being several lanes away from the sidewalk; Tyce recalled just a 
row of parked cars between them and the assault. Leslie thinks the at-
tack happened in front of a dark, boarded- up building; Tyce recalls “a 
con ve nience store or takeout chicken store, a place with big neon lights 
in front.” Leslie says the attacker was bigger than the victim; Tyce says 
the opposite. Leslie thinks it took about thirty seconds for 911 to pick 
up, and that the conversation lasted three or four minutes; Tyce re-
members a ﬁ ve- minute wait followed by a one- minute conversation. 
And while we told you that Leslie placed the call from the passenger 
seat while Tyce was driving, Tyce remembers himself calling 911 while 
Leslie was driving. It seems that our memory systems do like to place us 
in the center of the action.41
Think back one last time to your own memory of how you learned 
about the attacks of September 11, 2001. Now that you know about the 
illusion of memory, you know that you should doubt the veracity of 
your own recollections. But if you still have trouble overcoming the 
convincing impression that your memory is right, you aren’t alone. In a 
more recent ﬂ ashbulb memory study, psychologists Jennifer Talarico 
and David Rubin examined people’s accounts of how they heard about 
the 9/11 attacks.42 Unlike all previous studies of ﬂ ashbulb memories, 
theirs compared how well people remembered the ﬂ ashbulb event with 
how well they remembered another event from about the same time. 
Thinking creatively and quickly at an emotional time, on September 
12, 2001, Talarico and Rubin had a group of Duke University under-
graduates come into the lab and complete a detailed questionnaire 
about how they ﬁ rst heard about the attacks. They also had the under-
graduates recall another personal memory of their choosing that was 
still fresh in their minds from the few days just prior to the attacks. 
Then either 1, 6, or 32 weeks later, they asked their subjects to recall 

76  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
each event again. All of the memories, whether of 9/11 or of the more 
ordinary event, became more inaccurate as more time passed. The lon-
ger the gap between the original recollection and the later test, the less 
consistent the memories, and the more false details they included.
Talarico and Rubin did one more clever thing. They asked the stu-
dents to rate how strongly they believed in the accuracy of their own 
memories. For the everyday memory, people had a good sense of how 
accurate they  were: As their memories got worse, they  were less conﬁ -
dent in them. That is, they did not suffer from the illusion of memory 
for everyday events. Just as people know that memory for arbitrary facts 
is fallible, they know that they forget otherwise trivial details about 
their experiences. When they cannot recollect the details well, they be-
come less trusting of their memories.
The ﬂ ashbulb memories showed an entirely different pattern, though. 
Subjects continued to believe strongly in the accuracy of their memories 
even though their memories became less accurate over time. The illusion 
of memory— the difference between how accurate our memories are and 
how accurate we think they are— operates at maximum strength for 
ﬂ ashbulb memories. Early writing on ﬂ ashbulb memories suggested that 
they  were created by the activation of a special “print now” mechanism 
in the brain. In light of Talarico and Rubin’s ﬁ ndings, it may be better 
to think of this mechanism as saying instead “believe now.”
Can We Ever Trust Our Memories?
In many cases, memory distortions and embellishments are minor mat-
ters, but in some contexts they have tremendous consequences, precisely 
because of the illusion of memory. When people are subject to the illu-
sion of memory, they impugn the intentions and motivations of those 
who are innocently misremembering. The power of this illusion was 
revealed in a crucial incident in the 2008 presidential campaign. Run-
ning against Barack Obama for the Demo cratic nomination, Hillary 
Clinton repeatedly emphasized her greater experience in international 
affairs. In a speech at George Washington University, she described a 

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  77
particularly harrowing March 1996 mission to Tuzla, Bosnia: “I re-
member landing under sniper ﬁ re. There was supposed to be some kind 
of a greeting ceremony at the airport, but instead we just ran with our 
heads down to get into the vehicles to get to our base.” Unfortunately 
for Clinton, the Washington Post looked into her story and published a 
photograph showing not a dash for cover but . . .  a greeting ceremony, 
featuring the then First Lady kissing a Bosnian child who had just read 
a welcoming poem. Out of one hundred contemporary news reports of 
the event, none even mentioned a security threat. Several news videos 
also surfaced, all showing a calm stroll from the plane to an uneventful 
ceremony on the tarmac.
A commenter on the Post’s website responded to the fact- checking 
article: “There are only three ways to explain Clinton’s story  here: (a) 
she is a bald- faced liar; (b) her perception of reality is utterly skewed; or 
(c) her memory is utterly demented.” Po liti cal commentator Peggy 
Noonan wrote in the Wall Street Journal that “we have to hope they  were 
lies, because if they  weren’t, if she thought what she was saying was true, 
we are in worse trouble than we thought. . . .  It was as if she’d watched 
the movie Wag the Dog, with its fake footage of a terriﬁ ed refugee 
woman running frantically from mortar ﬁ re, and found it not a caution-
ary tale about manipulation and politics, but an inspiration.” A cover of 
the New Republic depicted a bug- eyed Clinton hearing “voices in her 
head” and ranting that she offered to sacriﬁ ce her own life to protect her 
traveling companions in Bosnia (“And I said to Sinbad, ‘Leave me, save 
yourself!’ ”). This is the typical response of the human mind to another 
person’s false memory, especially an arguably self- serving memory like 
Clinton’s grace- under- ﬁ re brush with death. Even Bill Clinton later prof-
fered commonsense excuses for his wife’s memory lapse, claiming (in-
correctly) that she made the comments late at night and pointing out 
(correctly but perhaps unhelpfully) that she was sixty years old.
An entirely plausible alternative explanation for Clinton’s ﬁ ctitious 
snipers is that, like all fallible human minds, hers automatically and 
unconsciously reconstructed the landing in Tuzla to be consistent with 
the image of herself that she was convinced was accurate. Like Neil 

78  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Reed’s memory of being reprimanded by Bobby Knight, Clinton’s 
memory of arriving in Bosnia was systematically distorted to become 
consistent with her internalized, personal narrative. Like Reed, and the 
students whose ﬂ ashbulb memories of the Challenger explosion proved 
inaccurate, Clinton could easily have had full conﬁ dence in the accu-
racy of her memory. And, as in Reed’s case, videos revealed the truth. 
Hillary Clinton’s distorted memory contributed to her loss of the presi-
dential nomination by helping to revivify the pop u lar impression, fair 
or not, that she would say anything to get elected (an impression that 
was compounded by her initial refusal to acknowledge the error after 
the videos surfaced).43
Is it possible to distinguish calculated deception from accidental distor-
tion? We noted earlier that the illusion of memory does not apply equally 
to all memories. We are more aware of the limits on our ability to remem-
ber arbitrary facts and details, and we do not expect others to remember 
such details. We do not expect people to be able to remember random 
ﬁ fteen- digit numbers, although even for digit memory, people do overesti-
mate their own ability to remember. It turns out that more than 40 per-
cent of respondents to a survey thought they could remember ten random 
digits, even though less than 1 percent of people can actually do this when 
they are tested.44 However, the illusion of memory is more powerful when 
we remember personally relevant information or experiences. The critical 
factor driving the illusion seems to be the extent to which a memory trig-
gers a strong recollective experience. In other words, if you recall how you 
experienced and learned something rather than merely what you experi-
enced and learned, you are far more likely to trust the veracity of your 
memory. Just as the vividness of our visual perception makes us think we 
are paying attention to more than we are, our experience of ﬂ uent, vivid 
recollection fuels the illusion of memory. When we recall a set of arbitrary 
digits or facts, we do not have a strong recollective experience. When we 
recall how we learned about the 9/11 attacks, we do. That is why Hillary 
Clinton and Neil Reed held ﬁ rm to what they remembered— they had 
distinct and powerful recollections of what happened, and the vividness of 
their memories led them to believe them more strongly.45

THE COACH WHO CHOKED  79
The vividness of our recollections is tied to how they affect us emo-
tionally. For most people, lists of numbers do not inspire fear or sadness, 
but thoughts of 9/11 do. And these emotions affect how we think we 
remember, even if they do not affect how much we actually remember. 
Subjects in an experiment  were asked to view either emotionally neutral 
photographs, such as a farm scene, or strongly arousing and negative im-
ages, such as a gun pointed right at the camera.46 Later, when asked to 
decide whether they had seen these images before, they had stronger rec-
ollective experiences for the emotional pictures than the neutral ones. 
Emotional memories, like the ones we have for 9/11, are more likely to 
induce strong, vivid recall— regardless of whether they are accurate. Be-
ware of memories accompanied by strong emotions and vivid details— 
they are just as likely to be wrong as mundane memories, but you’re far 
less likely to realize it.
Unfortunately, people regularly use vividness and emotionality as an 
indicator of accuracy; they use these cues to assess how conﬁ dent they 
are in a memory. Critically, people also judge the accuracy of another 
person’s memory based on how much conﬁ dence that person expresses 
in the memory. As we will see in the next chapter, the tendency to as-
sume that conﬁ dently recalled memories are accurate ones illustrates 
another cognitive illusion: the illusion of conﬁ dence.

3
C H A P T E R
what smart chess players
and stupid criminals
have in common
O
ne summer day when he was in graduate school, Chris woke up 
with a headache. This  wasn’t unusual— he has always been prone to 
headaches. Later that day the aches spread to the rest of his body, and 
he began to feel exhausted and apathetic. It was a chore to get up from 
bed, walk into the living room of his apartment, sit down, and turn on 
the TV. His  whole body hurt when he tried to stand up. Simple tasks 
like taking a shower left him breathless. The symptoms suggested a bad 
ﬂ u, but strangely he had no respiratory symptoms, and July is not ex-
actly the height of ﬂ u season. After feeling awful for a few days, Chris 
went to Harvard’s health ser vice. The nurse who saw him concluded 
that it probably was a virus and told him to rest and stay hydrated.
The next day, a Sunday, his symptoms unchanged, Chris took one of 
those enervating showers. Moving slowly to conserve energy, he turned 
to let the water hit the back of his legs, and just when it did he felt a 
sharp pain. Twisting his neck and looking down, he saw a huge red rash 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  81
that looked like a sunburst, right in the middle of his left calf. It was 
much larger than any mosquito bite he’d ever seen. Armed with a new 
symptom, he went into the after- hours care department and proudly 
displayed the rash. The doctor on duty asked Chris whether he’d been 
bitten by a tick recently. At ﬁ rst Chris was inclined to say no, since he’d 
never even seen a tick in the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts. But 
then he remembered that he’d visited his parents in Armonk, a suburb 
of New York City, a couple of weeks earlier, and had spent time with his 
mother in her vegetable garden. There  were plenty of ticks there. The 
doctor showed Chris a picture from a medical book that illustrated the 
characteristic skin rash produced from infection by Borrelia burgdorferi, 
the tick- borne bacteria that cause Lyme disease. It looked exactly like 
Chris’s calf.1
If Lyme disease isn’t diagnosed early, it becomes more difﬁ cult to 
treat and has the potential to cause chronic disability. After the doctor 
explained the diagnosis, she excused herself from the room. She returned 
moments later with another book, in which she looked up the treat-
ment for acute Lyme disease. She wrote a prescription for twenty- one 
days of the antibiotic doxycycline and handed it to Chris.
Chris was a little unnerved by this experience. First, the diagnosis 
itself seemed ominous. But more unsettling was the doctor’s open con-
sultation of reference books during the session. Chris had never seen a 
doctor do this before, and this one did it twice. Did she know what she 
was doing? In the northeastern United States, where Lyme disease is 
prevalent, how could an urgent- care doctor not be familiar with its di-
agnosis and treatment? Chris went straight to the drugstore to ﬁ ll the 
prescription, but he  couldn’t help feeling uneasy about the doctor’s un-
certainty.
If you encountered a doctor who had to look up the diagnostic crite-
ria and recommended treatment for your condition,  wouldn’t you 
wonder too? To do so would only be natural: We all tend to think of 
a conﬁ dent doctor as a competent one and an uncertain doctor as a 
 potential malpractice suit. We treat conﬁ dence as an honest signal of a 
person’s professional skill, accurate memory, or expert knowledge. But 

82  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
as you’ll see in this chapter, the conﬁ dence that people project, whether 
they are diagnosing a patient, making decisions about foreign policy, or 
testifying in court, is all too often an illusion.
Where Everyone Thinks They Are Underrated
To understand this illusion of conﬁ dence, we will begin in an unlikely 
place: the ballroom of the Adams Mark Hotel in Philadelphia, long-
time site of the aptly named World Open, one of the largest annual 
open chess tournaments in the world. Anyone who pays the entry fee, 
from novice to grandmaster, can play. In 2008, more than fourteen 
hundred players competed for over $300,000 in prize money. The scene 
is not necessarily what you’d expect. For one thing, silence does not 
reign; there is a constant patter of chess pieces clicking against other 
pieces and buttons on chess clocks being slapped as players make their 
moves. Outside the playing rooms, it’s even noisier. Players chatter 
about the games they just ﬁ nished, the games they’re about to play, and 
even about the games they’re playing at that moment. (The rules permit 
general conversation about your game, as long as you don’t solicit or 
receive advice from anyone.) The players themselves aren’t all like the 
geeky, dateless high school chess team members you remember. Nor are 
they all bearded, pensive old men. Some could deﬁ nitely use a shower 
or a make over, but most are normal- looking children, parents, lawyers, 
doctors, engineers; there are also professional chess players, many from 
foreign countries. One ste reo type does hold true, though: There is a 
distinct absence of women. Fewer than 5 percent of tournament chess 
players are female.
The strangest thing about the players in this tournament— indeed, 
about the players in every chess tournament— is that they know pre-
cisely how good they are at chess compared with the other players. This 
is not true of most activities in life, or even of most competitive endeav-
ors. There is no master ranking scale to tell you how you compare in 
skill with other drivers, business managers, teachers, or parents. Even 
professions like law and medicine have no clear way of determining 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  83
who is best. This lack of a clear mea sure of ability makes it easy to get 
an inﬂ ated sense of your own skill. But chess has a mathematically ob-
jective, public rating system that provides up- to- date, accurate, and 
precise numerical information about a player’s “strength” (chess jargon 
for ability) relative to other players. All tournament players know that if 
you win a tournament game, your rating goes up, and if you lose a 
game, your rating goes down. Battling a higher- rated player to a draw 
also raises your rating, while drawing with a lower- rated player reduces 
it. Ratings are public knowledge and are printed next to each player’s 
name on tournament scoreboards; many players ask their opponent 
“What’s your rating?” before beginning a game. Ratings are valued so 
highly that chess players will remember their opponents better by their 
ratings than by their names or faces. “I beat a 1726” or “I lost to a 1455” 
are not uncommon things to hear in the hallway outside the playing 
room.
In July 1998, the average U.S. Chess Federation rating of the 27,562 
people who’d played at least twenty tournament games was 1337. Mas-
ters are players rated 2200 or higher. Chris achieved this milestone 
when he was in college. Dan had a rating just under 1800 in high school 
but hasn’t played competitively since then. Comparing two players’ rat-
ings gives the odds that one will defeat the other. Ratings are set and 
adjusted so that over a long series of games, a player rated two hundred 
points higher than his opponent should score about 75 percent of the 
points (wins count as one point, draws count as half a point). A player 
rated four hundred points higher than his or her opponent is expected 
to win almost every game.
Despite playing hundreds of tournament games in high school and 
being well above average for a tournament player, Dan never beat a 
master- level player, and he would stand effectively no chance of beating 
Chris in a tournament game. Similarly, Chris has defeated only one 
grandmaster in tournament play, despite once being ranked among the 
top 2 percent of players nationally. The differences in skill between 
these levels are just too large. If you consistently beat a player with the 
same rating as yours, then your rating will go up and theirs will go down 

84  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
so that the forecasts predict that you will beat them in the future. Unlike 
the rankings published for most sports, the chess rating system is ex-
tremely accurate; for practical purposes, your rating is a nearly perfect 
indicator of your ability. Armed with knowledge of their own ratings, 
and the workings of the rating system, players ought to be exquisitely 
aware of how competent they are. But what do they actually think about 
their own abilities?
Together with our friend Dan Benjamin, who was then an under-
graduate student at Harvard and is now an economics professor at Cor-
nell University, we ran an experiment at the World Open in Philadelphia 
and at another tournament, the U.S. Amateur Team Championship in 
Parsippany, New Jersey. As players walked by on their way to or from 
their games we asked them to ﬁ ll out a short questionnaire. We posed 
two simple questions: “What is your most recent ofﬁ cial chess rating?” 
and “What do you think your rating should be to reﬂ ect your true cur-
rent strength?”2
As expected, the players knew their ratings: Half reported their rat-
ings exactly, and most of the rest  were off by only a few points. Since 
the players know what they are rated, they ought to be able to correctly 
answer the second question about what they should be rated. The correct 
answer is their current rating, because the rating system’s design ensures 
that ratings are an accurate mea sure of skill. But only 21 percent of the 
players in our experiment actually said their current rating reﬂ ected their 
true strength. About 4 percent thought they  were overrated, and the 
other 75 percent believed they  were underrated. The magnitude of their 
overconﬁ dence in their own playing ability was stunning: On average, 
these competitive chess players thought they  were ninety- nine points 
underrated, which means they believed that they would win a match 
against another player with the exact same rating as their own by a two- 
to- one margin— a crushing victory. Of course, in reality the most likely 
outcome of a match against a player with the same rating as their own 
would be a tie.
What explains this extreme overconﬁ dence in the face of concrete 
evidence for their actual skills? Not a lack of familiarity with chess: 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  85
These players had played the game for an average of twenty years. Not 
a lack of feedback about their competitive skill levels: They had been 
playing in rated tournaments for thirteen years, and their average rating 
was 1751, well above the average player’s. Not being out of touch with 
their own skill level (from being out of practice): Over half had played 
at least one other tournament within the two months before we surveyed 
them.
Perhaps the players interpreted our question slightly differently than 
we had intended. Maybe they  were predicting what their ratings would 
be once the system caught up to their true strength. Because ratings are 
adjusted only after tournaments, and the updated ratings sometimes take 
a month or two to be published, it is possible for rapidly improving 
players to be systematically underrated in the ofﬁ cial lists, because they 
are improving at a rate too fast for their ratings to keep up. We checked 
our subjects’ ratings a year later, and the players  were rated almost ex-
actly as they had been when we ﬁ rst did the experiment: one hundred 
points lower than their own estimates of their skill. In fact, even after 
ﬁ ve years, they still hadn’t reached the levels they had estimated as their 
actual strength. The overconﬁ dence that players displayed cannot be 
explained by a reasonable expectation of future improvement.3 Our 
tournament chess players, despite their long and intimate experience 
with competitive chess ratings, overestimated their abilities. They suf-
fered from our third everyday illusion: the illusion of conﬁ dence.
The illusion of conﬁ dence has two distinct but related aspects. First, 
as with the chess players, it causes us to overestimate our own qualities, 
especially our abilities relative to other people. Second, as Chris experi-
enced in the doctor’s ofﬁ ce, it causes us to interpret the conﬁ dence— or 
lack thereof— that other people express as a valid signal of their own 
abilities, of the extent of their knowledge, and of the accuracy of their 
memories. This  wouldn’t be a problem if conﬁ dence in fact had a close 
relationship with these things, but the reality is that conﬁ dence and 
ability can diverge so far that relying on the former becomes a gigantic 
mental trap, with potentially disastrous consequences. Thinking you’re 
better at chess than you really are is only the beginning.

86  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
“Unskilled and Unaware of It”
Charles Darwin observed that “ignorance more frequently begets con-
ﬁ dence than does knowledge.”4 In fact, those who are the least skilled 
are the most likely to think better of themselves than they should— 
they disproportionately experience the illusion of conﬁ dence. Some of 
the most striking examples of this principle come from criminals, an 
idea captured in Woody Allen’s ﬁ rst feature ﬁ lm, Take the Money and 
Run.5 Allen stars as Virgil Starkwell, a boy raised in difﬁ cult circum-
stances who turns to a life of crime as a teenager. But Virgil never man-
ages to achieve success in his profession. As a child he tries to steal 
gumballs but gets his hand stuck and has to run down the street carry-
ing the entire machine. As an adult he tries to rob a bank, but the tellers 
 can’t read his holdup note and the police arrive before he can explain it 
to them. He tries to break out of jail by carving a gun out of soap and 
coating it with black shoe polish, but as he leaves, it pours rain and the 
guards notice suds frothing from his weapon.
Stupid criminals are a staple of ﬁ lm and tele vi sion comedy in part 
because they violate the ste reo type of the criminal mastermind— the 
genius- turned- psychopath James Bond villain. But this ste reo type is 
not representative of actual criminals, at least not those who get caught. 
Smut Brown, the murder suspect whom Kenneth Conley chased down 
in Boston, was a high school dropout who was arrested eight times in a 
single year.6 People convicted of crimes are, on average, less intelligent 
than noncriminals.7 And they can be spectacularly foolish. A high 
school classmate of Dan’s decided to vandalize the school— by spray- 
painting his own initials on the back wall. A Briton named Peter Ad-
dison went one step further and vandalized the side of a building by 
writing “Peter Addison was  here.” Sixty- six- year- old Samuel Porter tried 
to pass a one- million- dollar bill at a supermarket in the United States 
and became irate when the cashier  wouldn’t make change for him.
In a brilliant article entitled “Unskilled and Unaware of It,” social 
psychologists Justin Kruger and David Dunning of Cornell Univer-
sity tell the story of McArthur Wheeler, who robbed two banks in 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  87
Pittsburgh in 1995 without using a disguise.8 Security camera footage of 
him was broadcast on the eve ning news the same day as the robberies, 
and he was arrested an hour later. According to Kruger and Dunning, 
“When police later showed him the surveillance tapes, Mr. Wheeler 
stared in incredulity. ‘But I wore the juice,’ he mumbled. Apparently, 
Mr. Wheeler was under the impression that rubbing one’s face with 
lemon juice”— a substance used by generations of children to write hid-
den messages—“rendered it invisible to videotape cameras.”9
Kruger and Dunning wondered whether Wheeler’s combination of 
incompetence and obliviousness was unusual (perhaps a proﬁ le peculiar 
to failed criminals) or whether it might be a more general phenomenon. 
In their ﬁ rst experiment, they zeroed in not on criminal ability, which 
is (we hope) uncommon, but on a quality that most people believe they 
possess: a sense of humor. They asked whether people who are bad at 
understanding which jokes are funny and which are not mistakenly 
believe they have a perfectly good sense of humor. But how to mea sure 
sense of humor?
Unlike chess, there is no rating system for sense of humor, but one 
clear lesson of the past century of psychology research is that almost 
any quality can be mea sured well enough to be studied scientiﬁ cally. 
We don’t mean to say that it’s easy to capture the ineffable qualities that 
make something funny. If it  were, then someone with no sense of humor 
could write a computer program to generate good jokes. What we mean 
is that people are remarkably consistent in judging what’s funny and 
what’s groan- worthy. The same is true for many other seemingly immea-
sur able qualities. You might think that beauty is in the eye of the be-
holder, but it isn’t— when asked to judge the attractiveness of a set of 
faces, people give remarkably consistent ratings despite individual dif-
ferences in tastes and preferences. This is the reason why most people 
will never be models.10
To create their sense- of- humor test, Kruger and Dunning selected 
thirty jokes written by Woody Allen, Al Franken, Jack Handey, and 
Jeff Rovin, and e-mailed them to professional comedians, eight of 
whom agreed to rate how funny the jokes  were. Kruger and Dunning 

88  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
had them use a funniness scale that ranged from 1 to 11, with 1 mean-
ing “not at all funny” and 11 meaning “very funny.” You can test your 
own sense of humor right now. Decide which of these two jokes is fun-
nier:
1. Question: What is as big as a man, but weighs nothing? An-
swer: His shadow.
2. If a kid asks where rain comes from, I think a cute thing to 
tell him is “God is crying.” And if he asks why God is crying, 
another cute thing to tell him is “Probably because of some-
thing you did.”
The experts generally agreed about which jokes  were funny and which 
 were not. That’s not surprising, considering that expert comedians suc-
ceed as comedians because they know what most people will ﬁ nd hu-
morous. The ﬁ rst joke listed above received the lowest rating (1.3) of the 
thirty that  were tested, and the second one, from Jack Handey’s “Deep 
Thoughts” on Saturday Night Live, received the highest rating (9.6). 
Kruger and Dunning then asked undergraduate students at Cornell 
to rate the same jokes. The idea was that people with a good sense of 
humor would rate the jokes similarly to the professional funny people, 
but  people with a bad sense of humor would rate them differently. The 
top scorers agreed with the comedians 78 percent of the time on whether 
or not a joke was funny. The bottom scorers— those in the bottom quar-
ter of the subjects on the sense- of- humor test— actually disagreed with 
the comedians about whether a joke was funny more often than they 
agreed with them. They thought only 44 percent of the funny jokes 
 were funny, but that 56 percent of the unfunny jokes  were.11
Next, Kruger and Dunning asked their subjects to assess their own 
“ability to recognize what’s funny” by writing down the percentage of 
other Cornell students they thought  were worse than themselves in this 
skill. The average student is, by deﬁ nition, better than 50 percent of 
other students. But 66 percent of the subjects thought they had a better 
sense of humor than most of their peers.12 Where did that sixteen-

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  89
percentage- point overconﬁ dence effect come from? Almost exclusively 
from those participants with the worst sense of humor! People who 
scored in the lowest 25 percent on the sense- of- humor test thought they 
had an above- average sense of humor.
The same pattern held in our study of chess players who thought 
they should have been more highly rated than they actually  were. The 
players who considered themselves most underrated  were dispropor-
tionately found in the bottom half of the ability range. On average, these 
weaker players thought they  were underrated by 150 points, whereas 
the players in the top half in ability claimed to be only 50 points under-
rated.13 Stronger players thus  were somewhat overconﬁ dent, but weaker 
players  were extremely overconﬁ dent.
These ﬁ ndings help to explain why competitive reality shows like 
America’s Got Talent and American Idol attract so many people who 
audition but have no hope of qualifying, let alone winning. Many are 
just trying to get a few seconds of TV time, but some, like William 
Hung with his famously awful rendition of Ricky Martin’s “She 
Bangs,” seem to believe that they’re much more skilled than they 
 actually are.
In other experiments, Kruger and Dunning showed that this unskilled- 
and- unaware effect can be mea sured in many areas besides humor, in-
cluding logical reasoning and En glish grammar skills. It probably applies 
to any area of human experience. Whether in real life or on the tele vi sion 
comedy The Ofﬁ ce, we have all encountered obliviously incompetent 
managers. People who graduate last in their medical school classes are 
still doctors—and probably think they are pretty good ones.
Aside from showing that the depth of a stupid criminal’s plight can 
be quantiﬁ ed, can psychology offer any help to the McArthur Wheelers 
of the world? The answer to this depends on the source of their prob-
lem. The incompetent face two signiﬁ cant hurdles. First, they are below 
 average in ability. Second, since they don’t realize that they are below aver-
age, they are unlikely to take steps to improve their ability. McArthur 
Wheeler didn’t know that he needed to become a better criminal before 
taking on the challenge of robbing banks. But what kept him from that 

90  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
realization? Why  couldn’t he imagine executing his plan for robbing a 
bank and realize that he didn’t fully grasp everything involved? Why 
didn’t he question his own competence?
Our colleague Brian Scholl, the Yale psychology professor who 
worked with us on some of the inattentional blindness studies described 
in Chapter 1, tells an anecdote that might shed some light on the rea-
sons why the illusion of conﬁ dence is so powerful. In his graduate school 
days at Rutgers University in New Jersey, he learned to play the ancient 
and challenging board game Go. Brian found that with some practice, 
he could beat all of his friends. While visiting New York, he had an op-
portunity to test his skills against an acquaintance who was a top- notch 
Go player. To his own surprise, the match was close and he ended up los-
ing by just half a point. He came away from the game with a newfound 
sense of conﬁ dence in his skills. Unfortunately, his conﬁ dence came 
crashing to Earth when he talked with a professor in his department who 
was an expert Go player. When he described his success against the Go 
expert, she just shook her head and rolled her eyes. “Brian,” she said, 
“don’t you know that when a good Go player is facing a much weaker 
player, they sometimes challenge themselves by trying to win by as few 
points as possible?”
Brian’s error of ascribing his Go results to his own skill, although 
reasonable, reﬂ ects a general tendency we all have to interpret feedback 
about our abilities in the most positive possible light. We tend to think 
that our good per for mances reﬂ ect our superior abilities, while our 
 mistakes are “accidental,” “inadvertent,” or a result of circumstances be-
yond our control, and we do our best to ignore evidence that contra-
dicts these conclusions. If incompetence and overconﬁ dence are linked, 
would training incompetent people to be more skilled improve their 
understanding of their own skill levels? Kruger and Dunning found 
just that in a later experiment: Teaching the people who did worst on a 
logical reasoning task to perform the task better signiﬁ cantly (although 
not completely) reduced their overconﬁ dence. Making people more 
competent is the way— or at least one way— to make them better judges 
of their competence.14

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  91
The ﬁ nding that incompetence causes overconﬁ dence is actually re-
assuring. It tells us that as we study and practice a task, we get better at 
both performing the task and knowing how well we perform it. Think 
of it this way: When people start learning a new skill, their skill level is 
low and their conﬁ dence is often higher than it should be— they are 
overconﬁ dent. As their skills improve, their conﬁ dence also increases, 
but at a slower rate, so that eventually, at a high level of skill, their con-
ﬁ dence levels are appropriate for their skill levels (or, at least, they are 
closer to the appropriate levels). The most dangerous kind of overconﬁ -
dence in our abilities comes not when we are already skilled at a task 
but when we are still unskilled.
Once you know about this aspect of the illusion of conﬁ dence, you 
can start to pay more attention to what conﬁ dence really means, for 
yourself and for others. If you are just learning a new task, you now 
know that you should hedge your estimate of how well you are doing. 
You can also recognize that other people are most likely to be overcon-
ﬁ dent when they are ﬁ rst learning a task. When your children are learn-
ing to drive, they will be more conﬁ dent of their skill than they should 
be. Managers who have just been promoted to new positions are likely to 
display unwarranted certainty in their own actions. And keep in mind 
that it is gaining real skill in a task, not just doing it more and more, that 
makes conﬁ dence a truer signal of ability. Experience does not guarantee 
expertise.
Brian Scholl’s Go anecdote shows how we tend to assume the best of 
our abilities (and the worst of our adversary’s abilities). Unwarranted 
certainty about our own competence spans ability, gender, and national-
ity. According to our national survey, 63 percent of Americans consider 
themselves to be above average in intelligence. Perhaps unsurprisingly, 
men  were more conﬁ dent in their intelligence than women, with 71 
percent judging themselves to be smarter than average. But even among 
women, signiﬁ cantly more than half— 57 percent— thought themselves 
to be smarter than the average person. This overconﬁ dence isn’t limited 
to arrogant Americans; according to a recent survey of a representative 
sample of Canadians, approximately 70 percent considered themselves 

92  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
“above average” in intelligence too. Nor is this overconﬁ dence a new 
phenomenon, a reﬂ ection of some ambiguity in the concept of intelli-
gence, an artifact of North American narcissism, or an inﬂ ated twenty- 
ﬁ rst- century notion of self- esteem: A 1981 study found that 69 percent 
of Swedish college students estimated themselves to be superior to 50 
percent of their peers in driving ability, and 77 percent believed they 
 were in the top 50 percent in safety. Most people also consider them-
selves to be above average in attractiveness.15
This illusion of conﬁ dence occurs automatically, without our actu-
ally reﬂ ecting on the situation. Only when direct, incontrovertible 
evidence forces us to confront our limitations can we see through the 
illusion. The disillusionment that Brian Scholl experienced after learn-
ing that he’d been played by the Go expert forced him to recalibrate his 
beliefs in his own skills, diminishing his overconﬁ dence. If Brian kept 
playing Go, his ability would improve and his level of conﬁ dence would 
move closer to his level of skill. Competence helps to dispel the illusion 
of conﬁ dence. The key, though, is having deﬁ nitive evidence of your 
own skills— you have to become good enough at what you do to recog-
nize your own limitations.
We don’t want you to think we believe that people are nothing but 
bluster and bravado, always overstating their abilities and trying to 
deceive others. In fact, people who are highly skilled occasionally suf-
fer from the opposite problem. Almost all of the new teachers or profes-
sors we have met, especially those who achieved some early success in 
their careers, are convinced that they are fooling people— that they 
aren’t really as good as people think they are.16 Recall Kruger and Dun-
ning’s humor experiment. We didn’t tell you this before, but the sub-
jects in the top 25 percent in sense of humor didn’t fully realize how 
good their senses of humor  were— they actually underestimated the 
number of their peers who  were less funny.17 Overconﬁ dence is more 
common— and more dangerous— but underconﬁ dence like this does 
exist.

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  93
A Crisis of Conﬁ dence
The combination of incompetence and overconﬁ dence gives us hilari-
ous stories of stupid criminals and entertaining video clips of deluded 
American Idol aspirants, but misplaced conﬁ dence can have more in-
sidious effects as well. Western society places extraordinary value on 
individual self- conﬁ dence; a life lived without conﬁ dence is not a wor-
thy life. David Baird’s self- help book A Thousand Paths to Conﬁ dence 
begins by declaring, “Every moment of our life is absolutely precious 
and is not to be wasted in self- doubt. The wish to be conﬁ dent and to 
live life with conﬁ dence is the vital ﬁ rst step. If you are prepared to take 
it, congratulate yourself— you have begun your journey on the path to 
conﬁ dence.”18 A pop u lar business book by Harvard professor Rosabeth 
Moss Kanter, not coincidentally titled Conﬁ dence, argues that main-
taining conﬁ dence perpetuates winning streaks, while losing it can trig-
ger losing streaks, and that “conﬁ dence shapes the outcomes of many 
contests of life— from simple ball games to complex enterprises, from 
individual per for mance to national culture.”19
The central premise of the Albert Brooks movie Defending Your Life is 
that only those who acted conﬁ dently while they were alive can proceed 
to the next level in the afterlife. The power of conﬁ dence pervades par-
enting advice as well, with a recent cover story in Parents magazine offer-
ing tips on how to “raise a conﬁ dent child,” promising “the most effective 
ways to help your child become happy, self- assured, and successful.”20 
Actress Tina Fey echoed this sentiment upon accepting an Emmy Award 
for her tele vi sion comedy 30 Rock: “I thank my parents for somehow 
raising me to have conﬁ dence that is disproportionate with my looks and 
abilities. Well done. That is what all parents should do.”
President Jimmy Carter thought that conﬁ dence had even broader 
signiﬁ cance. On national tele vi sion in July 1979 he gave his most fa-
mous presidential speech, in which he reported the grave lesson he 
had learned from a series of private meetings with politicians, busi-
nesspeople, clergy, and other citizens. After quoting nineteen of these 
people (including, though without attribution, ﬁ rst- term Arkansas 

94  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
governor Bill Clinton), many of whom  were sharply critical of his lead-
ership and gloomy about the country’s economic prospects, he diag-
nosed the problem not as one of politics or policy, but of psychology:
I want to talk to you right now about a fundamental threat to 
American democracy. . . .  The threat is nearly invisible in ordi-
nary ways. It is a crisis of conﬁ dence. It is a crisis that strikes 
at the very heart and soul and spirit of our national will. . . .  The 
erosion of our conﬁ dence in the future is threatening to destroy 
the social and the po liti cal fabric of America.21
The president was especially troubled by polls that suggested “a ma-
jority of people believe that the next ﬁ ve years will be worse than the 
past ﬁ ve years,” and by what he perceived as growing consumerism and 
disrespect for traditional institutions. He went on to propose a series of 
new energy- related policies intended to gradually reduce the country’s 
use of imported oil. Whether or not his diagnosis of America’s mood was 
correct, and regardless of whether changing energy sources was the right 
prescription, after an initially positive reaction and an 11-percent jump 
in his job-approval ratings, many commentators assailed Carter for seem-
ingly blaming the government’s failings on the people.22 This speech be-
came known as the “malaise speech” because of comments Clark Clifford, 
a Demo cratic party wise man, had made to journalists before the speech 
about what he perceived to be Carter’s concerns about the country. 
Carter’s pollster, Patrick Cadell, had also used the word in a memo to the 
president that was later leaked to the press. Ironically, Carter never once 
used the word “malaise,” but he did mention “conﬁ dence” ﬁ fteen times. 
In his mind, a sort of collective self- conﬁ dence was the key ingredient in 
the recipe for the nation’s success.
Time and again, people embrace certainty and reject tentativeness, 
whether in their own beliefs and memories, the counsel of an adviser, the 
testimony of a witness, or the speech of a leader during a crisis. Indeed, 
we pay great attention to conﬁ dence— in ourselves, our leaders, and those 
around us— particularly when the facts or the future are uncertain. In 
the 1980s, the investment bank Drexel Burnham Lambert and its star 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  95
ﬁ nancier Michael Milken  were able to catalyze hostile corporate take-
overs merely by claiming in a letter to be “highly conﬁ dent” that they 
could raise the necessary funds.23 Before they invented the aptly named 
“highly conﬁ dent letter,” Milken and his colleagues had to spend weeks 
or months making ﬁ nancial arrangements, work that might prove 
wasted if the deal didn’t go through. Expressing their conﬁ dence in 
advance turned out to be just as effective— not to mention faster and 
cheaper— once Drexel and Milken’s reputations preceded them into 
battle.
According to journalist Bob Woodward, in late 2002 President George 
W. Bush had doubts about launching an invasion of Iraq, so he asked 
CIA director George Tenet directly about the strength of the evidence 
that Saddam Hussein possessed unconventional weapons. Tenet said, 
“It’s a slam dunk case!” Bush repeated, “George, how conﬁ dent are you?” 
Tenet’s reply: “Don’t worry, it’s a slam dunk!” Weeks into the war, White 
 House spokesman Ari Fleischer expressed “high conﬁ dence” that weap-
ons of mass destruction would yet be found. As of this writing, they are 
still missing, and an exhaustive government investigation has concluded 
that they  were not there to be found.24
Why does conﬁ dence have such a hold on us? Why do we have such 
an overwhelming and often unnoticed inclination to take another per-
son’s outward conﬁ dence as an honest signal of his or her inner knowl-
edge, ability, and resolve? As we have seen, the most incompetent among 
us tend to be the most overconﬁ dent, yet we still rely on conﬁ dence as 
an indicator of ability.
Sometimes the Cream  Doesn’t Rise to the Top
Imagine being asked to work together with three other people— call 
them Jane, Emily, and Megan— to solve challenging math problems. 
You don’t know who in your group is good at math; you have only your 
(imperfect) knowledge of your own abilities. On the ﬁ rst problem, Jane 
is the ﬁ rst to suggest an answer, and Emily chimes in with her own 
thoughts. Megan is initially quiet, but after a while, she comes up with 

96  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the correct answer and explains why the other answers  were wrong. 
This happens several times, so it becomes clear to all that Megan is 
good at solving problems like these. The group comes to defer to her as 
their de facto leader, and it does very well on its task. In an ideal world, 
group dynamics would always work this way: The cream would rise to 
the top; all members would contribute their unique knowledge, skills, 
and competence; and group deliberation would lead to better decisions. 
But the reality of group per for mance too often diverges from this ideal.
Chris once interviewed a U.S. government intelligence agent about 
group decision pro cesses. The agent described a method his group some-
times used to arrive at a shared estimate for an unknown quantity: The 
members went around the room, each giving his or her own estimate, in 
descending order of se niority.25 Imagine the false sense of consensus and 
conﬁ dence that cascades through a group when one person after an-
other conﬁ rms the boss’s original guess. Although each staff member 
could have offered an in de pen dent, unbiased, uninﬂ uenced opinion by 
secret ballot, the chances of that happening in practice are virtually 
nil. The very pro cess of putting individuals together to deliberate before 
they reach a conclusion almost guarantees that the group’s decision will 
not be the product of in de pen dent opinions and contributions. Instead, 
it will be inﬂ uenced by group dynamics, personality conﬂ icts, and other 
social factors that have little to do with who knows what, and why they 
know it.
Rather than producing better understanding of abilities and more 
realistic expressions of conﬁ dence, group pro cesses can inspire a feeling 
akin to “safety in numbers” among the most hesitant members, decreas-
ing realism and increasing certainty. We think that this reﬂ ects another 
illusion people have about the mind— the misguided intuition that the 
best way for a group to use the abilities of its members in solving a prob-
lem is to deliberate over the correct answer and arrive at a consensus.
Suppose you are in a group of people asked to estimate an unknown 
quantity, such as the number of jelly beans in a large jar. You might 
think the best approach would be to discuss the options with other 
members until you agree on an estimate, but you’d be wrong. A differ-

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  97
ent strategy consistently outperforms all others: With no prior discus-
sion, each person should write down his or her best estimate, and then 
the group should simply average together all the in de pen dent esti-
mates.26 We asked Richard Hackman, a Harvard professor and expert 
on the psychology of groups, if he had ever heard of a group spontane-
ously deciding to use this procedure, as opposed to immediately launch-
ing into discussion and debate.27 He had not.
Of course, in some contexts, the overconﬁ dence derived from group 
consensus has value. In the midst of a military battle, ner vous, low- 
conﬁ dence soldiers can draw strength from their comrades and leaders 
and take necessary risks— including the ultimate risk, their own lives— 
that they might choose not to take if they  were alone in the decision. 
But the illusion of conﬁ dence can have tragic consequences when in de-
pen dent analysis and judgment of the highest quality are required. And 
just like individuals, groups appear to be totally unaware that they have 
this tendency to overstate their collective abilities.
Cameron Anderson and Gavin Kilduff at Berkeley’s Haas School of 
Business actually conducted the math problem–solving experiment we 
asked you to imagine.28 They formed groups of four students who had 
never met one another and asked them to solve math questions from 
the GMAT, a standardized test used for admission to graduate business 
schools. An advantage of using math problems as the group task was 
that Anderson and Kilduff could objectively mea sure how well each 
group member performed by assessing (from the videos) how many good 
and bad solutions each member suggested. And they could compare 
group members’ perceptions of each person’s math competence with an 
objective mea sure of the person’s actual competence: scores on the math 
section of the SAT college admission test.
Anderson and Kilduff recorded all of the group interactions on video 
and reviewed them later to determine who the group leaders  were. They 
also asked outside observers to make the same determination, and they 
polled the members of each group to see whom they thought had taken 
the leadership roles. All parties identiﬁ ed the same people as group 
leaders. The important question was what factors determined which of 

98  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the four members of each group became its leader. In the hypothetical 
example we used to start this section, the cream  rose to the top and the 
best mathematician, Megan, emerged as the go- to group member.
As you’ve probably anticipated, in the actual experiment, the group 
leaders proved to be no more competent than anyone  else. They became 
leaders by force of personality rather than strength of ability. Before 
starting the group task, the participants completed a short question-
naire designed to mea sure how “dominant” they tended to be. Those 
people with the most dominant personalities tended to become the 
leaders. How did the dominant individuals become the group leaders 
even though they  were no better at math? Did they bully the others 
into obeying, shouting down meek but intelligent group members? 
Did they campaign for the role, persuading others that they  were the 
best at math, or at least the best at or ga niz ing their group? Not at all. 
The answer is almost absurdly simple: They spoke ﬁ rst. For 94 percent 
of the problems, the group’s ﬁ nal answer was the ﬁ rst answer anyone 
suggested, and  people with dominant personalities just tend to speak 
ﬁ rst and most forcefully.
So in this experiment, group leadership was determined largely by 
conﬁ dence. People with dominant personalities tend to exhibit greater 
self- conﬁ dence, and due to the illusion of conﬁ dence, others tend to 
trust and follow people who speak with conﬁ dence. If you offer your 
opinion early and often, people will take your conﬁ dence as an indica-
tor of ability, even if you are actually no better than your peers. The il-
lusion of conﬁ dence keeps the cream blended in. Only when conﬁ dence 
happens to be correlated with actual competence will the most able 
person rise to the top.
The Trait of Conﬁ dence
Psychologists use the term trait to describe a general characteristic of a 
person that inﬂ uences his or her behavior in a wide variety of situations. 
In Anderson and Kilduff’s study of group leadership, dominance was 
taken to be a trait— people scoring high on the researchers’ dominance 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  99
test were thought to assert control and assume power across a wide range 
of situations. Similarly, if you score high on a test of extraversion, you are 
probably more outgoing than the average person, and your tendency to 
approach and engage with other people will manifest itself more often 
than not.
Personality traits don’t determine your behavior all the time— many 
other factors, especially ones par tic u lar to the situation you are in, have 
powerful inﬂ uences as well. An extraverted person who knows nothing 
about Star Trek might be more shy at a science- ﬁ ction convention than 
an introvert who attends these events all the time. However, extraverted 
people tend toward more social engagement in the absence of other 
overriding situational factors. By default, they are more socially gregari-
ous than are introverted people.
Conﬁ dence itself  doesn’t show up in most of the lists of traits compiled 
by psychologists. It isn’t one of the so- called “big ﬁ ve” dimensions, which 
include neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness, 
and conscientiousness. Conﬁ dence is related to, but is not the same as 
dominance, and even dominance isn’t typically mea sured in studies of 
personality. We think that differences among people in their tendency to 
express conﬁ dence are vitally important for understanding how we make 
decisions and inﬂ uence one another. So do these differences exist? Is con-
ﬁ dence a trait?
The “con” part of “con man,” “con artist,” and “con game” is short for 
conﬁ dence. The original “conﬁ dence man” was a grifter in the 1840s 
named William Thompson, who had the audacity to approach strang-
ers on the streets of Manhattan and simply ask them to hand over their 
watches. Attempting this gambit required Thompson to somehow gain 
the conﬁ dence of his marks; amazingly, he was able to do this while 
explicitly asking them, “Have you conﬁ dence in me to trust me with 
your watch until tomorrow?”29
The most inherently conﬁ dent person in history might have been 
Frank Abagnale, who was portrayed by Leonardo DiCaprio in Steven 
Spielberg’s movie Catch Me If You Can. Abagnale started early: While 
still a high school student, he successfully impersonated a high school 

100  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
teacher, and he conned his father out of $3,400. By the age of eigh teen, 
pretending to be a Pan Am pi lot, he had tricked the airline into letting 
him ﬂ y over one million miles as a “deadhead”— riding in unsold seats 
or as a guest in the cockpit. He expertly forged checks worth millions of 
dollars. When he was ﬁ nally arrested in France, at the age of twenty- 
one, he was wanted in twelve countries. After being tried and serving 
time in France and Sweden, he was extradited to the United States, 
where he repeatedly escaped and eluded authorities, on one occasion by 
pretending to be an undercover investigator looking into allegations of 
poor conditions for prisoners. Eventually he was recaptured and con-
victed. As part of a deal with American prosecutors, he agreed to assist 
the FBI in future investigations of other frauds in exchange for early 
parole. The diversity, ease, and precociousness of his con games attest 
to his ability to display levels of conﬁ dence that people expect to see 
only in those who are telling the truth.30
Chris and some of his colleagues wondered whether conﬁ dence is a 
stable trait, as the careers of Abagnale and Thompson suggest.31 They 
conducted a simple experiment to ﬁ nd out. Subjects  were asked to an-
swer a series of challenging true/false trivia questions, such as “the 
O.J. Simpson murder trial ended in 1993” (false— it ended in 1995), 
and to express their conﬁ dence in each answer as a percentage (between 
50% and 100%). On this test, most people express considerable over-
conﬁ dence: They get about 60 percent of the answers correct, but their 
average conﬁ dence is about 75 percent.
The critical element in the design of this experiment was the creation 
of two trivia tests that  were equally difﬁ cult but included entirely differ-
ent questions. Each subject ﬁ rst completed one of the tests, and then 
several weeks later, completed the other one. Remarkably, just by know-
ing how conﬁ dent someone was on the ﬁ rst test, it was possible to pre-
dict how conﬁ dent they would be on the second test. Of those people 
who scored in the top half on conﬁ dence in the ﬁ rst test they took, 90 
percent scored in the top half on the second test. Yet conﬁ dence did not 
predict accuracy; the more conﬁ dent people  were no more accurate than 
the less conﬁ dent people. Conﬁ dence also was unrelated to intelligence. 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  101
Other experiments have shown that conﬁ dence is a general trait: 
People who are highly conﬁ dent of their skills in one domain, such as 
visual perception, also tend to be highly conﬁ dent of their skills in 
other domains, such as memory.32 In short, conﬁ dence appears to be a 
consistent quality that varies from one person to the next, but has rela-
tively little to do with one’s underlying knowledge or mental ability. 
One thing that does appear to inﬂ uence conﬁ dence is genes. Accord-
ing to a recent study by a group of economists in Sweden, identical 
twins are more similar to each other in how conﬁ dent they are of their 
own abilities than are fraternal twins.33 Since identical twins have es-
sentially the same genes, but fraternal twins are no more similar ge ne t-
ically than ordinary siblings, conﬁ dence must have at least some 
ge ne tic basis. Your conﬁ dence isn’t entirely determined by your ge ne tic 
makeup, but it’s not entirely in de pen dent of it. As it turns out, Frank 
Abagnale’s father was also a con man; he lost the family home in a failed 
tax- fraud scheme.
Why David Took on Goliath
In August 2008, the tiny nation of Georgia provoked a military conﬂ ict 
with its northern neighbor Rus sia over two provinces whose separatist 
movements  were being encouraged and supported by the Rus sian gov-
ernment. Georgia’s army was overwhelmed after less than one week of 
ﬁ ghting, and Rus sia was left in control of the provinces. All that Geor-
gia obtained from the war was some sympathy among Western govern-
ments. Incredibly, Georgia’s leaders actually believed their forces would 
quickly overtake the key points in South Ossetia and Abkhazia and 
that, once entrenched, they would be able to repel Rus sian counterat-
tacks. “Several Georgian ofﬁ cials said that night that seizing South 
 Ossetia would be militarily easy,” according to the New York Times. 
“Some administration ofﬁ cials said the Georgian military had drawn 
up a ‘concept of operations’ for a crisis in South Ossetia that called for 
its army units to sweep across the region and rapidly establish such ﬁ rm 
control that a Rus sian response could be pre- empted.”34

102  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
The Georgians  were woefully overconﬁ dent in provoking war with 
the second- strongest military power in the world. In his book Overcon-
ﬁ dence and War, po liti cal scientist Dominic Johnson of Prince ton Uni-
versity analyzes a range of military turning points, from World War I 
to Vietnam to Iraq, and although he  doesn’t use our terminology, he 
makes the point that almost any country that voluntarily initiates a war 
and then loses must have suffered from the illusion of conﬁ dence, since 
negotiation is always an option.35 When Mikheil Saakashvili was 
elected president of Georgia in 2004, he was only thirty- six years old. 
He stocked the government with loyal ministers who  were also in their 
thirties and lacked military experience but sympathized with their 
leader’s views about the importance of reclaiming the breakaway re-
gions from Rus sian inﬂ uence. Over the next four years they managed 
to convince themselves that it was a good idea to ﬁ ght an army that 
outnumbered theirs by twenty- ﬁ ve to one. It’s not hard to imagine how 
a group of like- minded government ofﬁ cials could take a set of opinions 
that none of them held with great conﬁ dence individually and aggre-
gate them, by deliberating among themselves and reinforcing one an-
other’s public statements, into a high- conﬁ dence conclusion.36
Chris and his colleagues at Harvard tried to capture this pro cess of 
conﬁ dence inﬂ ation in groups through an experiment. They began by 
giving seven hundred people one of the true/false trivia tests we just 
described. As usual, people thought they knew more than they did, av-
eraging 70 percent conﬁ dence in their answers even though their actual 
scores averaged only 54 percent correct. Chris’s team used each person’s 
conﬁ dence on the ﬁ rst test to select members for three different types of 
two- person groups: groups with two high- conﬁ dence members, groups 
with two low- conﬁ dence members, and groups with one high- and one 
low- conﬁ dence member. Each pair then visited the laboratory, where 
they worked together on the second trivia test— one that was just as 
difﬁ cult but had different questions from the ﬁ rst one. The members of 
each group could share their thoughts, deliberate about the best answer, 
and make a collective judgment about how likely they  were to be right.
Our intuition tells us that groups should be more accurate and less 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  103
overconﬁ dent than individuals. When two people come up with differ-
ent answers to a trivia question, one of them must be wrong. Such dis-
crepancies should lead to two changes. First, they should spur further 
discussion, which should sometimes result in more accurate answers. 
Second, they should provide a signal to both individuals that their cer-
tainty in their own opinion may be too high, so the group’s collective 
certainty should decrease when there is disagreement.
At least for this sort of trivia task, though, two heads weren’t better 
than one: The groups  were no better at solving the trivia questions than 
 were the individuals. But being part of a group did swell the heads of 
the subjects. Even though they  were no more accurate, they  were more 
conﬁ dent!37 Conﬁ dence increased the most for pairs composed of two 
low- conﬁ dence people. The members of groups like this apparently re-
inforced each other, leading to an 11-percent increase in conﬁ dence de-
spite no improvement in per for mance. This experiment illustrates why 
the Georgian government’s high- conﬁ dence decision to provoke war 
with Rus sia did not necessarily stem from the overconﬁ dent beliefs of 
any one individual. The people making these decisions might each have 
had low conﬁ dence, perhaps so low that they would not have given 
the order by themselves. In a group, however, their conﬁ dence could 
have inﬂ ated to the point where what  were actually risky, uncertain 
actions seemed highly likely to succeed.
The Fault Lies Not in Our Conﬁ dence, 
But in Our Love of Conﬁ dence
In the hit Fox TV show House, M.D., Dr. Gregory  House and his medi-
cal fellows encounter one rare case after another, solving each one by the 
end of an episode, after ﬁ rst testing several false leads.  House, like many 
other tele vi sion doctors, is overbearingly conﬁ dent and self- assured. He 
has an uncanny ability to diagnose rare disorders that others miss. Al-
though the character of Dr.  House is ﬁ ctional, Dr. Jim Keating plays the 
same role in his work at St. Louis Children’s Hospital. Like  House, he 
solves the cases that nobody  else can. Unlike  House, he is gregarious, 

104  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
friendly, quick to laugh, and willing to admit when he  doesn’t know the 
answer. Dr. Keating runs a clinic for infants and children with undiag-
nosed (and often undiagnosable) problems. Dr. Keating typically sees 
patients only after they have been to many other doctors and specialists 
and undergone countless tests. He’s called in as a last resort— somebody 
who might be able to see what everyone  else missed.
As you might expect, Dr. Keating has an impressive educational 
pedigree— undergraduate and medical degrees from Harvard, special-
ties in pediatrics, pediatric critical care, and pediatric gastroenterology, 
a master’s in epidemiology and biostatistics from London, and a stint 
in Vietnam when he treated civilians during the war, even diagnosing 
one patient with bubonic plague. Only after accumulating de cades of 
experience across a broad range of medical subspecialties did he start 
the diagnostic clinic that he’s been running for more than ten years 
now. Now that he is in his early seventies, he told Dan, “It was time 
not to be doing all of those things. The diagnostic center ﬁ ts well be-
cause I have the breadth of experience with a  whole range of problems 
and the conﬁ dence that comes from doing clinical medicine intensely 
with  patients.”
Keating recognizes the role that conﬁ dence plays in medicine. “Doc-
tors need to have some level of conﬁ dence to be able to interact with 
patients and everybody  else, the nurses . . .  In the emergency room, 
when everything is happening at once and the patient’s in shock, I 
like to hear a voice that’s steady and calm.” Patients trust doctors, 
perhaps more than they should, and that trust reinforces the conﬁ -
dence that doctors already have. As Keating puts it, “When people go 
to the doctor, they often believe that the doctor has an ability to make 
the right decisions for them. That goes beyond the scientiﬁ c reality. 
They trust your decision-making more than their own. That’s a prob-
lem because it encourages doctors to not be honest about what they 
know and what they don’t know. It builds your ego to have people 
think that you know.”
In medicine, the conﬁ dence cycle is self- perpetuating. Doctors learn 
to speak with conﬁ dence as part of their training pro cess (of course, 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  105
there may also be a tendency for inherently conﬁ dent people to become 
doctors). Then patients, mistaking conﬁ dence for competence, treat 
doctors more as priests with divine insight than as people who might 
not know as much as they profess to. This adulation in turn reinforces 
the behavior of doctors, leading them to be more conﬁ dent. The dan-
ger comes when conﬁ dence gets too far ahead of knowledge and ability. 
As Keating notes, “Equanimity is something we should aspire to, but 
we ought to get there by building skills, and it should always have a ‘not 
sure’ component to it so you can continue to learn. There’s still a lot of 
room for humility in our profession.” Doctors have to be able to listen 
to the evidence, admit when they don’t know, and learn from their pa-
tients. Not all of them are able to overcome their overconﬁ dence.
Psychology professor Seth Roberts of Berkeley described the experi-
ence of being told by his doctor that he had a small hernia and that 
he needed surgery. Roberts asked the surgeon whether the risk of side 
 effects from anesthesia and surgery, as well as the costs in time and 
money, justiﬁ ed the beneﬁ ts of correcting a “problem” that  wasn’t actu-
ally bothering him at all. Yes, he was told, there are clinical trials showing 
the value of the surgery, and you can ﬁ nd them easily online. Roberts 
 couldn’t ﬁ nd them, nor could his mother, a former medical- school li-
brarian. The surgeon insisted that the studies existed and promised to 
ﬁ nd and send them. They never arrived. We don’t have any special in-
sight into whether the surgery was a good idea for Roberts— it might or 
might not have been. Our focus is on the surgeon’s extreme conﬁ dence 
that her decision was not only correct, but justiﬁ ed by clinical trials. Even 
after learning that an experienced medical researcher  couldn’t ﬁ nd this 
evidence, she continued to insist on its existence.38
An obdurate certainty in the face of conﬂ icting evidence is perhaps 
the best indication that you need a different doctor. The best doctors show 
a range of conﬁ dence— they admit when they don’t know and are more 
conﬁ dent when they do know. Doctors who willingly consult people with 
greater knowledge than their own are likely to provide much better care 
than those who think they can handle any situation on their own. When 
Dan met with potential pediatricians for his son, one of the ﬁ rst things 

106  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
he mentioned was that his own father is a pediatrician. He then gauged 
their reactions. Did they seem to be threatened by this fact? Did they 
express willingness to take input from other doctors, including Dan’s fa-
ther? Dr. Keating advises looking for the following trait in a doctor: 
“They need to be able to say ‘I don’t know’ and mean it.”
Adopting this strategy for evaluating doctors requires consciously 
overriding our tendency to trust that conﬁ dence corresponds to 
knowledge— to assume that doctors who express certainty in their knowl-
edge are better than those who express doubt. A study conducted in 1986 
at the University of Rochester demonstrates the power of this misguided 
assumption.39 The researchers asked patients who  were waiting for their 
own appointments to view a videotape of a simulated meeting between a 
doctor and a patient and to rate their satisfaction with the doctor. The 
patient had a heart murmur and had been told by his dentist that he 
should talk to his doctor about possibly taking antibiotics before having 
oral surgery (taking antibiotics prior to dental surgery is a common step 
to prevent heart valve infections in people with heart disease).
In the video, the doctor took a history, performed a physical exam, 
conﬁ rmed the existence of a heart problem, and wrote a prescription for 
antibiotics. In some versions of the tape, the doctor expressed no uncer-
tainty whatsoever about the diagnosis or treatment. In other versions 
the doctor acknowledged uncertainty about the need for antibiotics but 
prescribed them nonetheless. In one of these tapes, the doctor just said, 
“You have nothing to lose,” and went ahead with the prescription. In 
another, he consulted a reference book before writing the prescription. 
The patients viewing these videos found the conﬁ dent doctors most 
satisfying, and they rated the one who looked in a book to be the least 
satisfying of all. At least in medicine, an expert is evidently expected to 
have all relevant knowledge stored in memory; consulting a reference is 
even worse than effectively saying “what the hell” and charging ahead.
Recall Chris’s encounter with the doctor who diagnosed and treated 
his Lyme disease. This doctor would have received the lowest rating 
from the subjects in the videotape study, and at the time, Chris proba-
bly would have given her a low rating too. But he ﬁ lled his prescription, 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  107
took all of the antibiotic as directed, and was cured in short order. 
Looking back, he realizes that the doctor had the self- awareness to know 
the limits of her knowledge and the true competence to look informa-
tion up rather than charge ahead with a decision in a false show of 
bravado.
Doctors who express doubt are probably more self- aware than those 
who don’t, but people rarely notice that sign of actual competence in an 
expert. Instead, we focus on personality and appearances. A number of 
studies show that patients are more likely to trust and conﬁ de in doc-
tors who are dressed formally and wear a white lab coat than those who 
dress more casually.40 Yet the worst doctor is just as able to put on a lab 
coat as the best doctor, so what doctors wear should have no bearing on 
our estimation of their abilities.
The self- help literature focuses extensively on the importance of ap-
pearing conﬁ dent. Rightly so: You will persuade more people and con-
sequently you will have more success (at least in the short term) if you 
present your ideas conﬁ dently. If your goal is to convince patients to 
accept your diagnoses without questioning, by all means wear a lab 
coat. Faking conﬁ dence can be beneﬁ cial (although those who can con-
vincingly feign conﬁ dence are likely to be fairly conﬁ dent people to 
begin with). Unfortunately, if everyone takes the advice of the self- help 
books and “fakes it till they make it,” the already limited signaling 
value of conﬁ dence will be further eroded, which will make the illusion 
of conﬁ dence even more dangerous. In the extreme, we will be relying 
on something that has no predictive validity rather than something 
that— at present— at least occasionally does improve our judgments. 
Increasing your own conﬁ dence might help you, but at the cost of hurt-
ing all of us.
One question still remains: Why do we tend to trust the pronounce-
ments of conﬁ dent doctors more than those of more hesitant doctors? 
One reason is self- knowledge. When we know more about a topic, we 
tend to be more conﬁ dent in our judgments about it. (As we men-
tioned earlier, our conﬁ dence increases as we gain skill, but our over-
conﬁ dence decreases.) When dealing with people we know well, we 

108  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
can judge whether their conﬁ dence is high or low for them. With knowl-
edge of the range of conﬁ dence someone exhibits, you can use conﬁ -
dence as a reasonable predictor of that person’s knowledge; just like 
you, people generally act more conﬁ dent when they know more about a 
topic and less conﬁ dent when they know less. For example, if you ob-
serve that your close friend is more conﬁ dent about his ability to write a 
good wedding toast than about his ability to ﬁ x a ﬂ at tire, you can rea-
sonably infer that he is better at being a best man than at repairing cars.
The problem, though, is that conﬁ dence is also a personality trait, 
which means that the baseline level of conﬁ dence people express can vary 
dramatically from one person to the next. If you don’t know how much 
conﬁ dence someone expresses across a range of situations, you have no 
way to judge whether the conﬁ dence you see at any par tic u lar moment 
reﬂ ects their knowledge or personality. If during your ﬁ rst encounter 
with someone, he expressed conﬁ dence in his ability to give wedding 
toasts, you would have no way to know whether he is truly skilled at giving 
toasts or whether he is just conﬁ dent in general. If he is a conﬁ dent person 
but an inexperienced toast-giver, then his conﬁ dence level would likely be 
even higher in a different area where he actually had some expertise.
We all encounter hundreds or even thousands of people whom we 
don’t know well, but whose conﬁ dence we can observe— and draw con-
clusions from. For such casual acquaintances, conﬁ dence is a weak signal. 
But in a smaller- scale, more communal society, such as the sort in which 
our brains evolved, conﬁ dence would be a much more accurate signal of 
knowledge and abilities. When close- knit groups and families spend their 
entire lives together, people come to know almost everyone they ever 
interact with, and they can adjust for baseline differences in conﬁ dence 
when interpreting other people’s behavior. In these conditions it is en-
tirely reasonable to rely on conﬁ dence; if your brother shows more conﬁ -
dence across a range of situations than your sister, you know to discount 
his bravado when assessing his true competence. Unfortunately, this 
otherwise useful mechanism becomes a potentially catastrophic everyday 
illusion when we deal with people we hardly know— like eyewitnesses 
testifying in court.

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  109
Her Conﬁ dence and His Convictions
In July 1984, Jennifer Thompson was a twenty- two- year- old student 
at Elon College in North Carolina. She lived in an apartment complex 
in Burlington, a town about ﬁ ve miles from the college. Late one night, 
Thompson was startled awake by a noise and saw a black man in her 
bedroom. He jumped on her and pinned her down by her arms. She 
screamed. He produced a knife, held it to her throat, and told her that 
if she made any more noise he would kill her.41
At ﬁ rst Thompson thought this might be a joke played on her by a 
friend (a friend with an appalling sense of humor). But she realized it 
 wasn’t once she got a look at the intruder’s face. She said he could take 
what ever he wanted from her apartment. The man pulled off her un-
derwear, held her legs down, and performed oral sex. Thompson later 
recalled, “At that point I realized that I was going to be raped. And I 
didn’t know if this was going to be the end, if he was going to kill me, 
if he was going to hurt me, and I decided that what I needed to do was 
to outsmart him.” The attack went on for half an hour, and during that 
time Thompson turned on lights to get a better look at the rapist. Each 
time, he ordered her to turn them off right away. The rapist turned on 
her stereo, and a blue light illuminated his face. Gradually, Thompson 
assembled a sense of what he looked like. “It was just long enough for me 
to think, OK, his nose looks this way, his shirt is navy blue, not black.”
At one point the rapist tried to kiss Thompson. She told him that 
she would “feel so much more at ease” if he would just put his knife 
outside the apartment. Surprisingly, he did. Then she asked to get a 
drink in the kitchen. Once there, she saw that the back door was open 
and realized that the rapist must have entered the apartment through it. 
She ran outside and found a neighbor— a professor at Elon who rec-
ognized her from campus— who let her in. She fainted and was taken 
to the hospital.
Later that same night, less than a mile away, another rape took 
place. The attacker appeared in the victim’s bedroom, fondled her 
breasts, and brieﬂ y left before returning to rape her. The victim tried 

110  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
to telephone for help, but the line was cut (as it had been at Thompson’s 
home). The rapist spent as much as thirty minutes in the apartment 
and left by the front door. The police quickly inferred that the same 
man committed both crimes.
Just hours after her ordeal, Jennifer Thompson described her attacker 
to a police composite artist. Detective Mike Gauldin, who investigated 
the case, said later that he “had great conﬁ dence in her ability to iden-
tify her assailant.” According to the bulletin the police issued, the sus-
pect was a “black male with a light complexion, around six feet tall, 170 
to 175 pounds . . .  with short hair and a pencil- type mustache.” After 
publicizing the sketch, Gauldin received a tip that Ronald Cotton, who 
worked at a nearby seafood restaurant, resembled the person in the pic-
ture. Thompson readily picked a photograph of Cotton out of an array 
that included ﬁ ve other potential suspects, all black males, mentioned 
by tipsters. Only then did the police tell her that Cotton had a prior 
conviction for attempted rape. He’d also been convicted for breaking 
and entering and was said to have touched some of the waitresses at his 
workplace and made inappropriate comments to them. Thompson later 
identiﬁ ed Cotton in a “live” lineup, in which the suspects also spoke 
words she remembered her attacker saying. Ronald Cotton was arrested 
and imprisoned while he awaited trial.
During the trial, which took place in January 1985, no deﬁ nitive physi-
cal evidence was offered, nor was it mentioned that the victim of the other 
rape that night could not identify Cotton (and thus that he was not being 
tried for that crime). The case was decided on the contrast between Cot-
ton’s shaky and inconsistent alibis for the night of the rape, and Thomp-
son’s conﬁ dent, consistent identiﬁ cation of Cotton, from the photo array, 
to the lineup, to the courtroom. Thompson proved to be a compelling 
witness: She told the jury that during the rape, she had the presence of 
mind to focus her efforts on memorizing “every single detail on the rapist’s 
face” in order to make sure he was caught later. “Jennifer, are you abso-
lutely sure that Ronald Ju nior Cotton is the man?” asked the prosecutor. 
“Yes,” she replied. The jury convicted Cotton after four hours of delibera-
tion. He was sentenced to life plus ﬁ fty years in prison.

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  111
Two years later, Ronald Cotton received a new trial after another 
prisoner named Bobby Poole told other inmates that he, not Cotton, 
was the one who had raped Jennifer Thompson. Cotton and Poole 
looked similar, so much so that some prison workers mistook them for 
each other. Cotton tricked Poole into posing side by side with him for a 
photograph, which he sent to his lawyer with a letter describing his 
claim that Poole was the real rapist. But in court during Cotton’s sec-
ond trial, Thompson looked at Bobby Poole and said, “I have never 
seen him in my life. I have no idea who he is.” A more categorical— and 
conﬁ dent— statement is hard to imagine. The jury was convinced, and 
Cotton went back to prison with an even harsher sentence, this time 
having been convicted of both rapes.
As the years passed, Thompson gradually managed to put the en-
tire matter behind her. In 1995, ten years after the ﬁ rst trial, she was 
contacted again by Mike Gauldin and the district attorney, who told 
her that lawyers for Cotton had requested DNA testing to determine 
whether he might have been wrongly convicted. DNA recovered from 
her body at the hospital would be compared with fresh samples pro-
vided by Ronald Cotton, Bobby Poole, and Thompson herself. She 
cooperated enthusiastically, convinced that the test “would allow me 
to move on once and for all.” But the test proved that Thompson, de-
spite her inner and outward conﬁ dence in her memory, had been wrong 
all along. Cotton had been right in protesting his innocence, as had 
the jail house braggart Poole in boasting of his own guilt—his DNA 
matched that left by the rapist.
Thompson accepted Cotton’s innocence, but she was racked with guilt 
over the responsibility she felt for taking away his freedom. She wrote 
later that “for so many years, the police ofﬁ cers and the prosecutors told 
me I was the ‘best witness’ they ever put on the stand; I was ‘textbook.’ ” 
Jurors believe conﬁ dent witnesses, and investigators and prosecutors 
know this. The U.S. Supreme Court stated that the “level of certainty 
of the witness” was an important factor in a 1972 case where a victim 
expressed “no doubt” in court that she recognized her own rapist.42 By 
contrast, most psychologists who testify as experts on eyewitness memory 

112  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
say that “an eyewitness’s conﬁ dence is not a good predictor of his or her 
identiﬁ cation accuracy.”43 In fact, mistaken eyewitness identiﬁ cations, 
and their conﬁ dent pre sen ta tion to the jury, are the main cause of over 
75 percent of wrongful convictions that are later overturned by DNA 
evidence.44
In a powerful demonstration of the extent to which conﬁ dence sways 
juries, psychologist Gary Wells and his colleagues conducted an elabo-
rate experiment that resembled the entire criminal law pro cess, from 
the initial witnessing of a crime to the jury’s decision on guilt or inno-
cence. First, the researchers staged a crime for each of 108 different 
subjects: An actor pretended to steal a calculator from the room where 
each subject was completing some forms.45 Wells varied the amount of 
time that the perpetrator was in the room, how much he said to the 
subject, and whether he wore a hat (which made his face harder to see). 
Shortly after the “criminal” left the room, the experimenter entered and 
asked the subject to select the criminal from a photographic lineup and 
to state a level of conﬁ dence in that selection. Not surprisingly, subjects 
who had viewed the criminal only brieﬂ y  were more than twice as likely 
to make an incorrect selection from the lineup as those who viewed the 
perpetrator for a long time. Yet they  were nearly as conﬁ dent in their 
selection as those who saw the perpetrator for a long time.
The most interesting part of this experiment  wasn’t the ﬁ nding of 
overconﬁ dence, which had been demonstrated before. After selecting a 
person from the lineup and judging their conﬁ dence in their selection, 
the subjects  were then “cross- examined” by another experimenter who 
had no information about which choice they had made or how conﬁ -
dent they  were. Videotapes of these cross- examinations  were shown to a 
new group of subjects— the “jurors”— who  were asked to judge whether 
the witness had made an accurate identiﬁ cation. The jurors trusted the 
selections of highly conﬁ dent witnesses 77 percent of the time and less 
conﬁ dent witnesses 59 percent of the time. More important, the jurors 
 were disproportionately swayed by a highly conﬁ dent witness when the 
witness experienced poor viewing conditions (only a brief exposure to a 
hat- wearing perpetrator). That is, conﬁ dence had the most detrimental 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  113
effect on juror judgments when the witnesses had the least information 
to go on.
At Ronald Cotton’s trials, the juries relied on conﬁ dence as a way 
to distinguish an accurate witness from an inaccurate one. A group of 
scientists led by Siegfried Sporer, a psychologist at the University of 
Giessen in Germany, reviewed all of the studies done on the identiﬁ ca-
tion of suspects from lineups— a crucial step in the investigation of 
Cotton for the Thompson rape. Several of these studies showed no rela-
tionship between the accuracy of witnesses and the level of conﬁ dence 
they expressed, but others found that higher conﬁ dence is associated 
with greater accuracy. Considering all of the relevant studies, they 
found that on average, high- conﬁ dence witnesses are accurate 70 per-
cent of the time, whereas low- conﬁ dence witnesses are accurate just 30 
percent of the time.46 So, all other things being equal, a conﬁ dent wit-
ness is more likely— much more likely— to be accurate than an uncon-
ﬁ dent one.
But there are two problems  here. First, the level of conﬁ dence wit-
nesses express depends as much on whether they are conﬁ dent in gen-
eral as on whether they are accurate in a given instance. If jurors could 
observe the conﬁ dence of a par tic u lar witness under a wide variety of 
situations, they could better judge whether that witness’s testimony was 
unusually conﬁ dent. In the absence of any information about whether 
or not a witness generally acts with conﬁ dence, we tend to trust people 
who appear conﬁ dent. The effect of a conﬁ dent witness holds so much 
sway that 37 percent of respondents in our national survey agreed that 
“the testimony of one conﬁ dent eyewitness should be enough evidence 
to convict a defendant of a crime.”
Second, and even more important, is that while higher conﬁ dence is 
associated with higher accuracy, the association is not perfect. Highly 
conﬁ dent witnesses are right in their identiﬁ cations 70 percent of the 
time, which means they are wrong the other 30 percent of the time; a 
criminal conviction based entirely on a conﬁ dent eyewitness identiﬁ ca-
tion has a 30 percent chance of being erroneous. As eyewitness testi-
mony expert Gary Wells and his colleagues at Iowa State University put 

114  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
it, “We would expect to encounter a highly conﬁ dent mistaken eyewit-
ness (or a nonconﬁ dent accurate eyewitness) about as often as we would 
encounter a tall female (or a short male).”47 This should make us ques-
tion verdicts that rely exclusively on eyewitness memories, no matter 
how conﬁ dently they are recalled in court.
The Ronald Cotton case is often described as one of mistaken eye-
witness identiﬁ cation due to the fallibility of memory. It is. But if the 
illusion of conﬁ dence did not exist, the authorities and the jurors would 
not have given Thompson’s identiﬁ cations and recollections the inordi-
nate weight they did. They would have recognized that her lack of 
doubt still left much room for error, and that physical and even circum-
stantial evidence are necessary backstops for eyewitness testimony— no 
matter how articulate, persuasive, and conﬁ dent its delivery.48 The illu-
sion of conﬁ dence obscures all of this, often with disastrous conse-
quences.
For Ronald Cotton, the consequence was eleven years in prison for 
crimes he didn’t commit, but it could easily have been his entire life. At 
his second trial, on the basis of new testimony by the second victim, he 
was convicted of both rapes that  were committed on that July night. His 
lawyers later wanted to test his DNA against samples from each crime 
scene, but the material from the second rape had deteriorated too much. 
If the samples taken from Jennifer Thompson  were not testable— or 
 were gone entirely— there would have been no way to prove Cotton’s 
innocence. Instead, he was set free on June 30, 1995. He was offered 
$5,000 in compensation by the state of North Carolina, an amount later 
raised to over $100,000 by changes to the law. These days, he travels and 
speaks on the issue of false convictions, often in tandem with Jennifer 
Thompson, who is now a married mother of triplets and an advocate for 
criminal justice reform.
In our view, what is most in need of reform is the legal system’s un-
derstanding of how the mind works. The police, the witnesses, the law-
yers, the judges, and the jurors are all too susceptible to the illusions we 
have discussed. Because they are human, they believe that we pay atten-
tion to much more than we do, that our memories are more complete 

WHAT SMART CHESS PLAYERS AND STUPID CRIMINALS HAVE IN COMMON  115
and faithful than they are, and that conﬁ dence is a reliable gauge of ac-
curacy. The common law of criminal procedure was established over 
centuries in En gland and the United States, and its assumptions are 
based precisely on mistaken intuitions like these.
The mind is not the only thing we think we understand much better 
than we actually do. From physical mechanisms as simple as a toilet or 
a zipper, to complex technologies like the Internet, to vast engineering 
projects like Boston’s “Big Dig,” to abstract entities like ﬁ nancial mar-
kets and terrorist networks, we easily deceive ourselves into thinking 
that we understand and can explain things that we really know very 
little about. In fact, our dangerous tendency to overestimate the extent 
and the depth of our knowledge is the next everyday illusion we will 
discuss. The illusion of knowledge is like the illusion of conﬁ dence, but 
it is not a direct expression of one’s level of certainty or ability. It  doesn’t 
involve telling someone  else that you are “conﬁ dent,” “certain,” “better 
than the average person,” and so on. It involves implicitly believing that 
you understand things at a deeper level than you really do, and it lurks 
behind some of the most dangerous and misguided decisions we make.

4
C H A P T E R
should you be more like
a weather forecaster or a
hedge fund manager?
I
n june 2000, U.S. president Bill Clinton and British prime minister 
Tony Blair jointly announced the completion of the initial phase of 
the Human Genome Project, the celebrated international effort to de-
code the DNA sequence of all twenty- three human chromosomes. The 
project ultimately spent about $2.5 billion over ten years to produce a 
“ﬁ rst draft” of the sequence, and over $1 billion more to ﬁ ll in the gaps 
and polish the results.1 One of the most intriguing questions that biolo-
gists hoped the project would answer seemed to be a simple one: How 
many genes are there in the human genome?2
Before the sequence was completed, prevailing opinion held that the 
complexity of human biology and behavior must be the product of a 
large number of genes, probably between 80,000 and 100,000. In Sep-
tember 1999, a high- ﬂ ying biotech company called Incyte Genomics 
proclaimed that there  were 140,000 genes in the human genome. In 
May 2000, top ge ne ticists from around the world converged at the 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  117
“Genome Sequencing and Biology” conference at the Cold Spring 
 Harbor Laboratory in New York, and a lively debate about the true count 
ensued. Yet no consensus estimate emerged; some agreed with counts 
as high as those claimed by Incyte, and others argued that the number 
might be lower than 50,000.
With so many different opinions on offer, Ewan Birney, a ge ne ticist at 
the Eu ro pe an Bioinformatics Institute, started a betting pool for his fel-
low researchers to predict the ﬁ nal count. Each participant put in a dollar, 
and the winner would receive the total amount collected, plus a signed, 
leather- bound copy of Nobel Prize–winner James Watson’s memoir, The 
Double Helix. Incyte’s Sam LaBrie came in with the highest initial esti-
mate: 153,478 genes. The average of the ﬁ rst 338 predictions entered was 
66,050. Birney raised the entry fee to ﬁ ve dollars in 2001, and then to 
twenty dollars in 2002— it  wouldn’t really be fair to let later bettors in for 
the same amount as earlier ones, since the late bettors could use the ear-
lier estimates as well as their own research ﬁ ndings to guide their guesses. 
The 115 later entries averaged 44,375, and the pot grew to $1,200. Over 
the full two- year betting period, the lowest entry was 25,747, submitted 
by Lee Rowen from the Institute for Systems Biology in Seattle.
The terms of the competition, set in 2000, required Birney to declare 
a winner in 2003. However, to Birney’s surprise, there was still no con-
sensus “ﬁ nal count” at that point. Based on evidence available at the 
time, Birney estimated the total count to be about 24,500. He decided 
to award portions of the pool to the three entrants who bet on the low-
est numbers, with Rowen getting the largest prize. The ﬁ nal number is 
still in dispute, but the most accepted value has dropped to 20,500, 
squarely in the range between the roundworm called C. elegans (19,500) 
and the mustard plant called Arabidopsis (27,000).
The bettors all  were leaders in the ﬁ eld of genetics, and they  were sure 
that the number was higher than it actually was; the range of their 453 
predictions, from the highest to the lowest estimate, did not even include 
the correct count. Francis Collins of the National Institutes of Health 
and Eric Lander of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, leaders of 
the Genome Project,  were each off by more than 100 percent, no better 

118  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
than the average guess. The collective also had a pretty poor idea of how 
quickly the gene- count question would be resolved (predicted: 2003, ac-
tual: 2007 or later). Collins reacted stoically: “Oh well, live and learn.”
This is far from the only example of scientists overestimating their 
knowledge in their own ﬁ elds of expertise. In 1957, two of the pioneers of 
computer science and artiﬁ cial intelligence, Herbert Simon and Allen 
Newell, publicly predicted that within ten years a computer would be able 
to defeat the world chess champion in a match.3 By 1968 no one had come 
close to creating a machine capable of that feat. David Levy, a Scottish 
computer programmer and chess player who would later achieve the title 
of international master (one level below grandmaster), met with four other 
computer scientists and bet them £500 of his own money— an amount 
equal to about one- half of his annual income at the time— that no com-
puter would be able to beat him in a match within the next ten years. In 
1978, with the pot sweetened to £1250 by further wagers, Levy in fact 
defeated the best computer program by a score of 31⁄2– 11⁄2. Together with 
Omni magazine, he then offered a new prize of $5,000 to anyone whose 
computer could beat him, with no time limit on the bet. Finally, in 1989, 
Levy lost to Deep Thought, a pre de ces sor of IBM’s Deep Blue computer. 
Only in 1997 did Deep Blue, with its multiple pro cessors and custom- 
designed chess chips, defeat world champion Garry Kasparov 31⁄2– 21⁄2 
and fulﬁ ll the Simon- Newell prophecy— thirty years behind schedule.4
In 1980, ecologist Paul Ehrlich, a professor at Stanford University, and 
his colleagues John Harte and John Holdren of the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley,  were convinced that global overpopulation would 
lead to drastic increases in the prices of food and other commodities 
that  were in ﬁ nite supply. Indeed, Ehrlich had been convinced that this 
threat was dire for some time, having written in 1968, “In the 1970s the 
world will undergo famines— hundreds of millions of people are going 
to starve to death.”5 He and Holdren predicted the imminent “exhaus-
tion of mineral resources.”6
Julian Simon, an economist at the University of Mary land, had the 
 opposite view. He published an article in the journal Science titled “Re-
sources, Population, Environment: An Oversupply of False Bad News.”7 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  119
Simon, whose previous claim to fame was inventing the system under 
which airlines reward passengers for giving up their seats on overbooked 
ﬂ ights, proceeded to challenge the doomsayers to put their money where 
their mouths  were: Pick ﬁ ve commodities and bet that their prices would 
increase over the next ten years, as one would expect if demand  were al-
ways increasing and supply  were constant or decreasing. Ehrlich was out-
raged by the apostasy displayed by Simon (whom he referred to as the 
leader of a “space- age cargo cult”), so he got Harte and Holdren to join 
him in accepting the wager proposed by the economist. They selected ﬁ ve 
metals—chrome, copper, nickel, tin, and tungsten—and calculated the 
amount of each that could be purchased for $200 in 1980. If these metals’ 
prices  were higher ten years later, Simon would pay Ehrlich, Harte, and 
Holdren the difference; if the prices  were lower, they would pay him. By 
1990, all ﬁ ve commodities had gone down in price. In fact, they had col-
lectively dropped more than 50 percent. Simon received an envelope con-
taining a check in the amount of his winnings. There was no cover note.8
You might object that  we’ve cherry- picked examples in which experts 
made their most horribly errant predictions. We agree that these exam-
ples are atypical, and  we’re not arguing that experts know nothing and 
are always wrong. Especially in scientiﬁ c domains, they know a lot more 
and are right much more often than the average person. But these stories 
show that even scientiﬁ c experts can dramatically overestimate what 
they know. Every single ge ne ticist guessed high on the gene count, and 
some  were off by a factor of ﬁ ve; the computer scientists  were off by a 
factor of four; and the ecological doomsayers  were wrong about every 
one of the metals they selected. If expert judgments can be so misguided, 
the rest of us must also be capable of overestimating what we know. 
Whenever people think they know more than they do, they are under 
the inﬂ uence of our next everyday illusion: the illusion of knowledge.
The Virtue of Being Like an Annoying Child
Spend a moment now and try to form an image in your mind of a bi-
cycle. Even better, if you have a piece of paper, draw a sketch of a bicycle. 

120  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Don’t worry about making a great piece of art— just focus on getting all 
the major parts in the right place. Sketch out the frame, the handlebars, 
the wheels, the pedals, and so on. For simplicity, just make it a single- 
speed bicycle. Got it? If you had to rate your understanding of how a 
bicycle works on a 1 to 7 scale, where 1 means “no understanding” and 7 
means “complete understanding,” what score would you give yourself?
If you are like most of the people who participated in a clever study 
by British psychologist Rebecca Lawson, you thought you had a pretty 
good understanding of bicycles; her subjects rated the level of their 
knowledge at 4.5 out of 7, on average.9 Now either look at your draw-
ing or refresh your mental image and then answer the following ques-
tions: Does your bicycle have a chain? If so, does the chain run between 
the two wheels? Does the frame of your bicycle connect the front and 
back wheels? Are the pedals connected to the inside of the chain? If 
you drew a chain connecting the two wheels of your bicycle, think 
about how the bicycle would turn— the chain would have to stretch 
whenever the front wheel rotated, but chains aren’t stretchy. Similarly, 
if a rigid frame connected both wheels, the bicycle could only go 
straight. Some people draw pedals outside the loop of the chain, mak-
ing it impossible to turn the chain by pedaling. Errors like these  were 
common in Lawson’s study, and they are not trivial details of the func-
tioning of a bicycle— the pedals turn the chain, which causes the back 
wheel to  rotate, and the front wheel must be free to turn or the bicycle 
cannot change direction. People are much better at making sense of 
a bicycle’s workings when the thing is sitting right in front of them than 
they are at explaining (or drawing) a bicycle purely from memory.
This example illustrates a critical aspect of the illusion of knowledge. 
Because of our extensive experience and familiarity with ordinary ma-
chines and tools, we often think we have a deep understanding of how they 
work. Think about each of the following objects and then judge your 
knowledge of it on the same 1 to 7 scale: a car speedometer, a zipper, a 
piano key, a toilet, a cylinder lock, a he li cop ter, and a sewing machine. 
Now try one more task: Pick the object that you gave the highest rating, 
the one you feel you best understand, and try to explain how it works. Give 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  121
the kind of explanation you would give to a per sis tent ly inquisitive 
child— try to generate a detailed step- by- step description of how it works, 
and explain why it works. That is, try to come up with the causal connec-
tions between each step (in the case of the bicycle, you would have to say 
something about why pedaling makes the wheels turn, not just that ped-
aling makes the wheels turn). If you aren’t sure how two steps are causally 
connected, you’ve uncovered a gap in your knowledge.
This test is similar to a series of ingenious experiments that Leon 
Rozenblit conducted as part of his doctoral research at Yale University 
with Professor Frank Keil (who, incidentally, was also Dan’s graduate 
school adviser).10 For his ﬁ rst study, Rozenblit approached students in 
the hallways of the psychology building and asked them if they knew 
why the sky is blue or how a cylinder lock works. If they answered yes, 
he then played what he calls the “why boy” game, which he describes as 
follows: “I ask you a question and you give me an answer, and I say 
‘why is that?’ Channeling the spirit of a curious ﬁ ve- year- old, I then just 
keep following each explanation with another ‘why is that?’ until the 
other person gets really annoyed.”11 The unexpected result of this infor-
mal experiment was that people gave up really quickly— they answered 
no more than one or two “why” questions before they reached a gap in 
their understanding. Even more striking  were their reactions when they 
discovered that they really had no understanding. “It was clearly coun-
terintuitive to them. People  were surprised and chagrined and a little 
embarrassed.” After all, they had just claimed to know the answer.
Rozenblit pursued this illusion of knowledge in more than a dozen 
experiments over the next few years, testing people from all walks of life 
(from undergraduates at Yale to members of the New Haven commu-
nity), and the results  were remarkably consistent. No matter whom you 
talk to, you will eventually reach a point where they can no longer 
answer the why question. For most of us, our depth of understanding 
is sufﬁ ciently shallow that we may exhaust our knowledge after just 
the ﬁ rst question. We know that there is an answer, and we feel that 
we know it, but until asked to produce it we seem blissfully unaware of 
the shortcomings in our own knowledge.

122  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Before you tried this little test, you might have thought intuitively 
that you understood how a toilet works, but all you really understand is 
how to work a toilet— and maybe how to unclog one. You likely under-
stand how the various visible parts interact and move together. And, if 
you  were looking inside a toilet and playing with the mechanism a bit, 
you might be able to ﬁ gure out how it works. But when you aren’t look-
ing at a toilet, your impression of understanding is illusory: You mistake 
your knowledge of what happens for an understanding of why it hap-
pens, and you mistake your feeling of familiarity for genuine knowledge.
We sometimes encounter students who come to our ofﬁ ces and ask 
how they could have worked so hard but still failed our tests. They usu-
ally tell us that they read and reread the textbook and their class notes, 
and that they thought they understood everything well by the time of 
the exam. And they probably did internalize some bits and pieces of the 
material, but the illusion of knowledge led them to confuse the familiar-
ity they had gained from repeated exposure to the concepts in the course 
with an actual understanding of them. As a rule, reading text over and 
over again yields diminishing returns in actual knowledge, but it in-
creases familiarity and fosters a false sense of understanding. Only by 
testing ourselves can we actually determine whether or not we really 
understand. That is one reason why teachers give tests, and why the best 
tests probe knowledge at a deep level. Asking whether a lock has cylin-
ders tests whether people can memorize the parts of a lock. Asking how 
to pick a lock tests whether people understand why locks have cylinders 
and what functional role they play in the operation of the lock.
Perhaps the most striking aspect of the illusion is how rarely we 
bother to do anything to probe the limits of our knowledge— especially 
considering how easy it is to do this. Before telling Leon Rozenblit that 
you know why the sky is blue, all you have to do is simulate the “why 
boy” game with yourself to see whether you actually know. We fall prey 
to the illusion because we simply do not recognize the need to question 
our own knowledge. According to Rozenblit,
In our day- to- day lives, do we stop and ask ourselves, “Do I 
know where the rain is coming from?” We probably don’t do it 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  123
without provocation, and it only happens in appropriate social 
and cognitive contexts: a ﬁ ve- year- old asks you, you’re having an 
argument with someone, you’re trying to write about it, you’re 
trying to teach a class about it.
And even when we do check our knowledge, we often mislead our-
selves. We focus on those snippets of information that we do possess, or 
can easily obtain, but ignore all of the elements that are missing, leaving 
us with the impression that we understand everything we need to. The 
illusion is remarkably per sis tent. Even after completing an entire ex-
periment with Rozenblit, repeatedly playing the “why boy” game, some 
subjects still did not spontaneously check their own knowledge before 
proclaiming that they would have done better with different objects: “If 
you had just asked me about the lock, I could have done that.”
Our tendency to make this error isn’t limited to our thoughts and 
beliefs about physical devices and systems. It happens whenever we have 
a big project to complete, a problem to solve, or an assignment to do. We 
must overcome the temptation to dive in and get started rather than ex-
amine our understanding of the task and its requirements. Avoiding this 
aspect of the illusion of knowledge was the key for Tim Roberts, who 
won the $25,000 top prize in the 2008 edition of a computer program-
ming tournament called the TopCoder Open. He had six hours to write 
a program that met a set of written speciﬁ cations. Unlike his competi-
tors, Roberts spent the ﬁ rst hour studying the specs and asking ques-
tions—“at least 30”— of their author. Only after verifying that he 
completely understood the challenge did he start to code. He completed 
a program that did exactly what was required, and nothing more. But it 
worked, and it was ﬁ nished on time. The time he spent escaping the il-
lusion of knowledge was an investment that paid off handsomely in the 
end.12
The Best- Laid Plans . . .  
The illusion of knowledge makes us think we know how common ob-
jects work when we really don’t, but it is even more inﬂ uential and 

124  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
consequential when we reason about complex systems. Unlike a toilet or 
a bicycle, a complex system has many more interacting parts, and the 
system’s overall behavior cannot be easily determined just by knowing 
how its individual parts behave. Large- scale innovative engineering 
projects, like the construction of the iconic Sydney Opera  House or the 
“Big Dig” in Boston, are classic examples of this sort of complexity.
The Big Dig was a project intended to reor ga nize the transporta-
tion network in downtown Boston.13 In 1948, the Massachusetts gov-
ernment developed a plan to build new highways through and around 
the city in an attempt to address growing trafﬁ c volume on local roads. 
As part of this highway expansion, a thousand buildings  were de-
stroyed and twenty thousand residents  were displaced to erect a two- 
level elevated highway cutting through downtown Boston. Although 
it was six lanes wide, the highway had too many on- and off- ramps and 
it was subject to chronic stop- and- go congestion for eight or more 
hours every day. It was also an eyesore. Disappointment with these re-
sults caused a companion project to be cancelled, further increasing 
the load on the elevated highway.
The main goals of the Big Dig, which entered the planning stage in 
1982,  were to move the downtown portion of the elevated highway 
underground and to build a new tunnel under Boston Harbor to con-
nect the city to Logan International Airport. Several other roads and 
bridges  were added or improved. In 1985, the entire operation was pro-
jected to cost $6 billion. Construction began in 1991, and by the time 
it was completed in 2006, the total cost was nearly $15 billion. Since 
much of the money was borrowed by issuing bonds, the ultimate cost 
by the time all loans are repaid will include an additional $7 billion in 
interest, resulting in a total expense more than 250 percent higher than 
originally planned.
The Big Dig’s cost grew for many reasons. One was the constant need 
to change plans as the project progressed. Ofﬁ cials considered stacking 
elevated highways one hundred feet high at one location in order to get 
trafﬁ c to where it needed to be; in the end that problem was solved by 
constructing a bridge that was the largest of its type ever built. Another 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  125
factor driving up costs was the need to develop new technologies and 
engineering methods to meet the challenges of submerging miles of 
highway in an area already dense with subway lines, railroad tracks, and 
buildings. But why  weren’t these engineering complications foreseen? 
Everybody involved knew that the Big Dig was a public works effort of 
unpre ce dented size and complexity, but nobody realized, at least early 
on, that their estimates of the time and cost to complete it  were little 
more than shots in the dark, and optimistic shots at that. 
It is not as though this sort of underestimate had never happened 
before. The history of architecture is replete with examples of projects 
that turned out to be more difﬁ cult and costly than their designers— 
and the businessmen and politicians who launched them— ever ex-
pected. The Brooklyn Bridge, built between 1870 and 1883, cost twice 
as much as originally planned. The Sydney Opera  House was commis-
sioned by the Australian government in 1959 and designed by Danish 
architect Jørn Utzon over six months in his spare time. It was forecast 
in 1960 to cost 7 million Australian dollars. By the time it was ﬁ n-
ished, the bill came to AU$102 million. (Another AU$45 million will 
need to be spent to bring the building in line with aspects of Utzon’s 
original design that  were not realized.) Antoni Gaudi began to direct 
the construction of the Sagrada Familia Church in Barcelona in 1883, 
and he said in 1886 that he could ﬁ nish it in ten years. It is expected to 
be completed in 2026, a mere one hundred years after his death.14
It is said that “the best- laid plans of mice and men often go awry” and 
that “no battle plan survives contact with the enemy.” Hofstadter’s law 
tells us: “It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into 
account Hofstadter’s Law.”15 The fact that we need these aphorisms to 
remind us of the inherent difﬁ culty of planning demonstrates the 
strength of the illusion of knowledge. The problem is not that our plans 
go awry— after all, the world is more complex than our simple mental 
models and, as Yogi Berra explained, “it’s tough to make predictions, es-
pecially about the future.”16 Even expert project managers don’t get it 
right: They are more accurate than amateurs, but they are still wrong 
one- third of the time.17 We all experience this sort of illusory knowledge, 

126  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
even for simpler projects. We underestimate how long they will take or 
how much they will cost, because what seems simple and straightforward 
in our mind typically turns out to be more complex when our plans en-
counter reality. The problem is that we never learn to take this limitation 
into account. Over and over, the illusion of knowledge convinces us that 
we have a deep understanding of what a project will entail, when all we 
really have is a rough and optimistic guess based on shallow  familiarity.
By now you may be sensing a pattern to the everyday illusions we have 
been discussing: They all tend to cast an overly favorable light on our 
mental capacities. There are no illusions of blindness, amnesia, idiocy, 
and cluelessness. Instead, everyday illusions tell us that we perceive and 
remember more than we do, that  we’re all above average, and that we 
know more about the world and the future than is justiﬁ ed. Everyday il-
lusions might be so per sis tent and pervasive in our thought patterns pre-
cisely because they lead us to think better of ourselves than we objectively 
should. Positive illusions can motivate us to get out of bed and optimisti-
cally take up challenges we might shrink from if we constantly had the 
truth about our minds in mind. If these illusions are in fact driven by a 
bias toward overly positive self- evaluation, then people who are less sub-
ject to this bias also should be less subject to everyday illusions. Indeed, 
people suffering from depression do tend to evaluate themselves more 
negatively and less optimistically, possibly resulting in a more accurate 
view of the relationship between themselves and the world.18
A larger dose of realism in planning ought to help us make better deci-
sions about how to allocate our time and resources. Since the illusion of 
knowledge is an inherent barrier to realism in any plans we draw up for 
our own use, how can we avoid it? The answer is simple to learn, but not 
so simple to execute, and it works only for the kinds of projects that have 
been done many times before— it works if you are writing a report, devel-
oping a piece of software, renovating your  house, or even putting up a new 
ofﬁ ce building, but not if you are planning a one- of- a-kind project like 
the Big Dig. Fortunately, most of the projects you do are not as unique as 
you may think they are. For us, planning this book was a unique and 
unpre ce dented task. But for a publisher trying to  estimate how long it 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  127
would take us to write it, it was similar to all the other nonﬁ ction, two- 
author, three- hundred- page books that have come out in the last few years.
To avoid the illusion of knowledge, start by admitting that your per-
sonal views of how expensive and time- consuming your own seemingly 
unique project will be are probably wrong. It can be hard to do this, 
because you truly do know much more about your own project than 
anyone  else does, but this familiarity gives the false sense that only you 
understand it well enough to plan it out accurately. If instead you seek 
out similar projects that other people or organizations have already com-
pleted (the more similar to yours, the better, of course), you can use the 
actual time and cost of those projects to gauge how long yours will take. 
Taking such an “outside view” of what we normally keep inside our own 
minds dramatically changes the way we see our plans.19
Even if you don’t have access to a database of renovation project time-
lines or software engineering case studies, you can ask other people to 
take a fresh look at your ideas and make their own forecast for the proj-
ect. Not a forecast of how long it would take them to execute the ideas 
(since they too will likely underestimate their own time and costs), but 
of how long it will take you (or your contractors, employees,  etc.) to 
do so. You can also imagine rolling your eyes as someone  else excitedly 
tells you about their own plans to get a project like yours done. Such 
mental simulations can help you adopt an outside view. As a last resort, 
just calling to mind occasions when you  were wildly optimistic (if you 
can be objective enough to recall them— we’ve all been foolish in this 
way more than once in our lives) can help you to reduce the illusion of 
knowledge that distorts your current predictions.20
“Every Time You Think You Know . . . 
Something  Else Happens”
Thirty- two- year- old Brian Hunter was paid at least $75 million in 
2005. His job was to trade futures contracts in energy, especially natu-
ral gas, for a Greenwich, Connecticut, hedge fund called Amaranth 
Advisors. His trading strategy involved placing bets on the future price 

128  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
of gas by buying and selling options. In the summer of 2005, when gas 
was trading at $7– 9 per million BTUs, he predicted that prices would 
rise considerably by early fall, so he loaded up on cheap options to buy 
at prices like $12 that seemed outrageously high to the market at the 
time. When hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma devastated oil plat-
forms and pro cessing plants along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico in 
late summer, prices went over $13. Suddenly, Hunter’s previously over-
priced options  were valuable. With trades like this he generated proﬁ ts 
of more than $1 billion that year for Amaranth and its investors.
By August of the next year, Hunter and his colleagues had racked up 
gains of $2 billion. Gas prices had peaked at over $15 the previous De-
cember, post- Katrina, but  were now in decline. Hunter again placed a 
huge bet  that they would reverse course and rise again. Instead, prices 
plunged, falling below $5. In a single September week, Hunter’s trades 
lost $5 billion, approximately one- half of Amaranth’s total assets. After 
a total loss of approximately $6.5 billion, which at the time was the 
largest publicly disclosed trading loss in history, the fund was forced to 
liquidate.
What went wrong at Amaranth? Brian Hunter, and others at the ﬁ rm, 
believed that they knew more about their world (the energy markets) 
than they actually did. Amaranth’s found er, Nick Maounis, thought 
that Hunter was “really, really good at taking controlled and mea sured 
risk.” But Hunter’s success was due at least as much to unpredictable 
events like hurricanes as to his understanding of the markets. Just be-
fore the blowup, Hunter himself even said, “Every time you think you 
know what these markets can do, something  else happens.” But risk was 
apparently not being managed, and Hunter had not fully accounted 
for the unpredictability of the energy markets. He had actually made 
the same mistake earlier in his career at Deutsche Bank, blaming a one- 
week December 2003 loss of $51 million on “an unpre ce dented and 
unforeseeable run- up in gas prices.”21
Throughout the history of ﬁ nancial markets, investors have formed 
theories to explain why some assets go up and others go down in value, 
and some writers have promoted simple strategies derived from these 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  129
models. The Dow theory, based on the late- nineteenth- century writ-
ings of Wall Street Journal found er Charles Dow, was premised on the 
idea that investors could tell whether an upswing in industrial stocks 
was likely to continue by looking for a similar upswing in transporta-
tion company shares. The “Nifty Fifty” theory of the 1960s and early 
1970s claimed that the best growth would be achieved by ﬁ fty of the 
largest multinational corporations traded on the New York Stock Ex-
change, and those  were therefore the best and— by virtue of their 
size— safest investments. The 1990s saw the “Dogs of the Dow” and 
the “Foolish Four”— models that advocated holding par tic u lar propor-
tions of the stocks from the Dow Jones Industrial Average that paid the 
highest dividends as a percentage of their share prices.22
Just as a lightweight model airplane keeps a few key features of a real 
airplane but leaves out all the rest, each of these theories represents a par-
tic u lar model of how the ﬁ nancial markets work, one that strips down a 
complex system into a simple one that investors can use to make deci-
sions. Behind most patterns of behavior in our everyday lives are mod-
els. They aren’t stated explicitly like the stock market models; rather 
they consist of implicit assumptions about how things work. When 
you are walking down a staircase, your brain automatically maintains 
and updates a model of your physical surroundings that it uses to deter-
mine the force and direction of your leg movements. You only become 
aware of this model when it is wrong— which it is when you expect one 
more step, only to feel a sudden thud when your foot hits the ﬂ oor in-
stead of slicing through empty space.
Albert Einstein is said to have recommended that “everything should 
be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.” The Foolish Four, the 
Nifty Fifty, and their ilk unfortunately fall into the “simpler” category. 
They  can’t adapt to changes in market conditions, they don’t account 
for an inevitable decrease in their proﬁ tability when more people adopt 
the same strategies, and they often assume that trends in historical ﬁ nan-
cial data will recur in the future. By basing their projections so closely on 
past data patterns (a statistical foible known as “overﬁ tting”), they are 
almost guaranteed to go wrong once conditions change.

130  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Even worse are investment strategies that appear to start with a target 
value, usually a nice round marketable number, and then calculate the 
rate of growth in stock prices needed to reach the target. Arguments are 
then retroﬁ tted to the numbers to explain why such a high rate of growth 
is plausible, or even likely. The stock market bubble of the dot- com era 
generated a bumper crop of this nonsense. In October 1999, with the 
Dow Jones Industrial Average at 11,497 after a long run- up, James K. 
Glassman and Kevin Hassett published Dow 36,000, which forecast 
that stock prices would more than triple within six years. Their opti-
mism surpassed that of Dow 30,000 but was no match for Dow 40,000, 
let alone Dow 100,000. (All of these are real books, by different authors, 
and every one of them was selling for just one cent— plus shipping and 
handling, of course— on Amazon .com’s used-book marketplace as of 
April 2009.) The sheer number of these titles testiﬁ es to the large mar-
ket for simple models that investors can easily assimilate and act on 
because they give a false sense of understanding. By the time the stock 
market began to recover from the dot- com bust, more titles appeared, 
including Dow 30,000 by 2008: Why It’s Different This Time.
Illusory Knowledge and a Real Crisis
With hindsight we can see that the implosion of Amaranth in 2006 was 
a harbinger of the much larger ﬁ nancial crisis that came to a head two 
years later. Venerable companies like Bear Stearns and Lehman Broth-
ers went out of business, others like AIG  were driven into government 
control, and the economy plunged into a deep recession. The world ﬁ -
nancial system is perhaps the ultimate complex system: It reﬂ ects deci-
sions made by literally billions of people every day, and those decisions 
are all based on beliefs about how much, or how little, various investors 
know. Any time you buy an individual stock, you are acting on an im-
plicit belief that the market has undervalued the stock. Your purchase 
represents a claim that you have better knowledge than most other in-
vestors about the future value of that stock.
Consider the biggest investment that most people make: their  house.23 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  131
Most people view the decision about what  house to buy as, at least in 
part, an investing decision. They wonder whether a  house will have good 
“resale value” or whether it is in an “up- and- coming” or “declining” 
neighborhood. Some people make a business of buying, improving, and 
selling the  houses they live in, a practice called “ﬂ ipping” that was pro-
moted heavily by tele vi sion shows like Property Ladder and Flip That 
 House in the mid- 2000s. At that time, the number of people who 
thought  houses  were a good investment was rising dramatically.24 Even 
if you have never been a  house ﬂ ipper, you may still think of your  house 
in part as a savings account, an asset you expect to appreciate in value 
over the medium- to- long term. Flipping is based on a model of the real 
estate market in which the prices of  houses can also be counted on to 
increase in the short term, and the demand for them is always strong.
Acting on this model, people with no experience investing in real 
estate started buying  houses on credit with the intent of selling them 
quickly at a proﬁ t. The speculative cycle was exacerbated, of course, by 
the willingness of banks to make loans that would probably never be 
repaid. Alberto Ramirez, a strawberry picker who lived in Watsonville, 
California, and earned about $15,000 a year, was able to buy a  house for 
$720,000 without putting any money down; naturally he soon found 
that he  couldn’t afford the payments. The apotheosis of subprime lend-
ing gimmicks was mortgage company HCL Finance’s “ninja” loan— no 
income, no job, no assets. Harvard economist Ed Glaeser, explaining 
why he did not foresee the bubble and ensuing crash in the housing mar-
ket, said, “I underestimated the human capacity to think rosy thoughts 
about the value of a  house.”25
Flawed models of the housing market extended well beyond individual 
homeowners and speculators, of course. Large banks and government- 
backed corporations purchased mortgages and resold them in groups 
to other investors as mortgage- backed securities, which  were them-
selves packaged together into the infamous collateralized debt obliga-
tions (CDOs). The bond- rating agencies— Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, 
and Fitch— used complex statistical models to evaluate the riskiness of 
these new securities. But behind these models lay simple assumptions 

132  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
that— when they no longer applied— undermined the entire ediﬁ ce. As 
late as 2007, Moody’s was still using a model that had been built using 
data from the period before 2002— before the era of massive overbuild-
ing, ninja loans, and strawberry pickers buying luxury homes. That is, 
despite the changes in the market, the model assumed that mortgage 
borrowers of 2007 would default at about the same rate as the mortgage 
borrowers of 2002. When the housing bubble burst, a general recession 
ensued, and the rate of mortgage defaults diverged from historical norms. 
As a result, many CDOs turned out to be riskier than the models had 
predicted, and ﬁ rms that had invested in them lost a lot of money.
It can be difﬁ cult to determine how well our simple models corre-
spond to the realities of complex systems, but it is easy to determine 
three things: (1) how well we understand our simple models; (2) how 
familiar we are with the surface elements, concepts, and vocabulary of 
the complex system; and (3) how much information we are aware of, and 
can easily access, about the complex system. We then take our knowl-
edge of these par tic u lar things as signals that we understand the system 
as a  whole— an utterly unwarranted inference that can quickly land us 
in hot water. Analysts understood their models, they  were familiar with 
the vocabulary of subprime mortgages, CDOs, and the like, and they 
 were swimming in a river of ﬁ nancial data and news, giving them the 
illusion that they understood the housing market itself—an illusion that 
persisted until the market collapsed.26 With more and more ﬁ nancial 
information available at higher speed and lower cost (think CNBC, 
Yahoo! Finance, and online discount stockbrokers), the conditions for 
this illusion have spread from professional market participants to ordi-
nary individual investors.
In a brilliant article for Condé Nast Portfolio, journalist Michael 
Lewis tells the story of a hedge fund manager named Steve Eisman who 
was one of the few to see through the smoke and mirrors of the housing 
boom and the CDO markets. Eisman looked into some complicated 
mortgage securities and had trouble understanding their terms, despite 
his many years of experience as a trader. Dan Gertner, a writer for Grant’s 
Interest Rate Observer, had a similar experience; he actually read through 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  133
the several hundred pages that constituted the complete documentation 
for a CDO— something none of its investors probably ever did— and 
after days of study still  couldn’t ﬁ gure out how it really worked.
The central issue for any complex investment is how to properly de-
termine its value. In this case, the value was obscured by layer upon 
layer of untestable assumptions, but buyers and sellers deceived them-
selves into thinking they understood both the value and the risk. Eis-
man would go to meetings and ask CDO salespeople to explain their 
products to him, and when they spouted some gobbledygook, he would 
ask them to explain what exactly they meant. Essentially, he played 
Leon Rozenblit’s “why boy,” gradually exposing whether the CDO 
vendors really knew their own products. “You ﬁ gure out if they even 
know what they’re talking about,” said one of Eisman’s partners. “And 
a lot of times, they don’t!” He might just as well have asked them to 
explain how their toilets worked.
You don’t have to be a seller of newfangled securities to let the sur-
face familiarity of ﬁ nancial terms and concepts blind you into thinking 
you know more about the markets than you really do. For a few years, 
Chris made a specialty of investing in small biotechnology and phar-
maceutical companies that focused on developing treatments for brain 
diseases. A couple of his stocks did well for a time, increasing by over 
500 percent in one case. He started to believe that he actually had some 
talent for picking stocks in this sector, and easily came up with reasons 
why: He knew a lot of neuroscience and some ge ne tics, and he was 
competent at designing experiments and analyzing data, which is the 
core discipline behind the clinical trials that are used to decide whether 
drugs can jump over all the regulatory hurdles to reach patients. But 
the sample of his stock- picking experience was orders of magnitude too 
small to demonstrate any real skill— luck was the most likely explana-
tion for his success. That interpretation seems to have been conﬁ rmed: 
Most of his picks lost three- quarters or more of their value in the end.
If you  can’t escape the illusion entirely and still think of yourself as a 
knowledgeable stock picker, you might try to limit how much the illusion 
can affect you by allocating just a small proportion of your assets to 

134  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 active investment decisions, and thinking of those investments at least 
partly as a hobby. The rest of your money could be dedicated to strate-
gies that are less subject to the illusion of knowledge, such as passively 
investing in index funds that just track the movements of the overall 
market. That’s also a reasonable plan for a gambler who wants to keep 
his or her hobby under control: Set aside a small bankroll and focus on 
the entertainment that comes from the practice rather than counting 
on it to generate signiﬁ cant income. Chris has abandoned stock picking 
entirely, and he keeps his poker money in a separate bank account.
Sometimes More Is Less
Imagine that you are a subject in the following experiment, conducted by 
pioneering behavioral economist Richard Thaler and his colleagues.27 
You are told that you are in charge of managing the endowment port-
folio of a small college and investing it in a simulated ﬁ nancial market. 
The market consists entirely of just two mutual funds, A and B, and you 
start with a hundred shares that you must allocate between the two. You 
can put all of your shares into A, all of them into B, or some into A and 
the rest into B. You will be running the portfolio for twenty- ﬁ ve simu-
lated years. Every so often, you will be informed of how each fund has 
performed, and thus whether your shares have gone up or down in value, 
and you will then have the opportunity to change how your shares are 
allocated. At the end of the simulation, you will be paid an amount that 
is proportional to how well your shares have performed, so you have an 
incentive to do as well as you can. Before the game begins, however, you 
have to choose how often you would like to receive the feedback and have 
the chance to change your allocations: every month, every year, or every 
ﬁ ve years (of simulated time).
The correct answer seems obvious: Give us information, and let us 
use that information, as often as possible! Thaler’s group tested whether 
this intuitive answer is right— not by giving people the choice, but by 
randomly assigning them to receive feedback monthly, yearly, or every 
ﬁ ve years. Most people initially tried a 50/50 allocation between the two 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  135
funds since they knew nothing about which might be better. As they 
got information about the per for mance of the funds, they shifted their 
allocations. Since the simulated length of the experiment was twenty- 
ﬁ ve years, the subjects in the ﬁ ve- year condition got feedback and could 
change their allocations only a few times, compared with hundreds of 
times for the subjects in the monthly condition. By the end of the ex-
periment, subjects who only got per for mance information once every 
ﬁ ve years earned more than twice as much as those who got monthly 
feedback.
How could having sixty times as many pieces of information and op-
portunities to adjust their portfolios have caused the monthly- feedback 
investors to do worse than the ﬁ ve- year ones? The answer lies partly in 
the nature of the two funds the investors had to choose from. The ﬁ rst 
had a low average rate of return but was fairly safe— it didn’t vary much 
from month to month and rarely lost money. It was designed to simu-
late a mutual fund consisting of bonds. The second was like a stock 
mutual fund: It had a much higher rate of return, but also a much 
higher variance, so that it lost money in about 40 percent of the months.
In the long run, the best returns resulted from investing all of the 
money in the stock fund, since the higher return made up for the losses. 
Over a one- year or ﬁ ve- year period, the occasional monthly losses in the 
stock fund  were canceled out by gains, so the stock fund rarely had a 
losing year and never had a losing ﬁ ve- year stretch. In the monthly 
 condition, when subjects saw losses in the stock fund, they tended to 
shift their money to the safer bond fund, thereby hurting their long- 
term per for mance. Subjects who received feedback every year or every 
ﬁ ve years saw that the stock fund outperformed the bond fund, but 
they did not see the difference in variability. At the end of the experi-
ment, the subjects in the ﬁ ve- year condition had 66 percent of their 
money in the stock fund, compared with only 40 percent for the sub-
jects in the monthly condition.
What went wrong for the subjects who got monthly feedback? 
They got a lot of information, but it was short- term information that 
was not representative of the true, long- term pattern of per for mance 

136  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
for the two funds. The short- term information created an illusion of 
knowledge— knowledge that the stock fund was too risky, in this case. 
The monthly- feedback subjects had all the information they needed 
to generate actual knowledge— that the stock fund was the better 
long- term investment— but they didn’t manage to do so.
The same thing happens in the real world of investing decisions. 
Brad Barber and Terrance Odean managed to obtain six years of trad-
ing rec ords for sixty thousand accounts from a brokerage ﬁ rm and com-
pared investment returns between people who bought and sold stocks 
frequently and those who traded rarely. Presumably investors who make 
lots of trades believe that they have lots of knowledge and good ideas 
about stocks—that each of their trades will make money because it is 
anticipating a market move. But once their returns  were adjusted for 
the costs and tax payments generated by all the trades they made, the 
most active traders earned one- third less per year than the least active 
ones.28
Professional and amateur investors alike should seek the best rates of 
return they can get, balanced against the level of risk they are taking. 
Individual investors in par tic u lar may be better off paying more attention 
to the riskiness of their portfolios than they currently do. Earning an 
extra few percentage points on your money may not be worth the anxi-
ety, lost sleep, and bad temper that can accompany the volatility of large 
price swings. To make truly informed ﬁ nancial decisions, you must 
have an accurate picture of the long-term returns and short-term vola-
tility you should expect from each of your investment options, and 
you must evaluate these factors in light of your own ability to tolerate 
risk.
We are generally taught that it is better to have more information 
than to have less. Who  wouldn’t want to consult Consumer Reports be-
fore purchasing a car or a dishwasher? Who  wouldn’t want to know the 
price of a ﬂ at- screen TV at three different stores rather than just one? 
And in these cases, more information does make for better decisions (at 
least up to a point). The studies we just presented, and others like them, 
suggest that investors who have more information also believe that they 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  137
have better knowledge. But when that information is in fact uninfor-
mative, it only feeds the illusion of knowledge. In reality, most short- 
term ﬂ uctuations in value are unrelated to longer- term rates of return 
and should not determine your investment decisions (unless you are 
investing money that you might need in the near future, of course). 
When it comes to assessing the long- term characteristics of an invest-
ment, sometimes having more information can result in less real un-
derstanding. What the Thaler group’s experiment showed was that 
paradoxically, people who got the most feedback about the short- term 
risks  were least likely to acquire knowledge of the long- term returns.
The illusion of knowledge  can’t predict the timing and magnitude of 
each ﬁ nancial bubble— in fact, knowing about the illusion should make 
us just as wary of attempts to predict price drops as price increases. The 
illusion of knowledge does appear to be a necessary ingredient for the for-
mation of bubbles, though. Each historical bubble has been associated 
with a piece of new “knowledge” that was disseminated so widely that 
it eventually reached people who knew nothing  else about ﬁ nance ex-
cept for that one piece of information (tulip bulbs are a  can’t-lose invest-
ment, the Internet will fundamentally change what companies are 
worth, the Dow is going to 36,000, real estate never loses value, and so 
on). The proliferation of information about ﬁ nance, from cable news 
networks to websites to business magazines, is a recipe for the illusory 
feeling that we know how the markets work, when all we really have is a 
lot of information about what they are doing at the moment, what they 
have done in the past, and how people think they work, none of which 
necessarily predicts what they will do in the future. Familiarity with the 
language of ﬁ nance and the immediacy of market changes often masks 
a lack of deep knowledge, and the increasingly rapid ﬂ ow of informa-
tion may even shorten the cycle of booms and busts in the future.
The Power of Familiarity
Much as we cannot focus attention on more than a limited subset of 
our world and we cannot remember everything around us, the illusion 

138  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
of knowledge is a by- product of an otherwise effective and useful men-
tal pro cess. We rarely need to explain why something works. Rather, we 
just need to understand how to work it. We need to understand how to 
unclog a toilet, but we don’t need to know how ﬂ ushing the toilet causes 
water to empty from the bowl and then to ﬁ ll it back up. Our ability to 
operate a toilet when we need to— and to do so without even thinking 
about the process— gives us a sense that we understand it. And for most 
practical purposes, that is all the understanding we really need.
In Chapter 2, we discussed the error of “change blindness blindness”— 
the idea that people think they will notice changes that, in reality, they 
rarely do. People easily confuse what they actually remember with what 
they potentially could remember if given the chance to study things fur-
ther. Stop reading now and draw a picture of the face of a penny, or form 
an image of one in your mind. Odds are that your image has at least a 
couple of errors— you might have Lincoln facing the wrong direction, or 
you might have put the date in the wrong place, or you might have for-
gotten to include the date altogether. You have seen pennies every day 
for years, and before now you probably thought you knew what a penny 
looked like. You do know enough to tell a penny apart from other coins, 
which is the only knowledge you really need.29
Ronald Rensink, a vision scientist at the University of British Colum-
bia and a leader in the study of change blindness, has made the interest-
ing proposal that the mind works much like a Web browser. Chris’s 
father, a smart man born long before the digital computer was invented, 
has asked Chris several times over the years to explain how all the infor-
mation from the Internet gets into his “set,” his quaint name for his 
iMac. Most of us know that the contents of the Internet are distributed 
across millions of computers around the world, rather than being dupli-
cated inside every desktop computer. But if you had a fast enough Inter-
net connection and there  were fast enough servers on the network, you 
would not be able to see any difference between these two accounts of 
how the Internet works. From your perspective, the information you 
want arrives as soon as you request it; you follow a link with your Web 
browser, and the contents of the page appear almost immediately. The 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  139
perception that the Web is stored locally on your computer is a reason-
able misunderstanding, and in most cases, one that would make no 
difference to you. When your Internet connection goes down, though, 
your “set” no longer has access to the information you thought was 
inside it. Similarly, the experiments in which we don’t notice people 
changing into other people reveal how little information we store in our 
memories. We don’t need to store this information any more than our 
computers need to store the contents of the Web— in each case, under 
normal circumstances, we can obtain the information on demand, 
whether by looking at the person standing in front of us or by accessing 
sites on the Internet.30
Neurobabble and Brain Porn
Companies often prey on the illusion of knowledge to hawk their wares, 
emphasizing technical details in a way that leads people to think they 
understand how a product works. For example, audiophiles and audio 
cable manufacturers regularly wax poetic about the quality of the cables 
that connect different system components. Cable manufacturers tout the 
superior shielding on their cables, greater dynamic range, higher- quality 
copper, gold- plated connectors, and cleaner sound. Reviewers say that 
the cables make their old speakers sound like new ones, and that there is 
simply no comparison between the high- end cables and regular cables. 
In at least one informal experiment, though, audiophiles in a blind test 
could not distinguish one expensive set of cables from wire coat hangers 
used as speaker cables!31 All of the high- tech cable technology made little 
difference in the sound of the music. Of course, it is possible that the 
other components in their stereo systems might have been of insufﬁ cient 
quality to reveal the difference, but most people listening to music or 
watching movies on a home theater system  wouldn’t have the sort of 
equipment necessary to detect the difference either.
The hype is much funnier in the case of cables that transmit digital 
signals. As long as a cable is able to transmit the 0s and 1s that make up 
a digital signal, the quality of the wire  doesn’t matter one bit. The factor 

140  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
that matters is the protocol used to generate and interpret those 0s 
and 1s. Modern stereo systems and video systems use digital stan-
dards such as HDMI to transfer information from one component to 
another. Yet prices on HDMI cables vary by more than a factor of 
ten: A cable that costs $5 will transmit the signal just as well as a 
cable that costs $50. Denon even sells a 1.5- meter Ethernet cable for 
audio systems that is priced at $500. Here is the product description 
at  Amazon .com: 
Get the purest digital audio you’ve ever experienced from multi- 
channel DVD and CD playback through your Denon home 
theater receiver with the AK- DL1 dedicated cable. Made of 
high- purity copper wire, it’s designed to thoroughly eliminate 
adverse effects from vibration and helps stabilize the digital 
transmission from occurrences of jitter and ripple. A tin- bearing 
copper alloy is used for the cable’s shield while the insulation is 
made of a ﬂ uoropolymer material with superior heat re sis tance, 
weather re sis tance, and anti- aging properties. The connector 
features a rounded plug lever to prevent bending or breaking 
and direction marks to indicate correct direction for connecting 
cable.
Apparently, some people have actually bought this product, but as 
reviewers on Amazon .com point out, since the signal is digital rather 
than analog, there is no reason to expect any difference in sound qual-
ity between this cable and an ordinary Ethernet cable you can get from 
your local dollar store. It’s not even clear what “jitter” and “ripple” 
mean, why vibration matters for a stream of 0s and 1s, or how ﬂ uo-
ropolymers prevent aging. Most of the hundreds of reviews of this 
product on Amazon .com are facetious, and the ﬁ ve most commonly 
associated customer tags for it include “snake oil,” “ripoff,” “waste of 
money,” “throwing your money away,” and “unconscionable.”32
A group of researchers in the Yale psychology department, including 
Dan’s graduate school adviser, Frank Keil, and our friend Jeremy Gray, 
conducted a mischievous experiment in which subjects read passages 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  141
of text that included some uninformative babble like the description of 
Denon’s cable. Each passage began with a straightforward summary of 
a psychology experiment like the following:
Researchers created a list of facts that about 50% of people 
knew. Subjects then read the list and noted which ones they al-
ready knew. They then judged what percentage of other people 
would know those facts. When subjects knew a fact, they 
thought that an inaccurately large percentage of others would 
know it, too. For example, a subject who already knew that 
Hartford was the capital of Connecticut might think that 80% 
of other people would know it, even though only 50% actually 
do. The researchers call this ﬁ nding “the curse of knowledge.”
After reading this passage, subjects would then read either a good or 
a bad explanation for the “curse of knowledge.” The “bad” explanation 
for the curse of knowledge was the following: “This ‘curse’ happens 
because subjects make more mistakes when they have to judge the 
knowledge of others. People are better at judging what they themselves 
know.” Note that this explanation  doesn’t actually tell us anything 
about the “curse of knowledge.” The experiment showed that people 
judge the knowledge of others differently depending on whether they 
themselves have the knowledge. It said nothing about whether we are 
better at judging our own knowledge or the knowledge of others.
In contrast, a “good” explanation read as follows: “This ‘curse’ hap-
pens because subjects have trouble switching their point of view to 
 consider what someone  else might know, mistakenly projecting their 
own knowledge onto others.” This explanation is good because it ex-
plains the curse of knowledge in terms of a broader principle about our 
minds— the difﬁ culty we have in adopting another person’s perspec-
tive. The explanation may or may not be scientiﬁ cally correct, but at 
least it is logically relevant.
Each subject read a series of these passages and explanations and 
rated how satisfying each explanation was. Generally, people rated the 
good explanations as more satisfying— they recognized that the good 

142  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
explanations actually said something to explain the experimental result, 
and the bad ones  were largely irrelevant.
The twist in the experiment came from a third condition, in which 
irrelevant information about the brain was added to the bad explana-
tion: “Brain scans indicate that this ‘curse’ happens because of the fron-
tal lobe brain circuitry known to be involved in self- knowledge. Subjects 
make more mistakes when they have to judge the knowledge of others. 
People are much better at judging what they themselves know.”
Much as the technobabble in the cable description on Amazon.com 
doesn’t turn a $2 bundle of wires into a $500 gadget, this superﬂ uous 
brain- talk, which we like to call “neurobabble,” does nothing to rescue 
the validity of the bad psychological explanation. But the subjects 
rated the bad explanations that included neurobabble as more satisfy-
ing than those that did not. The neurobabble induced an illusion of 
knowledge; it made the bad explanations seem like they imparted 
more understanding than they actually did. Even students in an intro-
ductory neuroscience course  were inﬂ uenced. Fortunately, neurosci-
ence graduate students had enough actual understanding to immunize 
them to the neurobabble.33
The cousin of neurobabble is “brain porn,” the colorful images of 
blobs of activity on brain scans that can seduce us into thinking we have 
learned more about the brain (and the mind) than we really have. Neu-
roscientists have recognized that these pictures can sometimes be more 
of a sales tool for their research than a true aid to understanding. In one 
clever experiment, David McCabe and Alan Castel had subjects read 
one of two descriptions of a ﬁ ctitious research study. The text was identi-
cal, but one description was accompanied by a typical three- dimensional 
brain image with activated areas drawn in color, while the other included 
only an ordinary bar graph of the same data. Subjects who read the ver-
sion with the brain porn thought that the article was signiﬁ cantly better 
written and made more sense. The kicker is that none of the ﬁ ctitious 
studies actually made any sense— they all described dubious claims that 
 were not at all improved by the decorative brain scans.34
Neurobabble has crept into advertising, alongside technobabble and 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  143
other irrelevant information that makes consumers feel that they un-
derstand something better than they really do. In a ubiquitous maga-
zine ad, Allstate Insurance asks, “Why do most 16- year- olds drive like 
they’re missing a part of their brain?” and answers, “Because they are.” 
The company attributes their risky driving to an immature dorsal lat-
eral prefrontal cortex, a region critical for “decision making, problem 
solving and understanding future consequences of today’s actions.” Be-
neath the headline, a cartoon depicts a brain with a car- shaped hole 
right in this location.35 The ad copy might be right about the science, 
but the information about the brain is entirely irrelevant to its point. 
Teenagers are indeed risky drivers, but that’s all you need to know to be 
persuaded that parents should talk more to their children about road 
safety, which is the point of Allstate’s ad. If you’re more likely to talk to 
your kids (or to buy Allstate’s insurance) because you know what part 
of the brain is responsible for risk- taking, you are a victim of the illu-
sion of knowledge— courtesy of neurobabble and brain porn.
There’s a 50 Percent Chance the Weather Will Be Great, 
Sort of Wish You  Were  Here
In the 2005 comedy- drama The Weather Man, the title character (played 
by Nicolas Cage) is paid well but receives little respect for his job, which 
consists entirely of acting authoritative while reading forecasts prepared 
by others. It’s easy to mock a class of professionals whose work comes to 
mind mainly when a game is rained out or a ﬂ ight is delayed. There are 
some places, though, where the weather really is important news, and 
accurate weather forecasts can make millions or even billions of dollars 
of difference in people’s lives. Dan lives in Champaign, a college town in 
east- central Illinois. The University of Illinois, where he teaches, is the 
largest employer in the area, but the dominant economic force in the 
region is large- scale farming of corn and soybeans. Illinois produces a 
larger soybean crop than any other state and is the second- largest corn 
producer.36 The weather inﬂ uences all of the important decisions a 
farmer makes, including when to plant and harvest, what to plant, and 

144  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
how to plan ahead for future supply and demand. Farmers in Illinois 
monitor conditions far outside their own region. A bumper corn crop 
during Argentina’s summer can affect which crops Illinois farmers plant 
in the spring. Even the world markets for oil and other forms of energy 
affect planting decisions, since Illinois corn is responsible for 40 percent 
of the ethanol produced in the United States.
Few National Public Radio stations have more than one weather 
forecaster on staff, and even fewer have one with a meteorology degree. 
The Champaign NPR station, WILL, has one full- time meteorologist, 
two part- time meteorologists, and another weather forecaster on staff. 
WILL gives detailed weather forecasts throughout the day, devoting as 
much time to the weather as any station in the United States. It has to, 
because farmers depend on weather forecasts for their livelihood.37 If 
weather forecasters really know how much they know—in technical 
terms, if they are “well calibrated”— then farmers can rely on their pre-
dictions when making major decisions.
Although people have attempted to predict the weather for millen-
nia, the ﬁ rst published forecast appeared in print less than 150 years 
ago, in Cincinnati on September 1, 1869: “Cloudy and warm this eve-
ning. Tomorrow clear.”38 The addition of probabilities expressed as per-
centages didn’t begin until 1920, when Cleve Hallenbeck, the head of 
the U.S. Weather Bureau ofﬁ ce in Roswell, New Mexico, published an 
article advocating their use. Hallenbeck had tested his method with an 
informal experiment that lasted 220 days. On each day he estimated 
the probability of rain and then recorded whether it rained. His fore-
casts turned out to be remarkably well calibrated: It rained on most of 
his high- probability days and on few of his low- probability days. How-
ever, only in 1965 did the U.S. National Weather Ser vice begin to regu-
larly include percentage probabilities of rain in its forecasts. In 1980, 
meteorologists Jerome Charba and William Klein undertook a massive 
examination of more than 150,000 precipitation forecasts during the two 
years from 1977 to 1979. The forecasted likelihood of rain matched the 
actual probability of rain almost perfectly. Tellingly, the only systematic 
errors happened when the forecasters assigned a 100 percent chance of 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  145
rain— it turned out to rain on only about 90 percent of those days. Be-
ware of certainty!
What makes weather forecasts, at least good ones, different from 
other forms of reasoning and prediction? When meteorologists say that 
there is a 60 percent chance of rain, they are estimating the probability 
that, given the existing atmospheric conditions, it actually will rain. And 
these estimates are highly accurate over a long series of forecasts. Meteo-
rologists continually adjust their predictions— and the mathematical 
and statistical models and computer programs that generate those 
predictions— based on feedback from previous predictions. If a 60 per-
cent probability of rain is attached to certain climate patterns, but it only 
rains 40 percent of the time, then the models are reﬁ ned so that the next 
time those atmospheric conditions occur, the estimated probability of 
rain will be lower. Weather forecasting is unusual in that forecasters re-
ceive immediate and deﬁ nitive feedback about their predictions, and 
their knowledge of probabilities accumulates over time. For example, 
during the period from 1966 through 1978, skill at forecasting precipita-
tion thirty- six hours in advance nearly doubled.39
Like weather forecasters, when we receive appropriate feedback, we 
can sometimes calibrate our judgments and eliminate the illusion of 
knowledge. In a demonstration Dan has used in an introductory psychol-
ogy class, students are each given a playing card, which they proceed to 
hold to their forehead so that they  can’t see it, but everyone  else can.40 
Then each person in the class tries to get the person with the highest pos-
sible card to pair up with him or her. Remember, the students  can’t see 
their own card, but they can see everyone  else’s—so they can see who re-
jects them.
Initially, most people in the class will try to pair up with an Ace or 
King (the highest cards), but most will be rejected. Only those who 
have a really high card are likely to be accepted by someone who has an 
Ace or a King. People with an Ace or King don’t know what they have, 
but they know that they really  can’t do better than an Ace or King and 
they aren’t likely to accept an invitation from someone with a 6 or 7— 
they hope to match with someone higher. Surprisingly, people pair off 

146  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
quite quickly with others who have cards comparable to their own. 
They are able to rapidly use the feedback they get from rejection to 
calibrate their expectations. The same principle can be used to explain 
why people of widely different attractiveness rarely end up as couples41— 
people reach for the best they can get, and dating allows for some cali-
bration of your self- impressions.
The card- matching game and the real world of dating and mating 
provide immediate and direct (and sometimes painful) feedback in the 
form of rejection. Unfortunately, for most of the judgments that we 
make in our lives, we never receive the precise feedback that weather 
forecasters do of seeing the next morning whether we  were right or 
wrong, day after day, year after year. This is an important difference 
between meteorology and ﬁ elds like medicine. Information about the 
correctness of a diagnosis, or the outcome of a surgical procedure, is 
available in principle. In practice, though, it is rarely collected system-
atically, stored, and analyzed the way data about the weather is; a doc-
tor who diagnoses pneumonia and prescribes a treatment will have to 
wait awhile to learn—or may never learn—whether the treatment 
worked. Even then it may be difﬁ cult to distinguish the effects of the 
treatment from improvements that happened spontaneously. If you’ve 
recently switched from a ﬁ lm camera to a digital camera, you have ex-
perienced the beneﬁ ts of instant feedback. You no longer have to wait 
for your ﬁ lm to be developed before you know what you did wrong (or 
right) in composing your shots. And when you do make a mistake, you 
can ﬁ x it right away. As any student knows, whether in photography, 
psychology, or business, it’s harder to improve if you don’t get immedi-
ate feedback about your mistakes.
Why Does the Illusion of Knowledge Persist?
Scientists, architects, and hedge fund managers are respected, but weather 
forecasters are parodied. Yet weather forecasters have fewer illusions about 
their own knowledge than do members of these other professions. In 
Chapter 3 we saw that doctors who consulted books and computers  were 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  147
underappreciated by patients, whereas a rape victim who expressed no 
doubt in her testimony was praised as a model witness. There we argued 
that our love of conﬁ dence can reward people for acting as though they 
are more skilled and accurate than they really are. The illusion of knowl-
edge has similar consequences: We seem to prefer the advice of experts 
who act like they know more than they really do— or who honestly be-
lieve their knowledge is greater than it is.
Do people actually prefer expressions of knowledge that exude more 
certainty to more tentative statements, even when the tentative ones are 
better calibrated? Try answering the following simple question devised 
by the Dutch psychologist Gideon Keren:
Listed below are four- day weather forecasts for the probability of 
rain, made by two meteorologists, Anna and Betty:
 
monday 
tuesday 
wednesday 
thursday
Anna’s Forecast: 
90% 
90% 
90% 
90%
Betty’s Forecast: 
75% 
75% 
75% 
75%
As it turned out, it rained on three out of the four days. Who, in 
your opinion, was a better forecaster: Anna or Betty?
This question pits our preferences for accuracy and certainty against 
each other. Betty said it should rain 75 percent of the time, and it did, 
so her predictions reﬂ ected no illusion of knowledge. Anna thought she 
knew more about the likelihood of rain than she really did: It would 
have to have rained on all four days for her forecasts to be more accu-
rate than Betty’s. When we conducted an experiment using a variant 
of this question, nearly half of our subjects, however, preferred Anna’s 
forecast.42
The conditions of this experiment differ from most real- world situa-
tions, in which we rarely get to choose among experts with such clear 
track rec ords of success or failure in prediction. A study of experts on 
international politics—a ﬁ eld in which it can take years or decades to 
see whether predictions are borne out—found that their forecasts  were 

148  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
signiﬁ cantly less accurate than those of simple statistical models. The 
way the forecasts  were worse was revealing: In general, the experts pre-
dicted that po liti cal and economic conditions would change (for the 
better or the worse) more often than they actually did. So a strategy of 
simply assuming that the future will be the same as the present would 
have yielded more accurate predictions (but probably less airtime for the 
pundit). Unlike the weather forecasting experiment, though, people lis-
tening to these po liti cal experts have no way to tell in advance how ac-
curate their forecasts will be.43 Compared to the laboratory, in the real 
world it’s much harder to make a correct choice, precisely because we ei-
ther lack the necessary information, or we have it but lack the time, atten-
tion, and insight we need to evaluate it properly.
The Anna/Betty experiment shows that even when we have all the 
necessary information to recognize which expert knows the limits of 
her own knowledge, we often prefer the one who does not. Self- help 
authors who say precisely what to do (“eat this, not that”) have larger 
audiences than those who give a menu of reasonable options for read-
ers to try out in order to ﬁ nd out what works best for them. TV stock- 
picking guru Jim  Cramer tells you to “buy buy buy” or “sell sell sell” 
(with a hearty “Boo- yah!”) rather than to analyze investment ideas in 
the context of your overall ﬁ nancial goals, weighting of different types of 
assets, and other nuanced considerations that might undermine the daz-
zling sense of conviction that he exudes.44
So the illusion of knowledge persists in part because people prefer ex-
perts who think they know more than they really do. People who know 
the limits of their knowledge say things like “there is a 75 percent chance 
of rain,” while people who don’t know those limits express undue cer-
tainty. Yet even those with the best understanding of their ﬁ eld can fall 
prey to the illusion of knowledge. Recall the scientists who made mis-
guided predictions about the number of human genes, the limits of 
natural resources, and the promise of chess- playing computers. These 
scientists  were far from marginal ﬁ gures or failures in their ﬁ elds. Eric 
Lander, who mispredicted the number of human genes, and John 
Holdren, who wrongly forecast ever- rising commodity prices, went on to 

SHOULD YOU BE MORE LIKE A WEATHER FORECASTER OR A HEDGE FUND MANAGER?  149
become science advisers in Barack Obama’s administration. Paul Ehrlich 
received a MacArthur Foundation “genius” award worth $345,000 
in 1990, the same year he lost his bet about commodity prices. And 
Herbert Simon won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1978— for his 
 “pioneering research on the decision- making pro cesses within economic 
organizations,” not for his ability to forecast the results of chess matches.45
In none of these cases did the illusion of knowledge cost people their 
livelihoods, but in others it has. The archetype of the successful inves-
tor is not someone who hedges his bets carefully and makes sure that 
his asset allocation and leverage reﬂ ect an appropriate level of uncer-
tainty about the future. It is one who makes bold moves— who gambles 
it all and wins. The illusion of knowledge is so strong that we eagerly 
welcome back into the fold people who win for a while and then go too 
far and lose it all. In 2007, despite his disastrous losses at Amaranth and 
Deutsche Bank, and despite having been formally charged with market 
manipulation by the U.S. government, Brian Hunter was raising capital 
for a new hedge fund— as did the disgraced found ers of Long- Term 
Capital Management and other failed funds before him.46

5
C H A P T E R
jumping to conclusions
O
n may 29, 2005, a six- year- old girl was hospitalized in Cincinnati, 
where she’d been visiting relatives. She was dehydrated, had a fever 
and a rash, and had to spend days in the hospital on a ventilator. The 
hospital sent a blood sample to the Ohio State Department of Health 
Laboratory for testing, and the result conﬁ rmed their initial diagnosis: 
She had measles.1
Measles is among the most infectious viruses affecting children. When 
a person with measles sneezes, another person can contract the dis-
ease just by breathing the air in the room or touching a contaminated 
surface— the virus remains active for up to two hours. The rash is the 
ﬁ rst visible evidence that distinguishes the measles infection from other 
viruses, but the disease is contagious for four days before the rash ap-
pears. Moreover, someone exposed to measles might show no symp-
toms at all for up to two weeks.
The combination of delayed onset of symptoms, the potential for 
carriers to spread the disease before they know they are infected, and the 
highly infectious nature of the virus itself creates a perfect recipe for epi-
demics. Before the 1970s, measles was so prevalent, even in the United 
States, that it was unusual for children not to get it. It’s still prevalent 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  151
throughout much of the world; according to the World Health Or ga ni-
za tion (WHO), nearly two hundred thousand people died from mea-
sles infection in 2007 alone, and it remains a leading cause of death in 
children worldwide.
Serious complications of the disease include blindness, severe dehy-
dration, diarrhea, encephalitis, and pneumonia. In poorer, developing 
countries with inadequate health care and high rates of malnutrition, 
measles outbreaks can be catastrophic; the WHO estimates death rates 
as high as 10 percent from outbreaks in such regions. In wealthier coun-
tries with effective health care systems, measles rarely causes death, but 
it can cause serious complications for people with existing health prob-
lems like asthma.
The elimination of measles is one of the great success stories for pro-
grams of systematic vaccination. Cases of measles in the United States 
are exceptionally rare today because of the effectiveness of the combina-
tion MMR vaccine that inoculates against measles, mumps, and ru-
bella. Mandatory MMR vaccination of children before they enter the 
public school system largely eliminated measles from the United States 
by the year 2000. Vaccination levels of 90 percent of the population are 
needed to effectively prevent epidemics, and the United States has ex-
ceeded that threshold for more than a de cade. So how did a six- year- old 
girl in Cincinnati get the disease?
Measles is still endemic in parts of Eu rope where vaccination pro-
grams are voluntary, and full- scale epidemics are common in Africa and 
parts of Asia. Most cases of measles in the United States are isolated—
an unvaccinated person visits a country where an outbreak is underway, 
is exposed to the virus, returns home, and then starts to show symp-
toms. The girl visiting Cincinnati lived in northwest Indiana and hadn’t 
been out of the country. So how did she get it?
Because measles can be contagious for so long before symptoms ap-
pear, it can be transmitted by people who don’t know they have it. Even 
if this girl hadn’t been to a region where measles is endemic, she could 
have unknowingly encountered someone who had. She most likely was 
infected about two weeks earlier, on May 15, when she attended a large 

152  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
gathering with about ﬁ ve hundred members of her Indiana church. 
Her parents reported to Cincinnati hospital workers that one of the 
teenagers at the gathering was sick— she had a fever, a cough, and con-
junctivitis (colloquially known as “pink eye”). As it turned out, that 
seventeen- year- old girl had just returned to Indiana following a church 
mission in Bucharest, the capital of Romania, where she’d worked in an 
orphanage and hospital. She had traveled on commercial ﬂ ights to get 
back to the United States on May 14 and attended the church gathering 
the next day. She was the “index case”— the ﬁ rst person to be infected, 
and thus the source of the infections in all of the later patients— in 
what quickly became the biggest measles outbreak in the United States 
since 2000.
During May and June of 2005, another 32 people contracted measles. 
Of these 34 documented cases, 33  were church members who either came 
into direct contact with the seventeen- year- old index case or lived in the 
same  house as someone who had. The only person who contracted mea-
sles outside of the church community worked at a hospital where one of 
the patients was treated. Fortunately, none of those infected died from 
the disease. In addition to the six- year- old girl in Cincinnati, a forty- ﬁ ve-
year- old man needed intravenous ﬂ uids and the hospital worker needed 
six days of ventilator support because of pneumonia and respiratory dis-
tress. Through effective treatment and management of the outbreak— 
anyone exposed to the virus who hadn’t yet shown symptoms had to be 
quarantined for eigh teen days— the outbreak was contained by the end 
of July, with no new cases reported after then. By one estimate, the total 
cost of the containment and treatment efforts was nearly $300,000.2
Only two of the 34 patients had been vaccinated, and one of those 
two— the hospital worker— had only received one dose of the vaccine. 
The six- year- old girl hadn’t been vaccinated, nor had the seventeen- 
year- old who had traveled to Romania. In the gathering of 500 people, 
50  were unvaccinated, and 16 of those 50 subsequently got measles. 
The outbreak was containable because most of the community mem-
bers had been vaccinated. In countries where vaccination is less com-
mon, the outbreak would have been much larger.

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  153
Why  were 10 percent of the church members unvaccinated when 
the vaccination rate for school- age children in the United States is over 
95 percent? Although vaccination is mandatory for all children attend-
ing public schools in the United States, in many states, parents can ﬁ le 
a “personal belief exemption” that allows them to forgo vaccination for 
their children for religious or other reasons. And in fact, most of the 
measles cases occurred in a few families that had declined inoculation. 
Many of these families continued to refuse vaccination even as health 
authorities  were trying to control the outbreak.
The 2005 Cincinnati outbreak was not unique. During the ﬁ rst 
seven months of 2008, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) docu-
mented 131 cases of measles in the United States, more than double 
the yearly average from 2001 through 2007, and the highest number 
since 1996. Most of the cases occurred among schoolchildren who are 
eligible for vaccination but whose parents declined to have them vac-
cinated.
Why would parents knowingly reject a vaccine that could prevent a 
serious and highly contagious childhood illness, one that had been ef-
fectively eradicated by that same vaccine? Why would people knowingly 
violate CDC and WHO guidelines by traveling to foreign countries 
where measles and other preventable diseases are prevalent without ﬁ rst 
vaccinating themselves? Why would parents expose their children to 
potentially deadly diseases like measles when a safe and effective vac-
cine has been available for more than forty years?
This behavior, as we’ll discover, is the result of another everyday 
illusion— the illusion of cause. Before we can understand why people 
would choose not to vaccinate their children, we must ﬁ rst consider 
three separate, but interrelated, biases that contribute to the illusion of 
cause. These biases arise from the fact that our minds are built to detect 
meaning in patterns, to infer causal relationships from coincidences, and 
to believe that earlier events cause later ones.

154  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Seeing the God in Everything
Pattern perception is central to our lives, and skill in many professions is 
based almost entirely on the ability to rapidly recognize a large variety of 
important patterns. Doctors look for combinations of symptoms that 
form a pattern, allowing them to infer an underlying cause, make a diag-
nosis, select a treatment, and predict their patient’s outcome. Clinical 
psychologists and counselors look for patterns in thoughts and behaviors 
to help diagnose mental dysfunction. Stock traders follow the ups and 
downs of the major indices, looking for consistencies that will give them 
an advantage. Baseball coaches decide where to position their players in 
the ﬁ eld based on regularities in where batters tend to hit the ball, and 
pitchers adjust their pitching based on the patterns they perceive in a 
batter’s swings. All of us use pattern detection without even knowing 
that  we’re doing it. We can identify people we know from no more infor-
mation than characteristic regularities in their gaits. Just by picking up 
patterns of movement and gesture from brief silent videos, students can 
even predict which teachers are likely to receive good ratings at the end 
of a semester.3 We  can’t help but see patterns in the world and make 
predictions based on those patterns.
These extraordinary pattern detection abilities often serve us well, en-
abling us to draw conclusions in seconds (or milliseconds) that would 
take minutes or hours if we had to rely on laborious logical calculations. 
Unfortunately, they can also lead us astray, contributing to the illusion 
of cause. At times, we perceive patterns where none exist, and we misper-
ceive them where they do exist. Regardless of whether a repeating pat-
tern actually exists, when we perceive that it does, we readily infer that it 
results from a causal relationship. Much as our memory for the world 
can be distorted to match our conceptions of what we should remember, 
and just as we can fail to see the gorillas around us because they do 
not ﬁ t with our preexisting expectations, our understanding of our world 
is systematically biased to perceive meaning rather than randomness and 
to infer cause rather than coincidence. And we are usually completely 
unaware of these biases.

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  155
The illusion of cause arises when we see patterns in randomness, and 
we are most likely to see patterns when we think we understand what is 
causing them. Our intuitive beliefs about causation lead us to perceive 
patterns consistent with those beliefs at least as often as the patterns we 
perceive lead us to form new beliefs. Some of the most striking exam-
ples of pattern perception gone awry involve the detection of faces in 
unusual places.
One day in 1994, Diana Duyser saw something strange after she bit 
into a grilled cheese sandwich she had just made.  Etched into the sur-
face of the toasted bread, staring back at her, was a face. Duyser, a jew-
elry designer in South Florida, immediately recognized the face as that 
of the Virgin Mary. She stopped eating the sandwich and stored it in a 
plastic box, where it remained, miraculously mold- free, for ten years. 
Then, for unknown reasons, she decided to sell this religious icon on 
eBay. The Internet gambling site GoldenPalace .com put in the winning 
bid of $28,000 and sent its CEO to personally pick up the purchase. In 
handing it over, Duyser was quoted as saying, “I do believe that this is 
the Virgin Mary Mother of God.”4
The human mind’s tendency to promiscuously perceive meaningful 
visual patterns in randomness has a one- word name: pareidolia. Like 
the Virgin Mary Grilled Cheese, many examples of pareidolia involve 
religious images. The “Nun Bun” was a cinnamon pastry whose twisty 
rolls eerily resembled the nose and jowls of Mother Teresa. It was found 
in a Nashville coffee shop in 1996, but was stolen on Christmas in 2005. 
“Our Lady of the Underpass” was another appearance by the Virgin 
Mary, this time in the guise of a salt stain under Interstate 94 in Chicago 
that drew huge crowds and stopped trafﬁ c for months in 2005. Other 
cases include Hot Chocolate Jesus, Jesus on a shrimp tail dinner, Jesus in 
a dental x-ray, and Cheesus (a Cheeto purportedly shaped like Jesus). 
Islam forbids images of Allah, but followers in West Yorkshire, En gland, 
have noticed the word “Allah” written out, in Arabic, in the veiny mate-
rial inside a sliced- open tomato.
You won’t be surprised to learn that we favor a mundane explanation 
for all of these face sightings. Your visual system has a difﬁ cult problem 

156  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
to solve in recognizing faces, objects, and words. They can all appear in 
a wide variety of conditions: good light, bad light, near, far, oriented at 
different angles, with some parts hidden, in different colors, and so on. 
Like an ampliﬁ er that you turn up in order to hear a weak signal, your 
visual system is exquisitely sensitive to the patterns that are most impor-
tant to you. In fact, visual areas of your brain can be activated by im-
ages that only vaguely resemble what they’re tuned for. In just one- ﬁ fth 
of a second, your brain can distinguish a face from other objects like 
chairs or cars. In just an instant more, your brain can distinguish ob-
jects that look a bit like faces, such as a parking meter or a three- prong 
outlet, from other objects like chairs. Seeing objects that resemble faces 
induces activity in a brain area called the fusiform gyrus that is highly 
sensitive to real faces. In other words, almost immediately after you see 
an object that looks anything like a face, your brain treats it like a face 
and pro cesses it differently than other objects. That’s one reason why 
we ﬁ nd it so easy to see facelike patterns as actual faces.5
The same principles apply to our other senses. Play Led Zeppelin’s 
“Stairway to Heaven” backward and you may hear “Satan,” “666,” and 
some other strange words. Play Queen’s “Another One Bites the Dust” 
backward and the late Freddie Mercury might tell you “it’s fun to smoke 
marijuana.” This phenomenon can be exploited for fun and proﬁ t. A 
writer named Karen Stollznow noticed a faint outline on a Pop- Tart that 
could be interpreted as the miter- style hat traditionally worn by the pope. 
She snapped a digital photo, uploaded it to eBay, and opened up bid-
ding on the “Pope Tart.” Over the course of the auction she exchanged 
numerous entertaining e-mails with believers and skeptics. By the 
end, the winning bid was $46. She attributed the relatively low price 
paid for the Pope Tart to a lack of publicity, as compared with the press 
releases and tele vi sion coverage received by the Virgin Mary Grilled 
Cheese.6
These examples represent just the tip of the iceberg that is the mind’s 
hyperactive tendency to spot patterns. Even trained professionals are 
biased to see patterns they expect to see and not ones that seem incon-
sistent with their beliefs. Recall Brian Hunter, the hedge fund manager 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  157
who lost it all (more than once) by betting on the future price of natural 
gas. He thought he understood the reasons for the movements of the 
energy markets, and his inference of a causal pattern in the markets led 
to his company’s downfall. When pattern recognition works well, we 
can ﬁ nd the face of our lost child in the middle of a huge crowd at the 
mall. When it works too well, we spot deities in pastries, trends in stock 
prices, and other relationships that aren’t really there or don’t mean 
what we think they do.
Causes and Symptoms
Unlike the parade of unusual patients appearing on tele vi sion dramas 
like Grey’s Anatomy and House, or coming to Dr. Keating’s St. Louis 
diagnostic clinic, the vast majority of the patients whom doctors see 
on a daily basis have run- of- the- mill problems. Experts quickly recog-
nize common sets of symptoms; they’re sensitized to the most probable 
diagnoses, learning quite reasonably to expect to encounter the com-
mon cold more often than an exotic Asian ﬂ u, and ordinary sadness 
more often than clinical depression.
Intuitively, most people think that experts consider more alternatives 
and more possible diagnoses rather than fewer. Yet the mark of true 
expertise is not the ability to consider more options, but the ability to 
ﬁ lter out irrelevant ones. Imagine that a child arrives in the emergency 
room wheezing and short of breath. The most likely explanation might 
be asthma, in which case treating with a bronchodilator like albuterol 
should ﬁ x the problem. Of course, it’s also possible that the wheezing is 
caused by something the child swallowed that became lodged in his 
throat. Such a foreign body could cause all sorts of other symptoms, 
including secondary infections. On shows like House, that rare explana-
tion would of course turn out to be the cause of the child’s symptoms. 
In reality, though, asthma or pneumonia is a far more likely explana-
tion. An expert doctor recognizes the pattern, and likely has seen many 
patients with asthma, leading to a quick and almost always accurate 
diagnosis. Unless your job is like Dr. Keating’s, and you know that 

158  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
you’re dealing with exceptional cases, focusing too much on the rare 
causes would be counterproductive. Expert doctors consider ﬁ rst those 
few diagnoses that are the most probable explanations for a pattern of 
symptoms.
Experts are, in a sense, primed to see patterns that ﬁ t their well- 
established expectations, but perceiving the world through a lens of ex-
pectations, however reasonable, can backﬁ re. Just as people counting 
basketball passes often fail to notice an unexpected gorilla, experts can 
miss a “gorilla” if it is an unusual, unexpected, or rare underlying cause 
of a pattern. This can be an issue when doctors move from practicing in 
hospitals during their residencies and fellowships to practicing privately, 
especially if they go into family practice or internal medicine in a more 
suburban area. The frequencies of diseases doctors encounter in urban 
teaching hospitals differ greatly from those in suburban medical ofﬁ ces, 
so doctors must retune their pattern recognizers to the new environ-
ment in order to maintain an expert level of diagnostic skill.
Expectations can cause anyone to sometimes see things that don’t 
exist. Chris’s mother has suffered from arthritis pain in her hands and 
knees for several years, and she feels that her joints hurt more on days 
when it is cold and raining. She’s not alone. A 1972 study found that 
80– 90 percent of arthritis patients reported greater pain when the tem-
perature went down, the barometric pressure went down, and the humid-
ity went up— in other words, when a cold rain was on the way. Medical 
textbooks used to devote entire chapters to the relationship between 
weather and arthritis. Some experts have even advised chronic pain 
patients to move across the country to warmer, drier areas. But does the 
weather actually exacerbate arthritis pain?
Researchers Donald Redelmeier, a medical doctor, and Amos Tversky, 
a cognitive psychologist, tracked eigh teen arthritis patients over ﬁ fteen 
months, asking them to rate their pain level twice each month. Then 
they matched these data up with local weather reports from the same 
time period. All but one of the patients believed that weather changes 
had affected their pain levels. But when Redelmeier and Tversky 
mapped the reports of pain to the weather the same day, or the day be-

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  159
fore, or two days before, there was no association at all. Despite the 
strong beliefs of the subjects who participated in their experiment, 
changes in the weather  were entirely unrelated to reports of pain.
Chris told his mother about this study. She said she was sure it was 
right, but she still felt what she felt. It’s not surprising that pain  doesn’t 
necessarily respond to statistics. So why do arthritis sufferers believe 
in a pattern that  doesn’t exist? What would lead people to think there 
was an association even when the weather was completely unpredictive? 
 Redelmeier and Tversky conducted a second experiment. They recruited 
undergraduates for a study and showed them pairs of numbers, one giv-
ing a patient’s pain level and the other giving the barometric pressure 
for that day. Keep in mind that in actuality, pain and weather condi-
tions are unrelated— knowing the barometric pressure is of no use in 
predicting how much pain a patient experienced that day, because pain 
is just as likely when it’s warm and sunny as when it’s cold and rainy. 
In the fake, experimental data there was also no relationship. Yet just 
like the actual patients, more than half of the undergraduates thought 
there was a link between arthritis and pain in the data set. In one case, 
87 percent saw a positive relationship.
Through a pro cess of “selective matching,” the subjects in this experi-
ment focused on patterns that existed only in subsets of the data, such as 
a few days when low pressure and pain happened to coincide, and ne-
glected the rest. Arthritis sufferers likely do the same: They remember 
those days when arthritis pain coincided with cold, rainy weather better 
than those days when they had pain but it was warm and sunny, and 
much better than pain- free days, which don’t stand out in memory at all. 
Putative links between the weather and symptoms are part of our every-
day language; we speak of “feeling under the weather” and we think that 
wearing hats in winter lessens our chances of “catching a cold.” The sub-
jects and the patients perceived an association where none existed be-
cause they interpreted the weather and pain data in a way that was 
consistent with their preexisting beliefs. In essence, they saw the gorilla 
they expected to see even when it was nowhere in sight.7

160  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Beware of Belief Becoming “Because”
Many introductory psychology textbooks ask students to think about 
possible reasons why ice cream consumption should be positively asso-
ciated with drowning rates. More people drown on days when a lot of 
ice cream is consumed, and fewer people drown on days when only a 
little ice cream is consumed. Eating ice cream presumably  doesn’t cause 
drowning, and news of drownings shouldn’t inspire people to eat ice 
cream. Rather, a third factor— the summer heat— likely causes both. 
Less ice cream is consumed in winter, and fewer people drown then 
because fewer people go swimming.8
This example draws attention to the second major bias underlying 
the illusion of cause— when two events tend to happen together, we 
infer that one must have caused the other. Textbooks use the ice cream–
drowning correlation precisely because it’s hard to see how either one 
could cause the other, but easy to see how a third, unmentioned factor 
could cause both. Unfortunately, seeing through the illusion of cause is 
rarely so simple in the real world.
Most conspiracy theories are based on detecting patterns in events 
that, when viewed with the theory in mind, seem to help us understand 
why they happened. In essence, conspiracy theories infer cause from 
coincidence. The more you believe the theory, the more likely you are 
to fall prey to the illusion of cause.
Conspiracy theories result from a pattern perception mechanism 
gone awry— they are cognitive versions of the Virgin Mary Grilled 
Cheese. Those conspiracy theorists who already believed that President 
Bush would stage 9/11 to justify a preconceived plan to invade Iraq 
 were quick to see his false memory of seeing the ﬁ rst plane hit the tow-
ers as evidence that he knew about the attack in advance. People who 
already thought that Hillary Clinton would say anything to get elected 
 were quick to jump on her false memory of Bosnian snipers as evidence 
that she was lying to beneﬁ t her campaign. In both cases, people used 
their understanding of the person to ﬁ t the event into a pattern. They 
inferred an underlying cause, and they  were so conﬁ dent that they had 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  161
the right cause that they failed to notice more plausible alternative ex-
planations.
Illustrations of this illusion of cause are so pervasive that undergrad-
uates in our research methods classes have no problem completing our 
assignment to ﬁ nd a recent media report that mistakenly infers a causal 
relationship from a mere association. One BBC article, provocatively 
titled “Sex Keeps You Young,” reported a study by Dr. David Weeks of 
the Royal Edinburgh Hospital showing that “couples who have sex at 
least three times a week look more than 10 years younger than the aver-
age adult who makes love twice a week.”9 The caption to an attached 
photo read, “Regular sex ‘can take years off your looks.’ ” Although 
having sex could somehow cause a youthful appearance, it is at least as 
plausible that having a youthful appearance leads to more sexual en-
counters, or that a youthful appearance is a sign of physical ﬁ tness, 
which makes frequent sex easier, or that people who appear more youth-
ful are more likely to maintain an ongoing sexual relationship, or . . . 
the possible explanations are endless. The statistical association between 
youthful appearance and sexual activity does not imply that one causes 
the other. Had the title been phrased in the opposite way, “Looking 
Young Gets You More Sex,” it would have been equally conclusory, but 
less surprising and therefore less newsworthy.
Of course, some correlations are more likely to reﬂ ect an actual 
causal relationship than others. Higher summer temperatures are more 
likely to cause people to eat ice cream than are reports of drownings. 
Statisticians and social scientists have developed clever ways to gather 
and analyze correlational data that increase the odds of ﬁ nding a true 
causal effect. But the only way— let us repeat, the only way— to deﬁ ni-
tively test whether an association is causal is to run an experiment. 
Without an experiment, observing an association may just be the scien-
tiﬁ c equivalent of noticing a coincidence. Many medical studies adopt 
an epidemiological approach, mea sur ing rates of illness and compar-
ing them among groups of people or among societies. For example, an 
epidemiological study might measure and compare the overall health 
of people who eat lots of vegetables with that of people who eat few 

162  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
vegetables. Such a study could show that people who eat vegetables 
throughout their lives tend to be healthier than those who don’t. This study 
would provide scientiﬁ c evidence for an association between vegetable-
eating and health, but it would not support a claim that eating vege-
tables causes health (or that being healthy causes people to eat vegetables, 
for that matter). Both vegetable-eating and health could be caused by a 
third factor—for instance, wealth may enable people to afford both tasty, 
fresh produce and superior health care. Epidemiological studies are not 
experiments, but in many cases—such as smoking and lung cancer in 
humans—they are the best way to determine whether two factors are 
associated, and therefore have at least a potential causal connection.
Unlike an observed association, though, an experiment systematically 
varies one factor, known as the in de pen dent variable, to see its effect on 
another factor, the dependent variable. For example, if you  were inter-
ested in learning whether people are better able to focus on a difﬁ cult 
task when listening to background music than when sitting in silence, you 
would randomly assign some people to listen to music and others to 
work in silence and you would mea sure how well they do on some cogni-
tive test. You have introduced a cause (listening to music or not listening 
to music) and then observed an effect (differences in per for mance on the 
cognitive test). Just mea sur ing two effects and showing that they co- 
occur does not imply that one causes the other. That is, if you just mea-
sure whether people listen to music and then mea sure how they do on 
cognitive tasks, you cannot demonstrate a causal link between music 
listening and cognitive per for mance. Why not?
Paradoxically, properly inferring causation depends on an element of 
randomness. Each person must be assigned randomly to one of the two 
groups—otherwise, any differences between the groups could be due to 
other systematic biases. Let’s say you just asked people to report whether 
they listen to music while working and you found that people who 
worked in silence tended to be more productive. Many factors could 
cause this difference. Perhaps people who are better educated prefer work-
ing in silence, or perhaps people with attention deﬁ cits are more likely to 
listen to music.

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  163
A standard principle taught in introductory psychology classes is that 
correlation does not imply causation. This principle needs to be taught 
because it runs counter to the illusion of cause. It is particularly hard to 
internalize, and in the abstract, knowing the principle does little to im-
munize us against the error. Fortunately, we have a simple trick to help 
you spot the illusion in action: When you hear or read about an associa-
tion between two factors, think about whether people could have been 
assigned randomly to conditions for one of them. If it would have been 
impossible, too expensive, or ethically dubious to randomly assign people 
to those groups, then the study could not have been an experiment and 
the causal inference is not supported. To illustrate this idea, here are 
some examples taken from actual news headlines:10
• “Drop That BlackBerry! Multitasking May Be Harmful”— 
Could researchers randomly assign some people to lead a mul-
titasking, BlackBerry- addicted life and others to just focus on 
one thing at a time all day long? Probably not. The study actu-
ally used a questionnaire to ﬁ nd people who already tended to 
watch TV, text- message, and use their computers simultane-
ously, and compared them with people who tended to do just 
one of these things at a time. Then they gave a set of cognitive 
tests to both groups and found that the multitaskers did worse 
on some of the tests. The original article describes the study’s 
method clearly, but the headline added an unwarranted causal 
interpretation. It’s also possible that people who do badly at 
the cognitive tests also think they can multitask just ﬁ ne, and 
therefore tend to do it more than they should.
• “Bullying Harms Kids’ Mental Health”— Could a researcher 
randomly assign some kids to be bullied and others not to be 
bullied? No—not ethically, anyway. So the study must have 
mea sured an association between being bullied and suffering 
mental health problems. The causal relationship could well be 
reversed— children who have mental health issues might be 
more likely to get bullied. Or some other factors, perhaps in 

164  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
their family background, could cause them both to be bullied 
and to have mental health issues.
• “Does Your Neighborhood Cause Schizophrenia?”— This 
study showed that rates of schizo phre nia  were greater in some 
neighborhoods than others. Could the researchers have ran-
domly assigned people to live in different neighborhoods? In 
our experience people generally like to participate in psychol-
ogy experiments, but requiring them to pack up and move 
might be asking too much.
• “House work Cuts Breast Cancer Risk”— We doubt experi-
menters would have much luck randomly assigning some 
women to a “more  house work” condition and others to a “less 
 house work” condition (though some of the subjects might be 
happy with their luck).
• “Sexual Lyrics Prompt Teens to Have Sex”— Were some teens 
randomly assigned to listen to sexually explicit lyrics and others 
to listen to more innocuous lyrics, and then observed to see 
how much sex they had? Perhaps an adventurous experimenter 
could do this in the lab, but that’s not what these researchers 
did. And it’s doubtful that exposing teens to the music of 
 Eminem and Prince in a lab would cause a mea sur able change 
in their sexual behavior even if such an experiment  were 
 conducted.
Once you apply this trick, you can see the humor in most of these 
misleading headlines. In most of these cases, the researchers likely knew 
the limits of their studies, understood that correlation does not imply 
causation, and used the right logic and terminology in their scientiﬁ c 
papers. But when their research was “translated” for pop u lar consump-
tion, the illusion of cause took over and these subtleties  were lost. News 
reporting often gets the causation wrong in an attempt to make the 
claim more interesting or the narrative more convincing. It’s far less 
exciting to say that those teens who listen to sexually explicit lyrics also 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  165
happen to have sex at earlier ages. That more precise phrasing leaves 
open the plausible alternatives— that having sex or being interested in 
sex makes teens more receptive to sexually explicit lyrics, or that some 
other factor contributes to both sexual precocity and a preference for 
sexually explicit lyrics.
And Then What Happened?
The illusory perception of causes from correlations is closely tied to the 
appeal of stories. When we hear that teens are listening to sexually 
explicit music or playing violent games, we expect there to be conse-
quences, and when we hear that those same teens are subsequently more 
likely to have sex or to be violent, we perceive a causal link. We imme-
diately believe we understand how these behaviors are causally linked, 
but our understanding is based on a logical fallacy. The third major 
mechanism driving the illusion of cause comes from the way in which 
we interpret narratives. In chronologies or mere sequences of happen-
ings, we assume that the earlier events must have caused the later ones.
David Foster Wallace, the celebrated author of the novel Inﬁ nite Jest, 
committed suicide by hanging himself in the late summer of 2008. 
Like many famous creative writers, he suffered for a long time from 
depression and substance abuse, and he had attempted suicide before. 
Wallace was something of a literary prodigy, publishing his ﬁ rst novel, 
The Broom of the System, at the age of twenty- ﬁ ve while he was still 
studying for his master of ﬁ ne arts (MFA) degree. The book was praised 
by the New York Times, but received mixed reviews elsewhere. Wallace 
worked on a follow- up short story collection, but could not help feeling 
like a failure. His mother brought him back to live at home. According 
to a proﬁ le in the New Yorker by D. T. Max,11 things went downhill 
quickly:
One night, he and Amy [his sister] watched “The Karen Carpen-
ter Story,” a maudlin TV movie about the singer, who died of a 
heart attack brought on by anorexia. When it was over, Wallace’s 

166  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
sister, who was working on her own M.F.A., at the University of 
Virginia, told David that she had to drive back to Virginia. David 
asked her not to go. After she went, he tried to commit suicide 
with pills.
What do you make of this passage about Wallace’s earlier suicide at-
tempt? To us, the most natural interpretation is that the movie upset 
Wallace, that he wanted his sister to stay with him but she refused, and 
that in despair over losing her companionship, he overdosed. But if you 
read the passage again, you will see that none of these facts are stated 
explicitly. Strictly speaking, even the idea that he wanted her to stay is 
only implied by the sentence, “David asked her not to go.” Max is al-
most clinically sparing in his just- the- facts approach. But the interpre-
tation we attach to these facts seems obvious; we come to it automatically 
and without conscious thought, indeed without even realizing that we 
are adding in information that is not present in the source. This is 
the illusion of cause at work. When a series of facts is narrated, we ﬁ ll 
in the gaps to create a causal sequence: Event 1 caused Event 2, which 
caused Event 3, and so on. The movie made Wallace sad, which made 
him ask Amy to stay; she went, so she must have refused him, causing 
him to attempt suicide.
In addition to automatically inferring cause when it is only implied 
by a sequence, we also tend to remember a narrative better when we 
have to draw such inferences than when we don’t. Consider the follow-
ing pairs of sentences, taken from a study by University of Denver psy-
chologist Janice Keenan and her colleagues:12
1. Joey’s big brother punched him again and again. The next day 
his body was covered by bruises.
2. Joey’s crazy mother became furiously angry with him. The 
next day his body was covered by bruises.
In the ﬁ rst case, no inference is needed— the cause of Joey’s bruising 
is stated explicitly in the ﬁ rst sentence. In the second case, the cause of 
the bruises is implied but not stated. For this reason, understanding the 
second pair of sentences turns out to be slightly harder (and takes 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  167
slightly longer) than understanding the ﬁ rst. But what you’re doing as 
you read the sentences is crucial. To understand the second pair of sen-
tences, you must make an extra logical inference that you don’t need in 
order to make sense of the ﬁ rst pair. And in making this inference, you 
form a richer and more elaborate memory for what you’ve read. Readers 
of the New Yorker story likely will remember the implied cause of 
 Wallace’s early suicide attempt, even though it never was stated in the 
story itself. They will do so because they drew the inference themselves 
rather than having it handed to them.
“Tell me a story,” children beg their parents. “And then what hap-
pened?” they ask if they hear a pause. Adults spend billions of dollars 
on movies, tele vi sion, novels, short stories, works of biography and his-
tory, and other forms of narrative. One appeal of spectator sports is 
their chronology; every play, every shot, every home run is a new event 
in a story whose ending is in doubt. Teachers— and authors of books on 
science— are learning that stories are effective ways to grab and control 
an audience’s attention.13 But there is a paradox  here: Stories—that is, 
sequences of events—are by themselves entertaining, but not directly 
useful. It’s hard to see why evolution would have designed our brains to 
prefer receiving facts in chronological order unless there was some other 
beneﬁ t to be gained from that type of pre sen ta tion. Unlike a speciﬁ c 
story, a general rule about what causes what can be extremely valuable. 
Knowing that your brother ate a piece of fruit with dark spots on it and 
then vomited encourages you to infer causation (by food poisoning), a 
piece of knowledge that can help you in a wide variety of future situa-
tions. So we may delight in narrative precisely because we compulsively 
assume causation when all we have is chronological order, and it’s the 
causation, not the sequence of events, that our brains are really designed 
to crave and use.
In the next paragraph of his David Foster Wallace proﬁ le, D. T. Max 
tells us that after recovering from his suicide attempt, “Wallace had 
decided that writing was not worth the risk to his mental health. He 
applied and was accepted as a graduate student in philosophy at Har-
vard.” Again, the causation is implied: It was Wallace’s fear of depres-
sion and suicide that drove him—perhaps ironically—to graduate 

168  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
study in philosophy. But what are we to conclude about how he went 
about it? One possibility is that he applied to Harvard, and only to 
Harvard. A much more common practice is to apply to a wide variety 
of graduate programs and to see which ones admit you. Applying just to 
Harvard is the act of someone who is either expressing supreme conﬁ -
dence or setting himself up to fail (or both); applying broadly is the act 
of someone who just wants to pursue his interests at the best school he 
can get into. The different actions signal different personalities and ap-
proaches to life.
It seems to us that Max is implying that Wallace applied only to Har-
vard, because if he had applied to other schools, that fact would have 
been relevant for our interpretation of Wallace’s behavior, so the author 
would have mentioned it. We automatically make the assumption, when 
reading statements like this one, that we have been given all of the in-
formation we need, and that the most straightforward causal interpre-
tation is also the correct one. Max’s words don’t explicitly say that 
Wallace applied only to Harvard; they just lead us, without our aware-
ness, into concluding that he did.
The mind apparently prefers to make these extra leaps of logic over 
being explicitly told the reasons for everything. This may be one reason 
why the timeworn advice “show, don’t tell” is so valuable to creative 
writers seeking to make their prose more compelling. The illusion of 
narrative can indeed be a powerful tool for authors and speakers. By 
arranging purely factual statements in different orders, or by omitting 
or inserting relevant information, they can control what inferences their 
audiences will make, without explicitly arguing for and defending those 
inferences themselves. D. T. Max, whether deliberately or not, creates 
the impression that Wallace’s suicide attempt was precipitated by his 
sister’s possibly callous refusal to stay with him, and that Wallace chose 
to apply only to Harvard for graduate school. When you know about 
the contribution of narrative to the illusion of cause, you can read his 
words differently, and see that none of these conclusions are necessarily 
correct. (Tip: Listen carefully for when politicians and advertisers use 
this technique!)

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  169
“I Want to Buy Your Rock”
A conversation between Homer and Lisa in an episode of The Simpsons 
provides one of the best illustrations of the dangers of turning a tempo-
ral association into a causal explanation.14 After a bear is spotted in 
Springﬁ eld, the town initiates an ofﬁ cial Bear Patrol, complete with he-
li cop ters and trucks with sirens, to make sure no bears are in town.
homer:  Ahhh . . .  not a bear in sight. The bear patrol must be 
working like a charm.
lisa:  That’s specious reasoning, Dad.
homer:  Thank you, honey.
lisa  (picking up a rock from the ground): By your logic, I could 
claim that this rock keeps tigers away.
homer:  Ooooh . . .  how does it work?
lisa:  It  doesn’t work— it’s just a stupid rock. But I don’t see any 
tigers around  here, do you?
homer:  Lisa, I want to buy your rock.
Homer assumes that the bear patrol kept away bears, but it really did 
nothing at all— the ﬁ rst bear sighting was an anomaly that would not 
have recurred in any case. The scene is funny because the causal rela-
tionship is so outlandish. Rocks don’t keep tigers away, but Homer 
draws the inference anyway because the chronology of events induced 
an illusion of cause. In other cases, when the causal relationship seems 
plausible, people naturally accept it rather than think about alterna-
tives, and the consequences can be much greater than overpaying for an 
anti-tiger rock.
In April 2009, the Supreme Court of the United States heard oral 
arguments in the case of Northwest Austin Municipal Utility District 
No. 1 v. Holder. At issue was the Voting Rights Act, one of the federal 
civil rights laws enacted during the 1960s. Among other things, the law 

170  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
sought to prevent po liti cal jurisdictions (utility districts, cities, school 
boards, counties,  etc.) in southern states from drawing boundaries and 
setting up election rules so as to favor the interests of white over black 
voters. Section 5 of the law required these states to obtain “preclear-
ance” from the federal government before changing any election proce-
dures. The Texas utility district argued that since the law imposed these 
requirements only on some of the states in the  union (mostly those that 
had been— a hundred years earlier— part of the Confederacy), it un-
constitutionally discriminated against them.
Chief Justice John Roberts asked Neal Katyal, the government’s 
lawyer, about the import of the fact that just one out of every two thou-
sand applications for an election rule change is rejected. Katyal an-
swered, “I think what that represents is that Section 5 is actually working 
very well; that it provides a deterrent.” Roberts might have had the bear 
patrol episode in the back of his mind when he replied: “Well, that’s like 
the old elephant whistle— you know, I have this whistle to keep away the 
elephants. You know, well, that’s silly. Well, there are no elephants, so it 
must work.”15
Roberts’s point, though he expressed it in the language of The Simp-
sons rather than that of cognitive psychology, is that the illusion of cause 
can make us assume that one event (the passage of the law) caused an-
other event (the virtual end of discriminatory election rules), when the 
available data don’t logically establish such a relationship. The fact that 
the government grants preclearance almost every time says nothing 
about whether the law caused compliance. Something other than the 
law— such as a gradual reduction of racism, or at least overtly racist 
practices, over time— might have caused the change.
We are taking no position on whether this part of the Voting Rights 
Act is necessary today; it may be or it may not be. But this is precisely 
the point: We have no way to know how useful it is if the only informa-
tion we have is that virtually nobody is violating it. It’s possible that 
they would behave consistently with the proscriptions of the law even if 
it  were no longer on the books.
The problem illustrated by the arguments over the Voting Rights 
Act is endemic in public policy. How many laws are passed, renewed, or 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  171
repealed on the basis of a truly causal understanding of their effects on 
behavior? We often speak of the clichéd danger of unintended conse-
quences, but we rarely think about how little we can actually say about 
the intended consequences of government action. We know what was 
happening before the law or regulation went into effect, and we may 
know that something different happened afterward, but that alone does 
not prove that the law caused the difference. The only way to mea sure the 
causal effect of a law would be to conduct an experiment. In the case of 
the Voting Rights Act, the closest one could come would be to repeal 
Section 5 for a randomly selected group of jurisdictions and compare 
those with the rest over time, examining how many discriminatory elec-
toral rules are enacted in each case. If the rate of discrimination differs 
between the two groups, then we could infer that the law has an ef-
fect.16 Of course, the law might still violate the Constitution, but there 
are some questions that even clever experimentation and data analysis 
 can’t answer!
This tendency to neglect alternative paths to the same outcome in 
favor of a single narrative pervades many of the bestselling business 
books.17 Almost every report claiming to identify the key factors that 
lead companies to succeed, from In Search of Excellence to Good to Great, 
errs by considering only companies that succeeded and then analyzing 
what they did. They don’t look at whether other companies did those 
same things and failed. Malcolm Gladwell’s bestseller The Tipping Point 
describes the remarkable reversal of fortune for the maker of unfashion-
able Hush Puppies after their shoes suddenly became trendy. Gladwell 
argues that Hush Puppies succeeded because they were adopted by a 
trendy subculture, which made them appealing and generated buzz. And 
he’s right that Hush Puppies generated buzz. But the conclusion that the 
buzz caused their success follows only from a retrospective narrative 
bias and not from an experiment. In fact, it’s not even clear that there’s 
an association between buzz and success in the data. To establish even a 
noncausal association we would need to know how many other similar 
companies took off without ﬁ rst generating a buzz, and how many 
other companies generated similar buzz but remained grounded. Only 
then could we start worrying about whether the buzz caused the 

172  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
 success— or whether the causation really ran in the other direction 
(success leading to buzz), or even in both directions simultaneously (a 
virtuous cycle).
There is one ﬁ nal pitfall inherent in turning chronology into causal-
ity. Because we perceive sequences of events as part of a timeline, with 
one leading to the next, it is hard to see that there are almost always 
many interrelated reasons or causes for a single outcome. The sequen-
tial nature of time leads people to act as though a complex decision or 
event must have only a single cause. We make fun of the enthusiasts of 
conspiracy theories for thinking this way, but they are just operating 
under a more extreme form of the illusion of cause that affects us all. 
 Here are some statements made by Chris Matthews, host of the MSNBC 
news program Hardball, about the origins of the 2003 U.S. invasion of 
Iraq:
• “What is the motive for this war?” (February 4, 2003)
• “I wanted to know whether 9/11 is the reason, because a lot of 
people think it’s payback.” (February 6, 2003)
• “Do you believe the weapons of mass destruction was the rea-
son for this war?” (October 24, 2003)
• “. . . the reason we went to war with Iraq was not to make a 
better Iraq. It was to kill the bad guys.” (October 31, 2003)
• “President Bush says he wants democracy to spread through-
out the Middle East. Was that the real reason behind the war 
in Iraq?” (November 7, 2003)
• “Why do you think we went to Iraq? The real reason, not the 
sales pitch.” (October 9, 2006)
• “Their reason for this war, which they don’t regret, was never 
the reason they used to sell us on the war.” (January 29, 2009)
We added the emphasis in each statement to show how it presupposes 
that the war must have had a single motive, reason, or cause. In the 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  173
mind of a decision maker (or perhaps a “decider,” in this case), there 
might seem to be just one reason for a decision. But of course nearly 
every complex decision has multiple, complex causes. In this case, even 
as he searched for the one true reason, Matthews identiﬁ ed a wide vari-
ety of possibilities: weapons of mass destruction, Iraq’s support of terror-
ism, Saddam Hussein’s despotism, and the strategic goal of establishing 
democracy in Arab countries, to name only the most prominent. And 
they all arose against the backdrop of a new post- 9/11 sensitivity to the 
possibility of enemies launching attacks on the U.S. homeland. Had one 
or some of these preconditions not been in place, the war might not 
have been launched. But it is not possible to isolate just one of them after 
the fact and say it was the reason for the invasion.18
This kind of faulty reasoning about cause and effect is just as com-
mon in business as in politics. Sherry Lansing, long described as the 
most powerful woman in Hollywood, was CEO of Paramount Pictures 
from 1992 to 2004. She oversaw megahits like Forrest Gump and T itanic, 
and ﬁ lms from her studio received three Academy Awards for Best Pic-
ture. According to an article in the Los Angeles Times, after a series of 
failed projects and declines in Paramount’s share of box- ofﬁ ce revenues, 
Lansing’s contract was not renewed. She resigned a year early, and it 
was widely believed that she had effectively been ﬁ red for poor per for-
mance. But just as the hits  weren’t due solely to her genius, the duds 
 couldn’t have been due solely to her screwups— hundreds of other people 
have creative inﬂ uence on each movie, and hundreds of factors deter-
mine whether a movie captures the imagination (and cash) of audiences.
Lansing’s successor, Brad Grey, was lauded for turning the studio 
around; two of the ﬁ rst ﬁ lms released under his leadership, War of the 
Worlds and The Longest Yard,  were top grossers in 2005. However, both 
movies  were conceived and produced during Lansing’s tenure. If she 
had just hung on for a few more months, she would have received the 
credit and might have remained in charge.19 There’s no doubt that a 
CEO is ofﬁ cially responsible for the per for mance of her company, but 
attributing all of the company’s successes or failures to the one person at 
the top is a classic illustration of the illusion of cause.

174  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
The Vaccination Hypothesis
Let’s return to the story that began this chapter, about the six- year- old 
girl who contracted measles at a church meeting in Indiana after an 
unvaccinated missionary returned from Romania and spread the dis-
ease. We asked why parents would forgo a vaccine that helped to elimi-
nate a serious and extremely contagious childhood disease. Now that 
we have discussed the three biases underlying the illusion of cause— 
overzealous pattern detection mechanisms, the unjustiﬁ ed leap from 
correlation to causation, and the inherent appeal of chronological 
 narratives— we can begin to explain why some people voluntarily choose 
not to vaccinate their children against measles. The answer is that these 
parents, the media, some high- proﬁ le celebrities, and even some doctors 
have fallen prey to the illusion of cause. More precisely, they perceive a 
pattern where none actually exists and confuse a coincidence of timing 
for a causal relationship.
Autism is a pervasive developmental disorder that currently affects 
about 1 in 110 children. The diagnosis of autism has become more 
common over the past de cade in the United States.20 The symptoms 
of autism include delayed or impaired language and social skills. Prior 
to age two, most children engage in “parallel play”— doing the same 
things as other children they play with, but not interacting directly 
with them. And many kids are not very verbal before age two. Autism 
is most frequently diagnosed during preschool, when typically develop-
ing children start playing interactively and their language development 
accelerates. Many parents of autistic children begin noticing that some-
thing isn’t quite right with their kids around age two, and in some rela-
tively rare cases, a child who had been developing normally starts to 
regress and loses the ability to communicate. These symptoms tend to 
be most noticeable to parents not long after their children have been 
vaccinated for measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR). In other words, 
the most clear- cut symptoms of autism become much more pronounced 
after childhood vaccinations.
By now, you should recognize the harbingers of the illusion of cause. 
Parents and scientists seeking a cause for the increase in autism rates 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  175
spotted this association and inferred a causal relationship. Parents who 
saw no symptoms before the vaccinations noticed them afterward, a 
chronological pattern consistent with a causal narrative. They also no-
ticed that increases in vaccination rates roughly coincided with in-
creases in the diagnosis of autism. All three of the major contributors to 
the illusion of cause— pattern, correlation, and chronology— converged 
in this case. Of course, the increase in the frequency of the autism diag-
nosis also coincided with an increase in piracy off the coast of Somalia, 
but nobody argues that autism causes piracy (or that pirates cause au-
tism, for that matter). The association has to have a plausible causal link, 
a connection that makes intuitive sense on its surface. It needs to pro-
vide an “Aha!” experience, one that taps our pattern perception mecha-
nisms and triggers the illusion of cause. It needs more than the perception 
of an intuitive causal link to become a pop u lar movement, though. It 
needs a credible authority to validate the causal link. In the case of vac-
cines and autism, it needed Dr. Andrew Wakeﬁ eld.21
Andrew Wakeﬁ eld was a prominent London physician who in 1998 
announced the discovery of a link between autism and the MMR vac-
cine. He and a group of colleagues published an article in the medical 
journal The Lancet that suggested a link between the MMR vaccine 
and several cases of autism.22 At a press conference on the day his paper 
was released, Wakeﬁ eld explained how he came to this belief: “In 1995, I 
was approached by parents— articulate, well- educated, and concerned— 
who told me the stories of their children’s deterioration into autism . . . 
Their children had developed normally for the ﬁ rst ﬁ fteen to eigh teen 
months of life when they received the MMR vaccination. But after a 
variable period the children regressed, losing speech, language, social 
skills, and imaginative play, descending into autism.”23 Wakeﬁ eld’s an-
nounced link between autism and the so- called “triple jab” received ex-
tensive pop u lar media attention, which likely led some parents to begin 
refusing MMR vaccination for their children, in turn contributing to 
reduced population immunity to measles in Great Britain.
Wakeﬁ eld’s report was based on claims by parents of eight of the 
twelve children in the study that their children developed autism after 
receiving the MMR vaccine. The article acknowledged that the study 

176  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
had not proven an association between the vaccine and autism. To do 
that, you would need to conduct a large- scale epidemiological study to 
examine rates of autism in children who had and who had not received 
the vaccine. Wakeﬁ eld’s promotion of an association in his press confer-
ences prompted Paul Ofﬁ t, a pediatrics professor at the University of 
Pennsylvania and a noted virologist, to comment sardonically in his 
book Autism’s False Prophets, “It would have been more accurate if he 
had said he hadn’t provided any evidence that MMR caused autism and 
had merely reported the convictions of the parents of eight autistic chil-
dren.”24 Even if Wakeﬁ eld had conducted a large- scale epidemiological 
study showing that vaccinated children had higher rates of autism, he 
still would not have demonstrated a causal link. Recall that to dem-
onstrate causation, an experimenter must use random assignment to 
conditions. To make such an inference, Wakeﬁ eld would have had 
to run a clinical trial in which some children  were randomly assigned 
to receive a vaccine and others to receive a placebo, and he then would 
have had to show that the rates of autism differed signiﬁ cantly between 
these two groups.
Not only has no such clinical trial ever been conducted—nor could 
it ethically be conducted—but extensive epidemiological studies with 
hundreds of thousands of children have shown no association whatso-
ever. The rates of autism are no higher among children who have been 
vaccinated than among those who  haven’t. The link between vaccines 
and autism is illusory— there’s actually no association whatsoever, let 
alone a causal one. People perceive a pattern that ﬁ ts their beliefs and 
expectations, and they infer a causal relationship from a sequence of 
events. Yet the anecdotal evidence provided by a few patients inspired 
an international fear of a highly effective vaccine.25
What Mother Teresa, Quentin Tarantino, 
and Jenny McCarthy All Know
The extensive epidemiological evidence against a link between vaccines 
and autism and the lack of any experiments showing such a link estab-
lish that any inference of causality is an illusion. Vaccines  can’t cause 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  177
autism if vaccinations aren’t even statistically associated with autism. 
Given such incontrovertible evidence, rates of vaccination should re-
turn to the levels that effectively eliminated measles as a common dis-
ease. The vaccine is safe and effective in preventing measles, and it is 
entirely unrelated to autism. Game over, right?
Not exactly. As authors Chip and Dan Heath note in their engaging 
book Made to Stick, personal anecdotes are more memorable and stick in 
our minds much longer than abstract data.26 They quote Mother Teresa: 
“If I look at the mass, I will never act. If I look at the one, I will.” Anec-
dotes are inherently more persuasive than statistics. Precisely because 
 anecdotes capitalize on the power of narrative, they hold considerable 
sway over all of us. You might know from reading Consumer Reports that 
Hondas and Toyotas have excellent reliability. Consumers  Union, the 
publisher of Consumer Reports, surveys thousands of car own ers and com-
piles their responses to generate their reliability ratings. But your one 
friend who complains that his Toyota is perpetually in the shop and in-
sists that he would never buy another one can have more power than 
the aggregated reports of thousands of strangers. We can relate to the 
experiences— especially the suffering— of a single car own er. We  can’t 
relate to the statistical facts about thousands. And for a story to be power-
ful, persuasive, and memorable, we need to be able to empathize. Quentin 
Tarantino, maker of ultraviolent ﬁ lms, explains the importance of empa-
thy this way: “A beheading in a movie  doesn’t make me wince. But when 
somebody gets a paper cut in a movie, you go, ‘Ooh!’ ”27
It can be difﬁ cult to overcome a belief that is formed from compel-
ling anecdotes. Recall the experiment in which people remembered 
pairs of sentences better when they had to infer a cause than when the 
cause was stated explicitly. Anecdotes work in much the same way— we 
naturally generalize from one example to the population as a  whole, 
and our memories for such inferences are inherently sticky. Individual 
examples lodge in our minds, but statistics and averages do not. And it 
makes sense that anecdotes are compelling to us. Our brains evolved 
under conditions in which the only evidence available to us was what 
we experienced ourselves and what we heard from trusted others. Our 
ancestors lacked access to huge data sets, statistics, and experimental 

178  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
methods. By necessity, we learned from speciﬁ c examples, not by com-
piling data from many people across a wide range of situations.
Prominent neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran uses the following 
analogy to explain the power of examples: “Imagine that I cart a pig into 
your living room and tell you that it can talk. You might say ‘Oh, really? 
Show me.’ I then wave my wand and the pig starts talking. You might 
respond, ‘My God! That’s amazing!’ You are not likely to say, ‘Ah, but 
that’s just one pig. Show me a few more and then I might believe you.’ ”28 
If you’re convinced that you’ve seen a talking pig, no amount of scientiﬁ c 
evidence that pigs are incapable of talking would convince you. Instead, 
scientists would need to prove to you that the pig you saw didn’t actually 
talk— that Ramachandran used smoke and mirrors to create an illu-
sion of a talking pig. And the more people circulate similar anecdotes, 
all equally fooled into believing the magic is real, the more science will 
struggle.
If a friend tells you, “I tried this new diet supplement and I now have 
more energy and fewer headaches,” you will infer that the diet supple-
ment caused those beneﬁ ts. And having drawn that inference yourself 
(or trusting your friend who did), you will remember it better. A parent’s 
story about how her son deteriorated after receiving the MMR vaccine 
and her expressed belief that the vaccine caused her son’s autism is com-
pelling, memorable, and hard to dismiss from our thoughts. Even in the 
face of overwhelming scientiﬁ c evidence and statistics culled from stud-
ies of hundreds of thousands of people, that one personalized case carries 
undue inﬂ uence. Parents know what they’ve experienced, but they usu-
ally don’t know the science in the same way. Much as we intuitively 
think we know how a zipper works but never test that intuition, nothing 
impels us to test our anecdote- driven ideas. Like the illusion of knowl-
edge, the illusion of cause can only be revealed by systematically testing 
our understanding, exploring the logical bases of our beliefs, and ac-
knowledging that inferences of causality might derive from evidence 
that cannot really support them. That level of self- examination is one 
that we seldom reach.
Enter Jenny McCarthy, former Playboy centerfold, star of a hit MTV 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  179
series, actress, and mother of a boy diagnosed with autism. With the best 
of intentions and a desire to help children like her own, she has inadver-
tently become a spokesmodel for an illusion. When McCarthy’s son, 
Evan, was diagnosed with autism, she, like many parents, began looking 
for a cause. And despite overwhelming scientiﬁ c evidence against a link 
between vaccinations and autism, she locked onto that false lead as the 
explanation: “It’s an infection and/or toxins and/or funguses on top of 
vaccines that push children into this neurological downslide which we 
call autism.” So convinced was she by her personal experience that she 
stated baldly in response to a question about whether parents should vac-
cinate their children, “If I had another child, there’s no way in hell.”29 
She made similar claims on the Oprah Winfrey Show, lending support to 
the unfounded fears of a vast audience of parents worried that vaccines 
can cause autism. Unfortunately, her advocacy, coupled with frequent 
media coverage of the illusory link, has been effective. The sad result 
is lowered population immunity to diseases like measles, which makes 
possible outbreaks like the one we described at the beginning of this 
chapter.
The powerful story of a mother who is convinced she understands the 
true reason for her son’s illness is far more inﬂ uential than literally dozens 
of studies with hundreds of thousands of children showing that her rea-
son is bunk. (It also makes for more engaging tele vi sion.) Just as Jennifer 
Thompson’s powerful testimony about being raped led to the conviction 
of Ronald Cotton, the story of one mother’s experience overwhelms our 
ability to properly weigh the evidence. It appeals to emotion, to our natu-
ral tendency to empathize with a person in pain, and to our tendency to 
give undue inﬂ uence to anecdotes. Unfortunately, as we empathize with 
someone’s experiences, we become less critical of the message those expe-
riences convey. We also remember the message better. That is the basis of 
many advertising campaigns— if you can make the viewer empathize 
with the actors in the advertisement, people become less critical of what 
they have to say. In the case of autism, the consequences have been cata-
strophic.
If people want to eschew vaccinating their children, thereby putting 

180  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
them at risk of devastating illnesses, current law essentially gives them 
that right. However, that choice is not made in a vacuum. By not vac-
cinating your own children, you put other children at risk of exposure 
during an outbreak. As virus expert Paul Ofﬁ t notes, “There are 500,000 
people in the United States who  can’t be vaccinated. They  can’t be vac-
cinated because they’re on cancer chemotherapy, or they’ve had a bone 
marrow transplant, or a solid organ transplant, or they’re receiving ste-
roids because they have severe asthma. They depend on those around 
them being vaccinated.”30 When such children come into contact with 
measles, they can die.
Vaccination enables a barricade against the rapid spread of the dis-
ease by making it possible to effectively quarantine a small number of 
people. The more unvaccinated people in a population, the greater the 
likelihood that an infection in one person will snowball into a broad 
outbreak. The relatively high levels of vaccination that still prevail in 
the United States are the reason why the outbreak in Indiana was easily 
halted. In Britain, where the media gave more coverage to Wakeﬁ eld’s 
publicity campaign, widespread outbreaks are increasingly common 
and measles is again considered endemic. That is what happens when 
the media gives airtime and weight to anecdotal claims of causality 
rather than proper epidemiological studies.
To some extent, we all must rely on secondary sources. We all put our 
trust in experts and the advice they give. Scientists, too, are affected by 
anecdotes and empathy. We tend to be more trusting of ideas from people 
close to us and more dismissive of those we know less well. Yet science has 
a way of ﬁ ltering out unfounded conclusions: determine whether the stud-
ies behind them can be replicated. Anecdotes don’t cumulate in the way 
that large scientiﬁ c studies can. And scientiﬁ c training does help in deter-
mining which sources to trust. McCarthy, for all of her good intentions, 
has devoted her energy and charm to attracting media coverage to a sci-
entiﬁ cally debunked explanation for autism, effectively diverting atten-
tion and resources from more promising research on the condition.
McCarthy’s reliance on anecdotes over the scientiﬁ c method and more 
rigorous statistical analysis has also fueled her belief in false cures for 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  181
autism. She is convinced that she cured her son’s autism through “a 
gluten- free, casein- free diet, vitamin supplementation, detox of metals, 
and anti- fungals for yeast overgrowth that plagued his intestines.”31 But 
she’s astonished that the medical and scientiﬁ c communities  haven’t 
jumped to investigate her son’s miraculous recovery: “What might sur-
prise a lot of you is that  we’ve never been contacted by a single member 
of the CDC, the American Academy of Pediatrics, or any other health 
authority to evaluate and understand how Evan recovered from autism.”
Could McCarthy be right that her special diet cured her son? Possibly. 
Is it likely? Not at all. Her regimen is just the latest in a long list of alleged 
cures for autism. Given the overwhelming scientiﬁ c evidence that autism 
has strong ge ne tic bases and that brain development in people with 
autism differs markedly from brain development in typical children, it’s 
more likely that Evan’s improvements resulted from extensive behavioral 
modiﬁ cation therapy that does help some children with autism. Or per-
haps his symptoms just became less pronounced as he matured. It’s even 
possible that Evan did not have autism in the ﬁ rst place, but instead had 
another disorder with similar symptoms that could have improved in re-
sponse to medicines he was given for seizures.32
The tools of scientiﬁ c reasoning can resolve questions like whether or 
not vaccines are linked to autism, but people do not necessarily accept 
the results of scientiﬁ c studies, even when the data are overwhelming. 
An earlier false lead in the search for an autism cure focused on the 
hormone secretin, which plays a role in the digestive system. Anecdotal 
evidence from a small number of cases suggested that injection of secre-
tin obtained from pigs led to the elimination of autistic symptoms. Yet 
more than a dozen small clinical trials showed it to be no more effective 
than a placebo injection of salt water. And a large-scale clinical trial 
examining multiple doses of synthetic secretin, sponsored by a drug 
company seeking FDA approval to market the synthetic hormone as an 
autism treatment, found no beneﬁ t.33 That is science at work: Research-
ers test the hypothesis that a drug is effective by randomly assigning 
some people to receive the treatment and others to receive a placebo, and 
then they mea sure the outcome. The problem comes when people must 

182  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
reason about the outcome— do they trust the science, or do they trust 
their often ﬂ awed intuitions? Do they believe that they know better?
Adrian Sandler and his colleagues conducted one of these clinical tri-
als. They randomly assigned 28 children to receive a dose of secretin and 
another 28 to receive a placebo. Not surprisingly (at least in hindsight), 
they found no beneﬁ t whatsoever from the secretin. The more interest-
ing ﬁ nding of this study came from interviews conducted afterward 
with the parents of the children: Even after learning that secretin had no 
beneﬁ t at all, 69 percent of them remained interested in injecting their 
child with it. In another double- blind study, parents  were asked to guess 
whether their child had received secretin or the placebo. Parents often 
believe that they can detect effects that are missed by the more objective 
mea sures used in studies, and they use that belief to justify their contin-
ued faith in the efﬁ cacy of the treatment. In this case, though, the par-
ents could not even guess successfully whether or not their child had 
received secretin— they had no idea whether their child had received the 
drug precisely because the drug had no detectable effect.
A central problem in combating medical anecdotes with hard data is 
that in any clinical trial, some people receiving the treatment will im-
prove and some won’t. Our tendency is to remember the cases where 
people improved and to assume that the treatment caused the improve-
ment. What we usually fail to do is to compare the rates of improvement 
with the treatment and without the treatment. If the treatment has a 
causal effect, then a greater proportion of those who received the treat-
ment should improve than those who didn’t. If the treatment  doesn’t 
have a causal effect, then other, uncontrolled factors probably led some 
people to improve anyhow.
Just as business authors rarely consider how many companies follow 
the ideas they champion but still fail, or how many companies succeed 
with other approaches, people thinking about stories of vaccination and 
autism do not tally up the number of children who receive vaccines and 
do not develop autism, who show symptoms before vaccination, or who 
show symptoms without having been vaccinated. When these numbers 
are properly taken into account, it becomes clear that children tend to 

JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS  183
be diagnosed with autism at the same rates and at the same ages regard-
less of whether or not they received vaccinations.34 The problem is 
 exacerbated by the typical developmental trajectory of cognition and 
behavior. As any parent knows, development is not a continuous, grad-
ual pro cess. Just as children grow physically in spurts, they develop cog-
nitively in spurts as well. Children with autism are much the same. For 
long stretches, they might show no improvement, only to show a big 
change in a short time frame. If parents happen to notice improvement 
while they are trying some new miracle cure, they will readily associate 
the treatment with the improvement.35
Accepting that a perceived cause is illusory can be difﬁ cult, and over-
coming anecdotes with science and statistics can be even harder. Perhaps 
the best indication of the powerful hold of these anecdotal hypotheses 
comes from the emotions they inspire. Ofﬁ t’s authoritative book on the 
lack of scientiﬁ c links between autism and vaccination has an average 
customer rating of 3.9 on the 1– 5 scale at Amazon .com. However, in 
this case, the average is not typical of the individual reviews. Of the 102 
reviewers at the time of this writing, not a single one gives the book the 
middle rating (three stars), whereas 70 give it the highest possible rating 
and 25 give it the lowest possible rating!36
Despite the now- overwhelming evidence that vaccinations are not at 
all associated with autism, 29 percent of people in our national survey 
agreed with the statement “vaccines given to children are partly re-
sponsible for causing autism.”37 It’s a bit reassuring that all the media 
attention to this illusory cause hasn’t inﬂ uenced more people, but sci-
ence can only claim a partial victory at best. If 29 percent of parents 
follow through on such beliefs and do not vaccinate their children, 
population immunity could drop precipitously, leading to widespread 
measles outbreaks. Moreover, new autism “cures” relying on anecdotal 
evidence rather than careful experimentation continue to surface and 
lead parents down dangerous paths. We hope that reading this chapter 
has given you some immunity to these attempts to exploit the illusion 
of cause.
We have explored three ways the illusion of cause can affect us. First, 

184  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
we perceive patterns in randomness, and we interpret these repeating 
patterns as predictions of future events. Second, we look at events that 
happen together as having a causal relationship. Finally, we tend to in-
terpret events that happened earlier as the causes of events that happened 
or appeared to happen later. The illusion of cause has deep roots. We 
humans are distinct from other primates in our ability to perform “causal 
inference.” Even young children realize that when one object hits another, 
it can make the other object move. They can reason about hypothetical 
causes as well: If an object moved, something must have caused it to 
move. Our primate relatives generally do not make these inferences, and 
consequently, they have trouble learning about causes that they  can’t 
see.38 On the timeline of evolution, therefore, the ability to infer the exis-
tence of hidden causes is quite recent, and new mechanisms often need 
reﬁ nement. We have no trouble inferring causes— the real trouble is that 
we are sometimes too good at inferring causes for our own good.

6
C H A P T E R
get smart quick!
B
efore the 2007 national football League season, as before 
every season, the New York Jets made several adjustments to the 
team. Rookies arrived at training camp, some veterans left the team, 
other players had to compete for positions on the starting roster, and 
the playbook was updated. But one change was more unusual: Head 
Coach Eric Mangini ordered that the stadium loudspeakers play classi-
cal music— speciﬁ cally, compositions by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart— 
during team practices. “Mozart’s music and brain waves are very similar, 
and it stimulates learning,” explained Mangini, a coach known for me-
ticulously preparing his team.1
Eric Mangini has much company in believing that listening to Mo-
zart can make you smarter. An entrepreneur named Don Campbell 
trademarked the phrase “The Mozart Effect” and used it to market a 
series of books and CDs for adults and children alike. Campbell even 
consults with hospitals on the optimal design of sound systems to 
maximize the healing powers of music.2 In 1998, Governor Zell Miller 
persuaded the Georgia legislature to spend public money to issue clas-
sical music tapes to all parents of newborn babies in the state. As part 
of his state- of- the- state speech, he played Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” to 

186  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
the legislators and asked, “Don’t you feel smarter already?”3 A hospital 
in Slovakia puts headphones on all of the infants in its nursery, within 
hours of their birth, to give them a true head start on building their 
brainpower. “Mozart’s music has a very good effect on the development 
of the intelligence quotient,” said the doctor who started the practice 
there.4
So far, we have discussed several everyday illusions that expose errors 
in the way people think about their own minds, and we have tried to 
convince you that these errors can have dramatic consequences for human 
affairs. We have also suggested ways to minimize the impact these illu-
sions have on your own life. With our understanding of these illusions, 
we have found it possible— though far from easy— to change our mind- 
set so as to recognize and escape them at least some of the time. But we 
would all be better off if there  were a simple way to overcome everyday 
illusions, a way to increase our brainpower enough to make the illusions 
just disappear.
The illusion of potential leads us to think that vast reservoirs of un-
tapped mental ability exist in our brains, just waiting to be accessed— if 
only we knew how. The illusion combines two beliefs: ﬁ rst, that beneath 
the surface, the human mind and brain harbor the potential to perform 
at much higher levels, in a wide range of situations and contexts, than 
they typically do; and second, that this potential can be released with 
simple techniques that are easily and rapidly implemented. The story of 
the Mozart effect is a perfect illustration of how this illusion can trans-
form a claim with almost no scientiﬁ c support into a pop u lar legend 
that fuels multimillion- dollar businesses, so we will begin this chapter 
by going into it in depth.
“The Magic Genius of Mozart”
The Mozart effect burst into public consciousness in October 1993 when 
Nature, one of the top two scientiﬁ c journals (the other being Science), 
published a one- page article by Frances Rauscher, Gordon Shaw, and 
Katherine Ky under the innocuous title, “Music and Spatial Task Per-

GET SMART QUICK!  187
for mance.”5 Shaw, a physics professor who had shifted his interests to 
neuroscience, together with his student Xiaodan Leng, had developed 
a mathematical theory of how neurons in the brain work  together. As a 
classical music enthusiast, Shaw noticed some similarities between the 
mathematical structure of classical pieces and the patterns his theory 
predicted would be found in the electrical activity of neurons. From 
this perceived similarity, he made the prediction that merely listening 
to music could enhance the function of one’s brain— but only the right 
kind of music.6 Shaw believed that Mozart had composed music that 
would “optimally resonate with the inherent internal neural language,” 
and that it would have the greatest enhancing effect. As he later wrote, 
“The magic genius of Mozart perhaps displayed a supreme use of the 
inherent cortical language in his music.”7
To help him test his theory, Shaw hired Frances Rauscher, a former 
concert cellist who had switched her profession to psychology, and to-
gether they conducted a simple experiment. Each of thirty- six college 
students performed three tests taken from a standard IQ test battery: 
“pattern analysis,” “matrix reasoning,” and “paper folding and cutting.” 
In the pattern- analysis task, subjects constructed objects out of blocks 
according to patterns they  were given. In the matrix-reasoning task, 
subjects selected which of several shapes would complete a pattern 
composed of other abstract shapes. In the paper- folding- and- cutting 
task, subjects viewed a picture of an origami- like design, with dashed 
and solid lines showing where one would fold and cut the pattern. 
Then the subjects chose which of several pictures accurately showed 
what the paper would look like after being unfolded.
Before taking these tests, the subjects listened to one of the following 
recordings: ten minutes of Mozart’s “Sonata for Two Pianos in D Major 
(K.448),” ten minutes of “relaxation instructions designed to lower blood 
pressure,” or ten minutes of silence. The sonata is described as “gallant 
from beginning to end . . .  one of the most profound and mature of all 
Mozart’s compositions.”8 According to the article, the subjects who did 
well on one of the tests did well on the others: There  were signiﬁ cant cor-
relations among all the tests, just as would be expected for the subparts 

188  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
of an IQ test, or any test of general cognitive ability like the SAT. So 
Shaw and colleagues combined the three tests into a single measure of 
what they called “abstract reasoning ability” and transformed it to the 
scale of IQ scores, which have an average of 100 points for the general 
population. Then they compared the three listening conditions, and 
found that the scores after sitting in silence  were 110, after listening to 
relaxation instructions they  were 111, and after listening to the Mozart 
sonata they  were 119.
Thus, listening to Mozart appeared to make the students smarter, by 
eight to nine IQ points. Although nine points might seem small, it’s 
not: An average person, who is by deﬁ nition more intelligent than 50 
percent of other people, would be more intelligent than 70 percent of 
other people after listening to the Mozart sonata. The simple tonic of 
ten minutes of classical music, if its effects could be harnessed, would 
propel a typical student past 20 percent of his or her relaxing or silence- 
enjoying peers, potentially turning Bs into As and failing grades into 
passing ones.
The media reported this new scientiﬁ c ﬁ nding with enthusiasm. 
 “Mozart Makes You Smarter” read the headline in the Boston Globe. “Lis-
tening to Mozart is not only a music lover’s plea sure. It’s a brain tonic,” 
the article began.9 Less than a year after Rauscher, Shaw, and Ky pub-
lished their article, music companies started creating new CDs to exploit 
the publicity, with titles such as Mozart for Your Mind, Mozart Makes You 
Smarter, and Tune Your Brain with Mozart. Ironically, most of these did 
not include the K.448 piano sonata that was used in the experiment, but 
it didn’t matter. Sales ran into the millions.10 In his address to the Geor-
gia state legislature, Zell Miller cited the Rauscher article: “There’s even a 
study that showed that after college students listened to a Mozart piano 
sonata for ten minutes, their IQ scores increased by nine points . . .  no 
one doubts that listening to music, especially at a very early age, affects 
the spatial- temporal reasoning that underlies math, engineering, and 
chess.”11
Subsequent research reports from the Mozart effect team also  were 
covered extensively in the press. Just like the original, these new experi-

GET SMART QUICK!  189
ments found dramatic improvements in mental task per for mance im-
mediately after the Mozart sonata, but not after silence or relaxation.12 
Meanwhile, psychologists interested in music and cognition began to 
examine this discovery, which was intriguing because no previous re-
search had shown that merely listening to music could have such a large 
effect on mental ability.
The ﬁ rst in de pen dent research group to publish its ﬁ ndings was 
headed by Con Stough of the University of Auckland in New Zea-
land.13 They used the same Mozart sonata and silence conditions as 
in the original study, and added a new one: dance music, speciﬁ cally 
ten minutes of “Fake 88 (House Mix)” and “What Can I Say to Make 
You Love Me? (Hateful Club Mix)” by Alexander  O’Neal. Thirty 
subjects participated in each listening condition and worked on part 
of the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices test after each one. This 
test is considered an excellent mea sure of general intelligence. Stough’s 
team found that the Mozart group outperformed the control groups by 
only about one IQ point, not even close to the eight to nine points re-
ported by Rauscher. A one- point difference is small enough that it 
could easily have arisen just from the random variations in the mea-
sures of cognitive abilities, or from accidental differences among the 
subjects assigned to the Mozart and control groups. Other researchers 
reported similar experiences.14
Along with two of his students, Kenneth Steele, a psychology profes-
sor at Appalachian State University in North Carolina, tried a Mozart 
experiment in 1997. They used a “digit span” test, which mea sures the 
longest list of digits that you can hold in short- term memory accurately 
enough to repeat it back, either forward or backward. This test is strongly 
associated with general intelligence: the smarter you are, the longer your 
backward digit span. But listening to Mozart had no effect on digit 
span. Steele tried again the next year, this time copying the design of 
Rauscher and Shaw’s 1995 follow- up study, which had also produced a 
large Mozart effect. Steele used the paper- folding task rather than digit 
span, but again he found no beneﬁ ts of Mozart.15 The next year the 
American Psychological Society’s ﬂ agship journal, Psychological Science, 

190  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
published these new results under the title “Mystery of the Mozart 
 Effect: Failure to Replicate,” and the society issued a press release head-
lined “ ‘Mozart Effect’ De- Bunked.” Almost immediately, the headline 
was changed to “ ‘Mozart Effect’ Challenged” after Gordon Shaw threat-
ened the APS with a lawsuit.16
Steele wrote later that when he started his experiments, he expected to 
replicate the Mozart effect.17 Indeed, researchers rarely conduct experi-
ments that they think will fail! Experiments can fail for many reasons 
even when the theory that motivated them is correct. In this case, the 
theory that listening to Mozart increases cognitive per for mance could 
be true, but any par tic u lar experiment intended to test the theory 
could fail to support it because of a variety of errors in design or execu-
tion, none of which have anything to do with the correctness of the the-
ory. But after repeated failures to ﬁ nd any cognitive improvement after 
listening to Mozart, Steele came to believe that there was no Mozart ef-
fect to be found.
The Media and the Aftermath
The studies by Stough, Steele, and others received little notice, but the 
publications of the original discoverers continued to inﬂ uence public 
perceptions and even public policy— Rauscher even testiﬁ ed about her 
ﬁ ndings before a committee of the U.S. Congress. The media gives 
tremendous weight and coverage to the ﬁ rst study published on a re-
search question, and essentially ignores all of those that come later. This 
bias is unsurprising— fame goes to the discoverer, not to the person 
who got there a few months later, or who just followed up on the origi-
nal work. But even in science, the judgment of greatness is a retrospec-
tive one that only history can render, and journalism is well known to 
be only the ﬁ rst draft of history. When a new ﬁ nding is announced, 
journalists and other observers might be hard- pressed to say, “I won’t 
report this story until I see it replicated by at least two other laborato-
ries.” And restraint is all the less likely when the impact might be as 
great as nine IQ points in ten minutes. The ﬁ rst report of a new scien-

GET SMART QUICK!  191
tiﬁ c ﬁ nding is analogous to the front- page coverage granted to a high- 
proﬁ le criminal indictment; the news that the results didn’t hold up 
winds up in the back pages (if it is covered at all), next to the story about 
the suspect’s eventual exoneration.
As the Mozart effect story evolved, it became even more fantastical. 
Even though all of the relevant studies had been conducted with college 
students or adults, the legend spread that Mozart was great for children, 
babies, and even fetuses. A Chinese newspaper columnist wrote, “Ac-
cording to studies conducted in the West, babies who hear Cosi Fan 
Tutte or the Mass in C Minor during gestation are likely to come out of 
the womb smarter than their peers.”18
Social psychologists Adrian Bangerter and Chip Heath mea sured the 
news coverage devoted to the initial Rauscher-Shaw study and found that 
in 1993, the year of its publication, it received plenty of media attention, 
but no more than the other widely covered research studies published in 
Nature around the same time. (These concerned topics like schizo phre-
nia, the orbit of Pluto, skin cancer, and even how many sexual partners 
men and women claim to have.) In the ensuing eight years, though, the 
Mozart effect paper received more than ten times as much coverage as 
those studies. The media’s interest in the others diminished sharply 
after the initial reports, but coverage of the Mozart effect only grew.19
Chris’s interest in the Mozart effect was piqued in early 1998 when 
he was writing an article about the concept of intelligence. The enthu-
siastic public reaction to the Mozart effect stems partly from the way 
that the concept of intelligence is presented in the media. Intelligence 
tests are thought by many to be a simplistic, arbitrary, inaccurate, and 
even racist way of understanding human cognition.20 What better way 
to debunk IQ tests than to show that just listening to a few minutes of 
music can dramatically change your score? The reception of the Mozart 
effect among experts on cognition was different. Chris noticed that the 
failures to replicate the original Rauscher, Shaw, and Ky ﬁ nding  were 
piling up, and that almost all of the successful replications came from 
the original team, not from in de pen dent researchers. In science, when-
ever just one or a few labs can produce an effect, and others cannot (as 

192  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
in the celebrated case of cold fusion), scientists and skeptics begin to 
doubt the effect itself. Was the Mozart effect real, or just a myth?
Chris decided to conduct a meta- analysis, a statistical procedure that 
combines all of the available data from all of the studies on a research 
question to determine the best answer. The value of meta- analysis can 
perhaps be best understood by analogy to the classic carnival game of 
guessing the number of jelly beans in a jar that we discussed in Chapter 
3. If you have a large group of people who want to come up with their 
best collective estimate of an unknown quantity, the way to do it is to 
have everyone make his or her guess privately, and then average together 
all the guesses. Each person’s guess is unlikely to be right, but it is equally 
likely to be too high or too low. As a result, if you average all of the in de-
pen dent guesses, the estimates that are too large will cancel out the ones 
that are too small, and you will end up with a more accurate estimate of 
the actual total.21
The same principle applies to scientiﬁ c research. Any individual 
study might be affected by inadvertent biases or errors that distort its 
results, leading to an imprecise estimate of the true effect (here, how 
much your IQ increases after listening to Mozart). By averaging across 
a number of studies, though, any random errors that led to over- or 
underestimates of the size of an effect will tend to average out, leaving a 
better estimate of the truth. Because they are based on all of the rele-
vant studies, the results of a meta- analysis are not unduly inﬂ uenced 
by a single memorable or well- publicized ﬁ nding, such as the original 
Rauscher- Shaw article.
After scouring scientiﬁ c journals for experiments like the original 
one, Chris noticed that— aside from Steele’s article in Psychological 
Science— all of the followup studies  were published in journals that 
most researchers never read, and many have never even heard of. He 
wrote to the authors of many of the articles to request additional data or 
information he needed to evaluate their results. In total, he found six-
teen experiments (including the original) that tested the Mozart  effect 
and  were published in peer- reviewed scientiﬁ c journals. All of them used 
the same sonata and compared it with silence, relaxation, or both. For 

GET SMART QUICK!  193
each experiment, Chris calculated the size of the difference in per for-
mance between those subjects who had listened to Mozart and those 
who had not. When compared with silence, Mozart improved per for-
mance by the equivalent of 1.4 IQ points, only one- sixth as much as the 
Rauscher-Shaw team had found. For experiments comparing the sonata 
with relaxation, the advantage for Mozart turned out to be three IQ 
points, about a third as much as the original article reported, but still 
twice as large as in the comparison between Mozart and silence. There 
may be good reason for this small beneﬁ t: Relaxation reduces anxiety 
and arousal, but being in a “laid- back” state is not ideal for solving dif-
ﬁ cult problems on IQ tests. Nor is being excessively anxious, of course—
a happy medium is best. Compared with relaxation, sitting in silence 
likely has a similar, but weaker effect— without external stimulation, 
your mind may wander, making you less prepared for hard work.
Chris concluded that the entire “Mozart effect” might have nothing 
to do with a positive effect of listening to music. Rather than Mozart 
making you smarter, sitting in silence or getting relaxed might make you 
dumber! Viewed this way, Mozart’s music is a control condition that 
resembles the general level of mental stimulation we encounter during 
everyday life, and silence and relaxation are “treatments” that reduce cog-
nitive per for mance. In either case, though, there is little or no Mozart 
effect to explain.
Several additional studies could not be included in Chris’s meta- 
analysis because they did not include the relaxation or silence control 
conditions. However, they did reveal another possible explanation for 
the apparent beneﬁ t of Mozart. In one, British researcher Susan Hallam 
arranged for the BBC to conduct a massive experiment on eight thousand 
children in two hundred schools around the United Kingdom. The chil-
dren listened to either a Mozart string quintet, a discussion about scien-
tiﬁ c experiments, or three pop u lar songs (“Country  House” by Blur, 
“Return of the Mack” by Mark Morrison, and “Stepping Stone” by PJ 
and Duncan), and then performed cognitive tests like those originally 
used by Rauscher. The children who listened to pop u lar music did the 
best, and there was no difference in per for mance between those who 

194  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
listened to Mozart and those who heard the science discussion. An 
 article on this ﬁ nding cheekily dubbed it the “Blur Effect.”22
A second study by Kristin Nantais and Glenn Schellenberg of the 
University of Toronto found no overall difference in cognitive task per-
for mance after listening to the Mozart sonata or the short story “The 
Last Rung on the Ladder” by Stephen King. But subjects did do better 
after listening to what they liked best.23 The most sensible explanation 
for this ﬁ nding, as well as for the “Blur Effect,” is that your mood im-
proves when you hear what you like, and you do modestly better on IQ 
tests when you are in a better mood. The effect has nothing to do with 
increasing your intelligence per se.
Chris submitted his meta- analysis to Nature, the journal that pub-
lished the initial 1993 article. He did not expect the editors to accept it, 
because its conclusion— that any small beneﬁ ts that do exist result from 
arousal and positive mood rather than any special property of Mozart’s 
music— could be interpreted as questioning the journal’s decision to 
publish the ﬁ rst paper. To his surprise and delight, they accepted the 
paper and published it in August 1999 alongside another report of 
a failure to replicate by Kenneth Steele and his colleagues. Rauscher 
was given space to reply, and Nature highlighted the exchange in its 
weekly press bulletin. The media, loving a good ﬁ ght, even among staid 
academics, sprang into action: Chris was interviewed for CNN, CBS, 
and NBC news programs. Rauscher and Steele debated on the Today 
show, with Matt Lauer as referee. Chris’s article even earned him a 
short appearance on an episode of Penn and Teller: Bullshit! entitled, 
charmingly, “Baby Bullshit.”
Recall the media analysis done by Adrian Bangerter and Chip Heath. 
They found a spike in coverage of the Mozart effect in 1999, coincident 
with these articles in Nature, and then things died down again. Did 
Chris’s meta- analysis, and the studies by Steele and Schellenberg, ﬁ nally 
debunk the Mozart effect? Yes and no. Bangerter and Heath found that 
news articles mentioning the positive effect of listening to Mozart for 
adults became less and less frequent, but that articles falsely claiming 
that Mozart made babies smarter became more common! Indeed, this 

GET SMART QUICK!  195
trend started just one year after the original Rauscher-Shaw report. To 
be clear, we repeat that no published studies had ever examined the ef-
fect with babies!24 Our national survey of ﬁ fteen hundred adults was 
conducted in 2009, ten years after Chris’s meta- analysis was published. 
It found that 40 percent of people agreed that “listening to music by 
Mozart will increase your intelligence.” A majority disagreed, but keep 
in mind that the scientiﬁ c evidence does not support this claim at all. It 
would be better if almost everybody disagreed, as they would with a 
statement like “on average, women are taller than men.”
Indeed, the Mozart effect still resonates with many. Eric Mangini 
must have been a believer in 2007 when he made classical music the new 
workout soundtrack for the New York Jets. Until we each had our ﬁ rst 
child, we didn’t realize the extent to which the Mozart- for- babies myth 
has permeated the child- care industry. Intelligent, highly educated friends 
sent us toys that included— as a matter of routine, not a special feature— a 
“Mozart” setting that played classical music. The Baby Einstein company 
was founded in a basement with $5,000 in capital in 1997 (hot on the 
heels of the initial burst of Mozart effect publicity) and grew to sales of 
$25 million in 2001 before it was acquired by Disney.25 The names of its 
DVDs—Baby Mozart, Baby Einstein, Baby Van Gogh, and so on— imply 
that by watching them, your child will become more like a genius and 
less like an ordinary baby. Videos designed to be watched by babies are 
now a $100- million- a-year business,26 even though the American Acad-
emy of Pediatrics currently recommends that children younger than two 
years old watch no tele vi sion or videos whatsoever.
A research group led by Frederick J. Zimmerman, a pediatrician at 
the University of Washington, attempted to test the effect of the prod-
ucts inspired by the Mozart effect on children’s cognitive abilities. The 
researchers commissioned a telephone survey of parents of children less 
than two years old in the states of Washington and Montana. Each par-
ent answered a series of questions about how much time his or her child 
spent watching educational tele vi sion, movies, and other media, with a 
separate category for “baby DVDs/videos.” Later in the survey, the par-
ents  were asked whether their children understood and/or used each of 

196  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
ninety words typically found in the vocabularies of young children. 
There  were separate vocabulary lists for infants (age 8– 16 months) and 
toddlers (age 17– 24 months), so the researchers looked at these age groups 
separately. For the infants, each additional hour per day spent watching 
baby DVDs was associated with an 8 percent reduction in vocabulary. 
For the toddlers, there was no signiﬁ cant relationship between DVD 
viewing and vocabulary size.27
If you have become sensitive to the illusion of cause that we discussed 
in Chapter 5, you will notice that this is just a correlational study. The 
researchers  couldn’t randomly assign some babies to watch videos 
and others to not watch videos, so a headline of “Watching Baby DVDs 
Will Make Your Child Dumber” is not justiﬁ ed. The family environ-
ments of infants who watched more videos might be less conducive to 
vocabulary building in other ways. In their statistical analysis, Zim-
merman and his colleagues accounted for some of the most likely fac-
tors that could make the DVD- watching children different, such as 
how much education their parents had, how much their parents read to 
them, how much other media they watched, whether they watched 
alone or with their parents, and so on. Even after all of those factors 
 were accounted for, DVD watching was still associated with smaller 
vocabularies. Although we cannot make a strong causal inference from 
this study, it certainly provides no support for the belief that watching 
videos or listening to Mozart improves cognition.
Disney, which was getting $200 million in annual revenue from the 
Baby Einstein brand when the Zimmerman group published its article, 
reacted sharply. Its CEO, Robert Iger, publicly criticized the study as 
“ﬂ awed” for not differentiating between different baby DVD products, 
implying that other DVDs might lead to smaller vocabularies, but not 
those made by his company.28 A Disney spokesman pounced on a state-
ment by one of Zimmerman’s coauthors, who told a newspaper that the 
study had found “harm” to children’s vocabularies from baby DVDs. 
The company had a point  here: As we have noted, the study was corre-
lational, not causal, so strictly speaking, harm was not found.
Unfortunately, Disney’s spokesman undermined his defense of scien-

GET SMART QUICK!  197
tiﬁ c rigor by making an even more fallacious argument himself: “ ‘Baby 
Einstein’ has been so well- received, and if properly used, they do have 
an impact on infants’ health and happiness.”29 In other words, the 
product must be good for kids because it has been “well- received” (pre-
sumably by parents, many of whom might be understandably grateful 
for something that absorbs the attention of a crying baby for a few min-
utes, and who would like to believe that a product they spent money on 
with good intentions really did beneﬁ t their child). The spokesman of-
fered no evidence, either correlational or causal, to support his claim 
that using the DVDs “properly” is beneﬁ cial.
In the end, Eric Mangini’s own Mozart experiment did not succeed. 
In 2006, he had guided the Jets to a 10– 6 record and a playoff appear-
ance. He added classical music to the practices the next season, and his 
team went 4– 12. Mangini lasted just one more year as the Jets’ head 
coach before being ﬁ red.30
What Lies Beneath
Why does the Mozart effect ﬁ nd such a ready audience? Why do so 
many people buy classical CDs for their infants and DVDs for their tod-
dlers? Why are people so willing to believe that music and videos can 
effortlessly raise their children’s IQs? The Mozart effect masterfully ex-
ploits the illusion of potential. We all would like to be more intelligent, 
and the Mozart effect tells us that we can become more intelligent just 
by listening to classical music. The subtitle to Don Campbell’s book The 
Mozart Effect directly appeals to the illusion: Tapping the Power of Music 
to Heal the Body, Strengthen the Mind, and Unlock the Creative Spirit.
We already mentioned that 40 percent of people still believe in the 
Mozart effect, despite the scientiﬁ c evidence against it. Lest you think 
that this is just a silly belief that has no real importance, consider some 
of the implications. Parents holding this belief might think that they 
are doing just as much, if not more, for their children by sitting them in 
front of a baby DVD or playing classical music than by interacting with 
them. Daycare centers, schools, and other institutions might follow 

198  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
suit. The fad of playing Mozart to babies could substitute for much bet-
ter practices, ones that might actually help the social and intellectual 
development of children. In other words, a belief in the Mozart effect 
might make children worse off than they would have been otherwise, 
as suggested by the Zimmerman group’s study of baby DVDs.
If such a sizable number of people continue to believe in the Mozart 
effect despite its debunking, what about other beliefs in hidden mental 
powers that have not received as severe a public lashing as the Mozart 
effect? In our national telephone survey, we asked several questions that 
touched on other manifestations of the illusion of potential.
Sixty- one percent of our respondents agreed that “hypnosis is useful 
in helping witnesses accurately recall details of crimes.” The idea that 
hypnosis can put the brain into a special state, in which the powers of 
memory are dramatically greater than normal, reﬂ ects a belief in a 
form of easily unlocked potential. But it is false. People under hypnosis 
do generate more “memories” than they do in a normal state, but these 
recollections are as likely to be false as true.31 Hypnosis leads them to 
come up with more information, but not necessarily more accurate 
information. In fact, it might actually be people’s beliefs in the power 
of hypnosis that lead them to recall more things: If people believe that 
they should have better memory under hypnosis, they will try harder 
to retrieve more memories when hypnotized. Unfortunately, there’s no 
way to know whether the memories hypnotized people retrieve are true 
or not— unless of course we know exactly what the person should be 
able to remember. But if we knew that, then we’d have no need to use 
hypnosis in the ﬁ rst place!32
Seventy- two percent of people agreed that “most people use only 
10 percent of their brain capacity.” This strange belief, a staple of adver-
tisements, self- help books, and comedy routines, has been around so 
long that some psychologists have conducted historical investigations of 
its origins.33 In some ways, it is the purest form of the illusion of poten-
tial: If we use only 10 percent of our brain, there must be another 90 
percent waiting to be put to work, if we can just ﬁ gure out how. There 
are so many problems with this belief that it’s hard to know where to 

GET SMART QUICK!  199
begin. Just as some laws cannot be enforced because they are written 
too imprecisely, this statement ought to be declared “void for vague-
ness.” First, there is no known way to mea sure a person’s “brain capac-
ity” or to determine how much of that capacity he or she uses. Second, 
when brain tissue produces no activity whatsoever for an extended 
time, that means it is dead. So, if we only used 10 percent of our brain, 
there would be no possibility of increasing that percentage, short of a 
miraculous resurrection or a brain transplant. Finally, there is no reason 
to suspect that evolution— or even an intelligent designer— would give 
us an organ that is 90 percent inefﬁ cient. Having a large brain is posi-
tively dangerous to the survival of the human species— the large head 
needed to contain it can barely exit the birth canal, leading to a risk of 
death during childbirth. If we used only a fraction of our brain, natural 
selection would have shrunk it long ago.
This “10 percent myth” surfaced long before brain- imaging technolo-
gies like MRI and PET scanning even existed, but misunderstandings of 
neuroscience research might reinforce it. In the pictures of brain activity 
(“brain porn”) that appear in media reports about neuroscience research, 
large areas of the brain are dark, or not “lit up” with blobs of color. How-
ever, the blobs don’t indicate the “active” areas of the brain— they indi-
cate areas that are more active in one situation or group of people than in 
another. For a neurologically normal person, the entire brain, including 
the dark areas, is always “on,” with at least a baseline level of activity, and 
any task you can perform will raise activity in many brain areas. So, 
needless to say, “using more of your brain” will not help you avoid every-
day illusions.
Sixty- ﬁ ve percent of people apparently believe that “if someone be-
hind you is staring at the back of your head, you can sense that they are 
looking at you.” Although it would be nice if we could reach out and 
touch someone with our eyes, our eyes do not emit any such rays, and 
there are no receptors in the back of our head that can detect someone’s 
stare. This false belief rests on the idea that people have hidden, previ-
ously unmea sured perceptual abilities that function in de pen dently of 
our standard ﬁ ve senses, and that this sixth sense can prove useful. The 

200  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
idea has been thoroughly debunked, though. A prominent psychologist 
named Edward Titchener wrote, in the journal Science, “I have tested 
this . . .  in a series of laboratory experiments conducted with persons 
who declared themselves peculiarly susceptible to the stare or peculiarly 
capable of ‘making people turn round’ . . .  the experiments have invari-
ably given a negative result.”34 We  can’t make people turn around by 
looking at them, and we  can’t tell when someone  else is looking at us, at 
least not without ﬁ rst looking back at them.35
Why would people come to believe in such extrasensory perception? 
We tend to remember those cases when we turned around and saw 
someone, but not those cases when we turned around and nobody was 
there (nor the times when someone was there and we didn’t notice, and 
certainly not the “times” when nobody was there and we didn’t notice 
anyone). Recall from Chapter 5 that we are also prone to infer a causal 
pattern when the sequence of events is consistent with a narrative. If 
you start staring at someone and then they happen to turn around, the 
illusion of cause would lead you to the false inference that you caused 
them to turn. And when you infer a cause, you are especially likely to 
remember it.
Since it was utterly obvious to him that people actually  couldn’t feel 
the stares of others, Titchener felt the need to explain why he bothered to 
conduct studies to debunk the idea in the ﬁ rst place. He noted that the 
experiments “have their justiﬁ cation in the breaking- down of a supersti-
tion which has deep and widespread roots in the pop u lar consciousness.” 
He was absolutely right about the prevalence of the “sixth sense” belief. 
Unfortunately, Titchener’s attempts to eradicate this superstition through 
experimentation  were in effec tive.36 The prevalence of the false belief 
about feeling the stares of others has been remarkably stable over time— 
Titchener’s article in Science was published in 1898.
Subliminal Pseudoscience
The most pop u lar false belief in our survey was the idea that “sublimi-
nal messages in advertisements can cause people to buy things,” which 

GET SMART QUICK!  201
was endorsed by 76 percent of respondents. Subliminal persuasion, 
much like the belief that you can feel someone staring, is based on the 
idea that people are inordinately sensitive to weak signals, ones that we 
might not be able to detect using our normal sensory mechanisms. If 
we can change people’s beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors through subtle 
and undetectable inﬂ uences, then in principle we could use those same 
powers to allow ourselves to accomplish great things, releasing abilities 
and skills we didn’t know we had. A belief in the power of subliminal 
persuasion underlies the idea that we can help ourselves quit smoking or 
learn a new language by listening to subliminal recordings while we 
sleep, unlocking the potential for change without exerting any conscious 
effort.
You might have heard of a famous experiment from the 1950s in 
which subliminal messages were shown during movies to drive up sales 
of soda and popcorn. You might also remember reading that advertisers 
embed sexual words and images in photographs to arouse greater desire 
for their products. In his 1973 bestseller Subliminal Seduction, Wilson 
Bryan Key described many examples of such subliminal “embeds” and 
his theories of the psychology behind them.37 The ﬁ rst sentence of 
Key’s book states: “Subliminal perception is a subject that virtually no 
one wants to believe exists, and— if it does exist— they much less be-
lieve that it has any practical application.” If Key was right about public 
sentiment at that time, then our survey and others like it show that 
pop u lar beliefs have changed dramatically in the years since. People 
now overwhelmingly believe that subliminal information affects how 
we think and act.
The movie experiment is one of the ﬁ rst exhibits Key offers to support 
his contention that subliminal advertising has vast power to manipulate 
our minds. According to Key’s account, the experiment was conducted at 
a movie theater in Fort Lee, New Jersey, in 1957. The experiment ran for 
six weeks, during which time two messages  were transmitted to viewers 
on alternate days: “Hungry? Eat Popcorn” and “Drink Coca- Cola.” The 
messages  were displayed for one three- thousandth of a second, once every 
ﬁ ve seconds. The results  were a 58 percent increase in popcorn sales and 

202  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
an 18 percent increase in Coca- Cola sales, presumably compared with 
the period before the messages  were inserted into the movies. When the 
study was reported in the press, the National Association of Broadcasters 
quickly banned its members from using the technique, and the United 
Kingdom and Australia enacted laws proscribing it.
The ﬁ rst color illustration in Key’s book is now famous. It shows an 
ad for Gilbey’s gin, featuring an open bottle next to a tall glass ﬁ lled 
with ice cubes and clear gin. It looks like an ordinary image, but if you 
look closely, you can see three distorted letters making up the word 
“sex” faintly outlined in the ice cubes. Key showed this ad to a thou-
sand college students, and 62 percent of them reported feeling aroused, 
romantic, excited, and the like. Nothing about this study demonstrates 
that the embedded “sex” caused these responses, because there was no 
control group of subjects who  were asked to describe their feelings without 
being shown a liquor ad. It’s possible that any kind of alcohol advertising 
would have induced a similar response, or that these college students  were 
just perpetually horny.
Key reports a better- designed experiment in which two classes, each 
with one hundred students,  were shown a Playboy magazine ad featuring 
a male model. The students  were asked to rate how masculine the image 
was, on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 standing for “very masculine,” and 5 
standing for “very feminine.” One class saw just the ad and gave an aver-
age rating of 3.3 on the scale. The other class saw the ad with the word 
“man” subliminally presented on it, using the same technique as in the 
movie theater experiment. Their average rating was 2.4. Only 3 percent 
of the ﬁ rst class rated the image a 1 or 2, but 61 percent of the second 
class did. Merely pairing the image with a word that was compatible, but 
imperceptible, dramatically shifted the evaluations. Unfortunately, in 
light of everything  else we now know about this kind of experiment, this 
shift was much too dramatic to be believable. Subliminal stimuli typi-
cally have tiny effects (if they have any effects at all), and larger effects 
likely result from stimuli that were not actually subliminal.38
What about the popcorn and Coke study? It may be directly respon-
sible for the public’s belief in the power of subliminal persuasion tech-

GET SMART QUICK!  203
niques. Just one year after the study’s results were announced, a survey 
found that 41 percent of American adults had heard of subliminal ad-
vertising. By 1983, this number had increased to 81 percent, the major-
ity of whom believed that it works, just as in our own poll. Wilson 
Bryan Key, writing in 1973, did not speciﬁ cally mention that an adver-
tising expert named James Vicary was behind the popcorn-Coke experi-
ment. This could be because, more than ten years earlier, Vicary had 
publicly acknowledged that the study was a fraud. In an interview with 
Advertising Age, he confessed that his advertising business had not been 
going well, so he cooked up the “study” to help get more customers. 
Other researchers have attempted to replicate Vicary’s purported ﬁ nd-
ings, and none have succeeded. A Canadian tele vi sion station ﬂ ashed 
“phone now” repeatedly during one of its programs, but there was no 
increase in telephone calls. People who  were watching at the time  were 
later asked what they thought they’d seen. Nobody got the right an-
swer, but many reported having felt hungry or thirsty.39
If you’re like us, you probably ﬁ rst heard about the Vicary “results” 
in high school or college but  were never told they  were fabricated. By 
now you should sense a pattern that itself contributes to the per sis tence 
of beliefs in untapped potential: Initial claims for some new way of 
penetrating the mind’s mysteries are heavily promoted and take on a 
life of their own, but the follow- up research that refutes those claims 
goes almost entirely unnoticed. Scientists have debated for over a cen-
tury whether we can even pro cess the meaning of words or images that 
we do not consciously see.40 But even if we can, that doesn’t mean that 
the information in ultrabrief stimuli can cause us to do things we 
 wouldn’t otherwise do, like buy more popcorn or soda. Despite the lack 
of evidence for subliminal persuasion, people nevertheless persist in 
their belief that such mind control is possible.41 The makers of self- help 
recordings that purport to reprogram your mind and eliminate un-
wanted behaviors like smoking and overeating via subliminal messages 
are not deterred by the double- blind, controlled studies that ﬁ nd zero 
actual beneﬁ t from them.42
The premise of Key’s Subliminal Seduction was the idea that subliminal 

204  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
communication might be even more powerful than more visible forms 
of persuasion, because if we aren’t aware of an advertising message, we 
can’t discount it or think carefully about how it is trying to inﬂ uence 
our behavior. This belief in the powerful effects of subtle inﬂ uences is a 
key part of the illusion of potential. During the 1984 presidential elec-
tion campaign, ABC News anchor Peter Jennings smiled more when 
he spoke about Ronald Reagan, the Republican, than about Walter 
Mondale, the Demo crat. (The anchors of NBC and CBS smiled about 
equally often for each candidate.) According to a small survey, ABC 
viewers in Cleveland  were 13 percent more likely than NBC and CBS 
viewers to vote for Reagan in the 1984 election. In Williamstown, Mas-
sachusetts, the difference was 21 percent, and in Erie, Pennsylvania, it 
was an astonishing 24 percent.43 Did Jennings’s pattern of smiling cause 
his viewers to prefer Reagan? The researchers who conducted this study 
thought so, as did Malcolm Gladwell, who explained the results in his 
bestseller The Tipping Point: “It’s not that smiles and nods are sublimi-
nal messages. They are straightforward and on the surface. It’s just that 
they are incredibly subtle . . .  the ABC viewers who voted for Reagan 
would never, in a thousand years, tell you that they voted that way be-
cause Peter Jennings smiled every time he mentioned the President.” 
But exposure to Peter Jennings was just one tiny component of the elec-
tion coverage experienced by American voters, and the way the press 
reported the election was just one of many factors that affected people’s 
votes.
Think about what is really more likely: that Peter Jennings’s facial 
muscles caused a jump of 13 to 24 percent in votes for Ronald Reagan, 
or that people who viewed ABC News had some preexisting character-
istics that made them prefer that network to the others and made them 
more likely to vote for Reagan. To us, it is much more logical to think 
that the three broadcast TV networks drew different kinds of viewers 
because they broadcast different mixes of shows, and ABC’s viewers at 
that time  were just more conservative than those who watched CBS 
and NBC. Another possible explanation is that these percentage differ-
ences  were just statistical blips arising from the small size of the surveys, 
which included only about one- tenth as many voters as modern- era 

GET SMART QUICK!  205
 po liti cal polls. One reason why many people, perhaps including the re-
search team behind the study, prefer the causal explanation is that, like 
Wilson Bryan Key’s claims about subliminal advertising, it invokes the 
mysterious power of inﬂ uences that lie outside of our awareness.44
Training Your Brain?
If we  can’t unleash untapped mental powers through subliminal mes-
sages or hypnosis, perhaps there are other ways to enhance our abilities 
with relatively little pain. Unless you’ve been living in a cave for the past 
few years, you must have heard or seen advertisements like the follow-
ing tele vi sion commercial for Nintendo’s Brain Age software for its 
gaming systems:45
actor 1:  How long has it been? [hugs his friend and then turns 
toward his wife] Honey, this is my old friend David. We went to 
high school together.
david:  [turns toward his wife] Honey, this is . . .  uhh . . .  
uhh . . .  uhhh . . .  
narrator:  Has this ever happened to you? Exercise your mind 
with Brain Age. Train your brain in minutes a day. By complet-
ing a few challenging exercises and puzzles, you can help keep 
your mind sharp.
Cognitive training is a growing industry that capitalizes on the fear 
most people have of cognitive declines that come with aging. Brain Age 
and its sequel, Brain Age 2, have sold a combined 31 million copies since 
their release in 2005.46 Many other cognitive training programs have 
appeared as well, often promoted with claims that they will help you 
overcome aging’s negative effects on memory with just a few minutes of 
training each day. The website for Mindscape’s Brain Trainer claims 
that “spending 10 to 15 minutes a day on a brain training workout using 
simple exercises and puzzles can improve the skills needed to achieve 
greater success academically and in everyday life.”47
Now that you have read about the Mozart effect, the 10 percent 

206  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
myth, and subliminal persuasion, you can see why these advertisements 
are so effective, and you can begin to inoculate yourself against their 
power. They work by playing on our desire for the quick ﬁ x, the cure- 
all salve that will remedy all our problems. By playing these games for 
only minutes a day, you’ll be better able to come up with that word or 
name on the tip of your tongue, you’ll overcome the limits on your 
memory, and your entire brain will get younger. Just as those promoting 
the usefulness of listening to Mozart as an intelligence booster appeal to 
the desires of parents to help their children succeed, cognitive- training 
games capitalize on our desire to improve our own minds. These appeals 
are in some ways even more powerful because they promise a fountain of 
mental youth that can return our brains to a state when they gave us 
better memory and more efﬁ cient thinking powers.48  We’re already fa-
miliar with the “potential ability” these games purport to release, because 
we know that at some point in our lives, this ability was real rather than 
just potential.
These companies are smart to focus on aging. Most aspects of cogni-
tion, including memory, attention, pro cessing speed, and the ability to 
switch between tasks, decline throughout adulthood.49 These changes 
are noticeable and frustrating. The more often we forget conversations 
we’ve had with a spouse, or struggle to recall the name of a friend, the 
more we long to regain our previous abilities and skills. Just as com-
petitive athletes normally experience a drop- off in skill as they approach 
their forties, the rest of us see many of our mental abilities go downhill 
in middle age. Even for games like chess, in which experts build up a 
mental database of patterns and situations over years of practice, the 
elite levels are dominated by young players; currently, only three of the 
top ﬁ fty players in the world are over forty years old, and approximately 
two- thirds are in their twenties.50
Not all aspects of thinking decline equally, though, and some don’t 
decline at all. Aspects of cognition that are based on accumulated 
knowledge and experience are relatively preserved with age and can 
even improve, especially when speed of pro cessing is not crucial. An 
expert diagnostician like Dr. Keating, the pediatric “House” we intro-

GET SMART QUICK!  207
duced in Chapter 3, only gets better with age; the more unusual pa-
tients he encounters, the more able he is to spot similarities to his 
increasingly large mental database of familiar cases. That said, a doctor 
in his seventies, even if he’s better able to identify a disorder, might have 
more trouble recalling its name, and might be slower to learn the latest 
procedures to treat it than would a doctor in his thirties. Old dogs can 
learn new tricks— it’s just a bit harder and takes a bit longer.
Since cognitive- training programs appeal directly to the illusion of 
potential, at this point you might be inclined to dismiss them outright. 
But that would be unwise. Just because a man is paranoid  doesn’t mean 
that people aren’t actually stalking him. We should be suspicious about 
any simple cure for a complex problem, and we should be hesitant about 
claims that we can acquire skills without effort. But there still could be 
some truth in the adage “use it or lose it.” So what, exactly, do the brain- 
training programs offer?
Most of the programs provide a set of basic gamelike cognitive tasks, 
such as arithmetic (with a time limit), word- ﬁ nding, and Sudoku. They 
are chosen to stress your reasoning and memory abilities, and they can 
be fun and challenging. The programs show how your per for mance on 
each task improves over time, and in some cases they provide a compos-
ite “brain ﬁ tness” score. Most of the programs justify their claims of 
brain training by pointing to how much people can improve at these 
simple tasks.
If you play these games and stick with them, you will get better at 
them regardless of your age. Practicing anything diligently enough will 
make you better. The real goal of the brain- training systems, though, is 
broader than improving your per for mance on their speciﬁ c tasks. Just 
as you don’t lift weights only to be able to lift bigger weights, you don’t 
play brain- training games to get better at playing brain- training games. 
Even according to the marketers of these programs, you use them to 
improve your ability to think and remember in your daily activities. 
Brain Age is supposed to help you recall your old friends’ names, ﬁ nd 
your car keys, and do two things at once, not just get better at solving 
Sudoku.

208  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Few studies have even investigated whether training on simple per-
ception and memory tasks has any consequences for our daily mental 
chores. Although many studies have shown that people who are more 
cognitively active when they’re younger preserve their abilities better as 
they age, such studies are correlational.51 Thinking about the illusion of 
cause reminds us that an association between two factors can occur 
even if neither one causes the other. The only way to study the effects 
of brain training on daily cognition is to conduct an experiment, ran-
domly assigning some people to training conditions and others to con-
trol conditions, and then mea sur ing the results of training. Over the 
past de cade several clinical trials have done just that.
The largest experiment to date started in 1998 and randomly as-
signed 2,832 se niors to one of four groups: verbal memory training, 
problem solving, pro cessing speed, or a control group that did no cog-
nitive training.52 This massive clinical trial, funded by the National 
Institutes of Health and conducted by researchers from many universi-
ties, hospitals, and research institutes, was known as the ACTIVE trial, 
which stands for “Advanced Cognitive Training for In de pen dent and 
Vital El der ly.” In the experiment, each group practiced one particular 
task for ten sessions of one hour each, spread out over about six weeks, 
and after the training, their per for mance was tested both on a set of 
laboratory tasks and on some real- world tasks. The hope was that train-
ing on the cognitive tasks would help to keep the brain sharp, leading 
to improvements on other cognitive tasks and on real- world functioning.
Not surprisingly, if you practice doing a visual search task for ten 
hours, you get better at visual search. If you practice a verbal memory 
task for ten hours, you get better at verbal memory. Many of the par-
ticipants, particularly for the speed- of- processing training, showed 
improvements immediately after training, and the improvements lasted 
for years. However, the improvements  were limited to the speciﬁ c tasks 
they learned and did not carry over to the non-trained laboratory tasks. 
Practicing verbal memory buys you almost nothing for your pro cessing 
speed, and vice versa.
Later followup surveys of participants in the ACTIVE study did 

GET SMART QUICK!  209
show some evidence for transfer to real- world per for mance. Participants 
in the training groups reported fewer problems with daily activities 
than did people in the no- training control group. Of course, in this 
case, the participants knew they  were in a training group and that they 
 were expected to improve, so some of the self- reported beneﬁ ts could be 
due to placebo effects.
Unfortunately, the results of the ACTIVE study are consistent with 
other studies. Training tends to be speciﬁ c to the task that is trained. If 
you play Brain Age, you’ll get better at the speciﬁ c tasks included in the 
software, but your new skills won’t transfer to other sorts of tasks. In 
fact, in the now vast cognitive- training literature, almost none of the 
studies document any transfer to tasks outside the laboratory, and most 
show only narrow transfer of skill between laboratory tasks—from the 
one practiced to those that are very similar.53 If you want to get better at 
Sudoku, and especially if you like doing Sudoku, by all means, do more 
Sudoku. If you think that doing Sudoku will keep your mind sharp and 
help you avoid misplacing your keys or forgetting to take your medicine, 
you’re likely succumbing to the illusion of potential. The same goes for 
solving crossword puzzles, a favorite recommendation of those who be-
lieve that mental exercise can keep the brain sharp and stave off demen-
tia and the cognitive effects of aging: Unfortunately, people who do 
more crosswords decline mentally at the same rate as those who do fewer 
crosswords.54 Practice improves speciﬁ c skills, not general abilities.
The Real Way to Unlock Your Potential
Please don’t get us wrong.  We’re not trying to argue that there is liter-
ally no potential for increasing our mental abilities. Our intellectual 
capacities are never frozen in place. We all have tremendous potential to 
learn new skills and to improve our abilities. Indeed, neuroscience re-
search is showing that the plasticity of the adult brain— its ability to 
change in structure in response to training, injury, and other events— is 
much greater than previously believed. The illusion is that it is easy to 
unlock this potential, that it can be discovered all at once, or that it can 

210  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
be released with minimal effort. The potential is there, in everyone, to 
acquire extraordinary mental abilities. Most people, without any train-
ing, can remember a list of about seven numbers after hearing it only 
once. Yet one college student trained himself to be able to remember up 
to seventy- nine digits.55 His feat was extraordinary, revealing a latent 
potential for exceptional digit memory, but it took hundreds of hours of 
practice and training. In principle, most people have the same potential 
ability, and could do the same thing with enough practice.
Genius is not born fully formed— it takes years to develop, and it 
follows a predictable trajectory. Mozart’s early compositions  were not 
masterpieces, and Bobby Fischer made plenty of mistakes when he was 
learning the game of chess. Both likely possessed exceptional talent to 
develop, but they did not become great without training and practice. 
And their greatness was limited to the domains they trained in. Train-
ing your memory for digits will not help you remember names. How-
ever, expertise in a domain does improve many other abilities within 
that domain that  were not speciﬁ cally trained.
A series of classic experiments conducted by the pioneering cognitive 
psychologists Adriaan de Groot, William Chase, and Herbert Simon 
demonstrated that chess masters can remember far more than seven 
items when the items tap into their expertise.56 We repeated their stud-
ies ourselves by testing Chris’s friend Patrick Wolff, a grandmaster who 
had won the U.S. championship twice. We brought Patrick into the lab 
and showed him a diagram of a chess position from an obscure master 
game for just ﬁ ve seconds. We then gave him an empty chessboard and 
a set of pieces and asked him to re- create the position from memory. 
Remarkably, he could reconstruct the position with nearly 100 percent 
accuracy even when it contained twenty- ﬁ ve or thirty pieces, far more 
than the typical seven- item limit for short- term memory.
After watching him perform this feat a few times, we asked him to 
explain how he did it. He ﬁ rst pointed out that the training of a chess 
grandmaster  doesn’t include practice in setting up chess positions after 
seeing them for just a few seconds. He said that he was able to quickly 
make sense of the positions and to combine pieces into groups based on 
the relationships among them. In essence, by recognizing familiar pat-

GET SMART QUICK!  211
terns, he stuffed not one but several pieces into each of his memory slots. 
As he became an expert in chess, he developed other skills that help in 
playing chess well— mental imagery, spatial reasoning, visual memory— 
all of which contributed to his ability to do this memory task better 
than other people. However, being an expert in chess did not make 
him an imagery, reasoning, or memory expert in general. In fact, when 
the chess positions we showed him had the same number of pieces ar-
ranged on the board randomly, his memory was no better than that of 
a beginner, because his chess expertise and database of patterns  were of 
little help. The same principle applies to the student who stretched his 
memory span to seventy- nine digits— his new memory capacity was 
speciﬁ c to combinations of numbers, so even after several months of 
training with numbers, he still had a span of only six items when tested 
with letters.57 In other words, he trained his potential ability to remem-
ber numbers, but that training did not transfer to any other skills.
Chess grandmasters can apply their expertise to perform a wide vari-
ety of chess tasks extremely well, even if they have never carried out 
those tasks before. One of the most dramatic examples is blindfold 
chess. Top players can play an entire game “blindfolded,” without ever 
looking at the board— they are told (in chess notation) what moves 
their opponents have made, and they announce the moves they would 
like to make in reply. Grandmaster- level players can play two or more 
blindfold games simultaneously, at a high level of skill, even if they’ve 
never tried this before. The exceptional chess memory and imagery 
abilities needed to perform this feat accrue more or less automatically 
as players become experts.
Working with Eliot Hearst (another psychology professor who is also 
a chess master), Chris conducted a study to mea sure how much worse 
chess grandmasters play when they  can’t see the board and pieces.58 You 
might think that they’d make more errors because of the additional 
memory load of remembering where every piece is. To ﬁ nd out whether 
this supposition is true, Chris took advantage of a unique chess tour-
nament that has taken place in Monaco every year since 1992. In the 
tournament, twelve of the world’s top players, including many world 
championship contenders, play each other twice: once under normal 

212  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
conditions, and once under blindfold conditions. Since the same players 
are involved in the normal and blindfold games, any difference in the 
number of errors must be due to the conditions, not the competitors.
In total, from 1993 to 1998 there  were about four hundred regular 
games and four hundred blindfold games played in the tournament, 
with each lasting an average of forty- ﬁ ve moves by each player. Chris 
used a chess- playing program called Fritz, which was recognized as one 
of the best software chess players in the world, to ﬁ nd all the serious 
mistakes the humans made. Fritz undoubtedly missed some of the most 
subtle errors, but larger blunders and signiﬁ cant mistakes  were easy for 
it to catch.
Under normal playing conditions, the grandmasters made an average 
of two mistakes for every three games. These  were major blunders, ones 
that could have— and often did— cost them a game against top- level 
opposition. The surprise, though, was that the rate of errors in blind-
fold chess was virtually the same. The grandmasters had trained their 
potential so well that they could perform their art without even looking 
at its elements (look, Ma, no board or pieces!). For those interested in 
unlocking their potential, that’s good news, of course. The bad news is 
that they didn’t become chess grandmasters by just listening to the right 
music or reading the right self- help books. They did it by concentrated 
study and practice over a period of at least ten years. The brain’s poten-
tial is vast, and you can indeed tap into it, but it takes time and effort.
Get Your Head in the Game
Practicing games like chess will enhance your ability to do chess- related 
tasks, but the transfer is relatively limited. Advocates for adding chess to 
school curricula argue that “chess makes you smarter,” but there is no 
solid evidence for this claim from large, properly controlled experiments.59 
Is there any evidence for broad transfer of skill to tasks and domains 
other than the one you practice?
Cognitive psychologists  were jarred into rethinking the limits of 
transfer by a striking set of experiments published in 2003 by Shawn 

GET SMART QUICK!  213
Green and Daphne Bavelier of the University of Rochester.60 The cen-
tral conclusion of these studies was that playing video games can im-
prove your ability on a variety of basic cognitive tasks that are, at least 
on their surface, unrelated to the video games you play. Their ﬁ rst four 
experiments showed that expert video- game players, deﬁ ned as people 
who had played at least four hours per week for the past six months, 
outperformed video- game novices on tests of some attention and per-
ception abilities. Although this sort of comparison is interesting and 
provocative, as we discussed in Chapter 5, an association alone does not 
support a causal inference. It is quite possible that only people with su-
perior abilities in attention and perception become video- game addicts, 
or that other differences between the experts and novices might con-
tribute to the differences in cognitive per for mance. Dan’s colleague 
Walter Boot, a psychology professor at Florida State University, sug-
gests one such factor: “People who are able to handle college while also 
spending a lot of time playing video games are different from people 
who need to spend more of their time studying.”61 The only way to 
avoid such confounding factors and determine for sure whether playing 
video games improves attention and perception is to give novice players 
video-game training and then see whether their cognitive abilities have 
improved.
Green and Bavelier did exactly that in their ﬁ nal experiment. They 
recruited novice video- game players, deﬁ ned as people who had spent 
little or no time playing video games in the past six months, and ran-
domly assigned these subjects to one of two groups. One group spent 
one hour a day for ten days playing Medal of Honor, a fast- paced “ﬁ rst- 
person shooter” game in which players view and monitor their surround-
ings as if they  were looking through the eyes of their character in the 
game’s world. A second group played the two- dimensional puzzle game 
Tetris for the same amount of time. Before this practice, each completed 
a battery of basic cognition, perception, and attention tasks, and after 
training, they repeated the same battery of tasks. For example, in one of 
the tasks, known as Useful Field of View, a simple object appeared for 
just a fraction of a second right where the subject was looking, and 

214  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
subjects made a judgment about it (such as whether it was a car or a 
truck). At the same moment, another object appeared at some distance 
from where they  were looking, and they had to determine where the 
peripheral object had appeared. The task mea sures how well people can 
focus attention on a central object while still devoting some attention to 
their periphery.
Green and Bavelier hypothesized that action video games would lead 
to better per for mance on this task because people have to focus on a 
wide ﬁ eld of view to do well in the games. In contrast, Tetris should not 
be of as much beneﬁ t because it  doesn’t require players to distribute 
their attention as broadly. Their results conﬁ rmed their prediction: 
Subjects who practiced Medal of Honor showed dramatic improvement 
on a number of attention and perception tasks, but the Tetris group 
showed no improvement at all. Following training on Medal of Honor, 
subjects  were more than twice as accurate in the ﬁ eld-of-view task as 
they had been before training. Before training, they correctly reported 
the location of about 25 percent of the peripheral targets, but after train-
ing they got more than 50 percent right.
This ﬁ nding was so surprising, and led to a publication in Nature, 
because it seemed to break down a wall between two ways that practice 
can improve our mental abilities. Suppose you work hard at becoming 
an expert Sudoku solver, spending all your free time doing nothing but 
solving Sudoku puzzles. You will, of course, get faster and more accu-
rate at solving Sudoku. Moreover, you might ﬁ nd that your ability to 
solve KenKen puzzles— a new variant of Sudoku— also improves some-
what, even though you had not done a single one during the time you 
practiced Sudoku. Your improved per for mance on KenKen would be 
an example of “narrow transfer,” where improvement on one mental 
skill transfers to other highly similar skills. It would be more surprising 
to ﬁ nd that practicing Sudoku improved your ability to calculate tips in 
your head, prepare your income taxes, or remember telephone numbers. 
Improvements on those skills would demonstrate “broad transfer,” be-
cause they have little surface- level similarity to Sudoku. Playing Medal 
of Honor to get better at ﬁ nding targets in a similar ﬁ rst- person- shooter 

GET SMART QUICK!  215
video game would be an example of narrow transfer. Playing Medal of 
Honor to improve your ability to pay attention to your surroundings 
while driving your car is like solving Sudoku to get better at remember-
ing telephone numbers. It’s an example of broad transfer, which is valu-
able because it improves aspects of cognition that  weren’t speciﬁ cally 
trained. Moreover, in this case, a different skill was improved by doing 
something fun and engaging. We’ll bet that you’re more likely to follow 
the adage “practice makes perfect” if the “practice” consists entirely of 
playing video games.
Green and Bavelier’s experiment suggests that video- game training 
might actually enable people to release some untapped potential for 
broader skills without having to spend effort practicing those par tic u lar 
skills. It’s far from obvious why passively listening to ten minutes of Mo-
zart should change a cognitive ability (spatial reasoning) that has little or 
nothing to do with music or even hearing. But video games do require 
players to actively use a variety of cognitive skills, and it’s not implausible 
that ten hours of training on a game that requires attention to a wide 
visual ﬁ eld could improve per for mance on a task that requires subjects 
to focus across a wide display, even though the game and the task are 
different in many other respects.
Perhaps the most astonishing aspect of this experiment was that it 
required only ten hours of training. Think about the implications of this: 
We all spend much of our lives focusing on our environment from a 
ﬁ rst- person perspective, making rapid decisions, and acting on them. 
Daily tasks like driving require us to focus on a wide visual ﬁ eld— you 
need to focus both on the road in front of you and on the side streets. 
And you most likely have driven for much more than ten hours in the 
past six months. Even if you  haven’t, you likely have done other things 
that require similar skills— playing any sport, or even walking down a 
crowded city street, requires similar rapid decisions and awareness of 
your surroundings. Why, then, should an additional ten hours of play-
ing one video game have such a large effect on basic cognitive skills?
One possible answer to this question is that playing video games 
does not actually produce dramatic improvements on largely unrelated 

216  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
tasks. As was the case with the Mozart effect, Green and Bavelier’s ini-
tial study could turn out to be an outlier— subsequent studies may 
show that video- game training is not as potent as originally thought. 
But it is also possible that there really is something about playing a ﬁ rst- 
person action video game that does release untapped potential with 
minimal effort. Video games can be more engaging and intense than 
many other activities that draw on the same cognitive abilities, so they 
could conceivably provide more productive and efﬁ cient training that 
extends beyond the game itself.
More recently, Bavelier and her colleagues have used much more ex-
tensive training, often thirty to ﬁ fty hours, to ﬁ nd further cognitive bene-
ﬁ ts of video games. These studies have shown transfer to several different 
basic perceptual abilities. One study found that video- game training im-
proved contrast sensitivity, which is essentially the ability to detect a shape 
that is similar in brightness to the background, like a darkly clad person 
walking along a poorly lit sidewalk.62 Another showed that action video- 
game training improved the ability to identify letters placed close together 
in the periphery of the visual ﬁ eld, essentially increasing the spatial reso-
lution of attention.63 Given how basic and fundamental these skills are to 
all aspects of perception, these ﬁ ndings are even more surprising than the 
original ﬁ eld-of-view result.64 Meta phor ical ly, these ﬁ ndings suggest that 
practicing video games is akin to putting on your glasses— it improves all 
aspects of visual perception. For example, increased contrast sensitivity 
should make driving at night easier. Even though these followup studies 
involved substantially more training, they showed broad transfer to abili-
ties that could affect many real- world skills. That said, none of these ar-
ticles have reported on transfer to per for mance on real- world tasks, and 
given the lack of any direct evidence, the authors are appropriately careful 
not to claim any impact beyond the lab.
As with the Mozart effect, one worrisome aspect of these video- game 
ﬁ ndings is that the majority of the evidence comes from a single group 
of researchers. Unlike with the Mozart effect, the group’s studies con-
sistently appear in top- tier, peer- reviewed journals rather than obscure 
scientiﬁ c backwaters. A bigger problem, though, is that training studies 
do not lend themselves to easy replication. Studies of the Mozart effect 

GET SMART QUICK!  217
are easy to conduct— bring people into the lab for an hour, play them 
some Mozart, and give them a few cognitive tests. All you really need is 
a CD player and some pens. Studies of video- game training are much 
grander in scale. Each participant must be trained for many hours 
under direct supervision of laboratory personnel. That requires full- 
time research staff, more computers, a lot more money to pay subjects 
for their time, and the space to accommodate hundreds of subject- hours 
of testing. Few labs are devoted to doing this sort of research, and those 
that are not typically don’t have the funding or resources available for a 
quick attempt at replication.
To our knowledge, only one published study from a laboratory un-
afﬁ liated with the original researchers has successfully replicated the 
core result of the original Green and Bavelier article. In that study, Jing 
Feng, Ian Spence, and Jay Pratt of the University of Toronto showed 
that playing an action video game for ten hours improved the ability to 
imagine simple shapes rotating as well as the ability to pay attention to 
objects that the subjects  were not directly looking at. They also found 
that women, who are on average somewhat worse than men on these 
spatial tasks, improved more from the training.65
A second study, although not a direct replica of the Green and Bave-
lier experiment, did show a positive effect of video- game practice using 
a different game and a different subject population: se niors.66 This 
study addresses one of the major motivations for brain training: helping 
to preserve and improve cognitive functioning in aging. In this ex-
periment, cognitive neuroscientist Chandramallika Basak and her col-
leagues randomly assigned one group of se niors to play Rise of Nations 
and another group to a no- training control condition. Rise of Nations 
is a slow- paced strategy game that requires players to keep track of a 
lot of information while switching back and forth between different 
strategic elements. The researchers’ hypothesis was that training on this 
sort of strategy game would improve what’s known as “executive func-
tioning,” which is the ability to allocate cognitive resources effec-
tively among multiple tasks and goals. Their study found substantial 
transfer from the video game to a variety of laboratory mea sures of ex-
ecutive functioning. That makes sense given the demands of the game, 

218  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
but because the study did not include any other games for comparison, 
it’s also possible that the beneﬁ ts had nothing to do with being trained 
on this particular kind of video game, or indeed with video-game train-
ing at all. Se niors in the training group might simply have been more 
motivated to improve because they knew they were receiving special 
treatment as part of a study, and that motivation could have led to the 
biggest improvements for those tasks where they  were already the most 
impaired.67
These questions about the proper interpretation of the original Green-
Bavelier study will be moot unless it can be consistently and indepen-
dently replicated. One large-scale attempt to do just that, led by 
video-game researcher Walter Boot, did not produce the same results as 
the earlier experiments.68 Dan was one of the co authors of Boot’s paper 
and participated in the design of the study. The original study and the 
replication by Feng’s group were both relatively small in scope: In each 
case, no more than ten subjects were assigned to each condition, and 
their training lasted only about ten hours. Boot’s study used more than 
twice as many subjects in each condition and gave the subjects more 
than twice as much training, over twenty hours on each game. He also 
used a much larger battery of cognitive tasks, including all of the ones 
used by Green and Bavelier plus about twenty others. The battery itself 
took up to two hours to complete, and each participant completed all 
the tasks before and after the training as well as once about halfway 
through it. Boot used the same Tetris and Medal of Honor games used 
in the original study, as well as the Rise of Nations game used in Basak’s 
experiment. Like Basak, he had the idea that training with that sort of 
strategy game would not enhance attention and perception, but instead 
would improve per for mance on mea sures of problem solving, reasoning, 
and possibly memory. Boot also included a group that received no train-
ing at all in order to provide a clear estimate of how much people might 
improve just by retaking the cognitive tasks before and after training. 
So this study was designed to test all of the alternative explanations 
for the positive ﬁ ndings that the original studies did not address—as 
well as the possibility that training released untapped potential.

GET SMART QUICK!  219
One oddity in all of the previous experiments showing positive evi-
dence of video- game training is that none of the control groups did any 
better the second time they took the cognitive tests than they did the 
ﬁ rst time. In the original study by Green and Bavelier, the subjects who 
played Tetris (a video game, but not a fast- paced, ﬁ rst- person “action” 
game) showed no improvement when they did the cognitive tasks for a 
second time, after completing their training. The same was true for the 
replication by Feng and colleagues: Subjects in the control condition did 
no better when retaking the cognitive tasks. It also held true for most of 
the positive effects in the Basak study and for the subsequent studies 
conducted by Bavelier and her colleagues. Given what we know about 
practice and learning, this ﬁ nding is hard to explain; people almost al-
ways perform better when they do a task a second time. Such improve-
ments are typical as well for the sorts of tasks used in the Brain Age 
software and other brain-training products. In fact, these routine prac-
tice effects are exactly the “evidence” those programs rely on to back 
their claims that their users’ brains are “improving.”
Why does lack of improvement in the control conditions matter? Be-
cause the evidence for the positive effects of video- game training is based 
on a comparison to these control groups. To support the claim that video 
games improve cognition, an experiment must show that people trained 
with video games improve more than people receiving other training or 
no training. It’s much easier to show an improvement relative to a con-
trol group if the control group shows no improvement at all. Had sub-
jects in the control groups improved as expected, the beneﬁ ts that could 
be ascribed to video games would have been reduced.
In Boot’s experiment, unlike the others, the control group did show 
a typical increase in per for mance from the ﬁ rst to the last testing ses-
sion. The group that practiced action video games also improved on the 
cognitive tasks. But it improved by the same amount as the control 
group, meaning that there was no speciﬁ c effect of video- game training 
on cognitive abilities.69 This failure to replicate is especially signiﬁ cant 
because Boot doubled the amount of training and used more subjects 
and control groups— all of which strengthened the design of the study 

220  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
and made it a more deﬁ nitive test of the broad transfer hypothesis ad-
vanced by Green and Bavelier. Their initially promising idea that a 
small amount of video- game training could have big effects does not 
seem to be borne out. It’s possible that some subtle differences in the 
methods among the various studies account for the different results, 
but if the effect is that fragile, it is hard to imagine that video games 
will turn out to be a panacea for cognitive decline.70
Recall that the ﬁ rst four experiments in Green and Bavelier’s Nature 
article showed that video- game experts consistently outperformed nov-
ices on the same tasks that beneﬁ ted from training in their experiment. 
Since the effects of training appear to be somewhat tenuous, you might 
now wonder why experts should tend to outperform novices. One ex-
planation is that the cognitive differences between experts and novices 
might require a lot more than ten or even ﬁ fty hours of training to de-
velop. The experts in these studies often play more than twenty hours 
of video games in a single week! If it takes that much effort to transfer 
skill from video games to general perception, would video- game train-
ing really be a worthwhile thing to do (if you didn’t already love playing 
video games)? The beneﬁ t of being a little faster on a selective attention 
task is probably not worth the hundreds of hours you would have to 
spend to receive it—you would be better off practicing the speciﬁ c skills 
you are trying to improve. Given the lack of direct evidence that video- 
game training would even have consequences for our daily lives— say, 
by making us safer drivers— the potential beneﬁ ts of training are even 
more uncertain.
A more subtle concern is that the experts might not actually be 
any better at these cognitive tasks even if they do show better per for-
mance in the lab. How could that be? Some other factor unrelated to 
cognitive abilities might enhance per for mance. In his interview with 
Dan, Walter Boot raised a possibility rarely discussed in the scientiﬁ c 
literature:
Video- game experts might perform better because they know 
they have been selected to be in the study based on their expertise. 

GET SMART QUICK!  221
Participants recruited through advertisements or ﬂ yers targeting 
gamers know they’re being selected because they’re an expert, be-
cause they are special, and they might be more motivated, more 
attentive, and have expectations that they should perform well. 
Because of all the media coverage, especially in blogs frequented 
by gamers, they know that they are expected to do better. And the 
nonexperts might not even know they are in a video- game study.71
In other words, the experts might outperform the novices not because 
they are inherently better at these tasks or because they have thousands 
of hours of video- game experience, but because they know that the study 
is about video- game expertise and that they are expected to do better. 
This sort of “expectancy effect” is a well-known issue in this kind of 
experiment. One way to address the problem would be to recruit sub-
jects without any mention of video games and then mea sure video- 
game expertise only after subjects are ﬁ nished with all the cognitive 
tasks. That way, subjects would have no way of knowing that the study 
is about video- game expertise. Unfortunately, it’s an inefﬁ cient way to 
conduct a study, because you might need to test many additional sub-
jects in order to have enough who meet the criteria for a novice or ex-
pert.
Regardless of how the subjects are recruited, it is dangerous to draw 
any causal conclusions about the role of video games in cognition from 
studies of differences between expert and novice players— training ex-
periments are essential to draw proper inferences about cause.72 Watch 
out for misreporting of such expertise effects in the media— journalists 
regularly claim that video games cause improvements when the studies 
they describe show only a difference between expert and novice players. 
Some writers have promoted the idea that video games have beneﬁ ts ex-
tending far beyond increased attention or perceptual abilities— enhancing 
general intelligence, social ability, conﬁ dence, and logical thinking— 
with even less actual evidence for these claims.73

222  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Give Your Brain a Real Workout
In promoting Brain Age, Nintendo’s website makes the following broad 
claim about how its products enhance brain function:
Everyone knows you can prevent muscle loss with exercise, and 
use such activities to improve your body over time. And the same 
could be said for your brain. The design of Brain Age is based on 
the premise that cognitive exercise can improve blood ﬂ ow to the 
brain. All it takes is as little as a few minutes of play time a day. 
For everyone who spends all their play time at the gym working 
out the major muscle groups, don’t forget— your brain is like a 
muscle, too. And it craves exercise.74
As it turns out, the ﬁ nal sentence is accurate, but not in the way that 
Nintendo’s marketers intended. They meant to imply that cognitive ex-
ercise is necessary to keep your brain functioning well. In reality, aero-
bic physical exercise is likely far better for your brain.75 Cognitive 
neuroscientist Arthur Kramer, a colleague of Dan’s at the University of 
Illinois, led one of the best- known studies of how improving physical 
ﬁ tness can affect cognitive abilities.76 Their experiment, published in 
Nature, randomly assigned 124 sedentary but otherwise healthy se niors 
to one of two training conditions for six months: aerobic ﬁ tness, in 
which the subjects spent about three hours each week walking, and an 
anaerobic exercise condition, in which subjects spent the same amount 
of time doing stretching and toning exercises. Although both forms of 
exercise are good for your body and lead to better overall ﬁ tness, aerobic 
exercise more effectively improves the health of your heart and increases 
blood ﬂ ow to your brain.
Not surprisingly, both training groups experienced the expected bene-
ﬁ ts to their physical ﬁ tness. The surprising result, though, is that walk-
ing for as little as a few hours a week also led to large improvements on 
cognitive tasks, particularly those that rely on executive functions like 
planning and multitasking. The stretching and toning exercise had no 
cognitive bene ﬁ ts. Kramer’s group also conducted a meta- analysis of all the 

GET SMART QUICK!  223
clinical trials of the effects of aerobic ﬁ tness training on cognition 
through 2001; the results conﬁ rmed a sizable beneﬁ t of this type of ﬁ t-
ness training for cognition.77
The beneﬁ ts of exercise are deeper than improvements in behavior 
and cognition. With age, most adults start to lose some of the gray matter 
in their brains. (This could be part of the reason for the accompanying 
cognitive declines.) In another clinical trial, Kramer’s group randomly 
assigned se niors to the same aerobic and anaerobic six- month training 
regimens just described, except this time, they ﬁ rst used MRI scan-
ning to acquire a complete picture of each subject’s brain before and 
after the ﬁ tness training.78 The result was astounding: Se niors who had 
walked for just forty- ﬁ ve minutes a day for three days each week pre-
served much more gray matter in their frontal brain regions than did 
those who had done stretching and toning. Aerobic exercise actually did 
keep their brains healthier and younger.
It might seem counterintuitive, but the best thing you can do to pre-
serve and maintain your mental abilities may have little to do with cog-
nition at all. Training your brain directly might have less impact than 
exercising your body, particularly if you exercise in a way that main-
tains your aerobic ﬁ tness. The exercise  doesn’t even need to be particu-
larly strenuous. You don’t need to compete in triathlons; just walking at 
a reasonable clip for thirty minutes or more a few times a week leads to 
better executive functioning and a healthier brain. Despite Nintendo’s 
claims that you need to exercise your brain, it seems that sitting in a 
chair and doing cognitive puzzles is far less beneﬁ cial than walking 
around the block a few times. Exercise improves cognition broadly by 
increasing the ﬁ tness of your brain itself. And doing puzzles does noth-
ing for your longevity, your health, or your looks.

conclusion
the myth of intuition
W
hat do you learn when you read proﬁ les of corporate 
CEOs? You expect to ﬁ nd out what makes them tick: how they 
got to their current position, what inspired them to make the decisions 
they did, why their management style sets them up for success. And 
most important, you expect to learn about someone whose approach to 
business—and perhaps life in general—is worth emulating.
As we discussed in Chapter 4, the only way to be sure that you un-
derstand something is to test your knowledge. Let’s do that now. Apply 
what you’ve learned about everyday illusions to this proﬁ le of business 
leader Larry Taylor. Some of the illusions will shine through, but others 
will be more subtle. See if you can spot them all.
Larry Taylor is on his way to work. A stocky man with a military- 
style buzz cut and intense blue eyes, he sits ramrod straight behind 
the steering wheel. Despite being the CEO of Chimera Informa-
tion Systems, a privately held corporation with more than $900 
million in annual sales, he  doesn’t have a driver. It would be awk-

CONCLUSION  225
ward to have a driver when your car is just a Toyota Camry with 
cloth seats, not a Mercedes or Lexus with full leather and burl-
wood interior. Taylor makes the forty- minute commute every day. 
En route, he talks with several of his top managers by phone, get-
ting updates on software development projects, marketing plans, 
and sales progress—all before he arrives at the ofﬁ ce.
All you need to do is follow Taylor around for a few hours to see 
why his company’s revenues are growing at a rate of 45 percent per 
year, and why he was voted the most innovative and effective ex-
ecutive in the Midwest last year. According to industry analysts, 
Taylor’s arrival in the corner ofﬁ ce in 2003 is the reason why Chi-
mera has changed from a dowdy vendor of inventory- management 
software to an industry- leading developer of “middleware” for Web 
2.0— applications that sit between a company’s public website and 
private data ware houses, managing communication between the 
two. Taylor’s next move will be to create software that enables 
even the smallest Internet retailers— the hundreds of thousands 
of EdsArgyleSocks .coms and eBay storefronts of the world— to 
manage their supply chains with the sophistication of an Amazon 
or a Walmart. According to Taylor, this is a $2 billion market op-
portunity that is wide open.
Today, Taylor is talking to his chief ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer, Jane Flynt, 
about Chimera’s quarterly earnings release that’s due in a week. 
Taylor speaks with the slight Texas drawl he acquired growing up 
in San Antonio. There is a pause in the conversation when Flynt 
steps away from her phone to ask an assistant to run some new 
analyses that Taylor suggested. At this moment, Taylor mutes his 
phone and explains the real reason he hired Flynt, who had never 
been the head of ﬁ nance at a large company, over other candidates 
with Ivy League pedigrees and much more experience.
“It was almost two years ago, but I remember it like it was yes-
terday,” says Taylor. “It was a crazy time . . .  we needed to have a 
new CFO in place for the next board meeting, which was coming 
up fast, but I was traveling to see customers most days of the week 
back then. So I had them come in on a Sunday morning.” The four 

226  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
candidates on the short list duly showed up at 9:00 a.m., in their 
Sunday best. As a ﬁ nal “test” in the interview, Taylor handed out 
laptops with PowerPoint installed and asked each candidate to pre-
pare and deliver a ﬁ ve- minute pre sen ta tion on why he or she should 
be chosen as Chimera’s new CFO. And he told them that they had 
to deliver their pre sen ta tions to him and to the other candidates, in 
the company boardroom. “When I said that, their jaws all dropped 
at once,” Taylor recalled. “They all had to be as ner vous as a bunch 
of cats in a room full of rocking chairs.” He gave them just ten 
minutes with the computers to make their slides. “I picked Flynt to 
go ﬁ rst, and I thought she would wet herself. But she didn’t. She 
gave one of the best speeches I had ever heard in my life. What I 
kept thinking about was how self- assured she was under all the 
pressure of the situation I’d set up. I let the other guys give their 
talks, but I knew right then that I wanted Jane, and when the in-
terviews  were over I hired her on the spot.”
Taylor is renowned at Chimera for the quickness with which 
he grasps complex ideas and information. “I only need to read a 
docu ment once, and I pretty much completely understand it, and 
I’ll remember all of the details, too,” he tells us. A recent proﬁ le 
of Taylor in Inventory World reported that “Taylor says that he 
knows everything about how Chimera’s products work, often 
more than their own developers, whom he sometimes embar-
rasses with tough questions about software architecture and stan-
dards.”
He is a voracious reader— not just of company reports, trade 
journals, and business books, but also the latest science and history, 
and even an occasional vampire novel to keep up with the current 
obsession of his teenage daughters. From his business and science 
reading, he’s picked up dozens of ideas that he’s implemented at 
Chimera. To boost the inventiveness and productivity of his soft-
ware engineers, he ordered their managers to play classical music on 
the public address system for thirty minutes every day; behind the 
music, subliminal messages exhort employees to do their best.

CONCLUSION  227
Taylor learned how to play poker in high school, and he showed 
a talent for it in college, quickly becoming the biggest winner at his 
fraternity’s regular game. After graduating, he spent a couple of 
years as a professional poker player on the tournament and cash- 
game circuit. Nowadays he ﬁ nds his high- stakes action in the 
boardroom rather than the casino, but he still plays poker occa-
sionally on the Internet, using the screen name “royalﬂ ushCEO.” 
Does his experience in poker inﬂ uence his approach to business 
strategy? Is making a huge bluff to convince an opponent to fold a 
good hand the equivalent of making a risky but potentially re-
warding investment in an unproven technology or market? “It 
 doesn’t work like that,” Taylor says. “When I’m making a big deci-
sion for Chimera I don’t think about poker tactics. I think more 
about the broader lessons I took from the game. There’s a saying in 
poker that goes ‘think long, think wrong.’ It means that some-
times, the more you think about a decision, the more likely you are 
to make the wrong choice. I read Malcolm Gladwell’s book Blink, 
and it taught me that you have to go with your gut instincts, trust 
your intuition, when you’re faced with a complex, important deci-
sion.”
Taylor relied on his instincts when he decided to bet his com-
pany’s future on the new logistics software for mom- and- pop In-
ternet businesses. He’d learned from his reading that he was not 
using as much of his brainpower as he could be. His left brain 
was so busy analyzing every option in cost- beneﬁ t detail that his 
more emotional right brain never had a chance to take in the 
big picture. “I had two warring groups within Chimera on this 
launch question,” he says later in the day after coming out of a 
meeting with the project team. One group was gung ho for the 
new product, but the other had a laundry list of objections. Taylor 
had to referee and make the ﬁ nal call. “This time I told myself 
from the outset that I  wouldn’t get bogged down in the speciﬁ cs 
of the market, the pricing, the project timelines, and so on. Our 
marketing folks had prepared a proﬁ le of the target customer”— a 

228  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
thirty- ﬁ ve- year- old single mother who runs an eBay business out of 
a spare bedroom in her  house—“and I just thought about that 
woman, and how important her business was to her family and her 
future, and I visualized her making more money from that busi-
ness thanks to our software, and I knew that jumping into this 
market was the right thing to do.”
The product launch is set for the end of the year. On the drive 
home, Larry Taylor is a bit more relaxed than he was at the ofﬁ ce, 
but he’s not completely at rest. He is on the phone again— this time 
talking to his kids.
In case it  wasn’t obvious, the story you just read was entirely made 
up— 100 percent ﬁ ctitious. Taylor and Flynt don’t exist, and Chimera 
Information Systems is a chimera. We constructed this fake proﬁ le to 
mimic many similar articles we have seen in the business press.1 It’s 
full of commonsense notions, assumptions, and beliefs that portray 
Taylor as a somewhat unconventional, but no doubt successful, busi-
ness leader. Realizing that the proﬁ le must be fake  wasn’t the real test, 
though.
We intentionally constructed the Larry Taylor story to spotlight the 
six everyday illusions we have discussed in this book. Did you catch all 
of them at work? Let’s look back and see where Taylor— and the “writer” 
of the proﬁ le— were led astray by everyday illusions:
• Taylor starts his day by talking nonstop on his cell phone 
while he drives to work. We saw in Chapter 1 that the illusion 
of attention insidiously makes us think we can do both of 
these things at once just as well as we can do either one alone.
• During his “interview,” Taylor gives an extremely precise rec-
ollection of how he hired his chief ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer, emphasiz-
ing his own cleverness in announcing a surprise challenge. He 
may think he remembers the episode “like it was yesterday,” 
but as we learned in Chapter 2, our memories of even the 

CONCLUSION  229
most salient events are subject to distortion—even as we 
 remain conﬁ dent that we are recalling them accurately.
• Conﬁ dence was an important signal to Taylor when he 
 decided to hire his CFO: Jane Flynt stood out over more expe-
rienced, better-educated candidates precisely because of the 
conﬁ dence she exuded. But as we told you in Chapter 3, that 
sort of conﬁ dence is exactly what Jennifer Thompson  exuded 
on the witness stand when Ronald Cotton was  sentenced to 
life in prison for a crime he didn’t commit.
• What makes Taylor such a good manager? According to Taylor 
himself, it is his broad and deep knowledge of Chimera; others 
praise his ability to grasp complex information quickly. But as 
Chapter 4 illustrated, we habitually overestimate our own knowl-
edge (especially of how things work), and we quickly make im-
portant decisions that we might proﬁ tably stop to reﬂ ect on if we 
realized how little we really do know.
• What’s behind Chimera’s recent success? The experts think it’s 
Taylor— before he became CEO, the company was an also- 
ran, but now it’s a leader. From Chapter 5, we can recognize the 
illusion of cause that can result from a chronological  sequence of 
events: By itself, the fact that Chimera did better after Taylor 
than it did before him  doesn’t prove that his  arrival caused the 
improvement. Other changes to the company around the same 
time, or changes outside the company, like a general upswing in 
its industry, might have been responsible.
• The proﬁ le also reports that Taylor plays classical music and sub-
liminal messages to his employees and has been trying to access 
the unused capacity of his own brain. He seems to be under the 
sway of the illusion of potential that we covered in Chapter 6.
Earlier we mentioned that everyday illusions have a common charac-
teristic: They all make us think that our mental abilities and capacities 

230  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
are greater than they actually are. There’s another common thread that 
connects all of the illusions. In each case, we confuse how easily our 
minds can do something with how well they are doing it. In psycho-
logical lingo, we take the ﬂ uency with which we pro cess information as 
a signal that we are pro cessing a lot of information, that we are pro-
cessing it deeply, and that we are pro cessing it with great accuracy and 
skill. But effortless pro cessing is not necessarily illusion- free. For ex-
ample, retrieving memories almost never feels difﬁ cult to us. We expe-
rience the ease of retrieval, but we don’t experience all the distortions 
that happened to our memories after they were ﬁ rst stored. These dis-
tortions happen beneath the surface of our mental lives, without our 
awareness. We then mistakenly attribute the perceived ﬂ uency of our 
recall to the accuracy, completeness, and permanence of our memories. 
Fluency plays a similar role in our understanding of perception, atten-
tion, conﬁ dence, knowledge, and many other mental pro cesses, and in 
all of these cases, we have seen that signiﬁ cant illusions result.2
We aren’t arguing that everyday illusions are inherently bad or that 
they are simply bugs in the mind’s software that could have been avoided 
with better programming. Although the illusions result from our mental 
limitations, those limitations usually have a countervailing beneﬁ t. As 
we pointed out in Chapter 1, the inattentional blindness that causes us 
to miss the gorilla is an inevitable consequence of our generally salutary 
ability to focus attention on a primary goal—in that case, counting bas-
ketball passes. As in many other situations, the ability to focus is useful 
precisely because it greatly increases our ability to carry out otherwise 
difﬁ cult tasks.
In recent years, psychologists have proposed that most of our thought 
pro cesses can be divided into two types: those that are fast and auto-
matic and those that are slow and reﬂ ective. Both contribute to everyday 
illusions. The rapid, automatic pro cesses involved in perception, mem-
ory, and causal inference have serious limitations, but these limitations 
become much more consequential when our higher- level, reﬂ ective, more 
abstract reasoning abilities fail to see that we are going astray and make 
appropriate corrections. In other words, we get into more accidents 

CONCLUSION  231
when we talk on a phone while driving both because our attention 
is limited and because we don’t notice this limitation while it’s hap-
pening.3
It’s not only Larry Taylor and the misguided “author” of his proﬁ le 
who labor under these everyday illusions. We all do. When we uncriti-
cally consume stories like the one about Taylor, or when we do the 
things that Taylor does, we too fall prey to these illusions. Everyday il-
lusions are so woven into our habits of mind that we don’t even realize 
that they undergird all of the “common sense” that leads us to accept 
stories like Larry Taylor’s.
This type of common sense has another name: intuition. What we 
intuitively accept and believe is derived from what we collectively assume 
and understand, and intuition inﬂ uences our decisions automatically 
and without reﬂ ection. Intuition tells us that we pay attention to more 
than we do, that our memories are more detailed and robust than they 
are, that conﬁ dent people are competent people, that we know more 
than we really do, that coincidences and correlations demonstrate causa-
tion, and that our brains have vast reserves of power that are easy to un-
lock. But in all these cases, our intuitions are wrong, and they can cost us 
our fortunes, our health, and even our lives if we follow them blindly.
That’s not a message that has been pop u lar lately. Among the general 
public and among some psychologists, it has become fashionable to 
argue that intuitive methods of thinking and making decisions are su-
perior to analytical methods. Intuitive thinking is faster and easier, to 
be sure. And the idea that it might also be more accurate is seductive, 
because it ﬂ ies in the face of society’s long-standing celebration of ratio-
nality and logic as the purest and most objective forms of thought. To-
ward the end of the proﬁ le, we see that Larry Taylor has absorbed this 
contrarian message. Citing an adage from his days as a poker pro—
“think long, think wrong”— and his reading of Malcolm Gladwell’s 
Blink, he ignores all the analysis his staff has done and goes with his 
gut, which tells him that customers will beneﬁ t from the new product. 
He bets the company on this instinct, but he is at peace— and back on 
the phone while he drives home.

232  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Taylor’s decision might seem like an appalling way to gamble with 
the money of his investors and the careers of his employees. But sadly, 
it’s not at all far- fetched to portray a CEO who makes a billion- dollar 
decision on instinct. Business magazines routinely celebrate this kind of 
“decisive” leadership. For example, in its proﬁ le of Percy Barnevik, the 
celebrated CEO of the Swedish- Swiss company ABB, the magazine 
Long Range Planning gushed, “To meet him . . .  is to become immedi-
ately aware of an incisive, original approach to management in which 
the ability to make swift, conﬁ dent decisions is paramount.”4
To cite just one concrete example of the instinctual risk- taking that 
businesspeople engage in all the time, the decision by top executives of 
Motorola to launch the Iridium satellite telephone business was driven 
largely by an intuitive “vision” of customers being able to use a single 
portable phone to place calls from anywhere in the world, despite the 
extensive data that Motorola itself generated showing that this would be 
an eco nom ical ly unsound business. The phone would have cost $3,000, 
the ser vice would have cost $3 per minute, and communication would 
have been impossible indoors or in cities with skyscrapers. The product 
was ideal for the desert nomad with a few thousand dollars burning a 
hole in his pocket, but impractical for everyone  else. According to one 
outside analyst, even if Iridium captured the entire worldwide market 
for international business calls from developing countries, it still could 
not pay for the equipment its system required, let alone its operating ex-
penses. Iridium failed within a year of launch and ultimately lost almost 
$5 billion.5
When First Impressions Are Wrong Impressions
Thomas J. Wise was a celebrated British collector of rare books and 
manuscripts in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The 
cata log of his private collection, which he named the Ashley Library, 
ﬁ lled eleven printed volumes. Around 1885, an author named W. C. 
Bennett showed Wise several copies of a privately printed edition 
of Sonnets from the Portuguese, a famous series of poems written by 

CONCLUSION  233
 Elizabeth Barrett Browning during her courtship with Robert Brown-
ing. (“How do I love thee? Let me count the ways . . .”) The sonnets 
 were thought to have been ﬁ rst published in a two- volume collected 
edition of her poems that appeared in 1850. Bennett’s forty- seven- page 
pamphlet, labeled “not for publication,” was dated 1847, making it a 
previously unknown, earlier printing of the sonnets. Wise realized its 
value as a rarity and purchased a copy for £10. He also alerted several 
collector friends, who did the same, exhausting Bennett’s stock.
Wise’s story of how he came upon the Browning volume was corrobo-
rated by detailed accounts from one of his friends, Harry Buxton For-
man, and from a writer named Edmund Gosse. Over the ensuing years, 
Wise found and distributed previously unknown volumes of minor 
works by other writers, including Alfred Tennyson, Charles Dickens, 
and Robert Louis Stevenson. Numerous private collectors and libraries 
snapped them up; Wise’s fame and wealth grew commensurately. He 
eventually became known as the leading book collector and bibliogra-
pher in all of En gland.
By the turn of the century, however, some American book dealers 
were becoming discomﬁ ted by the steady stream of newly discovered, 
author- printed pamphlets. In 1898, George D. Smith’s Price Current of 
Books wrote, “Grave suspicions are entertained that some of these are 
being manufactured— but that these suspicions are well- grounded, 
cannot be said . . .  Maybe ‘The Last Tournament’ by Tennyson is worth 
$300, but it is curious that every Tennyson collector of note has been 
supplied with one lately!” Despite this and other isolated challenges to 
their provenance, the pamphlets  were broadly respected as genuine for 
de cades.
In the 1930s, two young British dealers, John Carter and Graham 
Pollard, formed their own suspicions about the authenticity of some of 
Wise’s ﬁ nds. They began a meticulous program of research in which 
they gathered and analyzed all of the evidence about the provenance of 
the Browning Sonnets pamphlet. They identiﬁ ed eight separate ways in 
which the existence of the volume was inconsistent with other facts 
known about Browning and her work, or with typical experience in rare 

234  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
books. For example, no copies inscribed by the author had ever been 
found, no copies existed that had been trimmed and bound in the way 
that was customary at the time of their printing, and the special private 
printing was not mentioned in any letters, memoirs, or other documents 
left by the Brownings.
Carter and Pollard next turned to direct scientiﬁ c analysis. Although 
the forensic science of the 1930s was not what it is today, it was possible to 
examine the paper used to print the Sonnets under a microscope. All 
paper manufactured in the United Kingdom before 1861 was made from 
rags, straw, or a strawlike material called esparto. Wood pulp was not 
used to make paper until 1874. Carter and Pollard put the Browning 
pamphlet under their microscope and saw a substantial amount of 
chemically treated wood pulp in its ﬁ bers. From this, and much other 
carefully gathered evidence, they concluded that the putative 1847 print-
ing of the Sonnets had to be a forgery produced after 1874. They per-
formed similar analyses on ﬁ fty other pamphlets and found decisive 
evidence that twenty- one of them  were similarly forged.
The two dealers published the results of their research in 1934, in a 
412- page book titled An Enquiry into the Nature of Certain XIXth Cen-
tury Pamphlets. They stopped short of explicitly accusing Wise of forg-
ery, but their case left no doubt that he was guilty.6 He denied the 
charges until his death three years later. Subsequent investigations re-
vealed that he had also stolen pages out of many rare books in the Brit-
ish Library. He is still celebrated today, but no longer as a great collector 
or bibliographer; instead, he is universally regarded as one of the great-
est literary forgers of all time.
How did Wise pull off this fraud on such a massive scale? In evaluat-
ing his individual items for their collections, private buyers and institu-
tional librarians didn’t have the opportunity to analyze the full scope of 
Wise’s offerings, or the skill to perform chemical analysis. Individually, 
the items looked authentic, and each nicely ﬁ lled a gap in an author’s 
known body of work. Intuition was of no help in discovering the fraud. 
The deception was only uncovered through the use of deductive logic, 
based on the overall pattern of newly discovered pamphlets, a careful 

CONCLUSION  235
comparison with other historical sources and facts, and scientiﬁ c study 
of the items themselves. The story of Thomas Wise and of the detective 
work performed by John Carter and Graham Pollard illustrates a tri-
umph of deliberation and analysis over instinct. Gut feelings led profes-
sional, expert collectors to spend small fortunes accumulating Wise’s 
pamphlets; rigorous analysis revealed their mistake.7
Ironically, one of the best- known cases used to demonstrate the power 
of intuition also involved the detection of a forgery. In his bestselling 
book Blink, which is subtitled The Power of Thinking Without Thinking, 
Malcolm Gladwell opens his case for “rapid cognition,” which is another 
name for intuition, with the story of art experts who could tell immedi-
ately that a purported ancient Greek statue known as a kouros was a fake, 
while scientiﬁ c experts incorrectly judged it to be authentic.8 Gladwell’s 
compelling narrative vividly portrays a case in which intuition outdid 
analysis. And as  we’ve seen repeatedly, a single vivid example that illus-
trates a causal argument may be taken as proof unless we think carefully 
about the information we  haven’t been given— and thinking about what 
is missing from a story does not come naturally. The case of the kouros 
might be an anomaly. After all, how often do art experts intuit that 
a piece is forged when scientiﬁ c analysis says it’s genuine? Cases like 
Wise’s— in which intuitions are refuted by analysis— might well be more 
common. Moreover, neither story informs us whether intuition or analy-
sis is more accurate when the artwork actually is genuine.
The story of Thomas J. Wise is just one example of deliberate, scien-
tiﬁ c analysis overcoming ﬂ awed, intuitive judgments; but just as Gladwell’s 
kouros story does not prove that intuition trumps analysis, our Wise 
story does not prove that analysis always trumps intuition. Intuition has 
its uses, but we don’t think it should be exalted above analysis without 
good evidence that it is truly superior. The key to successful decision-
making, we believe, is knowing when to trust your intuition and when 
to be wary of it and do the hard work of thinking things through.9

236  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
Picking Preserves and Recognizing Robbers
Are there times when deliberation consistently yields worse judgments 
than snap decisions and gut intuition? Yes, and  here’s an example from 
a classic experiment. Suppose you  were asked to participate in a blind 
taste- test of ﬁ ve different brands of strawberry jam. After tasting all of 
the jams, but before being asked to rate their quality, you spend a couple 
of minutes writing down your reasons for liking and disliking each 
jam. Then you rate each one on a scale from 1 to 9. How accurate 
would your ratings be, assuming we judged accuracy by comparing 
your ratings with those given by a panel of experts assembled by Con-
sumer Reports magazine?
When psychologists Timothy Wilson and Jonathan Schooler con-
ducted this experiment with college students as their subjects, they 
found that the ratings the students gave to the jams bore almost no re-
semblance to those given by the experts. They should have been able to 
tell which ones  were good and which ones  were not— the jams varied 
widely in quality and included those ranked 1st, 11th, 24th, 32nd, and 
44th best out of the 45 that Consumer Reports had reviewed. Did the 
students have no taste for jam, or did the pop u lar palate have a different 
preference from the expert one? Not at all. In a separate condition of the 
experiment, rather than writing the reasons they liked and disliked each 
jam, each subject wrote about something entirely unrelated: their reasons 
for choosing their college major. The subjects then rated the jams, and 
despite not having thought about them at all after tasting them, they 
made ratings that  were much closer to those of the experts.10
Why does thinking about jams make our decisions about them worse? 
There are two reasons. First, thinking about the jams  doesn’t give us any 
more information about them— once we taste them, we have all the infor-
mation we are going to get. Second, and we think more important, is the 
fact that jam preferences result mainly from emotional responses, not logi-
cal analysis. Emotional responses tend to happen automatically and rap-
idly, in contrast to the slower, deliberative pro cessing underlying analytic 
reasoning. A decision about how something tastes is a visceral judgment 

CONCLUSION  237
that  can’t be improved by cogitating about it. Thinking about it only gen-
erates irrelevant information that essentially jams up our intuitive, emo-
tional reaction.
Although taste preferences rely more on emotion than logic, deciding 
whether to launch a major new product seems to be a good occasion for 
setting emotion aside and spending some time on analysis. But the dis-
tinction isn’t always so obvious. In general, when there are few objective 
grounds for determining whether a decision is right or wrong, intuition 
 can’t be beat. But even when there are objective criteria, gut responses 
sometimes outperform analytical ones. Recall again the case from Chap-
ter 3 of Jennifer Thompson, who conﬁ dently and repeatedly identiﬁ ed 
the innocent man Ronald Cotton as her rapist. One reason she was so 
conﬁ dent was that she focused all her conscious attention on memoriz-
ing his appearance, in part to distract herself from the trauma and in 
part to help the police catch him if she survived. She caught glimpses of 
his face and body, and she wrote later of trying to store details, “to record 
information” in her mind— his height, the shape of his nose, his skin 
tone. It’s no wonder she was so conﬁ dent— she had worked hard to 
memorize his features during the most stressful moment of her life.
Unfortunately, thinking in words about a person’s appearance can 
actually impair your ability to recognize that person later. Although this 
possibility was known in the 1950s, interest in it was revived by a series 
of experiments conducted in 1990, when it was given the new name 
“verbal overshadowing.”11 In one experiment, subjects watched a thirty- 
second video of a bank robbery that included a view of the robber’s face. 
One group of subjects then spent ﬁ ve minutes writing a description of 
the face “in as much detail as possible.” A control group spent ﬁ ve min-
utes doing something unrelated. Afterward, the subjects tried to pick the 
robber out of a set of photographs of eight similar- looking individuals, 
and then indicated how conﬁ dent they  were in their choices.
The protocol used in this procedure mimics what happens in crimi-
nal cases (like Thompson’s). The police routinely ask witnesses to give 
detailed descriptions of suspects, and those same witnesses later try to 
identify a suspect in a photographic lineup. In the experiment, those 

238  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
subjects who did an unrelated task successfully identiﬁ ed the suspect 
64 percent of the time. But what about those who wrote detailed notes 
about the suspect? They picked the right suspect only 38 percent of the 
time! The verbal information in the written notes overshadowed the 
nonverbal information captured by the initial visual perception of 
the face, and the verbal information turned out to be less accurate. 
Ironically, our intuition tells us that analyzing a face will help us re-
member it better, but in this case at least, it is better for analysis to step 
back and let more automatic, pattern recognition pro cesses take over. 
This experiment did not involve an emotional evaluation, only an ob-
jective test of memory, but reﬂ ective deliberation did not help.12
Deliberation will outperform intuition when you have conscious ac-
cess to all the necessary data. In such cases, analysis can generate new 
information that will help you make a better decision. Let’s return for 
one last time to the game of chess. In Chapter 6, we presented the re-
markable ﬁ nding that chess grandmasters can play the game just as well 
blindfolded as they can with normal sight of the board. Grandmasters 
and masters also can play an extremely competent game with just ﬁ ve 
minutes— or less— in which to make all of their moves. Chris used to 
lose regularly to a grandmaster who played the entire game using a total 
of less than one minute to make all his moves, while giving Chris ﬁ ve 
minutes to make his. How is this possible?
The leading theory is that expert players recognize familiar patterns in 
the clusters of pieces they see on the board, and these patterns are con-
nected in their minds to potential strategies, tactics, and even speciﬁ c 
moves that are likely to work in those situations. In extreme cases, their 
pattern recognition may be so good, and their opponents so weak, that 
grandmasters can win games without doing much analysis at all. In es-
sence, they can rely entirely on intuition and still play well.
Recall the study in which Chris and his colleague Eliot Hearst used 
a computer program to ﬁ nd the mistakes grandmasters made in blind-
fold chess. In another part of that study, they compared games under 
ordinary tournament conditions, in which each game lasts up to ﬁ ve 
hours, to games under “rapid” conditions, in which the game is over in 
about one hour. (Neither of these conditions involved blindfold play.) If 

CONCLUSION  239
chess expertise resides exclusively in fast, intuitive pattern recognition, 
then the grandmasters should have made just as many mistakes when 
they had ﬁ ve hours as when they had just one hour. But under rapid con-
ditions, the number of mistakes went up by 36 percent, a highly sig-
niﬁ cant increase.13 In chess, having more time to think enables you to 
make better- quality moves—whether you are the world champion, a 
grandmaster, or an amateur—so there must be more to making good 
decisions in chess than just intuitive pattern recognition. The same is 
true for most of the important decisions we make in our lives.
Technology to the Rescue?
It’s easier to point out the nature of everyday illusions and their poten-
tially dire consequences than it is to ﬁ nd solutions to the problems they 
pose. But we see three broad approaches that might lessen the impact of 
these illusions in our lives.
First, simply learning how everyday illusions work— for example, by 
reading this book— will help you notice and avoid being victimized by 
them in the future. However, your ability to consciously supervise ev-
erything your mind is up to is limited. We have told you our best ideas 
for anticipating and avoiding everyday illusions, but this kind of knowl-
edge alone will not completely solve the problem.
Second, you could try to enhance your cognitive abilities through 
training. However, as we have seen, cognitive training is unlikely to 
improve per for mance enough to dispel everyday illusions, for two rea-
sons: (1) increasing overall brainpower is not as simple as doing mental 
exercise, playing video games, or listening to classical music; and (2) the 
cognitive abilities you can improve through training will probably not 
help you override everyday illusions. Mental exercise may be good for you 
in some ways, and may even be its own reward, but it won’t lead to an 
illusion- free life.
Technology holds promise as a helpful tool to avoid everyday illu-
sions. Indeed, there are already many mundane examples of technologies 
that have helped us overcome mental limitations. Writing, for example, 
helped humans preserve historical information more precisely and in 

240  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
larger quantity than would have been possible through memory and oral 
tradition. Similarly, the invention of calculating machines reduced the 
number of costly errors resulting from our limited ability to manipulate 
numbers in our heads.
Innovations like these have been critical to improving our productiv-
ity and quality of life. But they address only the limitations of our cog-
nitive systems, not the illusions that beset them. Illusions result from 
mistaken judgments about our limitations, and it is these judgments 
that we must adjust. Technology can help us, but we must ﬁ rst be will-
ing to acknowledge that automated judgments may sometimes be bet-
ter than our own judgments— a difﬁ cult and controversial step.
Still, we don’t think that technological innovation can entirely solve 
the problem. A complementary approach to replacing human judgment 
might be to change our environment so that our limitations become ir-
relevant. In other words, if we know the limits of our cognition, we can 
redesign our surroundings to avoid the consequences of mistaken intu-
itions. For example, now that you have read about the illusion of atten-
tion, we hope that you have been dissuaded from talking on a phone 
while driving. But the temptation to distract yourself while driving has 
only increased as phones have morphed into Internet access points and 
video- game machines. The best approach to overcoming the illusion of 
attention would be to reduce the temptation: Remove the power adapter 
from your car or keep the phone out of reach in a purse or briefcase in 
the backseat.
No amount of training will enable people to notice everything around 
them, and despite our best intentions, we cannot readily dismiss our in-
tuitive (and incorrect) beliefs about what captures our attention. But with 
knowledge of the illusion of attention, we can proactively restructure our 
lives so that we are less likely to be misled by the illusion. We think the 
same is true of the other everyday illusions, and we hope that people more 
inventive than we are will take up the challenge of designing solutions 
that help us overcome not just the limitations of our minds but our ev-
eryday illusions about them as well.

CONCLUSION  241
Look for Invisible Gorillas
You have reached the end of our book. As Woody Allen said when he 
reached the end of his legendary stand- up comedy routine, “I wish I 
had some kind of afﬁ rmative message to leave you with. I don’t. Would 
you take two negative messages?”14
One of our messages in this book is indeed negative: Be wary of your 
intuitions, especially intuitions about how your own mind works. Our 
mental systems for rapid cognition excel at solving the problems they 
evolved to solve, but our cultures, societies, and technologies today are 
much more complex than those of our ancestors. In many cases, intu-
ition is poorly adapted to solving problems in the modern world. Think 
twice before you decide to trust intuition over rational analysis, espe-
cially in important matters, and watch out for people who tell you intu-
ition can be a panacea for decision- making ills. And if anyone ever asks 
you to watch a video and count the passes of a basketball . . .  
But we also have an afﬁ rmative message to leave you with. You can 
make better decisions, and maybe even live a better life, if you do your 
best to look for the invisible gorillas in the world around you. We  were 
just trying to be clever when we titled our original article on the gorilla 
experiment “Gorillas in Our Midst,” but in a meta phorical sense, there 
are gorillas in our midst. There may be important things right in front of 
you that you aren’t noticing due to the illusion of attention. Now that you 
know about this illusion, you’ll be less apt to assume you’re seeing every-
thing there is to see. You may think you remember some things much 
better than you really do, because of the illusion of memory. Now that 
you understand this illusion, you’ll trust your own memory, and that of 
others, a bit less, and you’ll try to corroborate your memory in important 
situations. You’ll recognize that the conﬁ dence people express often re-
ﬂ ects their personalities rather than their knowledge, memory, or abili-
ties. You’ll be wary of thinking you know more about a topic than you 
really do, and you will test your own understanding before mistaking 
familiarity for knowledge. You won’t think you know the cause of some-
thing when all you really know is what happened before it or what tended 

242  THE INVISIBLE GORILLA
to accompany it. You’ll be skeptical of claims that simple tricks can un-
leash the untapped potential in your mind, but you’ll be aware that you 
can develop phenomenal levels of expertise if you study and practice the 
right way.
Chris once gave his seminar students the assignment of ﬁ nding an 
interesting story from history or current events in which everyday illu-
sions played an important role. The list they generated was fascinating 
in its scope: a controversial shooting by police in Brooklyn, the epic 
Ponzi scheme of Bernard Madoff, a living person pronounced dead who 
woke up in the morgue, and even the causes of the Vietnam War and 
the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger.
You can do this too. Take any opportunity you ﬁ nd to pause and ob-
serve human behavior through the lenses  we’ve given you. Try to track 
your own thoughts and actions as well, to make sure your intuitions and 
gut- level decisions are justiﬁ ed. Try your best to slow down, relax, and 
examine your assumptions before you jump to conclusions.
When you think about the world with an awareness of everyday illu-
sions, you won’t be as sure of yourself as you used to be, but you will 
have new insights into how your mind works, and new ways of under-
standing why people act the way they do. Often, it’s not because of stu-
pidity, arrogance, ignorance, or lack of focus. It’s because of the everyday 
illusions that affect us all. Our ﬁ nal hope is that you will always consider 
this possibility before you jump to a harsher conclusion.

A C  K N O W  L E D G  M E N T S
On September 30, 2004, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, we received the 
Ig Nobel Prize for psychology. The prize was awarded “for demonstrat-
ing that when people pay close attention to something, it’s all too easy to 
overlook anything  else— even a woman in a gorilla suit.” Two days later, 
we  were walking to a lecture hall at MIT to give a brief talk about the 
gorilla experiment when our conversation turned to the growing visibil-
ity of the gorilla video outside our home territory of cognitive psychol-
ogy. More and more people  were telling us that the video didn’t just 
point out a quirk of vision, it gave them new and broader insights into 
how their minds worked—or failed to work. Before then, our thinking 
about the gorilla video had been limited to its implications for visual 
perception and attention, but we began to realize that, meta phor ical ly, it 
might help people to think about cognitive limitations more generally. 
Over the course of that walk, we laid the foundation for this book, an 
exploration of the signiﬁ cance of cognitive limitations and our (un)
awareness of them. So our ﬁ rst duty is to thank Marc Abrahams, creator 
and impresario of the Ig Nobel Prizes, for giving us the “honor” that 
sparked this project. And we might not have gotten the prize were it not 
for Malcolm Gladwell, whose description of our gorilla study in the 
New Yorker in 2001 helped bring it to broader attention.
We owe an even greater debt to Ulric Neisser, whose groundbreaking 
work on selective looking inspired the gorilla study. During Dan’s ﬁ nal 
year of graduate school, Neisser returned to the faculty at Cornell, giv-
ing Dan the invaluable opportunity to talk to, argue with, and learn 

244  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
from his intellectual idol. Those conversations inspired Dan to try to 
replicate Neisser’s studies at Harvard. Without Neisser’s inspiration, the 
gorilla experiment never would have happened.
Several people provided advice while our ideas for this book  were 
still germinating. These early contributors include Michael Boylan, Bill 
Brewer, Neal Cohen, Marc Hauser, Stephen Kosslyn, and Susan Rabi-
ner. While writing the book, we received valuable information on spe-
ciﬁ c topics from Adrian Bangerter, George Bizer, David Baker, Walter 
Boot, David Dunning, Larry Fenson, Kathleen Galotti, Art Kramer, 
Justin Kruger, Dick Lehr, Jose Mestre, Michelle Meyer, Stephen Mi-
troff, Jay Pratt, Fred Rothenberg, Alan Schwartz, John Settlage, Ken-
neth Steele, Richard Thaler, and Frederick Zimmerman.
Several people subjected themselves to extended interviews as part of 
our research for the book. Although a few of them do not appear in the 
ﬁ nal version of the book, all contributed substantially to our thinking 
about everyday illusions. For giving their time and agreeing to be inter-
viewed, we thank Walter Boot, Bill Brewer, Daniel Chabris, Steven 
Franconeri, Jim Keating, Ed Kieser, Leslie Meltzer, Stephen Mitroff, 
Steven Most, Tyce Palmaffy, Trudy Ramirez, Leon Rozenblit, Melissa 
Sanchez, and Michael Silverman.
Many people gave us feedback on our writing, some reading drafts of 
several chapters and others reading the entire manuscript more than once. 
First and foremost, our editor at Crown, Rick Horgan, and his assistant, 
Nathan Roberson, helped us or ga nize our prose in a way that balanced 
the need to keep the book moving swiftly from one port of call to the 
next while remaining anchored to the underlying science. The following 
people provided insightful commentary on speciﬁ c chapters and sections, 
often correcting our misconceptions: Walter Boot, Nancy Boyce, Daniel 
Chabris, Jack Chen, Nicholas Christakis, Diana Goodman, Jamie Ham-
ilton, Art Kramer, James Levine, Allie Litt, Steve McGaughey, Lisa Mc-
Manus, Michael Meyer,  Michelle Meyer, Steven Most, Kathy Richards, 
Leon Rozenblit, Robyn Schneiderman, Rachel Scott, Michael Silverman, 
David Simons, Paul  Simons, Kenneth Steele, Courtnie Swearingen, 
and Richard Thaler. We would like to give special thanks to Steve 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  245
McGaughey, Michelle Meyer, Kathy Richards, David Simons, and Pat 
Simons for carefully reading and giving us extensive feedback on the 
entire book.
Several people gave input on our national survey of beliefs about 
how the mind works, including Diane Beck, Aaron Benjamin, Daniel 
Benjamin, George Bizer, Neal Cohen, Gary Dell, Jeremy Gray, Jamie 
Hamilton, Daniel Levin, Alejandro Lleras, Michelle Meyer, Neal Roese, 
Jennifer Shephard, Lisa Shin, and Annette Taylor. Kristen Pechtol col-
laborated with Chris on a preliminary version of the survey that was 
tested with students at  Union College. Jay Leve of SurveyUSA provided 
thoughtful feedback about the wording of our survey and additional 
statistical information we needed for data analysis.
Our literary agent, Jim Levine, was instrumental in helping us craft 
a proposal for our book that brought all of the everyday illusions to-
gether into a coherent narrative. He also deserves the credit for coining 
the phrase “everyday illusions.” Our thanks also go to Dan Ariely for 
introducing us to Jim. Steven Pinker and Daniel Gilbert graciously 
helped with our proposal. Elizabeth Fisher at Levine- Greenberg was 
tremendously helpful in coordinating international- rights sales and in 
guiding us through the complicated pro cess of negotiations with inter-
national agents and publishers.
We could not have completed this project without the ﬂ exibility and 
support provided by our academic institutions, the psychology depart-
ments at  Union College (Chris) and the University of Illinois (Dan). 
Dan would also like to acknowledge the Center for Advanced Study at 
the University of Illinois for sabbatical support when we  were begin-
ning our research for the book.
Since we have tried to explain everyday illusions by appealing to sci-
entiﬁ c research, our success depends on the work of many other scien-
tists. Although we describe much of our own research in this book, that 
research did not occur in a vacuum, and we  were not alone in doing it. 
We would like to thank all of our research collaborators and coauthors, 
without whom much of that work could not have been done. More 
broadly, we would like to thank all of our colleagues whose work we 

246  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
cited and discussed throughout this book, mostly without their knowl-
edge. Although they might not always agree with our interpretations of 
their ideas and results, we hope that we have done justice to their im-
portant scientiﬁ c contributions. Chris would like to acknowledge the 
lifelong inﬂ uence of Stephen Kosslyn, his mentor before, during, and 
after graduate school, who taught him much about scientiﬁ c thinking 
and generously supported him in the pursuit of his own in de pen dent 
research directions. Dan would particularly like to thank his long-term 
collaborator, Daniel Levin, whose ideas and writing about metacogni-
tion helped motivate many of the arguments we put forward through-
out this book.
Finally, we would each like to thank our families. Chris thanks his 
wife, Michelle Meyer; their son, Caleb; and his own parents, Daniel 
and Lois Chabris, for all their love and support, and for putting up with 
him and the  whole project. Dan thanks his wife, Kathy Richards, and 
their children, Jordan and Ella, for tolerating far too many long days and 
working weekends. He would also like to thank his parents, Pat and 
Paul Simons, and his brother, David Simons, for helping him to think 
clearly and for arguing with him when he didn’t.
We hope that we  haven’t overlooked anyone whom we should have 
thanked, but if we have, please consider attributing our omission to an 
everyday illusion rather than an intentional slight.

N O T E S
Chapter 1: “I Think I Would Have Seen That”
  1.  Details of this case are drawn from a variety of sources, including several excel-
lent, in- depth investigative articles written by award- winning journalist Dick Lehr for the 
Boston Globe. Lehr has written a book, The Fence (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), that 
discusses the case and the larger issues surrounding it. Our sources also include the fol-
lowing articles by Dick Lehr in the Globe: “Boston Police Turn on One of Their Own,” 
December 8, 1997, p. A1; “Truth or Consequences,” September 23, 2001; “Free and 
Clear,” January 22, 2006; “Witness in ’95 Brutality Case Offers New Account,” Septem-
ber 17, 2006. Other sources included the opinions of the U.S. district and circuit courts in 
the case, especially United States v. Kenneth M. Conley, 186 F.3d 7 (1st Cir. 1999); and 
Kenneth M. Conley v. United States, 415 F.3d 183 (1st Cir. 2005); as well as a brief ﬁ led by 
Conley in U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts (Kenneth M. Conley v. 
United States, No. 01- 10853- WGY, No. 01- 97- cr- 10213- WGY, June 26, 2003). When any 
sources provided discrepant details, we have regarded The Fence as deﬁ nitive because it 
was written most recently and incorporated the most research.
  2.  Biographical information about Michael Cox is from a proﬁ le prepared for his 
participation in a conference on “Race, Police, and the Community” at Harvard Law 
School, December 7– 9, 2000, law.harvard.edu/academics/clinical/cji/rpcconf/coxm.htm 
(accessed May 18, 2009).
  3.  S. Murphy, “A Settlement Is Reached in Beating of Police Ofﬁ cer,” The Boston 
Globe, March 4, 2006, p. B3.
  4.  Lehr, “Boston Police Turn on One of Their Own.”
  5.  The juror quotes are from Lehr, “Truth or Consequences.” The widespread belief 
that police ofﬁ cers are superior to civilians at observing and remembering relevant infor-
mation appears to be inconsistent with the scientiﬁ c evidence; e.g., P. B. Ainsworth, “In-
cident Perception by British Police Ofﬁ cers,” Law and Human Behavior 5 (1981): 231– 236.
  6.  Perjury is the crime of making a false statement while under oath in a legal pro-
ceeding. Each individual false statement can lead to a separate charge of perjury. Conley 
was accused of perjuring himself by claiming (1) that he did not see Cox (or any other po-
lice ofﬁ cer) chase Brown to the fence, and (2) that he did not see the attack on Cox. He was 

248  NOTES
acquitted of the second charge but convicted of the ﬁ rst. His conviction for obstruction of 
justice, which is the more general crime of interfering with law enforcement, in essence 
ﬂ owed automatically from the jury’s ﬁ nding that he had committed perjury, and it did not 
reﬂ ect any additional malfeasance.
  7.  All four suspects from the gold Lexus  were arrested that night. The victim at the 
hamburger restaurant had been shot multiple times in the chest, allegedly because he’d 
witnessed another shooting at a nearby bar earlier that same night. He died several days 
later. The next year, two of the suspects  were convicted of ﬁ rst- degree murder; Smut 
Brown, who  wasn’t accused of pulling the trigger himself, was acquitted. Michael Cox 
eventually recovered from his physical injuries and returned to work after a six- month 
absence. He went on to become a deputy superintendent of police in Boston. Two of those 
accused by Cox of being involved in the beating  were later found civilly liable and lost 
their jobs when Cox sued the Boston Police Department.
  8.  Our study was reported in the following article: D. J. Simons and C. F. Chabris, 
“Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for Dynamic Events,” Percep-
tion 28 (1999): 1059– 1074. Dan ﬁ rst learned about Neisser’s 1970s experiments when he 
was a college student. Neisser’s experiments used a complicated mirror apparatus to create 
ghostlike images of people who appeared to walk through one another. He designed those 
videos to test whether subjects could pay attention to one set of people while ignoring others 
who occupied exactly the same areas. That is, he asked whether people focus their visual 
attention on individual objects rather than on individual regions of space, and when they 
focus on objects, how selectively they focus. The most detailed description of Neisser’s 
earlier studies that inspired our experiment is in U. Neisser, “The Control of Information 
Pickup in Selective Looking,” in Perception and Its Development: A Tribute to Eleanor J. 
Gibson, ed. A. D. Pick, 201– 219 (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1979).
  9.  The term inattentional blindness comes from the title of a 1998 MIT Press book by 
Arien Mack of the New School for Social Research in New York and the late Irvin Rock 
of the University of California at Berkeley, two psychologists who did pioneering work in 
this area. In their original experiments, subjects stared at a point on a computer screen 
until a large cross appeared. One arm of the cross— either the horizontal or the vertical— 
was always longer than the other, and subjects tried to judge which was longer. The cross 
was visible for only a fraction of a second before it disappeared, so this was not an easy 
judgment to make accurately. After a few trials of this task, an additional, unexpected 
object appeared along with the cross. The object could be a geometric ﬁ gure like a small 
square, or a simple picture, or even a word. In most cases about one- quarter of subjects 
claimed not to have seen the unexpected object. Neisser’s original selective- looking stud-
ies and our gorilla experiment provide a somewhat more dramatic demonstration of inat-
tentional blindness because they presented a large, central, moving object for several 
seconds, rather than a brieﬂ y ﬂ ashed static image, but the conclusion is consistent: It is 
surprisingly easy to not notice what is in plain view.
10.  We hired SurveyUSA to ask a nationally representative sample of ﬁ fteen hundred 
adults a series of questions designed to probe how people think about the workings of their 
own minds. The respondents matched the entire U.S. population in gender, age, and re-
gional distribution. SurveyUSA used a prerecorded voice to read a set of sixteen statements, 
and after each one, respondents used their telephone keypad to indicate whether they 

NOTES  249
strongly agreed, mostly agreed, mostly disagreed, strongly disagreed, or  weren’t sure. We 
also collected demographic information about each person’s age, sex, income level, and 
race. Finally, we asked people how many psychology classes they had taken and how many 
books about psychology they had read over the past three years. This sort of prerecorded 
survey provides a level of control that is ideal for scientiﬁ c research because each person 
hears exactly the same questions, in the same order, and in the same voice. SurveyUSA has 
been one of the most accurate po liti cal polling ﬁ rms over the past few election cycles. The 
entire poll was completed over the course of one week in early June 2009. The percentages 
of agreement we give represent the sum of respondents who answered “strongly agree” or 
“mostly agree” to the question. If 75 percent either strongly or mostly agree with a state-
ment, this means that the other 25 percent either strongly or mostly disagree, or are not 
sure. However, it is important to keep in mind that all of the statements we presented are 
almost certainly false, so the rate of agreement in a world without everyday illusions should 
be close to 0 percent!
11.  Our colleague Daniel Levin, a psychology professor at Vanderbilt University, 
along with Bonnie Angelone of Rowan University, described the gorilla experiment to 
over one hundred undergraduate students, but without actually showing them the video 
or asking them to perform the task. After hearing about the experiment, including the 
appearance of the gorilla— but not hearing about the results— they  were asked whether 
they would have noticed the gorilla if they had participated in the experiment themselves. 
Fully 90 percent of them predicted that they would have seen it. When we originally con-
ducted the study, though, only 50 percent actually did. See D. T. Levin and B. L. Ange-
lone, “The Visual Metacognition Questionnaire: A Mea sure of Intuitions About Vision,” 
American Journal of Psychology 121 (2008): 451– 472.
12.  Simons and Chabris, “Gorillas in Our Midst.”
13.  CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Season 2, Episode 9, “And Then There  Were 
None” (originally broadcast on CBS, November 22, 2001).
14.  Lehr, The Fence, 270.
15.  O. Johnson, “Fed Court: Convicted Hub Cop’s Trial Unfair,” The Boston Herald, 
July 21, 2005, p. 28. Ironically, the witness, Ofﬁ cer Robert Walker, had initially claimed 
that he saw Conley at the fence. Later he recanted, saying that he had not actually seen 
Conley but said that he had because he was at the scene and should have seen him. Another 
victim of the illusion of attention! The appeals court found that the problem was not 
Walker’s faulty intuition about how the mind works, but the fact that the defense was 
never told about an FBI memo that documented his later requests for hypnosis and a poly-
graph (lie detector) test, information that would tend to cast further doubt on the credi-
bility of his memories.
One more interesting twist in the case of Kenny Conley deserves mention. In 2006, 
months after Conley rejoined the police force, Smut Brown was interviewed by Dick Lehr 
while Brown was in jail in Maine for a drug conviction (“Witness in ’95 Brutality Case 
Offers New Account”). Brown told Lehr about a crucial misrepre sen ta tion in the original 
trial eight years earlier. Brown had testiﬁ ed that he had seen a white cop on the other side 
of the fence, and he identiﬁ ed Conley as the white cop who had eventually caught him. 
The way this information was presented in court gave the impression that Conley was the 
white cop Brown had seen standing next to the beating. But Brown did not speciﬁ cally 

identify Conley as the cop he had seen next to the beating. The prosecution never asked 
him to, and the defense did not cross- examine him on this speciﬁ c point. Brown later said 
that he had gotten a good look at the ofﬁ cer on the other side of the fence, but not at the 
one who caught him, and he had just assumed they  were the same person. Speaking of 
Conley, Brown told Lehr, “When I seen him sitting at the defense table I didn’t have no 
clue, like, why they  were using me for that— because I didn’t recognize him.” In fact, 
Brown claimed that just before he testiﬁ ed, he spotted the cop he had seen at the site of 
the beating standing in the court house hallway and that he told this to the FBI agent in 
charge of the case. If true, Brown’s jail house claim would further undermine the legal 
case against Conley, by subtracting one witness who placed him at the scene of the attack 
on Cox. But as we will discuss in Chapter 2 of this book, this sort of sudden recollection 
is easily distorted, and trusting a memory like this can be dangerous, even when the 
person doing the remembering does not have self- serving motives for changing his previ-
ous story.
16.  C. Ross, “2 Embattled Cops Welcomed Back to Force,” The Boston Herald, May 
20, 2006, p. 6; Lehr, “Free and Clear.”
17.  D. Wedge, “Two Ofﬁ cers Cleared in ’95 Beating Get Back $$$,” The Boston 
 Herald, November 20, 2007, p. 4.
18.  Lehr, The Fence, 328.
19.  This quote is from p. 100 of R. Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance 
(New York: William Morrow, 1974).
20.  Except as noted, all of the quotes and facts about this incident are drawn from the 
wonderfully detailed and illustrated National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Ma-
rine Accident Brief for Accident # DCA- 01- MM- 022 ( www .ntsb .gov/ publictn/ 2005/ 
MAB0501 .htm). Other sources include M. Thompson, “Driving Blind,” Time, February 
18, 2001 ( www .time .com/ time/ magazine/ article/ 0 ,9171 ,99833 ,00 .html); T. McCarthy 
and J. McCabe, “Bitter Passage,” Time, April 15, 2001 ( www .time .com/ time/ magazine/ 
article/ 0 ,9171 ,106402 -1 ,00 .html); and S. Waddle, The Right Thing (Nashville, TN: In-
tegrity Publishers, 2003).
21.  This quote is used by permission from the transcript of a portion of an interview 
of Scott Waddle by Stone Phillips for Dateline NBC.
22.  For a recent analysis of “looked but failed to see” accidents, see A. Koustanaï, 
E. Boloix, P. Van Elslande, and C. Bastien, “Statistical Analysis of ‘Looked- But- Failed- 
to- See’ Accidents: Highlighting the Involvement of Two Distinct Mechanisms,” Accident 
Analysis and Prevention 40 (2008): 461– 469.
23.  D. Memmert, “The Effects of Eye Movements, Age, and Expertise on Inatten-
tional Blindness,” Consciousness and Cognition 15 (2006): 620– 627. Memmert’s subjects 
 were children with an average age of about eight years, but the rate of noticing the gorilla 
was virtually the same as in our studies of college students: 8 out of 20, or 40 percent. 
Psychologists use many different devices for tracking a subject’s eye movements. A typical 
design involves a small, lightweight helmet with one or two cameras directed at the sub-
ject’s eyes. Harmless infrared light is bounced off the subject’s eyes and detected by the 
cameras. Because the cameras are in a ﬁ xed position relative to the subject’s head (they’re 
attached ﬁ rmly to the helmet, which is attached ﬁ rmly to their head), experimenters can 
use these reﬂ ections to determine which way subjects are looking. Many systems use a 
250  NOTES

NOTES  251
second camera to determine where the subject’s head is relative to the scene being viewed, 
providing the necessary additional information to calculate exactly where in an image the 
subject is ﬁ xating their eyes. Current eye- tracking systems can mea sure the focus of gaze 
with exceptionally high spatial and temporal precision.
24.  Details about this accident and its consequences  were reported in an article on 
ESPN .com entitled “Big Ben in Serious Condition After Motorcycle Accident” on June 12 
and June 13, 2006 (sports.espn.go.com/nﬂ /news/story?id=2480830). Other details 
and some quotes come from the following stories: M. A. Fuoco, “Multiple Injuries, Few 
Answers for Roethlisberger,” The Pittsburgh Post Gazette, June 13, 2006 ( www .post -ga
zette .com/ pg/ 06164/ 697828 -66 .stm); J. Silver, “Roethlisberger, Car Driver Are Both 
Charged,” The Pittsburgh Post Gazette, June 20, 2006 ( www .post -gazette .com/ pg/ 06171/ 
699570 -66 .stm); D. Hench, “Steelers’ QB Hurt in Crash,” Portland Press Herald, June 13, 
2006.
25.  Statistics and quotes are drawn from the Hurt report: H. H. Hurt Jr., J. V. Ouel-
let, and D. R. Thom, Motorcycle Accident Cause Factors and Identiﬁ cation of Countermea-
sures, Volume 1: Technical report. Trafﬁ c Safety Center, University of Southern 
California, 1981.
26.  Hurt et al., Motorcycle Accident Cause Factors, 46. The larger study discussed in 
this report conducted on- site accident evaluations for 900 motorcycle accidents in the Los 
Angeles area, and it also examined 3,600 accident reports. The criteria used to select these 
62 cases for additional analysis  were not described in the report.
27.  S. B. Most, D. J. Simons, B. J. Scholl, R. Jimenez, E. Clifford, and C. F. Chabris, 
“How Not to Be Seen: The Contribution of Similarity and Selective Ignoring to Sus-
tained Inattentional Blindness,” Psychological Science 12 (2000): 9– 17.
28.  P. L. Jacobsen, “Safety in Numbers: More Walkers and Bicyclists, Safer Walking 
and Bicycling,” Injury Prevention 9 (2003): 205– 209. These results have been corrobo-
rated in other countries and other time periods; for similar analyses in Australia, see D. L. 
Robinson, “Safety in Numbers in Australia: More Walkers and Bicyclists, Safer Walking 
and Bicycling,” Health Promotion Journal of Australia 16, no. 1 (2005): 47– 51. See also 
Tom Vanderbilt’s excellent book Trafﬁ c (New York: Knopf, 2008), which discusses this 
issue and a number of related issues involving expectations and accidents. This book was 
an informative resource for the material in this chapter on driving.
29.  S. B. Most and R. S. Astur, “Feature- Based Attentional Set as a Cause of Trafﬁ c 
Accidents,” Visual Cognition 15 (2007): 125– 132.
30.  Fuoco, “Multiple Injuries, Few Answers for Roethlisberger.”
31.  E. Fischer, R. F. Haines, and T. A. Price, “Cognitive Issues in Head- Up Displays,” 
NASA Technical Paper 1711, 1980. See also R. F. Haines, “A Breakdown in Simultaneous 
Information Pro cessing,” in Presbyopia Research, ed. G. Obrecht and L. W. Stark (New 
York: Plenum Press, 1991).
32.  Statistics and some of the analyses in this section are drawn from “Runway Safety 
Report: Trends and Initiatives at Towered Airports in the United States, FY 2004 through 
FY 2007,” Federal Aviation Administration, June 2008. You could encounter a runway 
incursion much sooner or much later than our estimate of three thousand years of daily 
round- trip ﬂ ying, but in any case it is highly unlikely that you will in your lifetime. De-
tails of the Tenerife crash are taken from “. . . What’s He Doing? He’s Going to Kill Us 

All!” Time, April 11, 1977 ( www .time .com/ time/ magazine/ article/ 0 ,9171 ,918815 ,00 .
html) and from the Wikipedia entry on the Tenerife disaster, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Tenerife_disaster (accessed January 19, 2009).
33.  Fischer et al., “Cognitive Issues in Head- Up Displays,” 15.
34.  I. Larish and C. D. Wickens, Divided Attention with Superimposed and Separated 
Imagery: Implications for Head- up Displays, Aviation Research Laboratory Technical Re-
port ARL- 91- 04/NASA- HUD- 91- 1, 1991.
35.  Evidence for driving impairment while talking on a cell phone comes from D. A. 
Redelmeier and R. J. Tibshirani, “Association Between Cellular- Telephone Calls and 
Motor Vehicle Collisions,” New En gland Journal of Medicine 336 (1997): 453– 458; and 
D. L. Strayer, F. A. Drews, and D. J. Crouch, “Comparing the Cell- Phone Driver and the 
Drunk Driver,” Human Factors 48 (2006): 381– 391. Evidence linking alcohol consump-
tion to increased inattentional blindness comes from S. L. Clifaseﬁ , M. K. T. Takarangi, 
and J. S. Bergman, “Blind Drunk: The Effects of Alcohol on Inattentional Blindness,” 
Applied Cognitive Psychology 20 (2005): 697– 704. In this study, subjects  were less likely to 
notice the unexpected gorilla after having had an alcoholic beverage. Alcohol could have 
its effect by directly altering the ability to detect unexpected objects or by making the 
primary counting task more difﬁ cult.
36.  E. Goodman, “We Love, Hate Our Cell Phones,” The Boston Globe, July 6, 2001. 
Consistent with Goodman’s claim, a survey found that cell phone users agreed more 
strongly with the statement “I can use a cellular phone safely when driving” than with 
“People, in general, can use a cellular phone safely when driving.” M. S. Wogalter and 
C. B. Mayhorn, “Perceptions of Driver Distraction by Cellular Phone Users and Nonus-
ers,” Human Factors 47 (2005): 455– 467.
The New York legislation that took effect on December 1, 2001, involved adding Sec-
tion 1225- c to the New York vehicle and trafﬁ c law. Part of the law stated, “The court 
shall waive any ﬁ ne for which a person who violates the provisions of section 1225- c of the 
vehicle and trafﬁ c law . . . supplies the court with proof that, between the date on which 
he or she is charged with having violated such section and the appearance date for such 
violation, he or she possesses a hands- free mobile telephone.” This “get out of jail” provi-
sion was in effect until March 2002. The effect of this law essentially meant that rather 
than paying a ﬁ ne, people caught using a handheld phone could pay a cell-phone vendor 
for a hands- free headset. Consequently, it’s not surprising that the major telecommunica-
tion companies supported the legislation.
Nokia’s recommendation to use hands- free phones was titled “Safety Is the Most Im-
portant Call You Will Ever Make: A Guide to Safe and Responsible Wireless Phone Use” 
and its top safety tip was to “Get to know your wireless phone and its features such as 
speed dial and redial.” AT&T’s ﬂ ier was headed “A special offer just for you” and provided 
a coupon for a free hands- free earpiece. The statistic that 77 percent of people believe that 
talking on a hands- free phone is safer comes from the SurveyUSA representative national 
poll we commissioned, conducted June 1– 8, 2009.
37.  W. J. Horrey and C. D. Wickens, “Examining the Impact of Cell Phone Con-
versations on Driving Using Meta- Analytic Techniques,” Human Factors 48 (2006): 
196– 205.
38.  In most variants of the “gorilla” experiment, the gorilla did not stop to thump its 
252  NOTES

NOTES  253
chest. Instead, it just walked through the scene, remaining visible for ﬁ ve seconds. We 
created the “chest thump” version that we described earlier for a separate test to explore 
how dramatic we could make the event and still provoke inattentional blindness.
39.  B. J. Scholl, N. S. Noles, V. Pasheva, and R. Sussman, “Talking on a Cellular 
Telephone Dramatically Increases ‘sustained inattentional blindness’ ” [Abstract], Journal 
of Vision 3 (2003): 156 ( journalofvision.org/3/9/156/). More recent observational studies 
show that people are often oblivious to their surroundings when talking on a phone. For 
example, people walking across a college campus while talking on a phone  were less likely 
than undistracted pedestrians to notice a unicycling clown nearby: I. E. Hyman Jr., S. M. 
Boss, B. M. Wise, K. E. McKenzie, and J. M. Caggiano, “Did You See the Unicycling 
Clown? Inattentional Blindness While Walking and Talking on a Cell Phone,” Applied 
Cognitive Psychology.
40.  This ﬁ nding and the explanations in the next paragraph are based on F. A. 
Drews, M. Pasupathi, and D. L. Strayer, “Passenger and Cell Phone Conversations in 
Simulated Driving,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 14 (2008): 392– 400.
41.  The phenomenon of inattentional deafness can be traced to studies from the 
1950s and 1960s on the ability to attend selectively to information presented to one ear 
while ignoring sounds in the other ear. Under those conditions, people often fail to 
notice unexpected messages in the ignored ear. The term “inattentional deafness” was 
ﬁ rst used by Mack and Rock in their 1998 book Inattentional Blindness. For examples of 
early work on selective listening, see E. C. Cherry, “Some Experiments upon the Recog-
nition of Speech, with One and with Two Ears,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America 25 (1953): 975– 979; and A. Treisman, “Monitoring and Storage of Irrelevant 
Messages in Selective Attention,” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 3 
(1964): 449– 459.
42.  G. Weingarten, “Pearls Before Breakfast,” The Washington Post, April 8, 
2007, p. W10 ( www .washingtonpost .com/ wp -dyn/ content/ article/ 2007/ 04/ 04/ 
AR2007040401721 .html). Biographical information about Bell comes from Weingar-
ten’s article and the Wikipedia entry on Joshua Bell (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joshua_Bell). 
The biographical quote about Bell is from his ofﬁ cial biography,  www .joshuabell .com/ bio 
graphy (accessed January 16, 2009).
43.  Later, Joshua Bell had a different memory of his feelings. In the revised edition of 
Predictably Irrational (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), Dan Ariely writes of meeting Bell 
and asking about his day as a busker: “I wanted to know how he felt about being over-
looked and ignored by so many people. He responded that he was really not all that sur-
prised, and admitted that expectation is an important part of the way we experience music” 
(p. 272).
44.  Nokia Corporation, “Survey Results Conﬁ rm It: Women Are Better Multi- taskers 
Than Men,” press release, November 22, 2007,  www .nokia .com/ press/ press -releases/ 
showpressrelease ?newsid = 1170280 (accessed January 28, 2009). Despite the title of this 
press release, it reports no actual test of multitasking abilities, just a nonrepresentative 
survey of pop u lar beliefs about multitasking abilities. A typical study of the inefﬁ ciency of 
multitasking is J. S. Rubinstein, D. E. Meyer, and J. E. Evans, “Executive Control of Cog-
nitive Pro cesses in Task Switching,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception 
and Per for mance 27 (2001): 763– 797. There is frequent discussion of differences in brain 

anatomy between men and women that could explain a difference in multitasking ability, 
but we have been unable to ﬁ nd experiments that offer unequivocal evidence for a general 
superiority of women in dividing attention between multiple tasks or goals.
45.  These ﬁ ndings are reported in D. Memmert, “The Effects of Eye Movements, 
Age, and Expertise on Inattentional Blindness,” Consciousness and Cognition 15 (2006): 
620– 627; and D. Memmert, D. J. Simons, and T. Grimme, “The Relationship Between 
Visual Attention and Expertise in Sports,” Psychology of Sport and Exercise 10 (2009): 
146– 151.
46.  T. E. Lum, R. J. Fairbanks, E. C. Pennington, and F. L. Zwemer, “Proﬁ les in Pa-
tient Safety: Misplaced Femoral Line Guidewire and Multiple Failures to Detect the For-
eign Body on Chest Radiography,” Academic Emergency Medicine 12 (2005): 658– 662.
47.  Omitting a ﬁ nal step in a pro cess (e.g., removing a guidewire) once the main ob-
jective of the pro cess has been achieved (e.g., placing the central line correctly) is a com-
mon sort of mistake known as a post- completion error. This is the type of error you are 
making when you walk away with your stack of copies while the original document is still 
sitting on the glass, or when you type out an e-mail saying “as shown in the document I 
have attached” but hit “send” before you attach the document.
48.  D. B. Spring and D. J. Tennen house, “Radiology Malpractice Lawsuits: Califor-
nia Jury Verdicts,” Radiology 159 (1986): 811– 814.
49.  W. James, The Principles of Psychology (New York: Henry Holt, 1890). For a dis-
cussion of how people search for rare items, see J. M. Wolfe, T. S. Horowitz, and N. M. 
Kenner, “Rare Items Often Missed in Visual Searches,” Nature 435 (2005): 439– 440.
50.  The examples of uses of the gorilla video are from several sources. The ﬁ rst is from 
an e-mail sent to Dan’s company, Viscog Productions, Inc., on August 5, 2004, about the 
usefulness of its DVD that includes the gorilla video. Mahzarin Banaji, a Harvard psy-
chology professor, used inattentional blindness in an analysis of discrimination; see the 
story entitled “Tenure and Gender” in Harvard Magazine, January 2005 (harvardmaga 
zine.com/2005/01/tenure- and- gender.html). The parallels between inattentional blind-
ness and the failure to detect terrorists was discussed in “Background Brieﬁ ng,” ABC 
Radio National (Australia) with Gerald Tooth, December 8, 2002. Links to diet  were 
discussed in “Awareness, Fat Loss, & Moonwalking Bears,” December 31, 2008,  www 
.bellyfatreport .com/ ?s = bear (accessed June 9, 2009). Dean Radin’s views are presented in 
D. Radin, Entangled Minds: Extrasensory Experiences in a Quantum Reality (New York: 
Paraview Pocket Books, 2006). (Later in this book we discuss one of the main reasons 
why people come to believe in psychic phenomena despite the absence of scientiﬁ c evi-
dence to support their existence.) Discussion of bullying was from an e-mail received by 
Viscog Productions on September 1, 2008. The link to religion is from a March 2008 
sermon by Reverend Daniel Conklin of the Epiphany Parish in Seattle,  www .epiphany
seattle .org/ sermons/ Lent4 -2008 .html (accessed June 28, 2009).
51.  Wolfe et al., “Rare Items Often Missed.”
52.  For a brief discussion, see T. Grifﬁ ths and C. Moore, “A Matter of Perception,” 
Aquatics International, November/December 2004 ( www .aquaticsintl .com/ 2004/ nov/ 
0411 _rm .html) .
53.  Examples of GPS- induced accidents come from the following sources: “Driver 
Follows GPS into Sand,” Reuters, October 10, 2006 ( www .news .com .au/ story/ 0 ,23599 , 
254  NOTES

NOTES  255
20555319 -13762 ,00 .html); “Train Hits Car, and a G.P.S. Is Blamed,” Associated Press, 
October 1, 2008 ( www .nytimes .com/ 2008/ 10/ 01/ nyregion/ 01gps .html); T. Carey, “SatNav 
Danger Revealed: Navigation Device Blamed for Causing 300,000 Crashes,” July 21, 2008 
( www .mirror .co .uk/ news/ top -stories/ 2008/ 07/ 21/ satnav -danger -revealed -navigation 
-device - blamed -for -causing -300 -000 -crashes -89520 -20656554/ ); “Lorry Driver Had to 
Sleep in Cab for Three Nights After Sat- Nav Blunder Left Him Wedged in Country Lane,” 
Daily Mail, November 1, 2007 ( www .dailymail .co .uk/ news/ article -491073/ Lorry -driver 
-sleep - cab -nights -sat -nav -blunder -left -wedged -country -lane .html); “Sat- Nav Dunks Dozy 
Drivers in Deep Water,” The Times (London) Online, April 20, 2006 ( www .timesonline 
.co .uk/ tol/ news/ article707216 .ece). The ford in this last example is normally about two 
feet deep.
Chapter 2: The Coach Who Choked
  1.  Many of the details and quotes for the Bobby Knight/Neil Reed story are taken 
from an article entitled “A Dark Side of Knight,” ﬁ rst published on the CNN/Sports Il-
lustrated website on March 18, 2000, updated September 10, 2000. The article was 
 intended to expose some of the vulgar and abusive antics Knight exhibited during prac-
tices, with the implication that his behavior had caused the players to leave. However, the 
story acknowledged that Knight’s program had no more departures than other top college 
basketball programs. Some students who left the program, like Richard Mandev ille, re-
gretted not doing so sooner. Other players, like Alan Henderson— who stayed in the pro-
gram, graduated, and became a top shooting guard in the NBA— spoke more fondly of 
Knight’s motivational techniques. Henderson admitted that Knight had been a tough 
coach who “got on me sometimes like he got on everybody,” but praised him for his desire 
to improve his players and his generosity and willingness to help. Other quotes  were taken 
from the following CNN/Sports Illustrated articles: “Defending ‘The General,’ ” April 
12, 2000; and “The Knight Tape,” September 9, 2000. Biographical details on Bobby 
Knight are drawn from the National Basketball Association Hoopedia blog, hoopedia.
nba.com/index.php?title=Bob_Knight, and from Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Bob_Knight (both accessed June 29, 2009). Many of the incidents from Knight’s career 
are documented in “Bob Knight’s Outburst Timeline,” USA Today, November 14, 2006.
  2.  As we mentioned in a note to Chapter 1, our items  were designed to present beliefs 
that the scientiﬁ c consensus regards as false, so an ideal rate of agreement would be 0 
percent. We also found that 83 percent of people believe that amnesia, or sudden memory 
loss, results in the inability to recall one’s name and identity. This belief may reﬂ ect the 
way amnesia is usually portrayed in movies, tele vi sion, and literature. For example, when 
we meet Matt Damon’s character in the movie The Bourne Identity, we learn that he has 
no memory for who he is, why he has the skills he does, or where he is from. He spends 
much of the movie trying to answer these questions. But the inability to remember your 
name and identity is exceedingly rare in reality. Amnesia most often results from a brain 
injury that leaves the victim unable to form new memories, but with most memories of the 
past intact. (Some movies do accurately portray this more common syndrome, known as 
“anterograde” amnesia; our favorite is Memento.)
  3.  This pattern of recall is known as the serial position curve. This “U-shaped” curve 

(better recall of items from the beginning and end of a list than from the middle of the 
list, hence the U-shaped function) is one of the best- established ﬁ ndings in the literature 
on memory function; see H. Ebbinghaus, Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psy-
chology, trans. H. A. Ruger and C. E. Bussenius (New York: Columbia University, 
1885/1913). For evidence of a serial position curve with this par tic u lar type and length of 
list, see H. L. Roediger III and K. B. McDermott, “Creating False Memories: Remember-
ing Words Not Presented in Lists,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition 21 (1995): 803– 814.
  4.  Evidence for a seven- item limit on short- term memory comes from G. A. Miller, 
“The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Pro-
cessing Information,” Psychological Review 63 (1956): 81– 97. Evidence that children lack 
adult memorization skills comes from J. H. Flavell, A. G. Friedrichs, and J. D. Hoyt, 
“Developmental Changes in Memorization Pro cesses,” Cognitive Psychology 1 (1970): 
324– 340. This study shows that preschool children also think they will remember more 
than they actually do. Primary school students also overestimate their memory abilities, 
but not nearly as much as preschoolers.
  5.  J. Deese, “On the Prediction of Occurrence of Par tic u lar Verbal Intrusions in Im-
mediate Recall,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 58 (1959): 17– 22; Roediger and Mc-
Dermott, “Creating False Memories.”
  6.  The study was described in the following article: W. F. Brewer and J. C. Treyens, 
“Role of Schemata in Memory for Places,” Cognitive Psychology 13 (1981): 207– 230. 
Some of the earliest demonstrations that memory encodes meaning in the form of asso-
ciations with what we already know come from this classic: F. C. Bartlett, Remembering: 
A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1932).
  7.  “The Knight Tape,” CNN/Sports Illustrated, September 9, 2000.
  8.  This quote is also from CNN/Sports Illustrated’s report “The Knight Tape.”
  9.  Increased wait times have become more common with increased use of cell phones 
and decreased numbers of operators. For example, in Las Vegas in 2002, only 65 percent 
of calls  were answered within the national standard of ten seconds (A. Packer, “Metro 911 
Calls Often Put on Hold,” Las Vegas Sun, October 23, 2004). At the two largest call cen-
ters in Los Angeles and San Francisco, average wait times are more than ﬁ fty seconds, and 
in some extreme cases, callers had to wait more than ten minutes for an operator (R. Lopez 
and R. Connell, “Cell Phones Swamping 911 System,” The Los Angeles Times, August 26, 
2007).
10.  Chris learned of the incident in a conversation with the witnesses on May 30, 
2008. He asked them not to talk about it further before he could interview each of them 
separately. The interview with Leslie Meltzer took place by telephone on August 5, 2008; 
the interview with Tyce Palmaffy took place by telephone on December 30, 2008.
11.  Different people have different roles on a movie set, and each may notice elements 
related to his or her area of focus. Costumers might notice changes to clothing, cinema-
tographers focus on lighting changes,  etc. The script supervisor is the one person respon-
sible for trying to make sure all the important details match across shots. See A. Rowlands, 
The Continuity Supervisor, 4th ed. (Boston: Focal Press, 2000); P. P. Miller, Script Super-
vising and Film Continuity, 3rd ed. (Boston: Focal Press, 1999).
256  NOTES

NOTES  257
12.  At the time of this writing, a Google search for “ﬁ lm ﬂ ubs” turns up more than 
thirty- ﬁ ve hundred hits.
13.  “Film Flubs: Mistakes Made and Left in Pop u lar Movies,” Dateline NBC, March 
22, 1999. Saving Private Ryan won the Academy Award for editing in 1998 and Shake-
speare in Love was nominated that same year (see awardsdatabase.oscars.org). Mankiewicz 
also assumed that the ﬁ lmmakers  were unaware of the errors. Script supervisor Trudy 
Ramirez told Dan in an interview on June 6, 2009, “The amount of handling and view-
ing and the numbers of people that are involved in the post- production pro cess and in the 
editing is so extensive, that for something to literally get through with every one of those 
people being unaware is highly unlikely. I don’t know how many times it’s happened, if 
ever. A number of people would have discussed the merits of utilizing the shot with an 
error prior to it ending up in the ﬁ lm.” In other words, they might have needed a shot of 
soldiers walking across a ﬁ eld, but they didn’t have one with seven soldiers, so they de-
cided to use the one with eight soldiers despite the error. The facts about The Godfather 
and Spartacus come from the Internet Movie Database,  www .imdb .com/ title/ tt0068646/ 
goofs;  www.imdb.com/title/tt0054331/goofs (both accessed November 14, 2009).
14.  D. T. Levin and D. J. Simons, “Failure to Detect Changes to Attended Objects in 
Motion Pictures,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 4 (1997): 501– 506. You can view the 
ﬁ lm at  www .theinvisiblegorilla .com .
15.  Subjects answering yes  were then asked to describe the changes they noticed. Only 
one subject reported noticing anything, and that person’s description was sufﬁ ciently 
vague that it was not clear whether the individual had actually noticed a change.
16.  The term “change blindness” was coined in this article: R. A. Rensink, J. K. 
 O’Regan, and J. J. Clark, “To See or Not to See: The Need for Attention to Perceive 
Changes in Scenes,” Psychological Science 8 (1997): 368– 373.
17.  The term “change blindness blindness” and the data described in this paragraph 
come from: D. T. Levin, N. Momen, S. B. Drivdahl, and D. J. Simons, “Change Blindness 
Blindness: The Metacognitive Error of Overestimating Change- Detection Ability,” Visual 
Cognition 7 (2000): 397– 412. Of 300 subjects, 76 percent predicted they would notice the 
change to the plates, and 90 percent of 297 subjects predicted they would notice the change 
to the scarf.
18.  These quoted responses are taken from an unpublished replication of the earlier 
studies (which  were done at Cornell by the two Dans) that Dan conducted while he was 
at Harvard. They are typical of responses written by subjects in all of these change blind-
ness experiments. Levin and Simons (“Failure to Detect Changes to Attended Objects”) 
found that across four different pairs of actors performing two different simple actions, 
approximately two- thirds of the subjects failed to report any change. For the par tic u lar 
video described in the text, none of the subjects in the original experiment reported the 
change.
19.  See Levin and Simons, “Failure to Detect Changes to Attended Objects.” A video 
of a subject participating in this study can be viewed at  www .theinvisible gorilla .com .
20.  Script supervisors have many responsibilities on set, including keeping track of all 
the details of each take (e.g., the cameras used, what actors said, how the action pro-
gressed, how long the shot was,  etc.). Their extensive notes guide the entire postproduc-
tion pro cess.

21.  Quotes from Trudy Ramirez are from an e-mail correspondence on June 2– 6, 
2009, and a telephone interview with Dan on June 6, 2009. Dan also corresponded with 
a second script supervisor, Melissa Sanchez (on November 14, 2004, and June 2– 3, 2009), 
who was tremendously helpful in guiding our writing of this section.
22.  Two of the best- known training manuals for script supervisors, Script Supervising 
and Film Continuity by Pat Miller and The Continuity Supervisor by Avril Rowlands, give 
advice that is entirely consistent with what Trudy Ramirez said: Don’t count on your abil-
ity to remember visual details. Miller, who advises readers to take photographs and copious 
notes, recognizes the limits of memory: “It is humanly impossible and patently unneces-
sary for you to simultaneously watch and note every detail in a scene. The mark of a com-
petent continuity supervisor is not so much the possession of extraordinary powers of 
observation . . .  but your conﬁ dence in knowing what is important to observe” (p. 177). 
Rowlands agrees: “. . . it is what you notice that is important. You will never notice every-
thing that is happening within a shot and it is not necessary that you should, providing the 
things you do notice and write down are those which are important in order to preserve 
continuity” (p. 68).
23.  Of 108 undergraduates, 98 percent predicted they would notice the person change 
(Levin et al., “Change Blindness Blindness”).
24.  D. J. Simons and D. T. Levin, “Failure to Detect Changes to People During a 
Real- World Interaction,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 5 (1998): 644– 649.
25.  This experiment is described in D. T. Levin, D. J. Simons, B. L. Angelone, and 
C. F. Chabris, “Memory for Centrally Attended Changing Objects in an Incidental Real- 
World Change Detection Paradigm,” British Journal of Psychology 93 (2002): 289– 302. A 
demonstration of the experiment was broadcast on the BBC program Brain Story and was 
also re- created on Dateline NBC in 2003.
26.  For an overview of the evidence for change blindness, see D. J. Simons and 
M. Ambinder, “Change Blindness: Theory and Consequences,” Current Directions in Psy-
chological Science, 14 (2005): 44– 48.
27.  Simons and Levin, “Failure to Detect Changes to People.” The studies in which 
we changed the race or sex of the actor have not yet been published. We conducted one 
study in which we replaced a male actor with a female actor in the counter paradigm men-
tioned earlier, and nobody missed the change. Dan and his former graduate student Ste-
phen Mitroff also conducted a series of video- based change detection experiments in 
which the race or sex of an actor was changed. Again, nobody missed these changes.
28.  Of people who noticed the change, 81 percent correctly selected the ﬁ rst actor 
from the lineup, and 73 percent correctly picked the second. Those missing the change 
selected the correct ﬁ rst actor 37 percent of the time and the correct second actor 32 per-
cent of the time. See Levin et al., “Memory for Centrally Attended Changing Objects.”
29.  Details of this case and quotes are taken from a story by M. Rich: “Christmas 
Essay Was Not His, Author Admits,” The New York Times, January 9, 2009.
30.  K. A. Wade, M. Garry, J. D. Read, and S. Lindsay, “A Picture Is Worth a Thousand 
Lies: Using False Photographs to Create False Childhood Memories,” Psychonomic Bulletin 
and Review 9 (2002): 597– 603.
31.  D. L. M. Sacchi, F. Agnoli, and E. F. Loftus, “Changing History: Doctored Photo-
graphs Affect Memory for Past Public Events,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 21 (2007): 
258  NOTES

NOTES  259
1005– 1022. The story of this famous photograph, which was really four different photo-
graphs shot by four separate photographers, is discussed in the New York Times “Lens” 
blog (lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/06/03/behind- the- scenes- tank- man- of- tiananmen/).
32.  S. J. Sharman, M. Garry, J. A. Jacobson, E. F. Loftus, and P. H. Ditto, “False 
Memories for End- of- Life Decisions,” Health Psychology 27 (2008): 291– 296. The Sein-
feld quote is from “The Comeback,” Episode 147, broadcast January 30, 1997. A transcript 
of the dialog can be found online at  www .seinfeldscripts .com/ TheComeback .html (ac-
cessed July 24, 2009).
33. K. Frankovic, “To Tell the Truth to Pollsters,” cbsnews .com, August 15, 2007 
( www .cbsnews .com/ stories/ 2007/ 08/ 15/ opinion/ pollpositions/ main3169223 .shtml) .
34.  F. W. Colgrove, “Individual Memories,” American Journal of Psychology 10 (1899): 
228– 255. The quote is from pages 247– 248.
35.  R. Brown and J. Kulik, “Flashbulb Memories,” Cognition 5 (1977): 73– 99.
36.  Bush’s false memory was documented in D. L. Greenberg, “President Bush’s False 
‘Flashbulb’ Memory of 9/11/01,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 18 (2004): 363– 370. The 
video footage of the ﬁ rst plane hitting the World Trade Center came from a French ﬁ lm 
crew that had been following a New York City ﬁ reﬁ ghter and his comrades for a docu-
mentary. They happened to be ﬁ lming ﬁ reﬁ ghters investigating a gas leak near the World 
Trade Center when they heard a loud noise overhead. They turned their camera up just in 
time to catch the ﬁ rst plane hitting the ﬁ rst building. CBS broadcast its documentary 
in March 2002, six months after the attack. Clips of the relevant portion can be found on 
YouTube. See also J. Kiesewetter, “Brothers Filming Documentary Caught ‘9/11’ on 
Tape,” Gannett News Ser vice, March 10, 2002.
37.  At the time of this writing, there are many websites that promote the idea that 
President Bush knew about the attacks in advance, citing his comments about seeing the 
ﬁ rst plane as evidence. A Google search with the terms “Bush,” “ﬁ rst,” “plane,” and “9/11” 
turns up many of them. Incidentally, if Bush had been so diabolically clever as to plan the 
9/11 attacks, feign surprise, and cover everything up from Congress, the courts, and the 
media, why would he then reveal his involvement to a child? Conspiracy theories tend to 
fail spectacularly another test of cognitive plausibility by depending on the notion that a 
select few individuals have near- superhuman abilities to control and coordinate events 
and information.
38.  U. Neisser and N. Harsch, “Phantom Flashbulbs: False Recollections of Hearing 
the News About Challenger,” in Affect and Accuracy in Recall: Studies of  “Flashbulb” Mem-
ories, ed. E. Winograd and U. Neisser (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
39.  “The Knight Tape,” CNN/Sports Illustrated, September 9, 2000.
40.  From a conversation on November 27, 2008, and a letter from Daniel D. Chabris 
to Christopher F. Chabris (dated December 2, 2008).
41.  Interviews and conversation with Leslie Meltzer and Tyce Palmaffy.
42.  J. M. Talarico and D. C. Rubin, “Conﬁ dence, Not Consistency, Characterizes 
Flashbulb Memories,” Psychological Science 14 (2003): 455– 461.
43.  Details about the case of Hillary Clinton’s Bosnia memory are drawn from a fact- 
checking story published as “Hillary’s Balkan Adventure, Part II,” washingtonpost .com, 
March 21, 2008. The Peggy Noonan quote is from her column “Getting Mrs. Clinton,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 28, 2008. The satirical cover image was published by The 

New Republic, May 7, 2008; the image can be seen at meaningfuldistractions.ﬁ les.word
press.com/ 2008/05/newrepubhill.jpg (accessed August 30, 2009). Bill Clinton’s com-
ments came in a speech in a high school gymnasium in Indiana. He was quoted as saying, 
in reference to the people attacking his wife’s statements, “and some of them when they’re 
60 they’ll forget something when they’re tired at 11 at night, too.” These comments  were 
reported by Mike Memoli and posted to the MSNBC website by Domenico Montanaro 
in “Bill’s Back on the Trail,” MSNBC First Read, April 10, 2008. Hillary Clinton did 
later joke about the claims when appearing on the NBC To night Show with Jay Leno (April 
3, 2008): “I was worried I  wasn’t going to make it . . .  I was pinned down by sniper ﬁ re at 
the Burbank airport.”
44.  In this experiment, 41 percent of the 59 subjects thought they could recall ten or 
more digits. The maximum number of random digits a person can hear and recall success-
fully is known as their “digit span.” Given reasonable assumptions of a population mean 
digit span of 6.6 digits and standard deviation of 1.1 digits, only about 0.5 percent of 
people (1 in 200) should have a digit span of ten or greater. These results and analyses are 
presented in Experiment 2 of Levin et al., “Change Blindness Blindness.”
45.  For a discussion of how intuitions about the accuracy of memory interact with the 
nature of the recollective experience, see W. F. Brewer and C. Sampaio, “Pro cesses Lead-
ing to Conﬁ dence and Accuracy in Sentence Recognition: A Metamemory Approach,” 
Memory 14 (2006): 540– 552.
46.  T. Sharot, M. R. Delgado, and E. A. Phelps (2004), “How Emotion Enhances 
the Feeling of Remembering,” Nature Neuroscience 7 (2004): 1376– 1380.
Chapter 3: What Smart Chess Players and Stupid Criminals Have in Common
  1.  For information about Lyme disease, see G. P. Wormser et al., “The Clinical As-
sessment, Treatment, and Prevention of Lyme Disease, Human Granulocytic Anaplasmo-
sis, and Babesiosis: Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America,” IDSA Guidelines 43 (2006): 1089– 1134.
  2.  We surveyed 103 players in all; 31 in Parsippany and 72 in Philadelphia.
  3.  Our follow- up examination of ratings from years after the original survey neces-
sarily included only those players who kept playing tournament chess through that pe-
riod. Others became inactive, perhaps because their ratings  were not improving as they 
had hoped. When those players are added to the analysis, using the last ratings they had 
before they dropped out, the level of overconﬁ dence is 71 points at ﬁ ve years (as opposed 
to 54 points without those players).
  4.  C. Darwin, The Descent of Man (London: John Murray, 1871), 3.
  5.  A transcript of the dialogue from Take the Money and Run (which was released in 
1969) can be found online,  www .script-o-rama .com/ movie _scripts/ t/ take -the -money 
-and -run -script .html (accessed April 24, 2009).
  6.  D. Lehr, The Fence (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), 39– 40.
  7.  Evidence that criminals tend to be less intelligent comes from pp. 247– 249 of R. J. 
Herrnstein and C. Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American 
Life (New York: Free Press, 1994). Examples of inept criminals are drawn from “Daft 
Burglar Writes Name on Wall,” BBC News, September 6, 2007 (news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
uk_news/en gland/manchester/6981558.stm); and “Man Jailed After Trying to Pass $1 
260  NOTES

NOTES  261
Million Bill at Pittsburgh Giant Ea gle,” WTAE- TV4, October 9, 2007 ( www .thepitts 
burghchannel .com/ news/ 14300133/ detail .html ?rss = pit & psp = news). The largest bill in 
circulation is the $100 bill. Apparently a set of fake $1 million notes was distributed by a 
church in Texas; Porter was not the only person who tried to pass one. It is not clear 
whether the people who tried to spend them actually thought they  were legal tender.
  8.  The experiments described in this section are reported in J. Kruger and D. Dun-
ning, “Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difﬁ culties in Recognizing One’s Own Incom-
petence Lead to Inﬂ ated Self- Assessments,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 
(1999): 1121– 1134. The ﬁ nding that the less competent are more prone to overestimate 
their ability than the highly competent has been called the “Dunning- Kruger Effect,” 
presumably because Dunning was a professor and Kruger was a graduate student at the 
time. It earned its discoverers the Ig Nobel Prize for psychology in 2000 (improbable
.com/ig/ ig- pastwinners.html). Kruger is now a professor at New York University’s busi-
ness school.
  9.  Kruger and Dunning, “Unskilled and Unaware of It,” 1121. In Little Rock, Ar-
kansas, in 2007 a man named Langston Robbins entered a bank, walked right past an 
off- duty cop working as a security guard, and placed a holdup note in front of the teller. 
The cop arrested him after a struggle and a short chase. Lieutentant Terry Hastings of the 
Little Rock police told the Associated Press, “I just don’t know why he didn’t see a uni-
formed police ofﬁ cer standing basically right in front of him. . . .  My guess is he’s just not 
the brightest of people.” As we have seen, not noticing something right in front of you (or 
along your path, as in this case or the Kenny Conley incident) is a common occurrence 
that has nothing to do with an individual’s intelligence, or lack thereof. Hastings’s reac-
tion, though, has everything to do with the illusion of attention. What was perhaps unin-
telligent about Robbins’s plan— like McArthur Wheeler’s— was attempting the robbery 
with no disguise in front of a surveillance camera. See “Foiled Robbery Attempt Leads to 
Police Chase,” KATV- 7, September 6, 2007 ( www .katv .com/ news/ stories/ 0907/ 453127 .
html); the security video is available at “Police Say Tape Shows Attempted Bank Robbery 
in Front of Uniformed Cop,” USA Today On Deadline blog, September 7, 2007 (blogs.usa 
today.com/ondeadline/2007/09/police- say- tape.html). Several of the examples of stupid 
crimes that we have mentioned in this section come from “The Top Ten Stupid Crimi nals 
of 2007,” Neatorama blog ( www .neatorama .com/ 2007/ 12/ 18/ the -top -ten -stupid- criminals - 
of -2007/ ), which has links to original news sources.
10.  Research about judgments of beauty is reviewed in N.  Etcoff, Survival of the Pret-
tiest: The Science of Beauty (New York: Doubleday, 1999).
11.  These percentages  were constructed from additional information provided by Jus-
tin Kruger (personal communication, January 24, 2009). For the top quartile of subjects 
on the sense of humor test, the correlation between subject ratings of funniness and come-
dian ratings was r = .57; for the bottom quartile it was r =–.13 (in each case the correlation 
is across jokes).
12.  Here and in similar contexts in this book, when we refer to the “average” person 
or someone performing better than “average,” we are using the term average in an infor-
mal rather than a statistical sense. Although average in a statistical sense refers to the 
mean value, we are referring to the median. The median student has a better sense of 
humor than 50 percent of the other students and a worse sense of humor than the other 50 
percent. If sense of humor is symmetrically distributed about a mean value— and we have 

no reason to suspect otherwise— then the mean student is the median student as well. 
When the distribution is biased in one direction or the other, the mean and median may 
differ, but in the examples we discuss, they typically will be close to each other.
13.  We also used regression analysis to show that a player’s chess rating is the single 
best predictor of chess overconﬁ dence, beating out age, education level, years playing the 
game, years playing competitively, and the number of months since the player’s last tour-
nament (i.e., how “in practice” the player was at the time of our survey). For example, 
rating explains 23 percent of the variance in overconﬁ dence, while sex, age, and years of 
education together only explain an additional 10 percent.
14.  They chose reasoning as a skill to improve because it’s harder to improve a person’s 
sense of humor (especially if that person didn’t laugh at the joke about the child making 
God cry). Educational psychologist Diane Horgan raises the intriguing alternative that a 
better understanding of one’s skill level is not necessarily the result of greater skill. In-
stead, the causation can also run in the other direction: Realistically understanding your 
skill level might help you improve by enabling you to adjust your expectations, properly 
gauge feedback, identify your strengths and weaknesses, and so on. If you are overconﬁ -
dent in your ability, you may also be less motivated to improve it. After all, you “know” 
that you are already good, so you don’t need to practice more. These considerations should 
give pause to advocates of increasing children’s self- esteem as a salve for educational un-
derachievement. See D. Horgan, “Children and Chess Expertise: The Role of Calibra-
tion,” Psychological Research 54 (1992): 44– 50.
15.  Seventy- one percent of men and 66 percent of women believe they have above- 
average intelligence (M. Campbell, “100% Canadian,” The Globe and Mail, December 
30, 2000). Evidence that drivers think they are better than average is from O. Svenson, 
“Are We All Less Risky and More Skillful Than Our Fellow Drivers?” Acta Psychologica 
47 (1981): 143– 148. This study also included a group of American students, who  were 
slightly more conﬁ dent in their abilities than their Swedish counterparts: 93 percent 
thought they  were more skillful than 50 percent of their peers, and 88 percent thought 
they  were safer. Evidence about self- judged attractiveness comes from a study of college 
students in which men judged themselves to be about 15 percent more attractive than they 
actually  were. Women viewed themselves as slightly less attractive than they actually  were, 
although both men and women viewed themselves as above average in attractiveness (the 
women in the study  were judged to be a little more above average in attractiveness). See 
M. T. Gabriel, J. W. Critelli, and J. S. Ee, “Narcissistic Illusions in Self- Evaluations of 
Intelligence and Attractiveness,” Journal of Personality 62 (1994): 143– 155. Interestingly, 
a meta- analysis of a number of studies that mea sured the relationship between self- rated 
attractiveness and actual attractiveness (as rated by others) showed only a small relation-
ship. In other words, how attractive you judge yourself to be is only slightly related to how 
attractive others think you are. See A. Feingold, “Good- Looking People Are Not What 
We Think,” Psychological Bulletin 111 (1992): 304– 311.
16.  This belief in one’s own incompetence, despite all external evidence to the con-
trary, is sometimes known as the “Impostor Syndrome.” See M. E. Silverman, Unleash 
Your Dreams: Tame Your Hidden Fears and Live the Life You  Were Meant to Live (New 
York: Wiley, 2007), 73– 75; M. F. K. R. de Vries, “The Danger of Feeling Like a Fake,” 
Harvard Business Review (2005).
262  NOTES

NOTES  263
17.  In the Kruger and Dunning study, the top 25 percent of subjects in sense of humor 
 were, on average, funnier than 87.5 percent of the study participants (because the subjects 
occupied the 75– 100th percentiles of the sense of humor distribution, and the midpoint of 
that range is 87.5). However, these subjects estimated, on average, that they  were funnier 
than just 70 percent of their peers, indicating an average underconﬁ dence of 17.5 percent.
18.  D. Baird, A Thousand Paths to Conﬁ dence (London: Octopus, 2007), 10.
19.  R. M. Kanter, Conﬁ dence: How Winning Streaks and Losing Streaks Begin and End 
(New York: Crown Business, 2004), 6.
20.  A. Tugend, “Secrets of Conﬁ dent Kids,” Parents, May 2008, pp. 118– 122.
21.  A transcript and video recording of the so- called malaise speech can be found at 
the Miller Center of Public Affairs website (millercenter.org/scripps/archive/speeches/
detail/3402).
22.  The story of Carter’s speech, its po liti cal context, and the response to it is told in K. 
Mattson, “What the Heck Are You Thinking, Mr. President?” Jimmy Carter, America’s “Mal-
aise,” and the Speech That Should Have Changed the Country (New York: Bloomsbury, 2009).
23.  J. B. Stewart, Den of Thieves (New York: Simon & Schuster 1991), 117, 206; 
J. Kornbluth, Highly Conﬁ dent: The Crime and Punishment of Michael Milken (New York: 
Morrow, 1992).
24.  The conversation between Tenet and Bush was reported in B. Woodward, Plan of 
Attack (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), 249. Fleischer’s quote is from a White 
 House press conference, April 10, 2003,  www .whitehouse .gov/ news/ releases/ 2003/ 04/ 
20030410 -6 .html (accessed July 2006). Evidence about the absence of WMDs comes 
from Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD (also known 
as the “Duelfer Report”) ( https:// www .cia .gov/ library/ reports/ general -reports -1/ iraq _
wmd _2004/ index .html) .
25.  This is not as unusual a decision pro cess as you might think. The U.S. Supreme 
Court uses it during the conferences that follow oral arguments in its cases: The Chief 
Justice states his views on the case, followed by the other justices, from the most to least 
se nior. An advantage of this pro cess is that it ensures that everyone gets to speak, and in 
the case of tough- minded federal judges who are appointed for life, it probably does more 
good than harm. When some group members are clearly subordinate to others, though, it 
is a recipe for bad outcomes. The Supreme Court’s decision- making pro cess is described 
in W. H. Rehnquist, The Supreme Court: How It Was, How It Is (New York: William Mor-
row, 1987).
26.  In his book The Wisdom of Crowds (New York: Doubleday, 2004), James Suro-
wiecki reviews over a century of work, dating back to Sir Francis Galton, showing that the 
average of in de pen dent guesses comes closer to the actual total than the vast majority of 
the individual estimates that make up the average.
27.  From a discussion Chris had with Richard Hackman on April 27, 2009.
28.  C. Anderson and G. J. Kilduff, “Why Do Dominant Personalities Attain Inﬂ u-
ence in Face- to- Face Groups? The Competence- Signaling Effects of Trait Dominance,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 96 (2009): 491– 503. In a second experiment, 
similar results  were obtained with a more realistic, open- ended group task that involved 
simulated business decision-making.
29.  Information on William Thompson comes from Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/

wiki/William_Thompson_(conﬁ dence_man) (accessed May 2, 2009); and from the ar-
ticle “Arrest of the Conﬁ dence Man,” New- York Herald, July 8, 1849, chnm.gmu.edu/
lostmuseum/lm/328/ (accessed May 2, 2009).
30.  The story of Frank Abagnale is based on Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_
Abagnale (accessed May 2, 2009); and on his memoir: F. W. Abagnale and S. Redding, 
Catch Me If You Can (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1980).
31.  The experiments described  here are reported in C. F. Chabris, J. Schuldt, and A. 
W. Woolley, “Individual Differences in Conﬁ dence Affect Judgments Made Collectively 
by Groups” (poster presented at the annual convention of the Association for Psychologi-
cal Science, New York, May 25– 28, 2006).
32.  In an experiment with 61 subjects, conﬁ dence levels between the two test versions 
 were correlated (r = .80) but accuracy was not (r =–.05). In another experiment with 72 
subjects, conﬁ dence correlated only r = .12 with scores on a twelve-item version of Raven’s 
Advanced Progressive Matrices, a nonverbal “gold standard” mea sure of general cognitive 
ability. Earlier research by others indicated that conﬁ dence is a domain- general trait: G. 
Schraw, “The Effect of Generalized Metacognitive Knowledge on Test Per for mance and 
Conﬁ dence Judgments,” Journal of Experimental Education 65 (1997): 135– 146; A-R. Blais, 
M. M. Thompson, and J. V. Baranski, “Individual Differences in Decision Pro cessing and 
Conﬁ dence Judgments in Comparative Judgment Tasks: The Role of Cognitive Styles,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 38 (2005): 1707– 1713.
33.  Cesarini and colleagues found that ge ne tic differences explain 16–34 percent of 
the differences among individuals in overconﬁ dence. They studied 460 pairs of twins 
from the Swedish Twin Registry and asked them to estimate their cognitive abilities rela-
tive to the other subjects in the study. The difference between their estimated ranks and their 
actual ranks on a cognitive test was taken as a mea sure of overconﬁ dence. D. Cesarini, 
M. Johannesson, P. Lichtenstein, and B. Wallace, “Heritability of Overconﬁ dence,” Jour-
nal of the Eu ro pe an Economic Association 7 (2009), 617–627.
34.  Quotes and information in this section are from H. Cooper, C. J. Chivers, and C. J. 
Levy, “U.S. Watched as a Squabble Turned into a Showdown,” The New York Times, August 
17, 2008, p. A1 ( www .nytimes .com/ 2008/ 08/ 18/ washington/ 18diplo .html). A detailed 
summary of the Russia– Georgia War is available on Wikipedia (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
2008_South_Ossetia_war).
35.  D. D. P. Johnson, Overconﬁ dence and War: The Havoc and Glory of Positive Illu-
sions (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004).
36.  A similar collective overconﬁ dence might have contributed to the decision to in-
vade Iraq in 2003. Richard Pearle, then chairman of the Defense Policy Board, when 
 interviewed later on PBS WideAngle, noted the strong consensus within the Bush admin-
istration on the need to overthrow Saddam Hussein: “It’s not quite the case that the pres-
ident has the only vote that counts, but his thumb on the scale is not insigniﬁ cant. And I 
don’t think he’s meeting a lot of re sis tance, frankly. I think the other se nior ofﬁ cials of the 
administration have come to the same conclusion he has.”
37.  The average conﬁ dence of the individual subjects was 70 percent, and the average 
conﬁ dence of the groups was 74 percent, a small but statistically signiﬁ cant increase; 36 
groups of two people each participated in this experiment, 12 each in the three conditions 
(Chabris et al., “Individual Differences in Conﬁ dence”).
264  NOTES

NOTES  265
38.  See “The Case of the Missing Evidence” ( www .blog .sethroberts .net/ 2008/ 09/ 13/ 
the -case -of -the -missing -evidence/ ) .
39.  C. G. Johnson, J. C. Levenkron, A. L. Sackman, and R. Manchester, “Does Phy-
sician Uncertainty Affect Patient Satisfaction?” Journal of General Internal Medicine 3 
(1988): 144– 149.
40.  B. McKinstry and J. Wang, “Putting on the Style: What Patients Think of the 
Way Their Doctor Dresses,” British Journal of General Practice 41 (1991): 275– 278; S. U. 
Rehman, P. J. Nietert, D. W. Cope, and A. O. Kilpatrick, “What to Wear Today? Effect 
of Doctor’s Attire on the Trust and Conﬁ dence of Patients,” The American Journal of 
Medicine 118 (2005): 1279– 1286; and A. Cha, B. R. Hecht, K. Nelson, and M. P. Hop-
kins, “Resident Physician Attire: Does It Make a Difference to Our Patients?” American 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecol ogy 190 (2004): 1484– 1488. White lab coats also appear 
to be a source of infection: A. Treakle, K. Thom, J. Furuno, S. Strauss, A. Harris, and 
E. Perencevich, “Bacterial Contamination of Health Care Workers’ White Coats,” Ameri-
can Journal of Infection Control 37 (2009): 101– 105.
41.  Information on the Jennifer Thompson rape case is based primarily on judicial 
opinions in the case and on the following sources: J. M. Doyle, True Witness: Cops, Courts, 
Science, and the Battle Against Misidentiﬁ cation (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005); an 
episode of the PBS series Frontline, “What Jennifer Saw,” broadcast February 25, 1997; 
a joint memoir, J. Thompson- Cannino, R. Cotton, and E. Torneo, Picking Cotton: Our 
Memoir of Injustice and Redemption (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2009); and an article 
by Jennifer Thompson, “I Was Certain, But I Was Dead Wrong,” Houston Chronicle, June 
20, 2000,  www .commondreams .org/ views/ 062500 -103 .htm (accessed May 3, 2009). Di-
rect quotes are also drawn from these sources.
42.  Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972).
43.  Kassin and colleagues surveyed 63 expert- witness psychologists and found that 46 
said the evidence for this statement was either “very” or “generally” reliable: S. M. Kassin, 
P. C. Ellsworth, and V. L. Smith, “The ‘General Ac cep tance’ of Psychological Research on 
Eyewitness Testimony: A Survey of the Experts,” American Psychologist 44 (1989): 1089– 
1098.
44.  Innocence Project website,  www .innocenceproject .org/ understand/ Eyewitness 
-Misidentiﬁ cation .php (accessed February 21, 2009).
45.  R. C. L. Lindsay, G. L. Wells, and C. M. Rumpel, “Can People Detect Eyewitness- 
Identiﬁ cation Accuracy Within and Across Situations?” Journal of Applied Psychology 66 
(1981): 79– 89.
46.  S. Sporer, S. Penrod, D. Read, and B. L. Cutler, “Choosing, Conﬁ dence, and Ac-
curacy: A Meta- analysis of the Conﬁ dence- Accuracy Relation in Eyewitness Identiﬁ cation 
Studies,” Psychological Bulletin 118 (1995): 315– 327. They report an average correlation 
across studies of r = .41 between witness conﬁ dence and accuracy in simulated lineup tasks 
(when the “witness” chooses someone from the lineup, which Jennifer Thompson did in 
the Ronald Cotton investigation, as opposed to choosing no one; i.e., claiming the perpe-
trator is not in the lineup).
47.  G. L. Wells, E. A. Olson, and S. D. Charman, “The Conﬁ dence of Eyewitnesses 
in Their Identiﬁ cations from Lineups,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 11 
(2002): 151– 154.

48.  We are not claiming that physical evidence is always infallible. It can be relied on 
only to the extent that it is produced by honest, careful technicians applying valid science. 
That said, the forensic science behind such common techniques as hair and ﬁ ber analysis 
and ﬁ ngerprint matching is surprisingly primitive (e.g., see National Research Council, 
Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward [Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press, 2009]). Circumstantial evidence, which is often derided as 
being lower in value than direct evidence from eyewitnesses, can in fact be more reliable 
than any other kind of evidence— even a sworn confession— because it does not stand or 
fall based on a single disputable fact (e.g., whether a witness has good memory, or whether 
a confession was coerced). A good circumstantial case can be compelling because it in-
volves a large number of circumstances that would be unlikely to all occur together by 
chance.
Chapter 4: Should You Be More Like a Weather Forecaster or a Hedge Fund Manager?
  1.  Basic facts about the Human Genome Project, which involved researchers in sev-
eral countries, can be found at the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) website devoted to 
the project ( www .ornl .gov/ sci/ techresources/ Human _Genome/ home .shtml). The DOE 
was involved in biomedical research because of the recognition that radiation from nu-
clear weapons and other sources could affect human genes. The majority of the project’s 
funding, however, came from the bud get of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
  2.  The story of the gene count betting pool is based on a series of articles in Science 
magazine: E. Pennisi, “And the Gene Number Is . . . ?” Science 288 (2000): 1146– 1147; 
E. Pennisi, “A Low Number Wins the GeneSweep Pool,” Science 300 (2003): 1484; and 
E. Pennisi, “Working the (Gene Count) Numbers: Finally, a Firm Answer?” Science 316 
(2007): 1113. Other sources include an Associated Press article from October 20, 2004 
(reprinted at  www .thescienceforum .com/ Scientists -slash -estimated -number -of -human - 
genes -5t .php), and an article by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory’s David Stewart, who 
maintained the ofﬁ cial handwritten ledger in which all bets  were recorded,  www .cshl .edu/ 
public/ HT/ ss03 -sweep .pdf (accessed August 27, 2009). The pool’s defunct website has 
been archived at web.archive.org/web/20030424100755/ www.ensembl.org/Genesweep/ 
(accessed August 27, 2009).
  3.  The prediction was made in a talk given by Herbert Simon on behalf of himself 
and Allen Newell at the National Meeting of the Operations Research Society of America 
on November 14, 1957: H. A. Simon and A. Newell, “Heuristic Problem Solving: The Next 
Advance in Operations Research,” Operations Research 6 (1958): 1– 10. They also predicted 
that within ten years, computers would be proving important mathematical theorems and 
composing high- quality original music, and that most theories in psychology would be 
 expressed in the form of computer programs designed to simulate the human mind. None 
of these things fully came to pass, though some progress was made on each of them.
  4.  Nowadays even laptop computers are the equal of the world’s top players. The 
history of the bets is described by D. Levy and M. Newborn, How Computers Play Chess 
(New York: Computer Science Press, 1991). The match between Kasparov and Deep Blue 
is recounted in the following works: M. Newborn, Deep Blue: An Artiﬁ cial Intelligence 
Milestone (New York: Springer, 2003); F-H. Hsu, Behind Deep Blue: Building the Com-
266  NOTES

NOTES  267
puter That Defeated the World Chess Champion (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 
2002); and D. Goodman and R. Keene, Man Versus Machine: Kasparov Versus Deep Blue 
(Cambridge, MA: H3 Publications, 1997).
  5.  P. Ehrlich, The Population Bomb (New York: Ballantine, 1968).
  6.  Quoted by J. Tierney, “Science Adviser’s Unsustainable Bet (and Mine),” Tierney-
Lab blog, December 23, 2008 (tierneylab.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/12/23/science- advisors- 
unsustainable- bet- and- mine/). Other information on the Ehrlich- Simon wager is drawn 
from the following sources: J. Tierney, “Betting on the Planet,” The New York Times, 
December 2, 1990; J. Tierney, “Flawed Science Advisor for Obama?” TierneyLab blog, 
December 19, 2008 (tierneylab.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/12/19/ﬂ awed- science- advice- 
for- obama/); and E. Regis, “The Doomslayer,” Wired, February 1997.
  7.  J. L. Simon, “Resources, Population, Environment: An Oversupply of False Bad 
News,” Science 208 (1980): 1431– 1437.
  8.  We could have gone on and on with examples of scientiﬁ c overconﬁ dence; for 
example, even physicists have been found to be overconﬁ dent when historical data was 
examined to see how accurately they had mea sured well- known physical constants, like 
the speed of light: M. Henrion and B. Fischhoff, “Assessing Uncertainty in Physical Con-
stants,” American Journal of Physics 54 (1986): 791– 797.
  9.  R. Lawson, “The Science of Cycology: Failures to Understand How Everyday Ob-
jects Work,” Memory and Cognition 34 (2006): 1667– 1775.
10.  L. G. Rozenblit, “Systematic Bias in Knowledge Assessment: An Illusion of Ex-
planatory Depth,” PhD dissertation, Yale University, 2003.
11.  From an interview Dan conducted with Leon Rozenblit on August 14, 2008.
12.  B. Worthen, “Keeping It Simple Pays Off for Winning Programmer,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 20, 2008, p. B6 (online.wsj.com/article/SB121124841362205967.
html).
13.  Information on the Big Dig drawn primarily from the project’s ofﬁ cial website 
(masspike.com/bigdig/index.html).
14.  Information on the Brooklyn Bridge and Sydney Opera  House is from B. Flyv-
bjerg, “Design by Deception: The Politics of Megaproject Approval,” Harvard Design 
Magazine, Spring/Summer 2005, pp. 50– 59. Information on the Sagrada Familia is from 
R. Zerbst, Gaudi: The Complete Buildings (Hong Kong: Taschen, 2005) and from Wiki-
pedia (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sagrada_Família). The entire history of public architecture 
can be seen as one of cost overruns and delays. Bent Flyvbjerg, an expert on urban plan-
ning at the University of Aalborg in Denmark, has coauthored a study of three hundred 
such projects in twenty countries. He argues persuasively that all parties involved have 
learned to deliberately lowball the estimates, because if legislators and their constituents 
appreciated the true costs and uncertainties involved in these projects, they would never 
support them. In other words, those who do understand the complex systems— or at 
least understand the limits of their own knowledge— are exploiting the very lack of that 
understanding among the general public. See B. Flyvbjerg, N. Bruzelius, and W. Rothen-
gatter, Megaprojects and Risk: An Anatomy of Ambition (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2003).
15.  The ﬁ rst quote is from Robert Burns, the second is from Helmuth Graf von 
Moltke, and the third is from Douglas Hofstadter.

16.  This quip is usually attributed to Yogi Berra, whose sayings often had this sort of 
twisted logic, but a version of it was apparently said earlier by the physicist Neils Bohr.
17.  This study is described on p. 142 of P. B. Carroll and C. Mui, Billion Dollar Les-
sons: What You Can Learn from the Most Inexcusable Business Failures of the Last 25 Years 
(New York: Portfolio, 2008).
18.  The classic volume on the positive nature of most self- deception is S. E. Taylor, 
Positive Illusions: Creative Self- Deception and the Healthy Mind (New York: Basic 
Books, 1989). The idea that depressed people are less subject to everyday illusions is 
speculative; there is a controversial line of research suggesting that depressed people have 
a more realistic understanding of how much they can control events (e.g., L. B. Alloy and 
L. Y. Abramson, “Judgment of Contingency in Depressed and Nondepressed Students: 
Sadder but Wiser?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 108 [1979]: 441– 485).
19.  The idea of the “outside view” is described in detail in D. Lovallo and D. Kahne-
man, “Delusions of Success: How Optimism Undermines Executive Decisions,” Harvard 
Business Review (July 2003): 56– 63. The tendency to underestimate the time to complete 
a task is often called the “planning fallacy,” and the formal name for the technique of 
comparing a project to similar ones to estimate completion time is called “reference class 
forecasting.” This method has been endorsed by the American Planning Association. See 
B. Flyvbjerg, “From Nobel Prize to Project Management: Getting Risks Right,” Project 
Management Journal (August 2006): 5– 15. Another way to use the disinterested knowl-
edge of other people to help in forecasting project durations (and other future events) is to 
set up a prediction market, a sort of artiﬁ cial ﬁ nancial futures market in which individu-
als invest or gamble money on making the most accurate prediction. The aggregation of 
multiple, in de pen dent predictions, each from someone motivated by ﬁ nancial gain and 
not personally involved in carry ing out the plan, can yield much more accurate forecasts 
than those made by even expert individuals. For discussion, see C. R. Sunstein, Infotopia: 
How Many Minds Produce Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006); and 
R. W. Hahn and P. C. Tetlock, Information Markets: A New Way of Making Decisions 
(Washington, DC: AEI Press, 2006).
20.  Techniques like these  were studied experimentally in R. Buehler, D. Grifﬁ n, and 
M. Ross, “Exploring the ‘Planning Fallacy’: Why People Underestimate Their Task Com-
pletion Times,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (1994): 366– 381.
21.  Information on Brian Hunter and Amaranth Advisors comes from: A. Davis, “Blue 
Flameout: How Giant Bets on Natural Gas Sank Brash Hedge- Fund Trader,” The Wall 
Street Journal, September 19, 2006, p. A1 (online.wsj.com/article/SB115861715980366723.
html); and H. Till, “The Amaranth Collapse: What Happened and What Have We 
Learned Thus Far?” EDHEC Business School, Lille, France, 2007. The comparison be-
tween Amaranth and other debacles is based on “List of Trading Losses” in Wikipedia, 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_trading_losses (accessed March 27, 2009).
22.  Information on various investment strategies comes from the following sources: 
“Dow Theory” in Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dow_theory (accessed March 25, 
2009); discussion of the Nifty Fifty in Chapter 8, “The Amazing Two- Tier Market,” in 
D. N. Dreman, Psychology and the Stock Market: Investment Strategy Beyond Random Walk 
(New York: Amacom, 1977). “Dogs of the Dow” is a nickname for a strategy proposed by 
Michael O’Higgins in his book Beating the Dow: A High- Return, Low- Risk Method for 
268  NOTES

NOTES  269
Investing in the Dow Jones Industrial Stocks with as Little as $5000 (New York: HarperCol-
lins, 1991). The “Foolish Four” strategy, a derivative of one of O’Higgins’s ideas, is de-
scribed by Robert Sheard in The Unemotional Investor: Simple Systems for Beating the 
Market (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998). Both of the latter two books  were bestsellers.
23.  It is arguably wrong to view a  house as an investment. A typical asset bought for 
investment purposes is not usable while you own it; there’s nothing you can physically do 
with your Google stock or your municipal bonds or your money- market funds. (You  can’t 
even frame your pretty stock certiﬁ cates anymore, unless you make a special request for 
them from your broker.) The right way to think of a  house is as a hybrid of a consumable 
product that must be repaired and upgraded over time, like a car or a computer, and an 
underlying investment (which is based partly on the value of the land where it stands).
People make mistakes when thinking about housing prices for a variety of reasons, one 
of which is failing to make this distinction. For example, many homeowners mistakenly 
believe that improving their homes will increase the home’s value by a greater amount than 
the cost of the improvement; in fact, every one of twenty- nine common home improve-
ments yields an average increase in resale value less than 100 percent of its cost (see “Re-
modeling 2007 Cost Versus Value Report” [ www .remodeling .hw .net/ costvsvalue/ index 
.html]; and D. Crook, The Wall Street Journal Complete Homeowner’s Guidebook [New 
York: Three Rivers Press, 2008]). Remodeling a home ofﬁ ce costs $27,193 on average, but 
increases the home’s value by only $15,498, or 57 percent of the original expenditure, not 
counting any interest paid if the remodeling was ﬁ nanced. Even remodeling a kitchen, one 
of the classic value centers of a  house, returns only 74 percent of the money spent. Look at 
it this way: If your  house would sell for $500,000 today, but you decide to “invest” $40,000 
in a new kitchen before you put the  house on the market, you should expect to get about 
$530,000 for it. Putting the same money in the bank would be a much better investment: 
You  wouldn’t earn much in interest, but at least you  wouldn’t lose the $10,000!
When told these facts, people often become incredulous and even angry— precisely 
because they contradict a foundational piece of “knowledge” homeowners have about 
their “investments.” We will return to this subject later in this chapter when we discuss 
the necessary conditions for ﬁ nancial bubbles and panics. There are, of course, other rea-
sons to remodel a  house besides any expected “investment” gain: A recent study showed 
that additional full or half bathrooms in a  house  were more strongly associated with own-
er satisfaction than any other feature mea sured, including additional bedrooms, air con-
ditioning, and a garage. See R. N. James III, “Investing in Housing Characteristics That 
Count: A Cross- Sectional and Longitudinal Analysis of Bathrooms, Bathroom Additions, 
and Residential Satisfaction,” Housing and Society 35 (2008): 67– 82.
24.  M. Piazzesi and M. Schneider, “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Sur-
vey Evidence and a Search Model,” Stanford University manuscript, 2009,  www .stanford 
.edu/ ~piazzesi/ momentum %20in %20housing %20search .pdf (accessed August 17, 2009).
25.  Alberto Ramirez’s mortgage story is from C. Lloyd, “Minorities Are the Emerging 
Face of the Subprime Crisis,” SF Gate, April 13, 2007 ( www .sfgate .com/ cgi -bin/ article 
.cgi ?f = / g/ a/ 2007/ 04/ 13/ carollloyd .DTL). Ninja loans, and other bad home- ﬁ nance 
ideas, are mentioned in S. Pearlstein, “ ‘No Money Down’ Falls Flat,” The Washington 
Post, March 14, 2007, p. D1 ( www .washingtonpost .com/ wp -dyn/ content/ article/ 2007/ 
03/ 13/ AR2007031301733 _pf .html). Ed Glaeser’s quote comes from E. Glaeser, “In 

Housing, Even Hindsight Isn’t 20- 20,” The New York Times Economix blog, July 7, 2009 
(economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/07/07/in- housing- even- hindsight- isnt- 20- 20/?hp).
26.  R. Lowenstein, “Triple- A Failure,” The New York Times Magazine, April 27, 2008 
( www .nytimes .com/ 2008/ 04/ 27/ magazine/ 27Credit -t .html). Similar problems beset so- 
called “quant” funds, which  were hedge funds that made trading decisions entirely or 
mostly based on the predictions of computer models that  were calibrated with historical 
data that didn’t include market conditions like the increasingly risky environment of 
2007. See H. Sender and K. Kelly, “Blind to Trend, ‘Quant’ Funds Pay Heavy Price,” The 
Wall Street Journal, August 9, 2007.
27.  R. H. Thaler, A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, and A. Schwartz, “The Effect of Myopia 
and Loss Aversion on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
112 (1997): 647– 661.
28.  Interestingly, the most active traders also tended to have smaller portfolios at the 
beginning of the study than did the least active ones; obviously this difference would tend 
to magnify over time since their net returns would be lower as well. See B. Barber and 
T. Odean, “Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock Investment Per-
for mance of Individual Investors,” Journal of Finance 55 (2000): 773– 806. Men, espe-
cially single men, also trade much more frequently than women, and earn correspondingly 
lower returns on their investments. See also B. Barber and T. Odean, “Boys Will Be Boys: 
Gender, Overconﬁ dence, and Common Stock Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics 116 (2001): 261– 292.
29.  Unless you are a coin collector, you don’t know enough to distinguish a counter-
feit penny from a real one. Even coin collectors might fail to recognize subtle changes 
unless they’re actively looking for them. As a child, Dan collected coins, and he did spot 
one obvious fake. He was at a coin show, and a vendor was selling a really old coin that 
he claimed was from ancient Greece. The coin was well worn, with few details still 
 visible. It certainly looked like it could be more than two thousand years old, and the 
ﬁ gure on the front looked like a Greek hero. Dan didn’t buy it, though— it had a date of 
“300BC” partially visible below the ﬁ gure! (Some counterfeiters apparently are not ter-
ribly bright.)
30.  The idea that the mind works like a Web browser comes from R. A. Rensink, “The 
Dynamic Repre sen ta tion of Scenes,” Visual Cognition 7 (2000): 17– 42. In philosophy and 
psychology, meta phors for the workings of the mind often draw on the latest and greatest 
in technology. Early models of the mind appealed to the notions of hydraulics, with the 
ﬂ ows of ﬂ uids causing different thoughts and actions. Such models  were gradually replaced 
by the notion of the mind as a mechanical device, with meta phorical gears. In the 
1960s, the dominant model of the mind was as an information- processing device. Es-
sentially, the mind was treated as a powerful computer. The computer meta phor contin-
ues to hold sway in psychology, with some adjustments corresponding to further 
changes in technology: an emphasis on the parallel nature of pro cessing, off-loading of 
some types of pro cessing to specialized modules ( just as computer graphics are often 
handled by a special chip set), and so on. For an interesting discussion of the effects of 
technological developments on the nature of scientiﬁ c theories, see G. Gigerenzer, “From 
Tools to Theories: A Heuristic of Discovery in Cognitive Psychology,” Psychological Re-
view 98 (1991): 254– 267.
270  NOTES

NOTES  271
31.  B. Popken, “Do Coat Hangers Sound as Good as Monster Cables?” The Consum-
erist blog, March 3, 2008, consumerist .com/362926/do- coat- hangers- sound- as- good- 
monster- cables (accessed June 29, 2009).
32.  If you want some snarky entertainment, read the user reviews of the Denon cable 
at Amazon .com. Just search the site for “Denon Ethernet cable.” As of August 2009, one 
Amazon user was even offering one of these cables “used” for sale at $2,500!
33.  D. S. Weisberg, F. C. Keil, J. Goodstein, E. Rawson, and J. R. Gray, “The Seductive 
Allure of Neuroscience Explanations,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 20 (2008): 470– 
477. The “curse of knowledge” described in the example we gave from this experiment has 
implications for the illusion of knowledge. If we assume that other people know what we 
know, and we think we know more than we do, then we must think other people know 
more than they do as well!
34.  These results are from Experiment 1 of D. P. McCabe and A. D. Castel, “Seeing 
Is Believing: The Effect of Brain Images on Judgments of Scientiﬁ c Reasoning,” Cogni-
tion 107 (2008): 343– 352.
35.  The Allstate ad is on the company’s website,  www .allstate .com/ content/ refresh - 
attachments/ Brain -Ad .pdf (accessed November 15, 2009).
36.  Agricultural facts taken from Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illinois (accessed 
February 27, 2009).
37.  Details about Illinois weather forecasting and WILL are from an interview with 
Ed Kieser conducted by Dan on February 27, 2009.
38.  P. Hughes, “The Great Leap Forward: On the 125th Anniversary of the Weather 
Ser vice, A Look at the Invention That Got It Started,” Weatherwise 47, no. 5 (1994): 
 22– 27.
39.  J. P. Charba and W. H. Klein, “Skill in Precipitation Forecasting in the National 
Weather Ser vice,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 61 (1980): 1546– 1555. 
There has been much discussion of “chaos” in physical systems like the earth’s climate, 
and the now- clichéd idea that a butterﬂ y can ﬂ ap its wings on one side of the world and 
inﬂ uence the weather weeks later on the opposite side of the world. None of this makes it 
impossible to predict whether it will rain tomorrow.
40.  This demonstration was suggested by one of Dan’s teaching assistants, Richard 
Yao, who experienced it in a class as an undergraduate at Northwestern University.
41.  R. A. Price and S. G. Vandenberg, “Matching for Physical Attractiveness in Mar-
ried Couples,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 5 (1979): 398– 400.
42.  The meteorologist preference question was asked of the 72 chess players in Phila-
delphia who participated in the study of overconﬁ dence in chess ability that we discussed 
in Chapter 3. The question was ﬁ rst used in G. Keren, “On the Calibration of Probability 
Judgments: Some Critical Comments and Alternative Perspectives,” Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making 10 (1997): 269– 278. See also G. Keren and K. H. Teigen, “Why Is 
p = .90 Better Than p = .70? Preference for Deﬁ nitive Predictions by Lay Consumers of 
Probability Judgments,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 8 (2001): 191– 202. The pop u lar 
preference for certainty in weather reports was noted anecdotally over a century ago. 
When William Ernest Cooke introduced estimates of uncertainty to weather forecasting 
in 1906, he predicted that the public would prefer his new method, but immediately 
below his ﬁ rst article, a note by one Professor E. B. Garriott appeared, giving no fewer 

than ﬁ ve speciﬁ c arguments why Cooke’s “scheme” was impractical, concluding with 
 “because our public insist upon having our forecasts expressed concisely and in unequivo-
cal terms.” W. E. Cooke, “Forecasts and Veriﬁ cations in Western Australia,” Monthly 
Weather Review 34 (1906): 23– 24.
43.  P. E. Tetlock, Expert Po liti cal Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? 
(Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2005). In weather forecasting, meteorologists 
understand the need to show that over time their methods outperform a simple model 
that assumes that tomorrow’s weather will be the same as today’s weather. And they are 
easily able to make enough veriﬁ able predictions to show that they can beat such models. 
People in many other disciplines lack that ready source of feedback and they often do not 
check whether their models can outperform such simple heuristics. Even when they do 
have access to such data (e.g., public ﬁ nancial data can be used to determine whether a 
money manager’s method of actively picking stocks outperforms the returns of a passive 
index fund), they often do not bother to check. If they did, perhaps they would not ex-
press quite as much conﬁ dence as they do.
44.  We thank our editor, Rick Horgan, for suggesting these two examples.
45.  Citation for Herbert Simon from Nobel Prize website (nobelprize.org/nobel_
prizes/economics/laureates/1978/index.html).
46.  In August 2009, Amaranth agreed to a settlement with the U.S. government 
over the charges, but Brian Hunter did not. As of earlier that year, he was an adviser to 
Peak Ridge Capital Group, where his “Commodity Volatility Fund” was up 138 per-
cent in its ﬁ rst six months. “To have lost that amount of money and get back into the 
market with a similar- type trade takes a lot of conﬁ dence, if not arrogance,” said one 
industry analyst. See S. Kishan, “Ex- Amaranth Trader Hunter Helps Deliver 17% Gain 
for Peak Ridge,” Bloomberg.com, May 19, 2009 ( www .bloomberg .com/ apps/ news ?pid = 
20601087 & sid = aUlBVaEHAk04 & refer = home); “Ex- Amaranth Trader Makes Good, 
Possibly,” the New York Times DealBook blog, April 11, 2008 (dealbook.blogs.nytimes.
com/2008/04/11/ex- amaranth- trader- makes- good- possibly/); A. Davis, “Amaranth Case 
Shows Trading’s Dark Side,” The Wall Street Journal, July 26, 2007, p. C3; C. Kahn, “Fed-
eral Judge Orders Amaranth Advisors to Pay $7.5M for Price Manipulation,” Associated 
Press, August 12, 2009 (ca.news.ﬁ nance.yahoo.com/s/12082009/2/biz- ﬁ nance- federal- 
judge- orders- amaranth- advisors- pay- 7- 5m.html); J. Strasburg, “A De cade Later, Meri-
wether Must Scramble Again,” The Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2008, p. C1 (online.
wsj .com/article/SB120658664128767911.html); and G. Zuckerman and C. Karmin, “Re-
bounds by Hedge- Fund Stars Prove ‘It’s a Mulligan Industry,’ ” The Wall Street Journal, 
May 12, 2008, p. C1 (online.wsj.com/article/SB121055428158584071.html).
Chapter 5: Jumping to Conclusions
  1.  Details from this case and the subsequent outbreak of measles in Indiana  were 
taken from the CDC report “Import- Associated Measles Outbreak— Indiana, May– June 
2005,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 54 (October 27, 2005): 1073– 
1075. Other details came from A. A. Parker, W. Staggs, G. H. Dayan, I. R. Ortega- 
Sánchez, P. A. Rota, L. Lowe, P. Boardman, R. Teclaw, C. Graves, and C. W. LeBaron, 
“Implications of a 2005 Measles Outbreak in Indiana for Sustained Elimination of Mea-
272  NOTES

NOTES  273
sles in the United States,” New En gland Journal of Medicine 355 (2006): 447– 455. Other 
information about measles discussed in this section comes from the preceding sources as 
well as the following additional sources: World Health Or ga ni za tion Measles Fact Sheet, 
 www .who .int/ mediacentre/ factsheets/ fs286/ en/ (accessed March 24, 2009); CDC report 
“Outbreak of Measles— San Diego, California, January– February 2008,” Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 57 (February 22, 2008): 203– 206; “Conﬁ rmed Mea-
sles Cases in En gland and Wales: An Update to End– May 2008,” 2008, Health Protec-
tion Report 2, no. 25 (2008); S. B. Omar, W. K. Y. Pan, N. A. Halsey, L. H. Moulton, 
A. M. Navar, M. Pierce, and D. A. Salmon, “Nonmedical Exemptions to School Immuniza-
tion Requirements: Secular Trends and Association of State Policies with Pertussis Inci-
dence,” Journal of the American Medical Association 296 (2006): 1757– 1763; CDC report 
“Measles— United States, January 1– April 25, 2008,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Re-
port (MMWR) 57 (May 1, 2008): 494– 498; CDC report “Update: Measles— United 
States, January– July 2008,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 57 (May 1, 
2008): 893– 896. Information about the measles outbreak in Romania from: Associated 
Press, “Measles Outbreak Sickens 4000 in Romania,” December 5, 2005. After we wrote 
this chapter, an excellent article reporting on this case and its implications was published 
in Wired: A. Wallace, “An Epidemic of Fear: How Panicked Parents Skipping Shots En-
dangers Us All,” Wired, November 2009,  www .wired .com/ magazine/ 2009/ 10/ ff _ waron
science/ .
  2.  In Romania, more than four thousand people contracted measles and ten people 
died during the outbreak that was the source of the missionary girl’s infection.
  3.  Evidence that people can recognize their friends by their gait alone comes from 
J. E. Cutting and L. T. Kozlowski, “Recognizing Friends by Their Walk: Gait Perception 
Without Familiarity Cues,” Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 9 (1977): 353– 356. Evi-
dence that people can judge teachers from a brief glimpse comes from N. Ambady and 
R. Rosenthal, “Half a Minute: Predicting Teacher Evaluations from Thin Slices of Non-
verbal Behavior and Physical Attractiveness,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
64 (1993): 431– 441.
  4.  Examples of pareidolia discussed in this section come from the following sources: 
Associated Press, “ ‘Virgin Mary Grilled Cheese’ Sells for $28,000,” November 23, 2004 
( www .msnbc .msn .com/ id/ 6511148/ ); “Jesus Seen in Cheese Snack,” CNN .com, May 18, 
2009 ( www .cnn .com/ video/ #/ video/ living/ 2009/ 05/ 18/ pkg .tx .cheese .snack .jesus .KTXA); 
“Message from Allah ‘in Tomato,’ ” BBC News, September 9, 1999 (news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
uk_news/443173.stm). Other religious pareidolia examples are summarized by Wikipedia, 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perceptions_of_religious_imagery_in_natural_phenomena (ac-
cessed May 28, 2009).
  5.  This experiment is reported in N. Hadjikhani, K. Kveraga, P. Naik, and S. Ahl-
fors, “Early (M170) Activation of Face- Speciﬁ c Cortex by Face- like Objects,” Neuroreport 
20 (2009): 403– 407. The researchers showed their subjects pictures from an entertaining 
book that contains nothing but “found” images of faces in other common objects: 
F. Robert and J. Robert, Faces (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2000).
  6.  K. Stollznow, “Merchandising God: The Pope Tart,” The Skeptic (Autumn 2000): 
28– 34. The winning bid turned out to be a hoax, so Stollznow donated the Pope Tart to 
the second- highest bidder, a radio station DJ in Texas.

  7.  The experiments are reported in D. A. Redelmeier and A. Tversky, “On the Belief 
That Arthritis Pain Is Related to the Weather,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 93 (1996): 2895– 2896. According to these authors, modern medical textbooks 
downplay any relationship between the weather and arthritis pain. More recent studies 
have agreed in ﬁ nding little to no connection, e.g., F. V. Wilder, B. J. Hall, and J. P. Bar-
rett, “Osteoarthritis Pain and Weather,” Rheumatology 42 (2003): 955– 958. The 1972 
survey of arthritis patients is from D. F. Hill, “Climate and Arthritis in Arthritis and 
 Allied Conditions,” in A Textbook of Rheumatology (8th ed.), ed. J. L. Hollander and D. C. 
McCarty, 256– 263 (Philadelphia: Lea and Feringer, 1972) (as described by M.S. Shutty 
Jr., G. Cundiff, and D.E. DeGood, “Pain Complaint and the Weather: Weather Sensitiv-
ity and Symptom Complaints in Chronic Pain Patients,” Pain 49 [1992]: 199– 204). This 
tendency to see patterns we expect even when they aren’t present has been known for more 
than forty years. It can even interfere with our ability to see patterns that actually are pres-
ent but are unexpected. The seminal research on the effects of expectations on pattern 
perception involved the use of the Rohrshach “ink blot” test to categorize psychiatric pa-
tients as homosexual; see L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman, “Illusory Correlation as an 
Obstacle to the Use of Valid Psychodiagnostic Signs,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 74 
(1969): 21– 28.
  8.  Examples of correlations like this one, with a clear noncausal interpretation that 
makes much more sense than any causal one, can be found in almost every introductory 
psychology textbook (we use Psychology by Scott Lilienfeld and three coauthors). How-
ever, we have not been able to ﬁ nd a study in which this par tic u lar correlation was actually 
mea sured!
  9.  BBC News, “Sex Keeps You Young,” March 10, 1999 (news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
health/294119.stm). For details of the original study, see D. Weeks and J. James, Secrets of 
the Superyoung (New York: Villard Books, 1998).
10.  The headlines cited in this section and the research underlying them included the 
following sources: Headline from CNN .com, “Drop That BlackBerry! Multitasking May 
Be Harmful,” August 25, 2009 ( www .cnn .com/ 2009/ HEALTH/ 08/ 25/ multitasking .
harmful/ index .html). For the original study, see E. Ophir, C. Hass, and A. D. Wagner, 
“Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
2009. Headline from Reuters Health, “Bullying Harms Kids’ Mental Health: Study,” Feb-
ruary 6, 2008 ( www .reuters .com/ article/ healthNews/ idUSCOL67503120080206). For 
the original study, see L. Arseneault, B. J. Milne, A. Taylor, F. Adams, K. Delgado, 
A. Caspi, and T. E. Mofﬁ tt, “Being Bullied as an Environmentally Mediated Contribut-
ing Factor to Children’s Internalizing Problems: A Study of Twins Discordant for Victim-
ization,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 162 (2008): 145– 150. The article 
compared twins at age ten, of whom one had been bullied between ages seven and nine 
and one had not been bullied. Headline from MindHacks blog, “Does Your Neighbor-
hood Cause Schizo phre nia?” by Vaughn Bell, July 5, 2007,  www .mindhacks .com/ blog/ 
2007/ 07/ does _your _neighbourh .html (accessed June 1, 2009). The blog post and subse-
quent comments discuss various models in which environmental factors might contribute 
in a causal way to rates of schizo phre nia, although the study itself was not a random- 
assignment experiment and does not permit that conclusion. For the original study, see 
J. B. Kirkbride, P. Fearon, C. Morgan, P. Dazzan, K. Morgan, R. M. Murray, and 
274  NOTES

NOTES  275
P. B. Jones, “Neighborhood Variation in the Incidence of Psychotic Disorders in South-
east London,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 42 (2007): 438– 445. Head-
line from BBC News Online, “House work Cuts Breast Cancer Risk,” December 29, 2006 
(news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/6214655.stm). For the original study, see P. H. Lahmann et 
al., “Physical Activity and Breast Cancer Risk: The Eu ro pe an Prospective Investigation 
into Cancer and Nutrition,” Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention 16 (2007): 
36– 42. Headline from Associated Press, “Sexual Lyrics Prompt Teens to Have Sex,” by 
L. Tanner, August 6, 2006 ( www .sfgate .com/ cgi -bin/ article .cgi ?f = / n/ a/ 2006/ 08/ 06/ 
national/ a215010D94 .DTL). For details of the original study, see S. C. Martino, R. L. Col-
lins, M. N. Elliott, A. Strachman, D. E. Kanouse, and S. H. Berry, “Exposure to Degrading 
Versus Nondegrading Music Lyrics and Sexual Behavior Among Youth,” Pediatrics 118 
(2006): 430– 441.
11.  D. T. Max, “The Unﬁ nished: David Foster Wallace’s Struggle to Surpass 
 ‘Inﬁ nite Jest,’ ” The New Yorker, March 9, 2009, pp. 48– 61 ( www .newyorker .com/ 
 reporting/ 2009/ 03/ 09/ 090309fa _fact _max). For a discussion of some methods of 
 inferring causation without conducting experiments, see: S. G. West, “Alternatives 
to Randomized Experiments,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 18 (2009): 
299– 304.
12.  J. M. Keenan, S. D. Baillet, and P. Brown, “The Effects of Causal Cohesion on 
Comprehension and Memory,” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 23 (1984): 
115– 126. Reading sentences that require a causal inference also produces increased brain 
activity in a range of regions that differs from those activated by reading pairs of sentences 
that do not require an inference. See G. R. Kuperberg, B. M. Lakshmanan, D. N. Caplan, 
and P. J. Holcomb, “Making Sense of Discourse: An fMRI Study of Causal Inferencing 
Across Sentences,” Neuroimage 33 (2006): 343– 361.
13.  R. B. Cialdini, “What’s the Best Secret Device for Engaging Student Interest? 
The Answer Is in the Title,” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 24 (2005): 22– 29; C. 
Heath and D. Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die (New York: 
Random  House, 2007). Heath and Heath discuss this idea extensively in the course of 
giving advice on how to create and communicate memorable messages.
14.  From The Simpsons, Episode 723, “Much Apu about Nothing,” ﬁ rst aired May 5, 
1996 ( www .thesimpsons .com/ episode _guide/ 0723 .htm) .
15.  From U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments on April 29, 2009, in Northwest Austin 
Municipal Utility District No. 1 v. Holder (No. 08- 322). Ofﬁ cial transcript available from 
 www .supremecourtus .gov/ oral _arguments/ argument _transcripts .html (accessed June 
22, 2009).
16.  Although randomized experiments are occasionally conducted in the area of pub-
lic policy, often to test the presumed effects of ﬁ nancial incentives, they are the exception 
to the rule that most laws and regulations are passed based on assumptions that they will 
change behavior, rather than on evidence that they will. For discussion, see Chapter 3 of 
I. Ayres, Super Crunchers: Why Thinking- by- Numbers Is the New Way to Be Smart (New 
York: Bantam Books, 2007). 
17.  For a keen analysis of this problem in the business literature, see P. Rozenweig, 
The Halo Effect . . .  and the Eight Other Business Delusions That Deceive Managers (New 
York: Free Press, 2007). The problems of the Hush Puppies story are discussed in 

C. Thompson, “Is the Tipping Point Toast?” Fast Company, January 28, 2008 (www
.fastcompany.com/magazine/122/is-the-tipping-point-toast.html).
18.  All Chris Matthews quotes come from transcripts of Hardball, retrieved from 
Lexis/Nexis.
19.  The story of Sherry Lansing is discussed in L. Mlodinow, “Meet Hollywood’s Lat-
est Genius,” The Los Angeles Times, July 2, 2006. See also C. Eller, “Paramount CEO Brad 
Grey Signs on for Five More Years,” The Los Angeles Times, January 8, 2009 (articles.la 
times.com/2009/jan/08/business/ﬁ - grey8).
20.  Statistics from the Centers for Disease Control:  www .cdc .gov/ ncbddd/ Autism/ 
faq _prevalence .htm (accessed June 20, 2009) and www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/ss 5810a1.htm (accessed December 23, 2009).
21.  Details about Andrew Wakeﬁ eld and the subsequent media attention to the al-
leged link between the MMR vaccine and autism are drawn from a comprehensive book 
by Paul Ofﬁ t published in 2008 by Columbia University Press: Autism’s False Prophets: 
Bad Science, Risky Medicine, and the Search for a Cure. The book documents the history of 
alleged cures and causes of autism, pointing out how false causes have been promulgated 
by the media. It is essential reading for anyone whose child has been diagnosed with au-
tism and anyone who has questions about the risks of vaccines.
22.  A. J. Wakeﬁ eld et al., “Ileal- Lymphoid- Nodular Hyperplasia, Non- speciﬁ c Coli-
tis, and Pervasive Developmental Disorder In Children,” Lancet 351 (1998): 637– 641.
23.  Wakeﬁ eld’s quote is from Ofﬁ t (Autism’s False Prophets, p. 20).
24.  Ofﬁ t (Autism’s False Prophets, p. 55; emphasis in original).
25.  Use of the MMR vaccine ceased in Japan in 1993 (for reasons unrelated to au-
tism), but there was no decrease in autism diagnoses afterward. See H. Honda, Y. Shi-
mizu, and M. Rutter, “No Effect of MMR Withdrawal on the Incidence of Autism: A 
Total Population Study,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 46 (2005): 572– 579. 
One epidemiological study examined all children born in Denmark between 1991 and 
1998 (over 500,000 children) and found no difference in the rates of autism for those who 
had received the MMR vaccine and those who had not: K. M. Madsen, A. Hviid, M. 
Vestergard, D. Schendel, J. Wohlfahrt, P. Thorsen, J. Olsen, and M. Melbye, “A Population- 
Based Study of Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccination and Autism,” New En gland 
Journal of Medicine 347 (2002): 1477– 1482. Other epidemiological studies ﬁ nd the same 
result, with no association between vaccination and autism or between the timing of 
 vaccinations and autism. For details, see L. Dales, S. J. Hammer, and N. J. Smith, “Time 
Trends in Autism and in MMR Immunization Coverage in California,” Journal of 
the American Medical Association 285 (2001): 1183– 1185; B. Taylor, E. Miller, C. P. Far-
rington, M.- C. Petropoulos, I. Favot- Mayaud, J. Li, and P. A. Waight, “Autism and Measles, 
Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine: No Epidemiological Evidence for a Causal Association,” 
Lancet 353 (1999): 2026– 2029; C. P. Farrington, E. Miller, and B. Taylor, “MMR and 
Autism: Further Evidence Against a Causal Association,” Vaccine 19 (2001): 3632– 3635; 
and E. Fombonne, R. Zakarian, A. Bennett, L. Meng, and D. McLean- Heywood, “Per-
vasive Developmental Disorders in Montreal, Quebec, Canada: Prevalence and Links 
with Immunizations,” Pediatrics 118 (2006): e139– e150. Andrew Wakeﬁ eld’s claims of 
an association between MMR and autism later became embroiled in controversy over 
such issues as how the initial study was funded and how the patients  were selected; see 
276  NOTES

NOTES  277
Brian Deer, “Focus: MMR— The Truth Behind the Crisis,” The Sunday Times (London), 
February 22, 2004. That year, most of the original paper’s twelve coauthors, but not 
Wakeﬁ eld, published a retraction of the suggestion that their ﬁ ndings could support a 
causal connection between MMR vaccination and autism. See S. H. Murch et. al., “Re-
traction of an Interpretation,” Lancet 363 (2004), 750.
26.  Heath and Heath, Made to Stick.
27.  D. Ansen, “Pulp Friction,” Newsweek, October 13, 2003.
28.  V. S. Ramachandran and S. Blakeslee, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Myster-
ies of the Human Mind (New York: Harper Perennial, 1999), xiii.
29.  Jenny McCarthy quotes are from an interview on CNN Larry King Live, Sep-
tember 26, 2007. Describing her initial research pro cess, McCarthy said she “went online, 
researched, I typed in Google and then autism.”
30.  Paul Ofﬁ t quotes are from National Public Radio Morning Edition, December 11, 
2008.
31.  Quotes in this paragraph are from an essay by Jenny McCarthy and Jim Carey: 
“Jenny McCarthy: My Son’s Recovery from Autism,” CNN .com, April 4, 2008 ( www. 
cnn .com/ 2008/ US/ 04/ 02/ mccarthy .autismtreatment) .
32.  For a detailed history of purported cures for autism that have proven to be noth-
ing but snake oil, see Ofﬁ tt (Autism’s False Prophets). For evidence on the ge ne tic bases of 
autism, see R. Muhle, S. V. Trentacoste, and I. Rapin, “The Ge ne tics of Autism,” Pediat-
rics 113 (2004): e472– e486. For evidence on the differential brain development of chil-
dren with autism, see E. DiCicco- Bloom, C. Lord, L. Zwaigenbaum, E. Courchesne, 
S. R. Dager, C. Schmitz, R. T. Schultz, J. Crawley, and L. J. Young, “The Developmental 
Neurobiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder,” Journal of Neuroscience 26 (2006): 6897– 
6906. For a compilation of many studies examining the effectiveness of behavioral inter-
ventions, see J. M. Campbell, “Efﬁ cacy of Behavioral Interventions for Reducing Problem 
Behaviors in Autism: A Quantitative Synthesis of Single- Subject Research,” Research in 
Developmental Disabilities 24 (2003): 120– 138. See also the following report from the 
American Academy of Pediatrics: S. M. Myers, C. P. Johnson, and Council on Children 
with Disabilities, “Management of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders,” Pediat-
rics 120 (2007): 1162– 1182. The possibility that McCarthy’s son Evan was misdiagnosed 
and never actually had autism was suggested by Dr. Daniel Rubin in a letter to the editor 
of Neurology Today, a publication of the American Academy of Neurology: D. B. Rubin, 
“Fanning the Vaccine- Autism Link,” Neurology Today 8 (2008): 3,  www .neurotodayon 
line .com/ pt/ re/ neurotoday/ pdfhandler .00132985 -200808070 -00005 .pdf (accessed June 
20, 2009). Rubin argues that Evan might have had a seizure disorder known as Landau- 
Kleffner syndrome, which is often misdiagnosed as autism. The disorder is described on 
the website of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,  www .ninds.
nih .gov/ disorders/ landaukleffnersyndrome/ landaukleffnersyndrome .htm (accessed June 
20, 2009).
More generally, autism is a descriptive term for a set of symptoms that can have many 
different causes. The spectrum of children diagnosed with autism is broad, ranging from 
kids who are completely nonverbal and unable to interact with others to people who 
 successfully integrate themselves into society and have highly productive careers and 
 relationships. Moreover, the range of behaviors exhibited in autism varies widely, with 

some people with the diagnosis showing aggressive anti social behavior and others exhibit-
ing extreme shyness and passivity. Behavioral therapies can be effective in treating the 
symptoms of autism for many children, helping them learn to interpret and understand 
the social behaviors of others or eliminating undesirable behaviors. Yet, like cancer, au-
tism is not a single thing. There can be no single cure for cancer because cancer is not a 
single disease, and there can be no single cure for autism because autism represents a con-
stellation of neurological and behavioral atypicalities that can manifest themselves in a 
wide assortment of ways.
33.  Evidence about secretin comes from the following sources: D. Armstrong, “Autism 
Drug Secretin Fails in Trial,” The Wall Street Journal, January 6, 2004 (online.wsj.com/
article/SB107331800361143000.html?); A. D. Sandler, K. A. Sutton, J. DeWeese, M. A. 
Girardi, V. Sheppard, and J. W. Bodﬁ sh, “Lack of Beneﬁ t of a Single Dose of Synthetic 
Human Secretin in the Treatment of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorder,” New 
En gland Journal of Medicine 341 (1999): 1801– 1806; and J. Coplan, M. C. Souders, A. E. 
Mulberg, J. K. Belchic, J. Wray, A. F. Jawad, P. R. Gallagher, R. Mitchell, M. Gerdes, and 
S. E. Levy, “Children with Autistic Spectrum Disorders. II: Parents Are Unable to Distin-
guish Secretin from Placebo Under Double- Blind Conditions,” Archives of Disease in Child-
hood 88 (2003): 737– 739. The subject is also discussed extensively by Paul Ofﬁ t in Autism’s 
False Prophets.
34.  Recall our example of the perceived link between arthritis pain and the weather. 
In that case, even when people had all of the necessary numbers to properly calculate the 
correlation, they did not do so. Instead, they judged the strength of a relationship primar-
ily from the number of cases where the putative cause and the putative effect  were both 
present. In the weather/arthritis case, those  were the times when the weather was cold 
and rainy and pain was higher. In the autism example, those were the cases in which kids 
 were vaccinated and later developed autism. In both cases, people ignored all of the other 
critical numbers. This reasoning error was discovered nearly ﬁ fty years ago: J. Smedslund, 
“The Concept of Correlation in Adults,” Scandinavian Journal of Psychology 4 (1963): 
165– 173.
35.  A recent “cure” for autism, promoted by believers in the vaccine theory, involves 
large doses of the drug Lupron, which suppresses testosterone. Lupron is occasionally 
used to chemically castrate violent sex offenders. It might well lead to more docile be-
havior, but so would a frontal lobotomy. Unlike changing a child’s diet, administering 
Lupron could have substantial negative side effects, such as delayed puberty and heart 
and bone problems, not to mention regular, painful injections. The prime promoters of 
the drug as an autism therapy have conducted no clinical trials and have no special 
training in the medical subﬁ elds related to autism, and no scientiﬁ c studies have ever 
been conducted on the use of the drug in autism. For some details on this “therapy” and 
its promoters, see T. Tsouderos, “Miracle Drug Called Junk Science,” Chicago Tribune, 
May 21, 2009 ( www .chicagotribune .com/ health/ chi -autism -lupron -may21 ,0 ,242705 .
story) .
36.  Retrieved from Amazon .com on July 27, 2009.
37.  From the representative national poll conducted by SurveyUSA on our behalf in 
June 2009 (see notes to Chapter 1 for details).
38.  For a discussion of such differences, see D. C. Penn, K. J. Holyoak, and D. J. Povi-
278  NOTES

NOTES  279
nelli, “Darwin’s Mistake: Explaining the Discontinuity Between Human and Nonhuman 
Minds,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31 (2008): 109– 178.
Chapter 6: Get Smart Quick!
  1.  R. Cimini, “Mangini Gets Players Tuned In,” New York Daily News, July 31, 2007 
( www .nydailynews .com/ sports/ football/ jets/ 2007/ 07/ 31/ 2007 -07 -31 _mangini _gets _
players _tuned _in .html) .
  2.  S. Yun, “Music a Sound Contribution to Healing: Good Samaritan Taking Ca-
cophony Out of Hospital Care,” Rocky Mountain News, May 31, 2005,  www .mozarteffect 
.com/ RandR/ Doc _adds/ RMNews .htm (accessed June 24, 2009).
  3.  Zell Miller gave his speech on June 22, 1998, and requested $105,000 of public 
funds, according to “Random Samples,” Science, January 30, 1998 ( www .scienceonline 
.org/ cgi/ content/ summary/ 279/ 5351/ 663d) .
  4.  “Slovak Hospital Plays Mozart to Babies to Ease Birth Trauma,” Agence France- 
Presse, September 10, 2005,  www .andante .com/ article/ article .cfm ?id = 25923 (accessed 
May 29, 2009).
  5.  F. H. Rauscher, G. L. Shaw, and K. N. Ky, “Music and Spatial Task Per for mance,” 
Nature 365 (1993): 611.
  6.  Shaw described this idea as a “bold prediction” in the report on the Mozart effect 
done by the Fox Family Channel on their program “Exploring the Unknown” (broadcast 
in 1999).
  7.  G. L. Shaw, Keeping Mozart in Mind, 2nd ed. (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 
2004), 160. You may be reminded of our comments in Chapter 4 on “neurobabble” as you 
read these claims about a special relationship between Mozart’s music and the workings 
of the brain.
  8.  Mozart biographer Alfred Einstein, quoted by Shaw (Keeping Mozart in Mind, 
162).
  9.  R. A. Knox, “Mozart Makes You Smarter, Calif. Researchers Suggest,” The Boston 
Globe, October 14, 1993.
10.  According to a report on NBC Nightly News, August 1999.
11.  No studies have ever tested infants, a fact noted by Rauscher herself in a quote 
 here: “Random Samples,” Science, January 30, 1998 ( www .scienceonline .org/ cgi/ content/ 
summary/ 279/ 5351/ 663d) .
12.  Follow up studies by Rauscher and her colleagues included the following (among 
others): F. H. Rauscher, G. L. Shaw, and K. N. Ky, “Listening to Mozart Enhances 
Spatial- Temporal Reasoning: Towards a Neurophysiological Basis,” Neuroscience Letters 
185 (1995): 44– 47; and F. H. Rauscher, K. D. Robinson, and J. J. Jens, “Improved Maze 
Learning Through Early Music Exposure in Rats,” Neurological Research 20 (1998): 
427– 432.
13.  C. Stough, B. Kerkin, T. Bates, and G. Mangan, “Music and Spatial IQ,” Person-
ality and Individual Differences 17 (1994): 695.
14.  All studies of the Mozart effect conducted up to the summer of 1999 are summa-
rized in C. F. Chabris, “Prelude or Requiem for the ‘Mozart Effect’?” Nature 400 (1999): 
826– 827.

15.  K. M. Steele, K. E. Bass, and M. D. Crook, “The Mystery of the Mozart Effect: 
Failure to Replicate,” Psychological Science 10 (1999): 366– 369.
16.  According to a personal communication between Chris and Kenneth Steele, June 
13, 2009.
17.  K. M. Steele, “The ‘Mozart Effect’: An Example of the Scientiﬁ c Method in Op-
eration,” Psychology Teacher Network, November– December 2001, pp. 2– 3, 5.
18.  Mentioned in Kevin Kwong’s review of upcoming music and theater events in the 
South China Morning Post entitled “Just the Ticket,” August 25, 2000.
19.  A. Bangerter and C. Heath, “The Mozart Effect: Tracking the Evolution of a 
Scientiﬁ c Legend,” British Journal of Social Psychology 43 (2004): 605– 623. This paper 
argues that coverage of the Mozart effect supports the theory that rumors and legends 
spread because they “address the needs or concerns of social groups.” We agree, and we 
argue further that the par tic u lar need involved  here is the need to believe that all of us 
have untapped mental potential that can easily be released. Adrian Bangerter published 
an expanded version in French as La diffusion des croyances populaires: Le cas de l’effet Mo-
zart (Grenoble: Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, 2008).
20.  The most famous exposition of this argument appears in S. J. Gould, The Mismea-
sure of Man (New York: Norton, 1981).
21.  Sir Francis Galton performed this experiment at a country fair in En gland and 
reported it in this article: F. Galton, “Vox Populi,” Nature 75 (1907): 450– 451. For more 
on this topic, see J. Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds (New York: Doubleday, 2004); and 
C. Sunstein, Infotopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2006).
22.  E. G. Schellenberg and S. Hallam, “Music Listening and Cognitive Abilities in 10 
and 11 Year Olds: The Blur Effect,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1060 
(2005): 202– 209.
23.  K. M. Nantais and E. G. Schellenberg, “The Mozart Effect: An Artifact of Prefer-
ence,” Psychological Science 10 (1999): 370– 373.
24.  In addition to the “Blur Effect” study mentioned earlier, two other published 
studies have failed to ﬁ nd a Mozart effect in school- age children: P. McKelvie and J. Low, 
“Listening to Mozart Does Not Improve Children’s Spatial Ability: Final Curtains for the 
Mozart Effect,” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 20 (2002): 241– 258; and 
R. Crncec, S. J. Wilson, and M. Prior, “No Evidence for the Mozart Effect in Children,” 
Music Perception 23 (2006): 305– 317. The mistaken impression that the Mozart effect 
works best with fetuses, which led some parents to play classical music to their unborn 
children by wrapping headphones around the mothers’ bellies, might have arisen from 
publicity given to another ﬁ nding by Rauscher, published in another obscure journal. She 
reported exposing rats to the magical Mozart sonata for 60 days in utero, plus several days 
after they  were born, and comparing these animals with a control group for maze- running 
ability. The Mozart- exposed rats did better (Rauscher, Robinson, and Jens, “Improved 
Maze Learning”). Rauscher’s bête noire, Kenneth Steele, later pointed out that limitations 
on the auditory perception abilities of rats prevent them from hearing many of the notes in 
the sonata. See K. M. Steele, “Do Rats Show a Mozart Effect?” Music Perception 21 
(2003): 251– 265. However, Rauscher continued to trumpet her rat studies, claiming that 
gene expression was different in the brains of Mozart- exposed rats compared with control 
280  NOTES

NOTES  281
rats. See F. H. Rauscher, “The Mozart Effect in Rats: Response to Steele,” Music Percep-
tion 23 (2006): 447– 453. This is not surprising, of course: The brain pro cesses music— it 
 doesn’t go in one ear and out the other— so one would expect to ﬁ nd some difference be-
tween brains exposed to even just a few notes of music and brains exposed to something 
 else. Finding such a difference, whether in gene expression, blood ﬂ ow, electrical activity, 
or what ever, is irrelevant to the debate over the Mozart effect unless the difference is 
linked to a change in per for mance that is speciﬁ c to Mozart’s music, and not just a conse-
quence of changes in mood or arousal that could result from many different kinds of 
stimulation.
25.  B. Mook, “In a ‘Tot’- anic Size ’01 Deal, Disney Buys Baby Einstein,” Denver Busi-
ness Journal, March 1, 2002 ( www .bizjournals .com/ denver/ stories/ 2002/ 03/ 04/ focus9. 
html) .
26.  V. C. Strasburger, “First Do No Harm: Why Have Parents and Pediatricians 
Missed the Boat on Children and the Media?” Journal of Pediatrics 151 (2007): 334– 336.
27.  F. J. Zimmerman, D. A. Christakis, and A. N. Meltzoff, “Associations Between 
Media Viewing and Language Development in Children Under Age 2 years,” Journal of 
Pediatrics 151 (2007): 364– 368. The CDI gives a percentile score for a child based on 
how many of the ninety words he or she knows and says; the estimate of 8 percent reduc-
tion per hour of viewing is based on a drop of seventeen percentile points. That is, con-
sider Jane and Tanya, two children from similar families and with similar experiences, 
differing only in that Jane never watches baby DVDs but Tanya watches them for an hour 
per day. If Jane has an average vocabulary for her age (i.e., she is at the 50th percentile), 
then Tanya would be expected to be at the 33rd percentile, and to use 8 percent fewer 
words than Jane. Smaller- scale studies have found similar negative effects for some educa-
tional TV programming; e.g., see D. L. Linebarger and D. Walker, “Infants’ and Tod-
dlers’ Tele vi sion Viewing and Language Outcomes,” American Behavioral Scientist 48 
(2005): 624– 645.
28.  R. Monastersky, “Disney Throws Tantrum Over University Study Debunking 
Baby DVDs and Videos,” Chronicle of Higher Education News Blog, August 14, 2007 
(chronicle.com/news/article/2854/disney- throws- tantrum- over- university- study- debunk 
ing- baby- dvds- and- videos).
29.  Disney spokesman Gary Foster was quoted in H. Pankratz, “Retraction De-
manded on ‘Baby Einstein,’ ” The Denver Post, August 14, 2007 ( www .denverpost .com/ 
news/ ci _6617051). In September 2009, Disney announced that it would offer refunds to 
purchasers of Baby Einstein DVDs during the previous ﬁ ve years. See T. Lewin, “No 
Einstein in Your Crib? Get a Refund,” The New York Times, October 23, 2009, p. A1.
30.  Information about Eric Mangini’s coaching career from Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Eric_Mangini (accessed June 16, 2009). Of course, it would be wrong to con-
clude that adding Mozart caused his team’s decline— beware the illusion of cause! Most 
likely it had no effect whatsoever.
31.  For a discussion of the effects of hypnosis on memory accuracy (and conﬁ dence), 
see J. F. Kihlstrom, “Hypnosis, Memory and Amnesia,” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London B 352 (1997): 1727– 1732.
32.  Even though people aren’t well-informed about the reality of hypnosis and mem-
ory, the legal system does look askance at witnesses whose memory has been hypnotically 

enhanced, or who request hypnosis to help them remember. Recall Kenny Conley, the 
Boston cop who was convicted of perjury and obstruction of justice for his testimony that 
he never saw Michael Cox at the fence. A witness’s request to be hypnotized to improve his 
memory was at the core of the technicality that got his conviction reversed— the request 
undermined the witness’s credibility, and the prosecution failed to disclose it to the de-
fense.
33.  After an exhaustive search, Barry Beyerstein of Simon Fraser University wrote, “I 
confess that I have been frustrated in my attempts to unearth the ultimate source of the 10% 
myth . . .  there is little doubt that the primary disseminators (not to mention beneﬁ ciaries) 
of the 10% myth have been the touts and boosters in the ranks of the self- improvement in-
dustry, past and present.” See B. L. Beyerstein, “Whence Cometh the Myth That We Only 
Use 10% of Our Brains?” in Mind Myths: Exploring Pop u lar Assumptions About the Mind 
and Brain, ed. S. Della Salla, 3– 24 (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 1999).
34.  E. B. Titchener, “The ‘Feeling of Being Stared At,’ ” Science 8 (1898): 895– 897.
35.  See J. E. Coover, “The Feeling of Being Stared At,” The American Journal of Psy-
chology 24 (1913): 570– 575. Our survey result replicates laboratory studies conducted by 
Jane Cottrell and Gerald Winer showing that college students as well as children believe 
that they can feel the stares of unseen others. See J. E. Cottrell, G. A. Winer, and M. C. 
Smith, “Beliefs of Children and Adults About Feeling Stares of Unseen Others,” Develop-
mental Psychology 32 (1996): 50– 61.
36.  Some promoters of paranormal phenomena still argue in favor of the idea that 
people can perceive the stares of others, typically attributing the effect to mysterious ef-
fects in quantum mechanics. The methods are often suspect, and none of the studies have 
been published in mainstream scientiﬁ c journals. As was the case for the Mozart effect, 
proponents of the idea that people can feel the stares of others often appeal to other stud-
ies replicating the effect, but those other results are not published in mainstream journals. 
For a discussion by a proponent of these effects, see D. Radin, Entangled Minds (New 
York: Paraview Press, 2006), 125– 130. For critiques of their evidence, see M. Shermer, 
“Rupert’s Resonance,” Scientiﬁ c American, November 2005 ( www .scientiﬁ camerican .
com/ article .cfm ?id = ruperts -resonance); D. F. Marks and J. Colwell, “The Psychic Staring 
Effect: An Artifact of Pseudo Randomization,” Skeptical Inquirer, September/October 
2000 ( www .csicop .org/ si/ show/ psychic _staring _effect _an _artifact _of _pseudo _random-
iza tion/ ). Note that we are not saying that what is published in reputable scientiﬁ c jour-
nals is always correct, or that what gets shut out of those journals must be false. There are 
fads, fashions, and judgment calls in science, and our own papers are not always pub-
lished in the most prestigious venues (even if they should be!). But for any given phenom-
enon, if no mainstream scientiﬁ c journals will publish it, there’s an excellent chance it is 
not based on solid, replicable scientiﬁ c evidence.
37.  W. B. Key, Subliminal Seduction (New York: Prentice Hall, 1973). The Vicary ex-
periment is described on pages 22– 23, and the “man” experiment is described on pages 
29– 30.
38.  On page 30 of Key’s book, the raw data from this experiment are presented in 
table form. We used his data to calculate that the size of the difference between the con-
trol and the subliminal message conditions was large: approximately one standard devia-
tion. The probability that this difference could have arisen just due to chance was an 
282  NOTES

NOTES  283
astonishingly small .0000000001— in other words, it likely was too good to be true. The 
scientiﬁ c evidence for subliminal perception, to the extent that it meets rigorous standards 
and can be reproduced reliably, typically shows small effects, mostly in the speed with 
which people can respond. And the effects tend to be short- lived. There is still debate in 
the scientiﬁ c literature on whether this sort of perception in the absence of awareness even 
exists at all. For a discussion of some of the challenges involved in demonstrating sub-
liminal perception, see D. Hannula, D. J. Simons, and N. Cohen, “Imaging Implicit Per-
ception: Promise and Pitfalls,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6 (2005): 247– 255.
39.  The best account of the truth behind Vicary’s “experiment” is found in this arti-
cle: A. R. Pratkanis, “Myths of Subliminal Persuasion: The Cargo- Cult Science of Sub-
liminal Persuasion,” Skeptical Inquirer 16 (1992): 260– 72.
40.  See Hannula et al., “Imaging Implicit Perception.” The debate is over what it 
means to say that something was not consciously perceived, and the methods used to as-
sess precisely how much people are aware of. Most scientists, even those who are propo-
nents of the idea that subliminal perception is a robust phenomenon, agree that any effects 
of the meaning of an unseen stimulus on cognition will tend to be fairly small, and most 
doubt that subliminal stimuli can persuade us to do something we  wouldn’t otherwise do.
41.  A recent article has made an even stronger claim than the original one made by 
Vicary. This study showed that subliminally ﬂ ashing the Israeli ﬂ ag led Israeli subjects to 
substantially change their strongly held views on Palestinian statehood and settlements in 
Gaza. Both those who strongly opposed statehood and those who favored it moderated their 
views, becoming indistinguishable from each other. Even more amazing, the subliminal 
ﬂ ags changed whom the subjects voted for, again in the direction of moderation, this time 
weeks after the study! To us, this study illustrates how readily people will accept what are 
fantastical claims when they involve the release of untapped potential to change our minds. 
The mechanism proposed in the paper, that seeing a ﬂ ag would implicitly lead to more cen-
trist views, ﬁ ts only one explanation, generated after seeing the results. It seems more plau-
sible to us that seeing a ﬂ ag, if it has any effect at all, should make people’s views more 
extreme. Most people believe themselves to be patriotic, and seeing a ﬂ ag should only 
strengthen their existing views; it should not cause them to become more centrist. Although 
the result might be legitimate and replicable, given the ease with which we can succumb 
to the illusion of untapped potential, we think skepticism is warranted in the face of such a 
startling ﬁ nding. It is hard to imagine such a minimal experience changing someone’s sin-
cere views so radically, especially considering that they are exposed to so many more direct 
attempts at persuasion. The original study is R. R. Hassin, M. J. Ferguson, D. Shidlovski, 
and T. Gross, “Subliminal Exposure to National Flags Affects Po liti cal Thought and Behav-
ior,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (2007): 19757– 19761.
42.  A. G. Greenwald, E. R. Spangenberg, A. R. Pratkanis, and J. Eskenazi, “Double- 
Blind Tests of Subliminal Self- Help Audiotapes,” Psychological Science 2 (1991): 119– 122. 
According to this rigorous study by four research psychologists, these recordings do ap-
pear to induce nonspeciﬁ c placebo effects, because their listeners use them desiring and 
expecting to improve their mental function. They also leave some of their users with an 
illusion of having received the speciﬁ c beneﬁ ts sought, even when they  haven’t.
43.  B. Mullen et al., “Newscasters’ Facial Expressions and Voting Behavior: Can a 
Smile Elect a President?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51 (1986): 291– 295.

44.  See M. Gladwell, The Tipping Point (New York: Little, Brown, 2000), 74–80. It’s 
also worth mentioning that the evidence in the original study supporting the existence of 
an association between tele vi sion news viewing and voting was fairly minimal. The per-
centages  were based on data from fewer than forty people per town, and in some cases, 
only a handful of people watched ABC. If only ﬁ ve people watched ABC, then a shift of 
20 percent represents just one viewer. In a reanalysis of the data from the original study 
using a standard statistical test known as a chi- square, we found that none of the differ-
ences in voting patterns  were statistically signiﬁ cant. In other words, there might not even 
have been a reliable association between viewing preferences and voting patterns, making 
the causal claim that Peter Jennings inﬂ uenced voting just by smiling even less likely. In 
the modern era of polling, sample sizes to make claims like those in the paper would need 
to be at least an order of magnitude larger.
45.  Transcribed from a Flash version of the advertisement on Nintendo’s Brain Age 
website,  www .brainage .com/ launch/ ontv .jsp ?video = tvspot (accessed June 12, 2009).
46.  From Nintendo’s consolidated ﬁ nancial statements dated May 7, 2009,  www .nin 
tendo .com/ corp/ report/ 3QEnglishFinancial .pdf (accessed June 12, 2009).
47.  www .focusmm .co .uk/ shop/ Brain -Trainer -pr -1190 .html (accessed June 15, 2009). 
Immediately after this claim, the website includes a footnote disclaimer that states, “Focus 
Multi media and Mindscape are not qualiﬁ ed to offer medical advice. These exercises have 
been designed for recreational purposes only. No medical claims are made for these exer-
cises, express or implied.” Essentially, the site disclaims what it just claimed. This tactic is 
not at all unusual for materials promoting brain- training software. British consumer or-
ga ni za tion Which? recently reviewed a number of brain- training programs and evaluated 
their claims,  www .which .co .uk/ advice/ brain -training/ index .jsp (accessed June 15, 2009).
48.  As one example, the Real Age website claims that it is possible to quantify some-
one’s brain age and that with the right activities, you can turn back the clock by a mea-
sur able number of years,  www .realage .com/ ralong/ entry4 .aspx ?cbr = GGLE806 & gclid = 
CNGY5MG1qJsCFQJvswodCF -YDA (accessed June 26, 2009). Neither claim is even 
testable.
49.  For example, see T. A. Salt house, “The Processing- Speed Theory of Adult Age 
Differences in Cognition,” Psychological Review 103 (1996): 403– 428.
50.  Statistics are from the ofﬁ cial International Chess Federation (FIDE) rec ords, 
 ratings.ﬁ de.com/top.phtml?list=men (accessed June 17, 2009).
51.  For a recent review of cognitive- training interventions and other correlational stud-
ies, see C. Hertzog, A. F. Kramer, R. S. Wilson, and U. Lindenberger, “Enrichment Effects 
on Adult Cognitive Development: Can the Functional Capacity of Older Adults Be Pre-
served and Enhanced?” Psychological Science in the Public Interest 9 (2009): 1– 65.
52.  The results of this study and later follow- up analyses and longitudinal studies are 
reported in the following articles: K. Ball et al., “Effects of Cognitive Training Interven-
tions with Older Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” JAMA 288 (2002): 2271– 2281; 
S. L. Willis et al., “Long- Term Effects of Cognitive Training on Everyday Functional Out-
comes in Older Adults,” JAMA 296 (2006): 2805– 2814; and F. D. Wolinsky, F. W. Unver-
zagt, D. M. Smith, R. Jones, A. Stoddard, and S. L. Tennstedt, “The ACTIVE Cognitive 
Training Trial and Health- Related Quality of Life: Protection That Lasts for 5 Years,” 
Journal of Gerontology 61A (2006): 1324– 1329.
284  NOTES

NOTES  285
53.  One exception to this limited transfer comes from a speciﬁ c training technique 
known as variable priority training. In essence, variable priority training focuses less on 
enhancing the individual components of a task than on improving your ability to allocate 
resources to each of them efﬁ ciently— it trains your ability to multitask. Although trans-
fer is still limited, in most cases, to other laboratory tasks, the trained abilities are more 
general than the speciﬁ c task learned. For a discussion of this and other training methods, 
see Hertzog et al., “Enrichment Effects on Adult Cognitive Development.” See also A. F. 
Kramer, J. Larish, T. Weber, and L. Bardell, “Training for Executive Control: Task Coor-
dination Strategies and Aging,” in Attention and Per for mance XVII, ed. D. Gopher and 
A. Koriet, 617– 652 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
54.  T. A. Salt house, “Mental Exercise and Mental Aging: Evaluating the Validity of 
the ‘Use It or Lose It’ Hypothesis,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 1 (2006): 68– 87.
55.  The student trained for more than two hundred hours over the course of twenty 
months. His initial digit span was the more typical seven items. See K. A.  Ericsson, W. G. 
Chase, and S. Faloon, “Acquisition of a Memory Skill,” Science 208 (1980): 1181– 1182.
56.  A. D. de Groot, Thought and Choice in Chess (The Hague: Mouton, 1965); W. G. 
Chase and H. A. Simon, “Perception in Chess,” Cognitive Psychology 4 (1973): 55– 81; 
W. G. Chase and H. A. Simon, “The Mind’s Eye in Chess,” in Visual Information Pro cessing, 
ed. W. G. Chase, 215– 281 (New York: Academic Press, 1973). Herbert Simon was a politi-
cal scientist by training, but he became known as one of the most inﬂ uential computer sci-
entists and cognitive psychologists.
57.  Ericsson et al., “Acquisition of a Memory Skill.”
58.  C. F. Chabris and E. S. Hearst, “Visualization, Pattern Recognition, and Forward 
Search: Effects of Playing Speed and Sight of the Position on Grandmaster Chess Errors,” 
Cognitive Science 27 (2003): 637– 648. Eliot Hearst has written, with John Knott, the 
deﬁ nitive book on all aspects of blindfold chess: Blindfold Chess: History, Psychology, Tech-
niques, Champions, World Rec ords, and Important Games (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 
2009).
59.  There are some correlational studies showing that children who play chess do bet-
ter academically than children who do not, but they do not demonstrate that learning 
chess causes you to improve in other areas. (Perhaps smarter kids are more likely to be 
interested in chess.) For example, see K. van Delft, “Chess as a Subject in Elementary 
School,” unpublished report, University of Amsterdam, 1992. No experimental studies on 
this question have been published in quality journals; the best of these may be “Chess and 
Cognitive Development,” an unpublished 1976 doctoral dissertation by Johan Christiaen 
of Rijksuniversiteit Gent, Belgium. Christiaen randomly assigned twenty ﬁ fth- graders to 
chess instruction and twenty to a control group and found that the chess group did better 
on some tests of cognitive development.
60.  C. S. Green and D. Bavelier, “Action Video Game Modiﬁ es Visual Selective At-
tention,” Nature 423 (2003): 534– 537. The name “Useful Field of View” is a trademark 
of Visual Awareness Research Group, Inc.
61.  From an interview Dan conducted with Walter Boot on May 14, 2009.
62.  See R. Li, U. Polat, W. Makous, and D. Bavelier, “Enhancing the Contrast Sensi-
tivity Function Through Action Video Game Training,” Nature Neuroscience 12 (2009): 
549– 551. As in the original study, the control group in this experiment (this time, practicing 

a Sims game) showed no improvements the second time it was tested. In this case, that’s 
not terribly surprising, because the task mea sures a basic aspect of visual pro cessing. It is 
impressive that the contrast sensitivity advantages persisted even months after training. 
Where the original studies focused on higher- level cognitive beneﬁ ts, some of which 
might be attributable to learned strategies rather than changes in basic abilities, these 
newer studies focus on basic properties of the visual system. It’s harder to see how strate-
gies could inﬂ uence these mea sures.
63.  See C. S. Green and D. Bavelier, “Action- Video- Game Experience Alters the Spa-
tial Resolution of Attention,” Psychological Science 18 (2007): 88– 94. Again, the control 
group showed no improvements at all upon retesting.
64.  A potential danger any time a study is conducted using a large battery of cognitive 
tasks is that some performance differences are likely to prove statistically signiﬁ cant by 
chance. These additional studies report only one or two outcome mea sures tested before 
and after thirty or more hours of training. It’s not clear whether other mea sures  were tried 
but showed no differences, so additional replications are needed.
65.  J. Feng, I. Spence, and J. Pratt, “Playing an Action Video Game Reduces Gender 
Differences in Spatial Cognition,” Psychological Science 18 (2007): 850– 855. The sex dif-
ferences  were based on just seven women and three men in each training group, so it will 
be important to replicate this ﬁ nding with a larger sample.
66.  C. Basak, W. R. Boot, M. W. Voss, and A. F. Kramer, “Can Training in a Real- 
Time Strategy Video Game Attenuate Cognitive Decline in Older Adults?” Psychology 
and Aging 23 (2008): 765– 777.
67.  Interestingly, in Boot’s study with college students as subjects, training on Rise of 
Nations did not lead to differential improvements.
68.  W. R. Boot, A. F. Kramer, D. J. Simons, M. Fabiani, and G. Gratton, “The Ef-
fects of Video Game Playing on Attention, Memory, and Executive Control,” Acta Psycho-
logica 129 (2008): 387– 398.
69.  Boot’s study showed a comparable amount of improvement to that shown by 
Green and Bavelier for two of the transfer tasks (the attentional blink and the functional 
ﬁ eld of view), but Boot’s found no signiﬁ cant improvement for any of the groups in the 
enumeration task, whereas Green and Bavelier showed improvements just for the video- 
game training group.
70.  At least one other recent study has failed to replicate part of the original result as 
well, although not the training component. The following paper did not ﬁ nd differences 
between expert and novice video- game players: K. Murphy and A. Spencer, “Playing 
Video Games Does Not Make for Better Visual Attention Skills,” Journal of Articles in 
Support of the Null Hypothesis 6, no. 1 (2009).
71.  Quotes are from an interview Dan conducted with Walter Boot on May 11, 2009.
72.  The same caveat applies to studies about a topic related to the Mozart effect: the 
idea that musicians have better cognitive skills (such as better verbal memory) than non-
musicians. This difference is often attributed to their music training, but it could be a 
so- called “Hawthorne effect”— the simple consequence of knowing you are being singled 
out and expected to have better per for mance. Or it could result from some difference be-
tween the musicians and nonmusicians that was present before the music training started.
73.  For an engrossing pre sen ta tion of this claim, see Steven Johnson’s Everything Bad 
286  NOTES

NOTES  287
Is Good for You (New York: Riverhead, 2005). Johnson’s book argues convincingly that 
current tele vi sion programs and video games are much more complex, and require greater 
levels of mental effort to pro cess, than the most pop u lar shows and games of the 1970s 
and 1980s. But it offers no decisive evidence for its provocative thesis that the greater 
complexity of TV and games is causing an increase in intelligence or social ability. For 
support, Johnson does cite the Flynn effect, a large worldwide increase in mea sured gen-
eral cognitive ability during the twentieth century, but this upward trend began long be-
fore video games  were even invented, and in any case— we are sorry for sounding like a 
broken record on this point— a correlation or chronological connection does not prove 
causation. Many other things about society and daily life have changed in the last several 
de cades besides the invention of HBO dramas, reality TV, and massively multiplayer on-
line video games. Johnson grapples with these issues but cannot wrestle them down— 
because no one can.
74.  From the Nintendo Brain Age website,  www .brainage .com/ launch/ training .jsp 
(accessed June 12, 2009).
75.  See Hertzog et al., “Enrichment Effects on Adult Cognitive Development.”
76.  A. F. Kramer et al., “Ageing, Fitness and Neurocognitive Function,” Nature 400 
(1999): 418– 419.
77.  S. Colcombe and A. F. Kramer, “Fitness Effects on the Cognitive Function of Older 
Adults: A Meta- Analytic Study,” Psychological Science 14 (2003): 125– 130. See also A. F. 
Kramer and K. I. Erickson, “Capitalizing on Cortical Plasticity: Inﬂ uence of Physical Activ-
ity on Cognition and Brain Function,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2007): 342– 348.
78.  S. J. Colcombe, K. I. Erickson, P. E. Scalf, J. S. Kim, R. Prakash, E. McAuley, 
S. Elavsky, D. X. Marquez, L. Hu, and A. F. Kramer, “Aerobic Exercise Training Increases 
Brain Volume in Aging Humans,” Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences 61 (2006): 
1166– 1170.
Conclusion: The Myth of Intuition
  1.  Actual leadership proﬁ les like this one are dissected by Phil Rosenzweig in his 
excellent book The Halo Effect . . .  and the Eight Other Business Delusions That Deceive 
Managers (New York: Free Press, 2007); see especially pp. 18– 49. Although we have 
picked on business journalists in this example, we are not intentionally singling them out 
as subject to these illusions. To be crystal clear: Everyone is subject to everyday illusions, 
including ourselves.
  2.  For more on the role of ﬂ uency and mistaken attributions about our own thoughts, 
see D. M. Oppenheimer, “The Secret Life of Fluency,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12 
(2008): 237– 241; N. Schwartz, “Metacognitive Experiences in Consumer Judgment and 
Decision Making,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 14 (2004): 332– 348; and D. Kahne-
man and S. Frederick, “Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive 
Judgment,” in Heuristics and Biases, ed. T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁ n, and D. Kahneman, 49– 81 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
  3.  The fast, automatic pro cesses are often known as “System 1” and the slow, reﬂ ec-
tive pro cesses as “System 2,” a useful distinction ﬁ rst introduced by Steven A. Sloman, given 
these names by Keith E. Stanovich and Richard F. West, and advocated in an inﬂ uential 

paper by Daniel Kahneman and Shane Frederick. All of these papers are reprinted in 
Gilovich, Grifﬁ n, and Kahneman, Heuristics and Biases. For discussion of why the mind is 
designed this way, the following books all offer interesting perspectives: S. Pinker, How the 
Mind Works (New York: Norton, 1997); G. Marcus, Kluge: The Haphazard Construction of 
the Human Mind (New York: Houghton Mifﬂ in, 2008); G. Gigerenzer, Gut Feelings: The 
Intelligence of the Unconscious (New York: Viking, 2007); and M. Piattelli- Palmarini, In-
evitable Illusions: How Mistakes of Reason Rule Our Minds (New York: Wiley, 1994).
  4.  C. Kennedy, “ABB: Model Merger for the New Eu rope,” Long Range Planning 23, 
no. 5 (1992): 10– 17 (as cited by Rosenzweig, The Halo Effect). We are commenting on 
how Barnevik’s management style was portrayed in the press, not on Barnevik himself.
  5.  Information on the Iridium project comes from Chapter 6 of P. B. Carroll and 
C. Mui, Billion Dollar Lessons: What You Can Learn from the Most Inexcusable Business 
Failures of the Last 25 Years (New York: Portfolio, 2008).
  6.  Harry Buxton- Forman, who had vouched for Wise’s discovery, had expertise in 
the printing pro cess and appeared to have collaborated on the scam with Wise.
  7.  Information on the Thomas J. Wise fraud comes from these sources: M. Jones, 
P. Craddock, and N. Barker, Fake? The Art of Deception (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1990); J. Carter and G. Pollard, An Enquiry into the Nature of Certain XIXth Century 
Pamphlets (London: Constable, 1934); and W. B. Todd, Thomas J. Wise: Centenary Studies 
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1959).
  8.  M. Gladwell, Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking (New York: Little, 
Brown, 2005), 3– 8. Gladwell  doesn’t actually use the words intuition or intuitive much 
in Blink, but that is more a matter of word choice than of intended meaning. He argues 
that “there can be as much value in the blink of an eye as in months of rational analysis” (p. 
17). Gladwell presents numerous examples of high- quality “snap” decisions made in the 
blink of an eye, without the beneﬁ t of deliberation— that is, decisions made intuitively.
  9.  Many readers of Blink take Gladwell’s point about the power of rapid cognition to 
heart without fully appreciating the way he qualiﬁ es his claims. Gladwell notes that it is 
important to understand when intuitions will and will not be useful, and he provides ex-
amples in which intuitions fail: Warren Harding looked presidential, but turned out to be 
a bad president; musicians are selected more fairly when they are heard performing be-
hind a screen than when the judges can see them play; New York City police ofﬁ cers rap-
idly ﬁ red forty- one bullets at Amadou Diallo on a cold Bronx night in 1999. Blink does 
give more weight to the successes of intuition than to its failures, often attributing the 
failures to other situational factors such as excessive stress or pressure. But it seems just as 
reasonable to think that rapid cognition should be most effective precisely when careful 
deliberation is impossible (due to stress or time pressure).
10.  T. D. Wilson and J. W. Schooler, “Thinking Too Much: Introspection Can Reduce 
the Quality of Preferences and Decisions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 60 
(1991): 181– 192.
11.  J. W. Schooler and T. Y. Engstler- Schooler, “Verbal Overshadowing of Visual 
Memories: Some Things Are Better Left Unsaid,” Cognitive Psychology 22 (1990): 36– 71. 
This article points out some earlier literature on the effect, going back to E. Belbin, “The 
Inﬂ uence of Interpolated Recall Upon Recognition,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 2 (1950): 163– 169.
288  NOTES

NOTES  289
12.  In Blink, Malcolm Gladwell described a similar experiment and explained the 
verbal overshadowing effect this way: “Your brain has a part (the left hemi sphere) that 
thinks in words, and a part (the right hemi sphere) that thinks in pictures, and what hap-
pened as you described the face in words was that . . .  your thinking was bumped from 
the right to the left hemi sphere” (pp. 119– 120). As we pointed out in Chapter 6, the idea 
that the two halves of our brain have radically distinct, nonoverlapping capabilities and 
modes of thought (words versus pictures) is part and parcel of the false belief that the 
pictorial and holistic right hemi sphere is routinely suppressed by the verbal and analytical 
left, and that we can think much better by releasing its hidden potential.
13.  Chabris and Hearst, “Visualization, Pattern Recognition, and Forward Search.”
14.  From Woody Allen’s 1960s stand- up comedy, recorded on the album Standup 
Comic, released by Casablanca Rec ords in 1979. The quote is from the ﬁ nal track, “Sum-
ming Up.”


airplane collisions, 19– 22
airport scanners, 40
Allen, Woody, 86, 87, 241
Allstate Insurance, 143
Amaranth Advisors, 127– 28, 130, 
149
American Academy of Pediatrics, 
181, 195
American Psychological Society, 
189– 90
Ames Research Center, 19
analysis, and intuition, 232– 35, 
236– 39, 241
Anderson, Cameron, 97– 99
anecdotes, and cause, 177– 82, 183
Anna/Betty experiment, 147, 148
Army, U.S.: memories about, 
73– 74
arthritis: and weather, 158– 59
Astur, Robert, 18
AT&T Wireless, 23
attention
and age, 30– 31
awareness of, 41, 241
and Bell’s playing, 27– 30
and commercial airline pi lots, 
19– 22
and Conley, 2– 4, 5, 8– 10
a
Abagnale, Frank, 99– 100, 101
ABB company, 232
ability. See competence
accuracy
and common characteristics 
among illusions, 230
and conﬁ dence, 113– 14, 115
and hypnosis, 198
and intuition, 237– 38
of knowledge, 147
of memory, 61– 65, 68– 69, 72, 
73, 76, 79, 81, 198, 229
ACTIVE trial, 208– 9
Addison, Peter, 86
advertising
anecdotes in, 179
subliminal, 200– 205
age
and attention, 30– 31
and cognition, 206– 9, 217– 18, 
222– 23
and memory, 206– 9
and physical ﬁ tness, 222– 23
and training the brain, 206– 9, 
217– 18
and video games, 217– 18
Agnoli, Franca, 65
I N D E X

292  INDEX
and video games, 218
what to do about, 36– 39
as zero- sum game, 38
See also inattentional blindness
autism, 174– 83
b
baby DVDs/videos, 195– 98
Baby Einstein Company, 195, 
196– 97
Baird, David, 93
Bangerter, Adrian, 191, 194
bank robbery experiment, 237
Barber, Brad, 136
Barnevik, Percy, 232
Basak, Chandramallika, 217– 18, 
219
Bavelier, Daphne, 213– 14, 215, 216, 
217, 218, 219, 220
Bear Stearns, 130
belief: and cause, 160– 65, 176
Bell, Joshua, 27– 30, 33
Belushi, Jim, 44
Benjamin, Dan, 84
Bennett, W. C., 232, 233
Berra, Yogi, 125
bicycles
accidents with, 18
knowledge about, 119– 20
“Big Dig” (Boston), 115, 124– 25, 
126
Birney, Ewan, 117
Blair, Tony, 116
blindfold chess, 211– 12, 238
blindness
change, 54– 55, 57, 58, 59– 61
change blindness, 55, 138
See also inattentional blindness
attention (continued )
and driving while talking on 
phone, 22– 26, 225, 228
everyday examples of, 39– 40, 
41– 42
and evidence/proof, 10, 37– 38
and expectations, 15– 19, 21, 22, 
29, 30– 33, 35– 36, 37, 38, 39
and expertise, 33– 36
and ﬂ uency, 230
focused, 38– 39, 230
and gender, 31, 32
and gorilla study, 5– 7, 8, 13, 
16– 17, 18, 24– 25, 30– 33, 39
how the mind works, 8– 9
and illusion of attention as 
consequence of modern 
society, 37– 39
and inattentional deafness, 27– 30
and individual differences, 32
and intelligence, 32
and intuition, 240
and knowledge, 240
and lawsuits, 35
and limitations on attentional 
resources and awareness, 
24– 25, 36, 38, 40
and memory, 42
mistaken beliefs about, 19– 22
and motorcycle accidents, 14– 19
and multitasking, 24, 32
and nuclear submarine and the 
ﬁ shing boat story, 11– 13
and Taylor case, 225, 228
and technology, 37, 42, 240
and training people to improve 
attention, 32
and types of thought pro cesses, 
231

INDEX  293
Carter, Jimmy, 93– 94
Carter, John, 233– 35
Castel, Alan, 142
cause
and anecdotes, 177– 82, 183
and appeal of stories, 165
awareness of, 241– 42
and belief, 160– 65, 176
and chronological/sequential 
events, 153, 165– 68, 169– 76, 
184, 200, 227, 229
and correlations/coincidences, 
153, 154, 160– 65, 174– 76, 
184, 196, 213
and emotions, 179, 183
and expectations, 154, 158, 
176
and experiments, 161– 65
and expertise, 157– 58
hypothetical, 184
and instinct, 235
and intuition, 231
and memory, 154
and patterns, 153, 154– 57, 158, 
159, 160– 61, 174– 76, 184, 
200
and potential, 221
and randomness, 162– 64, 176, 
184
and science, 177– 84
and secondary sources, 181
single, 172– 73
and symptoms, 157– 59
and Taylor case, 227, 229
and temporal associations, 
169– 73
and training the brain, 208
and vaccination anecdotes, 
150– 53, 174– 83
Blink: The Power of Thinking 
Without Thinking (Gladwell), 
227, 231, 235
“Blur Effect,” 194
Boot, Walter, 213, 218, 219– 21
Bosnia: Clinton in, 76– 78, 160
brain
capacity of, 198– 99, 205– 6, 227
exercise of, 222– 23
and memory, 46, 208– 9, 211
plasticity of, 209
training the, 205– 9, 210– 11
and transfer of skills, 212– 21
and vision, 156
See also brain porn; cognition
Brain Age software (Nintendo), 
205, 209, 219, 222, 223
brain porn, 139– 43, 199
breast cancer story, 164
Brewer, William, 48– 49
Brooks, Albert, 93
Brown, Robert III “Smut,” 1– 4, 9, 
86
Brown, Roger, 68, 72
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett:
sonnets of, 232– 35
bubbles, ﬁ nancial, 137
bullying story, 163– 64
Bush, George W., 71– 72, 95, 160, 
172
business books, 171
buzz: and cause, 171– 72
c
cable systems story, 139– 40, 142
Cadell, Patrick, 94
Campbell, Don, 185, 197
Card, Andrew, 71

294  INDEX
classical music, 229, 239
See also Mozart effect
Clifford, Clark, 94
Clinton, Bill, 77, 94, 116
Clinton, Hillary, 76– 78, 160
CNN, 44, 50, 69, 70
cognition
and aging, 206– 9, 217– 18, 
222– 23
and analysis, 232– 35, 236– 39, 241
and exercise, 222– 23, 239
limits of, 239– 40
“rapid,” 141, 230– 31, 235, 
236– 39
and training, 205– 9, 210– 11, 239
and transfer of skills, 212– 21
types of, 230– 31
and video- game practice, 
213– 21
See also brain; Mozart effect
coincidence. See
correlations/coincidences
Colgrove, Frederick, 67– 68
Collins, Francis, 117, 118
color: and inattentional blindness, 
16– 17
commercial airline pi lots, 19– 22
“common sense,” 231
competence
and conﬁ dence, 81– 82, 85, 
86– 92, 95, 98, 101, 105, 107, 
108, 241
feedback about, 90
See also expertise; skills
complex systems
and intuition, 241
and knowledge, 123– 27, 130– 34
computer- based tracking tasks, 32
computers: and chess, 118, 119, 148, 
149, 238
cell phones: driving while talking 
on, 22– 26, 37, 225, 228, 231, 
240
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 
153, 181
CEOs (chief executive ofﬁ cers):
and single causes, 173
Chabris, Christopher
as chess player, 83, 238
chess study of, 211– 12
and conﬁ dence, 80– 81, 85, 
100– 101, 102, 106– 7
and gorilla study, 5, 30
as Harvard graduate student, 5
and illustrations about illusions, 
242
investments of, 133, 134
and memory, 47, 61– 62, 63, 67, 
73– 74
mentor of, 60
and mother’s symptoms, 158, 159
and Mozart effect, 191– 93, 194, 
195
and Picard story, 61– 62, 63, 74
Challenger space shuttle, 72– 73, 78, 
242
Chand, Candy, 63– 64
change blindness, 54– 55, 57, 58, 
59– 61
change blindness blindness, 55, 138
change of people, 55– 57, 60– 61, 139
Charba, Jerome, 144– 45
Chase, William, 210
chess, 82– 85, 118, 119, 148, 149, 
210– 12, 238– 39
Chimera Information Systems 
(ﬁ ctional company), 224– 29
chronological events: and cause, 
153, 165– 68, 169– 76, 184, 
200, 227, 229

INDEX  295
self- perpetuation of cycle of, 
104– 5
and Taylor case, 226, 229
and Thompson, 237
and training, 90– 91
trait of, 98– 101
and trust, 98, 104, 106, 107– 8, 
112
under-, 92
and underrated feelings, 82– 85
and war, 101– 2, 103
conﬁ dence man, 99– 100
Conley, Kenny, 2– 4, 5, 8– 10, 64, 
86
consensus: and conﬁ dence, 96– 97
conspiracy theories, 160– 61, 172
continuity errors, 52– 58, 59– 61
Cornell University: sense of humor 
test for students at, 88– 89
correlations/coincidences: and 
cause, 153, 154, 160– 65, 
174– 76, 184, 196, 213
Cotton, Ronald, 110– 11, 113, 114, 
179, 229, 237
Cox, Michael, 1– 4, 8, 9, 64
Cramer, Jim, 148
criminals
conﬁ dence of, 86– 87, 89– 90
and conﬁ dence of eyewitnesses, 
109– 15
crisis: and knowledge, 130– 34
“curse of knowledge,” 141– 42
d
Dakich, Dan, 44– 45, 49
Darwin, Charles, 86
Dateline NBC, 7, 12, 31, 53, 54
deafness, inattentional, 27– 30
Deese, James, 48
conﬁ dence
and accuracy, 113– 14, 115
awareness of, 241
beneﬁ ts of, 93– 94
and competence, 81– 82, 85, 
86– 92, 95, 98, 101, 105, 107, 
108, 241
and consensus, 96– 97
and cream rising to top, 95– 98
of criminals, 86– 87, 89– 90
crisis of, 93– 95
and doctors, 80– 82, 85, 103– 8
and evidence about limitations, 
92
and expectations, 85
and expertise, 81– 82, 91, 
106
of eyewitnesses, 108, 109– 15
faking, 107
and feedback, 90
and ﬂ uency, 230
and gender, 91
as ge ne tic, 101
and groups, 95– 99, 102– 3
and humor, 87– 89, 92
importance of, 94– 95
inﬂ ation of, 102– 3
and intelligence, 91– 92, 100
and intuition, 231
and knowledge, 108, 241
love of, 103– 8
and memory, 79, 81– 82, 114– 15, 
237, 241
misplaced, 93– 95
other’s views of their own, 85
and personality, 98, 107, 108, 
241
and rankings of chess players, 
82– 85
and self- knowledge, 107– 8

296  INDEX
elections of 2008, 76– 77
Emory University: memory study of 
students at, 72– 73
emotions, 79, 179, 183, 236– 37
empathy, 177, 179, 180
epidemiological studies, 161– 62, 
176
Ewing, Patrick, 43
exercise: and cognition, 222– 23, 
239
“expectancy effect,” 221
expectations
and attention, 15– 19, 21, 22, 29, 
30– 33, 35– 36, 37, 38, 39
and cause, 154, 158, 176
and conﬁ dence, 85
and memory, 48– 49, 50, 55, 57
experiments
and cause, 161– 65
control conditions of, 219– 20
replication of, 216– 17, 218, 
219– 20
See also speciﬁ c experiment or 
researcher
expertise
and attention, 33– 36
and cause, 157– 58
and conﬁ dence, 81– 82, 91, 
106
and ﬁ ltering of options, 157– 58
and intuition, 138– 39
and knowledge, 147, 148
and transfer of skills, 220– 21
and video- game studies, 220– 21
See also competence
extrasensory perception, 199– 200
eye tracker, 13, 32
eyewitnesses, 51– 52, 61, 74– 75, 
108, 109– 15, 147, 179, 229, 
237– 38
Deford, Frank, 50
de Groot, Adriaan, 210
Deutsche Bank, 128, 149
digit memory, 78, 79, 210, 211
Disney, 196– 97
doctors
and cause, 154, 157– 58
and conﬁ dence, 80– 82, 85, 
103– 8
knowledge of, 146– 47
and symptoms, 157– 58
trust in, 104, 107– 8
“door study,” 59– 60
Dow Jones Industrial Average 
(DJIA), 129, 130
Dow theory, 129
Drexel Burnham Lambert, 94– 95
driving
cell phone talking while, 22– 26, 
37, 225, 228, 231, 240
and motorcycles, 14– 19
and talking to passengers in car, 
26
drowning: and eating ice cream, 
160, 161
Duke University: memory study of 
students at, 75– 76
Dunning, David, 86– 87, 88, 89, 90, 
92
Duyser, Diana, 155
DVDs/videos, baby, 195– 98
e
ecol ogy: predicting, 118– 19
Ehime Maru (ﬁ shing boat), 11– 13
Ehrlich, Paul, 118, 119, 149
Einstein, Albert, 129
Eisman, Steve, 132, 133
elections of 1984, 204– 5

INDEX  297
and conﬁ dence, 91
and continuity errors in movies, 
60– 61
and intelligence, 91
and video games, 217
ge ne tics: and conﬁ dence, 101
genius, 210
genomes: knowledge about, 116– 18, 
119, 148, 149
Georgia: Rus sian conﬂ ict with, 
101– 2, 103
Gertner, Dan, 132– 33
Gladwell, Malcolm, 171, 204, 227, 
231, 235
Glaeser, Ed, 131
Glassman, James K., 130
Go (board game), 90, 91, 92
The Godfather (movie), 30, 52, 53
Goodman, Ellen, 23
gorilla study
and differences among people 
who notice or don’t notice the 
gorilla, 30– 33
and expectations, 15– 16, 30
and illusion of attention/ 
inattentional blindness, 5– 7, 
8, 13, 16– 17, 18, 24– 25, 
30– 33, 39
and limitations on attentional 
resources and awareness, 24– 25
Memmert eye tracker, 13, 32
of Most- Schol, 17, 18
and multitasking, 24
and “red gorilla,” 17, 18, 25, 32
uses of, 39
gorillas, and awareness of illusions, 
241
Gosse, Edmund, 233
GPS navigation systems, 41– 42
Gray, Jeremy, 140– 41
f
faces, sighting of, 155– 56, 157
failure of source memory, 61– 65
familiarity: and knowledge, 119– 23, 
126, 127, 137– 39, 241
feedback, 90, 135– 36, 146
Felling, Ron, 44, 50
Feng, Jing, 217, 218, 219
Fey, Tina, 93
ﬁ nancial markets
knowledge about, 127– 37, 149
models about workings of, 129
ﬁ rst impressions, 232– 35
Fischer, Bobby, 210
Fischer, Edith, 19
ﬁ shing boat and nuclear submarine 
case, 11– 13
ﬂ ashbulb memory, 68– 69, 72, 75, 
76, 78
Fleischer, Ari, 95
Fleishman, Martha, 14– 15, 19
ﬂ uency, 230
Flynt, Jane (ﬁ ctional character), 
225– 26, 228, 229
forecasting. See predictions/
forecasting
Forman, Harry Buxton, 233
Franconeri, Steve, 69
Franken, Al, 87
Fritz (chess program), 212
g
Garl, Tim, 45
Garry, Maryanne, 64
Gaudi, Antoni, 125
Gauldin, Mike, 110, 111
gender
and attention, 31, 32
and chess, 82

298  INDEX
i
ice cream, eating, and drowning, 
160, 161
Ig Nobel Prize, 8
Iger, Robert, 196
Illinois, weather in, 143– 44
illusions
awareness of everyday, 241– 42
common characteristics among 
everyday, 229– 30
inﬂ uence of, 11, 242
lack of proof about, 10
and learning how illusions work, 
239
lessening of impact of, 239– 40
prevalence of, 231
as result of mental limitations, 
230, 240
and Taylor case, 224– 29
See also attention; cause; conﬁ -
dence; knowledge; memory; 
potential
inattentional blindness
beneﬁ ts of, 230
change blindness distinguished 
from, 55
as consequence of modern 
society, 37– 39
deﬁ nition of, 6– 7, 55
and differences among people 
who notice or don’t notice the 
gorilla, 30– 33
elimination of, 17– 18, 38– 39, 41
everyday examples of, 40, 41– 42
and expectations, 36, 37, 38
and expertise, 33– 36
and motorcycle accidents, 14– 19
proof of, 10
results of, 38
See also attention; gorilla study
Green, Shawn, 212– 14, 215, 216, 
217, 218, 219, 220
Grey, Brad, 173
groups, and conﬁ dence, 95– 99, 
102– 3
h
Hackman, Richard, 97
Haines, Richard, 19– 22
Hallam, Susan, 193– 94
Hallenbeck, Cleve, 144
Handley, Jack, 87, 88
Hardball (TV show), 172– 73
Harsch, Nicole, 72– 73
Harte, John, 118, 119
Harvard University
change blindness experiment at, 
ix, 4, 5, 21, 31, 39, 60
Hassert, Kevin, 130
“head- up display,” 19– 20, 21, 
22, 41
Health Department, Ohio State, 
150
Hearst, Eliot, 211, 238
Heath, Chip, 177, 191, 194
Heath, Dan, 177
hedge funds, 127– 28, 132– 33, 149
Hofstadter’s Law, 125
Holdren, John, 118, 119, 148– 49
hot air balloon  ride: study about, 
64– 65
House, M.D. (TV show), 103, 157
housing market, 130– 34
humor, sense of, 87– 89, 92
Hung, William, 89
Hunter, Brian, 127– 28, 149, 
156– 57
Hussein, Saddam, 95
hypnosis, 198

INDEX  299
Jennings, Peter, 204– 5
Jensen, Melinda, 32
Johnson, Dominic, 102
Jordan, Michael, 43
k
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 93
Kasparov, Garry, 118
Katyal, Neal, 170
Keating, Jim, 103– 4, 105, 106, 157, 
206– 7
Keenan, Janice, 166– 67
Keil, Frank, 121, 140– 41
Kennedy, John F.: assassination of, 
68
Kennedy, Robert F. “Bobby”: 
assassination of, 68
Keren, Gideon, 147
Key, Wilson Bryan, 201– 2, 203– 4, 
205
Kilduff, Gavin, 97– 99
King, Martin Luther Jr., 68
Klein, William, 144– 45
Knight, Bobby, 43– 45, 49– 51, 71, 
72, 73, 78
knowledge
accuracy of, 147
and attention, 240
awareness of, 241
and brain porn, 139– 43
and complex systems, 123– 27, 
130– 34
and conﬁ dence, 108, 241
and crisis, 130– 34
“curse” of, 141– 42
deﬁ nition of, 115
depth of, 121– 22
everyday, 126
and experience, 119– 20
inattentional deafness, 27– 30
Incyte Genomics, 116, 117
Indiana University: Knight as coach 
at, 43– 45
individual differences, and noticing 
the gorilla, 31, 32
instinct: and Taylor case, 227– 28
intelligence, 32, 91– 92, 100
See also Mozart effect; potential
Internet: and how the Internet 
works, 138– 39
intuition
and accuracy, 237– 38
and analysis, 232– 35, 236– 39, 
241
and attention, 240
awareness of, 241, 242
common sense as, 231– 32
and complex systems, 241
and deliberation, 236– 39
and expertise, 138– 39
and ﬁ rst impressions, 232– 35
and memory, 231, 237
and patterns, 238, 239
and science, 234– 35
and Taylor case, 227
and technology, 240
trusting, 227, 235, 241
and Wise fraud, 234– 35
investments: and knowledge, 
127– 37, 149
Iraq War, 95, 160, 172– 73
Iridium satellite telephone, 232
j
Jacobsen, Peter, 18
jam taste test, 236– 37
James, William, 38
jelly beans experiment, 96– 97, 192

300  INDEX
lawsuits: and illusion of attention, 
35
leadership, 97– 99
legal system: need for reform of, 
114– 15
Lehman Brothers, 130
Lehr, Dick, 4, 8
Leng, Xiaodan, 187
Levin, Daniel, 54, 55– 56, 59
Levy, David, 118
Lewis, Michael, 132
life- and- death matters: memory 
about, 65– 66
lifeguards, 40– 41
Lincoln, Abraham: assassination 
of, 68
Lindsay, Stephen, 64
literary forgeries, 232– 35
Loftus, Elizabeth, 65
Long- Term Capital Management, 
149
“looking without seeing.” 
See attention
m
Madoff, Bernard, 242
“malaise speech”, Carter’s, 93– 94
Mangini, Eric, 185, 195, 197
Mankiewicz, Josh, 53– 54
Maounis, Nick, 128
math- problem solving experiment, 
97– 98
Matthews, Chris, 172– 73
Max, D. T., 165– 66, 167– 68
McCabe, David, 142
McCarthy, Evan, 179, 181
McCarthy, Jenny, 178– 79, 180– 81
McDermott, Kathleen, 48
measles, 150– 53, 179, 180
knowledge (continued )
and expertise, 147, 148
and false sense of understanding, 
122
and familiarity, 119– 23, 126, 
127, 137– 39, 241
and feedback, 135– 36, 146
about ﬁ nancial markets/ 
investments, 127– 37, 149
and ﬂ uency, 230
and intuition, 231
limits of, 121– 23, 148
and neurobabble, 139– 43
and outsider’s view, 127
per sis tence of illusion of, 
146– 49
and predictions/forecasting, 
116– 19, 143– 49
and risk management, 127– 29
and Taylor case, 226, 229
tests as determination of, 122
and unique projects, 123– 27
and “why boy” game, 119– 23, 
133
Kosslyn, Stephen, 60
kouros case, 235
Kramer, Arthur, 222– 23
Kruger, Justin, 86– 87, 88, 89, 90, 
92
Kulik, James, 68, 72
Ky, Katherine, 186– 87, 188, 191
l
LaBrie, Sam, 117
Lander, Eric, 117, 148– 49
Lansing, Sherry, 173
Lauer, Matt, 194
laws: causal effect of, 169– 71
Lawson, Rebecca, 120

INDEX  301
and Knight- Reed incident, 
43– 45, 49– 51, 71, 72, 73, 78
of life- and- death matters, 65– 66
limits to how much we can 
maintain, 47, 78
long- term, 46
about 9/11, 66– 73, 74, 75– 76, 
78, 79
of personal experiences, 76– 78
and Picard story, 61– 62, 63, 64, 
74
and potential, 208– 9, 211, 218
and professional change detec-
tors, 57– 58
and retrieval cues, 48
short- term, 46
stability of, 66
storage of, 46, 139
and Taylor case, 225– 26, 228– 29
as too good to be true, 73– 76
and training the brain, 208– 9, 
211
trust in, 74, 76– 79, 241
and video games, 218
vividness of, 78– 79
and word list test, 45– 48, 49
Mercury, Freddie, 156
Milken, Michael, 95
Miller, Zell, 185– 86, 188
mind
and false notion of how the mind 
works, 8– 9
and SurveyUSA study of how 
people think the mind 
works, 7
Web browser compared with, 
138– 39
See also brain
Mindscape, Brain Trainer of, 205
Mitroff, Stephen, 67, 69– 71
media: and Mozart effect, 190– 97
Meltzer, Leslie, 51– 52, 61, 74– 75
Memmert, Daniel, 13, 32
memory
and accuracy, 61– 65, 68– 69, 
72, 73, 76, 79, 81, 198, 229, 
230
and age, 206– 9
and anecdotes, 177– 78
and associations, 48
and attention, 42
awareness of, 241
and brain, 46
Brewer and Treyens study of, 
48– 49
and cause, 154
and change blindness, 54– 55, 
59– 61
and conﬁ dence, 79, 81– 82, 
114– 15, 237, 241
in conﬂ ict, 49– 52, 70– 71, 75
and continuity errors, 52– 58, 
59– 61
crutches for, 47
and digit memory, 78, 79, 210, 
211
emotional, 79
and expectations, 48– 49, 50, 
55, 57
failure of source, 61– 65
as feeling right, 73
ﬂ ashbulb, 68– 69, 72, 75, 76, 78
and ﬂ uency, 230
and holding for 911 operators, 
51– 52, 74– 75
how we think about, 45– 49
and hypnosis, 198
about important or dramatic 
events, 66– 73
and intuition, 231, 237

302  INDEX
New York Times, 64, 101, 165
New Yorker, 165, 167
Newell, Allen, 118
Nichols, Burgess, 4
911 operators: holding for, 51– 52, 
74– 75
Nintendo, 205, 209, 219, 222, 223
Nokia, 23, 31– 32
Noonan, Peggy, 77
Norman, Ken, 61– 62, 63, 64, 74
Northwest Austin Municipal Utility 
District No. 1 v. Holder 
(2009), 169– 71
nuclear submarine and ﬁ shing boat 
incident, 11– 13
o
Obama, Barack, 76
Odean, Terrance, 136
Ofﬁ t, Paul, 176, 180, 183
 O’Neal, Alexander, 189
p
pain: and weather, 158– 59
Palmaffy, Tyce, 51– 52, 61, 74– 75
pareidolia, 155
patterns
and cause, 153, 154– 57, 158, 159, 
160– 61, 174– 76, 184, 200
and intuition, 238, 239
and potential, 187– 88, 203, 
210– 11
pedestrian accidents, 18
person change, 55– 57, 60– 61, 139
personality, 31, 98– 99, 107, 108, 
241
Phillips, Stone, 12
photographs, and memory, 64– 65
models: and investments, 131– 32
Mondale, Walter, 204
Most, Steve, 17, 18
Mother Teresa, 155, 177
motorcycle accidents, 14– 19
Motorola, 232
movies
continuity errors in, 52– 58, 
59– 61
person change in, 55– 57, 60– 61
silent, 55– 56
and subliminal persuasion, 201– 3
Mozart effect
and potential, 185– 95, 197– 98, 
205– 6, 215
replication of studies of, 216– 17
multitasking, 24, 32, 163, 222
music. See baby DVDs/videos; 
classical music; Mozart effect
n
Nantais, Kristin, 194
narratives, illusion of, 168
National Association of Broad-
casters, 202
National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), 208
National Weather Ser vice, U.S., 144
natural resources: and global 
population, 118– 19, 148
Nature magazine, 186, 191, 194, 
214, 220, 222
Neisser, Ulric, 5, 59, 72– 73
neurobabble, 139– 42
New York: driving while talking on 
phone in, 23
New York Jets, 185, 195, 197
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 
129

INDEX  303
and training the brain, 205– 9, 
210– 11, 242
and transfer of skills, 212– 21
practice. See training
Pratt, Jay, 217
predictions/forecasting: and 
knowledge, 116– 19, 143– 49
Price, Toni, 19
professional change detectors, 57– 58
Psychological Science journal: Mozart 
effect articles in, 189– 90, 192
r
Radin, Dean, 40
radiologists: and illusion of atten-
tion, 33– 36, 40
Ramachandran, V. S., 178
Ramirez, Alberto, 131
Ramirez, Trudy, 57– 58, 60
randomness, 162– 64, 176, 184
rankings: of chess players, 82– 85
Rauscher, Frances, 186– 95
Read, Don, 64
Reagan, Ronald, 204– 5
real estate: investing in, 130– 34
reality shows, 89
“red gorilla” study, 17, 18, 25, 32
Redelmeier, Donald, 158– 59
Reed, Neil, 44– 45, 49– 51, 71, 72, 
73, 77– 78
Rensink, Ronald, 138
retrieval cues, 48
risk management, 127– 29
Roberts, John, 170
Roberts, Seth, 105
Roberts, Tim, 123
Roediger, Henry, 48
Roethlisberger, Ben, 14– 15, 18– 19
Rovin, Jeff, 87
physical ﬁ tness, 222– 23
Picard, Jean- Luc: story about, 
61– 62, 63, 64, 74
Picarello, John, 33
pi lots, commercial airline, 19– 22
Pirsig, Robert, 10
plagiarism, unintentional, 63– 64
Playboy magazine, 178– 79, 202
playing card experiment, 145– 46
poker, 227
politics
and cause, 172– 73
forecasting about, 147– 48
Pollard, Graham, 233– 35
Poole, Bobby, 111
popcorn- Coke study, 201– 3
population, global: and natural 
resources, 118– 19, 148
Porter, Samuel, 86
potential
and age, 206– 9
awareness of, 242
and baby DVDs/videos, 195– 98
and brain capacity, 198– 99, 
205– 6
and extrasensory perception, 
199– 200
and hypnosis, 198
and memory, 208– 9, 211, 218, 
221
and Mozart effect, 185– 95, 
197– 98, 205– 6, 215
and patterns, 187– 88, 203, 
210– 11
and practice, 242
real way to unlock, 209– 12
and sixth sense concept, 199– 200
and subliminal persuasion, 
200– 205, 206
and Taylor case, 226, 229

304  INDEX
and accordion player, 30
and age and gender factors, 
30– 31
and Boot’s video- game study, 218
as chess player, 83
and conﬁ dence in doctors, 105– 6
and conﬁ dence of high school 
classmate, 86
and Conley interview, 4, 8– 10
and continuity errors in movies, 
54, 55– 56, 59, 61
graduate adviser for, 121, 140
and individual differences and 
attention, 32
9/11 memories of, 67, 69– 71
and Picard story, 61
and playing card experiment, 
145– 46
and weather knowledge, 143
Simpson, Christopher, 45
The Simpsons (TV program), 169, 
170
sixth sense concept, 199– 200
skills
transfer of, 212– 21
See also competence
Slatkin, Leonard, 28
Smith, George D., 233
Sonnets from the Portuguese 
(E. Browning), 232– 35
Souza, Edna, 28– 29
Spence, Ian, 217
Spielberg, Steven, 53
Sporer, Siegfried, 113
stares of others, 199– 200
Steele, Kenneth, 189– 94
Stewart, Patrick, 61, 62
stock pickers, 133– 34, 148
Stollznow, Karen, 156
Stough, Con, 189, 190
Rowen, Lee, 117
Rozenblit, Leon, 121– 23, 133
Rubin, David, 75– 76
“runway incursions,” 20– 22
Rus sia: Georgian conﬂ ict with, 
101– 2, 103
s
Saakashvili, Micheil, 102
Sabina/Andrea conversation, 54, 55, 
56
Sacchi, Dario, 65
Sagrada Familia Church 
 (Barcelona), 125
Sandler, Adrian, 182
Saturday Night Live, 44, 88
Schellenberg, Glenn, 194
schizo phre nia story, 164
Scholl, Brian, 17, 25, 90, 91, 92
Schooler, Jonathan, 236– 37
science, 10, 177– 84, 234– 35
script supervisors, 53, 57– 58
Seinfeld (TV program), 65
“selective matching,” 159
self- help resources, 107, 203
self- knowledge: and conﬁ dence, 
107– 8
September 11, 2001, 66– 73, 74, 
75– 76, 78, 79, 160
sequence of events. See chronological 
events
sex, 161, 164– 65, 202
Sharman, Stefanie, 65
Shaw, Gordon, 186– 87, 188, 189, 
190, 191, 195
Silverman, Michael, 69– 71
Simon, Herbert, 118, 149, 210
Simon, Julian, 118– 19
Simons, Daniel

INDEX  305
and lessening impact of illusions, 
239
and potential, 205– 9, 210– 11, 
212– 21, 242
Treyens, James, 48– 49
true/false trivia questions study, 
100– 101, 102– 3
trust
and anecdotes versus scientiﬁ c 
ﬁ ndings, 180
and conﬁ dence, 98, 104, 106, 
107– 8, 112
in doctors, 104, 107– 8
of intuition, 227, 235, 241
of memory, 74, 76– 79, 241
Tversky, Amos, 158– 59
twins: and conﬁ dence as trait, 101
u
University of Illinois, 143, 222
University of Rochester: conﬁ dence 
study at, 106
USS Greenville, 11– 13, 20
Utzon, Jorn, 125
v
vaccinations, 151– 53, 174– 83
verbal overshadowing, 237– 38
Vicary, James, 203
video games, playing, 213– 21, 239
Virgin Mary Grilled Cheese, 155, 
156, 160
Virgin Mary, sightings of, 155
vision
and blindfold chess, 211– 12
and face sightings, 155– 56
and video games, 216
Voting Rights Act, 169– 71
subliminal persuasion, 200– 205, 
206, 226, 229
Sudoku, 207, 208, 214, 215
Supreme Court, U.S., 4, 111, 
169– 71
SurveyUSA, 7
Sydney Opera  House, 124, 125
symptoms: and causes, 157– 59
t
Talarico, Jennifer, 75– 76
Tarantino, Quentin, 177
Taylor, Larry (ﬁ ctional character), 
224– 29, 231– 32
technobabble, 142– 43
technology, 37, 42, 239– 40
temporal associations: and cause, 
169– 73
Tenet, George, 95
Tennyson, Alfred, 233
“10 percent myth,” 198– 99
testilying, 4
tests: as means for determining 
knowledge, 122
Thaler, Richard, 134– 36, 137
Thompson, Jennifer, 109– 11, 114, 
147, 179, 229, 237
Thompson, William, 99, 100
Tiananmen Square: memory about, 
65
Tindley, George, 33
The Tipping Point (Gladwell), 171, 
204
Titchener, Edward, 200
training
the brain, 205– 9, 210– 11, 239, 
242
and conﬁ dence, 90– 91
to improve attention, 32

306  INDEX
Wilson, Timothy, 236– 37
Wise, Thomas J., 232– 35
Wolff, Patrick, 210– 11
Woodward, Bob, 95
word list test, 45– 48, 49
World War II: memories about, 
73– 74
y
Yale University: Rozenblit’s knowl-
edge study among students 
at, 121
youth: and sex, 161
z
Zimmerman, Frederick J., 195– 96, 
198
Zwemer, Frank, 34– 35
w
Waddle, Scott, 11, 12
Wade, Kimberly, 64
Wakeﬁ eld, Andrew, 175– 76, 180
Wallace, David Foster, 165– 66, 
167– 68
Walmart, 225
Walsch, Neale Donald, 63– 64
war: and conﬁ dence, 101– 2
Washington Post, 27, 28, 77
Watson, James, 117
weather, 143– 46, 147, 148, 
158– 59
Web browser: mind compared with, 
138– 39
Weeks, David, 161
Weingarten, Gene, 27– 28, 29, 33
Wells, Gary, 112, 113– 14
Wheeler, McArthur, 86– 87, 89– 90
“why boy” game, 119– 23, 133

