TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

The Career Portfolio 
Workbook

This page intentionally left blank.

The Career Portfolio
Workbook
Using the Newest Tool in Your Job-Hunting Arsenal 
to Impress Employers and Land a Great Job
FRANK SATTERTHWAITE
GARY D’ORSI
McGraw-Hill
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Lisbon
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and gary D’Orsi. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-142505-5
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-140855-X. 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked
name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the
trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate train-
ing programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-
4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve
one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may
use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work
may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS
TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK,
INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless
of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information
accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, spe-
cial, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071425055

This book is dedicated 
to Frank’s wife, Martha Werenfels, and two children, Peter and Toby;
and to Gary’s wife, Julie D’Orsi, and two children, Zachary and Amanda,
with deep gratitude 
for their immeasurable support, encouragement . . . and patience!

This page intentionally left blank.

Contents
Acknowledgments
ix
PART 1
BUILDING, USING, AND MAINTAINING
YOUR CAREER PORTFOLIO
1
Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
3
2
Assembling Your Master Portfolio
15
3
Targeting Your Portfolio
29
4
Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
45
5
Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
61
6
Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
79
7
Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses 
for Portfolios
101
8
Developing Your Portfolio to Protect and Advance 
Your Career
115
9
Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
125
10
Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
139
vii
For more information about this title, click here.
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

PART 2
EXAMPLES OF TARGETED PORTFOLIOS
Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job
in a Highly Competitive Field
159
Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
175
Peter Evans: Getting That First Job 
After Graduating from School
189
Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
205
Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
223
APPENDIX: WORKSHEETS
243
viii
Contents

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. John Yena, Dr. Stephen Friedheim,
and Celeste Brantolino for their useful comments on our original 
proposal for this book. We would like to thank Jeffrey Krames and
Mary Glenn of McGraw-Hill for making this book happen; Michelle
Howry for helping us shape the outline for the final draft; Donya Dick-
erson for her careful editing; and Janice Race for coordinating the pro-
duction of this book.
We would also like to thank Deans Louis D’Abrosca and Joe 
Goldblatt of Johnson & Wales University for supporting our desire to
create and continue to develop a career self-management course for the
Alan Shawn Feinstein Graduate School. This course became the initial
testing ground for many of the ideas in this book. Dr. Martin Sivula has
given us many insightful comments and suggestions for the research
that has informed our understanding of what makes an effective career
portfolio.
We are indebted to Ames Brown for his ideas on digital formats for
portfolios and for writing a section of the digital options chapter. Jim
Abbott and Ralph Florio made special contributions by providing ideas
for key sections of this book.
We also want to thank the clients for whom we are career coaches.
Each of you has inspired us to do our very best to help you find effec-
tive ways to create portfolios that document and present your many im-
pressive career P.E.A.K.S.
Reflecting on his own career, Frank would like to especially thank
Dr. Douglas T. (Tim) Hall, now at Boston University, for providing a 
fascinating introduction to the study of the field of careers when Frank
was a graduate student at Yale. Frank still treasures his notes from
that course, though some of the pages, alas, have turned brown and
curly along the edges!
This book would not have been at all possible without the support
and encouragement the authors received where it counts most—at
home. Our wives and kids were always there when we needed them,
though we weren’t always there when they needed us. With regard to
the latter, Frank would like to thank his mother, Emily (a.k.a.
“Granny”) Satterthwaite, and our kids’ world-class caregiver, Claire
Custer, for being essential members of our extended family, particular-
ly during the crisis of meeting a book deadline.
ix
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Part I
BUILDING, USING, AND MAINTAINING
YOUR CAREER PORTFOLIO
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

1
Introduction: What Is
a Career Portfolio?
OVERVIEW
This warm-up chapter is intended to stretch your mind and get you 
acquainted with the key concepts you will need to put together and
then use a career portfolio that gets you a high-paying position or your
dream job. We will be introducing a lot of ideas that we will explore fur-
ther throughout the book.
This chapter focuses on what career portfolios are and aren’t, who
should use them, what they should look like, how they are put together,
and how they should be used. By the end of this chapter you will be
ready to delve into each of these topics in greater depth. Studying these
chapters and taking a careful look at the examples of targeted portfo-
lios in Part 2 of this book will enable you to put together an irresistible
portfolio that will lead to employment success.
However, if you are in a big rush and need that portfolio as of yes-
terday, we suggest that you skip right to Chapter 10.
WHAT IS A CAREER PORTFOLIO?
You first need a clear understanding of exactly what a career portfolio
is and isn’t. A career portfolio is a collection of documents and other
3
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

easily portable artifacts that people can use to validate claims they
make about themselves.
A career portfolio is not a resume, which simply lists your experi-
ences and accomplishments. Nor is it a cover letter in which you write
about yourself and your qualifications for a particular job. Instead, it
is a collection of actual documents that support and make tangible the
things you want to say about yourself in a cover letter, a resume, or a
face-to-face interview. Letters of commendation, performance evalua-
tions, certificates, papers, and pictures of things created or of activities
led are all examples of items that might be included in a career port-
folio.
The carrying case for a career portfolio typically looks like a
leather briefcase that can be zippered shut. The kind of impression you
wish to make (along with your budget!) will determine the actual look
of the carrying case you use for your portfolio. When you open it, the
carrying case reveals a three-ringed binder.
Placing original documents in your portfolio would be a mistake,
since if you were to lose your portfolio, you’d lose everything. Instead,
use photocopies of originals, a practice which has the added advantage
of enabling you to scale the size of the documents you include in your
portfolio to the size of your binder. Smaller photographs or memo-pad
notes of appreciation can be made bigger, and huge spreadsheets can be
reduced in size to fit comfortably in your carrying case.
An alternative to punching three holes directly in the photocopies
is to slip each photocopy into the sleeve of a clear plastic page protector
with three holes in it.
Whatever system is used for physically storing documents inside
the portfolio’s carrying case, the important point is this: A career port-
folio should contain documents that support the important things you
want known about yourself.
In Chapter 2 we will discuss in greater detail the different kinds
of items you might want to collect and how you can obtain the ones you
don’t presently have. As career coaches, the authors frequently find
that many of our clients at first feel they don’t have any items to use
in their career portfolios. But as you read Chapter 2 you will likely dis-
cover, as our clients inevitably do, that you really do have many port-
folio-worthy documents. The key point to know right up front is that
career-relevant documents can come from most anywhere, not just
from a person’s work life. You can, in fact, build an entire career port-
folio using only items that come from your school, volunteer, or leisure
activities.
WHY SHOULD YOU USE A CAREER PORTFOLIO?
In fields such as art, advertising, architecture, writing, photography, de-
sign, and fashion, students and practitioners have been using portfolios
as the primary vehicle for marketing themselves for years.
Nowadays, the use of portfolios is spreading to other fields as well.
Career-minded people, whether they are students or practitioners, high
4
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

up in an organization or just starting out, are discovering that a well-
thought-out and presented career portfolio is an effective self-market-
ing tool that enhances their ability to present themselves both clearly
and credibly.
If people are already using career portfolios in your field, you’d be
wise to have one. And if not many people are using portfolios yet in your
organization or field, so much the better for you, if you have one.
Whatever your field or background, a well-targeted portfolio that
is properly presented can be a great self-marketing tool for five main
reasons:
1. It draws attention to the key information you want to convey about
yourself.
2. It provides links that connect you with an opportunity.
3. It makes the key intangibles tangible.
4. It adds to your credibility.
5. It builds confidence.
I Portfolios get attention. We’ve all known ever since kindergarten that
“show and tell” is more powerful than just tell. The simple act of hand-
ing a potential employer a document from your portfolio not only gets
that person’s undivided attention, it also piques her curiosity.
I Portfolios provide links. Once you have a potential employer’s atten-
tion, each item that you present in a well-targeted portfolio helps to
make the link between what you can do and what the other person is
looking for.
I Portfolios make key intangibles tangible. As we will see in future sec-
tions, our research indicates that employers and bosses are looking
for certain key intangibles that can be brought to life in a portfolio.
I Portfolios add to your credibility. When you present an item from
your portfolio, you are not just saying you are something, you are
showing that your claims about yourself have real substance. In
this way a portfolio that contains the right items adds to your cred-
ibility. Selectively shown items help to answer the question that al-
ways lurks when people are meeting for the first time: “Is this per-
son for real?” There is something to that old adage, “Seeing is
believing.”
I Portfolios build confidence. Even if you show up for a job interview
and discover that you have forgotten to bring your portfolio, all is not
lost. If you’ve done your homework and created a great portfolio, you
will know exactly what you bring to this opportunity and will be able
to articulate why you are the right person for the job with great con-
fidence. You will know that what you say about yourself is true, and
the sense that you truly believe what you are saying will come across,
with or without your portfolio. But, of course, you will be more effec-
tive if you do remember to bring your portfolio with you!
Chapter 1: Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
5

WHO SHOULD USE A CAREER PORTFOLIO?
Anyone who is presently using, or intending to use, a resume should
consider using a career portfolio. A career portfolio should not be
viewed as taking the place of a resume. Instead, it should be viewed as
a way of substantiating the information from your resume and cover
letter once you have gotten the job interview. In Chapter 5, we will
show you how to create a resume that works in tandem with your port-
folio. The fundamental point is this: Use resumes to get interviews, and
then use portfolios to get jobs.
Among the obvious users of a career portfolio would be the follow-
ing:
I Students seeking employment. Whether you are a student at a two-
year community college or a physician completing an advanced resi-
dency program, a career portfolio enables you to package what you
have learned in a way that is appealing to potential employers.
I Students seeking admission to college or graduate school. A properly
targeted portfolio can give you a significant advantage if you are com-
peting for admission to a school that interviews its applicants. The
items in your portfolio can bring to life and make credible the things
you say about yourself in your written application. And the fact that
you have gone to the effort of assembling a portfolio to bring to an in-
terview conveys the impression that you are strongly motivated and
are well organized to mount your campaign for admission.
I People preparing for a key job interview in a highly competitive field.
A career portfolio helps you differentiate yourself from your competi-
tion. It creates the impression that you are well organized and 
properly focused—that you’ve “got your act together,” so to speak. It’s
also the perfect antidote for that common career malady: “pre-job-in-
terview jitters.”
I People who are “between opportunities.” If you were fired from or quit
your last job, creating a portfolio is a very constructive thing to do
during your downtime. It not only gives you an edge in future job in-
terviews, it also helps you rebuild whatever confidence you may have
lost due to the manner of your parting company with your former em-
ployer.
I People who want to re-enter the world of work after time off. Let’s say
you’ve taken time off from your work career to do something else—to
travel, to start a family, or maybe just to do nothing in particular for
a while. A portfolio helps you present the noncareer accomplishments
you’ve done in a way that makes you a viable job candidate. Assem-
bling a career portfolio also enables you to overcome the fear and hes-
itation many people feel when they have been away from the world
of work for a period of time.
I People who want to change careers. If you are looking to do some-
thing different in your work life, a career portfolio is a great vehicle
for presenting your transferable skills to an employer in a field that
is new to you. Going on informational interviews, which is part of the
6
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

process we propose for targeting your portfolio, will also help you
identify the new direction you want to go in. We explain how to do in-
formational interviews in Chapter 4.
I People going for a promotion, a work reassignment, a raise, or an an-
nual review. Portfolios are not just tools for getting new jobs in dif-
ferent organizations. A portfolio also helps you make the case for a
promotion or work assignment within your present organization. And
during an annual review a career portfolio can be useful for demon-
strating the value you bring to an organization. In Chapter 7, we ex-
plore how portfolios can be used to great effect in these and other ca-
reer advancement situations, including going for a raise.
I Independent consultants looking for business or referrals. If you are
an independent consultant or contractor, a portfolio is an effective
way of demonstrating what you can do for clients. Advertising pro-
fessionals have always used portfolios to showcase their talents.
In Part 2, you will find several examples of targeted portfolios.
In addition to individuals, organizations such as schools and cor-
porations can make good use of portfolios. For example:
I Portfolios can improve teaching and placement in schools and univer-
sities. Many school systems are beginning to use student portfolios
as an assessment tool and as a means of focusing their teaching on
outcomes that will prove useful to their students in their future aca-
demic and work careers.
Colleges and universities are also beginning to encourage, and in
some cases require, their students to create portfolios that will give
them an edge in the job market. Placement offices are discovering
that students who have well-thought-out portfolios are getting more
job offers at higher salary levels than students who only use a re-
sume. In Chapter 7, we will discuss some techniques universities can
use to help their students prepare portfolios.
I Portfolios can improve staffing and other human resource activities.
Given the fact that change is now a constant in most organizations,
those firms that are most adept at reshuffling their employees to cap-
italize on emerging opportunities can gain a significant competitive
advantage. Requiring employees to create and maintain career port-
folios can help management identify the right people for internal re-
assignments. Including the use of portfolios in annual performance
reviews enables managers to gain a better understanding of the
range of talents of their subordinates. We will also cover this topic in
greater depth in Chapter 7.
HOW CAN CREATING A CAREER PORTFOLIO HELP YOU
MANAGE YOUR CAREER?
The process of assembling and then targeting your portfolio doesn’t just
give you a great self-marketing tool, it also serves as a very effective
Chapter 1: Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
7

technique for managing your career. The knowledge you gain both
about yourself and about potential career paths will enable you to make
career decisions that are right for you and increase your feelings of ca-
reer security. Here’s how:
I Make better career decisions. As you begin to gather and then assess
the documents for your Master Portfolio (the collection of every item
that could be included in your portfolio), you are likely to notice that
your life has certain themes and patterns. The process of identifying
the skills and accomplishments that you are most proud of will give
you a strong sense of the things you like to do and the situations that
seem to bring out the best in you. The process of doing information-
al interviews, which are used to target your portfolio, will also give
you a clear idea as to which jobs and fields are most appealing to you
and whether or not you have the qualifications to succeed in these
areas. Armed with this self-knowledge and marketplace knowledge,
you will be in a good position to make career decisions that are right
for you.
I Increase your feelings of career security. Since few organizations
these days can guarantee lifetime employment, your ability to con-
tinue to be gainfully employed will depend upon the level of your em-
ployability. Having a high level of employability means that you have
the qualifications that employers are looking for. Your present em-
ployer may let you go, but if that happens, there are likely to be many
others who will quickly hire you. The more versatile you are, of
course, the more potential directions you can go in, and hence the
higher your level of employability.
In Chapter 8, we will show you how to use our portfolio system
to achieve a high level of employability. Job security may be a thing
of the past. But career security is quite attainable when you learn
how to create and maintain a career portfolio.
WHAT FORMAT SHOULD A PORTFOLIO BE IN?
The format that you use for the portfolio you bring to an interview will
influence how well you use your portfolio during that meeting. If your
documents are organized in appropriate, easy-to-remember categories,
you will be able to easily select the right document at the right moment.
During an important interview you do not want to be continually fum-
bling within your portfolio to find something, as this will disrupt the
flow of the discussion and may leave the impression that you are not
well organized. This is certainly not the effect you are trying to achieve
with your portfolio!
Your Master Portfolio
Prior to going on an interview (or ideally, even before you start looking
for a job), you need to collect every item that you feel you might be able
to use at some future date. We call this collection of potentially usable
items your Master Portfolio.
8
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

When you are at home, leafing through the items in your Master
Portfolio, you are reviewing documents at your leisure. You have plen-
ty of time to pause over certain items and consider their value. The im-
portant point to remember with your Master Portfolio is that you keep
collecting and evaluating potentially useful documents and that you
file them in a way that you can retrieve them easily. In Chapter 2, we
suggest categories that might prove useful for filing and retrieving
items in your master collection. But the system you use for organizing
your Master Portfolio is up to you.
With your Master Portfolio you can be as sloppy or as neat as you
like. But when you are in an interview you want to come across as being
well organized and right on target. For this reason you need a carefully
thought-out format for your targeted portfolio, the portfolio that you’ll
bring to the actual interview.
Your Targeted, “Can-Do Portfolio”
We call the career portfolio that candidates bring to meetings their
Can-Do Portfolio, since this particular collection of documents has been
selected to give evidence that they can do whatever is considered most
important in the job under consideration, whether it’s a full-time job, a
consulting assignment, or the “job” of being a successful student in 
college or graduate school. A good Can-Do Portfolio enables you to make
a convincing case that you are ready, willing, and able to get the job
done. In Chapter 3, we will discuss in depth how a career portfolio can
be successfully targeted in this fashion. In Part 2 we also give specific
examples of Can-Do Portfolios that have been targeted for different
uses.
Our experience with clients indicates that a highly effective tar-
geted portfolio can be organized around the following five categories,
which can be easily recalled using the acronym, P.E.A.K.S.
THE P.E.A.K.S. CATEGORIES
I Personal Characteristics
I Experience
I Accomplishments
I Knowledge
I Skills
Prior to conducting our research, we thought, as many people do, that
what employers are primarily seeking in job candidates is an applicant
who has the right combination of knowledge, skills, and experience for
the job, along with a history of noteworthy achievements in comparable
situations. Clearly, these are all very important qualifications in most
employers’ minds. But there was something missing from this list, and
it turns out it’s the most important dimension.
When we surveyed people who interview job candidates and asked
them to rank the relative importance of a job applicant’s knowledge,
Chapter 1: Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
9

skills, experience, accomplishments, and personal characteristics that
add value, the majority of the employers surveyed ranked personal char-
acteristics first. Our research has been quite consistent on this point.
Personal characteristics are ranked highest, whether the groups being
surveyed are recruiters at a collegiate job fair or employers of physi-
cians completing residency programs.
Which personal characteristics are employers thinking of? Are
they looking for workers who are creative, attentive to detail, or people-
oriented? The particular personal characteristics considered most 
important will, it turns out, depend upon the nature of the job, the 
culture of the organization, and, of course, which person you happen to
ask. We will discuss how you can determine which personal character-
istics to feature in your portfolio in Chapter 3. But for now, the impor-
tant thing to know is this: It is very important to include evidence of
your personal characteristics that add value in your Can-Do Portfolio.
One of the distinct advantages of having a properly targeted port-
folio is you can make key intangibles, such as personal characteristics,
quite tangible. Rather than just saying, “People tell me I have a lot of
initiative,” and leave it at that, with a portfolio you can also show an in-
terviewer an actual document, perhaps a commendation you received,
that gives evidence of your initiative.
But a portfolio can only make these important intangibles come
alive if you include a personal characteristics section. And so we sug-
gest that you use the P.E.A.K.S. format to organize the items in your
targeted portfolio. The rest of this section provides a synopsis of each of
the P.E.A.K.S. categories so that you can begin to get a better idea of
exactly what we mean by each of these entries.
What Is Included in Each of the P.E.A.K.S. Categories?
Personal Characteristics That Add Value
Your personality traits or characteristic behavior patterns make
you a valued employee or work associate. An example of a document
that indicates a desired trait might be a letter commending you on a
perfect attendance record, which you could present as evidence that
you are highly dependable. Or, you might have a copy of a performance
evaluation that refers to a successful project that you initiated. This
can be presented as evidence that you are a self-starter.
Particularly useful in this category are letters of appreciation that
make explicit reference to your desirable personal qualities. An exam-
ple might be a letter of appreciation for completing a project that makes
reference to your work ethic, commitment, or dedication.
Experience
Included in the experience section are items that document your
participation in activities that are similar to the kind of work you
would be doing in the job for which you are interviewing. This experi-
ence does not have to be from the world of paid work. You may have
done something as a volunteer or when you were at school that in an
10
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

important way is similar to the kind of work you would be called upon
to do in the job for which you are interviewing.
An example might be a copy of a marketing plan you created while
volunteering for a community service organization. You could show this
as a way of indicating that you have had experience creating market-
ing plans. A letter commending you on the job you did coordinating
some event at your school could be presented as an example of your ex-
perience as an event planner.
Accomplishments
In this section you would include items that document your abili-
ty to do outstanding work. You might have a copy of a letter associated
with an award you won or maybe a picture of you receiving an award.
The actual award is not necessary, though a photocopy of an award
is certainly an option. Another possibility would be a summary of fig-
ures describing a situation before you took charge and a second set of
figures that document the results you were able to achieve. (Naturally,
you will want to be careful not to release or share any proprietary in-
formation owned by the organization you were working for when you
achieved these results. To avoid doing this, you might have to blank out
certain proprietary information on the printout.) A letter of apprecia-
tion that details what you achieved could also be an entry under “Ac-
complishments.”
The items included in this section should highlight your ability to
solve problems and to create value.
Knowledge
In this section, you document the useful knowledge you have that
would help you to excel in the job for which you are being interviewed.
Include evidence of your special knowledge that adds value and sets
you apart from other candidates.
Certificates and diplomas are, of course, a way of demonstrating
your formal mastery of a subject. However, there are many other ways
of demonstrating that you have significant knowledge in an area that
is important to an interviewer. For example, if you have traveled ex-
tensively or lived abroad, and the job for which you are interviewing
has a strong international component, you could include a copy of your
visa or copies of the pages of a much-stamped passport. If you do so,
take time to point to some of the stamps in your passport and describe
things you learned about these countries that you think would help you
perform well in the international arena.
Skills
While the knowledge category focuses on the things you know, the
skills category in your portfolio focuses on your ability to do certain
things that would be valued by an employer. Obviously you have to
know a lot to be proficient at something, but the emphasis here is on
Chapter 1: Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
11

your ability to put this knowledge to work so that you can actually do
something productive, rather than just talk about it.
Evidence of areas of expertise, like language or computer skills,
should be included in this section of your targeted portfolio if these
skills are important to have for the job.
In preparing for any job interview, it is important to determine
what key skills are needed to be successful at the job you are inter-
viewing for. Again, informational interviews are an excellent source for
this kind of information.
Once you know the skills the employer is seeking in a job candi-
date, you can indicate your proficiency in these skill areas in many dif-
ferent ways. For example, you can present a document that gives evi-
dence of something you accomplished and then use this as a pretext for
discussing the kinds of skills you needed to get the job done.
A word of warning: Make sure that the skills you highlight in your
portfolio are the ones that you not only are proficient at but also enjoy
using. You don’t want to get hired to do something you are good at but
can’t stand doing!
In the next several chapters of this book we explore how you can
identify and get documents that verify your desirable P.E.A.K.S.
HOW DO YOU ACTUALLY USE A CAREER PORTFOLIO—AND WHEN?
So far in this chapter we have talked about what a career portfolio is
and isn’t, who might use one, and what a portfolio might look like. Here
we take a quick look at how a portfolio can be used in an actual meet-
ing or interview. We will explore this topic in much greater depth in
Chapters 6 and 7.
Typically, a career portfolio is not shown in its entirety during an
evaluation or an interview. Instead, at appropriate moments during the
interview, you selectively show particular documents that both validate
and bring to life the claims you are making. You must find the right mo-
ment to show a particular document, such as responding to an impor-
tant question during a job interview, as in the following example:
Interviewer:
“This position requires a person who has a strong work ethic and the or-
ganizational skills necessary to work on multiple projects at the same
time. Can you describe a situation where you had to work on several pro-
jects at the same time and what you did to achieve success?”
Job candidate:
“Yes, last fall I was charged with creating a business plan for my division.
This was a very comprehensive plan that detailed the potential of my di-
vision as well as set baseline goals to help the company make large prof-
its. At the same time, I chaired a steering committee set up to recommend
changes in the organizational structure of my division. Even though both
projects were demanding and time-consuming, I was able to get both tasks
competed successfully. In fact, I would like to show you some letters of
commendation I received from my company that describe my work ethic
and creativity on these projects.”
12
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

The candidate would then present two letters of commendation from
his or her portfolio. (For an example of a letter of commendation, please
turn to Part 2.)
Obviously, the letters of commendation will not cover everything
that was involved in these projects. But they do lend credibility to the
candidate’s claim that he has a strong work ethic, is creative, and can
get results while working on more than one project at a time.
The letters of commendation may not, in fact, refer explicitly to the
candidate’s “organizational skills,” but the candidate will have the 
opportunity to discuss the organizational skills used on these two pro-
jects. And, because of the evidence presented, the interviewer is likely
to be a willing listener.
Documents in a portfolio are not meant to tell the whole story. A
document that is properly selected and presented will pique the inter-
viewer’s interest and lend credibility to the statements that the job can-
didate makes in explaining the context for the document. In the above
example, even though the letters of commendation may not refer to
these specific traits, the job candidate can talk about how he or she had
to set priorities and get the right people going on the right tasks in
order to get things done successfully and on time.
One important thing to remember: You can show portfolio docu-
ments from non-work situations. In the previous example, the job can-
didate showed documents that came from the world of work. But if this
person were a student, he might show documents associated with sev-
eral projects accomplished at the same time while in school. A person
who has taken time off from a work career to raise a family might show
documents associated with volunteer projects, such as fund-raising for
the PTA or organizing a neighborhood block association party. A picture
of the latter event would enable the job candidate to discuss the many
activities that had to be organized to have a successful turnout. The
point: Use the best stuff you have, which will vary according to your
background.
Another key point to know about using a portfolio is that you
should never leave your portfolio behind at the conclusion of an inter-
view. In fact, it’s not even a good idea to hand your portfolio to the per-
son with whom you are meeting. Once you let go of your portfolio, you
lose control of how you present the information in it. We will discuss the
particular do’s and don’ts for showing your portfolio in future chapters.
The example in this section of how a portfolio might be used occurs
in the context of a job interview. There are, of course, many alternative
uses for portfolios, including asking for a raise and going through a per-
formance evaluation. We will discuss how you can use a portfolio in
these and other situations in greater depth in Chapters 6 and 7.
Before ending this chapter, we will give you a brief overview of the
P.E.A.K.S. process of assembling and targeting a career portfolio for ef-
fective use.
Chapter 1: Introduction: What Is a Career Portfolio?
13

HOW DO YOU CREATE A PORTFOLIO THAT FEATURES 
THE RIGHT CAREER P.E.A.K.S?
In Chapters 2 and 3, we will walk you through an easy process for cre-
ating a portfolio that features your best P.E.A.K.S. for the situations in
which you intend to use your portfolio. The following is a summary of
how the process works.
The Four-Step P.E.A.K.S. Portfolio Creation Process
1. Collect all the documents you can get your hands on that demon-
strate one or more categories of your career P.E.A.K.S. and that may
be appropriate for inclusion in a future, targeted portfolio. This all-
inclusive collection of documents is your Master Portfolio.
2. File these Master Portfolio documents any way you want, but keep
track of what you have using Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary
Sheets. All of your documents are listed on these summary sheets,
along with ratings of the relative strength of the P.E.A.K.S. that are
demonstrated in each document.
3. Analyze a desired job or promotion in terms of the P.E.A.K.S. that
candidates should have for this job or promotion. You can use infor-
mational interviews and a Job P.E.A.K.S. Worksheet (see the appen-
dix) to assist you with this process.
4. Finally, using your list of the P.E.A.K.S. that employers will find 
desirable as your guide, select the documents from your Master
Portfolio that would be most impressive in your upcoming interview.
Since all of the documents in your Master Portfolio are listed and
rated on your Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheets, finding
the right documents to include in your targeted portfolio can be done
very quickly.
Still hesitating? If you need a little more inspiration to get started,
please take a look at some of the examples we have provided 
of P.E.A.K.S. portfolios in Part 2. Once you get the hang of it, creating
a P.E.A.K.S. portfolio that gets results is very easy to do. So let’s get
started.
14
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

2
Assembling Your Master Portfolio
OVERVIEW
Assembling your Master Portfolio is the stage where you get your
hands on as many different types of documents as possible that you will
later hone and refine for specific targeted Can-Do Portfolios. But first
you need some useful documents to choose from. We call this collection
of portfolio-worthy documents your Master Portfolio.
This chapter details the kinds of documents you should be looking
for and some strategies you can use to obtain new documents for your
Master Portfolio. We’ll show you how to assess the value of each item in
your collection, a practice that will help later as you create a targeted
portfolio. We’ll review different techniques for filing these documents,
and finally we’ll suggest a method you can use to summarize every-
thing you have in your Master Portfolio.
We have created two worksheets that you might find useful for as-
sessing and summarizing the items in your collection. These work-
sheets are totally optional. The last thing we want to do is discourage
you from collecting items for your Master Portfolio because you dread
filling out a bunch of forms! You do not have to fill out any forms or cre-
ate a fancy filing system in order to have a useful Master Portfolio. The
worksheets are there for those of you who find them helpful. Whatever
you decide to do, the important thing is for you to begin collecting doc-
uments that might prove useful for future targeted portfolios.
Get ready for a treasure hunt. One last point. If you are hesitating
about getting started because collecting and sizing up all these docu-
15
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

ments about yourself seems like an awful lot of work, here’s something
you should know. The process may start slowly, but it builds. One idea
leads to another, and before long you almost feel like you are on a real
treasure hunt. The items you find are, in fact, personal treasures. Each
item demonstrates your outstanding qualities. Assembling a collection
of items that reveal your best features can be a huge confidence builder.
So get started!
A MASTER PORTFOLIO IS MORE “STORAGE BIN” THAN “PORTFOLIO”
Your Master Portfolio should contain every item you can get your hands
on that you feel might at some future date be considered for inclusion
in a portfolio you would bring to an interview. In point of fact, you will
likely end up taking only a small percentage of the items in your Mas-
ter Portfolio to an interview. But prior to deciding which items to bring
to a meeting, you need a collection of items to choose from. And the
more items you have to choose from in your Master Portfolio, the better
your targeted portfolios are likely to be.
As your collection of portfolio-worthy documents builds, you will
likely discover that you have accumulated more items than you could
easily carry from place to place. It is true that portfolios are, by defini-
tion, meant to be readily portable. So in this sense, your Master Port-
folio eventually becomes more like a storage bin than a portfolio you
can carry around. A more accurate term for it might be “master collec-
tion of potentially useful portfolio documents.” To save words, we call it
your Master Portfolio.
We suggest that you initially place items you wish to include in
your Master Portfolio in a box or filing cabinet at home. (Keep in mind
that when people are terminated, a security guard sometimes appears
at the former employee’s office to prevent the former employee from
taking any files home.) You may also decide to scan these items onto a
computer disk. If you decide to create a digital portfolio, you should,
nevertheless, keep hard copies of everything you have scanned. In a
face-to-face interview, you most likely will want to present documents
that you can actually hold. People tend to put more trust in things they
can touch and feel. And, as with all computer files, it’s a good idea to
have backup hard copies.
Later in this chapter (see “Different Ways of Filing Master Port-
folio Documents”) we will discuss filing systems you can use to keep
track of everything in your Master Portfolio. But your first task is to
start collecting items.
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE LOOKING FOR
Ultimately you are hoping to find documents that give evidence of
P.E.A.K.S. that would appeal to the particular people to whom you will
be showing your portfolio at various times in the future. Remember
from Chapter 1 that your P.E.A.K.S. are your personal characteristics
that add value, experience, accomplishments, knowledge, and skills.
16
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Unfortunately, you can’t really know in advance all of the possible sit-
uations where you might wish to use your portfolio. And you can’t know
for sure which of your P.E.A.K.S. future employers and clients might be
most interested in. So you would do well when starting out to cast as
wide a net as possible, picking up everything and anything that might
be viewed as giving evidence of one or more of your P.E.A.K.S.
Too much ain’t enough. Err on the side of collecting too much,
rather than too little, for your Master Portfolio. If you get too picky
early on, you may reject something that could be quite useful at some
unanticipated future date. Just because you have grabbed an item and
tossed it into the box storing your Master Portfolio documents doesn’t
mean you have made a commitment to using it. You can always discard
that item later on, if over time it does not seem to add any significant
value to your portfolio. So, if in doubt, don’t throw it out, is a good gen-
eral rule to follow when first assembling a Master Portfolio.
If you can’t find a key document, make a note to yourself. As you
start to collect items for your portfolio, all sorts of things will occur to
you. You will remember things you once had but can’t put your hands
on right away. Maybe they are in a relative’s attic or even in another
country. It helps if you can keep a running list of portfolio-worthy items
that you can eventually get a hold of but are not in your possession
right now.
As a general rule, the more recent the document, the more powerful
its effect. We are often asked, “How far back should we go when we are
collecting items for our portfolio?” If you have been out of school for, say,
ten years, documents relating to school activities and accomplishments
will have less impact than similar documents from a recent graduate.
That said, an ancient document that suggests you have always had a
particular talent or personal characteristic that is highly desirable for
the job could be quite powerful. Generally speaking, however, you
should be looking hardest for documents that were generated in the
past five years.
Focus on kinds of documents that might prove particularly useful.
We have found that focusing on documents that fall into one of the 
following seven categories can help people find items that exemplify
particularly desirable P.E.A.K.S.:
1. Bio stats. Documents that give basic information about you. An ex-
ample might be a document showing that you have security clear-
ance.
2. Targeted task skills. Evidence of skills you have mastered that en-
able you to perform specific tasks.
3. People skills. Evidence of your ability to work effectively with people:
your ability to handle many different types of people with tact and
skill, to be an effective “team player,” to lead people, and so on.
4. Learning skills. Evidence of both your ability to learn and your in-
terest in continuing to learn.
5. Self-management skills. Evidence of your ability to organize and
manage yourself effectively.
Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
17

6. Task accomplishments. Evidence of specific things you have accom-
plished in response to a problem or perceived need. These items
could range from creative products (such as a paper you wrote or a
logo you created) to things you have accomplished in an organization
(like finding new sources of revenue or implementing a new com-
puter system).
7. Community service. Evidence of volunteer activities that are of ser-
vice to your community.
In the accompanying table we give some examples of documents that
would fit into one or more of the above categories. This is not meant to
give you a complete list of all the items that might be included under
each category. The goal is to help you brainstorm useful items you
might have gotten or might be able to get easily.
Table: Examples of Portfolio Documents
18
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
1. Bio Stats
• Resume: on paper, disk, or other format
• Personal history
• Hobbies
• Extracurricular activities
• Passport, work permits, and visa enabling
you to travel/work and/or study in coun-
tries other than your own
• Foreign travel and languages
• Your e-mail address
• Web site address and home page printout
• Business cards, past and present
• Evidence of good health: for example, a
record showing you’ve accumulated credit
for not taking sick days
• Attendance record or letter commending
you for excellent attendance record
• Letters of introduction/recommendation
from faculty or past employers/bosses
• Professional photo (the kind used in press
releases)
• Military service, honors
• Sports affiliations, honors
• Security clearance
• Letters from police showing clean record, if
applying for a high-security position
• List of references (make sure you’ve first
asked these people to be your reference)
2. Learning Skills
• Degrees
• Transcripts from schools you have attend-
ed and/or reports on academic progress
• GPA (Grade Point Average)
• High grades in individual courses
• Academic awards: dean’s list, honors,
prizes
• Scholarship award letters
• Certificates
• Licenses you hold
• Experiential learning (self-directed)
• Professional development activities: semi-
nars; workshops; conferences; professional
networking; professional organizations
• Letters from faculty noting your accom-
plishments
• Favorable faculty evaluations
• Examples of academic work: papers, pro-
jects, etc.
3. Targeted Task Skills
• Evidence of communications skills: writ-
ten, oral
• Writing sample with highly favorable
handwritten comments; samples of arti-
cles you have published
• Still photographs from a video of a presen-
tation you have made

Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
19
3. Targeted Task Skills (cont.)
• Evidence of competence in more than one
language
• Project or work samples that illustrate a
task skill, such as the ability to create a
marketing plan (black out or delete propri-
etary information)
• Evidence of computer and other technical
skills
4. People Skills
• Leadership activities (at work, in school, or
in community)
• Evidence of being appointed to a leader-
ship position and commendations received
for your leadership skills
• Evidence you were elected to a position by
your peers (captain of a team; student or
employee representative)
• Evidence that you are an effective team
player: favorable peer and leader evalua-
tions
• Management experience
• Organizational affiliations and positions
held
• Letters or articles announcing a promotion
or new assignment received
• Evidence of interest in and exposure to
more than one culture; proof of foreign
travel/study
5. Self-Management Skills
• Personal mission statement
• Your personal and career goals
• Your personal S.W.O.T. Analysis* giving a
self-assessment of how best to capitalize
on your strengths
• Time management skills
• Personal financial plan: e.g., plan that en-
abled you to attend school
• Career self-management course docu-
ments
5. Self-Management Skills (cont.)
• Professional presence: lectures, presenta-
tions, publications
• Networking skills: evidence of professional
contacts
• Listed in professional or honorific directo-
ries (professional lists, who’s who lists)
6. Task Accomplishments
• S.T.A.R.s+
• Creative products
• Pictures of something you created or docu-
menting your participation
• Awards for task accomplishment
• Letters you have received relating to your
accomplishments
• Letters of appreciation, employer testimo-
nials
• Letters from satisfied clients
• Pins/medallions awarded
• News articles about you or something you
were significantly involved in
• Photographs of you in newspapers, maga-
zines, or in-house publications, because of
an accomplishment
• Sales reports documenting your success
• New accounts you opened
• New business activities you created that
contributed to an organization’s success
• Section from a business plan you created
(with proprietary information deleted)
• Evidence of new products or services you
created
• Evidence of inventions you patented
• Evidence of revenues or profits you were
responsible for achieving
• Customer satisfaction reports
• Employee surveys you created
• Promotional materials you developed
• Designs or logos you created
*S.W.O.T. is an acronym for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Organizations frequently do
S.W.O.T. analyses in order to identify appropriate strategies. If you are familiar with this technique you can per-
form a personal S.W.O.T. analysis to help you identify useful career strategies.
+S.T.A.R. stands for situation (challenge, problem, or opportunity) faced task to be undertaken, action taken
(what decisions you made and actions you took in response to the problem), and results (the outcome of your ac-
tion).

Again, the above list is not meant to be all-inclusive. We provide it only
to get you thinking about things you might have that could prove use-
ful in your portfolio. Don’t worry if you don’t have many of the above
items, or even any of them. The important thing is that the documents
that you do eventually find give evidence of important P.E.A.K.S.
For further inspiration you might want to take a moment to thumb
through some of the portfolio items in Part 2.
STRATEGIES FOR CREATING NEW DOCUMENTS FOR YOUR COLLECTION
When assembling your Master Portfolio, in addition to looking for doc-
uments you already have, you should be looking for opportunities to ask
people for new documents and you should be on the lookout for oppor-
tunities to create some of these items yourself.
Ask people to create useful documents for you. Do not just wait for
documents to come to you. If someone, for example a friend, colleague,
professor, customer, or client, praises you or thanks you for something
you recently did, you might ask this person: “Would you write me a
short note restating that so I can include it in my portfolio?”
The chances are they will be happy to do so and may even be in-
trigued by the idea of a portfolio. If they reply that they’d like to write
you a note but are very busy right now, you can offer to do a draft of the
note, which they can edit, put on their stationery, and sign. (You may
have observed that many, if not most, letters of recommendation get
done this way!)
If the person is your current boss, you obviously don’t want to cre-
ate the impression that you are looking for a job unless he or she knows
that you are and is supportive. However, you can tactfully say some-
thing like, “You know, Mary [insert your boss’s name], I’m sure that
someday, possibly quite soon, you are going to be moving on to a bigger
position. When that happens, I want to make sure that I have a good
portfolio ready so that I can get a good position, too.”
20
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
6. Task Accomplishments (cont.)
• Printouts from Web sites created for
clients/employers
• Training manuals and programs you cre-
ated
• Performance appraisals received, if highly
favorable
• Evidence of a favorable 360-degree perfor-
mance evaluation*
• Evidence of achievements in clubs, sports,
hobbies, or other recreational achievements
• Tax return information (e.g., proof of past
commissions/earnings; proof of profitable
business)
7. Community Service
• Volunteer organizational affiliations, posi-
tions held
• Activities specified and illustrated: hours,
photos
• Awards
• Thank-you letters for community service
time or accomplishments
• Peace Corps service
• Pins/medallions awarded
• News articles about you or something you
were significantly involved in
*Evaluations from a sample of all the people you work with and for.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

The chances are your boss will want to learn more about putting
together a portfolio for his or her own use!
You can (and should) create some of your portfolio documents your-
self. In addition to asking for documents, you can also add to the items
in your Master Portfolio by creating them. We are not talking about 
deceptive practices, such as fabricating fake letters of recommendation
or creating bogus performance evaluations. Most assuredly, and we
can’t stress this too much, you should never include anything in your
portfolio that lacks integrity. You won’t feel good about inclusions that
are, in point of fact, dishonest. And if you ever get caught using some-
thing that is not authentic, your credibility will be totally destroyed—
the very opposite of what you are trying to achieve with your portfolio.
You can and should, of course, make minor deletions to protect the
rights of the authors of the documents you use. For example, you would
need to delete proprietary information, such as confidential market
share data, from copies of documents that you will be showing outside
this organization.
Consider taking pictures and using the Web. You can create your
own tailor-made documents by taking pictures of something you creat-
ed or visiting Web sites that have pictures and other information that
pertain to some important aspect of your life so far. One of the authors
of this book used an Internet search engine to find the Web site for a
school in Brazil where he once was an instructor. He was able to down-
load pictures of this school in Rio de Janeiro, which he then combined
with other pictures he found of Rio to create a colorful collage. Since
there is no such thing as a bad picture of Rio, it didn’t take much artis-
tic ability to create a visually arresting prop for discussing his interna-
tional experience.
Color sells. When creating your own documents or copying docu-
ments you already have, remember that color can lend appeal. Obvi-
ously you do not want to include a lot of gaudy colors that have the net
effect of cheapening your own image. But you should be on the lookout
for opportunities to include at least a little dash of color in your collec-
tion of portfolio documents. So, if you receive a letter of commendation
and the person’s name and address at the top of the letter are in color,
you would do well to pay a little extra and have whatever photocopies
are made done in color and on paper that matches the original sta-
tionery.
In this chapter our focus is on finding and creating documents that
are based on your life so far. In Chapter 8, we will discuss activities you
can pursue in the future that will generate a continuous flow of portfo-
lio-worthy documents.
HOW TO ASSESS THE P.E.A.K.S. IN YOUR DOCUMENTS
Thus far we have discussed how you can go about finding and creating
items to include in your Master Portfolio collection. Now, we will show
you a strategy for evaluating the P.E.A.K.S. demonstrated by each of
the documents in your Master Portfolio. If you do this well, when it
Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
21

comes time to actually select items from your Master Portfolio to take
to an interview you will be able to quickly put your hands on useful doc-
uments. In Chapter 3, we will show you some techniques you can use to
decide which of your P.E.AK.S. you should feature in the Can-Do Port-
folios you take to particular interviews. But first, it is very useful to
know just what P.E.A.K.S. you have in your Master Portfolio.
The Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form
To demonstrate how you can assess the items in your Master Portfolio,
we have created a worksheet called the Career P.E.A.K.S. Measure-
ment Form. Prior to showing you how to use this form, we should make
one thing very clear. You do not have to fill out a Career P.E.A.K.S.
Measurement Form for every item in your Master Portfolio. Some of you
will want to use this form for many of your items; and others of you will
decide you would prefer to assess your documents without filling out
this form. The important thing is that you understand the thinking
that should go into analyzing your documents. Whether or not you use
the Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form to record your assessments
of the relative strength of your documents is entirely up to you. We do
recommend, however, that you read the next section so that you have a
very clear idea as to what is involved when you assess the P.E.A.K.S.
represented by a document.
An Example of Assessing the P.E.A.K.S. in a Document
Let us say, as a hypothetical example, that during the past year you
were given the responsibility of leading a team of diverse people in rais-
ing productivity in your department by 10 percent. You had to deal with
some very difficult personalities, but by the end of the year, the innov-
ative ideas that your team recommended and subsequently adopted 
resulted in a 15 percent increase in productivity. In your annual per-
formance evaluation your boss gave you a very favorable set of com-
ments on your ability to get results.
To illustrate how you might describe and assess the P.E.A.K.S.
that are featured in your annual performance review we have filled in
a Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form, which follows.
At the top of the Measurement Form, there is a place for the name
of the document and a brief verbal description of the document. Under
“Code” you can indicate where this document is located in your file. In
this case, the document happens to be the third item in the “Task 
Accomplishments” section of your Master Portfolio file. The assignment
of a code to identify your documents is totally arbitrary. Depending
upon the filing system you choose to use, you may or may not have sep-
arate categories in your Master Portfolio. The important point is that
you know where to find this document.
Next to each P.E.A.K.S. category, we give an example of what you
might write, and a hypothetical numerical score that you might give
each of the P.E.A.K.S., ranging from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest). These
scores are meant to reflect how strong you feel each of the individual
22
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

P.E.A.K.S. is. The worksheets are for your own personal reference, not
for sharing with an interviewer. So be candid.
If you decide you would like to use the Career P.E.A.K.S. Mea-
surement Form to assess the P.E.A.K.S. in some of your documents, we
have included a blank copy of this form in the appendix.
But again, the key thing is that you understand how to assess the
P.E.A.K.S in your documents, regardless of whether or not you actual-
ly use the Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form.
Example Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form
Name of Document: Annual Performance Evaluation
Description: 15% increase in productivity accomplishment
Code: Task Accomplishments: #3
SPECIFY
RATE: 1 TO 5
(5 = highest score)
DIFFERENT WAYS OF FILING MASTER PORTFOLIO DOCUMENTS
As the number of items in your Master Portfolio collection increases,
you may want a filing system better than just tossing everything into
a big box. The real issues are (1) knowing what you have and (2) 
retrieval. Knowing what you have can be accomplished by keeping
summary sheets, a topic we will discuss in the next section of this
chapter. The effectiveness and efficiency of your retrieval system will
ultimately depend upon your ability to develop a filing system that
not only works, but also is in tune with how you like to organize your-
Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
23
Personal characteristics
Ability to handle diverse, often difficult personalities
that add value
with skill 
4
Experience
Shows experience managing a new team
4
Accomplishment(s)
STAR:
Situation:
Productivity flat, difficult personalities
Task:
To increase productivity by 10%
Action taken: Brainstorm; everyone participated
Results:
Productivity increased by 15%
5
Knowledge
Good basic knowledge developed of our operations
3
Skills
Leading a team, leading change
4
Total: 20

self. You have to be comfortable with your filing system or you won’t
keep using it.
Using tabs may help. You will likely find that it is easier to locate
items if you have them stored in folders that have tabs on them for
identification. There are, of course, many general categories you could
use for these tabs. The following set of headings, which we reviewed
earlier in this chapter, could prove useful for filing items in your Mas-
ter Portfolio:
I Bio stats
I Targeted task skills
I People skills
I Learning skills
I Self-management skills
I Task accomplishments
I Community service
An obvious alternative to the above categories would be to file each doc-
ument according to which of the following P.E.A.K.S. the documents
best exemplifies:
I Personal characteristics that add value
I Experience
I Accomplishments
I Knowledge
I Skills
The problem with using the P.E.A.K.S. categories for initially filing doc-
uments in your Master Portfolio is that this filing system would require
you to carefully analyze each document before filing it. Determining
which of the P.E.A.K.S. a document best exemplifies can take a fair
amount of time. And if it takes a long time to decide which category to
file something under, the net result may be that you find yourself
putting an excellent document aside somewhere, fully intending to file
it in the future and losing it in the process.
Whatever nomenclature you do end up using for your Master Port-
folio filing system, you will no doubt discover that some of your items
could be filed under more than one heading. In these cases you can put
copies of the same document in several different files or leave a note in
each appropriate category that specifies the location of the actual doc-
ument.
If you use Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Forms, don’t lose them.
If you use these worksheets, you will need some system for keeping
track of where they are. You are unlikely to misplace them if you use
paper clips to attach the filled-out forms directly to the original docu-
ments they assess. Alternatively, you can have a separate file or files for
these worksheets.
Your filing system should suit your personal style for organizing
things. With your Master Portfolio you can be as sloppy or as neat as
24
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

you like to be. When you are shuffling through your Master Portfolio
documents at home and at your leisure, you are not in an interview sit-
uation where you need to be able to find what you are looking for im-
mediately.
Truthfully, one of the authors likes to just toss stuff into a big box
and then periodically assess what he has and file it accordingly. The
other author feels more comfortable if he can carefully file things into
separate folders right up front. If the two of us were forced to use each
other’s approach to filing documents for our Master Portfolios, we’d
probably both quit!
The key is to find a filing system you will continue to use. We have
suggested some headings that might prove useful for filing and 
retrieving the items in your master collection of portfolio items. These
are only suggestions.
If using the headings we have suggested for your Master Portfolio
collection sounds like something you do not want to do, then chuck this
system for filing your documents and try some other approach. The 
important thing with your Master Portfolio is that you keep collecting
and evaluating potentially useful documents and that you file them in
a way that allows you to retrieve them easily.
HOW TO KEEP TRACK OF THE CONTENTS OF YOUR MASTER PORTFOLIO
Whatever system you use for filing your documents, you will want to
know what’s actually in your Master Portfolio collection. Keeping track
of all the different documents in your Master Portfolio may be fairly
easy when you start out, if you haven’t got many documents to include.
However, if you are industrious about tracking down and soliciting
items that you would like to include in your portfolio, it soon becomes
difficult to remember everything you have in your Master Portfolio.
You can keep weeding things out, so that your Master Portfolio 
remains a manageable size. But, as noted earlier, this is not an advis-
able strategy, since you never know precisely what sort of work and jobs
you will be going after in the future. If you decide to make a significant
career shift, an item that seems of little use today may prove im-
mensely useful at some point in the future. For example, there may be
items you now have that document some esoteric knowledge that you
have that is of little use in your present job but would prove to be just
what an employer is looking for in a future job. We have often observed
that people who are dissatisfied with their present job are able to make
successful career shifts by marketing special skills and knowledge they
have that they would love to use but are unable to do so in their pre-
sent job. So your best bet is to keep all those documents that don’t seem
to fit into your present career, since you never know when they might
prove useful.
Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheets
To help you keep track of all the items in your Master Portfolio collec-
tion, we have created a Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheet. You
Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
25

can use this form to list all of your items in this collection, along with
your ratings of the P.E.A.K.S. associated with each of these items.
If your summary sheets are up to date, whenever you are putting
together a Can-Do Portfolio for a particular job interview, you can run
your eye down these summary sheets to see what you’ve got in your
Master Portfolio that might be useful for this interview.
And perhaps even more important, these “snapshots” of the con-
tents of your Master Portfolio will enable you to see patterns and
themes with respect to the P.E.A.K.S. that have characterized your life.
This sort of self-knowledge can be very useful, not only for a job inter-
view but also for making important career decisions.
How to Use Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheets
Recording items on this summary sheet is quite simple. Let us say, for
example, that you want to list all the items in a Master Portfolio file
you call “Task Accomplishments.” The first thing you would do would be
to write “Task Accomplishments” in the upper left-hand corner of the
form. Refer to the example below to see how this would be done.
Example: Career P.E.A.K.S Master Summary Sheet for Portfolio Categories
On a scale of 1 to 5, rate each item for its P.E.A.K.S. (5 being most important)
26
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
Master Portfolio
Category:
P
E
A
K
S
Task
Personal
Experience
Accomplish-
Knowledge
Skills
Accomplishments
Characteristics
ments
That Add Value
Totals
Printout figures:
3
3
5
2
4
17
doubled advertising
for student newspaper
Boss’s letter: praising
2
4
5
4
4
19
marketing plan
Annual performance
4
4
5
3
4
20
evaluation:
15% boost in
productivity
Etc.

If your Master Portfolio does not have different files and headings, you
can simply leave the “Master Portfolio Category” area blank.
Your next step is to create in the left-hand column a list of all the
items that are filed in the category under consideration, using short,
clear descriptions. Let’s say, for example, that you have a computer
printout that gives sales figures documenting your success in leading a
team that doubled the amount of advertising for your school newspa-
per. You might list this as “Printout figures: doubled advertising for
school newspaper,” as we have done in the example.
After writing a short description of the document, record the
P.E.A.K.S. ratings you would assign to it. These ratings are listed in the
same row that the description is in, which for the “doubled advertising”
example would be the first row. See the accompanying summary sheet
illustrating how the ratings for these P.E.A.K.S. are recorded. (These
ratings are the same as the P.E.A.K.S. ratings you assigned to this doc-
ument on the corresponding Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form if
you used one.)
Your second item on the “Task Accomplishments” part of the 
Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheet might be a letter from your
boss congratulating you on the marketing plan you put together for a
major account. Here you put “Boss’s letter praising marketing plan”
and record the P.E.A.K.S. ratings associated with this item.
In the accompanying example, we have also recorded a third item,
“Annual Performance Evaluation: 15% boost in productivity.” This is
the document we analyzed earlier in this chapter, using a Career
P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form. As you can see, the same P.E.A.K.S. rat-
ings would be recorded in the Master Portfolio Summary Sheet that
were listed in the Career P.E.A.K.S. Measurement Form for this docu-
ment.
For those of you who would like to have a go at using the above sys-
tem for listing the items in your Master Portfolio, we have included a
blank Career P.E.A.K.S. Master Summary Sheet in the appendix of this
book.
Keeping a List of What You Have, Even If the P.E.A.K.S. 
Have Not Been Analyzed
Regardless of whether or not you use the above form, it is important
that you keep a list of all the items in your Master Portfolio. This prac-
tice will enable you to see at a glance everything you’ve got so that
when it comes time to actually select items from your Master Portfolio
to take to an interview, you can feel confident that you haven’t over-
looked any important items.
This list will be most useful if it also includes a summary of how
you have rated the P.E.A.K.S. featured in each document. But do not let
the fact that you have not yet rated the P.EA.K.S associated with a par-
ticular document prevent you from at least adding this document to
your list.
Chapter 2: Assembling Your Master Portfolio
27

FINAL THOUGHTS
In this chapter we have taken a close look at how you can assem-
ble a master collection of portfolio-worthy documents. The worksheets,
forms, and filing systems that we have suggested are strictly optional.
What’s important is that you begin collecting documents that demon-
strate important things about you, and that you keep doing this.
As long as you are alive and well and have career-related ambi-
tions, there really is no point in time at which you should stop collect-
ing items for your Master Portfolio. The truth is you can never really
know when a document that reveals something important about you
could prove useful.
Continuing to collect items for your Master Portfolio is a good
thing to do. But there’s a danger here. You don’t want to get so involved
in perfecting your Master Portfolio collection, your filing system, sum-
mary lists, and so on, that you never get around to creating a portfolio
you can actually use.
A Master Portfolio is most useful when it is put to use. In Chapter
3, we will show you how to select items from your Master Portfolio that
you can use in specific situations, such as being interviewed for a job.
28
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

3
Targeting Your Portfolio
OVERVIEW
When the time comes to select items from your Master Portfolio to take
to an interview, one strategy might be to simply sift through the items
in your Master Portfolio and pull out the documents that you think
might work. But will you hit the mark? In this chapter we will discuss
strategies you can use to improve your aim so that you bring a well-tar-
geted portfolio to every interview.
Specifically, we will review the following:
I What it means to target a portfolio and why you should do so
I When you should create a targeted portfolio
I How to select items that will appeal to your target audience
I How to organize the items in your targeted portfolio
I How to create the “right look” for your targeted portfolio
By the end of this chapter you should have a clear idea of how to create
a well-targeted Can-Do Portfolio that will include the best items to
bring to a particular interview.
In addition to having a great product, if you follow the suggested
strategies, you are also likely to feel a great surge of confidence. Know-
ing that you will be bringing the “right stuff” to a meeting can actually
inspire you to look forward to interviews that might otherwise fill you
with dread.
29
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

If you would like to see some specific examples of targeted portfo-
lios before learning how to create one, take a quick look at some of the
examples we have provided of Can-Do Portfolios in Part 2 of this book.
WHAT IS A TARGETED PORTFOLIO?
A targeted portfolio is a collection of career-relevant documents that
have been chosen because of their intended appeal to a specific audi-
ence. Simply put, these are the items from your Master Portfolio that
you would bring to a meeting, hoping to impress the person or people
with whom you are meeting.
As noted earlier, we call a targeted career portfolio that is designed
to appeal to a particular audience a Can-Do Portfolio. It’s called can-do
because it gives evidence that you can do whatever is considered most
important in the job or promotion under consideration. A strong Can-
Do Portfolio enables you to make a convincing case that you are ready,
willing, and able to get the job done. It helps you differentiate yourself
from other candidates along important, job-relevant dimensions.
In addition to giving evidence that you can do whatever is consid-
ered most important in the job or promotion under consideration, a
Can-Do Portfolio that has been properly targeted has the following two
important features:
1. It is targeted at a particular audience. A properly targeted Can-Do
Portfolio is not an all-inclusive scrapbook that captures everything
you have done so far in your career. A chronological sequence of doc-
uments accompanied by a seemingly endless recitation of “and then
I did this, and then I did that” is unlikely to hold the interest of any-
one other than possibly your mother. The key is to select documents
that will have a particular appeal to the person or people with whom
you will be meeting.
2. It is very selective. In most situations where you might show items
from your portfolio, you will have very little time to do so. You must
be very efficient and show only those items that will have the great-
est impact. When collecting items for your Master Portfolio, you
should err on the side of collecting too much. But with Can-Do Port-
folios the very opposite is true. If in doubt, leave it out, is a good rule
to follow.
In the later sections of this chapter we will review techniques for
identifying the specific kinds of items you should include in your tar-
geted, Can-Do Portfolio, but first let’s take a look at when you should
target your portfolio.
WHEN SHOULD YOU TARGET YOUR CAN-DO PORTFOLIO?
You will want to have a targeted portfolio ready whenever you are
about to go to a meeting during which you would like to show some of
30
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

your portfolio items. In future chapters we will discuss techniques you
can use to present your portfolio during different kinds of meetings.
But prior to actually showing your portfolio, you first need to select a
set of items that would be appropriate for presentation at the particu-
lar meeting you will be going to.
Wait until you have a specific situation in mind. There is no point
trying to target your portfolio prior to having a specific kind of situation
in which you might use it in mind. Since a properly targeted portfolio is
focused on a specific position you desire, the odds are that for each posi-
tion you interview for you will want to assemble a Can-Do Portfolio that
has been specifically targeted in a somewhat different way.
Anytime you create a resume, consider also targeting your portfolio.
As stated earlier, resumes should be used to get the interview and port-
folios to get the job. So if you find yourself putting together a resume,
the odds are you should also be targeting your portfolio. In Chapter 5,
we show you how to create a P.E.A.K.S. resume that, in addition to im-
proving your chances of getting an interview, also sets you up nicely to
present your portfolio once you get there.
Try to target your portfolio prior to your first meeting. Typically,
you are not required to bring a portfolio to an interview or meeting. But
if you have a portfolio that demonstrates that you can do what the per-
son with whom you are interviewing considers important, your chances
of having a successful meeting are certainly improved. Therefore, your
goal should be to have a targeted portfolio prepared prior to your first
meeting. However, if you are not ready to bring a portfolio, then don’t.
Presenting a poorly organized portfolio is unlikely to make a good first
impression.
If possible, assemble your Master Portfolio first. If an important
meeting is coming up very soon, then obviously you will have to start
assembling a Can-Do Portfolio for this meeting as soon as you can. And
you may have to do this without first assembling a master collection of
items. If, in fact, you find yourself in such a situation right now, you
might do well to consult Chapter 10. But attempting to put together a
targeted portfolio prior to assembling a Master Portfolio collection of
potentially usable documents will dilute your efforts. As noted earlier,
the more items you have to choose from, the better your targeted port-
folio is likely to be.
Have a Can-Do Portfolio ready to close the deal. You may still be
able to use a targeted portfolio, even if you were not able to put one to-
gether in time for your first meeting. During your initial meeting you
should be able to pick up a lot of clues as to exactly what would impress
the people with whom you are meeting. If you are invited back, you can
bring a perfectly targeted Can-Do Portfolio to the next meeting. As you
will see in future chapters, nicely targeted portfolios are very useful for
“closing the deal.”
A Can-Do Portfolio is always a work in progress. As you acquire
new documents and gain more information on ways to impress the next
set of people who will see your portfolio, you will want to make adjust-
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
31

ments to your Can-Do Portfolio. It’s best to think of a targeted portfolio
as a work in progress. As a general rule, each time there is a significant
change in the kind of opportunity you are pursuing or the type of peo-
ple to whom you will be presenting your portfolio, you should consider
making changes in your Can-Do Portfolio.
HOW TO SELECT ITEMS TO INCLUDE IN YOUR CAN-DO PORTFOLIO
The people with whom you will be meeting to discuss an opportunity
may never have heard of the acronym, P.E.A.K.S., but it nicely sum-
marizes the kinds of things most people are looking for when inter-
viewing candidates for jobs and promotions. Interviewers are likely to
respond favorably to documents that demonstrate that you have per-
sonal characteristics that they believe would add value to their organi-
zation. And they will be interested in items from your portfolio that in-
dicate that you have relevant experience, accomplishments, knowledge,
and skills for the job or promotion under consideration.
While we know that the people with whom you will be meeting are
looking for desirable P.E.A.K.S. in candidates, the question remains,
which P.E.A.K.S. do they value most in candidates? Which personal
characteristics, for example, will they think are most important? Are
they looking for people who are detail-oriented, as might be the case for
some jobs in accounting, or are they seeking creativity, which might be
considered a key trait of a successful copywriter in an advertising firm?
And what kinds of accomplishments and skills would they find most
impressive?
The challenge when targeting your Can-Do Portfolio is to identify
ahead of time the kinds of P.E.A.K.S. that the people with whom you
will be meeting are seeking in candidates. This will enable you to in-
clude in your portfolio the best items you have to demonstrate these
P.E.A.K.S.
Here’s a process you can follow to target your portfolio:
1. Describe the opportunity you are pursuing in realistic terms.
2. Identify the P.E.A.K.S. that the interviewer will consider desirable.
3. Select items that best demonstrate how you have the desired
P.E.A.K.S.
Each of these steps is described in the sections that follow.
Step 1: Describing the Opportunity You Are Pursuing 
in Realistic Terms
The more accurately you are able to describe the real responsibilities,
activities, and goals associated with a job or promotion, the easier it
will be for you to identify the particular P.E.A.K.S. that are considered
most desirable in candidates seeking this position.
Look for a job description. A good place to start is with a formal
job description, if you can obtain one. Jobs that are advertised or post-
32
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

ed often include a brief description of what the job involves and the
qualifications that candidates are expected to have. To get a more com-
prehensive write-up, you can try contacting the people who will be in-
terviewing you and ask them if you can obtain a copy of the job de-
scription prior to your interview. Making this kind of request has the
added advantage of sending the message that you are doing your home-
work.
Get a realistic picture of the job. Regardless of how extensive it is,
a formal write-up of a job can only tell you so much. You are not told
what it is really like to be an incumbent of this particular job in this
particular organization and industry. But a job description will give you
a general idea as to what the job entails, so that you can start making
inquiries into the specifics involved.
The key is to gather as much information as you can about what
the job really involves. To learn more about the organization and the
field in which it operates, you might first look at the organization’s Web
site, annual report, and promotional literature. But to get a less-biased,
more up-to-date view on what’s really going on in the organization and
its industry, you should also search for relevant articles in trade jour-
nals and the popular press.
Play detective. Talk to people who might know something about
this job, organization, or industry. Suppliers of the organization, former
employees, customers, and competitors all have their biases, but they
also have a lot of inside information that doesn’t show up anywhere
else. If you can’t find anyone who knows something about this particu-
lar organization or job, you might still be able to find someone who has
worked at an equivalent job in a different organization.
Do informational interviews. The best way to get a realistic pic-
ture of a job is to conduct informational interviews with people who can
provide much of the information you are seeking. Unlike a job inter-
view, in which you are the person being interviewed, when doing an in-
formational interview you make the appointment and you do the inter-
viewing. Informational interviews can be tremendously useful not only
for getting a realistic picture of a job but also for assessing career di-
rections you are considering. In the next chapter we will discuss every-
thing you need to know about how to set up and conduct effective in-
formational interviews.
Do as much research as you can. If you do not have time to do an
informational interview, or do not wish to do one, it is still a good idea
to do whatever research you can into the exact nature of the position
for which you are going to be interviewed. Reading any material you
can quickly put your hands on and having informal chats with anyone
you can easily get a hold of who might know something useful is a lot
better than not doing any digging at all.
The better you understand the real requirements of a job, the eas-
ier it will be to identify documents that demonstrate your ability to do
this job well.
As you can see in the examples we provide in Part 2, you don’t
have to write a long essay on a job to prepare a targeted portfolio. A
short paragraph will do, so long as you are catching the essence of what
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
33

the job really requires. In fact, you don’t have to write anything at all,
though keeping some notes is helpful. The important point is that you
understand what the incumbent of the job has to be able to do to be con-
sidered successful.
Step 2: Identifying the P.E.A.K.S. That the Interviewer 
Will Consider Desirable
Once you have a clear idea of the various job requirements, the next
step is to identify the particular P.E.A.K.S. that the people who will be
interviewing you are likely to be seeking in candidates.
Begin with the “customer’s” mind in mind. Whenever you present
items from your portfolio, you are engaging in self-marketing. And so,
when preparing your presentation you would do well to heed the effec-
tive marketer’s first rule: Begin with the customer in mind.
The “customer” here, of course, is the person to whom you will be
showing items from your portfolio. And the important point is not what
you think the customer should think is important, but what the cus-
tomer actually does think is important. To do this effectively, you must
have the customer’s mind in mind, so to speak. Then consider what’s on
the customer’s mind in terms of the P.E.A.K.S. they think a candidate
for a particular job or promotion should have. The following are some
strategies you can use.
Put yourself in their place. Once you have a clear idea as to what
the job under consideration really requires, put yourself in the place of
the interviewer and make your best guess as to the kinds of P.E.A.K.S.
this person will consider desirable. The problem, of course, is that the
real issue is not what you would think is important if you were doing
the interviewing, but what they think. Putting yourself into someone
else’s position does not eliminate your own personal biases, nor does it
take into account the mental processes of the person doing the inter-
viewing.
Learn as much as you can about the mind-set of the people who will
be interviewing you. The better you understand the mind-set of the
people who will be interviewing you, the easier it will be to identify the
kinds of P.E.A.K.S. they consider most desirable. By mind-set we mean
the key assumptions and biases that shape a person’s thinking on a
particular topic. You might think it is nearly impossible to anticipate an
interviewer’s mind-set, particularly since the assumptions and biases
that influence that person’s thinking are often unspoken.
While it is true that without meeting someone, you cannot know
for sure what this person’s particular mind-set will be, it is also true
that people in a particular field or profession are likely to share what
we might call a professional mind-set. No two people in a field or a pro-
fession will have identical mind-sets, but they are likely to share cer-
tain assumptions about the P.E.A.K.S. that a person who is successful
in their field should have. The fact is that certain kinds of people are
attracted to certain kinds of fields. A person who is very outgoing and
likes to meet and interact with people on a regular basis is more likely
to be attracted to sales than, say, bookkeeping. And subsequent train-
34
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

ing and experience tends to reinforce a particular way of thinking.
Salespeople learn to be very responsive to their customers and to accept
rejection without letting it diminish their efforts. Bookkeepers are 
rewarded for being extremely well organized and detail-oriented.
Though it is not always possible to do so, it is particularly useful if
you can learn about the background of the person who will be inter-
viewing you prior to the interview. At the very least, you want to learn
as much as you can about the kinds of people who are in the field in
which you will be interviewing.
Have discussions with people who might know the interviewer’s
mind-set. The people who can give you a realistic picture of a job are
also likely to be able to tell you about the typical mind-set of inter-
viewers in this field.
Rather than ask about “professional mind-sets,” which might 
require a fair amount of explanation on your part, you would probably
do better to ask, “So what are the personal characteristics that inter-
viewers are looking for in candidates for this kind of job?” You can make
some suggestions as to what you think these personal characteristics
might be, so that the person you are talking with knows what you mean
by personal characteristics. And, of course, you also want to ask: “What
sort of experience do you think the interviewer will be looking for?”
“Please tell me about the kinds of accomplishments, knowledge, and
skills that are likely to be most valued in job candidates.”
It is particularly helpful if you can get the people you interview to
specify which of the particular P.E.A.K.S. they have mentioned are of
the highest priority.
Obviously, you can come up with your own variation on these ques-
tions, but these are the kinds of questions that are likely to elicit the 
information you need to target your portfolio.
Talk with assistants, if you can. It is not unreasonable to call the
office of the person who will be interviewing you and ask if you can
have a quick phone conversation with one of the interviewer’s assis-
tants to learn more about the job for which you will be interviewing. If
you are able to get a hold of one of these people, in addition to finding
out about the particulars of the job, you can ask about the particular
P.E.A.K.S that are important to the person with whom you will be
meeting.
Ask P.E.A.K.S. questions during informational interviews. If you
are in a rush, then you may not have time to do formal, informational
interviews. But if you can schedule an informational interview, defi-
nitely ask the above questions about the P.E.A.K.S. that are considered
desirable. We explore ways you can do this in the next chapter, which
focuses on techniques for conducting effective informational interviews.
Listen carefully for desired P.E.A.K.S. during job interviews. As
noted earlier, in most cases you will want to be able to bring a targeted
Can-Do Portfolio to your first job interview. But whether or not you are
able to do this, you would do well to listen very carefully for clues as to
what the interviewer and people in this organization think are partic-
ularly impressive P.E.A.K.S. If you are invited back, this knowledge
will enable you to further refine what is included in your portfolio. And
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
35

the knowledge of desired P.E.A.K.S. that is derived from actual job 
interviews could also prove useful if you will be interviewing for a com-
parable position in a similar organization.
Be sure to identify the personal characteristics that interviewers 
believe add value. Discussions that people have about jobs are often so
focused on things like required skills, knowledge, and experience that
it is easy to overlook an analysis of the personal characteristics of can-
didates that are believed to add value. But, as our research has shown,
people who make employment decisions tend to rank the personal char-
acteristics of job candidates as more important than their experience,
accomplishments, knowledge, and skills. So remember to ask about the
most desirable personal characteristics that a candidate could have.
The beauty of having a targeted portfolio is that by selecting the right
documents, you can make some of these all-important intangibles more
real and tangible for the interviewer.
Make a list of desired P.E.A.K.S. It is very useful if, based on the
research you have conducted, you make a list of the particular
P.E.A.K.S. that the people to whom you will be showing your Can-Do
Portfolio are likely to consider highly desirable. If possible, indicate
which of the P.E.A.K.S. on your list are of the highest priority.
To assist you with this process we have included a Job P.E.A.K.S.
Worksheet in the appendix, which you may find helpful. Whether or not
you use this worksheet is up to you. What’s important is that before 
selecting the items to include in your targeted portfolio, you have as
good an idea as possible of the particular P.E.A.K.S. that the person or
people to whom you will show your Can-Do Portfolio are likely to find
most impressive.
Step 3: Selecting Items That Best Demonstrate How You 
Have the Desired P.E.A.K.S.
If you have followed the steps above and have a good summary list of
what’s in your Master Portfolio collection, the selection of documents to
include in your Can-Do Portfolio should be relatively easy. The follow-
ing are some considerations to help you make your choices.
Think link. The items in a properly targeted portfolio should pro-
vide links between what the person who will be conducting the interview
is looking for and what you have to offer. And so, the first question to ask
yourself is, “Does this document give evidence that I have one or more of
the P.E.A.K.S. that the interviewer is likely to consider desirable?”
Identifying potentially useful documents to include in your target-
ed Can-Do Portfolio can be done very quickly if all of the documents in
your Master Portfolio collection have been rated on Career PE.A.K.S.
Master Summary Sheets.
Include good conversation pieces as well as documents that need no
explanation. You should give strong consideration to any item that you
can simply hand to an interviewer and, without further explanation,
this person immediately understands that the document gives evidence
that you have one of the P.E.A.K.S. that is being sought in candidates.
36
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

An example is a letter of commendation that explicitly praises you for
a desired skill or personal characteristic.
But you should not limit yourself to documents that speak for
themselves. As we will see in future chapters, the best way to show your
portfolio is to do so in person. If you were to send your portfolio ahead
or leave it behind, then every item would have to be self-explanatory.
But since you will be presenting your portfolio in person, you will be
able to explain why a particular item gives strong evidence that you
have a desired qualification.
An example of a powerful document that might require some ex-
planation is a spreadsheet that records impressive sales figures. Maybe
you had the highest percentage increase in sales for three years run-
ning of all the salespeople in your company. To make sure that the in-
terviewer is reading the figures correctly and understands what the
spreadsheet indicates, you probably need to explain it to him.
A document that requires some explanation can give you a great
opening to point out important things you want to convey about your-
self. When presenting impressive sales figures, for example, you would
have an opportunity to talk about the challenges you faced and the
techniques you used to be successful.
Try to include only one or two pages of reports and other extended
documents. So that you can include a number of different items in your
Can-Do Portfolio, try to limit the number of pages associated with any
one item. If, for example, you want to talk about a marketing report you
compiled, you could include the executive summary and/or the title
page. If you want to include a school paper that received a very favor-
able comment, include the page that has the professor’s comments on
it. If your interviewer expresses a strong interest in a report or paper
you have done, you can offer to send him or her a copy after the inter-
view, provided, of course, that information that should not be shared
with this person can be deleted.
Your goal is not to go over a paper or report you did line by line,
but instead to have a prop that enables you to discuss the key
P.E.A.K.S. you demonstrated in doing this project.
Consider including pictures. A picture can be a good conversation
piece for initiating a discussion of important P.E.A.K.S. that you have.
For example, if you have a picture of yourself on a sports team, you can
use this to discuss both your competitiveness and your skills as a team
player. A picture of a volunteer event that you organized might be use-
ful for discussing your organizational skills. If the picture showed up in
a publication, so much the better, but having a photo from a newspaper
or magazine is not necessary.
Make sure the items you include add to your credibility. If your ex-
planation of how an item demonstrates one of your P.E.A.K.S. comes
across as too much of a stretch, the interviewer might start wondering
if other things you are saying about yourself are less than credible as
well.
It is important to remember that a fundamental reason for show-
ing your portfolio is to add to your credibility. With this in mind, you
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
37

should be careful not to include items that might have the net effect of
undermining your credibility.
In addition to refraining from including items that give only tenu-
ous evidence of key P.E.A.K.S, you should also be careful to avoid choos-
ing items that are, in essence, inauthentic. To protect against loss or
theft, you should use photocopies, but they should be copies of the real
thing.
Be careful to delete proprietary information. The documents you
choose should not contain any misrepresentations. That said, you
should make whatever deletions are necessary to protect the rights of
the authors of the documents you use. Deleting proprietary information
from company documents is necessary if you will be showing these doc-
uments to another company in the same industry.
Do not limit yourself to items drawn from the world of work. While
it is desirable to include as many items as you can that are drawn from
actual work experience, it is entirely appropriate to include items
drawn from your nonprofessional life, such as hobbies or even family or
other social events you have organized. The important thing is that
these items give evidence of desired P.E.A.K.S. that would impress an
employer or client.
Your education, work, and personal history will determine the
menu of items you will have to choose from. The younger you are, the
more likely it is that the majority of items in your Can-Do Portfolio will
be drawn from skills learned and achievements made during your
school years.
Whenever possible, include your most recent documents. Generally
speaking, whenever you have a choice, you should include your most re-
cent documents. Documents from the past five years are likely to have
the greatest impact. That said, a document from long ago that suggests
you have always had a desired talent or personal characteristic could
also be quite powerful.
Try to cover each of the P.E.A.K.S. categories. Having a perfectly
balanced portfolio, with an equal number of entries under each
P.E.A.K.S. category, is not necessary. The odds are that you will not be
showing your entire portfolio during an interview, and your prior 
research is likely to reveal that certain P.E.A.K.S. are far more impor-
tant than others for each job you apply for. Still, if you can have sever-
al documents in each of the P.E.A.K.S. categories, you will have more
options during your interview. You cannot know ahead of time what will
happen during the interview, but if you have a wide variety of entries
in your portfolio, you are likely to have more opportunities to show the
right item at the right moment.
If there is a particular personal characteristic or a specific kind of
experience, accomplishment, knowledge, or skill you know is considered
highly desirable in a candidate, you should try to include several 
different documents that give evidence that you have this special some-
thing.
You may not be able to include entries in all of the P.E.A.K.S. cat-
egories, but you should give a high priority to identifying documents
38
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

that indicate that you have the personal characteristics that the inter-
viewer is likely to consider highly desirable. Remember, your portfolio
gives you the opportunity to make these key intangibles tangible.
Be wary of featuring skills and knowledge that you do not enjoy
using. If you have a skill or area of knowledge that you feel an inter-
viewer would value but you do not enjoy using, look out! You may well
find yourself getting a job you can’t stand.
The more you are able to use skills and areas of knowledge that
you enjoy developing and using, the happier you are likely to be.
Assembling a Can-Do Portfolio will give you a great surge of confidence,
but only if it features the P.E.A.K.S. that you value.
Include documents that enable you to lead from strength. Docu-
ments that demonstrate any of the desired P.E.A.K.S. that are par-
ticular strengths of yours should be considered strong candidates for
inclusion in your targeted portfolio.
Use documents to address important concerns about your qualifi-
cations. Is there something about your candidacy that makes you 
vulnerable? An example of a vulnerability that can be effectively 
addressed with a good portfolio item would be the gender issue that a
male obstetrics/gynecology physician would face. See, for example, the
career situation of Zachary Schwartz, an OB/GYN, in Part 2. Roughly
80 percent of the doctors he would be competing against for a position
in the women’s health field would be female physicians. The burden
was on him to overcome the presumption that female patients would
find a female doctor far more sensitive to their needs and concerns than
he, as a male, could ever be. For this reason he included in his portfolio
a letter from a female patient that thanked him for his caring manner
and sensitivity to her concerns and needs.
Try to include no more than twenty items in your Can-Do Portfolio.
We would suggest that you first decide which items you feel make good
entries in your Can-Do Portfolio, and then cut this list back, based on
the physical capacity of the carrying case you choose to use and the
number of documents that you feel is manageable. As a rule of thumb,
we suggest that twenty documents is the absolute upper limit. And you
certainly do not need this many items. In Part 2, we give examples of
how nicely targeted portfolios can be assembled with only eight docu-
ments.
One thing to bear in mind is that the more documents you bring
with you to an interview, the more time it will take to put your hands
on a document that you suddenly decide you want to present. This
brings us to our next subject, how best to organize the items in your
Can-Do Portfolio.
HOW TO ORGANIZE YOUR CAN-DO PORTFOLIO
There is only one rule you must follow when choosing a system to 
organize the items in your Can-Do Portfolio: Items must be easily 
retrievable under pressure. With this rule in mind, the following are
some things to think about.
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
39

Consider using some form of three-ring binder for your Can-Do
Portfolio. Loose items that are stuffed into a briefcase can be hard to
find when you are in the middle of an important conversation. Alterna-
tively, these same items can be readily retrieved if they have been filed
under headings in a three-ring binder. Furthermore, a person who is
calmly flipping through the pages of a binder appears to be a lot better
organized than someone who is fishing about with his head stuck in a
briefcase! For this reason, we recommend that you use some form of
three-ring binder for your Can-Do Portfolio items. We will discuss the
look of this binder later in this chapter under “Getting the Right Look
for Your Can-Do Portfolio.”
Try using tabs with P.E.A.K.S. headings. We suggest that organiz-
ing the entries in your Can-Do Portfolio using the following six head-
ings is very useful:
I Resume
I Personal characteristics
I Experience
I Accomplishments
I Knowledge
I Skills
If your Can-Do Portfolio is organized in the above fashion, you will find
that it is very easy to put your finger on the document you need to high-
light one of your P.E.A.K.S.
Clearly, some of your items could be filed under more than one of
the above categories. In these cases you can put extra copies of the
same document in several different sections, if that helps you locate it
quickly.
The above organizational system is only a suggestion. You should
use whatever filing system you find works best for easily retrieving ex-
amples of your P.E.A.K.S.
Include extra copies of your P.E.A.K.S. resume. Note that “Re-
sume” is one of the tabs suggested above. Having several extra copies
of your resume filed under this tab is extremely beneficial. This way, if
some of the people with whom you are meeting do not have a copy of
your resume, you can hand them one. Even if you sent your resume in
advance of your interview, they may not have it.
A well-thought-out resume can give you openings to present key
items in your portfolio. In Chapter 5, we will show you how to put to-
gether a P.E.A.K.S. resume that encourages interviewers to focus on
your key P.E.A.K.S.
You can use a digital format for your Can-Do Portfolio in certain
situations. In most face-to-face interviewing situations you will want to
hand people documents that they can touch. They are more likely to
trust an item they can hold than something they see on a screen. But
in some situations having your Can-Do Portfolio stored on a disk can be
40
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

quite effective. If you believe the digital option is appropriate for you,
refer to Chapter 9 for ways to prepare and present a digital portfolio.
GETTING THE RIGHT LOOK FOR YOUR CAN-DO PORTFOLIO
When it comes time to use your Can-Do Portfolio, the effectiveness of
your presentation will be determined not only by what you say and
what you have in your portfolio but also by how everything looks. The
following are some strategies you can use to get the right look for the
portfolio you take to an interview.
Getting the Right Look for Your Carrying Case
As noted earlier, the carrying case for a portfolio that is taken to a
meeting is typically an enclosed three-ring binder that can be zippered
shut. The kind of impression you wish to make will, of course, deter-
mine the particular look you are trying to achieve with the carrying
case for your Can-Do Portfolio.
Consider using a carrying case that looks like a briefcase. For most
situations we recommend a binder that looks like a thin, leather brief-
case. The beauty of carrying your portfolio items in what appears to be
a briefcase is that it is not intrusive. In most cases you cannot know
ahead of time whether or not the right opportunities will come up to
present items from your portfolio. If your portfolio looks like a briefcase,
you have the option of not using it, without drawing attention to the fact
that you have brought a collection of portfolio items along. It’s perfectly
reasonable for you to show up for an interview carrying a briefcase. And
you can, in fact, use your portfolio carrying case as a briefcase, as well,
in which you might carry business cards, an appointment book, and a
pad of lined paper for taking notes. Alternatively, a loose-leaf binder
that is not zipped shut is likely to catch the interviewer’s eye. If the in-
terviewer asks what you have brought along, you have just lost control
of when and how you present the items in your portfolio.
If a certain kind of carrying case is expected, use it. The nature of
the field in which you will be interviewing is an important factor when
choosing a carrying case. People in design fields are expected to have
portfolios, and typically the carrying case is quite large to accommodate
artwork that needs to be bigger than a sheet of notebook paper to be
properly appreciated. On the other hand, if you are applying for an ac-
counting or sales position, an 81/2- by 11-inch format is probably just
right.
Use a carrying case that blends. Another thing to bear in mind is
that the carrying case for your portfolio can look very ordinary or
quite sophisticated, depending upon the color and texture of the ma-
terial used for its outside cover. You will want to avoid bringing to a
meeting something that does not support the image you are trying to
project. So, as a general rule, the design and look of your carrying case
should be compatible with the kind of clothes you intend to wear. The
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
41

less obtrusive your portfolio is, the more control you have over when
you use it.
Getting the Right Look for Your Portfolio Items
As we will see in future chapters, typically when you present your port-
folio, you hand a person one or two documents at a time. The following
are some ways to increase the visual impact of these documents.
Photocopy your documents. To protect yourself in case you 
misplace your targeted portfolio, we recommend that you include only
photocopies in your Can-Do Portfolio. Using photocopies has the added
advantage of giving you more creative freedom with regard to the lay-
out you use for presenting these documents.
Size your documents consistently. Provided that you do not alter
the fundamental essence and integrity of a document, you can make
certain adjustments like alteration in size when you photocopy the
originals. Little photographs or memo-pad notes of appreciation can be
enlarged to give them greater impact, and huge spreadsheets can be re-
duced in size to fit comfortably in your carrying case.
Try using collages. In addition to being able to make documents
bigger or smaller than their original size, photocopying also makes it
easy to create a collage of several documents on a single piece of paper.
For example, you could photocopy several cards containing customer
service comments onto a single notebook-sized page. And if you have
several degrees or certificates that you would like to present, you could
first photocopy each of them at a reduced size. By cutting and pasting,
you can combine them all on one page that you then photocopy. If you
are trying to make the point that you have been well educated or
trained, this presentation could have quite an impact. For added effect,
you might add to this paper the seals or logos of the institutions from
which you received these degrees. But be careful! Documents must be
presented clearly and not appear cluttered.
Remember, color sells. Items are visually most appealing and seem
most authentic when they are copied in a way that captures their orig-
inal color and texture. Pictures, logos, and other graphics that were
originally in color should be copied with a process that captures the
color and texture of the original document. It will cost a bit more to
make photocopies in high-quality color, but as we have said before, color
sells.
Use sheet protectors. Sliding your portfolio documents into clear
plastic sleeves, known as sheet protectors, keeps the documents from
becoming damaged or worn with frequent handling, and it can give
them a nice, fresh look and feel. Three-ring sheet protectors have the
further virtue of enabling you to store your documents in a binder,
without having to punch holes in them.
We have found that heavy-duty, three-ring sheet protectors that
are clear on both sides and can hold 81/2- by 11-inch documents work
quite well in most Can-Do Portfolios. You can find these items at most
office supply and stationery stores.
42
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Use the front and back of a sheet protector to link documents.
Using sheet protectors that are clear on both sides gives you the option
of displaying with one plastic sleeve two items that are linked. For ex-
ample, if you did an important report that was well received, you might
put the executive summary or some other key page on the top side of
the sheet protector and a note or e-mail that praises this project on the
back. A page protector that is clear on both sides can also be used to
show both the front and the back of two-sided items, like brochures.
Store extra items behind displayed documents. Extra copies of doc-
uments can be stored behind the items that are displayed in sheet pro-
tectors. If, for example, there are several pages from a report that you
would really like to have available in the event that the interviewer is
intrigued by this project, you can store these pages behind the title
page or executive summary that you have displayed. Sandwiched be-
tween an executive summary on one side and a letter of commendation
on the flip side of the sheet protector, these pages are out of sight, but
easy to retrieve. You might also store extra copies of your resume be-
hind the resume in your sheet protector.
FINAL THOUGHTS
The following are a few final suggestions.
Have someone in the industry take a look at your proposed Can-Do
Portfolio. Once you have put together what you think is a good Can-Do
Portfolio, it is very helpful if you can have someone who is knowledge-
able about the job for which you are interviewing give you a critique of
your portfolio. Although in an actual job interview you are unlikely to
show more than a couple of items from your portfolio, you cannot know
in advance which of your items you will have an opportunity to present.
This limitation means that you would do well to have someone assess
the appropriateness of all of the items that you intend to include in
your Can-Do Portfolio.
Earlier in this chapter, we suggested that an excellent way to learn
about the desired P.E.A.K.S. for a job is to do formal, informational in-
terviews with people who are in a position to know. Informational in-
terviews are also useful for getting feedback on your Can-Do Portfolio
prior to using it in an actual job interview.
Do the best you can and then go with it. Don’t be discouraged if you
feel that despite your best efforts your Can-Do Portfolio doesn’t include
everything you think it should. Maybe there’s an elusive document that
you can’t seem to put your hands on. Or it could be there’s an impor-
tant skill that you haven’t yet developed. In Chapter 8, we will discuss
strategies you can use to generate new P.E.A.K.S. that you can docu-
ment in future portfolios. But no matter what you do, the fact is there
will always be something you wish you had in your portfolio but don’t.
Missing some items is not the problem you may think it is. As
we’ve said, the best way to use your portfolio in an interview is not to
show the whole thing, but instead to present a few items at the right
moment. You may be aware that you are missing an item or two that
Chapter 3: Targeting Your Portfolio
43

you would like to have, but the person to whom you are presenting your
portfolio will not know this. Just because you are missing an arrow or
two from your quiver doesn’t mean you can’t hit the target with the ar-
rows you do have.
Let the P.E.A.K.S. in your Can-Do Portfolio give you confidence.
The process of targeting your portfolio should make you very aware of
the particular P.E.A.K.S. you have that are right for the job under con-
sideration. Focus on these strengths and you will start looking forward
to going to interviews that will give you opportunities to discuss these
P.E.A.K.S.
You will know that whatever claims you make about yourself, you
can back up. You will know this because you have a Can-Do Portfolio.
In the next chapter we will discuss everything you need to know
about how to set up and then conduct an effective informational 
interview. You might want to at least skim this chapter to see if an in-
formational interview is something you would like to do. Clients tell us
that they find informational interviews not only very useful but also
fun to do. But if you are pressed for time, you should proceed directly
to Chapter 5.
44
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

4
Using Informational Interviews 
to Perfect Your Portfolio
OVERVIEW
In this chapter we will show you how to use informational interviews
to get the precise information you need to create a portfolio that is 
tailored specifically for a future meeting. In the previous chapter, we 
alluded to the fact that informational interviews are a great tool for
learning about the particular P.E.A.K.S. that an employer is likely to be
seeking in job candidates. And we also suggested that informational in-
terviews are useful for getting feedback on drafts of your Can-Do Port-
folio. In this chapter, we will show you some strategies for getting and
conducting informational interviews that are both fun and productive.
Specifically, we will review the following:
I What informational interviews are and why they are important
I Key things you can learn in an informational interview
I How to identify and then contact the right people to interview
I The homework you should do prior to these interviews
I How to conduct an informational interview
We noted in the past chapter that this is an optional chapter. You
can, in fact, create a targeted portfolio without doing informational in-
45
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

terviews. But you will get your best information for targeting your port-
folio if you make the effort to do some informational interviews.
And here’s an added bonus. In this chapter you will learn how in-
formational interviews can be used for targeting your career. Do one,
and you will probably want to do some more!
INFORMATIONAL INTERVIEWS: WHAT THEY ARE 
AND WHY THEY ARE IMPORTANT
Informational interviews are interviews that are used for gathering in-
formation. In the context of managing your career, informational inter-
views are primarily intended to generate information about industries,
organizations, and jobs so that you can both make informed career 
decisions and learn how to present yourself effectively in future job in-
terviews.
Whereas the primary reason for going on a job interview is to get
job offers, the primary purpose of conducting an informational inter-
view is to learn more about careers and jobs in a particular field and to
learn what employers are looking for.
The more you can learn about what a particular field or job in-
volves and what potential employers are looking for, the easier it is to
select the documents to include in your targeted career portfolio. For
this reason, it’s a good idea to begin conducting informational inter-
views well ahead of the time you intend to actually start applying for
jobs. Doing so will give you more time to prepare yourself and collect
the documents you need to put together a strong portfolio. For example,
you might discover that doing volunteer work or engaging in further
training is necessary for enhancing your portfolio. If you’ve started
early enough in the process, you’ll have more time to attain these goals.
Unlike in a job interview, in an informational interview you will be
asking most of the questions, and, therefore, the person you are inter-
viewing should be doing most of the talking. Nevertheless, the person
with whom you are speaking is likely to ask you about yourself. And so,
as in a job interview, you will want to be prepared to share some key
highlights about your background and, more importantly, be prepared
to talk about your career goals.
It is decidedly bad form to appear to be angling for a job when your
announced purpose is to have an informational interview. Nevertheless,
the possibility always exists that the person you are speaking with may
have a particular job in mind that you could be a candidate for. What-
ever the circumstances, you can be sure that the person you are inter-
viewing will be assessing you, even as you ask the questions. Therefore,
you will want to make a good impression. Your desire to make a good
impression doesn’t necessarily mean that you are likely to show your
portfolio during an informational interview. The informational inter-
view is intended to give you some guidelines for developing and target-
ing a portfolio that you will use in the future. However, if your portfo-
lio is in reasonable shape, you may decide to show it during an
informational interview as a way of making a good impression and of
getting useful feedback.
46
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

In addition to the obvious focus on information gathering, another
important objective of an informational interview can be to build your
network of contacts. The person you are interviewing could very well
learn at some future date about jobs that might be just right for you. If
you made a good impression and are still in his or her mind, this per-
son will likely bring these opportunities to your attention. And, if you
have established a good relationship, this person could also prove a use-
ful advisor when you are assessing future job offers.
Another benefit you will get from doing an informational interview
is practice describing yourself in a situation that is less pressured than
a formal job interview. Clearly, becoming adept at informational inter-
viewing is a skill that can prove valuable to you throughout your career.
KEY THINGS YOU CAN LEARN IN AN INFORMATIONAL INTERVIEW
As noted above, the main reason for conducting an informational inter-
view is to gather information about jobs and careers in fields in which
you might be interested. Having this information will enable you to
make informed career decisions and will enable you to present yourself
effectively in future job interviews. The following are some specific
things you can learn in an informational interview.
Realistic Job Previews in Fields You Are Considering
First of all, you will want to learn as much as you can about what it
would be like to be employed in the particular field you are exploring.
Instead of focusing on learning about just the positive aspects of the
field, you would do well to encourage the person you are interviewing
to give you what is known as a realistic job preview. A realistic job pre-
view, or RJP, is meant to be a complete and balanced picture, warts and
all, of what to expect in a particular job. With an RJP, you are hoping
to gain an understanding of the job that is closer to reality than the de-
scriptions you are likely to read in promotional literature put out by
employers and professional organizations. An RJP can both supple-
ment and rebut the information you have already gathered.
The literature on realistic job previews primarily focuses on the
desirability of recruiters giving job applicants a balanced picture of
what the job will be like, so that the person who ultimately accepts the
job is less likely to be subsequently disappointed. For more on this, see,
John Wanous, Organizational Entry: Recruitment, Selection, and So-
cialization of Newcomers, 2nd Ed. (Addison-Wesley, 1992). People who
conduct informational interviews would also do well to make sure they
get a realistic job preview.
The P.E.A.K.S. That Employers Are Looking for
in Your Intended Field
Once you determine that you are indeed interested in pursuing a job in
the area you’ve been discussing, you will then need to know what qual-
ities employers are looking for in job candidates.
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
47

Learning about the specific P.E.A.K.S. that employers are seeking
in candidates can also provide guidelines for selecting items to include
in your targeted Can-Do Portfolio. You will also learn about areas
where employers might perceive you as weak or even unqualified. This
information will give you the opportunity to make some improvements
before actually applying for the job you have your heart set on. You may
need to do more training in a particular skill area before going on a job
interview. For example, your computer skills could fall short of what
employers in your chosen field are looking for, and so you would do well
to take an appropriate computer course before applying for a job in this
field.
An Insider’s View of Desirable Personal Characteristics 
for a Particular Job
If the person you interview is working in the field you are considering,
an informational interview can be particularly useful for learning
more about the personal characteristics of people who are currently in 
demand for the particular kind of job that you are considering. Job
postings and formal job descriptions typically focus on the skills,
knowledge, and experience that a candidate should have and reveal
little about the desired personal characteristics. But, as we have said
several times before, the majority of employers that we have surveyed
in many different fields have indicated that, when assessing candi-
dates for a job, they give highest priority to personal characteristics
that add value.
The precise definition of what these personal characteristics are
will vary with industries and employers. Informational interviews can
help you learn more about the specific characteristics that are most val-
ued for the kind of job you are considering. This knowledge will enable
you to decide which of your personal characteristics you should try to
feature in your Can-Do Portfolio.
Of course, if the personal characteristics that employers are look-
ing for are not a good description of the real you, and you hear this from
more than one person that you talk to, you may want to reconsider your
career choice. You will never be happy trying to be someone you are not.
You want to develop a portfolio that not only resonates with potential
employers but is also in tune with the real you!
What a Person Like You Should Know about Jobs 
You Are Exploring
The ideal informational interview is with a person who not only has
firsthand knowledge of the field and type of job you are exploring but is
also like you in some significant way. Maybe this person has already
made the kind of career shift you are now considering. Or she might
have had an education that is similar to yours. When there are signifi-
cant points of similarity between you and the person you are inter-
viewing, there is a particularly good chance that you will get insights
that are relevant to your situation.
48
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Feedback on Drafts of Your Can-Do Portfolio
If you have prepared a draft of your targeted Can-Do Portfolio, infor-
mational interviews are a great place to get low-risk feedback on the
appropriateness of the items you are thinking of including. The odds
are that the person you are interviewing will be intrigued by the fact
that you have a portfolio and will be interested in taking a look at it.
Further Leads
If the interview goes well, the person you are talking with is likely to
suggest further people you should talk to and may even provide you
with some job leads. You may also be able to get an insider’s view of the
next steps you should take to get the kind of job you are seeking.
HOW TO GET USEFUL INFORMATIONAL INTERVIEWS
To get good information about a job or field in which you are interest-
ed, you need to talk to people who are both knowledgeable about the
field or type of job that you wish to learn more about and willing to talk
to you.
The following are some strategies to set up informational inter-
views with people who can help you.
Think broadly about people who might be knowledgeable. The
kinds of people who might be particularly useful to interview are not
limited to current incumbents of the kind of job you are looking for.
Here are some other categories to consider:
I People who have entered the field you are interested in recently (in
the past couple of years) and who can tell you what it’s like
I Senior people who have pursued careers in the field and can provide
some perspective
I People who have recently left the field
I People who work with people in the field—consultants, suppliers, and
so on.
Contact the least intimidating people first. This step will get you
started. Comfortable initial contacts might include friends, extended
family members, parents’ friends, friends’ parents, professors, former
employers, teammates, classmates, alumni of schools you went to,
trusted colleagues, and so on. Your initial contacts may not be the peo-
ple you wish to interview but, instead, be people who can refer you to
people to interview.
Seek out friends of friends. When developing contacts, you should
know that your most promising leads are most likely to come from
friends of friends rather than from the people you actually know at the
beginning of your search. So, if you don’t know anyone in the field in
which you’d like to do an informational interview, that’s not a barrier.
The odds are that someone you know will know someone in your cho-
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
49

sen field. And most certainly a friend of a friend will know someone who
would be a good interview for you. The key thing is to get the word out
among people you trust that you are looking to do some informational
interviews in a particular field.
If a person you want to interview is a friend of a friend, your
chances of getting an interview are improved if your friend makes the
first contact. If this arrangement cannot be made, you will at least want
to refer to your friend when you initially contact this person.
Try writing first, then following up with a phone call. The most po-
lite and probably easiest approach to obtain an informational interview
is to write a letter (or send an e-mail) and then follow up with a phone
call. When you write, be sure to mention how you got that person’s
name—for example, “My uncle John Doe recommended that I write to
you.” Include your resume and mention that you are in the process of
learning more about careers in that person’s field. It doesn’t hurt to tell
him you understand that he has had a lot of interesting experience and
you would be very appreciative if he could spend a little time with you
sharing his thoughts on what it’s like to be in the career he is in. Most
people like to talk about themselves; let them know this will be an op-
portunity to do so.
When you do your follow-up phone call to ask for an appointment,
be sure to convey to this person that you’re not looking for him to spend
half a day with you. Tell him that you know he’s “incredibly busy,” and
so, any time he can give you would be “truly appreciated.” You might
say something like: “I know you’ve got a tough schedule. I’d love to meet
with you whenever it’s convenient for you, maybe for cup of coffee, or
whatever works best for you.”
Although it is preferable to meet in person, an informational in-
terview can take place over the phone.
Make an extra effort to meet with busy people. A busy person is an
active person who is typically “in the know” about the very things you
are most interested in. If the person you are trying to get an appoint-
ment with starts grumbling about her busy schedule, you can say some-
thing like: “You know, it’s busy people like you who can give me the best
insights into what it’s like to be in your field. I’d really love to talk to
you. I’m ready to meet you anywhere, or, if you’d prefer, we could talk
on the phone sometime.” If she still doesn’t seem at all intrigued or in-
terested, it’s best not to push it.
Tell that person you’re sorry she won’t be able to talk to you per-
sonally, but that you can certainly understand why this is the case,
given her busy schedule. You might then ask, “Is there someone else you
could recommend that I might talk to, so that I can learn more about
your field? Maybe someone in your organization?” You may be able to
salvage a lead out of this otherwise dying conversation! And, of course,
remember to thank the person in a gracious manner. You don’t want to
burn any bridges!
Try to interview someone in this field who is like you in some sig-
nificant way. As noted earlier, particularly useful are people with
whom you have something in common and who have been successful in
a field that you are interested in. The more similar the person is to you,
50
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

the better the read you will get on what it would be like for you to be in
this job or field.
Try to set up appointments with at least three different people. You
will want to make sure that you are not relying on just one person’s
opinion. For this reason it is a good idea to have informational inter-
views with at least three different people for each job area that you are
exploring.
Talk to people in the target organization last. If you are able to find
a contact at a place where you might really like to work, you may want
to wait a bit to arrange an interview. Information you gather from other
interviews along the way will enable you to ask just the right questions
of this insider.
Of course, if you only have time for one informational interview,
then your top choice should probably be someone from the target orga-
nization.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR AN INFORMATIONAL INTERVIEW
Although the purpose of an informational interview is to obtain infor-
mation, prior research and preparation are still essential. The more you
know going into an interview, the better your questions will be. And if
you have done your homework, you won’t have to burn up valuable time
asking basic questions about things you could have found out on your
own. In an informational interview you want to focus on picking up in-
sider information that you are unlikely to get from a printed source.
Remember, the better prepared you are for this interview, the bet-
ter the impression you are likely to make on a person who has the po-
tential to help you. The following are some ways to prepare for an in-
formational interview.
Do prior research on the person and the organization. Learn some-
thing about the person you are going to see, beginning with his or her
title. You also need to have information about the company or organi-
zation, along with its products or services, size, and place in the mar-
ket. You should not have to ask for information that is easily available
elsewhere. In particular, make sure you have studied the organization’s
Web site and that you have skimmed newspapers, weekly news maga-
zines, and trade journals for current information on the organization.
Prepare key questions ahead of time. Write down the key questions
you want to ask. It is not inappropriate to bring this list. In fact, it’s a
good way of letting the interviewee know that you have done your
homework and are well prepared. Later in this chapter, in the section
on conducting interviews, we will suggest some key questions you
might consider asking.
Be prepared to talk about yourself. While you will be responsible
for conducting the interview, the person with whom you are speaking
is, nevertheless, likely to ask you about yourself. In fact, it is a good idea
to talk a little bit at the beginning of the interview about your back-
ground and to articulate your current career goals. Having this know-
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
51

ledge will enable the person with whom you are talking to give you the
kind of information and advice that would be most helpful to you.
It is a good idea to practice giving a 2- to 3-minute summary of
your background and the career direction that you are now considering.
Learn how to get to the point quickly. The more you practice, the less
rambling and more focused you are likely to be.
Consider preparing a resume for this interview. Being able to bring
a good resume to informational interviews offers some advantages. You
can hand your resume to the people whom you are interviewing and in
a matter of seconds they can get a quick overview of your background.
And if the interview goes well, they can use this resume to describe you
to other people and maybe even send it to a job lead that occurs to
them. You might also ask them to give you feedback on your resume.
On the other hand, you may decide that you would prefer to create
a resume after an informational interview, so that you can use what
you learn to further target and hone your resume. If your interviewees
ask you for a copy of your resume, you can always tell them you are in
the process of reworking it and that you would be happy to send them
a copy. In fact, you can include a copy of your revised resume with your
thank-you note and mention that the interview gave you the precise in-
formation and insights you needed to get your resume into its current
form.
So, whether or not you prepare a resume in advance of an infor-
mational interview is up to you. But bear in mind, an informational in-
terview does give you an excellent opportunity to get constructive feed-
back on your resume.
Assemble a careful draft of your Can-Do Portfolio, if you are ready
to do so. As noted earlier, informational interviews can also be used to
get constructive feedback on drafts of your Can-Do Portfolio.
If you intend to bring a draft of your targeted portfolio to an infor-
mational interview, the items that you include should be carefully 
selected according to the criteria discussed in earlier chapters. The 
carrying case should be the one you intend to use on a job interview.
And the items should be well organized and have the look that you in-
tend to achieve when you present them in a job interview.
Showing up at an informational interview with a big stack of dis-
organized, loose items and asking, “So, which of these do you think I
should include in my portfolio?” would be inappropriate. For starters,
the person you are interviewing might not know much about career
portfolios, and so it would be unreasonable to expect her to show you
how to put together a good portfolio. More importantly, you would be
wasting that person’s time by having her sift through potential port-
folio items. What you are trying to do is get feedback on the impact of
your best effort at assembling a convincing portfolio.
So, if you wish to get useful feedback on the latest draft of your
Can-Do Portfolio, it should be as good as you can make it at that point
in time. And it should look exactly the way you think it should look if
you were taking it to a job interview.
52
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

HOW TO CONDUCT AN INFORMATIONAL INTERVIEW
It’s important that you have a clear idea of how to proceed when you
conduct an informational interview. If you go about the interview in a
well-organized fashion, you will give yourself your best chance of get-
ting what you want from the interview. And you will come across as
being very professional.
Creating a good impression can pay dividends. There are many
reasons why you should strive to make as good an impression as you
can, just as you would if you were interviewing for a job. Here are just
a few:
1. You have asked someone for a favor. You would certainly like this
person to remember that you were gracious and appreciative, as well
as enthusiastic, bright, and articulate;
2. The person might be thinking of hiring someone in the near future;
3. Your interviewee might be told the next day that his or her compa-
ny would like to hire someone;
4. A professional colleague of this person might ask if he or she can
recommend any good candidates for an opening;
5. You might work with this person in another capacity, as a client, cus-
tomer, or colleague, sometime in the future;
6. You might want this person to be someone you can turn to for future
advice.
The Stages of a Successful Informational Interview
To get the information that you need and to create a good impression
in the process of doing so, it is helpful if you think of an informational
interview in terms of the following four stages:
I Introductory stage
I Need-to-know stage
I Finding further leads stage
I Obliging stage
Note that we have underlined the first letter of the word that describes
each stage of the interview and that together the letters create the
acronym I.N.F.O. If you can remember that you are seeking I.N.F.O. in
an informational interview, this acronym will help you keep focused on
what you want to accomplish during each stage of a well-conducted in-
formational interview.
The following are some things to think about as you pilot the 
interview through each of the above stages, beginning with the intro-
ductory stage.
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
53

Introductory Stage
First impressions can be lasting impressions. Ordinarily, you
should dress and behave exactly as you would for a regular interview.
However, if the person suggests that you meet, not at his or her office,
but at home or at a coffee shop or other informal location, then it would
be acceptable to dress a bit more casually, but never in blue jeans,
shorts, sundresses, or other distinctly “play clothes.” The following are
some points to keep in mind during the introductory stage of the inter-
view:
I Thank the person for making time for you.
I Confirm the amount of time the person can give you, so that you don’t
overstay.
I Talk a little about your mutual contact, if a friend helped you set up
the interview.
I Explain why you asked for an interview. Give a short explanation of
who you are and why you want to talk to this person: “To determine
if this job/organization/field would be right for me. And to find out
what employers are looking for in candidates.”
I If you have prepared a resume, this is a good time to hand it to your
interviewee. Even if you’ve already sent the person one, you should
bring extra copies to the interview, as it might have been misplaced.
Your resume is particularly useful at this stage of the interview for
giving a quick summary of your background. Moreover, if the person
with whom you are speaking asks to keep your resume, it can serve
as a reminder of you and also be something he can show to others.
I Do not give the people you are interviewing the impression you are
looking for them to give you a job or help you get a job. If you do, they
will most likely resent the fact that you have, in effect, deceived
them. You said you wanted to get advice from them and now you’re
pestering them for a job! They know you’re looking for a new job; if
they want to mention some possibilities in their firm, fine. But let
them make the first move.
Need-to-Know Stage
Once you have completed the brief introductory phase, you will
want to spend the bulk of the time you have asking the interviewee
questions about what it’s really like to be in the job or organization or
career you’ve come to learn about. And, as noted earlier, you will want
to learn more about what employers are looking for when they inter-
view candidates for positions in this field.
As a result of your research, you may have developed some industry-
specific questions for your discussion. It is usually helpful, however, to
begin the discussion with a few broad or general questions. And, remem-
ber to be sensitive to the age and title of the person with whom you are
speaking. Certainly, you will ask different questions of a chief executive
officer than of a marketing assistant.
54
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Feel free to take notes. Writing down what they say usually flat-
ters interviewees. A tape recorder, however, might upset them and
could put a damper on candor. What follows are the specific topics you
will likely need to know.
Try to get a realistic job preview (RJP). Once you’ve covered the
general issues, you can tell the interviewee that you would like to get
as realistic a picture as possible of what it’s like to be in this job/orga-
nization/career. To begin to get a balanced view, you can ask questions
like the following:
I “What did you do this past week that you see as typical of a career in
this field?”
I “What do you wish you’d known more about before entering this 
career?”
I “What would you say are the two things that are really great about
this organization and what two things do you wish were different?”
Listen carefully for the real message, then probe with questions like:
“Can you say more about . . . ?”
You will also want to discount the biases of the person you are in-
terviewing. If this person was recently fired or demoted or is a com-
petitor of the organization you are trying to learn more about, certain
biases are likely to surface, despite the interviewee’s attempts to be ob-
jective.
The goal of an RJP is not to linger on the negatives but to get a bal-
anced picture so that you can make an informed career choice. And
please bear in mind that whatever job you take, you will have to, as the
expression goes, “dig some dirt.” In other words, you will always have to
do some unpleasant things you don’t really want to do, if you hope to be
successful.
One final point about RJPs: Learn as much as you can about the
“culture” of the organizations for which you think you might want to
work. By organizational culture, we mean the often tacit, but never-
theless very real, rules and shared understandings that seem to govern
behavior in a particular organization. You will want to know what sort
of behavior gets rewarded (risk-taking? conservative analysis? team ef-
forts? individual contributions?), and what kind of behavior is frowned
upon, despite what you might read in the promotional literature.
Ask questions that will tell you if the organizations you might
work for are the kinds of places you would like in terms of the “climate”
and “feel” you desire. People’s happiness in their jobs often has a lot to
do with the fact that they are comfortable with the culture of the orga-
nization they are working for. Yet this area is the one where job seek-
ers often do the least due diligence. Many job seekers get so focused on
things like salary and job content that they don’t make a sufficient 
effort to find out what the organization is like to work for day in and
day out.
Ask about the P.E.A.K.S. that employers are looking for in candi-
dates. The second major task in the need-to-know stage is to find out
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
55

what employers are looking for in candidates for the type of job you
have been discussing.
The P.E.A.K.S. acronym can be helpful here. Each letter of
P.E.A.K.S. suggests a question you might ask:
P: “What personal characteristics are highly valued by employers?”
E: “What experience is highly valued?”
A: “What kinds of accomplishments are employers looking for?”
K: “What knowledge is highly valued?”
S: “What skills are employers looking for?
It is helpful to know which of the above P.E.A.K.S. is most important to
employers in a specific field: Personal characteristics? Experience?
Skills? And why do employers feel this way?
As noted earlier, the answers to these questions will give you some
good guidelines for selecting items to include in your targeted Can-Do
Portfolio. And you can learn if there are areas where employers will
perceive you as weak or even unqualified, so that you can make some
improvements before actually applying for a job in this field.
Ask about which personal characteristics that add value are per-
ceived as key. As noted earlier, the P category, personal characteristics
that add value, is typically perceived as very important by employers.
However, the precise definition of what these characteristics are will
vary with industries and employers. So asking the interviewee ques-
tions like the following is important:
I “Which of the personal characteristics that you mentioned are most
important?”
I “What would you say are the top three personal characteristics that
add value in the eyes of potential employers?”
Ask “why” questions to understand the mind-set of the people in the
organization and field you are considering. You want to understand not
only what employers in a particular field and organization feel is im-
portant but also why they feel this way. The better you understand the
key assumptions and biases that shape the mind-set of the people you
will be showing your portfolio to, the easier it will be to select the right
items and present them in the right way.
Unless your interviewee happens to know the particular person
with whom you will be meeting for a job interview, there is no way to
know for sure what the particular biases of the individual will be. But
there do tend to be certain professional biases that practitioners are
likely to acquire in their field. Organizations can have a particular
corporate culture that is likely to influence the thinking of all of their
employees.
Rather than talking about mind-set, which might be an unfamil-
iar concept, the best way to learn more about the professional biases of
practitioners in a particular field and organization is to ask your inter-
viewee a lot of “why” questions. As your interviewee answers the vari-
56
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

ous P.E.A.K.S. questions, you can probe with follow-up “why” questions,
such as the following:
I “Why are people in this organization likely to give such importance to
this particular personal characteristic?”
I “Why do they feel that this kind of experience is particularly valuable
to have?”
Get feedback on your Can-Do Portfolio, if it is ready to show. A good
time to get feedback on the latest draft of your Can-Do Portfolio is after
you have covered the key RJP and P.E.A.K.S. questions. Both you and
your interviewee will have fresh in your minds the key things that em-
ployers in your intended field are likely to be seeking in candidates.
Provided that you are not asking your interviewee to sift through
a huge pile of items, you should feel comfortable showing your inter-
viewee a select group of items that you are considering for inclusion in
your portfolio. What you are hoping to get is feedback from someone
who is in a position to know about which items are likely to be most im-
pressive and which documents you should probably leave home.
Explain to your interviewee that in an actual job interview, you
would probably show only a few of these items. And then ask her which
would be the best ones to try to show. As noted earlier, the odds are that
your interviewee will be intrigued by the fact that you have a portfolio
and will be very interested in taking a look at it.
Get feedback on your resume, if it is ready to show. As with drafts
of your targeted portfolio, you will also want to get feedback on your re-
sume. The key issue is to find out if it is properly targeted. Your inter-
viewee is unlikely to want to spend a lot of time editing your resume
line by line, but you can ask questions like these:
I “Will this resume help me get job interviews in the field we have been
discussing?”
I “What sort of changes would you recommend that I make to improve
my chances of getting job interviews?”
Finding Further Leads Stage
Although it is important not to appear to be asking your intervie-
wee for a job, it is entirely appropriate for you to ask in an informa-
tional interview what the interviewee thinks your next steps should be.
You might ask:
I “Is there anyone else that you think I should talk to?”
I “How might I contact this person?”
I “Is this a person I should call directly, or would you like to speak to
him first?”
I “Can I use your name when contacting this person?”
Finally, without saying or even implying that you want this person
to either give you a job or even help you get a job, it is perfectly appro-
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
57

priate to ask for advice on how you should go about getting a job in this
area. Good questions might be:
I “Knowing what you know about me, what do you feel would be the
best way for me to get a job in this field?”
I “If you were me, what would you do next to get a job in this field?”
I “Is there something I should have asked you that I haven’t?”
Obliging Stage
As noted earlier, although you are not being evaluated with 
respect to a specific position, you can be sure that the person with
whom you are speaking is forming impressions of you. If you make a
good impression, this person might be able to help you sometime in the
future. To make a good impression, you do not want to just focus on sell-
ing yourself. You also want to make the other person feel appreciated by
you. The more this person feels appreciated by you, the more likely he
or she will be to help you in the future.
Here are some ways to make your interviewees feel appreciated:
I Be a good listener. Listen attentively, sympathetically, and don’t 
interrupt.
I Nod appreciatively when your interviewees think they’ve made a good
point. Nodding doesn’t mean you necessarily agree with them, it just
means you understand what they are saying and why they feel the
way they do.
I Show that you respect how important and busy they are by not over-
staying your welcome. Because you requested the meeting, it is your
responsibility to monitor the time. If you asked for a half hour, you
should point out that you are asking your final question as it gets
close to that time. If the person with whom you are speaking encour-
ages you to continue or says that she would be willing to talk for an-
other twenty minutes, thank her and continue. Otherwise, stick to
the original plan and take responsibility for bringing the interview to
a close: “This conversation has been most helpful to me, Ms. Smith. I
know you’ve got a lot of important things to attend to. Thank you
very much for your time.”
I Continue to be obliging after the interview. If you’ve been polite, lis-
tened carefully to everything that has been said, and been appropri-
ately appreciative along the way, the chances are you will get some
very useful information during the interview. You will also be well on
your way to making a friend who could prove very useful to you. So
it is important to keep in touch.
I Write a thank-you note immediately after the informational inter-
view. If you can, pick up on something they said or advised you to do
and tell them how you intend to follow through.
I Write thank-you notes when you get a job. Your contact should not
cease with a post-interview thank-you note. It is courteous, and can
also be helpful, to keep the people you meet informed of your
58
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

progress, by writing to let them know when you find a new job. You
may write a handwritten note if you wish, but make sure the tone is
professional. Include, if you can, something that they said or did that
helped you in the process. When someone has assisted you, he or she
becomes a stakeholder in your success and will, except in rare in-
stances, be delighted and interested to know what happens to you.
I Keep in touch periodically. Most everyone has something they are
passionate about. Keep a file in which you note next to each inter-
viewee’s name at least one strong interest that he has, at work or in
his personal life. In the future, whenever you come across something
that might be of interest to people on your list, let them know about
the article, event, or whatever. The best way to maintain a network
of useful contacts is to make yourself useful to others. You don’t want
to be in the position of only calling people when you need a favor. The
more reciprocal the relationship, the stronger the link. Of course, you
don’t want to overdo this, either. A periodic note is a lot more power-
ful than “weekly updates”!
FINAL THOUGHTS
The above suggestions are just that—suggestions. It would certainly be
unwise to blindly follow any predetermined outline. If you have a clear
idea of what you would like to get out of the interview and are mindful
of the I.N.F.O. outline, you can feel free to capture the moment and “go
with the flow,” when the interviewee feels like getting expansive on a
particular topic. Since you know what you want to achieve, you will be
able to use appropriate junctures to return to the key questions you
want to ask.
In the appendix we have included an Informational Interview 
Debriefing Form. We recommend that you review this form as you 
prepare for doing an informational interview and that you fill it in after
the interview to summarize the key things you learned about the job
you are considering. Whether or not you choose to use this form, you
should bring your own specific questions to the interview and take
notes on the key points your interviewee makes.
Chapter 4: Using Informational Interviews to Perfect Your Portfolio
59

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

5
Creating Resumes That Work 
with Your Portfolio
OVERVIEW
In this chapter we will show you how to create a P.E.A.K.S. resume that
not only sets you up to show key items from your portfolio during an in-
terview but also improves your chances of getting that interview in the
first place.
Specifically we will review:
I What you should be able to achieve with your resume
I How a P.E.A.K.S. resume format can help you achieve these goals
I How to create a “master resume” that puts the right stuff at your fin-
gertips
I How to target your resume for going after a particular job
If you are wondering whether you should put in the extra effort to
create a P.E.A.K.S. resume, here are some things to consider.
Special bonus: You can get more job interviews with a P.E.A.K.S. re-
sume. The fact that a P.E.A.K.S. resume format is unusually effective
for getting job interviews was a discovery that occurred during the de-
velopment and testing of our portfolio system.
61
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

As we began showing people how to create and then use a Can-Do
Portfolio that demonstrates P.E.A.K.S., we were often asked what kind
of resume would work best with this portfolio. We knew that a tradi-
tional resume would be perfectly adequate, and so for a while we sug-
gested that our portfolio clients simply use any of the traditional ap-
proaches for creating their resume.
But as we thought about it more, we realized that you could use
P.E.A.K.S. subheadings in your resume to prompt questions about ac-
tivities associated with items in your portfolio. And so we developed a
P.E.A.K.S. resume format that was designed to create openings to show
portfolio items. It worked. But it did something else as well. Our clients
told us they felt they got more job interviews when they used a proper-
ly targeted P.E.A.K.S. resume.
You can use the work you’ve already done for your portfolio. As we
will see in this chapter, the system for creating a P.E.A.K.S. resume
parallels the process used for creating a Can-Do Portfolio. This means
you can use whatever research you’ve already done in connection with
putting together a Can-Do Portfolio.
If you are in a big rush to get a resume together, you can take a
shortcut. You are most likely to create your best resume if you follow
the recommendations in this chapter. But if you are in a huge rush, you
can study the examples of targeted resumes in Part 2, and then do your
best to try to emulate what you see there for your own resume.
RESUMES: WHAT THEY ARE AND WHY THEY ARE IMPORTANT
A resume is typically a one- to two-page summary of the highlights of
a person’s education, work experience, and career-relevant nonwork ex-
perience. As noted in the previous chapter, you can use a resume in an
informational interview to give the person from whom you are seeking
advice a quick overview of your background. But the key use for a re-
sume is in connection with going after a particular job.
When you are seeking a job, the fundamental purpose of a resume
is to help you get job interviews. Once you’ve made it to a job interview,
a resume can also serve as a starting point for reviewing your creden-
tials for a particular job. And after this interview is over, your inter-
viewer may very well use your resume as a quick way of describing you
to other people in the organization. So having a resume that’s just right
can make a big difference.
Your resume can create opportunities to show your portfolio. In ad-
dition to the traditional reasons for putting together a well-thought-out
resume, here’s another thing to consider. If you have created a targeted
portfolio that you would like to use during a job interview, handing your
interviewer a resume that highlights key things about you that you can
support with items from your portfolio is likely to create opportunities
for you to show some of these items.
A good resume directs the reader’s attention to your key qualifica-
tions for a job. Clearly, what you put in a resume is very important. You
will want to include the things that are most likely to receive favorable
attention from a prospective employer. But it’s not just a matter of find-
62
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

ing the right things to include; it’s also important that you properly di-
rect people’s attention to the very things you want people to know about
you. And do so quickly.
Typically, when a person first receives your resume, you will not be
there to explain it, and the recipient will spend no more than ten sec-
onds looking at it. You can’t assume that if something that you think is
very important is included in your resume, the recipient will see it. Nor
is it reasonable to assume that just because you’ve listed something,
the reader will understand its relevance to the job you are seeking. For
example, listing the title and duties of a position you once had does not
guarantee that the reader will instantly recognize the key skills you
displayed in this job. And yet, the skills you used in this job may be just
the skills the recipient of your resume is looking for.
Your resume will be most effective if the “format” of your resume—
the organization and arrangement of the information it includes—di-
rects the reader’s attention to key things you have that a prospective
employer is hoping to find in a job candidate. A P.E.A.K.S. resume for-
mat can do just that.
THE BENEFITS OF USING A P.E.A.K.S. RESUME
Definition of a P.E.A.K.S. resume. A P.E.A.K.S. resume is basically any
resume that categorizes key items according to the kind of personal
characteristic, experience, accomplishment, knowledge, or skill they ex-
emplify and is achieved by using P.E.A.K.S. subheadings.
Instead of just listing the things you did within a job, in a
P.E.A.K.S. resume you would organize what you have done according to
the P.E.A.K.S. categories. If, for example, the job required the mastery
of certain computer skills, you would list the particular computer sys-
tems you used under the subheading “Computer Skills.” If the job also
required you to work directly with customers, you would list this skill
under the subheading “Customer Service Skills.” The key things you
achieved within a job would be listed under the subheading “Accom-
plishments.” Special knowledge of a market or industry would be so
identified under the heading “Knowledge.” Each of these subheadings
would be listed under the job where these P.E.A.K.S. were developed or
exemplified.
To get a quick idea of what P.E.A.K.S. resumes look like, see Part
2 and examine some of the examples there of P.E.A.K.S. resumes.
You can, of course, use any resume format you like to pursue job
interviews. And there is no one format you must use for your resume in
order to introduce your portfolio. We would suggest, however, that you
are likely to get your best results if you use a P.E.A.K.S. resume. Here’s
why.
A P.E.A.K.S. resume format can be used to highlight desired quali-
fications. In a properly targeted P.E.A.K.S. resume, the subheadings
that specify particular P.E.A.K.S. would be determined not just by what
you have done but also by your best guess as to what the prospective
employer to whom you will be sending your resume will be seeking in
a candidate.
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
63

So if, for example, the person who will be receiving your resume is
likely to believe that multitasking skills are very desirable in a job can-
didate, and you have demonstrated these skills in a particular job, you
would include the subheading “Multitasking Skills” beneath your list-
ing of this particular job. You could then list several activities or pro-
jects that required multitasking skills.
By making connections very explicit, P.E.A.K.S. resumes leave less
to chance. You might say, isn’t it obvious that a particular job or project
requires certain kinds of skills or knowledge? Maybe to you, but the
person who reads your resume might not make the connection between
what you did and the key P.E.A.K.S. that are being sought in a job can-
didate. Remember, the recipient of your resume is unlikely to spend
more than a few seconds reviewing its contents.
By making very explicit the connections between what you have
done and the key P.E.A.K.S. that are being sought in job candidates,
you do not leave it to the reader’s imagination to determine the possi-
ble relevance of items in your resume to the job under consideration.
For this approach to be successful, of course, you need to have done
some research and have a clear idea as to the desired P.E.A.K.S. for this
particular job.
Extra work is required on your part to categorize key items in your
resume according to P.E.A.K.S. they exemplify, but the effort is worth
it. A properly targeted P.E.A.K.S. resume leaves it less to chance that
the reader will understand why the skills and experiences you listed in
your resume make you a strong candidate for the job under considera-
tion.
P.E.A.K.S. resumes are particularly useful for identifying transfer-
able skills. People who are attempting to make a substantial shift in
the direction of their career are under a particular burden to make the
case that some of the things they learned and achieved in their previ-
ous jobs are relevant to the new field they wish to enter. Adding to this
challenge is the fact that prospective employers often do not know
enough about what was required in a career-switcher’s previous jobs to
quickly understand that these jobs involved important transferable
skills. A P.E.A.K.S. format can highlight useful transferable skills that
a prospective employer might otherwise miss in a more traditional re-
sume.
P.E.A.K.S. resumes are easy to speed-read. Recipients of resumes
typically get annoyed when a resume contains a tangle of information
that is hard to slug through. They want to get the key points quickly so
that they can decide whether or not this person is, in their opinion,
worth talking to.
Because a P.E.A.K.S. resume uses headings that specify the rele-
vance of key items, it’s an “easy read.” The format enables readers to get
the important points quickly. And because a P.E.A.K.S. resume is easy
to digest, its length can be extended to more than one page.
P.E.A.K.S. resumes can be constructed to create openings to show
portfolio items. You can use P.E.A.K.S. headings in your resume to
draw attention to things you have in your portfolio that interviewers
are likely to be interested in learning more about. Using P.E.A.K.S.
64
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

headings is likely to prompt questions that will give you openings to
show key portfolio items that give tangible evidence that you, indeed,
have these desired P.E.A.K.S.
P.E.A.K.S. resumes get noticed—in a positive way. Using a
P.E.A.K.S. format gives your resume a distinct look that improves the
chances that it will get noticed in a stack of traditional resumes. It’s dif-
ferent, but not in a silly way like, say, using shocking purple paper that
will definitely get noticed but is likely to achieve nothing more than
making the print much harder to read!
The P.E.A.K.S. resume format is distinctly different in a way that
is helpful to the reader. The extra effort you put into highlighting your
P.E.A.K.S. is effort the reader does not have to make to figure out just
what it is you have that might be relevant to the job under considera-
tion.
As we noted at the start of this section, you can certainly use any
resume format you like to pursue jobs. But we do believe that a
P.E.A.K.S. resume format works best in all phases of the job-seeking
process. Our clients and students keep telling us that when they use a
P.E.A.K.S. resume they get more job interviews and during the inter-
view they often get compliments on their resume, such as, “Hey, this is
great! Where did you learn to do this resume?”
In the following sections we will show you how you can create a
P.E.A.K.S. resume that works.
CREATING A P.E.A.K.S. MASTER RESUME
The actual resume you use for a particular job should be a succinct syn-
opsis of your experience and education, presented in a format that
highlights the very things that are most likely to receive favorable at-
tention from the people who will be receiving your resume. This would
be your “targeted” resume, and you should expect over the course of
time to target your resume in many different ways, as you take aim at
many different audiences.
One of the problems associated with creating targeted resumes is
that typically you are not given a lot of time to put them together. When
people ask you for a copy of your resume, you don’t want to take a long
time getting it to them, as this might suggest you are not particularly
interested in the opportunity they have in mind for you. You could send
along a copy of an old resume, but this may not include your latest in-
formation, and it’s not likely to be properly targeted for pursuing a new
opportunity.
Create a master resume that you can cut and paste. So that you are
always ready to put together a great resume on short notice, it’s ex-
tremely helpful if you can have on file a periodically updated master re-
sume that lists everything you might want to consider when creating a
targeted resume. This master list becomes a resource from which you
can select particular items for inclusion in a resume that is targeted at
obtaining a particular job or work assignment.
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
65

If you save this master resume in your computer as a template,
you will have the ability to quickly create a shorter, targeted resume
without danger of losing the original. To create a targeted resume, you
would simply make a copy of your master resume, delete the items you
don’t want to use, and then edit the rest.
Use the P.E.A.K.S. categories for your master resume. The creation
of a targeted portfolio will go a lot faster if the things you want to use
from your master resume are already in a P.E.A.K.S. format. Filing the
items in your master resume according to the P.E.A.K.S. they exempli-
fy also makes it easier to quickly identify the best things to use for a
targeted resume.
In early drafts of your master resume, stress length, not strength. It
doesn’t matter if you include marginal things in your master resume
that ultimately prove to be weak items. This isn’t a resume you will
show to anybody; it’s just a file that itemizes things you might conceiv-
ably use. Your goal should be to make your master resume as complete
as possible, so that when it comes time to pick and choose items for a
targeted resume, you will know that you have considered everything
that might work.
Use the items in your Master Portfolio collection for inspiration.
The items that you have collected for your Master Portfolio will remind
you of things you have done that should be included in your master re-
sume. If you have already categorized these items according to the
P.E.A.K.S. they best exemplify, that too will be helpful, as it will suggest
which of the P.E.A.K.S. subheadings the activities associated with
these documents should be listed under.
SUGGESTED CONTENT FOR YOUR P.E.A.K.S. MASTER RESUME
A good way to begin putting together your master resume is to keep it
simple and use the following basic categories that are found in most re-
sumes:
I Name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address
I Overview
I Work experience
I Education
I Additional information
I References
You can change these categories any time you want, but you’ve got to
start somewhere.
When creating a rough first draft, do not be concerned with tidi-
ness and getting everything just right. The important thing is to get
something down on paper that you can develop and change as more
ideas occur to you.
Please note, too, that if you are in a field that uses a curriculum
vitae format for resumes, you will be expected to provide a complete
66
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

record of all of your professional activities, including a list of all of your
publications, major presentations, and professional honors.
As we review what should go into each of the above categories,
we’ll point out some of the places where you can use P.E.A.K.S. sub-
headings to highlight your key qualifications.
Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-Mail Address
Typically the name you use on your resume should include your full
first name. If you like to use a shortened version of your first name in
formal situations, you can use this on your resume, but obvious nick-
names should be avoided. One of the authors uses Frank instead of his
full first name, Franklin, for his resume. But he does not include nick-
names that his friends from school still use, which he prefers to leave
to your imagination.
You should use an address where you are easily reachable and
want to be reached. If you have a job and don’t wish to be contacted at
work (which is usually the case), you can use your home address.
If you are a student and have a campus address that does not
apply during vacations or after graduation, you should give both a col-
lege and a permanent address. You might use your parents’ home ad-
dress, a post office box, or the address of someone who will know where
to contact you at all times. Also, always include phone numbers with
area codes. If you have an e-mail address, you will most likely want to
include this information as well.
Overview
The Overview should include both your “Professional Objective” and a
brief “Profile” that gives top billing to your “personal characteristics
that add value,” along with other P.E.A.K.S. that prospective employers
are likely to consider important.
If you are currently considering more than one career direction,
you would do well to develop several different versions of your overview
statement. This way you will have a useful draft on file to work with
when it comes time to create a targeted resume for one of the areas you
are considering.
A professional objective can be one of the most important parts of
a resume and should not be overlooked. It informs potential employers
that you have a focus and are moving in a certain direction, states your
work preference(s), and serves as a focal point for reviewing and ana-
lyzing your resume. It should be brief and clearly stated.
Your profile gives you the opportunity to present your strengths at
the very beginning of your resume. This is a good place to mention sev-
eral key P.E.A.K.S. you have that are likely to be considered particu-
larly desirable by recipients of your resume. And most importantly, you
should include here personal characteristics you have that prospective
employers are seeking in candidates. As noted earlier, our research in-
dicates that the majority of employers put particular emphasis on per-
sonal characteristics of candidates. Your informational interviews
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
67

should give you a good indication of the particular personal character-
istics that recipients of your resume will value most highly in a candi-
date.
You can combine your “profile” with your “professional objective”
statement, as is done in the following example:
Overview
A well-prepared professional with solid academic background and experi-
ence in marketing, seeking a marketing management position where he
can make a difference. A team player who is creative, enthusiastic, and
likes to get things done. Strong background in sports marketing.
Alternatively, you can list “Professional Objective” and “Profile” as sep-
arate subheadings under the general heading, “Overview”:
Overview
Professional Objective: Professional sales representative with a diverse
range of successful sales experience, seeking institutional manager posi-
tion within the pharmaceutical industry.
Profile: Enthusiastic, dedicated, persistent, able to build lasting relation-
ships. A leader who is a team player.
Further examples of overview statements can be found in the resumes
included in Part 2.
Work Experience
You might call this section “Professional Experience,” if you have been
working as a professional or your work experience has been preparing
you for a professional career. Bear in mind that the term “professional”
is used pretty broadly these days. Work that was once considered cleri-
cal, for example, can now be referred to as professional.
Many students have limited paid work experience but have been
involved in volunteer work, internships, practicums, student teaching,
or other forms of student work such as being an advertising director for
the school newspaper. These experiences should be included in the re-
sume if they involve P.E.A.K.S. that would be important to a potential
employer. It is particularly important that candidates for teaching po-
sitions include their student teaching experience in their resumes.
Homemakers and others who have taken time off from a “paid
work career” can list volunteer activities here, under “Work Experi-
ence,” or under a separate “Community Service” heading. Whatever you
decide to do with your headings, the most important thing to remember
when first putting together a master resume is to list these unpaid
work activities somewhere, as they give ample opportunity for demon-
strating P.E.A.K.S. that employers are seeking in candidates.
List all work experience in reverse chronological order. In other
words, list the most recent things you did first.
Each job or other work experience you have had can be listed using
the following format, which highlights your key P.E.A.K.S. Wherever
you see italicized font, you would replace it with the relevant informa-
68
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

tion. So, for example, in the first line, you would type in the actual job
title or role you had, but do not preface this with Title or Role. The
phrases below in bold font, such as “Experience,” should be typed on
the resume as subheadings for P.E.A.K.S. categories.
Title or Role
Name of organization where you worked
Location; Dates of employment
Personal Characteristics Demonstrated:
I Insert short phrases and adjectives that describe key personal charac-
teristics you demonstrated.
I Use bullets if necessary.
Experience:
I Insert brief description of valuable experience that you gained from
this job.
I Use bullets, if necessary.
Accomplishments:
I Insert a brief description of important accomplishments.
I Use bullets, if necessary.
Knowledge:
I Insert a brief description of useful knowledge gained.
I Use bullets, if necessary.
Skills:
I Insert a brief description of important skills.
I Use bullets, if necessary.
Since your personal characteristics that add value are featured
prominently in your initial overview, you will most likely want to focus
on your other P.E.A.K.S. in the “Work Experience” section of your re-
sume. In particular, you will probably want to focus on your skills and
accomplishments. You do not have to include all categories of P.E.A.K.S.
for each work experience that you list, nor should you.
The P.E.A.K.S. subheadings might include modifiers to highlight
the specific type of P.E.A.K.S. that were demonstrated in a job. For ex-
ample, you might use “Customer Service Skills,” if that is a good de-
scription of the kind of skills that are listed under this subheading. If
you use subheadings that have modifiers, you can have more than one
subheading for any of the P.E.A.K.S. categories. So in addition to “Cus-
tomer Service Skills,” you could also use “Computer Skills” for the same
job, if you had something to list under each of these categories.
A good way to get a feel for how P.E.A.K.S. subheadings might be
used in a resume is to take a look at the examples of P.E.A.K.S. resumes
in Part 2.
Education
This category is particularly important if you have not had a great deal
of work experience. As with your work experiences, you should list your
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
69

educational achievements in reverse chronological order, so that your
most recent degree or certificate is listed first.
Include your degree (AA, BS, BA, MBA, MA, etc.), college or uni-
versity attended, date of graduation, minors or concentrations, and any
special workshops, seminars, related coursework, or senior projects. A
grade point average (G.P.A.) of higher than a 3.0 (either overall G.P.A.
or G.P.A. in major) might also be noted here.
You might use “Knowledge” or “Skills” subheadings to highlight
areas of academic concentration and particular skills developed.
Additional Information
This category is useful for displaying information that doesn’t fit in any
other category. Although Interests, Computer Knowledge, and Activi-
ties can be separate categories, especially if you have items that would
be included under these that are very strong, alternatively, items that
would otherwise be listed under these categories can be listed here.
Languages spoken, or any extra, relevant bit of information can also be
placed here.
Again, you can use P.E.A.K.S. subheadings for each of the things
listed under “Additional Information.”
References
It’s a good idea to start creating a list of people you might want to use
as references. In particular, you will want to identify people who can
and will vouch for your key P.E.A.K.S.
TARGETING YOUR P.E.A.K.S. RESUME
A targeted resume is intended to appeal to a particular audience. When
seeking a specific job, the target audience for your resume would be the
people who review the resumes of candidates for this job.
If you use a P.E.A.K.S. format for your resume, the targeting
process should focus on including the particular P.E.A.K.S. that would
most impress your target audience.
When used in connection with seeking a particular job, a targeted
P.E.A.K.S. resume is really a can-do resume, in that it gives the reasons
why you “can do” the key things that the job under consideration re-
quires.
What follows are steps you can take to target an effective
P.E.A.K.S. resume.
The Ten-Step Process for Targeting a P.E.A.K.S. Resume
1. Describe the opportunity you are pursuing in realistic terms.
2. Identify the P.E.A.K.S. that the people who will be interviewing you
are likely to be seeking in candidates.
3. Create an “Overview” section that (a) clearly defines what you are
seeking in the context of the targeted opportunity and (b) presents
70
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

the “best you” in terms of the P.E.A.K.S. you have that are desired
by employers.
4. Select from your master resume the things from your “Work Expe-
rience,” “Education,” and “Additional Information” sections that
will give a picture of you that (a) is sufficiently complete and (b)
presents your most relevant P.E.A.K.S.
5. Decide on an overall plan and layout for organizing the above ma-
terial for your resume.
6. Use P.E.A.K.S. subheadings to demonstrate that you have desired
P.E.A.K.S.
7. Edit for language, length, and visual presentation.
8. Get feedback on your resume prior to distributing it.
9. Choose references who can verify your key P.E.A.K.S. And brief
them on the P.E.A.K.S. employers are seeking in candidates.
10. Prepare cover letters that refer to key P.E.A.K.S.
Each of these steps is discussed in the paragraphs below.
Step 1: Describing the Opportunity You Are Pursuing 
in Realistic Terms
The more accurately you are able to describe the real responsibilities,
activities, and goals associated with a job or promotion, the easier it
will be to identify the things that should be included in your targeted
resume.
You can, and in fact should, use the same statement or notes you
used for targeting your portfolio to target your resume.
You don’t have to write a long essay on a job to prepare a targeted
resume. A short paragraph will do, so long as you are catching the
essence of what the job really requires. In fact, you don’t have to write
anything at all, though keeping some notes is helpful. The important
point is that you understand what the incumbent of the job has to be
able to do to be considered successful.
Use Can-Do Portfolio research methods. To generate an accurate
description of the opportunity you are pursuing, you can use the same
research methods that are used for targeting a Can-Do Portfolio:
I Look for a job description.
I Get a realistic picture of the job.
I Play detective.
I Do informational interviews.
I Do as much research as you can.
You can find further descriptions and explanations of the above
techniques in Chapter 3.
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
71

Step 2: Identifying the P.E.A.K.S. That Interviewers Believe 
Are Most Important
Once you have a clear idea as to what the job under consideration re-
ally requires, the next step is to identify the particular P.E.A.K.S. that
the people who will receive your resume are likely to be seeking in can-
didates. The real issue here is not what you would think is important,
but what they think is important.
If you already have a list of desired P.E.A.K.S. that you prepared
in connection with targeting your portfolio, you can use that list here.
If not, you can use the techniques reviewed in Chapter 3 to generate a
useful list. Be sure to identify the “personal characteristics” that are
highly valued.
Step 3: Creating a Targeted Overview for Your Resume
As noted earlier, the “Overview” section in your resume should include
both your professional objective and a brief profile that gives top billing
to your personal characteristics that add value, along with other
P.E.A.K.S. that prospective employers are likely to consider important.
Because it goes at the top of your resume, right after name and ad-
dress information, your overview is your opportunity to make a good
first impression. It should clearly define the kind of opportunity you are
seeking, stated in a way that makes you seem appropriate for the job
you are going after. And, equally important, your “Overview” section
should give a quick synopsis of the P.E.A.K.S. you have that will likely
impress the recipient of this resume, giving particular emphasis to your
personal characteristics that add value.
If you have created a draft of your overview for your master re-
sume, you can rework and refine it in light of the P.E.A.K.S. that you
believe are considered most important for the particular job you are
seeking.
Step 4: Identifying the Key Things to Include 
from Your Master Resume
If your master resume is in a computer file, you will have the ability to
quickly create a draft of your targeted resume by (1) copying your mas-
ter resume and pasting it into a new document, (2) deleting the items
you don’t want to use, and then (3) editing the rest. Here are some
guidelines for identifying what to include in your targeted resume.
Include activities that give evidence of desired P.E.A.K.S. As you
review your work experience, education, and other activities, use your
understanding of desired P.E.A.K.S. as your guideline for selecting the
particular things to include in your targeted resume.
Make sure your resume is sufficiently complete. Certain things are
expected in a resume such as relevant work experience and at least
something about formal education. If you are using a curriculum vitae
format for your resume, you will be expected to give a complete record
of all of your professional activities, including a list of all of your publi-
cations, major presentations, and professional honors.
72
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

If you are a student seeking a first full-time job, the recipient of
your resume will expect your resume to be mostly focused on formal ed-
ucation, school activities, and work experience acquired through stu-
dent types of work, which could include jobs held while at school, in-
ternships, and summer jobs.
On the other hand, if it has been a while since you have been in
school, the recipient of your resume is likely to be more interested in
what you have done since you were in school. If there have been long
periods of time when you haven’t held a job or been otherwise engaged
in paid work, you should be sure to include your volunteer activities,
and present them in a way that demonstrates desired P.E.A.K.S.
As we will see in the next section, you can also divert attention
from gaps in your employment history by using a “functional” format
for the overall plan of your resume.
Consider portfolio documents you would like to present. In addi-
tion to reviewing your master resume for useful material, you would do
well to also review the key documents in your Can-Do Portfolio so that
you can be sure to include in your targeted resume activities associat-
ed with documents you would like to present during an interview.
Step 5: Deciding on an Overall Plan for Your Resume
There is no one best way to organize a targeted resume. The major
headings that you decide to use, such as “Professional Experience” and
“Community Service,” and the decision as to whether the overall plan
will be chronological or functional will depend upon a number of fac-
tors, including your objectives, the material you would like to present,
and your personal preferences. Here are some things to consider as you
make these decisions.
Name and address information should go first, followed by the
overview. A standard practice is to place name and address informa-
tion right at the top of a resume, followed by some form of overview. You
would be wise to follow this practice.
The reader of your resume needs to know within a couple of sec-
onds the basics of who you are, what you are seeking, and the essence
of why you may be well qualified for the job or position. These are the
things that recipients of resumes typically want to know first, so that
they can decide whether or not it’s worth their time to read the rest.
And if they can’t find this basic information quickly, they very well may
not read the rest.
Consider whether a chronological or functional overall plan works
best for you. The material in most resumes is organized according to a
chronological or functional overall plan, or some combination of the
two. Since P.E.A.K.S. subheadings can be used within either organiza-
tional scheme, you can use either approach and still have a P.E.A.K.S.
resume. But it is important, nevertheless, to consider the relative mer-
its of these two organizational plans for your own situation.
A chronological resume typically lists jobs and other work experi-
ence you’ve had in reverse chronological order, beginning with the most
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
73

recent job you have had first. Educational achievements are also listed
in reverse order, so that your most recent degree is again listed first.
A functional resume, on the other hand, clumps jobs and other work
experiences according to the different functional areas they represent.
If, for example, you have had jobs in both the public relations and sales
fields, in a functional resume you might use these functional areas as
“Public Relations Experience” and “Sales Experience” headings and list
your work experience according to the appropriate category.
A functional resume has the advantage of quickly communicating
to the reader a person’s general areas of expertise. People who have been
out of the workforce for long periods of time might use a functional for-
mat to direct attention away from these gaps in their employment his-
tory. And people seeking to make substantial shifts in their career often
use functional resumes to highlight the basic skills they have that could
be readily applied to their new field, even though these skills were de-
veloped in an unrelated field. A chronological format, on the other hand,
enables people who have steadily worked their way up in a particular
field to underscore the continuity and progress of their work career.
It is beyond the scope of this book to explore the many other con-
siderations that might go into deciding whether to use a chronological
or functional format for your own resume. If you are struggling with
this decision, consult one of the many how-to books on creating resumes
that will tell you all you need to know to decide whether you should use
a chronological or functional format.
Develop major headings that are good descriptions of content areas.
The nature of the material that you have decided to include in your tar-
geted resume and the overall plan that you have chosen (chronological,
functional, or a hybrid of the two) can be used to determine the major
headings for the content areas of your resume. If you are having trou-
ble coming up with headings you like, reviewing the headings used in
the examples of targeted resumes included in Part 2 should give you
some inspiration.
Step 6: Using P.E.A.K.S. Subheadings for Items You Want to Feature
P.E.A.K.S. subheadings enable you to highlight the elements that are
likely to impress the recipients of your resume. As noted above,
P.E.A.K.S. subheadings can be used within either a chronological or
functional resume.
Here are some guidelines you can follow.
Use P.E.A.K.S. subheadings throughout your resume. Earlier in
this chapter we explained how to create effective P.E.A.K.S. subhead-
ings for your work experience. You can and should also use P.E.A.K.S.
subheadings under all of the major headings of your resume. The tar-
geted resumes in Part 2 give nice examples of how this can be done.
Refine the P.E.A.K.S. headings from your master resume. If you
have created a master resume that already has P.E.A.K.S. subhead-
ings, these subheadings provide a good first draft for the headings you
might use in your targeted resume. But once you are able to learn more
about which P.E.A.K.S. are considered most important for the particu-
74
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

lar job you are now pursuing, you should take another look at the sub-
headings you have created.
You may wish to add modifiers to your P.E.A.K.S. subheadings so
that these headings describe the specific kinds of P.E.A.K.S. being
sought in candidates. If, for example, a prospective employer is looking
for someone who has superb people skills, and you have done work or
performed a service that required particular finesse in working with
people, list these as “People Skills” rather than just calling them “Skills.”
Use P.E.A.K.S. subheadings to create opportunities to show your
portfolio. Headings that accurately describe desired P.E.A.K.S. are
likely to prompt questions that will give you opportunities to show doc-
uments in your portfolio that give evidence of these P.E.A.K.S.
Step 7: Editing for Language, Length, and Visual Presentation
Here are some things to think about as you edit your targeted resume
for its look and language.
Use language that recipients of your resume will understand and
like. Do not use jargon that the readers of your resume are unlikely to
understand. And try to use terms that they will like. For example, if the
people who will be reviewing your resume are looking for aspiring lead-
ers, use leader instead of manager and led rather than managed when
describing your supervision of activities.
Check for correctness of spelling, usage, and grammar. Mis-
spellings and poorly constructed sentences create a very negative im-
pression. Recipients of resumes have very little patience for resumes
that are poorly written, and they are likely to have even less patience
for authors of such resumes. Remember that computer programs de-
signed to catch spelling, grammar, and usage errors do not always iden-
tify every mistake. If possible, ask someone who is a good writer or ed-
itor to proofread your resume.
Use terms, fonts, and a format that computer programs will prop-
erly read and print. Keep in mind that resumes are often scanned first
by computers for key words and phrases. So be sure to use correct terms
when describing the kind of job you are looking for, and when you are
describing your P.E.A.K.S. try to use words and phrases that comput-
ers are likely to have been programmed to pick up. Make sure that you
use fonts that computers are likely to be able to “read.”
When you e-mail a resume that is in a word processing format,
such as Microsoft Word, the document may not print exactly as you sent
it. For example, a one-page resume that is forwarded in a word pro-
cessing format may come out as more than one page when the recipient
prints it. For this reason you may decide to e-mail your resume as an
attachment in a PDF (Portable Document Format).
Do not exceed two pages. You may have heard that resumes should
only be one page. The real issue with a resume is not its length but its
perceived ease of reading. Since a P.E.A.K.S. resume can be read quick-
ly, you can extend its length to two pages. You never want to leave out
vital information that would be supportive of your candidacy.
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
75

If your resume is in the form of a curriculum vitae, there is no limit
to its length. Since a “C.V.” is meant to include all of your publications,
presentations, and professional honors, the game here, in fact, is to
make it as long as possible.
If you have been out of school for some time, you are likely to want
to use both sides of a page. You should probably use only one side of a
page if you are fresh out of school, but do not use narrow margins and
miniscule print to fit everything in.
Whether you use one or two pages, be sure to include lots of “white
space” so that the text does not appear to be too crowded.
Be consistent. Make sure that whatever approach you use for pre-
senting your information, you keep with this approach throughout your
entire resume. The order in which you present information should be
consistent. And visual things like patterns of spacing and fonts used for
highlighting should not vary.
Make certain that your resume is visually appealing without being
flashy. If you wish to make a “statement” with your resume, do it with
words, not with flashy paper and unusual fonts. Use high-quality paper
in white, off-white, or other conservative colors. Use standard fonts that
are easy to read. Avoid smudges when printing copies. Have the final
version of your resume professionally reproduced, if that’s what it takes
to get the copies looking right.
Step 8: Getting Feedback on Your Resume Prior
to Distributing It—and After
It is extremely helpful if prior to showing your resume to a prospective
employer you are able to get some feedback not just on how it looks and
reads but also on whether or not it is properly targeted for the situation
in which you want to use it.
As noted in the last chapter, you are likely to be able to get par-
ticularly useful feedback on drafts of your resume in informational in-
terviews. If you can’t show it in an informational interview, at least
show your resume to some people who receive and assess resumes
from time to time. If there is a glaring gap or mistake, they’re likely to
flag it for you.
The key test for a resume is simply this: Does it generate invita-
tions to job interviews? People do not get invited to job interviews for
many reasons, including a downturn in the economy. But if you keep
sending a particular resume and you never get any nibbles from the
people who receive it, you should again ask people who are knowledge-
able about resumes and will be absolutely candid with you if there isn’t
something basically wrong with the way you have targeted this resume.
You can also get useful feedback on your resume if a person who is
interviewing you for a job uses your resume to review your credentials.
Does this person seem impressed by the P.E.A.K.S. you have featured
in your resume? If so, your resume is working for you. On the other
hand, if the interviewer keeps mentioning the importance of some
P.E.A.K.S. that you have not referred to in your resume, this emphasis
suggests that you might want to try to work these P.E.A.K.S. into your
next draft.
76
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Step 9: Choosing References Who Can Verify Your Key P.E.A.K.S.
You do not have to list in your resume the names of people who will
serve as references for you. You can simply put “References furnished
upon request” at the end of your resume. Or you can just ignore this
topic.
What you can’t ignore is that if someone is interested in possibly
hiring you, this person is likely to ask you for references. And so, you
will want to have at least a mental list of several people who will serve
as your references.
One rule you must follow is to never say someone is a reference
without first checking with this person to see if he or she would be will-
ing to provide this service for you. It’s just plain good manners to do so,
and furthermore, you’re likely to get a good read on just how favorable
a reference this person is likely to be when you ask this person if he or
she will serve as your reference.
We would strongly encourage you to choose as references people
who can verify that you have the particular P.E.A.K.S. that the recipi-
ents of your resume are likely to believe are highly desirable. And when
people agree to be one of your references, give them a copy of your re-
sume and brief them on the particular P.E.A.K.S. that you would like
them to verify that you have.
Step 10: Preparing Cover Letters That Refer to Key P.E.A.K.S.
It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss in any detail the many fac-
tors to consider when composing cover letters that accompany the mail-
ing of a resume. There are, in fact, many good books available on this
topic.
The one point we would like to make here is that a cover letter
gives you an opportunity to quickly mention one or two P.E.A.K.S. you
have that the recipient of your resume is likely to find particularly im-
pressive. Your goal is to get them to look at your resume.
You don’t have to go on and on about your P.E.A.K.S. in your cover
letter. If you have followed the above guidelines for preparing a target-
ed resume, your resume will give a strong synopsis of the key
P.E.A.K.S. you would bring to a job, without your having to say or write
another word.
FINAL THOUGHTS
As we mentioned up front, the resume you use in conjunction with your
portfolio does not have to have a P.E.A.K.S. format. But if you do make
the extra effort to feature your desired P.E.A.K.S. in your resume, we
believe you will discover, as our clients have, that you will get more job
interviews and have more opportunities during these interviews to
show key items from your portfolio.
If you have prepared a targeted portfolio that you are hoping to
show, you might put the following statement at the bottom of your re-
sume:
Portfolio available upon request.
Chapter 5: Creating Resumes That Work with Your Portfolio
77

Now that you know how to create a resume that will get you to an
interview and create opportunities to show your portfolio, it’s time to
take a look at how you can put your portfolio to work once you get there.
We’ll do just that in the next chapter.
78
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

6
Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
OVERVIEW
Once your Can-Do Portfolio is assembled and ready to be shown, the
time has come to put it to good use. In this chapter we will show you
how you can use your portfolio to get attractive job offers.
Specifically we will review:
I What you should be able to achieve in a job interview
I The advantages a portfolio can give you in an interview
I How to prepare yourself to use a portfolio in an interview
I How to use a portfolio during the different stages of an interview
I How to use your portfolio in follow-up interviews and when respond-
ing to a job offer
To many people, interviewing for a job does not come naturally. In
fact, it can feel like a form of torture! Selling yourself, or more politely,
drawing attention to your strong points and qualifications may not be
a role with which you are comfortable.
You may have dreaded job interviews in the past, but, as we will
see in this chapter, having a well-targeted portfolio and knowing how to
use it effectively can be a great confidence builder. Equipped with the
right tools and techniques, becoming very good at presenting who you
are and what you can do is possible. Once you learn how to do this, you
79
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

may even start looking forward to job interviews. And most certainly
you will get results.
We call this “the portfolio advantage.”
WHY EMPLOYERS CONDUCT JOB INTERVIEWS
A job interview is a conversation between a person who has applied for
a job and another person (or committee) who, on behalf of the employ-
ing organization, directs this conversation in a way that is intended to
assess the merits of the applicant’s candidacy for the job. As a result of
a job interview, a candidate may be offered a job, denied a job, invited
back for further interviews, or told that his or her name will be kept on
file should an appropriate position open up in the future.
The hiring organization’s goals normally include the following:
I Assessing how well the candidate’s qualifications match the job re-
quirements
I Assessing the likelihood that the candidate will be a well-motivated,
successful performer within the organization
I Assessing the candidate’s potential for growth and advancement
within the organization
I Determining if the candidate is likely to be a good fit for the culture
of the organization
I Assessing the likelihood that the candidate will remain with the or-
ganization long enough for the organization to get a reasonable re-
turn on its investment in the person
I Hiring the best person available for the job on mutually acceptable
terms
I Conducting the interviewing process in a manner that enhances the
reputation of the organization
The people who conduct job interviews are typically employees of
the hiring organization, though in some cases consultants or board
members conduct job interviews on behalf of the organization. The job
applicant may be someone from within the organization who is apply-
ing for a transfer or promotion or someone “from outside” who is not af-
filiated with the organization.
The timing of an interview usually gives a good indication as to
whether it is meant to be used for “screening” or “selecting” candi-
dates.
Early job interviews are often used for “screening” candidates. The
screening interview is used to weed out unqualified candidates as well
as applicants who are considered overqualified or overpriced. These in-
terviews are often performed by outside consultants, such as head-
hunters, or by professional interviewers from within the organization.
The goal of the screening interview is to quickly assess whether or not
an applicant for a particular job is sufficiently promising to justify
being interviewed in greater depth at a later time.
80
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Typically, a screening interview is quick and follows a set format
consisting of questions designed to determine if the applicant has the
basic requirements for the job, such as the right level of education and
experience. More often than not, screening interviews are conducted
over the phone. At the end of the screening interview, applicants may
have some idea of whether or not they will be invited for another, more
in-depth interview.
Obviously, if a screening interview is conducted over the phone,
there is no opportunity to show your portfolio face to face. However, if
you have done the research that is necessary to create a Can-Do Port-
folio, you will be well prepared to talk over the phone about the
P.E.A.K.S. you have that would make you a well-qualified candidate.
You do not need to show portfolio items to speak confidently about the
things you have done that generated these items. In Chapter 9 we will
discuss digital options for sharing your portfolio electronically.
Later interviews are used for “selecting” candidates. One or more
rounds of selection interviews follow the screening interview. As the
name implies, the goal of a selection interview is to make a selection.
Actually, both the interviewer and the person being interviewed are en-
gaged in making a selection. The interviewer is trying to decide which
candidate is best for the job. And the interviewee, in addition to trying
to make a good impression, is also attempting to determine if this job
is a good opportunity.
Typically there is more than one round of selection interviews. A
human resource specialist may be involved in early rounds of selection
interviews. People who would be associates of the person who eventu-
ally fills the job may also conduct selection interviews. But in the final
round of selection interviews, typically the person whose opinion is
given the most weight is the supervisor or manager of the position that
is being filled. In fact, it is usually this manager who conducts the final
round of selection interviews.
The focus of this chapter will be on selection interviews where you
meet face to face and therefore will have the opportunity to show your
portfolio.
WHAT YOU CAN ACHIEVE IN A JOB INTERVIEW
Prior to going on a job interview, your first task is to decide what you
want to achieve in this interview. As a candidate for a position, your
goals probably include the following:
I Acquiring enough information about the job and the organization to
make an informed decision as to whether or not you want to work
there. Is this position right for you? Is this organization’s culture
what you had hoped it would be? Will this job put you in a good posi-
tion to capitalize on future opportunities?
I Communicating information about yourself in a way that makes you
a strong candidate for the job.
I Learning more about the P.E.A.K.S. that the prospective employer is
seeking in candidates, so that you can further refine both your re-
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
81

sponses to questions and the content of your Can-Do Portfolio, should
you be invited back for further interviews.
I Receiving a job offer, if you believe this job is right for you, or, if this
is premature, to at least move on to the next round of interviews.
I Being able to get the specific things that might come with this job
that are most important to you (the salary, title, authority, and so on
that you are seeking) should you be offered this job.
You might also decide to go on a job interview even though you are
not initially interested in the particular job for which you will be inter-
viewed. Your goals here might include:
I Bringing yourself to the attention of this employer in a favorable way
so that you will be considered a viable candidate should a more de-
sirable job open up in the future.
I Developing your skills as an interviewee.
I Getting some practice showing your portfolio.
I Testing yourself in the marketplace so that you can benchmark your
P.E.A.K.S. and determine your current market value.
I Seeing if there are jobs available that might be more appealing to you
than the one you currently have.
I Getting a job offer on the outside so that you can attempt to leverage
a better deal or opportunity with your present employer.
As we will see in the following sections of this chapter, your Can-
Do Portfolio will help you achieve many of the key objectives of a job in-
terview. Most importantly, it can help you get the job!
THE PORTFOLIO ADVANTAGE
Here are some of the advantages that having a well-targeted Can-Do
Portfolio can give you during a job interview, if it is used properly:
I The simple fact that you bring a portfolio to the interview distin-
guishes you from candidates who did not bring a portfolio; this shows
initiative on your part.
I Having a nice-looking portfolio suggests that you are the kind of per-
son who is well prepared and well organized.
I Having a portfolio that contains documents that verify P.E.A.K.S.
that are relevant to the job under consideration suggests that you
have a very serious interest in this job, and that you have a clear idea
as to what is required to be successful in this job.
I The items in your portfolio enable you to give tangible evidence that
you, indeed, have important qualifications for this job.
I Your portfolio enables you to give tangible evidence that you have the
key personal characteristics being sought in a candidate.
82
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

I You can discuss your qualifications for the job with confidence, with
or without showing items from your portfolio. Even when you do not
show documents from your portfolio, just knowing that you can veri-
fy the claims you make about yourself allows you to talk in a very
confident and convincing manner about your qualifications.
I You come across as a can-do candidate. You give the overall impres-
sion that you are very much a candidate who is ready, willing, and
able to get the job done.
HOW TO GET READY TO USE YOUR PORTFOLIO DURING A JOB INTERVIEW
To make your best case with your portfolio during an interview, you
need to have gathered information beforehand about yourself, the job,
the organization, and the industry. And, of course, you will also want to
know ahead of time as much as you can about the P.E.A.K.S. that your
interviewers are likely to consider highly desirable.
The research you have already done in connection with targeting
a portfolio for a particular interview should help with the preinterview
preparation. But to be well prepared to use your portfolio effectively,
there are some further things you can do as well. The following would
be particularly helpful.
Have extra copies of a targeted P.E.A.K.S. resume ready to bring to
the interview. Even if you have sent your resume ahead, you should
still bring several copies to the actual interview. The interviewer may
have misplaced your resume, and more than one person may show up
to interview you. If you are able to hand to each of your interviewers a
copy of a resume that features P.E.A.K.S. that that person is likely to
find desirable, there’s a good chance you’ll get questions that enable
you to show items from your portfolio. Putting “Portfolio available upon
request” at the bottom of your resume also improves the chances you
will be able to show items from your portfolio.
Be ready to give a brief description of yourself that features your
key P.E.A.K.S. A standard practice for many interviewers is to get can-
didates to describe themselves by asking open-ended questions like, “So
tell me a little bit about yourself and what you’ve done.”
You should be ready to give a two- to three-minute synopsis of your
resume, making sure to include the key P.E.A.K.S. that the interview-
er is likely to want to know more about. Again, this information is like-
ly to prompt questions that will give you a chance to show documents
from your portfolio.
A good way to practice this synopsis is to do so out loud without re-
ferring to any notes. Time yourself to see if you can get it under three
minutes without rushing, and consult your resume at the end of each
recitation to make sure you have covered your key P.E.A.K.S. If you can
do this with a friend, so much the better. Listening to a tape of yourself
doing this can also be quite useful.
Know your portfolio. It is very important that you are intimately
familiar with what is in your portfolio. You need to know how to find
key documents quickly and what each document is saying about you.
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
83

It’s helpful to leaf through your portfolio as often as you can, mum-
bling to yourself the reasons why each document was included. It is
particularly important to do this the day of the interview, making sure
one last time that you know where each document is located.
Do role-playing with a friend, if possible. In addition to going over
your portfolio by yourself, it is particularly helpful if you can practice
presenting key items to a friend. Or lacking an available partner, do so
with a tape recorder.
Documents that give evidence of skills, knowledge, or experience
are typically pretty easy to explain. People often feel awkward, howev-
er, when talking about their desirable personal characteristics, so you
will want to practice doing so out loud to another person.
Although it may make you a bit self-conscious, you should also be
sure to practice talking about items that give evidence of your achieve-
ments. Many interviewers are likely to want to know if you have had
any significant accomplishments, believing, quite rightly, that past per-
formance is a good predictor of future performance.
An effective way to discuss your achievements is to use the
S.T.A.R. acronym that may be familiar to the interviewer. S.T.A.R.
stands for: situation (challenge, problem, or opportunity) faced, task to
be undertaken, action taken (what decisions you made and actions you
took in response to the problem), and results (the outcome of your ac-
tion).
Make copies of items you may wish to leave behind. You might
want to give a few items in your portfolio to your interviewer, if the op-
portunity arises. Before making copies of these documents, be sure to
remove any information that should not be distributed.
Make sure your portfolio is in good shape physically. Prior to show-
ing your portfolio, make sure that the carrying case looks good and that
the items and tabs have not become bent or torn.
HOW TO USE YOUR PORTFOLIO DURING A JOB INTERVIEW
In order to make the very best use of your portfolio during a job inter-
view, it’s useful if you know how to use your portfolio effectively during
each of the stages that a job interview is likely to pass through.
The Stages of a Job Interview
A job interview that goes well typically advances through six key
stages. To help you remember these stages and the order in which they
are likely to occur, we have created the acronym H.E.R.O.I.C., which
stands for:
I Helloing
I Engaging
I Responding
I Opportunity finding
I Involving
84
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

I Closing
The order may vary, and stages may be skipped. The helloing stage
of a job interview will happen at the beginning of every job interview,
and the closing stage will inevitably come at the end. The other stages
of the job interview process, however, may not come in the above order.
One or more of the engaging, opportunity-finding, or involving stages,
in fact, may not happen at all.
But if you are able to recognize the stages that do occur in an in-
terview and you know what can be achieved with your portfolio in each
of these stages, you should be able to make good use of your portfolio.
Help the interviewer through each stage. It is important to know
that while the interviewer is responsible for conducting the interview,
and as such, is ostensibly in charge of the process, you, as an intervie-
wee, can play an important role in assuring that the interview proceeds
smoothly and successfully. Perhaps it is best to think of yourself, not as
being interviewed, but instead as participating in an interview.
The idea is certainly not to try to seize control of the interview in
any obvious way. Much to the contrary, you will want to make the in-
terviewer feel that he or she is in control of the process at every step of
the way. Never lose sight of the fact that the person who is interview-
ing you wants to feel that he or she is being a skillful interviewer. Any-
thing you can do to subtly help the interviewer achieve a feeling of com-
petence can only work to your advantage. The interviewer is likely to
conclude that the easier it is to interview you, the easier it will be to
work with you.
The person who interviews you will most likely have a particular
approach that he or she wants to take during the interview. And more
often than not, the interviewer will have a specific set of topics that he
or she will want to cover, and a specific set of questions that all candi-
dates will be asked to respond to.
The interviewer will probably not be thinking about the “stages” of
the interview in any conscious way. But if you understand the different
stages that job interviews typically pass through and the order in
which these stages are likely to occur, you will be able to discern which
stage you are in. You will know what you hope to achieve in each stage
and how your career portfolio can be used to best advantage during job
interviews.
How to Use Your Portfolio During Each Stage of the Interview
Let’s take a look now at how you can make the best use of your portfo-
lio during each of the stages that are likely to occur during a job inter-
view, beginning with the helloing stage.
Stage 1: Helloing
Many interviewers will admit that they have largely made up
their minds about a candidate within the first five minutes of meeting
the person. So it is very important to make a good first impression. As
noted earlier, looking professional with regard to your clothes and
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
85

grooming is a good start. Here are some more things to think about dur-
ing the helloing stage.
Be courteous and attentive to everyone you meet. Make sure to be
very polite, not just to the senior people you meet, but also to the sec-
retaries, administrative assistants, and other people in the organiza-
tion. If junior people feel slighted, they won’t forget it, possibly to your
detriment.
Do not push your career portfolio. Have your portfolio, but don’t
show it during the helloing stage, unless asked to. Do not hold up your
portfolio and announce, “I have something I want to show you.” Use this
ammunition selectively throughout the interview.
If asked what you are carrying, you can say it’s a portfolio, but
don’t hand it to the interviewer. Instead, describe very quickly what’s
in it. You might hold it up briefly, and say something along the order of:
“This is my career portfolio. It has materials in it that document some
of my accomplishments.” Smile, put it back on your lap or at your side,
and then proceed with the interview.
If the interviewer insists on having a look at your portfolio right
then, instead of just handing it to him, get up and walk your portfolio
around to his side and show it to him. This enables you to retain con-
trol of how your career portfolio is presented. It is helpful to practice
this response beforehand with a friend.
Let the interviewer lead the transition to the next stage. The inter-
viewer will give the cue as to when the greeting stage is over. Your job
is not to lead to the next stage. Sit quietly and politely await the inter-
viewer’s next move. A professional or job-related question is typically
the signal that the helloing stage is over.
Stage 2: Engaging
As noted above, the usual signal that you are no longer in the hel-
loing stage is when the interviewer progresses from small talk to more
pointed questions aimed at getting to know you better professionally. In
addition to trying to find out more about you, typically the interviewer
will also want to talk about the organization and the position that you
are seeking.
We call this the engaging stage of the interview, because your goal,
as a candidate, is to engage the interviewer’s interest in you, both in-
tellectually and emotionally.
On an intellectual level, you want the interviewer to start think-
ing that you are a promising candidate based on your qualifications
and the way you present them. On an emotional level, you want the in-
terviewer to start feeling that you are a strong candidate because the
interviewer is starting to feel some rapport with you. During the en-
gaging stage you want the interviewer to start thinking and feeling,
“This might be the candidate we’ve been looking for. There’s something
about this candidate I like.”
If it’s a group interview, be responsive to everyone. If you are being
interviewed by more than one person, it’s natural to focus your atten-
tion on the senior members of the team. But it is important that in
86
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

doing so, you do not in any way ignore or treat disrespectfully the ju-
nior members of the interview team. You can bet that at the end of an
interview, the top person will turn to a trusted junior person and ask,
“So what do you think?” If you offended this person during the inter-
view, it’s unlikely that a glowing recommendation will be forthcoming!
And this less-than-glowing opinion can be devastating to a candidate.
Managers are unlikely to hire someone whom they feel would have dif-
ficulty getting along with peers and subordinates in their organiza-
tion.
Offer a copy of your resume to interviewers who do not appear to
have it in front of them. You can say, “I’ve brought along a copy of my
resume,” (an “extra copy,” if you already sent one) and hand it to the in-
terviewer. If your resume is in a P.E.A.K.S. format and the interviewer
uses it to review your qualifications, you are likely to get a number of
questions that will give you opportunities to show key documents from
your portfolio.
If asked to describe your background, you can introduce your port-
folio. If you are asked to give a synopsis of your career, you can give the
two- to three-minute self-description you have prepared that features
your key P.E.A.K.S. At the conclusion, you have a good opportunity to
hold up your Can-Do Portfolio and say something like: “I have brought
along my career portfolio. It has materials in it that document some of
the things I’ve just talked about.”
Hold on to your portfolio. As noted earlier, if the interviewer asks
to see the portfolio, instead of just handing it over, and thereby losing
control of it, turn to relevant entries and show her these items, while
holding on to the portfolio. This enables you to direct the interviewer’s
attention to the key documents in the order you want to present them.
Hand individual items to your interviewer. The best way to show
an item from your portfolio is to take it out of your portfolio case (but
not out of its translucent sheet protector) and hand it to your inter-
viewer. This focuses the interviewer’s attention on the particular item
you want him to see.
Err on the side of showing too few entries from your portfolio. You
are trying to use your portfolio to do the following:
1. Support a few points you’ve made about yourself
2. Demonstrate that you have initiative and are well organized
3. Leave the impression that your portfolio is full of impressive infor-
mation
Of course, if the interviewer insists on grabbing the portfolio from you,
you can’t really say, “Hands off, Buster!” But your goal is to retain con-
trol of your portfolio, so that you can use it selectively to emphasize
points you want to make throughout the interview.
If the interviewer reaches for the portfolio, you can respond by ask-
ing, “May I show this to you?” and, without waiting for a response, start
opening your portfolio to a relevant entry.
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
87

Stage 3: Responding
The responding stage of the interview occurs when you, as a can-
didate, begin fielding questions that are specifically intended to deter-
mine the extent to which your qualifications and personal qualities
match up with what the hiring organization is looking for. Unlike the
general questions you are asked during the engaging stage of the in-
terview, these interview questions are sharper, more specific, and more
intense.
Typically, the interviewer and/or the hiring organization has de-
veloped a list of questions, the answers to which, they believe, will give
a very strong indication as to whether or not a candidate is right for the
job. These are the questions you will be asked to respond to during the
responding stage of the interview.
If the engaging stage of the interview is characterized from the in-
terviewer’s perspective as “getting to know each other,” the responding
stage is the “let’s see if you’ve got what it takes” phase of the interview.
Although not all interviewers do so, an obvious tip-off that you
have entered the responding stage is if the interviewer suddenly starts
reading questions from notes and begins taking more careful notes
when you respond.
Whether or not the interviewer intensifies his or her note taking,
when you have entered the responding stage you are likely to feel that
the responses you are giving are being very carefully scrutinized. You
are likely to feel a greater amount of stress during this stage.
The responding stage can be pretty intense, as it is meant to be the
“moment of truth.” But it is also a phase of the interview when your Ca-
reer Portfolio can be particularly helpful, if used skillfully. Here are
some things to think about:
Look for clues about which P.E.A.K.S. most interest the interviewer.
You should be able to tell from the kinds of questions you are asked and
the responses you get which P.E.A.K.S. the interviewer seems to feel
are most important.
Getting a better read on the interviewer’s mind-set will enable you
to zero in on the particular P.E.A.K.S. you should be focusing on as the
interview progresses. And, if you are invited back for further inter-
views, knowing more about the P.E.A.K.S. that this organization par-
ticularly values will enable you to further refine the targeting of your
portfolio for these interviews.
Keep in mind your desirable P.E.A.K.S. when responding to ques-
tions. Many of the “standard” interview questions that are asked dur-
ing the responding stage of a job interview are really attempts to learn
more about a candidate’s P.E.A.K.S. As you respond to these questions,
try to refer to specific P.E.A.K.S. you have that the interviewer is like-
ly to find desirable. As you work your key P.E.A.K.S. into your respons-
es, you will be reminded of items in your Can-Do Portfolio that you
might want to show.
Show your portfolio very selectively. You should absolutely avoid
whipping out your portfolio every time you speak. However, if a ques-
tion comes up about your accomplishments or something else for which
88
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

you have a particularly strong portfolio item, it is appropriate to ask,
“May I show you something in my portfolio that illustrates this?”
If you know that your interviewer is interested in seeing items
from your portfolio, rather than asking for permission to show your
portfolio, you can simply open your portfolio and hand the interviewer
the relevant document. You will know pretty early on in the interview
whether or not the interviewer is receptive to seeing entries in your
portfolio. But even if the interviewer is excited about documents in your
portfolio, don’t overdo it. It’s a rule of show business: You always want
to leave ‘em hungering for more!
Most of the time, use portfolio items as confidence builders that you
don’t actually show. If you spend too much time during the responding
stage waiting to pounce with portfolio items, you run the risk of not
being very responsive to the questions you are asked.
The fact is, if you have done a good job of researching and putting
together a well-targeted Can-Do Portfolio, you don’t really have to show
portfolio items to get good value from them. Just knowing that you can
produce documents that verify claims you make about yourself will en-
able you to talk about your P.E.A.K.S. in a very confident and convinc-
ing manner.
Be sure to explain the portfolio items you do show. When you do
show something from your portfolio, you need to point out why this doc-
ument is important. Tell the interviewer quite explicitly the relevant
P.E.A.K.S. that this document illustrates or verifies. You don’t have to
be a big boaster. You can say something like: “This illustrates, I believe,
my ability to take responsibility and accomplish a big job in a short pe-
riod of time.”
Use portfolio items to demonstrate desirable personal characteris-
tics. Personal characteristics that are desirable in candidates but are
hard to prove when discussed in the abstract can be nicely illustrated
with your portfolio. When asked to describe some of the personal qual-
ities you bring to the workplace, it’s okay to say, “I have a lot of initia-
tive.” But it’s far more impressive to be able to say, “I think I show a
considerable amount of initiative. For example, here’s a letter of appre-
ciation I received for a project I initiated.” Use your portfolio to give
tangible evidence of these hard-to-measure intangible qualities that
can make all the difference in the hiring decision.
The responding stage is typically the longest phase of the inter-
view. As noted above, this is the stage when interviewers typically ask
the questions they believe will get at whether or not you are a strong
candidate. But this is not your final chance to make a good impression.
Once interviewers have finished asking the questions they intended to
ask, the interview is certainly not over, unless, of course, one or both of
you decide there is an obvious misfit between you and the position for
which you are interviewing.
Stage 4: Opportunity Finding
Opportunity finding can happen at any stage of the interview.
However, a particularly good moment to pursue opportunity finding oc-
curs when the interviewer has finished asking his or her list of set
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
89

questions. The interviewer might ask, “Do you have any questions?” or,
“Is there something you would like to tell us about yourself?” This is a
good chance to nudge the interview process toward the opportunity
finding stage.
The odds are that the person who is trying to fill this job has a
problem. Possibly the previous incumbent was fired or left unexpected-
ly. Or, perhaps a new project for which the interviewer has no qualified
staff is looming. This is the time in the interview when you attempt to
explore with the interviewer ways in which you would be particularly
well qualified to solve the interviewer’s problem.
Maybe the position is new and they’re not quite sure how the job
should be performed. Or there could be a sticky political situation in
connection with this job, and the interviewer is afraid that the person
who is hired might behave in a manner that only makes the situation
worse. If you can discover precisely what the problem is, you, as a can-
didate, may have uncovered a big opportunity.
You must take a proactive role here. During the opportunity find-
ing stage you want to zero in on what the critical issues are in the in-
terviewer’s mind, and then make the case that you are the person “to
get the job done.” Your Can-Do Portfolio can help you do this. Here’s
how.
Ask about the particular opportunities and challenges associated
with the job. You need to know exactly what the interviewer believes
are the issues and opportunities associated with the job. You may have
been able to pick up a lot of this information during the earlier, engag-
ing and responding stages. If you feel you now have a solid under-
standing of the opportunities and challenges, then you’ll want to verify
that you’ve got it right.
However, if you are still uncertain as to exactly what the opportu-
nities and challenges are in the job, this is a good time to ask questions
about the specific problems that an incumbent in this job must deal
with effectively to be successful.
Paraphrase your understanding of the job’s particular problems
and opportunities. As a way of making sure you understand what the
interviewer perceives the issues and problems to be, repeat to the in-
terviewer what you believe you have heard are the job’s particular chal-
lenges.
Make every effort to be polite here. You can begin your statement
with a phrase like, “If I understand correctly, the three big challenges
associated with this job are. . . .” And then ask, “Have I got it right, or
is there something else that is more important?”
Use your portfolio to show how you are the right person for this job.
Rather than just saying something like, “I think I can get these things
done for you,” use your portfolio to give the interviewer tangible evi-
dence that you can perform as desired in this position.
You might say something like, “Based on what you have told me
about this job and what I know about myself, I think I could do a good
90
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

job for you.” Briefly state your case, and then ask, “May I show you
some entries in my portfolio that support what I am saying?”
Explore opportunities not associated with the job that intrigue you.
Possibly the interviewer has said something along the way that is not
directly related to the job you are being interviewed for yet you feel you
could make a substantial contribution in this area. It can’t hurt to dis-
cuss this possibility during this stage of the interview.
You might say something like: “I know this isn’t part of the job I
am being interviewed for, but I was intrigued when you mentioned [the
particular opportunity]. I think I could make a substantial contribution
in this area. Is this something that perhaps we should discuss?”
Be enthusiastic! With your choice of words, tone of voice, and body
language, beam the message that you see many opportunities here. In-
terviewers are looking for highly motivated candidates. Enthusiasm is
a personal characteristic that all interviewers are likely to appreciate.
Stage 5: Involving
The involving stage follows naturally after the opportunity finding
stage. Here your goal is to get the interviewer truly excited about see-
ing you in the position for which you are being interviewed. If opportu-
nity finding is an intellectual exercise, involving is a matter of the
heart.
During the involving stage, you want the interviewer to be talking,
not about the job, but about you in the job. And doing so in a caring way.
This can be achieved by asking the right questions. Since you are try-
ing to get the interviewer to do most of the talking, you probably will
not be showing your portfolio during this phase of the interview.
Here are some examples of the kinds of questions you might ask
during this stage:
Ask the interviewer to describe how you could be particularly use-
ful to the organization. It is always best when the interviewer articu-
lates why you might be a good fit for the job under consideration. You
can encourage the interviewer to do this by asking a question like,
“From what you know about my qualifications, what projects are you
planning that, in your opinion, would be a good fit for me?”
You can then support positive suggestions the interviewer makes
by showing an item or two from your portfolio that confirms that you
have what it takes to do this project. But you should be wary of over-
selling, and you should be careful not to disrupt the flow while the in-
terviewer is making your case for you.
Get the interviewer to describe you in the third person. Interview-
ers always have less trouble talking about candidates in the third per-
son. If you ask, “what do you think of me?” you may get a very non-
committal answer or you might make the interviewer feel awkward. An
alternative approach is to ask a question about yourself, referring to
yourself by your first and last name. For example, you could say:
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
91

I am very enthusiastic about everything I’ve heard here today. I’d like to
know some of the ways you think Joe Candidate [use your first and last
name here] might be able to help you in this job?
Of course, if you feel awkward talking about yourself in the third per-
son, don’t do it.
Get the interviewer selling the job to you. Here’s a question that
can increase the interviewer’s involvement in your candidacy:
If this position were to be offered to me, what in your view would be the
main reasons for my accepting it?
This gets them telling you why you should take it!
Stage 6: Closing
Finally, the interviewer begins to close the interview. A signal that
the interviewer is thinking of winding down the interview occurs when
the interviewer begins to summarize what has been said, often accom-
panied by an elaboration of certain points that were made.
If you are interested in further pursuing this position, this is the
time to make it known. Just stating that the position is of interest to
you and then quickly reviewing the points that you have made which
qualify you for the position can accomplish this. If there are other ap-
plicable skills or experience that you believe would be helpful in your
being chosen, these points must be made now.
You may be able to show one more entry from your portfolio dur-
ing the closing phase. But as a general rule, this is not the time to show
your portfolio. The emphasis as you leave should not be on your portfo-
lio, which is a sales aid, but on you, the person they might hire.
Here are some things to think about during the closing stage.
Supply the interviewer with a few words that summarize why you
are a strong candidate. Based on what you know about yourself and
what you now know the interviewer is looking for, give the interviewer
a few words that summarize why you believe you are a strong candidate.
In other words, supply the interviewer with the language she can use to
describe you in a positive way to other people in their organization.
Do not leave your entire portfolio behind. You never want to leave
your entire portfolio with an interviewer. By doing so, you lose total
control over how it is used. What you can do is bring extra copies of en-
tries that you think are particularly useful for advancing your candi-
dacy. Then, if the interviewer indicates he or she would like you to leave
the portfolio behind, you can say, “I can’t leave this behind. However, I
do have copies of a few of the key entries that I’d be happy to leave with
you.”
Try not to commit to a salary number. The issue of your salary ex-
pectations may come up now or even earlier in the interview. As a basic
negotiating strategy, you do not want to be the first to commit to a spe-
cific number. Any figure you mention will put a ceiling on what you
92
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

might get. And if the number you give is on the high end for them, they
may not be prepared to think of you as worthy of this salary. As we will
see later on, salary negotiations are best conducted in a separate inter-
view, after the organization has made you an offer. You are in a much
stronger bargaining position, once the organization has committed to
you. And, you can prepare your portfolio especially for a salary negoti-
ation.
If at any point during the interview you are asked, “What are you
looking for in terms of money?” you can respond, “What is the salary
range you have budgeted for this position?” And if commissions are in-
volved, ask about the median salary of the person holding a position
comparable to the one you are seeking.
If your interviewer tells you, for example, that the position is rated
at $42,000 to $46,000, you can then say why you think you deserve to
receive the higher end of the scale, based on your knowledge and expe-
rience.
If you are asked what you are making now, don’t lie, though you
can say (when your salary is, say, $51,000 and you want an offer in the
$60,000 range) “I’m earning in the fifties right now, though I’m hoping
to improve on that.”
If you are given an offer, schedule a meeting to discuss it. Do not
accept or reject an offer when it is first presented, unless, of course, it
is outrageously good or bad. Prospective employers’ first offer is rarely
their best offer. Thank them. Make sure you understand exactly what
you are being offered. And tell them you would like to think about it
and meet with them again to discuss both their proposal and your “fu-
ture with the organization.” When scheduling this meeting, give your-
self at least several days to prepare your portfolio, for as you will see
later, your portfolio can be used to great advantage when responding to
a job offer.
Don’t overstay your welcome. The interviewer most likely has
other appointments to keep. Err on the side of leaving a little early. If
you’ve made a good impression, they’ll want you back.
End on a high note. The close of an interview most always ends
with “Do you have any further questions?” The odds are the interview-
er doesn’t really want to field a question now that would require a
lengthy answer. The interviewer is trying to send you a polite signal
that the interview is over.
Instead of asking a question, you can say something like: “No, I
think we’ve really covered it. I just want you to know that I appreciate
your spending this time with me. I’m really excited about this opportu-
nity and hope you feel the same way about my candidacy for this job.”
Ask about next steps. Before leaving an interview you should be
clear about the next steps. If the interview has gone well, you may want
to press for an indication of where your candidacy stands. Depending
upon where you are in the interviewing process, you might even ask for
the job. At the very least, you will want to find out when you can expect
to hear from your interviewer. To broach the subject of next steps, you
might ask:
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
93

Let me reiterate my strong interest in the position we have been dis-
cussing. I am very impressed with everything I have heard here today.
What’s the next step? How do we progress from here?
Don’t Worry If Interviewing Stages Get Skipped or Scrambled
As noted earlier, except for helloing and closing, the above stages may
not go in their prescribed order, and some of the stages we have de-
scribed may not happen at all.
But if you know what can be achieved with your portfolio in each
of the stages that do occur, you should be able to use your portfolio to
your advantage during the job interview.
HOW TO FOLLOW UP AFTER THE INTERVIEW
A week or so after the interview, it is perfectly appropriate for you to
call (or e-mail) your interviewers about the status of your candidacy,
provided you do not contact them on or before the date they said they
would get back to you. But well before you make any follow-up calls,
there are some things you must do almost immediately after the inter-
view.
Make some notes on what happened. As soon as you can after an
interview, jot down some notes. This is particularly important if you are
going to another interview in the same day. You certainly do not want
to confuse one interview with another. You might think you can keep
everything straight in your head and don’t need to write things down
until the evening. But at the end of a long, tense day, the events can all
seem like a blur. You don’t need to write pages, just jot down enough key
words and phrases to bring the conversations back to you.
These notes will become crucial if you are invited back for a second
interview. Your notes should include key things you learned about the
company and its future, your impressions of the people with whom you
met, and what you would like to learn more about.
Were there any topics raised during the interview that seemed to
elicit very strong positive or negative emotions? What seem to be the
particular interests of each interviewer? How does each of them view
the future of their organization?
Be sure to note when you can expect to hear from them, whether
or not you promised to send something, and if you agreed to make a fol-
low-up call on a certain date.
If you did not receive business cards from the people you met, you
may call the company directly when you get home and ask the recep-
tionist for the correct spellings of those people’s names and their titles.
Record P.E.A.K.S. they are seeking and portfolio items that most
impressed them. It is particularly useful to write down your impres-
sions of what the people you met are looking for and which of your
P.E.A.K.S. seemed to most impress each person. Were there items they
particularly liked in your portfolio?
94
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Promptly send a thank-you note. Your note should express your
appreciation, reconfirm your interest in the job, and briefly note how
you think your key P.E.A.K.S. would enable you to succeed in the posi-
tion. It should be sent within a day or two of the interview.
Send promised portfolio items with explanations. If you promised
to send some items from your portfolio, do so with your thank-you note.
Remove any information in these documents that should not be dis-
tributed. And be sure to explain, as you did in the interview, the context
for these items and their relevance.
HOW TO USE YOUR PORTFOLIO DURING SUBSEQUENT INTERVIEWS
If you are invited back for further interviews, the approach you take to
these interviews should parallel what you did in the first interview. You
should, of course, take advantage of the fact that you now know more
about the organization, about the potential opportunities there, and
about the specific P.E.A.K.S. being sought in job candidates. Here are
some specific things to think about if you are invited back for another
round of interviews.
Prepare a more targeted portfolio. Use the information you gath-
ered in your first interview to adjust your portfolio so that it is more
precisely targeted at the opportunities you would like to pursue. This
may mean adding or subtracting items and possibly rearranging the
order in which they appear. You should now have a better idea of the
kinds of P.E.A.K.S. they are looking for. Choose your items accordingly.
Make copies of portfolio items you might leave behind, based on
what you now know. Since you now have a better idea of what the
prospective employer is looking for in a candidate, a second interview
is a very good time to bring extra copies of several items you believe
would particularly impress the person who will interview you.
Assume your next set of interviewers will know nothing about you.
Do not assume just because you have been invited back for further in-
terviews that the new people who interview you will already know all
about you and be favorably disposed toward your candidacy. The first
person who interviewed you may have done nothing more than forward
your resume to your next interviewer with a note that said something
like, “I think it’s worth taking a second look at this candidate.” In fact,
your first interviewer might refrain from describing you at this stage so
that the next interviewer can take an unbiased look. There’s also the
possibility that your next interviewers have interviewed some other
candidates and already have their own favorite, so your challenge will
be to win them over. Your portfolio can help you do so.
Remember that the ideal interview is still H.E.R.O.I.C. Once there,
you will again want to be aware of which stage of the interview you are
in so that you can get your best results by using your portfolio appro-
priately in each phase.
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
95

HOW TO USE YOUR PORTFOLIO TO IMPROVE A JOB OFFER
As noted earlier, the first offer you get from prospective employers is
usually not their best offer. Even if the position is an entry-level job
that has a locked-in, nonnegotiable salary, there are usually some other
aspects of the job offer that are negotiable. Your portfolio can give you
a big assist when negotiating for an improved offer. Here’s how.
Schedule a meeting to discuss your future with the organization.
When you first get the offer, you may feel like reacting immediately to
some of the specifics, but there’s usually more to be gained if you do not.
Try to limit your emotions to a very pleasant “Thank you for making
this offer,” unless, of course, the offer is so good or so bad, you are pre-
pared to immediately accept or reject it. In either case, you will want to
first make sure you understand exactly what the offer is. Take notes
and repeat back to them your understanding of the offer.
If you want to try to improve the offer, tell them you’d like to take
a few days to think about it, and then meet with them again to discuss
both the offer and your future with the organization. When scheduling
this meeting, you should give yourself at least several days to get pre-
pared.
Identify the key things you want to improve in their offer. Your first
task is to determine which of the things in the job offer you are most in-
terested in trying to improve. Salary and benefits are of concern to most
people, but these are not the only issues that should be discussed when
responding to a job offer. Other key issues to consider include a signing
bonus, coverage of moving costs, paying off school loans, your starting
date, the date of your first salary review, equity opportunities, profes-
sional development opportunities, the flexibility of your work hours, the
length of your vacation, your title, your level of authority, the specifics
of who you report to and who reports to you, and the resources avail-
able to you.
Some of the additional benefits of a job offer may not be even re-
motely possible for you to negotiate or bring up. The important thing is
to identify the features that you care about that you might be able to
negotiate. To know what is, in fact, negotiable you need to do a reality
check.
Do a reality check. If you have not done this already, find out as
much as you can about the employment packages that recent hires are
getting for comparable jobs in the industry. You can use Internet search
engines to get printouts of salary ranges for jobs in most established
fields, and you can use the Web to search for postings for comparable
jobs. Job ads in regional newspapers and industry publications can also
yield useful information. Articles in the press may also spell out the
kinds of deals that people in comparable jobs are getting.
To learn about aspects of employment packages that are not like-
ly to show up in job postings and publications, you need to talk to in-
dustry insiders who are in a position to know who gets what and why.
You want to know what’s the least people are getting, what’s the most
they are getting, and why some people are getting more than others.
And here “getting” refers not just to salary and benefits, but to all the
96
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

other features of the employment package that are of interest to you.
An insider can tell you what’s negotiable and what’s not.
Particularly important is to try to find out from industry insiders
why some people get much better deals than others, beyond the fact
that they may have had great negotiating skills. What P.E.A.K.S. do
they have that make them worthy of the best offers? You may have got-
ten a good answer to this question when you were initially targeting
your portfolio. If not, get it now.
Your reality check should help you decide what things you can le-
gitimately try to improve upon and what you cannot.
Add documents to your portfolio that will help you negotiate a bet-
ter deal. Once you have decided on how you want the job offer to be im-
proved, add the following kinds of documents to help you make your
best case.
I Documents that reveal obvious shortcomings in their offer. If you have
seen a chart that demonstrates that others in the industry are typi-
cally getting far more than you are being offered for the same job,
make a copy for your portfolio.
If the job offer does not significantly improve upon what you al-
ready have in your present job, try to find documents that will verify
your current arrangement. You can use copies of things like organi-
zational charts and job descriptions to demonstrate the level and re-
sponsibilities of your current job. A copy of the last W-2 form you re-
ceived can document your current compensation.
I Documents that reaffirm that you can contribute in the ways they are
hoping you will. Review your notes from earlier interviews to identi-
fy the ways in which your interviewers seem to feel you can make
your biggest contribution to the organization. Then take a look at
your Master Portfolio collection to see if there are some documents
not yet in your Can-Do Portfolio that can give further evidence that
you have the P.E.A.K.S. necessary to add value in the way that the
interviewers hope you will. If they have you slotted for, say, bringing
a better sense of organization to a department, then add to your port-
folio everything you’ve got that demonstrates your ability to organize
people and processes.
I Documents that show you can add value in the way the people who get
the best deals do. Add to your Can-Do Portfolio any documents you
might have that demonstrate you have the key P.E.A.K.S. that the
people who get the best employment packages in a comparable posi-
tion seem to have. If, for example, people with good sales skills seem
to get the best deals in comparable positions, try to include evidence
that you can be an effective salesperson. Obviously, if you can’t stand
selling, even though you may be good at it, you would be better off not
trying to emphasize this skill or you may find yourself landing a
high-paying job you can’t stand!
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
97

Use your portfolio to demonstrate you are worthy of their best offer.
When you meet to discuss their offer, you can use your enhanced Can-
Do Portfolio to help you make the point that because you can add a lot
of value to their organization, they should give you an improved em-
ployment package.
Unlike in earlier interviews, if you have the right ammunition in
your portfolio, you can use it extensively when negotiating for a better
deal.
You should not shy away from presenting whatever evidence you
have that the deal you are being offered does not measure up to indus-
try standards; or that it does not significantly improve upon what you
are getting in your present job. This provides a reality check for them.
But your main focus during this meeting and the principal use of
your portfolio should be to demonstrate that you have the P.E.A.K.S.
that will enable you to add value to the organization in the very ways
they have indicated they hope you will. And stress that the value you
will add qualifies you for the very best deal available.
If you have done your homework, you can say something like, “I
know that the salary range for this kind of position is typically [quote
the range]. Here’s why I think I deserve [cite the highest figure].” And
then support this statement by making use of your portfolio.
When negotiating, it doesn’t hurt to keep throwing at them one
more example of why you are the very person they must have for this
job. Negotiators are expected to keep giving more and more evidence to
support their position.
One of our clients recently used this “total portfolio” strategy to ne-
gotiate for a better starting salary. The company offering her a job
ended up not only matching her salary request but also threw in a gen-
erous benefit package that made the offer all that more attractive. She
accepted.
Using portfolio items in your negotiations will take a lot of the
awkwardness and discomfort out of going after what you want. And you
will give yourself your best chance of getting all the good things you de-
serve!
FINAL THOUGHTS
Your portfolio can be a great asset in a job interview, if you use it prop-
erly. To help you remember the key dos and don’ts for using your port-
folio in a job interview, we’ve prepared the following checklist that you
might want to review each time you are planning to use your portfolio
to get that job.
Portfolio Dos and Don’ts
1. Do not let go of your portfolio. If it leaves your hands, the whole di-
rection of the interview will change. Instead, hand individual items
to your interviewer.
98
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

2. Keep the focus on you, not on your portfolio. Your portfolio should
be viewed as something that enhances the presentation of your
qualifications for the job, not as the central feature of the interview.
3. Do not keep your portfolio continuously open. To do so would put too
much focus on your portfolio.
4. Use the peek-a-boo technique when showing your portfolio. Take
your portfolio out to make a point, then close it and put it aside.
5. Do not use your portfolio as a crutch. Do not use it to fill awkward
silences or to remind you what to say next.
6. Look for opportunities to use your portfolio in response to key ques-
tions. Your portfolio can really come alive when you use it to sub-
stantiate a point you want to make about yourself in response to a
question that is obviously very important to the interviewer.
7. Always explain the relevance of the documents you present. When
you show an item from your portfolio, tell the interviewer quite ex-
plicitly the relevant P.E.A.K.S. that this document illustrates or
verifies. “I included this document to illustrate my ability to. . . . It
also, I believe, shows that I. . . .”
8. Use portfolio items to demonstrate desirable personal characteris-
tics.
Personal characteristics that are desirable in candidates but
are hard to prove can be nicely illustrated with your portfolio.
9. Use most of your portfolio items as confidence builders that you
don’t actually show. Remember, you do not need to show items to
speak confidently about the things you have done that generated
these items. Just knowing that you can verify claims you make
about yourself will enable you to talk in a very confident and con-
vincing manner about your qualifications.
10. Bring extra copies of items that your interviewer is likely to find
particularly impressive. And make doubly sure all proprietary in-
formation has been carefully deleted from anything you intend to
leave behind.
11. Do not leave behind items that have not been explained during the
interview. And do not send things from your portfolio that were not
discussed during the interview.
12. Be careful not to show your portfolio too much. Less is truly more
when presenting your portfolio. As noted earlier, follow the old
show biz maxim, and “leave ‘em hungering for more.”
Once you get your job, don’t throw your portfolio away and forget
about all this portfolio stuff! As you will see in the next chapter, a port-
folio can also be used to great advantage after you are on the job—dur-
ing performance reviews, when applying for new work assignments,
and when going for raises and promotions.
Chapter 6: Using Your Portfolio to Get That Job
99

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

7
Getting That Raise and Other
Important Uses for Portfolios
OVERVIEW
Thus far we’ve focused on how you can use a career portfolio to get the
job you want. But, as we pointed out in the first chapter, that’s not the
only thing a strong portfolio can do for you. In this chapter we will ex-
amine some other particularly good ways that a portfolio can be a real
career booster. And we will review several ways that career counselors
and organizations can achieve important goals by encouraging the use
of career portfolios.
Specifically, we will review how the Can-Do Career Portfolio sys-
tem, targeting career P.E.A.K.S., can be put to good use in the following
ways:
Personal Use:
1. To have a successful performance review
2. To get a raise
3. To get a promotion
4. To make lateral moves within your organization
5. To make a radical change in your career
6. To get consulting assignments
7. To get into college or graduate school
101
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

Organizational and Career Counseling Use:
1. In career counseling, placement, and outplacement activities
2. In staffing and other human resource management activities
3. In academic settings
As we’ll see in the following sections, the criteria used for selecting
items to put in your targeted portfolio and the strategy for presenting
it should vary with its intended use.
FURTHER USES FOR CAREER PORTFOLIOS
The following are seven important ways to use the Can-Do Portfolio
system to boost your career that we haven’t discussed yet in any detail.
Note that a somewhat different strategy is associated with each use of
your portfolio.
Use 1: To Get a Favorable Performance Review
Get started early. In order to create a portfolio that gives you an edge
in your next performance review, it is important for you and your boss
to have an explicit understanding of the criteria on which your perfor-
mance will be judged. If you have recently been hired, you should have
a conversation with your boss concerning these criteria. And whenever
you have a performance review, you should get a clear statement of
what areas your boss wants you to focus on in your job. Once you un-
derstand the basis on which your performance will be judged, you can
collect documents along the way that give evidence of your meeting (or
exceeding) these expectations. The actual assembling of your portfolio
for a performance review should begin several weeks before your re-
view, so that you have time to collect whatever documents you are miss-
ing and can put the finishing touches on your portfolio at your leisure.
Assemble a portfolio that shows you have met or exceeded your
boss’s expectations. Here are some things to think about when you are
assembling your portfolio:
1. Identify the key performance criteria in your boss’s mind. List the
performance criteria on which you will be judged. If you and your
boss agreed to a business plan, that would be “an important” source
for your performance criteria. The key issue is, “What will my boss
be judging me on, and in what order of priority?” If you are having
difficulty determining this, talk to a person you trust who has had
successful performance reviews from your boss in the past.
2. List the particular P.E.A.K.S. your boss considers most important.
Sort this list of performance criteria according to the P.E.A.K.S. they
exemplify. These performance criteria may not have been identified
as P.E.A.K.S. during your last performance review, but you can iden-
tify them as such. If, for example, your boss informed you in your last
performance review that you were perceived as “abrasive” by your
102
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

peers and you “should do something about this,” you might list “per-
ceived as cooperative and empathetic by peers” under desired “Per-
sonal Characteristics.”
3. Collect documents that demonstrate that you have met or exceeded
expectations. Performance figures, letters of appreciation, awards, ci-
tations, certificates—any document that gives evidence of one or
more of the high-priority P.E.A.K.S. you have demonstrated since
your last performance review should be collected. To review the tech-
niques for getting documents you’ve earned that you don’t already
have, refer to “Strategies for Creating New Documents for Your Col-
lection,” in Chapter 2.
4. Organize your portfolio using a P.E.A.K.S. format. Sort the above
documents according to their P.E.A.K.S. categories.
5. Select the best documents to show. Choose the documents that give
the strongest evidence that you have met or exceeded important ex-
pectations. Since, unlike on a job interview, you will be trying to
show most, if not all, of the documents in your portfolio, try to select
no more than a dozen documents.
6. Assemble two copies of your entire portfolio. Since you may be leav-
ing a copy of your entire portfolio with your boss, you should create
a second copy. The copy you leave with your boss should be some-
thing that can be easily slipped into a briefcase—a light, cardboard
binder that has metal clips that you fold back is probably preferable
to a heavier, three-ring, loose-leaf binder. Your boss’s copy should be
organized in the same way that yours is, with dividers and
P.E.A.K.S. headings. There is, of course, no need to delete propri-
etary information from internal documents.
Try to show the entire portfolio. Using a portfolio for an annual
performance review is different from using it for a job interview in that
you want your portfolio to become the center of attention. Obviously
you would like to linger on the P.E.A.K.S. that are most important to
your boss, but if you can, you should show every item in your portfolio.
Your goal is to demonstrate that you have met or exceeded as many of
your boss’s expectations as you can.
The kind of presentation that you are hoping to be able to make
would go something like this:
Last year, these goals were identified:
We agreed I would accomplish this [list goals here]. Here is what I did [list
accomplishments here].
We agreed I would work on these skills [list deficiencies here]. Here is what
I did [list improvements here].
We were looking for a 125% increase in production and according to the
latest production report we are at 145%.
In order to control the flow of your presentation, do not give your
boss a copy of your portfolio until after you are finished discussing the
items in your portfolio.
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
103

You will also want to make sure that by the end of the review you
have a clear idea of the P.E.A.K.S. that your boss wants you to focus on
in the future. With this knowledge you can begin preparing for your
next performance review.
Use 2: To Get a Raise
Using a portfolio to get a raise is quite similar to using a portfolio to get
a good performance review. In both cases, you will want to show every-
thing in your portfolio that gives evidence of your having met your
boss’s expectations. And you should prepare a second copy of your en-
tire portfolio to leave with your boss. If you have not done so yet, it
would be helpful to first review the suggestions made above for using a
portfolio to get a good performance review.
Here are some further things to think about.
Know the reasons why you might qualify for a raise. You will want
to include documents in your portfolio that help you make your case.
But first you need to know what your case is. Why might you qualify for
a raise? Were you promised a raise if you met certain expectations?
Does your organization offer merit increases if certain criteria are met?
Do industry salary figures reveal that other people are being paid more
than you are for essentially the same job? Have you taken on new re-
sponsibilities in your job that should qualify you for a raise? Are you of-
fering to take on new responsibilities?
Talk with someone who has been successful at getting a raise from
your boss. If you are going for a raise, it’s helpful to talk with someone
in your organization who has been successful at getting a raise from
your boss. Find out about the particular P.E.A.K.S. that most impressed
your boss.
In addition to P.E.A.K.S. documents, gather other key evidence that
supports your case. In addition to documents that demonstrate the
P.E.A.K.S. your boss considers most important, get documents that sup-
port the particular case you are making. If you believe you are under-
paid, get a document that quotes industry salary levels for your kind of
job. This data can usually be found using an Internet search engine. If
you have taken on additional responsibilities not originally assigned to
you that you believe qualify you for a raise, include a copy of your orig-
inal job description along with your write-up of your present responsi-
bilities.
Use 3: To Get a Promotion
Using your portfolio to get a promotion is quite similar to creating and
using a Can-Do Portfolio to get a job with a new employer, particularly
if the promotion is not controlled by your present boss. However, there
are some differences that can work in your favor when you are compet-
ing against people from outside your organization.
Being inside an organization means you are well placed to find out
about the precise P.E.A.K.S. that the people who will be interviewing
you consider most important. And you are in a good position to demon-
104
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

strate your ability to meet expectations in ways that are very mean-
ingful to the people who interview you. When going for a promotion,
here are some things to think about, in addition to the suggestions
made earlier in Chapters 3 and 6 on creating and using a portfolio to
pursue a job with a new employer.
Demonstrate that you are a reliable performer who is ready for a
new challenge. Your goal is to show that you can be relied upon to do
what you are asked to do and you are ready for a new challenge. You
should include documents that demonstrate you have consistently met
past expectations during your tenure in this organization. Including
these items is particularly important if someone who does not know you
very well is evaluating you for this promotion. But, unlike a portfolio
that you use to get a good performance evaluation, you do not want to
have in this portfolio mostly documents that demonstrate your ability
to handle your present job. If you do so, you might come across as being
indispensable in that job! The focus of your portfolio should instead be
on the P.E.A.K.S. you have developed that make you ready to take on
the new job.
Use your access to insiders to learn as much as you can about the
new job and boss. Here’s where you have a big advantage over out-
siders applying for the job. Talk to the people in your organization (or
to friends of friends in the organization) who can tell you about the ex-
pectations associated with the job. What are the specific responsibili-
ties, activities, and goals associated with the job? What are the partic-
ular P.E.A.K.S. that the person to whom you would report is seeking in
a candidate? Are there people from human resources who will also be
interviewing you? If so, what are their biases? If there was a problem
in the past with how this job was done, what was it, and how can you
present yourself as someone who can make significant improvements?
Get documents that verify relevant P.E.A.K.S. you have developed
in your current position or elsewhere. When collecting documents for
your portfolio, you should not limit yourself to items associated with
your present job. You are trying to demonstrate that you have what it
takes to succeed in a new job, which means that the desired P.E.A.K.S.
are likely to be somewhat different from those required for your present
job. Any document that gives evidence of one or more of the desired
P.E.A.K.S., regardless of where or when you developed these P.E.A.K.S.,
should be considered. It could be a document associated with a job you
once had at a different company, or maybe an item from a volunteer or
school activity that demonstrates one of these key P.E.A.K.S.
Show more portfolio items than if you were going for a job outside
your organization. When you are applying for a promotion, the people
who interview you are typically still thinking of you as someone in your
present job. The burden is on you to demonstrate that you have impor-
tant dimensions that your interviewers may have overlooked. To
counter current biases, you may wish to show more items from your
portfolio than you normally would if you were interviewing for a job at
a different organization. You want to make sure that you can present
concrete evidence that you have the very P.E.A.K.S. that are being
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
105

sought in a candidate. And you will want to keep focusing on the future,
or the interviewer might think you are too good to lose in your present
position.
You might wish to leave a full copy of your portfolio behind, so that
the people who are evaluating you can be reminded that your abilities
are far more extensive than they might have initially thought.
To see an example of how a portfolio might be targeted for a pro-
motion, you can refer to the Amanda Ferraro case in Part 2.
Use 4: To Make Lateral Moves within Your Organization
A portfolio can be very helpful if your goal is to make a lateral move in
your present organization. Here we are talking about moving sideways
without necessarily moving up in the chain of command. Getting a sub-
stantially different work assignment or a new kind of job in a different
department are examples of lateral moves. Reasons for pursuing such
a change may include wanting to gain broader experience within an or-
ganization, wanting to work with different colleagues, or wanting to
work on a specific assignment.
To assemble a useful portfolio, you should do many of the things
that we suggest you do if you are seeking a promotion. However, you
should also remember that the further the lateral move would take you
from your present setting, the more likely you are to be misinformed
about the key P.E.A.K.S. and responsibilities associated with the new
job. Therefore, it is particularly important that you learn as much as
you can about the new opportunity from people in the organization who
can give you reliable information about both the job and the person to
whom you will be reporting. Here are two other things to consider as
well.
Try to include evidence in your portfolio that you are a quick and
dedicated learner. You want to be able to make the statement “I can
learn new things quickly” and be able to back it up—particularly if the
new job is perceived as a real stretch for you. Documents that refer to
successful projects you have done in the past that required a lot of on-
the-spot learning demonstrate that you are a “quick study.” Evidence
that you have continually engaged in professional development activi-
ties, like attending workshops, could demonstrate that you are orient-
ed toward continually learning new things.
Feature P.E.A.K.S. from your present job that would be useful in the
new job. Rarely are two jobs entirely different. Any of the P.E.A.K.S.
that are important in your present job that would be considered very
useful in the new job should be demonstrated in your portfolio—espe-
cially if these P.E.A.K.S. are particular strengths of yours.
Use 5: To Change Careers
Changing careers means making a radical shift in the work you do. Ex-
amples of a career change include taking on a totally different kind of
job in the same field, like transitioning from being a stage actor to be-
coming a marketing person for a theatrical company. Or, even more
106
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

challenging, changing careers could involve changing both the kind of
job you have and the field in which you will be doing the new job. An
example is switching from being a schoolteacher to being a computer
salesperson.
If you want to get a job that is completely different from what you
are doing now, a properly targeted Can-Do Portfolio can help you to con-
vince a potential employer to take a chance on you. Since lateral moves
within the same organization can sometimes represent a fundamental
career shift, the advice given earlier in this chapter on making internal
lateral moves applies here as well. It must, however, be adjusted to the
fact that you are also seeking to move to a new organization, if that’s
what you are trying to do. Here are some further things to consider if
you are seeking to make a truly radical shift in your career.
Explain your “translatable skills” that will be useful in the new job.
Skills that you have developed in one context that can be used in a new
arena are often referred to as transferable skills. You probably have al-
ready developed and demonstrated a number of skills that could ulti-
mately be used in the new career you are trying to enter. The problem
is you may need to do some “translating” so that your potential em-
ployer understands that you, in fact, do have relevant transferable
skills.
If, for example, you are a nurse who is applying for a position in an
advertising agency, you can’t expect your interviewers to immediately
understand the relevance of your nursing background for being a suc-
cessful account executive or office manager. But, you can show your in-
terviewers a picture of disgruntled and anxious faces in an overcrowd-
ed physician’s waiting room and explain how you have to use your
people skills to calm these patients down and establish rapport with
them. And you can show your interviewers letters you have received
from grateful patients and say: “You know, people are people. Given the
way I’ve been able to handle patients with very distressing medical
problems, I think I could be quite effective working with some of your
most demanding clients.”
Use a P.E.A.K.S. functional resume. A resume that has P.E.A.K.S.
headings and uses a “functional” approach to organizing its items can
highlight useful transferable skills and other important “translatable”
P.E.A.K.S. that a prospective employer might otherwise miss. If the
items in your portfolio verify the P.E.A.K.S. you feature in your resume,
handing your interviewer a copy of your resume at the start of the in-
terview will set you up to show these key items from your portfolio.
To review the particulars of why a P.E.A.K.S. functional resume
makes sense for career-switchers, and how to create one of these re-
sumes, refer to Chapter 5. For a quick overview, see “P.E.A.K.S. resumes
are particularly useful for identifying transferable skills” and “Consid-
er whether a chronological or functional overall plan works best for
you,” in Chapter 5.
Be prepared to show many items from your portfolio. Since you
may have to overcome initial skepticism about your ability to add value
in your new career, be prepared to show more of your portfolio than you
would if you were not trying to make a radical shift.
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
107

For an example of a career-switcher’s Can-Do Portfolio, see Karen
Cresson’s in Part 2.
Use 6: To Get Consulting Assignments
If you are a consultant seeking to build your practice, a properly tar-
geted portfolio can be a very useful marketing tool during meetings
with potential clients. Brochures and Web sites are excellent vehicles
for making people aware of who you are and what your basic services
are. They can also help you get appointments with potential clients. But
when it comes time to sell your services to a potential client, a target-
ed portfolio can help tremendously.
When you meet with a potential client, two essential things have
to be established if you are to get the assignment. The client needs to
believe that you have the right expertise to help him or her and the
client must feel a rapport with you. A properly targeted and presented
portfolio is a wonderful vehicle for establishing both your level of ex-
pertise and a feeling of rapport. Here’s how it’s done.
Prepare a portfolio that demonstrates you have the expertise this
person is seeking. A client’s perception of your “expertise” will be de-
termined not just by the technical skills you are perceived to have, but
by assessments of your other P.E.A.K.S., as well. Prior to assembling
your portfolio, try to find out as much as you can about your prospec-
tive client’s problems and opportunities and about what kinds of
P.E.A.K.S. this person thinks a useful consultant should have. To get
this information you can use the same basic techniques described in
“How to Select Items to Include in Your Can-Do Portfolio” in Chapter 3.
If possible, try to have a phone conversation with this person prior to
your meeting to learn as much as you can about the reason why this
person is considering using a consultant and the desired P.E.A.K.S. of
the consultant being sought. Talk to people who either know this per-
son or are familiar with the kind of business and situation this person
is in.
The better you understand the kinds of P.E.A.K.S. that your poten-
tial client believes an expert consultant should have, the easier it will be
for you to select the right documents to include in your portfolio.
Present your portfolio in a way that establishes a feeling of rapport.
A feeling of rapport—a sense that you and your potential client are
“connecting” in a very positive way—is most likely to come if you place
the emphasis, not on your portfolio and not on yourself, but on your po-
tential client. Focus on being responsive to her hopes and fears. Ask
questions. Listen very carefully and with empathy. And then selective-
ly, in response to particular comments made or questions asked, show
some documents from your portfolio. Show enough documents to estab-
lish your credibility as an expert who can help this person. But beyond
that, you run the danger of overselling. You are better off leaving your
potential client with the feeling that you have a lot of impressive things
left in your “bag of tricks” that there just wasn’t enough time to go
through. A potential client who wants to see you again can very well be-
come a paying client.
108
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Use 7: To Get into College or Graduate School
As noted in Chapter 1, a properly targeted portfolio can give you a sig-
nificant advantage if you are competing for admission to a school that
interviews its applicants. The items in your portfolio can bring to life
and make credible the things you say about yourself in your written ap-
plication. And the fact that you have gone to the effort of assembling a
portfolio to bring to an interview conveys the impression that you are
strongly motivated, well organized, and “have your act together,” so to
speak—provided, of course, that the items you show from your portfo-
lio do not undermine or contradict statements you have made in your
written application! Here are some further things to consider.
Learn about the P.E.A.K.S. the school particularly favors and likes
to develop. Talk to someone closely associated with the school about the
P.E.A.K.S. that are most valued in candidates for admission and the
particular P.E.A.K.S. that the school prides itself on being able to de-
velop. Ideally, you should talk to someone in the admissions depart-
ment prior to your interview. But you can also learn a lot about valued
P.E.A.K.S. by talking to successful students, professors, and recent
graduates. This step really should be done prior to sending in your ap-
plication, as it will help you decide if this school would be a good fit for
you.
Use your portfolio to establish your distinct identity. You should in-
clude documents that demonstrate P.E.A.K.S. that are clearly valued
by the school. But there should also be a focus to your portfolio that es-
tablishes a clear identity for you. You want to be remembered in a pos-
itive way after the interview is over, and this is most likely to happen
if you can present a set of items that establishes you as a certain kind
of person who can make a certain kind of contribution. If you want to
be remembered as being a natural leader, then make sure you have a
set of documents that demonstrates this quality. If you have a special
interest that you have developed, include three or more items that
demonstrate your interest. Or, if you have a personal characteristic like
resourcefulness or persistence in the face of adversity, be prepared to
prove it. You can have several areas of concentration or themes in your
portfolio, but if there is no distinctive way of summing up what you are
presenting, you can’t expect to get a forceful endorsement from an in-
terviewer.
Try to “stay on message” when presenting your portfolio. Since your
goal is to have the interviewer be able to sum you up in a very positive
way in a few sentences, you should try to show as many items as you
can that support the distinct identity that you are trying to establish.
You will, of course, want to be responsive to the questions you are
asked. And you don’t want to be so focused on the points you are trying
to make that you are boringly repetitive. But it’s not a bad thing to be
remembered as being passionate about your interests.
If you are very confident of your portfolio and most of the items are
self-explanatory, you should bring along an extra copy of your portfolio
that you can give to your interviewer as a way of keeping you in his
mind.
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
109

ORGANIZATIONAL AND CAREER COUNSELING USES
As noted earlier, in addition to individuals using Can-Do Portfolios to
boost their own careers, career counselors and organizations can also
make good use of this portfolio system. The following three ways show
how.
Use 1: Career Counseling, Placement, and Outplacement
If you are engaged in some aspect of the career counseling/placement
business, having clients develop and use a career portfolio will increase
your ability to help them achieve their career goals and make sound ca-
reer decisions. Your role here is to coach your clients through the
process of creating and using portfolios. A structured way to do this is
to have your clients read sections of this book to get started and then
discuss with them what they have come up with. Here are some of the
expected benefits.
Your clients will have a power tool for getting jobs, raises, and pro-
motions. Hopefully, by now you’re in agreement with the proposition
that a well-targeted career portfolio can be a very powerful tool for mar-
keting oneself in the world of work. Making your clients aware of this
power tool and encouraging them to use it properly will enhance their
ability to get what they want in their careers.
Your clients will be better able to bounce back from adversity. A ca-
reer portfolio, as we will see in the next chapter, is not just a tool for
moving ahead, it’s also an excellent weapon for fighting back from ad-
versity. Not only does having a portfolio enable clients who have been
“beaten up” in the workplace to regain a competitive edge. The process
of assembling a portfolio is, in itself, a great confidence booster, since it
requires a person to review documents that demonstrate his or her ad-
mirable P.E.A.K.S.
Your clients will be able to make better career decisions. As they
create their portfolios, your clients will gain knowledge about them-
selves and the work world, which will help them make career choices
that are right for them.
The process of identifying and assessing documents for their Mas-
ter Portfolio is likely to give your clients a strong sense of what they
like to do and the situations that seem to bring out the best in them.
The process of doing informational interviews to target their port-
folios will help your clients determine which jobs and fields are most
appealing to them and whether or not they have the P.E.A.K.S. to suc-
ceed in these areas. Armed with this self-knowledge and marketplace
knowledge, your clients will be in a good position to make career deci-
sions that work for them.
Use 2: Staffing and Other Human Resource Management Activities
In earlier sections of this chapter, we discussed using Can-Do Portfo-
lios, targeting career P.E.A.K.S., for performance reviews, raises, pro-
motions, and job changes within an organization, all from the individ-
110
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

ual’s point of view. Here we’d like to make the point that organizations
can benefit from having their employees use the Can-Do Portfolio sys-
tem, as well.
An organization can use this system to do the following:
I Encourage employees to continue to develop themselves in produc-
tive ways
I Get the right people in the right jobs
Here are ways you can use the Can-Do Portfolio system to do this.
Encourage P.E.A.K.S. informational interviews within your organi-
zation. Employees who are encouraged, even required, to do a certain
number of informational interviews in their organization are likely to
become more proactive in managing their careers within the organiza-
tion. Conducting informational interviews will enable them to develop
a better idea of what kinds of jobs and activities would be most ap-
pealing to them in the future. And, if they ask P.E.A.K.S. questions,
they will improve their understanding of the P.E.A.K.S. they will need
to develop to get desired work assignments and promotions.
If the culture of an organization does not explicitly encourage em-
ployees to go on informational interviews, few people will feel comfort-
able doing so. To have a successful program, managers must be en-
couraged to grant informational interviews. Managers who do so are
likely to find that responding to questions during these interviews
sharpens their own thinking about the key things involved in the posi-
tions being discussed.
Require portfolios for annual reviews that cover all of the
P.E.A.K.S. categories. Requiring employees to present portfolios that
have documents from each of the P.E.A.K.S. categories during annual
reviews improves the chances that professional development issues will
be worked on throughout the year and properly discussed during the
performance review.
During annual reviews, in addition to discussing an employee’s ac-
complishments, progress made developing useful skills and knowledge
and the extent to which relevant experience has been gained may be
looked at as well. Personal characteristics can also be discussed to the
extent that they are relevant to the employee’s performance of her job.
For example, if an employee has demonstrated a greater patience with
customers during the past year, this could be commended. And if more
work needs to be done in this area, this room for improvement can be
noted and discussed.
For this “Total P.E.A.K.S.” portfolio approach to be successful,
managers should be required to unambiguously specify the particular
kinds of P.E.A.K.S. that their subordinates should seek to develop and
demonstrate in the upcoming year.
Create a P.E.A.K.S. master resume database. As noted in Chapter
1, firms that are most adept at reshuffling their employees to capital-
ize on emerging opportunities can gain a significant competitive ad-
vantage by using P.E.A.K.S. master resumes. Requiring employees to
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
111

periodically submit updated resumes that feature the full range of
their P.E.A.K.S. can help management identify the right people for
promotions and internal reassignments.
The key is to get employees to include not only the P.E.A.K.S.
demonstrated during their most recent job or jobs at the organization
but also strong P.E.A.K.S. developed outside the organization. You can
achieve this by having employees keep their P.E.A.K.S. master resumes
on file. To review the technique for assembling this kind of resume,
refer to “Creating a P.E.A.K.S. Master Resume” in Chapter 5.
Require Can-Do Portfolios in promotion and other staffing inter-
views. Requiring people who are applying for promotions, lateral trans-
fers, and other new work assignments to present their portfolios gives
management the opportunity to test the extent to which these appli-
cants have the P.E.A.K.S. considered most desirable in candidates for
these positions.
Use 3: Academic Settings
Schools and universities can use the Can-Do Portfolio system in a num-
ber of useful ways, including:
I Helping students get jobs
I Assisting students in getting into advanced academic programs
I Aiding students in setting career goals
I Assessing student progress
I Evaluating the effectiveness of the school’s curricula
Here are some steps to follow to achieve the above goals.
Identify the desirable P.E.A.K.S. for the students’ next steps. When
designing curricula, schools should take responsibility for identifying
the particular P.E.A.K.S. their students need to develop to get into ad-
vanced academic programs and to get the jobs they will be seeking.
One-on-one interviews and focus groups with desired employers and
graduate schools can be used to accomplish this goal.
Students should be encouraged to do informational interviews as
early as possible in their academic careers so they can set realistic ca-
reer goals and identify the specific P.E.A.K.S. they will need to develop
to achieve their goals upon graduation.
Encourage and help students to prepare Can-Do Portfolios. This
service can be coordinated by a school’s career services office, or, even
better, the process can be embedded in the school’s curriculum. The ca-
reer services office can offer workshops and counseling on how to pre-
pare and use a Can-Do Portfolio that will help students achieve their
career goals. On the academic side, students should be encouraged, or
required, to assemble a Master Portfolio as they progress through their
programs.
We have included an example of a student’s Can-Do Portfolio in
Part 2. It was developed by Peter Evans, who is graduating from com-
munity college and applying for his first job.
112
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Help students get feedback on their portfolios before they use them
in job interviews. Alumni and others who are already in the fields that
students aspire to enter can be recruited to evaluate student portfolios
before the students present their portfolios in actual job interviews. The
feedback from this evaluation process is of tremendous value, not only
to the students whose portfolios are being critiqued but also to those in
charge of developing university curricula. Those responsible for fund-
raising at the school are likely to be supportive of the idea of getting
alumni involved in the process of advising students, as it is a nice way
of keeping alma mater alive in the hearts and minds of alumni.
Use student portfolios for assessing student progress and quality of
curricula. Periodically assessing the quality of the portfolios that stu-
dents create within a particular academic program is a useful way of
evaluating not only the progress of individual students but also the ef-
fectiveness of the curriculum.
FINAL THOUGHTS
We’ve been reminded in this chapter that there are many good uses for
career portfolios. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that a port-
folio is only as good as the documents in it. And, if you only concern
yourself with your portfolio at the times when you might need it, you
are not likely to be able to come up with all of your best material. Not
on short notice.
In the next chapter we will explore ways you can continue to de-
velop your Master Portfolio, so that you will have on tap the very docu-
ments you need, when you need them.
Chapter 7: Getting That Raise and Other Important Uses for Portfolios
113

This page intentionally left blank.

8
Developing Your Portfolio
to Protect and Advance Your Career
OVERVIEW
This chapter focuses on how you can continue to develop your portfolio
over time in a way that protects your present career and brings you
closer to achieving your career dreams.
Many people have concerns about the stability of their present 
employment situation and most people have dreams about what they
hope to be doing in the future. A portfolio can alleviate anxieties and
help make dreams come true. In this chapter we’ll show you how.
Specifically, we will show you how developing three key portfolio habits
will enable you to:
I Achieve greater security in your present career
I Position yourself to realize your career dreams
YOUR MASTER PORTFOLIO CAN MAKE YOUR 
PRESENT CAREER MORE SECURE
Much has been written about how lifetime employment and job securi-
ty are a thing of the past in most organizations these days. It’s true. Re-
gardless of how well you perform and how well you are liked at your
present job, all it takes is a downturn in the economy, a superior prod-
115
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

uct or service suddenly being offered by a global competitor, or maybe
being taken over by another company. And poof, through no fault of
your own, you are suddenly “seeking other opportunities.” It doesn’t
matter that your boss recently told you, “You’ll always have a job here.”
She’s been fired, too!
When working to achieve greater security in your career, here are
some important things to keep in mind.
Your employability is your real source of security. An alternative to
pinning all of your hopes for continuing employment on the “security”
of your present job is to develop your “employability.”
Your employability is the ability you have right now, given your
present credentials, to find someone in the marketplace who would be
willing to hire you. As many commentators have written, the quality of
your employability is the best gauge these days of how strong your
prospects are for continuing to be employed without prolonged invol-
untary disruptions.
Two key indicators of the quality of your current employability are
(1) the speed with which you could be hired for a new job and (2) the
quality of the job you could get.
Obviously, the current state of the economy and of the job market
in your field set the general conditions for the quality of your employa-
bility at any given time. But your level of employability isn’t something
that just happens to you. There are steps you can take, particularly
with a portfolio, to enhance your employability.
Your employability comes from having marketable P.E.A.K.S. It’s
quite simple: The more desirable your P.E.A.K.S. are to employers in a
particular industry, the more employable you are in that field. And, of
course, if you are versatile and have P.E.A.K.S. that would be consid-
ered valuable in more than one field, you are that much more employ-
able. Having good contacts can bring you to the attention of prospective
employers, but if you don’t have the P.E.A.K.S. they are looking for, you
are dead in the water.
Your Master Portfolio can be your “employability fund.” If you sud-
denly found yourself unemployed and looking for a job, you would want
to have some money in an account you could draw on to make up for
your lost paycheck. The greater your savings, the more financial secu-
rity you would have during periods of unemployment. But a “rainy day”
fund won’t get you a job!
Wouldn’t it be nice if, in addition to having a savings account to
deal with the financial issues associated with periods of unemploy-
ment, you could also have a “career account” that in times of emergency
could be drawn on to help you get your career back on track?
This career account is, in fact, your Master Portfolio. Your deposits
into this “account” are the documents you have added that demonstrate
your P.E.A.K.S. If it is well stocked with the items that verify the
P.E.A.K.S. that employers are currently seeking in candidates, it is, in
effect, your “employability fund.” If you find yourself suddenly needing
a job, you can draw on this account to put together Can-Do Portfolios
that give you your best chance of getting quickly employed again.
116
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Later in this chapter we will go over the three key portfolio habits
that will enable you to develop a Master Portfolio that becomes a very
rich and well-diversified employability fund. Job security may be a
thing of the past, but the confidence that comes from knowing you are
very employable can definitely be part of your future.
MASTER PORTFOLIOS CAN ALSO HELP IF YOU HAVE A CAREER DREAM
So far we’ve talked about developing your Master Portfolio as protec-
tion against worst-case scenarios. A Master Portfolio is also an excel-
lent vehicle for realizing career dreams. We will talk about the specifics
of how this is done in a moment. But there’s an important first step,
and that is to have a career dream.
We are not talking here about your hoped-for next job, unless, of
course, the next job you have in mind is the ideal job you were always
hoping to someday have. We are talking about your dreams for the fu-
ture, the career or job that you think would be ideal to have someday,
but you are not so sure is very likely to happen. Your Master Portfolio
can help you make it happen. But, again, a dream can only come true
if you have one.
If you haven’t done this already, you need to get some ideas as to
what you might want to do in your future work life. The process of as-
sembling your Master Portfolio is likely to have helped you identify the
things you like to do and the situations that bring out the best in you.
And this information in turn can suggest future jobs and careers that
might appeal to you.
If you are still having trouble deciding what your ideal job or ca-
reer might be in the future, we would recommend that you try some of
the self-assessments provided in the best popular career development
books, which include Richard Bolles’ What Color Is Your Parachute?
(Ten Speed Press, 2002), Mary Burton and Richard Wedemeyer’s In
Transition (HarperBusiness, 1992), and Edgar Schein’s Career Anchors:
Discovering Your Real Values (Pfeiffer, 1990).
Once you know what your career dream is, developing the three
key career portfolio habits can make it become a reality.
THE THREE KEY CAREER PORTFOLIO HABITS
Once you have assembled your initial Master Portfolio, you can easily
continue to develop it in ways that will prove extremely useful to you
throughout your entire career. If you can make it a point to follow three
simple portfolio rules for a while, the results will be so rewarding these
portfolio “rules” are likely to become your “portfolio habits.” The three
key portfolio habits are:
1. Keep learning about the P.E.A.K.S. you need.
2. Always get documents for the P.E.A.K.S. you have developed.
3. Pursue activities that will develop your missing P.E.A.K.S.
Chapter 8: Developing Your Portfolio to Protect and Advance Your Career
117

Let’s have a look at each of these useful habits.
Habit 1: Continuing to Learn about the P.E.A.K.S. You Need
To update and develop your Master Portfolio in a useful way, you need
to know what kinds of documents to go after and collect. The basic
guideline for identifying items to pursue is to determine whether or not
these items verify one or more of the P.E.A.K.S. you might need to pro-
tect or advance your career. We suggest that you keep learning as much
as you can about the P.E.A.K.S. required to achieve the following:
1. Getting the near-term things you have already targeted, such as a
next job or raise,
2. Enhancing your employability, in case you suddenly need a new job,
and
3. Positioning yourself to go after your long-term dream job or career.
Since the world of work is continually changing, you would do well
to develop the habit of continually learning about the P.E.A.K.S. you
will need to protect and advance your career. It would make good sense
to do this, even if you weren’t developing a portfolio. And so, we would
encourage you to do the following things.
Keep on top of P.E.A.K.S. you will need to get the things you are
going for right now. Whatever career opportunity is in your sights
right now—a raise, a new work assignment, a next job—keep learning
about the P.E.A.K.S. that the people who will be assessing you consid-
er most desirable. To do this you can continue to use the techniques de-
scribed earlier in this book in Chapters 3 and 4 for identifying the key
P.E.A.K.S. associated with targeted opportunities.
Keep tracking the P.E.A.K.S. you would need to be hired for a job
like yours. Yes, you already have this job, but if you were to lose it, what
P.E.A.K.S. would you need to have to get another position like yours
somewhere else at your present salary? It is easy to get so caught up in
the demands of your current job you neglect the professional develop-
ment activities that keep you up to date in your field. You may also find
yourself becoming a “local expert” in areas that are useful to your cur-
rent organization but have little value to other organizations. If people
are turning to you because of your expertise in an arcane computer sys-
tem that was customized for your company years ago, that’s not neces-
sarily a specialized knowledge that other employers would value.
To learn about the “employability P.E.A.K.S.” you need in order to
get a job similar to the one you have right now, do some of the follow-
ing steps:
I Review recent job postings and job descriptions for positions like
yours.
I Have conversations with knowledgeable insiders. Tell them you want
to keep up and ask which P.E.A.K.S. are becoming most in demand
for your kind of job.
118
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

I Read industry publications, paying particular attention to industry
trends that may signal a shift in the P.E.A.K.S. needed for positions
like yours.
I Attend professional conferences to learn about current issues in your
field.
I Engage in shoptalk with your counterparts in other organizations to
learn about the challenges they face and the P.E.A.K.S. they have
demonstrated.
I Note the things you are told during a performance review that you
are doing well and those things that you need to improve, as this
could provide a succinct list of the key P.E.A.K.S. needed for your job.
I Seek feedback on your performance from work associates and cus-
tomers, again to understand the P.E.A.K.S. needed for your job.
Learn as much as you can about the P.E.A.K.S. you need for your
dream job. Once you know the kind of job you might want to have in
the future, you will want to know what you should do to give yourself
your best chance of being able to eventually get this job. Informational
interviews can help you address both of these concerns, if you find the
right people to interview and ask the right questions.
In Chapter 4, we explored the basic techniques for finding the best
people to interview. These techniques still apply here, except that you
now want to be on the lookout for people who, in addition to being
knowledgeable insiders, also have a little bit of the visionary in them.
Finding forward-thinking people to interview becomes particularly im-
portant if your ideal job or career is something you would like to do in
the far-off future, since the desirable P.E.A.K.S. will likely have
changed by then.
There’s no perfect formula for finding visionary people to inter-
view. But one way is to get the word out that you are particularly in-
terested in talking to people who could offer insights into how the job
and field that you are interested in learning more about may be chang-
ing in the future.
As for asking the right questions, we would suggest that, in addi-
tion to covering the topics recommended in Chapter 4, you also do the
following:
I Try to get a “futuristic job preview.” You should definitely still ask for
a realistic job preview that describes the job as it is right now, since
this is the known reality that, in fact, may not change very much in
the future. But you should also ask for the interviewee’s thoughts on
what this job might be like in the future. Then ask yourself, Do these
descriptions make you feel tingly with excitement? Or do they turn
you off?
I Get your interviewee’s thoughts on the P.E.A.K.S. that candidates for
these jobs will need to have in the future. Can you develop these
P.E.A.K.S.? More importantly, do you want to develop these
P.E.A.K.S.?
Chapter 8: Developing Your Portfolio to Protect and Advance Your Career
119

I Make sure to get a thorough explanation of the interviewee’s
thoughts on the personal characteristics that incumbents of the job
will need to have. If it sounds like the job would be a “natural” for
you, great. But if it doesn’t fit your natural style, that’s a flashing yel-
low light, signaling, “Caution!”
I Ask your interviewee about the specific things you would need to do
to eventually get the kind of job you have been discussing. Will you
need further formal education? Are there particular kinds of work as-
signments or other projects you should be seeking? Are there certain
kinds of job experience you will need before you can go after this job?
Ask yourself if these are things you are willing to do in order to get
this job. And if they are, find out about the specific P.E.A.K.S. that
you should endeavor to develop at each stop along the way.
Since the P.E.A.K.S. associated with the jobs and careers you are
considering for the future are likely to change over time, you would be
wise to keep finding out as much as you can about latest developments
in these areas. Articles in industry publications and conversations with
informed insiders are particularly good sources for this kind of infor-
mation.
Learning about the P.E.A.K.S. you will need to protect and ad-
vance your career will give you a good idea as to the kinds of documents
you would like to have in your Master Portfolio. Developing the next
two habits will enable you to get these documents.
Habit 2: Always Getting Documents for the P.E.A.K.S. 
You Have Developed
If you do nothing else with regard to developing your Master Portfolio,
at least do this: Whenever you’ve done something that demonstrates
one of the P.E.A.K.S. you might need, get something tangible you can
put in your portfolio that verifies this.
The document may just come your way, like a letter of apprecia-
tion. Or it could be a natural by-product of something you’ve done, like
an end-of-the-season group photo of a children’s team you coached.
If something useful falls in your lap, that’s easy, just save it in your
Master Portfolio collection. But sometimes you have to be more proac-
tive and go after items that will document what you have done.
As we mentioned in Chapter 2, if there are no items readily avail-
able to give tangible evidence of something important you have done,
you should create such a document. To remind yourself how to do this,
you might want to take another look at Chapter 2, under the section en-
titled “Strategies for Creating New Documents for Your Collection.”
Habit 3: Pursuing Activities That Will Develop 
Your Missing P.E.A.K.S.
Your missing P.E.A.K.S. are the ones you haven’t developed yet. It’s no
good looking for a document to verify one of these P.E.A.K.S., since you
haven’t done anything yet to merit such a document.
120
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

The way to rectify this situation, of course, is to pursue activities
that will both develop your missing P.E.A.K.S. and at the same time
give you the opportunity to prove you have done so. For example, if you
need a certain computer skill that you don’t have right now, you could
sign up for a course or workshop that teaches this skill and also gives
certificates upon successful completion. A student who needs evidence
of real-world marketing experience to get a desired job upon graduation
could volunteer to do a marketing plan for a struggling charity that
would write a letter of appreciation at the end of the project.
The following are ways to go about pursuing activities that will de-
velop your missing P.E.A.K.S.
Establish priorities for developing your missing P.E.A.K.S. Be-
cause you are unlikely to develop all of your missing P.E.A.K.S. simul-
taneously, it is a good idea to set some priorities. To help you do this,
here are some questions you might ask yourself:
I How secure is your current job right now?
I Is there something very important you need to remain employable
that you are missing?
I Is there something that is glaringly missing from your portfolio that
you will need in order to achieve your next career goal?
I What are the most important P.E.A.K.S. you are lacking that you will
need to achieve your long-term career plans?
Identify activities that will develop your high-priority missing
P.E.A.K.S. Choosing the right activities to develop your missing
P.E.A.K.S. is very important. To help you do this we have included a
worksheet in the appendix, “The Career P.E.A.K.S. Aspiration Work-
sheet,” which takes you step by step through the process of identifying
the development activities that are right for you. Whether or not you
choose to actually use this worksheet, you might want to at least take
a look at the step-by-step process for filling it in, as doing so may in-
spire you to come up with some good ideas. We also encourage you to
consider the following questions before deciding which activities to pur-
sue:
I What professional development activities have you been meaning to
get around to doing for some time now? You probably already know
what you should be doing to develop your P.E.A.K.S.
I What sort of development activities were you told in informational
interviews would be helpful?
I How long would it take to do each activity you are considering? You
can pick up a workshop quickly, but getting a further professional de-
gree is going to take a lot of advance planning.
I What will these activities cost you in both financial and personal
terms? And how great is their anticipated yield?
I Will you enjoy doing the activities you are considering? The bigger
the project the more difficulty you will have sticking with it, if it’s not
Chapter 8: Developing Your Portfolio to Protect and Advance Your Career
121

something that grabs your interest. And if you are not going to enjoy
this activity, will you really enjoy the job or career that requires it?
Consider creating a Will-Do Portfolio. Your Will-Do Portfolio is
your Can-Do Portfolio of the future. This is the targeted portfolio you
hope to be able to assemble when it comes time to apply for whatever
it is you are seeking in the future. A Will-Do Portfolio is, in effect, your
P.E.A.K.S. vision statement. It states the P.E.A.K.S. you intend to have
at a specific time in the future and it lists the specific documents that
you intend to have to verify these P.E.A.K.S.
The following are steps you need to create a Will-Do Portfolio:
1. List all of the P.E.A.K.S. you need to be able to achieve a future ca-
reer goal.
2. List the documents you presently have, or could get, that demon-
strate one or more of the above P.E.A.K.S. you have already devel-
oped.
3. List your missing P.E.A.K.S. These are the underdeveloped
P.E.A.K.S. for which you do not have documents.
4. List the activities you intend to pursue to develop your missing
P.E.A.K.S. and the documents you intend to earn to demonstrate
these P.E.A.K.S. The protocol for filling out the aspiration worksheet
that is included in the appendix will help you define these future ac-
tivities and documents.
It takes extra effort to actually create these lists, but consider the ben-
efits. A Will-Do Portfolio can help you maintain a proper focus on the
things you must do to get where you want to go. And it can also help
you identify the things you must not do—like pursuing superficially ap-
pealing career “opportunities” that sound nice but won’t actually help
you develop the P.E.A.K.S. you need to achieve your future career goal.
You don’t need to write a fancy essay to create a Will-Do Portfolio.
Just make a few lists you can look at every now and then.
Make sure it’s fun. If developing your missing P.E.A.K.S. sounds
like too much work, then you could very well be in the wrong field right
now or targeting the wrong future for your career. If that is the case,
doing further self-assessments and informational interviews could help
you identify what’s right for you.
Make it happen. All this planning is great, but it doesn’t mean a
thing if you don’t actually go out and do it. Once you have identified a
step you know you should take, today’s probably a good day to start.
FINAL THOUGHTS
There’s a danger here that we’ve made so many suggestions of ways
you can continue to develop your Master Portfolio that you will say,
“Sounds good, but I can’t possibly do all this stuff!” Fair enough. Nei-
ther of the authors does all of these things all the time. And we don’t
expect you to, either.
122
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

We are not trying to organize your lives with all these helpful
hints. We’ve made a lot of suggestions so that you can pick and choose
the ones you think might work for you. And we hope you will give at
least some of them a try. You will, after all, get out of your portfolio ex-
actly what you put into it.
If you do nothing else as a result of reading this chapter, we do
hope that you will develop Portfolio Habit 2:
Always get documents for the P.E.A.K.S. you have developed.
Make it a personal rule that whenever you have done something
that demonstrates one of the P.E.A.K.S. you might need, you will find a
way to get a document that verifies this. Do this one thing and your
Master Portfolio “career account” will continue to grow in very useful
ways. And here’s a nice bonus: This is an account you can draw on as
much as you like, without ever depleting it!
In the next chapter, we will explore some ways you can use a com-
puter, if you are so inclined, as a tool for developing and using your
portfolio.
Chapter 8: Developing Your Portfolio to Protect and Advance Your Career
123

This page intentionally left blank.

9
Digital Options for Your Portfolio
and Resume
OVERVIEW
In this chapter we will discuss ways in which you can use the comput-
er and the Internet to facilitate and enhance both the creation and the
presentation of your resume and portfolio.
Specifically, we will discuss the following:
I Creating and using digital resumes
I Getting digital help when creating your portfolio
I Presenting off-line digital portfolios
I Evaluating the pros and cons of having a Web-based portfolio
I The technical capabilities and constraints associated with different
digital formats
We believe that in most career situations presenting hard copy
portfolios in face-to-face meetings is the best way to achieve your career
objectives. Nevertheless, we believe that you should use the computer
and Internet to help with this process and to extend your reach. In this
chapter we will show you the ways in which a digital portfolio can help
you.
Let’s begin with your resume.
125
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

CREATING AND USING DIGITAL RESUMES
We strongly encourage you to create your resume in a digital format,
which will allow you to quickly target your resume by electronically
“cutting and pasting.” And, having your resume in a digital file means
you will be able to rapidly transmit your resume to as many people as
you like, provided that they have access to e-mail. Being able to quick-
ly create the right resume gives you a clear advantage in most situa-
tions that require a resume.
In Chapter 5, where we discussed techniques for creating resumes
that work particularly well with portfolios, we mentioned some advan-
tages that come from using a digital format for your resume and some
things to avoid, if you do so. The following is a review of what we said
with regard to digital options for your resume.
Begin by having your master resume in a computer file. It is ex-
tremely helpful to have an updated master resume on file in a digital
format so that you can put together a targeted resume on short notice.
This digital format would include everything you might want to con-
sider when creating a targeted resume and becomes a resource from
which you can select particular items for inclusion in a resume that is
targeted at obtaining a particular job or work assignment. If you save
this master resume in your computer as a template, you will have the
ability to quickly create a shorter targeted resume without danger of
losing the original. To create a targeted resume, you would simply make
a copy of your master resume, delete the items you don’t want to in-
clude, and then edit the rest.
Use a digital format that cannot be altered when printed. When
you e-mail a resume that is in a word processing format, such as Mi-
crosoft Word, the document may not print exactly as you sent it. For ex-
ample, a one-page resume that is forwarded in a word processing for-
mat may come out as more than one page when the recipient prints it.
For this reason, you may decide to e-mail your resume as an attach-
ment in an Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF). If you do so, you
will want to make sure that your recipient has the ability to read PDFs.
For more details on the pros and cons of using Microsoft Word versus
Adobe for transmitting documents, please see the section in this chap-
ter entitled “Technical Considerations.”
Use fonts and terms that computer programs will favorably identi-
fy. As mentioned in Chapter 5, keep in mind that resumes are often
scanned for key words and phrases by computers that act as gatekeep-
ers. Therefore, you will want to make sure that you use fonts that com-
puters can recognize. Also, try to use words and phrases that comput-
ers are likely to have been programmed to pick up, both when
describing the kind of job you are applying for and when describing
your P.E.A.K.S.
Once you post your resume, you should not retarget it at that site
very often. If you post your resume on a Web site, you can’t keep chang-
ing it at that site or you will lose credibility. However, if you have the
ability to post your resume at different Web sites that are meant for dif-
126
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

ferent audiences, you probably can post different resumes at each of
these sites without undermining your credibility.
GETTING DIGITAL HELP WHEN CREATING YOUR PORTFOLIO
In addition to using the computer for word processing, there are other
ways of getting digital help when creating your portfolio.
Use the Web to get images and information you want. You can use
Internet search engines to get all sorts of useful information and im-
ages for your portfolio. For example, if you are applying for a raise and
want to show your boss a printout that gives average salaries for your
kind of job in your part of the country, you can probably get the infor-
mation you need via the Web.
In Chapter 2, we mentioned that one of the authors of this book
used an Internet search engine to find the Web site for a school in
Brazil where he once was an instructor. He was able to download pic-
tures of this school in Rio de Janeiro, which he then combined with
other pictures he found of Rio, to create a visually appealing prop for
discussing his international experience.
The same author also downloaded a full-color picture of the British
flag from a Web site that sells flags, which he then attached to the first
page of a consulting contract he had with a British company. The intent
of including the flag was to visually reinforce the fact that he has sig-
nificant international experience.
Use CDs to store extra copies of Master Portfolio documents. If you
have access to the right computer equipment and software, you can
scan all of your portfolio documents into your computer and then burn
CDs to create backup copies of all of your documents. Obviously, you
don’t want to have everything only on the hard drive of your computer,
since, alas, computers do crash. To be extra safe, it’s a good idea to make
several CD copies of your portfolio documents and then store these in
separate locations.
PRESENTING OFF-LINE DIGITAL PORTFOLIOS
An off-line digital portfolio is one that is not posted at a Web site. In
most face-to-face interviewing situations you will want to hand people
documents that they can touch. They are more likely to trust an item
they can hold than something they see on a screen. Nevertheless, in
some situations presentation of your Can-Do Portfolio in a digital for-
mat can be quite effective.
You might show your portfolio via computer to demonstrate your
computer literacy. If you are interviewing for a job in the computer
field, consider bringing a laptop computer and showing items from your
portfolio to establish that you are someone who really likes to work
with computers. Having a digital portfolio on your laptop is not a daz-
zling technical feat, but it does show that you have computer sensibili-
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
127

ties and might give you an opening to discuss your computer creden-
tials.
Even in an intensely technical environment, it’s still probably a
bad idea to present your portfolio via computer. You run the risk of dis-
rupting the flow of the interview. You might be perceived as trying to
take control of the interview away from the interviewer by plopping
your laptop down in front of him or her. And there’s the danger that
your portfolio will become the focus of the interview, not you.
You might e-mail copies of digitized documents to your interviewer
after an interview. If you want to provide your interviewer with copies
of documents from your portfolio, e-mailing these documents as an at-
tachment might be an option, if they are digital files. Here are some
technical issues to bear in mind, if you are considering e-mailing a doc-
ument:
I Be sure the document is in a format that does not get changed with
transmission.
I Be sure that the recipient has the appropriate software to open the
file.
I Be sure that it won’t take a long time for your recipient to open the
file.
I If you compress the file so that it will not take a long time to trans-
mit and open, be sure that the images don’t become blurry as a result
of compression.
For a more detailed discussion of the above technical issues, please
see the section in this chapter entitled “Technical Considerations.”
Whether you send your documents by e-mail or conventional “snail
mail,” it’s important that you only send documents that have already
been thoroughly explained, so that your interviewer understands the
context for the documents and knows why they are important.
SHOULD YOU CREATE A WEB-BASED PORTFOLIO?
A digital alternative to e-mailing all or part of your portfolio as an at-
tachment is posting your portfolio at a Web site. As we will see in the
section below, “Technical Considerations,” the Hypertext Markup Lan-
guage (HTML) approach to transmitting your portfolio offers a number
of technical advantages over e-mail with regard to speed of transmis-
sion and ease of display. If you create a Web-based portfolio, you can
make your portfolio quickly available to as many people as you wish,
without imposing the burden of downloading a multimegabyte attach-
ment on anyone.
In addition to facilitating ease of transmission and display, a Web-
based portfolio can include buttons for learning more, as well as all of
the latest multimedia “bells and whistles,” including animations, film
clips of you in action, and voice-overs.
If a Web-based portfolio is done well, having one certainly conveys
the impression that you are technologically savvy.
128
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Scenarios in Which Having a Web-Based Portfolio 
Might Work for You
Use of Web-based portfolios presents certain problems, which we will
discuss in a moment, but first note that in certain scenarios having a
Web-based portfolio might make sense. Here are two.
You want to impress someone you happen to meet. Let’s say that on
an airplane or at a social function you happen to strike up a conversa-
tion with someone for whom you might like to work. To get this person
more interested in you, rather than just give her a business card and
probably never get a call, you could also give her a Web site address for
your portfolio. The Web site address can be included on your business
card. The person might find your portfolio intriguing and give you a call
to set up an appointment to discuss a job opportunity.
You can’t meet face to face. Perhaps you are granted a telephone
interview with a prospective employer with only a few hours’ notice. In
this instance, having a Web-based portfolio might give you the option of
being able to show items from your portfolio even though you can’t
meet face to face. If your interviewer has access to the Internet while
talking with you, and you feel comfortable proceeding in this fashion,
you can give him your portfolio’s Web address and refer him to items in
your portfolio that he would be able to quickly access.
Before you decide to create a Web-based portfolio, we would en-
courage you to consider the possibility that having to deal with one or
more of the following issues might limit the effectiveness of your online
portfolio.
Inclusion Issues
Certain items can’t be included because of the public nature of a web
site. Even if your Web site requires a password that restricts its audi-
ence, a Web site has a very public feel to it and is, in effect, a form of
publishing. Anything of an intimate nature that was not originally in-
tended for a public audience should be cleared with the people involved
before making it available on the Internet. You may believe that you
can include personal notes and e-mails you have received that give ev-
idence of your admirable personal qualities. But the senders of these
notes, who would not object to your showing these personal communi-
cations to someone privately, might feel their privacy is being invaded
if you include these on your Web site. Unfortunately, items you have to
drop from your Web site portfolio because of their personal nature
might, in fact, be some of the most powerful documents you have be-
cause they verify personal characteristics that add value.
With a Web-based portfolio, you also have to make an extra effort
to be sure you are not violating any copyright laws by posting, without
written permission, things like newspaper articles in which you are fea-
tured. And you must be very sure that you are not unwittingly pub-
lishing proprietary information. For example, if you post a favorable
performance evaluation you have received, even though you delete pro-
prietary information included therein, you may still be on the wrong
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
129

side of the law because you have distributed an organization’s propri-
etary format for doing written performance evaluations.
Documents that are not self-explanatory are not likely to be very ef-
fective on a Web site. Any portfolio item that needs context and expla-
nation to be understood is not likely to be a very powerful document in
a Web-based portfolio. You can insert little text boxes that attempt to
explain the relevance of the documents, and you can even try using
voice-overs to explain how the documents demonstrate your important
P.E.A.K.S., but it’s not the same as being there yourself and responding
to questions that the viewer might have.
Having to leave out documents that must be explained to be effec-
tive is likely to significantly dilute the impact of a Web-based portfolio.
Targeting Issues
The more precisely a portfolio is targeted, the more useful it is likely to
be in helping you get the career opportunity you are pursuing. As ex-
plained in Chapter 3, you want to have documents in your targeted
portfolio that demonstrate the particular P.E.A.K.S. that the people
who can help you consider most important.
If you intend to target your online portfolio, here are some things
to think about.
Creating a Web-based career portfolio that is open to all limits your
options. If you create a single Web-based career portfolio that anyone
can access, you lose the ability to offer different portfolios to different
audiences. If, like Popeye, you decide “I yam what I yam,” and you want
to post just one portfolio and let the chips fall where they may, that’s a
worthy sentiment. But you are losing the ability to make subtle ad-
justments in how you present yourself to different people in different
situations.
Web-based portfolios can be targeted. An alternative to the one-
size-fits-all Web-based portfolio is to make different online portfolios
available to different people by having different addresses for each
portfolio. These addresses would be handed out selectively. Or, you can
have one Web address for all of your portfolios, but have different pass-
words to access different versions of the portfolio.
People may notice when you retarget your Web-based portfolio. Be
aware that once you have handed out an address and/or password for a
Web-based portfolio, this information can be passed along to others to
whom you might wish you could show a somewhat different version of
your portfolio. This pass-along might become an issue if you are going
through a series of interviews for a job. For the second and third job in-
terviews in an organization, you might want to use a portfolio that has
been retargeted because of things you learned in an earlier interview.
You can, of course, change the content of your online portfolio along the
way, but your interviewers might notice that you have done so and not
feel comfortable with “someone who keeps changing his story.” This
issue is not so prevalent with a hard copy portfolio that you carry
around in a briefcase. Since you don’t show the whole portfolio at any
130
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

given meeting, only you will know that you have changed its contents
from one meeting to the next.
Presentation Issues
When you create a Web-based portfolio, you can specify the general look
and layout of your Web site, as well as what’s included, what goes
where, the “tell me more” buttons, and the multimedia enhancements.
In these ways you have a considerable amount of initial control over the
presentation of your online portfolio. But, unfortunately, there are two
very significant ways you do not have control over the presentation of
items from your portfolio.
You can’t selectively show the items within a Web-based portfolio.
You can select what items to include in your online portfolio, but once
these are posted, the viewer of a Web-based portfolio can choose to look
at everything or nothing. Giving your interviewer the freedom to roam
through your entire targeted portfolio significantly reduces your abili-
ty to control how it is used in an interview.
As we explained in Chapters 6 and 7, your targeted portfolio is not
something you will typically want to show in its entirety in most inter-
view situations. Your targeted portfolio is best thought of as an arsenal
of different kinds of weapons that you might want to use to hit the
mark, if the moment is right. You want to have many different weapons
on hand, because, until you find out exactly what kind of a situation
you are in, you can’t know which weapon you will need. You don’t know
for certain going into an interview which items will prove to be most ap-
propriate to show. The nature of the questions you get and the points
you want to make in response to something that is said will largely de-
termine which of the items in your portfolio you will want to bring to
the interviewer’s attention. It is unlikely that you would want to show
all of the items in your portfolio, as doing so would be overkill. When
you show everything, you are selling too much, and you run the risk of
putting the emphasis on the portfolio rather than on you. If there is one
rule we have emphasized for showing a portfolio, it’s the oft-quoted ar-
chitectural adage that applies to many successful strategies in life:
Less is more.
Once you have posted a Web-based portfolio, those who have access
to this Web site decide what they will look at. It is true that during a
phone interview, if your interviewer has access to your online portfolio,
you can refer her to particular items that she can view. But once your
portfolio is onscreen in front of your interviewer, there’s no telling what
she will be looking at during the rest of the interview. For all you know,
your interviewers will be idly scrolling through your entire portfolio
while you babble on about a particular item they are no longer looking
at. Or your interviewers might start grilling you about other items they
happen to find that, given the direction that the interview has taken,
you would rather not bring to their attention.
In sum, once your portfolio goes online and people have access to
it, you’ve lost control not only over which items they will look at but
also over how the portfolio will be used in an interview.
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
131

You can’t explain the items in a Web-based portfolio the way you
could in person. In general, portfolio items are best explained in the
context of an ongoing conversation. A single document can reveal many
different facets of your skills and experience. Which of these things you
should emphasize is best determined by the nature of the person you
are talking to and the kind of conversation you are having.
We mentioned earlier that you can use voice-overs and insert text
boxes to give the context for items in your Web-based portfolio and to
explain their relevance. But these explanations are necessarily gener-
ic, as opposed to being tailored to appeal to the particular mind-set of
the viewer who happens to be looking at the item.
If you are on the phone with someone who is looking at your online
portfolio, you can tailor your explanations up to a point. But you are
limited by the fact that you can’t see the other person’s facial expres-
sions in response to what he is looking at and what you are saying.
When you are in a face-to-face meeting, on the other hand, you can
read your interviewer’s facial expressions to help you decide how much
explanation is needed to convince him that an item in your portfolio
demonstrates one of your important P.E.A.K.S.
Professional Images
As noted earlier, having a Web-based portfolio does help you project the
image of being up to date and computer literate, which can be quite
useful—particularly if you are hoping to get a job that requires signifi-
cant computer skills.
Having an “all-about-me” Web site, however, may also give the im-
pression to some people that you are a person who is too focused on
himself. An “I_am_it.com” Web site could turn some people off as being
too boastful.
When presenting a portfolio during job interviews, you will want
to demonstrate to potential employers that you can help them with
their problems. As we noted in Chapter 6, you will want to engage an
interviewer’s interest in you, in part, by listening with empathy to the
interviewer’s description of the issues and problems associated with the
job under consideration. Once you have determined what the key con-
cerns are, you can present several documents from your portfolio as a
way of demonstrating that you can help the interviewer with her prob-
lems. You position yourself not as an all-purpose fantastic person, but
as someone who has P.E.A.K.S. that will be helpful to the interviewer.
If you create a Web-based portfolio, you should make a special ef-
fort to feature the kinds of problems you can help solve, as opposed to
having your Web site look like a digital “Ain’t I Great” brag sheet.
Computer Skill Issues
Creating a user-friendly, visually effective Web-based portfolio requires
some computer knowledge. You can get programs that will enable you
to create a Web site, but if this is the first time you have created a Web
site, you will probably need help. For an overview of the technical issues
associated with creating a Web-based portfolio, please see the section
later in this chapter entitled “Hypertext Markup Language (HTML).”
132
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS1
While most people can create an electronic portfolio of some kind, there
are many technical requirements and limitations associated with this
process that must be taken into consideration to create a valuable prod-
uct. Considerable thought, technical aptitude, and time are required to
reap the potential benefits of an electronic portfolio.
Technical Considerations When Selecting a Digital Format
Computer Literacy
Use formats that you have mastered. Ultimately, whatever elec-
tronic portfolio you present is a de facto piece of the portfolio itself. Pre-
senting a mediocre HTML portfolio says that you produce mediocre
work and are comfortable presenting it. On the other hand, a powerful,
multifaceted Internet presentation of your portfolio could be a strong
piece of documentary evidence about your technological capabilities.
Effective Format
It is important that your intended recipients be able to access your
portfolio easily. Therefore, you must select a format that can be easily
downloaded. After all, you want to talk with others about the content of
your portfolio, not its problems with transmission.
Size
Bandwidth and storage limitations still play a large role in elec-
tronic communication. Many recipients will find it cumbersome to
download and store a 5-megabyte mail message, even if they are antic-
ipating your correspondence. An overly long transmission would cer-
tainly discourage people from passing it on to other parties who might
be interested in seeing your portfolio. Even when using the latest tech-
nologies, keep it short and sweet.
Transmission Time
Select a format that can be transmitted quickly enough to add
value to your portfolio. For instance, it would be very effective if you
could say in a phone interview, “For an example of my work in restruc-
turing, look at www.myname.com/portfolio/restructuring,” and because
this material is in HTML format, your interviewer could access it
quickly.
Expense
Some formats require software and services that cost considerable
amounts of money. These formats should be avoided, as your recipient
may not have the appropriate software to work with them.
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
133
1This section was contributed by Ames Brown, with the reminder that the technical capabili-
ties of the various digital formats described here will no doubt improve with the introduction of
new versions.

Pros and Cons of Potential Digital Formats for a Portfolio
Electronic portfolios can be created in many different ways. Pros and
cons associated with three of the most common formats are outlined
below.
Microsoft Word
Summary: With this format, it’s easy to create, modify, and store
portfolios locally, but difficult to transmit portfolios to others.
Requirements:
1. If you have a computer, you probably have Microsoft Word, because
it is the most popular word processing software in the world. Mi-
crosoft Word is available on nearly every university and commercial
workstation, because it is the preferred software for editing docu-
ments. The creator of a Word document must have this software and
the recipient must have Word or the Word Viewer to be able to view
the transmission (see disadvantages below).
Advantages:
1. Since Word does not compress image content noticeably, it is an ideal
place to store and edit portfolios. Word documents store the complete
detail and clarity of the original digital image that is inserted. Con-
sequently, the Word document’s file size is large, but this size does
not matter for your Master Portfolio because you will probably not
need to transmit it frequently. From Word you can create a targeted
portfolio and export it to a PDF or HTML format that is smaller in
size.
2. Word makes it easy to position graphics and text and create attrac-
tive portfolios.
Disadvantages:
1. Word documents containing images are usually very large, making
transmission by e-mail nearly impossible. This is because Word does
not compress image content to preserve clarity. Alternatively, you
can burn a CD with a large Word document on it and mail it, but
that would eliminate the speed to be gained by using an electronic
portfolio.
2. Documents opened and printed by the recipient closely resemble
what is initially created, but significant discrepancies can exist. For
example, if you create a one-page resume on a PC using Arial font
and e-mail it to a Macintosh user, the document may print on two
pages. This result occurs because many Macintosh computers do not
have the Arial font and thus substitute the slightly larger Helvetica
font. In Helvetica, a resume that was designed to fit on one page may
get spread onto two pages. Other slight discrepancies arise with
spacing and formatting between the various versions of Word.
Therefore, no guarantee exists that what you save and transmit as
a Word document will look the same once it has been transmitted.
134
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

3. You must be certain that all of your recipients are equipped with
Word. Since Word costs nearly $200, it is unlikely that someone will
purchase it just to view your portfolio. There is a free Word docu-
ment viewer available from Microsoft, but unfortunately few people
know about it.
4. Word documents can be changed (unless they are specially coded).
This means that once your resume is circulated, someone could mod-
ify it to his or her liking before passing it on.
Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF)
Summary: This format is excellent for quickly transmitting port-
folio documents to others, though documents may become distorted if
the data is highly compressed to facilitate transmission.
Requirements:
1. PDF creation software, such as Adobe Acrobat or In Design, is re-
quired to read any document in this format. Recipients must have a
PDF viewer, which can be downloaded from the Internet at no ex-
pense.
Advantages:
1. Creating PDF documents is easy, because you are usually convert-
ing from another format to PDF. PDF creation software such as
Adobe Acrobat is essentially a converter that packages any printable
file format (for example, Word, Excel, PhotoShop, HTML) into a
PDF-formatted document.
2. PDF-reading software is ubiquitous. It is integrated into all the pop-
ular Internet browsers and comes with most new computers. The
software is free. In fact, it is a required piece of software for many
workplaces and universities. It is so common that most people are
not aware they have PDF software on their computers, since it is in-
tegrated into the applications they use every day.
3. The output of PDF creation software is considered “portable” be-
cause it can be easily and reliably transmitted.
4. PDFs allow you to specify the quality of the image transmitted.
When creating a PDF, you specify the level of detail you want for
your portfolio’s images. The more detail, the greater the file size.
5. PDF file size is generally very small. PDFs are known for preserv-
ing image quality at a small size.
6. PDFs are guaranteed to appear on-screen and print exactly the
same on everyone’s computer, including yours and your recipients’.
7. PDF files are unchangeable once they are created (unless you spec-
ify otherwise).
Disadvantages:
1. The compression of data that reduces the size of the file being sent,
and thereby facilitates transmission, may also cause blurry images
and even distorted text. As a general rule, the greater the compres-
sion of the data, the greater the distortion. There are, however, tools
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
135

you can use when publishing a portable PDF to determine the level
of compression and consequent level of detail in your PDF file.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
Summary: This format enables you to post your portfolio at an eas-
ily accessible Web site; results are impressive on-screen but usually not
on print output; usage requires a higher level of computer knowledge.
Requirements:
1. You will need a host. Free hosts usually put advertisements on your
page, which creates an unprofessional impression. To avoid having
advertisements on your HTML, you will probably need to pay a
monthly fee, unless you are affiliated with a university, in which
case free hosting is usually provided. You may wish to secure a 
domain such as www.yourname.net so that the location of your port-
folio will be easy for others to remember.
2. Unless you are a real techie, you will need HTML coding software.
There are many user-friendly, inexpensive packages available.
Advantages:
1. There is no need to transmit your portfolio to others; they simply
need to know the address. This setup saves you from imposing a
multimegabyte attachment on someone’s mailbox, which the recip-
ient might find cumbersome. Others can easily share your portfolio,
since they need only pass the address along.
2. An HTML format is universally accessible. Only Internet browsing
software is required, and this software is built into every major 
operating system.
3. Access is much faster because images on the Web appear as soon as
they are downloaded. A portfolio transmitted as an attachment,
however, must be transmitted completely before viewing by the 
recipient can begin. So, if you are in the middle of a phone inter-
view and decide to share your portfolio electronically, it is much
more convenient to suggest “Go to [your e-mail address]” than to
say “Wait for this 5-megabyte download and then open it up.”
4. Only you can modify your Web site. Better yet, you can update your
portfolio at your leisure and when people look back at it or pass it
on, they will see your updated version. With other print or elec-
tronic formats, once your portfolio is in someone else’s hands or 
e-mail box, you cannot change it. A Web-based portfolio gives you
added control.
5. A Web portfolio is, itself, portfolio material; it is a demonstration of
computer and Internet literacy.
6. You can distribute different targeted portfolios to different people.
For example, you could give a prospective employer one address
and then provide someone else with a different version of your port-
folio at a different address.
136
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

7. Value can be added to your portfolio with the Internet in many dif-
ferent ways, including interactivity, links, and access to real-time
data.
8. You can limit access to your portfolio by adding a simple password.
A guest book can be included and, using a standard or hidden
counter, you can also monitor how frequently people view your
portfolio.
9. A Web site can easily capitalize on the benefits of the other docu-
ment formats. For example, your page could display your portfolio
as HTML and also offer a link to download your portfolio as a print-
able PDF or Word document.
10. An HTML format offers the ability to produce multimedia portfolio
content such as audio, video, animated graphs, live formulas, and
queries.
Disadvantages:
1. Unfortunately, Web content still tends to print poorly. Even the
finest Web pages cannot compare to a well-crafted Word or PDF doc-
ument. However, if printing is not important, then Web content can
be impressive.
FINAL THOUGHT
The computer can be a wonderful tool. Let it be your servant, not your
master.
Chapter 9: Digital Options for Your Portfolio and Resume
137

This page intentionally left blank.

10
Portfolios on the Fly: Creating
a Portfolio in a Few Hours
OVERVIEW
This is the short course. In this chapter we show how you can put to-
gether a career portfolio in a few hours that will help you to be suc-
cessful in whatever career opportunity you are pursuing. We assume
that you are starting from scratch and haven’t previously read any
other sections of this book. And you haven’t started collecting any doc-
uments yet. You may not even have much of a clue as to what a career
portfolio is and how it can help you achieve your next career goal. But
you are hoping that a career portfolio can help you get what you are
going for. And you are in a big hurry.
We can help you. If you have an important interview coming up in
a few days or less, and you would like to have a portfolio that will give
you a competitive edge, we’ll show you how you can do this in the
amount of time you have available.
To put together your very best portfolio, you would want to read
through this book in its entirety and follow the suggestions contained
herein, but you may not have that luxury.
Then again, maybe you’re not in such a hurry. You may be curious
about career portfolios and what they can do for you, but you are not
prepared to commit to reading through an entire book on the subject,
139
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

just yet. We can help you, too. We’ll give you the short course, so you
don’t have to wait for this book to come out as an “executive digest.”
Specifically, the key topics in this chapter will be:
I A brief overview of what career portfolios are and how they can help
you
I How to create in ten quick steps a career portfolio that will help you
achieve your next career goal
At the conclusion of this chapter, we will refer you to specific sec-
tions of the book that will quickly explain how you can use your portfo-
lio to good effect in a face-to-face meeting.
Throughout this chapter, we will include cross-references to other
sections and chapters of the book so that, if you wish to do so, you can
learn about specific topics in greater depth elsewhere.
We do hope that you will be inspired to learn about portfolios in
greater depth. But for now, if you are reading this chapter to learn how
to quickly assemble a portfolio, you’ve got a job to do. So let’s go for it!
CAREER PORTFOLIOS DEFINED
In the next section we provide ten steps for putting together a targeted
career portfolio that is designed to help you achieve your career goals.
Before proceeding to these ten steps, let’s review a few important terms
and definitions that we have plucked from other chapters to explain
what career portfolios are and the kind of portfolio that you will be as-
sembling to suit your specific needs.
A career portfolio is a collection of documents and other easily
portable artifacts that people use to validate claims they make about
themselves.
A career portfolio is not a resume, which simply lists things about
you. Nor is it a cover letter in which you write about yourself and your
qualifications for a particular job. Instead, a career portfolio is a collec-
tion of documents that support and make tangible the things you want
to say about yourself in a cover letter, a resume, or a face-to-face inter-
view. Letters of commendation, performance evaluations, certificates,
papers, images of things created or of activities led, are all examples of
items that might be included in a career portfolio.
A Master Portfolio is compiled over time and is meant to be an up-
to-date, complete collection of every item that you feel you might be
able use at some future date in a career portfolio. These documents
come not just from your work life but also from volunteer activities,
from courses taken, from extracurricular activities you were involved
in at school, and, in some cases, from hobbies and leisure activities. Any
document that gives evidence of a skill, accomplishment, or other di-
mension to you that might make you an attractive candidate for a fu-
ture career opportunity can be included in your Master Portfolio. A
more accurate term for this compilation might be “master collection of
140
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

potentially useful portfolio documents.” For simplicity, we call it your
Master Portfolio.
Your Master Portfolio is not meant to be the portfolio you would
show to someone in an interview. It is likely to be too bulky to lug
around and many of the items might not be of particular interest to the
person to whom you would be showing your portfolio. The proper func-
tion of a Master Portfolio is to provide you with a broad selection of
readily available documents to choose from when it comes time to put
together a portfolio to take to a particular interview.
Because you are probably in a hurry, we are going to skip the step
of creating a Master Portfolio. But, if you would like to learn more about
Master Portfolios, take a look at Chapter 2.
A targeted career portfolio, which is what we will be focusing on in
this chapter, is a collection of career-relevant documents that have been
chosen because of their intended appeal to a particular audience. Sim-
ply put, these are the dozen or so items that you would bring to a meet-
ing, hoping to impress the person or people with whom you are meet-
ing.
We call a targeted career portfolio that is designed to appeal to a
particular audience a Can-Do Portfolio. We use the term Can-Do be-
cause it gives evidence that you can do whatever is considered most im-
portant in the job under consideration, whether it’s a full-time job, a
consulting assignment, or the “job” of being a successful student in col-
lege or graduate school. A good Can-Do Portfolio enables you to make a
convincing case that you are ready, willing, and able to get the job done.
It helps you differentiate yourself from other candidates along impor-
tant, job-relevant dimensions.
To get a quick idea of how a Can-Do Portfolio can be used in a job
interview, see the section entitled “How Do You Actually Use a Career
Portfolio—and When?” in Chapter 1.
A Can-Do Portfolio can be a great self-marketing tool when it is
well targeted and properly used. If you follow the ten steps below, you
can quickly create a Can-Do Portfolio that is designed to suit your spe-
cific needs. Later in this chapter we’ll refer you to sections of the book
that will tell you how to use your Can-Do Portfolio as an effective self-
marketing tool in interviews.
TEN STEPS FOR QUICKLY CREATING A CAN-DO PORTFOLIO
Our plan is to explain each step as succinctly as possible and, where ap-
propriate, give the locations in the book where these steps are ex-
plained more thoroughly, should you want further explanations and de-
tails on how to proceed.
Before beginning to do the first step, we suggest you quickly read
through all ten steps to get a general understanding of how doing these
steps, in the order presented, will enable you to create a portfolio that
suits your present needs.
To get the best results, you would be wise not to try and skip any
steps. As you will see, each step builds on the preceding steps.
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
141

Step 1: Specify the Type of Career Opportunity You Are Pursuing
In order to create a portfolio that is targeted for a specific purpose, you
first need to know the particular type of career situation in which you
intend to use it. Applying for a new job or for a promotion are two typ-
ical reasons for creating a Can-Do Portfolio. But there are other reasons
as well, which include the following:
1. Having a successful annual performance review
2. Getting a raise
3. Getting a new work assignment or responsibilities (within the com-
pany)
4. Getting a different kind of job within your organization
5. Making a career transition
6. Getting consulting assignments
7. Getting into college or graduate school
For further ideas and a more detailed discussion of the types of career
situations in which having a targeted portfolio can prove useful, see
“Why Should You Use a Career Portfolio?” in Chapter 1. Also refer to all
of Chapter 7.
If you still do not have a specific use in mind for your career port-
folio, there is really no point in trying to create a targeted portfolio,
since there is nothing to aim at. If this is the case, we recommend that
you skim the rest of this chapter to get a general idea of how targeted
portfolios are assembled. And if you think being able to create a first-
rate Can-Do Portfolio could prove useful to your career, we suggest that
you learn how to create and develop a Master Portfolio that will give
you a broad selection of readily available documents to choose from in
the future. Chapter 2 and Chapter 8 are particularly useful in this re-
gard.
Step 2: Review Examples of Portfolios Targeted for Specific Uses
To get a feel for what a targeted Can-Do Portfolio looks like, look at the
sample portfolios provided in Part 2. Each of these portfolios has been
labeled according to the type of situation for which it has been target-
ed. Do not be concerned if the use you have in mind for your Can-Do
Portfolio is not included in this collection of examples. In the next eight
steps we will show you how to create a portfolio that is suited to your
particular needs.
And do not worry if you do not happen to have many (or, in fact,
any) of the kinds of documents included in these sample portfolios. All
sorts of documents can be used effectively in a portfolio. We will tell you
how to identify and get the documents that will work for you.
Again, the goal in Step 2 is to give you a general idea as to what
Can-Do Portfolios look like. We will explain the actual process of creat-
ing a Can-Do Portfolio in the next eight steps.
142
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Step 3: Obtain an Understanding of the Importance of 
Your “P.E.A.K.S.”
As you reviewed the sample Can-Do Portfolios in Part 2, you probably
noticed that frequent reference is made to “P.E.A.K.S.” This is an
acronym for the following five categories that are used to describe an
individual:
I Personal Characteristics
I Experience
I Accomplishments
I Knowledge
I Skills
The fundamental strategy when creating a Can-Do Portfolio is to try to
feature the P.E.A.K.S. that are likely to be considered desirable by the
people who will be evaluating you. The particular P.E.A.K.S. that are
considered most important will depend upon the kind of opportunity
you are pursuing and the preferences of the people who will be assess-
ing you. In Step 5, we will show you how, even when you are in a rush,
you can at least make an “educated guess” as to which P.E.A.K.S. will
be considered most desirable.
Our research has revealed that the most important category of
P.E.A.K.S. in the minds of the majority of people who evaluate candi-
dates for jobs is personal characteristics. By personal characteristics we
mean personality traits or characteristic behavior patterns, such as
being gregarious or highly detail-oriented. Which particular personal
characteristics are considered most desirable in a candidate will de-
pend upon who is doing the evaluating and the nature of the job and or-
ganization.
One of the great advantages of having a portfolio is that it enables
you to present documents that give evidence of your highly valued per-
sonal characteristics. Being able to hand an interviewer a copy of a let-
ter of appreciation from a client who thanks you for “always under-
standing what I need and being so responsive to my concerns” is far
more powerful than just saying in an interview, “People find me re-
sponsive.” A portfolio document can make the intangibles tangible.
For more information on the research we’ve done on P.E.A.K.S. and
the kinds of items that might be included under each of the P.E.A.K.S.
categories, you can refer to “The P.E.A.K.S. Categories” in Chapter 1.
Step 4: Describe the Specific Opportunity You Are 
Pursuing, Accurately
In Step 1, we asked you to specify the situation in which you hope to
use a career portfolio—to get a new job, to build a consulting practice,
to gain admission to college or graduate school, or whatever. The point
was to make sure you have a specific use in mind, so that it makes
sense to proceed with creating a targeted portfolio. In Step 4, we are
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
143

asking you to get much more specific about the particular career op-
portunity you are pursuing.
The more accurately you are able to describe the real responsibil-
ities, activities, and goals associated with the career opportunity you
are pursuing, the easier it will be for you to identify the particular
P.E.A.K.S. that are considered most desirable in candidates seeking
this opportunity. The goal is to be able to describe the opportunity you
are seeking with enough details so that in Step 5, you will be able to
identify the key P.E.A.K.S. associated with this specific opportunity.
If you are applying for a promotion within your organization or a
new job on the outside, what are the specific responsibilities, activities,
and goals associated with the job? If a job description has not been post-
ed, you can call ahead and ask for one. And if one doesn’t exist, it is per-
fectly appropriate to ask to speak to someone who can give you a quick
description of what the job entails. (If you intend to call the office of the
person who will be interviewing you, please see Step 5 before doing so,
since there are some P.E.A.K.S. questions you can ask as well.)
If you are going for a raise, you should be able to describe in spe-
cific terms the performance criteria associated with your present job,
along with whatever additional responsibilities you may have taken on
that justify the raise.
If you are a consultant seeking to strengthen or expand your prac-
tice, you should know specifically what kinds of clients and consulting
assignments you are seeking.
If you are a student applying for college or graduate school, you
should know which schools and programs you are targeting.
You will know that you have completed this step successfully when
you can describe the career opportunity you are targeting to someone
who is knowledgeable about the kind of opportunity you are seeking,
and this person knows exactly what you are talking about. For exam-
ple, you should be able to describe a job you are interested in with
enough precision for an industry insider to know exactly what position
you are seeking. It’s not enough to say, “I’m looking for a well-paying,
interesting job in marketing.” If that is all you can come up with in
terms of level of specificity, you need to do some informational inter-
views to learn about specific jobs in your field of interest. To learn how
to do informational interviewing, refer to Chapter 4.
For further ideas on how to generate accurate descriptions of the op-
portunity you are seeking, refer to “Describing the Opportunity You Are
Pursuing in Realistic Terms” in Chapter 3 and have a look at Chapter 7.
Step 5: Identify the Key “P.E.A.K.S.” Associated with This
Opportunity
Once you are able to describe with precision the career opportunity you
are targeting, your next step is to identify the particular P.E.A.K.S. that
are considered most desirable in candidates seeking that opportunity.
The most important point to remember is that you should be try-
ing to determine the P.E.A.K.S. that will be important to the person or
144
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

people who will be interviewing you and to whom you will be showing
items from your portfolio.
If you are in a huge rush, you may only have time to guess at what
these P.E.A.K.S. might be. But you can, at least, make an educated
guess that is informed by what you already know about the opportuni-
ty you are pursuing. To do this, put yourself in the place of the inter-
viewer and ask yourself what would be the most important P.E.A.K.S.
given what you know about the activities, responsibilities, and goals as-
sociated with this opportunity.
If you can find the time, we strongly encourage you to talk to a few
people who know enough about the kind of opportunity you are seeking
to be able to give you some ideas as to what the key P.E.A.K.S. might
be in the minds of your interviewers. Even if you only have a short
phone conversation, if you talk to the right person you are likely to get
some very useful advice.
When pursuing a specific job, a particularly good person to talk to
is someone who works with the person who will be interviewing you. It
is not unreasonable to call the office of the person who will be inter-
viewing you and ask if you can have a quick phone conversation with
one of his or her assistants “to learn more about the job for which I’ll be
interviewing.” If you are able to get a hold of a person who works with
your interviewer, in addition to finding out about the particulars of the
job, you can ask about the particular P.E.A.K.S. that are important to
the person with whom you will be meeting. The person who answers the
phone, regardless of his or her level in the organization, may be able to
give you some useful information.
If you can’t hook up with someone who works with the person who
will be interviewing you, try to at least talk to an industry “insider”—
someone who is in a position to know about the kind of opportunity you
are seeking and may even know something about the person who will
be interviewing you. Suppliers of the organization and former employ-
ees, customers, and competitors all have their biases, but they also have
a lot of inside information that doesn’t show up anywhere else. You
might also try to talk to someone who has worked at an equivalent job
in a different organization.
Ask the people you talk with to specify the particular P.E.A.K.S.
that are considered desirable. And be sure to find out about the per-
sonal characteristics that are valued, as these characteristics are like-
ly to be particularly important to the interviewer. It is especially help-
ful if you can get the people with whom you speak to specify which of
the particular P.E.A.K.S. they have mentioned are of the highest prior-
ity.
If you are seeking a raise, speak with someone who has been suc-
cessful at getting a raise from your boss. Find out about the particular
P.E.A.K.S. that most impressed your boss in this situation.
If you are applying to a school, try to talk to someone closely asso-
ciated with the school about the P.E.A.K.S. that are most valued in can-
didates for admission. Ideally, you’d like to talk to someone in the ad-
missions department prior to your interview. But you can also learn a
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
145

lot about valued P.E.A.K.S. by talking to successful students, profes-
sors, and recent graduates.
Given your time constraints, you will probably only be able to do
abbreviated informational interviews with the people with whom you
talk. But if you would like to learn more about how to conduct an in-
formational interview, refer to Chapter 4. And if the career opportunity
you are pursuing is something other than a job, you might also have a
look at Chapter 7.
To complete Step 5, make a list of the particular P.E.A.K.S. the per-
son you will be showing your portfolio to is likely to consider most de-
sirable. And again, be sure to include key personal characteristics. If
possible, indicate which of the P.E.A.K.S. on your list are of the highest
priority. This list is your best guess at this point in time, based on all of
the information you have gathered.
Step 6: Find Documents That Demonstrate Your Desired P.E.A.K.S.
In this step, your mission is to gather all of the documents you can
quickly get your hands on that give evidence of P.E.A.K.S. you have
that would appeal to the particular people to whom you will be showing
your portfolio. From Step 5, you have a list of the P.E.A.K.S. that are
likely to be considered most desirable by the person or people who will
be evaluating you. Your job now is to do the best you can, in the time
you have, to find documents that demonstrate you have these desired
P.E.A.K.S.
Letters of commendation, performance evaluations, certificates,
papers, images of things created or of activities led are just a few ex-
amples of the kinds of items that might be included in your Can-Do
Portfolio.
As we noted earlier, it is important to remember that portfolio doc-
uments can come not just from your work life, but also from volunteer
activities, from courses taken, from extracurricular activities you were
involved in at school, and, in some cases, from hobbies and leisure ac-
tivities. Any document that gives evidence of one or more of the desired
P.E.A.K.S. on your list should be collected.
To get an idea of the range of items that might be included in a
portfolio, and to get you thinking about useful items you might have,
read “What You Should Be Looking For,” in Chapter 2. The table enti-
tled “Examples of Portfolio Documents” might be particularly useful for
giving you some ideas.
We should point out that Chapter 2 focuses on casting a wide net
to collect items for a Master Portfolio. But right now, you are looking for
items that give evidence of the specific P.E.A.K.S. on your list from Step
5. To get a clear understanding of how to identify items that support
particular P.E.A.K.S., refer to “Selecting Items That Best Demonstrate
How You Have the Desired P.E.A.K.S.” in Chapter 3.
Remember that your portfolio documents do not have to be self-ex-
planatory. You will be explaining whatever items you show during an
interview. Portfolio items should be used in the context of a conversa-
tion, not as stand-alone items that tell their own story. For a quick syn-
146
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

opsis of how portfolio items should be used in an interview, see “How Do
You Actually Use a Career Portfolio—and When?” in Chapter 1.
It’s nice if you can find enough documents to cover all five
P.E.A.K.S. categories. But you should put particular emphasis on find-
ing items that demonstrate the P.E.A.K.S. that are likely to be consid-
ered of top priority by the people to whom you will be showing your
portfolio. Items that give evidence of desired personal characteristics
are likely to fall into this category.
To save time, we are focusing on gathering pre-existing documents
that you can put your hands on without too much trouble. In Step 9, we
will discuss some ways to get and create documents you feel you should
have but don’t. Honest ways, that is!
Step 7: Use a P.E.A.K.S. Format to Organize Your Documents
Your goal in this step is to put together a rough draft of your Can-Do
Portfolio that is organized according to the five P.E.A.K.S. categories. To
do so, we recommend that you get five manila folders and print the fol-
lowing headings on the tabs:
I Personal Characteristics
I Experience
I Accomplishments
I Knowledge
I Skills
Once you have created folders that have these tabs, do a rough sort of
the documents you have collected, filing each document according to
which of the above P.E.A.K.S. that document demonstrates.
Clearly, some of your items could be filed under more than one of
the above categories. In these cases you can put photocopies of the same
document in two or more different sections.
If you are thinking of using a loose-leaf notebook instead of mani-
la folders to hold the documents for your draft, that’s fine, but do not
punch holes in original documents, since this can make them less ap-
pealing visually. Either place the documents in translucent sheet pro-
tectors with holes or make photocopies of your original documents and
then punch holes in the copies.
Don’t spend a lot of time agonizing over what should go where.
This is a rough draft that you can refine and hone in the next two steps.
Step 8: Assess the Draft of Your Portfolio, Strategically
Now that you have a rough draft of your Can-Do Portfolio, your task is
to assess your draft from a strategic point of view in order to select the
best documents to include in your final draft and identify the holes that
you should try to fill.
It is important to understand that your portfolio is meant to be a
tool you can use to enhance the presentation of your qualifications for
the opportunity you are pursuing. In most situations, your portfolio
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
147

should not be the central feature of the interview. You will want the em-
phasis to be on you, not on your portfolio.
You do not have to have a perfect portfolio that you would show
from cover to cover. What you do want to have is a collection of items
that you can strategically draw on to support claims you wish to make
about yourself.
If you have not done so yet, you might want to take a look at “How
Do You Actually Use a Career Portfolio—and When?” in Chapter 1, to
get an idea of how a portfolio can be used strategically.
If you are intending to use your portfolio for something other than
getting a new job outside your current organization, you can consult
Chapter 7 to learn more about the specific strategy your portfolio
should support.
To assess the strategic value of the items in your draft portfolio, we
recommend that you keep the list of desired P.E.A.K.S. that you devel-
oped in Step 5 readily visible and ask yourself which of the items in
your draft will enable you to achieve one or more of the following four
strategic objectives:
1. Covering the high-priority P.E.A.K.S. If there is a particular person-
al characteristic or a specific kind of experience, accomplishment,
knowledge, or skill that is likely to be considered highly desirable in
a candidate, you should try to include several different documents
that give evidence that you have this special something.
2. Demonstrating key personal characteristics. You may not be able to
include entries in all of the P.E.A.K.S. categories, but you should give
a high priority to identifying documents that indicate that you have
the particular personal characteristics that the interviewer is likely
to consider desirable. Remember, your portfolio gives you the oppor-
tunity to make these intangibles tangible.
3. Leading from strength. Any of the desired P.E.A.K.S. that are par-
ticular strengths of yours should be documented, if possible.
4. Addressing important concerns. Is there something about your can-
didacy that makes you vulnerable? An example of a vulnerability
that can be effectively addressed with a good portfolio item is the
gender issue that the male OB/GYN physician featured in Part 2
faced. Roughly 80 percent of the doctors he would be competing
against for a position in the women’s health field are female physi-
cians. The burden was on him to overcome the presumption that fe-
male patients find female doctors far more sensitive to their needs
and concerns than he, as a male, could ever be. For this reason he in-
cluded in his portfolio a letter from a female patient that thanked
him for his caring manner and sensitivity to her concerns and needs.
Items that allay any concerns that might arise about your qualifi-
cations are strong candidates for inclusion in your final draft.
To complete Step 8, pick the eight to twelve items that you believe
will best help you achieve the above strategic objectives. (Okay, you can
go higher, but, please, no more than twenty!)
148
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

Identify the “holes” in your targeted portfolio. Are there strategic
objectives that your current collection of documents will not help you
achieve? If so, what are the particular P.E.A.K.S. that you would need
to demonstrate to be able to achieve these objectives? Make a list of
these still-needed P.E.A.K.S.
Step 9: Fill the Holes
Your mission in this step is to do the best you can, in the time you have,
to fill the holes you have identified in your targeted portfolio. Take a
look at your still-needed P.E.A.K.S. list from Step 8. Which of these
still-needed P.E.A.K.S. represent the most serious shortcomings in your
targeted portfolio? And of these “gaping hole” P.E.A.K.S., which repre-
sent ones you have already developed but don’t have documents for?
These are the areas you should be focusing on.
You simply don’t have time right now to develop new P.E.A.K.S.
But you can go after and create, if need be, documents that demonstrate
P.E.A.K.S. you have already developed. In Chapter 8, we discuss activ-
ities you can pursue in the future to develop your not-yet-developed
P.E.A.K.S. But, again, there’s little time for that now.
Use your time wisely in this step. Go after the documents you real-
ly need that you can get or create in the time you have available to you.
To get the things you need may take a bit of extra effort on your
part. You have to be willing to contact people who can help you and be
willing to do most of the work associated with your request.
If someone, for example, has sent you a letter of appreciation that
gives evidence of one of your important P.E.A.K.S. and you’ve thrown it
out or can’t find it, you may need to obtain a replacement. In most
cases, it is perfectly appropriate for you to ask the person who sent the
letter for help—particularly if this person still feels kindly disposed to-
ward you. You can explain why you need the letter and ask if the per-
son can send you another copy. Actually, this is a great opportunity to
get an even better letter of appreciation than the one you originally re-
ceived, if you are willing to do the work of drafting it the way you want
it. Simply explain to the person which of your P.E.A.K.S. you are trying
to verify with the letter and offer to write a draft for her review and sig-
nature.
If someone once complimented you for something you did that
demonstrated one of your still-needed P.E.A.K.S., even though he never
sent you a letter, you could explain why you need a letter now and offer
to draft it. Even if you didn’t receive any compliments at the time, you
can still ask a person who can verify what you did to “write” a letter
that you would draft for them.
If you are willing to make these requests and to do most of the
work yourself, you are likely to be pleasantly surprised by how quickly
you can get the testimonials you need. To make sure that you get these
documents in time to use them, it is helpful if you can make arrange-
ments to personally pick them up.
One word of caution: You must never, ever ask for and/or create a
document that is less than truthful. You won’t feel good about items in
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
149

your portfolio that are dishonest. And, if you ever get caught using
something that is not authentic, your credibility will be totally de-
stroyed—the very opposite of what you are trying to achieve with your
portfolio.
In addition to going after needed testimonials, you can also use im-
ages as visual props for discussing important accomplishments. For a
few tips on how to do this and some further thoughts on how to create
documents that are based on P.E.A.K.S. you have already developed,
refer to “Strategies for Creating New Documents for Your Collection,”
in Chapter 2.
At the conclusion of Step 9, you should have between eight and
twenty documents filed in your manila folders for inclusion in the Can-
Do Portfolio.
Step 10: Assemble Your Can-Do Portfolio
In this final step, your task is to take what you’ve decided to go with
and put it into a presentable format. You will need an appropriate car-
rying case for the documents you have selected, and you will want to
have an attractive way of presenting each of these documents. Consid-
er the following ideas for putting the final touches on your portfolio.
Carrying Case
Consider using some form of standard-size, three-ring binder for
your Can-Do Portfolio. Loose items that are stuffed into a briefcase can
get damaged and are hard to find when you are in the middle of an im-
portant conversation. Alternatively, these same items can be readily re-
trieved if they have been filed under headings in a three-ring binder.
Furthermore, a person who is calmly flipping through the pages of a
binder appears to be a lot better organized than someone who is fish-
ing about with head stuck in briefcase.
The style of the binder that you use should support the image that
you are trying to project. A binder that can be zippered shut and looks
like a briefcase can be quite effective because you can also use it as a
briefcase, bringing along a notepad and extra copies of documents you
might want to leave behind. If your portfolio looks like a briefcase, it
will not draw attention at the start of the interview, which means you
can use your portfolio at your discretion.
Tabs
The items you bring with you need to be easily retrievable under
pressure. We suggest that you use dividers with tabs that have the
same five P.E.A.K.S. headings that you have used in the steps above. If
a document could be filed under more than one heading, make extra
copies of this document and file it under as many headings as you like,
if that makes it easier for you to retrieve it when you are distracted and
under pressure.
In addition to the five P.E.A.K.S. headings, you might also want to
have a heading labeled “Resume,” since it is a good idea to bring extra
copies of your resume to an interview.
150
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Documents
We strongly encourage you not to include original documents in
your Can-Do Portfolio. Since portfolios can get lost and even stolen, we
suggest that you make high-quality photocopies of your original docu-
ments and then store your originals in a safe place.
Photocopying documents will enable you to reduce or enlarge the
originals so that they can fit comfortably in a binder that will hold 81/2-
by 11-inch sheets.
Photocopying allows you to create “collages” of documents, when
appropriate. For example, you can create a collage of several favorable
customer service comments on one page.
Although it does cost more, photocopying your documents in their
original colors is probably worth the extra expense, since when the pho-
tocopying is done well, the copies look like the real thing.
Be very careful to delete any information that should not be
shared from the documents you place in your portfolio. The photocopies
that you present should certainly not be “doctored” in a way that cre-
ates any misrepresentations of what the original documents contained.
But when you make copies, you should make whatever deletions are
necessary to protect the rights of the authors of the documents you use.
Deleting proprietary information from company documents is especial-
ly important if you will be showing these documents to a competitor.
Rather than punch holes in the documents you present, we suggest
that you place these documents in standard-sized sheet protectors that
are clear on both sides and are equipped with holes. Documents usual-
ly look better without holes in them. And, typically when you are show-
ing documents from your portfolio, you will take them out of the binder
and hand them to your interviewer. Having your documents in sheet
protectors keeps them from becoming damaged and worn.
Using sheet protectors that are clear on both sides also gives you
the option of displaying two items that are linked in some way in one
plastic sleeve.
The above suggestions for assembling your portfolio are all dis-
cussed in greater depth in “Getting the Right Look for Your Can-Do
Portfolio,” in Chapter 3.
You will know you have completed this final step when you have a
Can-Do Portfolio that you are looking forward to showing to other peo-
ple. In the next section we will refer you to parts of the book that will
tell you how to make the best use of your portfolio.
HOW TO GET READY TO SHOW YOUR PORTFOLIO
You are now eligible to add “Portfolio available upon request” to the bot-
tom of your resume. But don’t think that once your portfolio is ready to
show, you can just hand it over when you get to an interview. If that’s
what you are planning on doing, you’d be better off leaving your portfo-
lio at home!
During the course of a meeting, your portfolio should typically be
used very selectively to support important claims you wish to make
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
151

about yourself at the right moments. To be able to do this effectively, we
suggest that you do the following.
Know your portfolio. Be thoroughly acquainted with what’s in
your Can-Do Portfolio, and know why each item is there. In Step 8, we
reviewed the four key strategic criteria for including items in a target-
ed portfolio: (1) to verify high-priority P.E.A.K.S. (2) to demonstrate key
personal characteristics, (3) to lead from strength, and (4) to address
important concerns. Your portfolio will be useless if you can’t remember
what’s in it, why these items are there, and how to find each item quick-
ly. Flipping through the pages of your Can-Do Portfolio, while mum-
bling to yourself why each item is there, is a good way to become fluent
with its contents.
Learn how to effectively show items from your portfolio. If there is
one rule to follow when showing items from your portfolio in a job in-
terview, it is to do so selectively. As stated earlier, your portfolio should
not be the central feature of the interview. You want the emphasis to be
on you, not on your portfolio. Your portfolio can be a wonderful tool for
enhancing the presentation of your credentials, if used properly.
If you are intending to use your portfolio in a job interview, we sug-
gest that you have a look at Chapter 6. For a quick review of the key
things to keep in mind, be sure to see the “Portfolio Dos and Don’ts.”
If you will be using your portfolio in pursuit of something other
than a job, in addition to the above “Dos and Don’ts” section in Chapter
6, you would do well to consult Chapter 7, since the above “show it se-
lectively” rule does not apply to all situations.
Practice, practice, practice. Once you know what’s in your portfolio
and how you should show items from it, it is very helpful to practice
presenting your portfolio. Do so with someone who can give you good
feedback, or if that’s not possible, practice by yourself, saying out loud
the kinds of things you would like to say about each item. When prac-
ticing, you should go through your entire portfolio, since you can’t know
in advance which items you will actually have the opportunity to show.
A P.E.A.K.S. resume is useful in conjunction with your portfolio.
You should give top priority to practicing using your portfolio. But if
you have some time left over, you might also consider creating a
P.E.A.K.S. resume that sets you up to show key items from your port-
folio during an interview. If you want to learn how to create one of these
resumes, have a look at Chapter 5.
FINAL THOUGHTS
If you have worked very quickly, you may be wondering if your portfo-
lio is good enough to use. A portfolio, we should point out, is always a
work in progress. No matter how hard you work at it, there will always
be something that could be improved.
The real issue is not, “How good is my portfolio?” The question to
ask yourself is: “Am I better off having this portfolio than not having
it?” The odds are that, even if you have put your portfolio together
152
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio

hastily, there will be one or two documents that you can use during
your upcoming meeting that will give you a significant advantage that
you would not otherwise have.
When you do have the time, we hope that you will explore other
sections of this book so that in the future you can get the many bene-
fits that will come from continuing to develop your Career Portfolio.
Chapter 10: Portfolios on the Fly: Creating a Portfolio in a Few Hours
153

This page intentionally left blank.

Part II
EXAMPLES OF TARGETED PORTFOLIOS
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION
In this part of the book we present five examples of targeted Can-Do
Portfolios. Each portfolio is targeted at a particular job for a person who
is in a particular career situation.
We have tried to provide enough details about each person’s “case”
for you to be able to understand why each document was included in a
given portfolio.
Although it is true that your portfolio may have as many as twen-
ty documents in it, for reasons of space, no more than a dozen docu-
ments are included in each portfolio here. Do not be concerned if you do
not happen to have any of the documents that we have included here or
if the documents you have in mind for your portfolio are quite different.
You should use whatever works for you. Nevertheless, looking at these
examples should spark some ideas. Consult Chapters 2 and 3 for fur-
ther ideas about the kinds of documents you might want to include in
your targeted portfolio. Hopefully, you will be able to come up with
some color documents, which, for reasons of cost, we could not include
here.
In addition to presenting examples of the kinds of documents that
might be used in a portfolio, we also wanted to give you an opportuni-
ty here to follow the strategic process associated with targeting an ef-
fective portfolio. As explained in Chapter 7, different career situations
157
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

require different strategies. And so we recommend that in addition to
looking at the portfolio documents in Part 2, you also take note of the
fact that different strategies are associated with each case.
Part 2 illustrates what might go into a particular portfolio and
tells you why. We do not, however, discuss in any depth how these doc-
uments should be presented during a meeting. Nor do we discuss here
how many documents should be presented. To review the specific tech-
niques that should be used for presenting portfolios in each of the ca-
reer situations described in Part 2, see Chapters 6 and 7.
The documents in this section are based on real documents but
have been changed to protect the privacy of the individuals who have
sent and received them.
The people in these cases are composites of people we have
coached. All names have been changed to protect these people’s coach-
es! Any resemblance to a real person bearing these names is purely co-
incidental.
The documents and people have been made up. But the cases, we
hope you will agree, are based on very real situations!
CASES
Zachary Schwartz:
Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive
Field
Gwen Johnson:
From Homemaker to Paid Job
Peter Evans:
Getting That First Job After Graduat-
ing from School
Karen Cresson:
Changing Careers
Amanda Ferraro:
Getting That Promotion
158
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

Zachary Schwartz:
Getting a Job in a Highly
Competitive Field
Zachary Schwartz, M.D., who is completing his residency,
targets his portfolio to get an edge in a highly competitive job
market.
CAREER SITUATION
Zachary Schwartz, M.D. is a fourth-year resident in an OB/GYN (ob-
stetrics and gynecology) residency program at City Medical Center in
Boston. His residency training is coming to an end, and he is now ap-
plying for a job in private practice.
Zachary has done very well in his residency program, but he is con-
cerned about his job prospects. Not only is he in a very competitive field
but he is also a male in a specialty that is rapidly becoming a predom-
inantly female occupation. Of the residents completing their OB/GYN
training at City Medical Center this year, Zachary is the only male.
There is also a general trend in the OB/GYN field of women patients
preferring female physicians. This is a point of vulnerability in
Zachary’s candidacy that must be overcome.
On the positive side, Zachary has performed exceedingly well dur-
ing his residency, receiving many kudos from both patients and super-
visors. He was selected to be the administrative chief in the final year
of his residency, has learned advanced surgical techniques not normal-
159
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

ly offered in residency programs, has published articles in prestigious
journals, and has taken a series of supplementary workshops on the
business aspects of the practice of medicine.
Though he did not grow up in Boston, Zachary has fallen in love
with the area. He doesn’t want to leave Boston, but is afraid that un-
less he can make a particularly strong presentation of his credentials
to job interviewers and find a way to allay concerns about his being a
male in a predominantly female specialty, he will have to move to find
a job. He decides to create a portfolio to help him make his case in job
interviews.
TARGETED JOB
Zachary responded to the following ad that ran in a professional jour-
nal, and is offered a job interview.
Obstetrician/Gynecologist
OB/GYN position in North End of Boston. Position available to join a
group of nine board certified OB/GYN’s with excellent training. The group
currently does 400 deliveries per year and each physician has a substan-
tial surgery schedule. Expect about 40% of the practice to be OB and 60%
GYN. The group has a favorable payer mix, shares calls equally, and has
been in existence for 35 years. The group is looking for a new, well-trained
physician with a commitment to the Boston area and a quality back-
ground. The physicians in the practice all come from top-notch programs.
We are offering a base salary, productivity incentives, partnership poten-
tial, and benefits including 4 weeks of vacation, and 2 weeks of CME.
DESIRED P.E.A.K.S.
Prior to assembling a portfolio to take to this job interview, Zachary did
an informational interview with a friend who is a partner in a success-
ful Boston OB/GYN practice. He learned that the following P.E.A.K.S.
are considered highly desirable in physicians seeking the kind of job
advertised.
Personal Characteristics
Compassionate, sensitive, responsive, professional, ethical, intuitive,
flexible, energetic, honest
Experience
Worked in a busy OB/GYN setting
Extensive surgical and obstetric experience
Accomplishments
Proven leader
Published
Knowledge
Advanced specialties within OB/GYN
160
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Understanding of management and business aspects of practice of
medicine
Skills
Obstetric and surgical skills
PORTFOLIO STRATEGY
Given the fact that residents have similar experiences during their
training, Zachary needs a portfolio that would help him differentiate
himself from his peers in favorable way. And he needs to allay concerns
that OB/GYN patients might not be as comfortable with him as they
would be with a female physician.
He will want to be able to demonstrate that he has developed the
very P.E.A.K.S. that he knows from his research are considered highly
valuable in candidates for the position he is seeking. And, in particular,
he will want to be able to give evidence that:
I His patients are evidently not put off by the fact that he is a male
physician and, in fact, find him a very caring and compassionate doc-
tor who is sensitive to the emotions associated with their health con-
cerns.
I He has very strong medical credentials that include an excellent
knowledge of the latest findings in his field and training in surgical
techniques that are not typically covered in residency programs.
I He has exceptionally good training in the business of medicine. He
has taken a series of workshops on how to handle the management
and business issues that come up in private practice. And he has
been very successful as the administrative chief during the fourth
year of his residency.
Finally, he would like to be able to give some evidence of the com-
mitment he has to staying in the Boston area, as this would reassure
his interviewers that if they hire him, he won’t quit after a couple of
years because he wants to live somewhere else.
CONTENTS OF THIS SAMPLE PORTFOLIO
Resume: This is a P.E.A.K.S. resume that is targeted at the job for
which Zachary will be interviewing. It sets him up to discuss and veri-
fy P.E.A.K.S. he has that are likely to be considered desirable in candi-
dates for this position.
P: Personal Characteristics
Letter from female attending physician. This letter, from a doctor who
supervised Zachary during a segment of his training, praises Zachary
for his ability to establish rapport with his patients.
Letter from a patient. This letter thanks Zachary for the sensitive and
caring way that he attended to her concerns.
Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
161

Picture of his new house. This picture of a house that he and his wife
recently bought in a Boston suburb can be used as a prop to discuss his
commitment to the Boston area, and to mention that his wife, who has
joined a local architecture practice, feels the same way.
E: Experience
Residency review. This verifies his excellent all-around experience and
performance as a resident in a very busy OB/GYN setting.
A: Accomplishments
Administrative chief recognition letter. This letter verifies his excellent
leadership skills in a very challenging and busy setting.
Collage of logos from medical journals. This can be used as a prop to
discuss research he did that was published in prestigious journals. If
the interviewer seems particularly interested in one or more of the top-
ics, copies of actual articles can be sent to the interviewer after the in-
terview. Zachary might also store copies of article abstracts inside the
plastic sheet protector, between the front and back display documents.
He could pull these out if the interviewer seemed interested in his re-
search. He could also store actual copies of these articles elsewhere in
his portfolio carrying case. By doing so, he could leave one behind after
the interview, if appropriate.
K: Knowledge
Letter on grand rounds presentation. This demonstrates his knowledge
of the latest findings in his field.
Med-BiZ curriculum. This shows the breadth of his training in the
business and management aspects of private practice.
S: Skills
Certificate for laser cosmetics course. This certificate also gives evi-
dence of an advanced surgical skill not usually received during an
OB/GYN residency.
Certificate for laparoscopy course. This certificate also gives evidence of
an advanced surgical skill.
162
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
163
R
E
S
U
M
E
Zachary Schwartz, MD
1234 Shaw Ave, Boston Suburb, MA 02111
Telephone: (555) 555-5555 Pager: (555) 555-5555 #1234 Email: Zschwartz@hospital.org
Overview: OB/GYN physician with exceptional medical credentials who is responsive to patients in
a way that will strengthen and build a practice’s reputation. Caring, understanding, and
compassionate. Willing to work the hours necessary in order to be successful.
Objective: Work in a busy group practice in the Boston area specializing in women’s health. Utilize
and continue to develop my surgical and obstetric skills. Add value to a practice.
Education:
OB/GYN Residency
City Medical Center
Boston, MA
June 1998−June 2002
Medical School
State University School of Medicine
1994−1998
Undergraduate
State University, 1990-1994
Magna cum laude
Work Experience:
City Hospital Women’s Clinic
Resident-In-Training
Experience:
275 normal deliveries; 225 c-sections; surgical case list with more than
500 procedures.
Accomplishments:
Administrative Chief
5 published journal articles
Knowledge:
Med-BiZ Participant (Business Training)
Skills:
Laparoscopy, Cosmetic Laser, Obgyn Proclog, and Coding,
Certifications:
ACLS
Licensure:
Massachusetts State License
Languages:
Fluent: English & Spanish
Memberships:
CREOG Fellow
Honors:
Golden Key National Honor Society
Interests:
Cooking, Boston sports, golf, reading, history
Personal Information:
Citizenship: United States
References and Portfolio Available upon Request

164
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
CITY MEDICAL CENTER
Dr. Zachary Schwartz
Resident
City Medical Center
Boston, MA 02111
April 13, 2001
Dr. Schwartz,
As this block comes to a close, I wanted to recognize you for your compassion and sensitivity with
our patients. As an attending physician it is always rewarding and encouraging seeing new
physicians who are able to establish a true rapport with their patients. I received many positive
comments from patients about the caring way that you interacted with them and their families.
The population we serve is deserving of the respect and compassion you show on a daily basis and
you should be commended.
Keep up the good work and good luck with the remainder of your training.
M aria Zuelinski
Maria Zuelinski, MD
Reproductive Endocrinology

Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
165
P
Dr. Zachary Schwartz
City Medical Center
Boston, MA. 02111
October 15, 2001
Dear Dr. Schwartz,
I am sending you this note to say thank you for all your concern, caring and compassion over the
past few months.
I am aware that our situation is one you probably deal with on a regular basis, but for us it was
extremely trying. You not only helped to reassure us, but also thoroughly explained the situation in
a way that was easy for us to understand. I know we were fortunate that we had a positive outcome,
as we were aware of what could have happened.
You are an extremely caring physician; we wish you all the success in your future when you enter
into private practice. Your future patients will be fortunate to have such a skilled and
compassionate physician.
Sincerely,
Jane Smith
Jane Smith
PS: We named our new son Zachary, enclosed is his photo from the hospital.

166
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
We have just purchased this home in a suburb of Boston

RESIDENCY REVIEW
Final Review
Resident: Zachary Schwartz, MD
Date: June 5, 2002
PGY Level: 1__ 2__ 3__ 4_X_
Date of Evaluation: June 1, 2002
Rating:
5 = Excellent, 4 = Above Average, 3 = Average, 2 = Below Average, 1 = Unsatisfactory, 0 = Cannot Evaluate
Knowledge Base for PGY Level
5
4
3
2
1
0
Clinical Care
Comments: Excellent job in this area. Mastered level
Technical Dexterity Skills for Diagnostic/Therapeutic Procedures
Comments: Outstanding skills and procedures
Record Keeping/Chart Performance/Medical Record Dictation
Comments: Consistently on time and complete records
Outpatient Clinics and Patient Care
Comments:
Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
167
History/Physical/Social Assessment
X
Management Plans/Orders
X
Progress Management of Patients
X
Discharge Planning
X
Operating Room
X
Labor and Delivery
X
Emergency Room
X
Other
X
X
X
E

168
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
E
Personal Attributes
Comments: Well-rounded, ethical, energetic and responsible physician
Administrative Skills
Comments: Compliant, on time and complete
Teaching Skills
Comments: Excellent teacher. Responsive to individual needs
Interpersonal Relationships
Comments: Caring, compassionate and understanding
Areas of Excellence/Strengths: You continue to look out for the interest of others and insist on
accuracy.
Areas of Needed Improvement: Try to learn to “compartmentalize” so that you do not take your
patients’ problems home with you, during the time you should be recharging your batteries.
Evaluation reviewed with the Resident:
X yes 
no
Residents Signature: Zachary Schwartz, MD
Date: June 2002
______________________
___________
Evaluator’s Signature: M artin Carbone, MD
Date: June 2002
_____________________
___________
Department Policy Compliance
X
Dictation of Medical Records
X
Submission of Statistics
X
Other
Patients
X
Students
X
Patients
X
Nurses/Staff
X
Peers
X
Students
X
Faculty
X
Judgment
X
Reliability
X
Setting of Priorities
X
Stress Management
X
Accepting of Instruction
X
Flexibility
X
Compassion
X

Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
169
A
CITY MEDICAL CENTER
Dr. Zachary Schwartz
Chief Resident
City Medical Center
Boston, MA 02111
June 21, 2002
Dr. Schwartz,
Administrative Chief duties are never easy, particularly in a busy hospital like ours. But somehow
you made the job seem quite manageable and I have never seen our residency program run as
smoothly as it has this year. Your organization of the schedule and the leadership skills you
demonstrated with the whole residency program earned you the respect of everyone connected with
this program. For this, we would not only like to offer our congratulations but also extend our
heartfelt thanks.
Influential leaders can wield a tremendous amount of influence in the practice of medicine. Under
your capable leadership, administrative issues did not get in the way of the smooth delivery of
services and the training of our residents.
Thank you for an exceptional job as administrative chief!
Best of luck in the future,
M artin Carbone
Martin Carbone, MD
Program Director

170
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
A
Refereed articles published in
THE REGIONAL JOURNAL OF MEDICINE
Annals of Reproduction
IJMR
THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL RESEARCH
Journal of OBGYN Research
NSI Journal of the
National Society of Internists
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Zachary Schwartz: Getting a Job in a Highly Competitive Field
171
K
CITY MEDICAL CENTER
Dr. Zachary Schwartz
Chief Resident
City Medical Center
Boston, MA 02111
March 15, 2002
Dr. Schwartz,
Congratulations on your successful Grand Rounds Presentation. Your topic, “Recent Research
Findings on Complications of Pregnancy,” was well received and very informative. You have a special
talent, teaching and explaining complex topics. I am confident that everyone in attendance learned
something new and will use this information as they manage their patients.
You were very well organized and your presentation skills are excellent. The result was a Grand
Rounds Presentation that was really brought to life.
Keep up the good work,
M artin Carbone
Martin Carbone, MD
Program Director

172
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
K
Med-BiZ Curriculum
Attended Regularly During Four-Year Residency
The Med-BiZ program was created by two physicians with MBAs who believe that
residents can learn to apply business and management principles in a way that is
beneficial to both their patients and the development of their practices. Through a
series of workshops that include hands-on training exercises, the Med-BiZ program
provides residents with the opportunity to acquire management skills and
knowledge in the following areas:
Workshop topics:
•
Communication Styles
•
Communication
•
Financial Management
•
Effective Presentations
•
Leadership/Managing Change
•
Office Coding
•
Activity-Based Costing
•
Running an Effective Meeting
•
Financial Planning
•
Practice Management
•
Team Building
•
Teamwork
•
Practice Marketing
•
Practice Efficiency
•
Patient Satisfaction
•
Avoiding Burnout
•
Negotiations
•
Ethics
•
Malpractice Issues

S
C ERTIFICATE OF COURSE
COMPLETION
This certificate is awarded to
Z a c h a r y  S c h w a r t z ,  M D
In recognition of completion of a course in Laser Cosmetics
A M E R I C A N L A S E R I N S T I T U T E
Sandra OBrien
4/2/02
_________________________________
____________
Instructor
Date
173

S
C E R T I F I C A T E  O F  C O U R S E
C O M P L E T I O N
This certificate is awarded to
Z a c h a r y  S c h w a r t z ,  M D
174
In recognition of completion of a course in Laparoscopy
American Endoscopy, Inc.
Kenneth P. Fontes
4/5/01
_________________________________
___________
Instructor
Date

Gwen Johnson:
From Homemaker to Paid Job
Gwen Johnson creates a portfolio to demonstrate that many
of the things that she has done in her role as an energetic,
actively engaged mother make her a strong candidate for the
paid job she is now seeking.
CAREER SITUATION
Gwen Johnson has been a homemaker for the past fourteen years. She
got married just before her senior year of college, and shortly after
graduating had a baby girl and then, a year later, a little boy. Instead
of pursuing a career, she became a very dedicated, full-time mother. In
this role, she coordinated her children’s participation in numerous ex-
tracurricular activities, led some of the programs they’ve been involved
with (such as Scouting), and did a lot of volunteer work for her chil-
dren’s schools. She also did a considerable amount of volunteer work for
a local foundation, Wishes and Dreams, that finds ways to grant wish-
es to children with life-threatening illnesses who would not otherwise
be able to realize their dreams.
Since her children are now older and less dependent upon her,
Gwen finds she has much more free time and would really like to get
going on her own professional career with a full-time, paid job. She
wants to get into an active, multitasking work environment that can
absorb her abundance of energy and she wants to continue to be ac-
tively involved in things that are meaningful to her. She knows that she
175
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

very much enjoyed the two times she participated in volunteer fund-
raising activities and would like to be paid to do that for an organiza-
tion that has a cause to which she can relate.
Gwen is afraid that that she will have difficulty getting a “paid” job
at a professional level, since she hasn’t been paid for anything since her
part-time jobs in college. Yet she knows she has talents and has been
able to achieve a lot in her volunteer work. She feels she could excel as
a professional fund-raiser and decides to assemble a Can-Do Portfolio
to demonstrate this capability.
Through a friend, she has gotten an interview for a fund-raising
job with For the Kids, a small, nonprofit organization that provides free
books, science kits, and other learning materials for needy children.
TARGETED JOB
Prior to her job interview, Gwen contacted For the Kids to get a job de-
scription and learned that this fund-raising position includes the fol-
lowing responsibilities:
I Organize and plan fund-raising programs for the organization, and
make contact with individuals or establishments to solicit funds or
in-kind gifts.
I Gather and evaluate information about potential contributors to de-
velop a mailing or contact list and to plan sales approaches.
I Prepare fund-raising brochures for mail-solicitation programs.
I Contact potential contributors and persuade them to contribute
funds or in-kind gifts by explaining the purpose and benefits of the
fund-raising program.
I Receive pledges or funds from contributors. Record expenses incurred
and contributions received.
I Write letters of appreciation for donations.
I Act as an ambassador for the organization.
I Design and implement fund-raising events. Oversee event details
from inception to completion. Coordinate public relations for the
events.
I Coordinate the sale of emblems or other tokens of the organization
represented.
I Organize and train volunteers and plan social functions to raise
funds.
DESIRED P.E.A.K.S.
Before assembling a targeted portfolio to bring to her job interview,
Gwen showed the above list of responsibilities to a professional fund-
raiser she knew at Wishes and Dreams, where she has been a volun-
teer. She learned that the following P.E.A.K.S. would be considered
highly desirable in a candidate for this position:
176
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

Personal Characteristics
Leader
Well organized
Enjoys multitasking
Outgoing
Strong determination/perseverance
Shows initiative
Enterprising
Experience
In nonprofit organizations
Accomplishments
Proven ability as a fund-raiser in nonprofit settings
Knowledge
Knowledge of fund-raising techniques
Skills
Writes persuasively
Makes an effective group presentation
Trains others effectively
PORTFOLIO STRATEGY
Gwen wants to be able to use portfolio documents to overcome possible
concerns about the fact that she has never had a full-time, paid job.
And, most importantly, she wants to be able to demonstrate that dur-
ing her career as a homemaker she has developed P.E.A.K.S. that make
her a strong candidate for this fund-raising position. To do so, she par-
ticularly wants to be able to do the following:
I Demonstrate the relevance of her volunteer experience for being a
professional fund raiser.
I Feature and make the most of her fund-raising experience, even
though she has only done this twice.
CONTENTS OF THIS SAMPLE PORTFOLIO
Resume: This is a P.E.A.K.S. resume that is targeted at the For the
Kids fund-raising job for which Gwen will be interviewing. The head-
ings set her up to discuss and verify the P.E.A.K.S. she has that are
likely to be considered desirable in candidates for this position.
P: Personal Characteristics
Collage of homemaker’s multitasking life. Gwen can use this as a prop
to discuss the fact that, as an actively engaged mother, she has had to
become quite expert at multitasking. She can make the point that given
Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
177

all of the homemaker’s activities she’s been involved in, many of them
simultaneously, she will have no trouble keeping up with the pace of
the work world. And she can talk about how her natural inclination was
to be the parent who was the leader of many of the programs her chil-
dren have been involved in, such as Scouting.
Letter from parent thanking her for creating the “Granny Corps” cross-
ing guards. This letter gives evidence of Gwen’s initiative, strong de-
termination, and perseverance. Although many of the moms had thrown
up their hands and said it couldn’t be done, Gwen found a creative way
to provide free crossing guards for her kids’ school. She can talk about
all the red tape she had to cut through to get her Granny Corps idea
approved. And as a way of underscoring her organizational and train-
ing skills, she can talk about the techniques she used for recruiting, or-
ganizing, and training grandmothers to be crossing guards.
Thank-you letter from fifth-grade class teacher. This letter shows she is
enterprising and well organized, and knows how to create and coordi-
nate special events that are both enjoyable and have a message.
Congratulations letter for making a very sick kid’s dream come true.
This letter gives evidence of Gwen’s strong personal commitment to
helping needy children, which is the fundamental mission of the For
the Kids organization, where she is hoping to get a job. The fact that
she has been a champion for making the dreams of many kids come
true is also a testament to her perseverance.
E: Experience
Letter welcoming her to the board of Wishes and Dreams Foundation.
This letter verifies that she has had significant experience at a non-
profit organization whose mission, like that of For the Kids, is to help
needy children.
A: Accomplishments
Certificate of appreciation for being top fund-raiser at Wishes and
Dreams. This certificate verifies that during a recent fund-raising
campaign at this foundation, Gwen was the top fund-raiser on the
board. She can use this as a prop to discuss some of the techniques she
used to make successful solicitations from corporations.
K: Knowledge
Certificate for completing fund-raising course. Soon after being ap-
pointed to the board of the Wishes and Dreams Foundation, Gwen
signed up for this series of workshops on fund-raising. She can use this
document to talk about how she used her knowledge of fund-raising
techniques that she gained in this course to become the top fund-rais-
er on the board of Wishes and Dreams.
After showing her certificate for this course, she might also mention
that she has an undergraduate degree in educational psychology and
178
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

talk about how her training in education, along with being a parent, en-
ables her to have a good understanding of the educational service that
For the Kids provides for needy children. There’s no need to show her
undergraduate degree to make this point.
S: Skills
Letter from school thanking her for chairing fund-raising drive. This
document is particularly useful because it identifies some of the key
qualities and skills that Gwen has that enabled her to reach her fund-
raising goal four months early. Specifically, it lauds her for being a well-
organized leader who did a superb job of training others.
Since it praises the effectiveness of the fund-raising letter she created,
this document can also be used as giving evidence of her ability to write
persuasively. Ideally, Gwen should have a copy of that fund-raising let-
ter in her portfolio, but since she has misplaced it, using this document
to show praise for the letter she wrote is the next best thing.
Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
179

180
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
R
E
S
U
M
E
Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane • Corpus Christi, TX 02920
(555) 555-5555
email: Gjohnson@web.com
Overview
Objective:
Seeking full-time fund-raising position in a nonprofit institution.
Personal Characteristics That Add Value:
A well-prepared professional with an academic background in educational psychology and
experience in successful fund-raising. Strong leader who is well-organized, creative, outgoing, and
determined to succeed. Enterprising, strong initiative and innate ability to multitask.
Experience:
Fund-Raising Experience
Volunteer Fund-Raising
Wishes and Dreams Foundation; Wish Grantor
Board of Directors
Accomplishments:
Fund-Raising
Successfully headed fund-raising campaign to raise $1.5 million for school
addition 3 months ahead of schedule.
Recognized as Top Fund-Raiser for Wishes and Dreams Foundation.
Special Knowledge:
Participated in two workshops on fund-raising techniques.
Skills:
Fund-raising letter writer
Ability to write persuasively
Training
Education
Texas State College
Dallas, Texas
B.S. Educational Psychology
1988
Community Service
St. Peter’s School, Wishes and Dreams Foundation
References and Career Portfolio Available upon Request
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

P
Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
181
G
y
m
n
a
s
t
i
c
s
Little League
Little League
Karate
G
i
r
l
S
c
o
u
t
L
e
a
d
e
r
G
i
r
l
S
c
o
u
t
L
e
a
d
e
r
G
i
r
l
S
c
o
u
t
L
e
a
d
e
r
Swim Lessons
P
T
A
L
E
A
D
E
R
D
a
n
c
e
CUB  SCOUT
LEADER
CUB  SCOUT
LEADER
S
C
H
O
O
L
F a m i l y
G
o
l
f
L
e
s
s
o
n
s
W i s h e s  a n d  D r e a m s
House
Mana
ge
me
nt
Hous
e M
an
ag
e
m
e
n
t
House M
anage
men
t

182
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
From the Desk of Joan Hennessey
Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane
Corpus Christi, TX 02920
September 19, 2001
Dear Mrs. Johnson,
Just a quick note to thank you for finding a way to get a crossing guard for our children. We’ve
brought this problem up many times in the past, and each time were told that it would be too
expensive to do. Your idea of forming a “Granny Corps” was brilliant, and you made it happen.
Thanks to you, now we know our kids will come home safely! You got it done, when others said it
couldn’t happen.
Sincerely,
Joan Hennessey
Joan Hennessey

Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
183
P
St. Peter’s School
Corpus Christi, TX 02920
Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane
Corpus Christi, TX 02920
May 5, 2000
Dear Gwen,
The 5th grade class would like to thank you for all your help this year as our room mom. Your
coordination of all the special events, including class parties, field trips, cultural fairs and other
extra-curricular events was very special.
As a teacher, I particularly liked the way each of the events you suggested and organized was not
only fun but also educational. The trip to the Port of Texas to see the tall ships and learn about
maritime navigation and the importance of protecting our seas is just one example of your
creativity.
Never before have I seen such excitement from the children. And the fact that you did all of this
keeping well within budget is a testament to your excellent business skills.
Thank you again for all your help.
Sincerely,
Miss Kathy Day
5th Grade Teacher
cc: Bro. John Pricine

Mike O’Neill
Executive Director
John Milluck
President
Joan Lutz
Vice President
Paul Quintz
Treasurer
Ellen Webber
Secretary
WISHES & DREAMS FOUNDATION
[
[
184
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
Mrs. Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane
Corpus Christi, TX 02921
October 12, 1998
Dear Gwen,
Congratulations on fulfilling your twenty-third dream. Michael B. and his
family had a great time at the resort and have lots of pictures to share.
Granting wishes is never easy but as you know it is very rewarding.
Your organizational skills and dedication have been a welcome addition to
our organization. Your commitment to the children is obvious and is
recognized by everyone you come in contact with.
Letters of appreciation from all the families you have worked with
continue to show that your commitment is sincere and your dedication
absolute.
Keep up the good work and thank you for your quality time.
Sincerely,
Mike ONeill
Mike O’Neill
Executive Director

Gwen Johnson: From Homemaker to Paid Job
185
E
Mike O’Neill
Executive Director
John Milluck
President
Joan Lutz
Vice President
Paul Quintz
Treasurer
Ellen Webber
Secretary
WISHES & DREAMS FOUNDATION
[
[
Mrs. Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane
Corpus Christi, TX 02921
January 3, 1997
Dear Gwen,
Your request to be placed on the Board of Directors for the Wishes and
Dreams Foundation has been reviewed by the external committee. We
are honored by your request and would like to welcome you to our Board
effective January 15th.
Your sincere commitment and community service experience make you a
welcome addition to our board.
We would like to grow in the area of fund-raising and corporate
sponsorship. We are confident that you are the right person for this
board position. You have demonstrated strong fund-raising skills and will
no doubt work well with Corporate America.
Keep up the good work and thank you for your time.
Sincerely,
Mike ONeill
Mike O’Neill
Executive Director

A
CERTIFICATE OF APPRECIATION
WISHES AND DREAMS
This certificate is awarded to
GWEN JOHNSON
For her valuable contributions as Top Fund-Raiser
Mike O Neill
9/22/97
_____________________________
__________
Executive Director
Date
186

K
187
This certificate is awarded to
Gwen Johnson
In recognition of completion of Workshop I and II in Fund-Raising Techniques
M ark Nelson
9/18/97
_________________________
__________
Instructor
Date
Certificate of Completion
Fund-Raising Consultants, Inc.

188
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
S
St. Peter’s School
Corpus Christi, TX 02920
Gwen Johnson
45 Trail Lane
Corpus Christi, TX 02920
January 24, 2002
Dear Gwen,
Fund-raising is no easy task. Companies and individuals are solicited regularly to help out with
everything from school events to public television, and from church events to personal tragedy.
When everyone is asking for support, funds become more difficult to receive. We were fortunate
when you agreed to chair our fund-raising campaign.
Our goal was to raise 1.5 million dollars to build a much-needed addition of four classrooms to our
existing school building. In fact, although there were many who thought this goal was too ambitious,
your leadership and fund-raising skills made it happen.
Drawing on your leadership and training skills you did a superb job of converting a group of
volunteers into a team that worked as a cohesive unit. The fund-raising letter you wrote was
particularly effective in raising the funds we needed for our addition. We are truly fortunate to have
had your volunteer services for our now successful campaign.
Our goal was to raise the necessary funds in twelve months. We reached our goal in only eight
months. You are a gifted fund-raiser. We thank you for your efforts and the children thank you for
the new addition, which is scheduled to begin in March.
Gratitude and heartfelt thanks,
Bro. John Pricine
Bro. John Pricine
Principal
S. Peter’s School

Peter Evans:
Getting That First Job After
Graduating from School
Peter Evans targets his portfolio to demonstrate that
although his G.P.A. has been average, he can be an
exceptional performer in the job he is hoping to get.
CAREER SITUATION
Peter Evans is about to graduate from a community college with an
associate’s degree in marketing and is hoping to get a job as an assis-
tant marketing manager for a fitness club. He’s had an up-and-down
academic record, doing very well in the courses that interested him
and not so well in courses that didn’t hold his attention. Now that he’s
competing for his first job, he wishes he’d worked a little harder in the
courses that bored him, since his overall grade point average, or
G.P.A., puts him pretty much in the middle of the pack.
Peter is applying for a marketing job in a fitness center because
he’s passionate about fitness and he loves promoting. He’s not a great
athlete, but he is a real fitness buff who tries to work out every day, and
runs as many marathons as he can fit into his schedule. His passion for
promoting was very much in evidence this past year when, as promo-
tions coordinator for his school’s Future Marketers’ Club, he pumped
new life into the organization. As promotions coordinator, he used his
own creative ideas to recruit new members. He also did exceptionally
189
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

well in the segments of the marketing courses he took that focused on
the creative aspects of doing marketing strategy and promotions.
About a year ago, Peter decided that he’d like to get into the busi-
ness of promoting fitness. With this in mind, just before the start of this
academic year, he conducted an informational interview with the mar-
keting director of a health club where he is a member in order to learn
about the qualifications he’d need to get a marketing job in this field.
He learned that while real-world marketing experience is pre-
ferred in candidates, if he could demonstrate that he has done some
promotional work while at school, and been successful at it, that would
make a positive impression on interviewers. And so Peter, who’s never
had anything other than cut-the-lawn type summer jobs, decided to
make an extra effort in his role as the Future Marketers’ Club promo-
tions coordinator, which he thoroughly enjoyed doing. He also learned
that presentation skills and the ability to use the computer to create
marketing materials would be particularly valued in candidates for
entry-level marketing positions. To develop his skills in these areas,
Peter took some workshops for which he received certificates.
There are some soft spots in his academic record, but Peter has
also been industrious in important ways during his school career. He
now needs a way to get potential employers to see the things he can do
for them. Peter is confident that he will succeed in a marketing job if
given the opportunity. He decides to create a Can-Do Portfolio to get
that opportunity.
TARGETED JOB
Peter responded to the following ad in the newspaper and was offered
a job interview.
Assistant Marketing Manager for Fitness Club
The role of the assistant marketing manager is to support the development
and distribution of marketing and sales materials and to assist in the pro-
duction of advertisements, marketing brochures, sales kits, and other pro-
motional materials. Responsibilities also include designing layouts, as-
sisting with the creation and implementation of strategic marketing
plans, making presentations to institutional customers, staging promo-
tional events, creating customer surveys, and writing articles. The position
requires at least a two-year degree and relevant experience in the field or
academic equivalent.
DESIRED P.E.A.K.S.
As noted earlier, before the start of his final year at a community col-
lege, Peter conducted an informational interview with the marketing
manager of a local health club to find out what the key qualifications
would be for an entry-level marketing job in the fitness field. He
learned that the following P.E.A.K.S. are highly desirable for this type
of work:
190
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Personal Characteristics
Creative
Enthusiastic
Strong follow-through
Team player
Experience
Marketing/promotional experience in work world or at school
Fitness background
Accomplishments
Proven ability to get things done, preferably in marketing
Knowledge
Fundamentals of marketing
Skills
Developing marketing plans
Creating marketing tools
Using computers to develop marketing materials
Presentation skills
Writing skills
PORTFOLIO STRATEGY
Being a new graduate who has never had a full-time job, Peter is con-
cerned that he may be viewed as lacking the experience and other qual-
ifications needed to be successful at this marketing job. And he knows
he may be asked about his G.P.A., which has been less than distin-
guished. His goal, therefore, is to be able to demonstrate that he, in fact,
has the very P.E.A.K.S. that are being sought in candidates for this po-
sition. In particular, he wants to be able to impress the following points
upon his interviewer:
I The courses and activities he excelled at during his school career are
relevant for this job.
I He has pursued special training in computers and in oral presenta-
tion techniques that will make him immediately productive at this
job.
I He has already demonstrated creativity in developing a fitness mar-
keting tool.
I He knows from the inside the whys and hows of physical fitness, be-
cause of his own regimen of personal training.
I He has had considerable success marketing a student organization.
In sum, he wants to be able to use his portfolio not only to remove any
reservations about his academic record but also to demonstrate that he
is uniquely qualified to excel at this job.
Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
191

CONTENTS OF THIS SAMPLE PORTFOLIO
Resume: This is a P.E.A.K.S. resume that is targeted at the fitness club
marketing job for which Peter will be interviewing. The headings set
him up to discuss and verify the P.E.A.K.S. he has that are likely to be
considered desirable in candidates for this position. Note that he does
not list his G.P.A. He does list marketing courses he took that are rele-
vant to this job, and that he can discuss with confidence because he has
in his portfolio examples of two projects he did in these courses that re-
ceived high grades.
P: Personal Characteristics
Letter of recommendation from a marketing professor. After doing very
well in two courses that he took with this professor, he asked her to
write a letter of recommendation. He knew her well enough to ask her
to mention his creativity, follow-through, and the fact that he is a team
player. She agreed that he has these qualities and included them in her
letter. He can now use this letter as evidence that he has these impor-
tant personal characteristics.
E: Experience
Medals for completing four marathons. These are medals he received
for completing four big city marathons in the past year. He can use this
as a prop to discuss his background in fitness. He can make the point
that because of his personal experience in this area, he will be able to
create marketing messages that explain the pleasures and benefits of
fitness. The fact that he completed these marathons can also be used as
evidence of his follow-through. He finishes what he starts.
A: Accomplishments
Congratulatory letter from the faculty advisor to the Future Marketers’
Club. This letter demonstrates his success at staging a promotional
event for a student organization. He can use it as proof that he not only
has experience in marketing, he can get things done. He can discuss how
he followed through on an idea he had and got great results. Once he
uses this document to establish that he’s had a notable success as a pro-
motions person, he can also use this as a springboard to discuss other
things he accomplished as the promotions coordinator for this student
organization.
K: Knowledge
Synopsis of marketing concentration courses. This document is basically
a rewrite of the descriptions of applicable courses in the school’s course
catalog. Since the write-ups are brief enough to be taken in at a glance,
Peter can hand this document to his interviewer to quickly establish that
he has a solid foundation in the fundamentals of marketing. He can use
these descriptions to segue into a discussion of the outstanding projects
he did in these courses.
192
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

S: Skills
Picture of a marketing tool with professor’s note. Peter developed this
marketing tool for the promotions segment of one of his marketing
courses. His assignment was to pick an industry and then come up with
a memorable message for a pin that a company could use to promote its
product or service. Peter picked the fitness industry and came up with
the “Do you want a pill or the sure cure” message. Although not re-
quired to do so, he took the assignment further and actually designed
and produced a set of pins with this message on it. His teacher was
thrilled. For his portfolio, Peter has included a picture of the pin he cre-
ated with his professor’s note. Alternatively, he might have stuck an ac-
tual pin onto the professor’s note. Either way, this is a very effective
way of illustrating his skill at creating marketing tools.
Certificate for Computer-Aided Design for Marketing course. Peter
knows from his informational interview that using computers for creat-
ing marketing materials is considered an important skill to have. He
can make the point that he took this series of workshops on top of his
regular course work because he wanted to have the skills to be imme-
diately productive in a marketing job.
Certificate for Oral Presentation Skills course. Peter also learned in the
informational interview he did that presentation skills are considered
particularly important in the marketing field. He can make the point
that because he really enjoys making presentations he took this extra
workshop to learn how to excel at doing this. His keenness to develop
himself, now that he’s found what he wants to do, will help deflect at-
tention from his mediocre G.P.A.
Title page and first page from a marketing plan he did for a course.
This paper that Peter did for his strategic marketing course demon-
strates that he knows how to develop a marketing plan. He can also use
this as a sample of his writing skills. He can display the title page and
the abstract for this paper on the front and back sides, respectively, of
a sheet protector, and then stuff a copy of the entire paper in between,
if it’s not too bulky. Or he can store a full copy of this paper elsewhere
in the carrying case for his portfolio. However he decides to present this
paper, he should make sure that the excellent comments and grade he
received are clearly visible!
Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
193

Peter Evans
45 North Street • Bradford, Iowa 50041 • (555) 555-5555
email: Pevans@scc.edu
Overview
A well-prepared individual with solid academic background and experience in marketing, seeking a
marketing management position where he can make a difference. A team player who is creative,
enthusiastic, and likes to get things done. Strong background in fitness.
Education
State Community College
Bradford, Iowa
AS Marketing
2002
Highlights of Educational Career
Experience:
Fitness—completed four marathons this past year
Accomplishments:
As promotions coordinator increased membership of student organization by 43%
Special Knowledge:
Marketing concentration included excellent courses in:
I Marketing Promotions and Communications
I Consumer Behavior
I Marketing Research
I Strategic Marketing Management
Skills Developed:
I Making oral presentations—certificate earned for completion of special course.
I Using computers to develop marketing materials—certificate earned for special course.
I Creating effective marketing tools—received high grade and praise for skill in this area.
I Developing strategic marketing plans—received high grade and praise for skill in this
area.
References and Career Portfolio
Available upon request
194
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
R
E
S
U
M
E

Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
195
P
From the Desk of Dr. Cynthia Clarke
Professor of Marketing
State Community College
Letter of Recommendation for Peter Evans
June 3, 2002
To Whom It May Concern:
I had the pleasant opportunity of having Peter in my class over the past two semesters at State
Community College. The two courses he took with me were “Marketing Promotions and
Communications” and “Strategic Marketing Management.” In each of these courses we do major
hands-on projects that prepare our students to be immediately productive as marketers in the
workplace. I was very pleased with both the marketing tools and the strategic marketing plan that
Peter created in the two courses he took with me.
Not only were his projects both creative and practical, his manner of interacting with other students
during the collaborative projects we did in class was most commendable. He is able to not only come
up with a lot of good ideas but also clearly be an enthusiastic “team player.”
Peter always did more than his fair share of the work needed to be done on the projects we did in
class. He took the initiative to get things started and, demonstrating great follow-through, picked up
the slack when things were going slowly. His teammates all seemed to respond favorably to Peter
both as a team member and as a person, and the output of his groups was always excellent.
I was glad to have Peter Evans as a student in my marketing courses. I highly recommend Peter as
an excellent person to hire for a marketing position. He will be the type of employee anyone would
be pleased to have on board.
Sincerely,
Cynthia Clarke
Dr. Cynthia Clarke
Professor
Marketing Concentration

E
196
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
197
A
FUTURE MARKETERS’ CLUB
STATE COMMUNITY COLLEGE
8/17/2001
Peter Evans
Future Marketers’ Club
Promotions Coordinator
Street Address
City, State 02222
Dear Peter,
The enrollment for the Future Marketers’ Club is up 43% year to date. Congratulations on this
fantastic achievement. Growth like this is a testament to your hard work and dedication to the
success of the Future Marketers’ Club.
All those in attendance enjoyed the event you coordinated during orientation. Your creative idea of
having every member serve as a greeter to those who came worked out brilliantly. Everyone felt as
though they were part of our club. I am confident that this is why our membership is up so
significantly.
Again, congratulations, and thank you for your leadership.
Sincerely,
Francine Spencer
Dr. Francine Spencer
Faculty Advisor

198
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
K
Marketing Concentration at State Community College
Marketing Promotions and Communications
In this course I learned how to choose and create the basic promotional tools that are available to
the marketing manager, including advertising, sales promotion, personal selling, and publicity. We
were given assignments where we actually created marketing tools.
Consumer Behavior
In this course I studied consumer behavior in the context of the overall marketing environment and
market segmentation. There was a tremendous emphasis on understanding the turbulent
environment surrounding the marketing decision-maker.
Market Research
Here we learned how marketing information can be used as the basis for decision making. Topics
included the cost and value of information, research design and instrumentation, data analysis, and
forecasting.
Strategic Marketing Management
This was the capstone course in marketing that integrated the marketing functions of product,
price, channels, and promotion with the concepts of strategic planning. Emphasis was on the
importance of this integration for carrying out effective marketing. This course essentially summed
up the entire core curriculum for the AS in Marketing. Each of us was assigned a company for
which we were required to develop a strategic marketing plan that we had to present and defend in
an oral presentation. And we participated in many group problem-solving exercises.

Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
199
S
Peter,
The marketing tool you developed for your fitness industry project is a winner!
I showed it to some marketers at a conference I attended last weekend, and they
loved it. To quote a marketing director I showed it to, as an example of the kind of
work one of my students is capable of:
Tell the kid, if he doesnt trademark it, I will!
M aybe you should.
Youve got a real knack for coming up with creative ideas for marketing tools.
I hope you pursue a career in this field!
Professor Clarke
Project Grade A+
P.S. Needless to say, I was very impressed that you took your idea to the next step
and actually created a real pin. The graphics look great.
Do you want a pill,
or
"The Sure
Cure"

S
Peter Evans
Computer-Aided Design for Marketing
Chester P. Little
11/14/2001
Instructor
Date
200
CAD
Specialist
CAD-Zukes, Inc. Specializing in CAD Training and Certification
Certified CAD Specialist
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

S
201
This certificate is presented to
In recognition of having successfully completed a course in
Making Effective Oral Presentations
Linda D. Stewart
5/9/2002
________________________________________
__________
Date
Peter  Evans
Certificate of Completion
P r e s e n t a t i o n   p r o f e s s i o n a l
d e v e l o p m e n t   s e r v i c e s
Instructor

202
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
S
State Community College
Bradford, Iowa
Associate Degree Program in Marketing
Marketing Plan for I.Java Café
A Marketing Plan Submitted
in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the
Degree of
Associate in Marketing
Peter Evans
April 5, 2002
Peter, this is an excellent example of a well-thought-out
marketing plan. Your company will succeed with this plan.
M arketing Plan Grade A+
Presentation to Class A+

Peter Evans: Getting That First Job After Graduating from School
203
S
First page of a marketing plan I did for my Strategic Marketing Course
Marketing Plan: I.Java café, an Internet café
1.0 Executive Summary
The goal of the I.Java café marketing plan is to outline the strategies, tactics, and programs that
will make the sales goals outlined in the I.Java café business plan a reality in the year 2002.
I.Java café, unlike a classic café, provides a distinctive forum for communication and entertainment
through the use of the Internet. I.Java café is the answer to a growing demand. The public wants: 1.
access to the Internet, and 2. a place to socialize with friends and colleagues.
Marketing will play an essential role in the success of I.Java café. I.Java café must build a brand
around the services it offers by heavily promoting itself through local radio and print advertising.
Although our marketing programs are just beginning, a strong emphasis will be put on keeping
customers and building brand loyalty through various programs focusing on customers, staff, and
experience.
Our targeted markets include:
1. Students from nearby colleges.
2. Businesspeople from the downtown business centers and professional buildings.
3. Senior Centers
2.0 Situation Analysis
I.Java café opened its doors a little over two months ago. Business is steady, and customers have
been impressed with our setup and uniqueness, however, we need to focus our attention on
implementing the strategies and tactics outlined in our original business plan.
Differentiating ourselves from the more traditional café has given us the ability to successfully
compete with the doughnut and coffee side of the business. Sales are in line with projections.
The target markets are rapidly accepting the Internet services side of the business. Club
memberships are exceeding the projections outlined in the business plan. College students tend to
gather for late-night sessions, nearby seniors from the center are getting a glimpse of what the
Internet has to offer, and local businesspeople continuously stop by for a quick lunch and an email
check....

This page intentionally left blank.

Karen Cresson:
Changing Careers
After ten years as an elementary school teacher, Karen
Cresson prepares her portfolio to get a job as an account
executive with a computer company.
CAREER SITUATION
Karen Cresson wants to change careers. She’s been a sixth-grade
teacher for the past ten years, has enjoyed many aspects of her job, and
has done well at it. But she’s ready to move on. She enjoys teaching and
believes in education, but she feels constrained by the classroom and by
the limits of her duties as a sixth-grade teacher.
Not sure what direction she wanted to go in next, Karen started
assembling a Master Portfolio. She hoped that gathering together doc-
uments that demonstrate important things about her might give her
some ideas. And it did. The note she got from a colleague thanking her
for restoring his computer when it crashed in the middle of class re-
minded Karen that people were always turning to her for help with
computers. The certificate she received for completing a course on edu-
cational software brought back memories of how much fun she had tak-
ing a course that many of her colleagues found intimidating. And the
letter from the principal of her school thanking her for persuading a
local company to donate computers to her classroom made her feel all
tingly. Why tingly, she asked herself? Was it the praise? Not really.
There were many notes of praise she’d received from the principal that
she was pleased to get, but that didn’t excite her that much.
205
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

What made her heart dance, she realized, was remembering the
thrill of the chase. And all for a good cause. She had loved being in the
role of sitting down with decision makers and pitching computers for
kids. She truly believed that getting the right educational software into
the classroom should be at the top of every school’s agenda. Persuading,
even educating, decision makers to buy into this idea would be some-
thing worth getting up in the morning for, she told herself.
Her pulse quickened again when she saw an ad in the paper for a
sales position with an educational software company she admired.
Knowledge of educational software, teaching experience, and advanced
courses in education were required. She had all of the above.
But she also realized that coming from the world of education,
with no experience in business or sales, might be an obstacle. Maybe
she should try to get a preview of what this job would really be like for
a person like herself. She called the alumni office of her alma mater and
discovered that one of her classmates had made the switch several
years ago from elementary school teacher to working for a software
company. She was able to do an informational interview over the phone
with this person, and decided she really did want to proceed with her
application.
Karen decided to create a Can-Do Portfolio to demonstrate that
she can make the transition from elementary school teacher to high-
performing account executive.
TARGETED JOB
The advertisement for the job that caught Karen’s eye read as follows:
Account Executive for Educational Software Company
Edu-Soft Inc. provides state-of-the-art educational software, including
both courseware and network solutions for the educational community.
Account Executive will sell the full breadth of our educational software
product line to elementary school systems. Job requires a balanced sales
effort involving sales/account management skills and product knowl-
edge/problem-solving/solution skills. Account Executive must be an expe-
rienced and fully capable individual who has the professional presence to
independently call on and lead the sales process at present and potential
accounts. Applicants must have knowledge of educational software, teach-
ing experience, and advanced courses in education.
DESIRED P.E.A.K.S.
Since Karen is not from this industry, the above job advertisement did
not provide her with enough information to fully understand what
P.E.A.K.S. would be considered most desirable in candidates for this
job. The job lists minimum requirements at the end, but that doesn’t
tell her which of her P.E.A.K.S. she should be featuring to be considered
an exceptional candidate. In order to target both her resume and her
portfolio, she needed to rely on the information she gathered from the
informational interview she did with her former classmate who is now
206
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

in the computer industry. Here are the desired P.E.A.K.S. she learned
about in this informational interview:
Personal Characteristics
Quick and dedicated learner
Professional presence
Enthusiastic
Well organized
Good planner
Creative
Persuasive
Experience
Teaching experience at elementary level
Accomplishments
Initiative taken outside of classroom
Knowledge
Elementary school curricula
Role of educational software in curriculum
Master’s degree in education
Skills
Selling skills
Presentation skills
Writing skills
Using the above information, Karen was able to create a P.E.A.K.S.
resume that got her a job interview with Edu-Soft.
PORTFOLIO STRATEGY
Karen’s goal is to be able to present her qualifications in a way that 
establishes her ability to make a quick and successful transition to this
new career. She wants the interviewer to know that not only would she
be productive shortly after taking this job, she would also be an excep-
tional performer in the future.
To do this she will want to be able to demonstrate that she has
strengths in the advertised formal requirements, and that she would
bring other very valuable P.E.A.K.S. to this job, as well.
Through the informational interview she did with her former
classmate, Karen was able to learn not only what the desired P.E.A.K.S.
are but also why these P.E.A.K.S. are considered important. The fol-
lowing P.E.A.K.S. she learned were considered particularly important
for a “career switcher,” like Karen, to be able to demonstrate:
I Quick and dedicated learner. This is an important trait for everyone
to have in the computer industry, but particularly important for a
Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
207

newcomer to the software business, because there is a huge amount
to learn about the company and product line just to get up to speed.
I Professional presence. This was mentioned in the job advertisement.
The reason it is considered important is because an account execu-
tive has to make presentations to senior executives. The interviewer
will want to know whether someone who has spent her professional
career so far in a sixth-grade classroom can do so and would not be
overwhelmed in such a situation.
I Initiative demonstrated outside of classroom. The interviewer will
want to know if Karen is able to take action and be creative outside
of the four walls of her sixth-grade classroom, where she has spent
most of her work life these past ten years.
The key will be to have documents available in her portfolio that
will enable Karen to demonstrate that she has these and other impor-
tant P.E.A.K.S. The documents do not have to be self-explanatory.
Karen can interpret the meaning of these documents for the interview-
ers. And she probably will have to do a fair amount of explaining, since
her P.E.A.K.S. were developed and demonstrated in a different field
from the computer industry.
CONTENTS OF THIS SAMPLE PORTFOLIO
Resume: This is a P.E.A.K.S. resume that is targeted at the job for
which Karen will be interviewing. The P.E.A.K.S. headings set her up
to discuss and verify P.E.A.K.S. she has that are likely to be considered
desirable in candidates for this position.
P: Personal Characteristics
Teacher Evaluation. The comments at the bottom of this document
praise Karen’s creativity. This form also indicates that Karen’s organi-
zation and planning are rated “excellent.”
Handwritten note from colleague thanking her for fixing computer
glitch. Karen can use this note to discuss the fact that she is the per-
son at the school to whom people are continually turning for help with
their computers. She can then segue into making the point that she is
handy with computers because she is a quick and dedicated learner,
particularly when it comes to computers. As noted earlier, being able to
pick things up quickly is particularly valued in career switchers.
E: Experience
Teacher of the Year certificate. This certificate would help her make the
point that not only does she have the teaching experience required for
the job, she, in fact, has been recognized as being an outstanding
teacher.
A: Accomplishments
Letter from principal congratulating her for getting extra computers.
This is a nice example of Karen showing initiative outside of her class-
208
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

room. When she learned that her school did not have the money to buy
more computers, she persuaded a local bank to donate used computers
to her school. She can talk about how she truly enjoyed meeting with se-
nior decision makers at this organization to sell them on the idea of the
importance of computers in the classroom. This document also demon-
strates that she has a professional presence outside the classroom.
Thank-you letter from family she helped in an emergency. This is an-
other example of Karen showing initiative outside the classroom. She
can talk about how, when she learned that this family in her neighbor-
hood was in a tight financial bind because of a fire, she organized a
fund-raiser to help them out. Showing this document might seem a bit
off the topic of selling educational software. But if she explains it prop-
erly, she can make the point that she feels she’s been cooped up in a
classroom for too long now and that she finds she really likes to get out
and make things happen in the world.
K: Knowledge
Master’s degree in education. This certificate demonstrates that not
only does she have the “advanced courses in education,” called for in the
ad for the job, she also has a master’s degree in education. She can also
use this degree as a prop to discuss the fact that she is dedicated to
learning.
Elementary School Teaching Certificate. This document helps her
make the point that, as a fully certified elementary school teacher, she
has an in-depth knowledge of elementary school curricula.
Certificate for course on educational software. This certificate demon-
strates that she has an up-to-date understanding of the role of educa-
tional software in the curriculum. Since this was an extensive course
that yielded far more credits than she was required to get to maintain
her teacher certification, she can also use this certificate as an example
of the fact that she is dedicated to continuous learning.
S: Skills
Proposal for curricular change. This letter can be used as an example
of her writing skills. She knows from her informational interview that
proposal writing is an important part of the account executive’s job, and
that she is likely to be asked for a writing sample. She should have an
extra copy of this letter available, which she can offer as a writing sam-
ple. This letter also gives evidence of her selling skills, particularly if it
is shown along with the next item.
Letter from principal. This letter verifies that the above proposal for a
curricular change was accepted and worked. Admittedly, no money ex-
changed hands, but if she presents this item properly, she can make the
point that she has the ability to sell a curricular idea to a key decision
maker in a school system.
Certificate for course on presentation skills. Since Karen knows from
her informational interview that the job interviewer is likely to be seek-
ing evidence of a candidate’s presentation skills, this document could
prove to be good to have in her portfolio.
Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
209

210
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
R
E
S
U
M
E
Karen P. Cresson
1234 Washington Street • Palisades, California 90272 • phone: (310) 555-1234 • email
Kcresson@teacher.com
Overview
Objective:
To obtain a sales and marketing position with a leading educational software company.
Personal Characteristics That Add Value:
Quick and dedicated learner, resourceful, and innovative instructor who strives to help others
learn and grow; exceptional communicator who is well organized, creative and persuasive.
Regarded as a key resource and problem solver by colleagues and administrators in the area of
computers.
Professional Experience
State Public Schools 
Palisades, California
Elementary School Teacher
6th Grade School Teacher
•
Experience:
Ten years’ teaching experience at the elementary school level
Outstanding Teacher of the Year
•
Accomplishments:
Persuaded local company to donate used computers to our classrooms.
Recognized for organizing an event to help a local family that was displaced from their
home due to fire.
•
Knowledge:
Master’s degree in education
Elementary School Teaching Certificate
Certification for educational software
•
Skills:
Outstanding writing skills
Strong selling skills
Trained in presenting
Education
State University
Phoenix, Arizona
M. Ed. (Master’s of Education), 1997
B.S., Education, 1992
Elementary School Certification
Professional Associations
National Education Association
Educational Technologists of America
References
Available upon request; Career Portfolio
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
211
P
Teaching Evaluation
State Public Schools
Teacher: Karen P. Cresson
Grade 6
Date June 31, 2002
Rating:
5 = Excellent, 4 = Above Average, 3 = Average, 2 = Below Average, 1 = Unsatisfactory, 0 = Cannot Evaluate
Knowledge Base for PGY Level
5
4
3
2
1
0
Classroom Management
Comments: Excellent job in this area.
Student Management 
Comments: Outstanding management of students
Record Keeping/Administrative
Comments: Consistently on time and complete records
Presentation Skills
Comments: Karen, your creativity in the classroom is inspirational to your students. You continue
to keep your students involved and interested in learning. Proof of this is the fact that you had
100% participation in the regional science fair and 100% participation in the cultural fair. Overall
you demonstrate good judgment in the classroom and are reliable and patient with your students.
They look to you as a role model.
Congratulations on having this year’s student yearbook dedicated to you.
Evaluator’s Signature Joseph Alcazino
Date 6/31/02
___________
_____
Organization
X
Curriculum Planning
X
Management of Student Activities
X
Creativity
X
Standardized Testing
X
Extracurricular
X
Advisory
X
Compassion
X
X
Clear, concise, articulate
X

212
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
Dear Karen,
Once again, you saved me from a near disaster. I don t know what I would do
without you. When I turned on my computer last Friday and saw nothing but gibberish
on the screen, I panicked. I am so fortunate to have a colleague like you. You went to
work and in no time at all figured out what the problem was and got me up and running.
It was very kind of you to interrupt your own busy schedule to do so. Then again, you
never hesitate to help any member of the faculty. You certainly have become our
school s resident computer whiz.
Thanks again for your help. I know you saved me hours of work, and I let Mr.
Alcazino know that once again you saved the school money as well. Because of you we
didnt have to call in a computer technician to fix my computer. I hope he appreciates
you as much as we all do.
Sincerely,
Lucy James

E
as the teacher of the academic year 2000
WHOSE EXCELLENCE IN TEACHING AND
MENTORING MAKE HER TEACHER OF THE YEAR
Joseph Alcazino
5/28/00
___________________________________________________
_________________
Principal
Date
213

214
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
A
From the desk of Joseph Alcazino
Principal
Brown Avenue Elementary School
October 21, 2002
Dear Karen,
What an accomplishment. Our school had a need to enhance our technology resources and you had
the vision to get it done. Because of your efforts and friendly persuasion, our school is now fully
equipped to handle all our technological needs.
Regional Bank was upgrading its IT department and your idea and initiative to solicit the bank for
a donation of their old computers could not have worked out better. Because of your efforts our
children now have a computer in every classroom and a fully equipped computer lab.
Karen, you have always led the way with technology in your own classroom and now you have
helped the entire school be leaders in technology, as well.
Thank you for your continued hard work and initiative.
Sincerely,
Joseph Alcazino
Joseph Alcazino
Principal

A
Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
215
THE NELSON FAMILY
Ms. Karen Cresson
Brown Avenue Elementary School
Palmdale, CA 11111
October 21, 2000
Dear Ms. Cresson,
Our family cannot thank you enough for all that you have done for us. The fire in our home on
October 3rd was obviously a traumatic experience for my family. At least nobody was hurt.
The biggest question we had was, what do we do now? How do we get back on our feet? Well thanks
to you we had less to worry about. You had everything under control. A fund raiser was just what
was needed to help our family. You are a true leader. You took control of the event and organized and
planned the car wash that raised enough money to help settle the family until our insurance kicked
in. We are forever grateful. I do not know how anyone could get things done as quickly as you did,
but you did it!
Thank you, Thank you, Thank you; you made our lives a little easier during an extremely difficult
time.
Warmest regards,
The Nelsons
The Nelson Family

K
having successfully completed all necessary requirements in the prescribed course of study is hereby
awarded the degree of
Master of Education
with all the honors, privileges and responsibilities pertaining thereto. In witness whereof we
have affixed our signatures on May 21, 1997
Dr. Paul Long
5/21/97
______________________________
__________
President
Date
Dr. Jeffery Pleason
5/21/97
________________________
__________
Chancellor
Date
216

K
This Certifies That
Karen P. Cresson
Having satisfactorily met certification requirements of the Board of Regents
for elementary education, has been granted a certificate and is authorized 
to serve in the public schools of our state as an
Elementary School Teacher
Certificate Number 0355098883
James Dugan
6/19/92
______________________________________
__________
Commissioner of Education
Date
217

K
218
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUING EDUCATION
Computer Certified
Professional
This certificate is awarded to
KAREN P. CRESSON
Course Completion and Certified Educational Technologist
Michael Daulton
5/8/01
_____________________________________
__________
Program Director
Date

Karen Cresson: Changing Careers
219
S
From the Desk of Karen Cresson
Brown Avenue Elementary School
September 3, 2000
Dear Mr. Alcazino,
This letter is a re-cap to our discussion of my proposal for the implementation of an advisory period
for all students. As you know, research has shown that it is crucial that each student is known well
by at least one adult during his years in school. This is easy during the early years of elementary
school when self-contained classrooms allow for a teacher-student bond. It is not so convenient
during the later years.
I recommend an advisory period twice a week. Each professional in our school would have an
advisory consisting of between 10 and 15 students. The advisor serves as a mentor and an advocate
for each of his/her advisorees. During the advisory period, the advisor will:
• Assess any problems, academic or personal, for each advisoree.
• Focus on interpersonal skills, such as peer relationships and bullying, and any obstacles to
success, such as drugs, alcohol, and gangs.
• Help each advisoree become a better student by working on study skills, test-taking strategies
and organizational skills.
A successful advisory incorporated into the curriculum will improve morale, performance,
motivation, trust and overall school climate.
An advisory is an extremely important aspect of the school experience. I hope that you will consider
including specified advisory time in next year’s curriculum. If you need further information in order
to make your decision, please do not hesitate to ask.
Sincerely,
Karen

220
Part I: Building, Using, and Maintaining Your Career Portfolio
S
Desk of Joseph Alcazino
Principal
Brown Avenue Elementary School
May 25, 2002
Dear Karen,
This letter is long overdue. I want to thank you for encouraging me to consider adding an advisory
period to the curriculum. It has been a fantastic success. I have documented evidence that discipline
referrals are less than last year, test scores have improved and absenteeism has dropped. The school
climate is much more relaxed and our students have a strong motivation to perform well.
Most importantly, because of the advisory period, we were able to intercede in a near disaster in our
school. It was during an advisory that we learned of the drug dealers trying to find a willing student
to infiltrate our school. I am certain that the group that came forward did so because of the
relationships we have developed with our students because of advisory.
Keep up the good work, Karen.
Sincerely,
Joe
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

221
S
C E R T I F I C A T E
O F C O M P L E T I O N
THIS CERTIFICATE IS AWARDED TO
K A R E N
P. C R E S S O N
IN RECOGNITION OF COMPLETION OF WORKSHOP ON EFFECTIVE PRESENTATION SKILLS
E D U C AT I O N A L P R O F E S S I O N A L D E V E L O P M E N T S E R V I C E S
Mitch ell Reading
11/5/99
____________________________________________________________
PROGRAM DIRECTOR
DATE

This page intentionally left blank.

Amanda Ferraro:
Getting That Promotion
Amanda Ferraro, whose goal is to get a promotion, assembled
this portfolio in order to win out over her competitors, who
have all been with the company longer than her.
CAREER SITUATION
Amanda Ferraro, who has been a sales representative at Rx Pharma-
ceutical Company for the past three and a half years, is applying for a
promotion. Her present job involves calling on the physicians who are
in private practice and the community (nonteaching) hospitals in her
territory. She has done an excellent job of developing existing accounts
and opening new ones, and she feels she is ready to take on a bigger
challenge. The job she has in her sights is that of institutional manag-
er, which recently became available in her territory and would involve
handling the large teaching hospitals in her district, known as institu-
tional accounts.
Institutional managers at Rx Pharmaceutical are more than just
sales representatives. They are also goodwill ambassadors for the com-
pany who, among other things, sponsor, and often present, continuing
education programs for the medical personnel at these hospitals.
Amanda feels that her teaching experience as an adjunct professor in a
local M.B.A. program has prepared her to do an excellent job of devel-
oping workshops on the business of medicine for medical residents. In
fact, soon after learning that the institutional manager’s position was
becoming available in her district, Amanda interviewed the director for
223
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

medical education at one of the large teaching hospitals that she would
be responsible for, if promoted, to discuss the kind of management ed-
ucation that would be desirable for this hospital’s residents. Together,
she and the director created an outline of the topics that should be cov-
ered in a series of workshops on the business of medicine.
Amanda has good ideas, but she is up against very stiff competi-
tion. She knows of at least six other sales representatives who have ap-
plied for this highly coveted position. All of these sales reps have been
with the company seven or more years. They have more pharmaceuti-
cal experience, more company knowledge, and because of their greater
longevity, more long-standing friendships with decision makers within
the company. All of these factors are working against Amanda.
Amanda wants to find a way to impress upon the district sales
manager who will interview her that she has great ideas and is a per-
former who catches on quickly and gets the job done. Prior to coming to
Rx Pharmaceutical, she had many successes in her two previous mar-
keting and sales jobs and she has been an outstanding performer in her
present job. Her experience is that of being successful when given new
opportunities in the general area of marketing and sales.
And so, she decides to create a portfolio to demonstrate that she
can do whatever is needed to be successful in this new job.
JOB DESCRIPTION FOR DESIRED PROMOTION
The institutional manager position that Amanda is applying for was
posted as follows:
Reporting to the District Sales Manager, the Institutional Manager is re-
sponsible for achieving sales forecasts, promoting products, and selling
these products to assigned institutions, key accounts and key customers.
This is accomplished by establishing mutually beneficial, long-term busi-
ness relationships with influential residents, fellows, attending physi-
cians, pharmacists, and health care providers who are key to the sales suc-
cess of promoted products. The Institutional Manager is also responsible
for coordinating hospital sales strategies with appropriate teammates to
maximize sales in the district and in assigned institutions. Additionally,
the Institutional Manager is responsible for conducting large-scale educa-
tional workshops and facilitating national and regional meetings.
DESIRED P.E.A.K.S.
Amanda already reports to the district sales manager, Frank DePeters,
who will be interviewing candidates for the institutional manager po-
sition. Because she has a solid professional relationship with DePeters,
Amanda already has some thoughts about the P.E.A.K.S. that DePeters
most values in sales representatives at her level. But, since this would
be a promotion to a new job at a higher level, Amanda does an infor-
mational interview with an institutional manager who has won sever-
al company awards and who also reports to DePeters. She learns dur-
224
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

ing this conversation that, because this job involves focusing on teach-
ing hospitals, DePeters believes that his institutional managers will be
most successful in developing accounts if they can present educational
workshops that these accounts feel are useful.
Based on this informational interview, Amanda is confident that
DePeters is seeking the following P.E.A.K.S. in candidates for the in-
stitutional manger position:
Personal Characteristics
Dedicated and persistent
Reliable
Well-organized planner
Ability to build lasting relationships
Leader who is a team player
Enthusiastic
Experience
In pharmaceutical industry
Accomplishments
In sales
Knowledge
Of curriculum
Of training concepts
Of products and the market
Skills
Teach in a way that motivates participants
Presentation skills
Selling skills
Ability to organize and carry out large-scale workshops
PORTFOLIO STRATEGY
Amanda’s goal is to present herself as a reliable performer who is ready
for this new challenge. To emphasize her reliability, she will need
enough documents in her portfolio to be able to remind the interviewer
(who is also her current boss) that she has consistently met, and often
exceeded, past expectations in her present job. But her primary focus,
of course, must be on the future and what she would bring to this new
job.
Since her boss knows her in her present job, the burden is on
Amanda to demonstrate that there are important dimensions to her
that he may have overlooked that would make her very successful in
the new job. Since she knows what the key P.E.A.K.S. are for this new
job, Amanda will want to highlight the ones she has that her boss may
not yet know about. The fact that she is a highly regarded adjunct pro-
Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
225

fessor in an M.B.A. program should be brought to her boss’s attention,
as this responsibility bears on her ability to develop and deliver the
high-quality educational programs for her future customers that De-
Peters believes are important. Verifying her success as a professor
would also give evidence of group presentation skills her boss may not
have known she had. She should also have available a copy of the “busi-
ness of medicine” outline she developed with a potential customer. This
demonstrates not only her educational expertise but also her enthusi-
asm and her ability to quickly build relationships with key customers.
Because she has less company experience than the other candi-
dates for this position, she will want to highlight the sales and mar-
keting experience she gained in her two previous jobs outside the com-
pany. A Can-Do Portfolio that enables her to accomplish all of these
things would indeed help Amanda make the case that she is ready, will-
ing, and able to move up to this new job.
CONTENTS OF THIS SAMPLE PORTFOLIO
Resume: This is a chronological P.E.A.K.S. resume that is targeted at
the job for which Amanda will be interviewing. The P.E.A.K.S. sub-
headings set her up to discuss and verify P.E.A.K.S. she has that are
likely to be considered desirable in candidates for this position. Because
the P.E.A.K.S. format is easy to read, this resume can be more than one
page.
P: Personal Characteristics
Letter from boss commending Amanda for achieving a difficult market-
share goal. She can use this letter to remind her boss that she has the
personal qualities of being dedicated and persistent that he admires,
and that she is a reliable performer who meets goals. He may have for-
gotten that he sent her this congratulatory note, since he has fifteen
other people who report to him as well.
Congratulatory letter for a Visiting Faculty Lecture Series that Amanda
organized. This letter demonstrates her boss’s belief that Amanda can
build lasting relationships with her customers, because her customers
turned out in such high numbers for this event that she organized. She
can also use this letter to talk about the fact that she had to be a well-
organized planner to create and coordinate this event. In fact, she can
present this letter in the course of discussing her organizational skills
and let her boss read that he had praised her ability to build lasting re-
lationships.
E: Experience
Coach Plan—New Drug Post Launch. This can be used to make the
point that, while she may not have been at the company as long as the
other candidates for the institutional manager position, she has al-
ready done an excellent job of mastering the company’s prescribed tech-
226
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

niques for making sales calls. She has sufficient company and pharma-
ceutical experience to move up to a higher job.
A: Accomplishments
Regional Representative of the Year letter. This is a reminder that she
has already had exceptional sales accomplishments at the Rx Pharma-
ceutical Company. A copy of this letter can also be filed in her portfolio
under “Skills” to verify her selling expertise.
Because this letter also commends her for her “commitment to team-
work,” a copy of this letter might also be filed in her portfolio under
“Personal Characteristics.”
The Copiers’ Copy newsletter. This is a newsletter put out by her former
employer, Copiers Are Us, where Amanda was an account executive.
The headline for the lead article announces that she has been the top
salesperson for three years in a row. This fact demonstrates that she
has a history of being an exceptional salesperson. She can make the
point that, if promoted, she will find a way to be exceptional in her new
position.
A copy of this newsletter could also be filed in her portfolio under
“Skills” to verify her selling skills.
Certificate for developing a new initiative in company. This is an award
for developing a new way of tracking the effectiveness of the Rx Phar-
maceutical Company’s educational programs in terms of the sales they
generate. Because DePeters believes that institutional managers are
most successful when they come up with strong educational programs,
this document is a particularly useful one for Amanda to include in her
portfolio. She can use it to demonstrate her ability to identify the most
profitable educational programs.
K: Knowledge
Hospital Training Program Sample Curriculum for Management Edu-
cation. This is the curriculum that Amanda designed in consultation
with the director of medical education at a major hospital in the terri-
tory she would get, if promoted. It is meant to be an example of the kind
of curriculum she could develop for institutional customers, if she were
promoted to the position of institutional manager. Developing and pre-
senting these supplementary management education workshops would
give her an “in” at key accounts.
Because the fact that she put this together can also be used to demon-
strate her enthusiasm for the new job, a copy of this might also be filed
under “Personal Characteristics” in her portfolio.
S: Skills
E-mail from Dean of Admissions at Johnston Fischer University. This
e-mail demonstrates that Amanda has the ability to teach in a way that
immediately captivates her audience. Since Amanda’s boss may not
Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
227

know much about the fact that she teaches during the evening as an
adjunct in a local M.B.A. program, this document can be a good prop for
discussing how her M.B.A. teaching skills could be useful for putting on
workshops at teaching hospitals.
Letter of recognition for gaining formulary positions for two key drugs.
Amanda received this letter of congratulations after getting an account
that is known for never adopting new drugs to add two recently intro-
duced drugs to their list of drugs that their physicians can prescribe.
This achievement demonstrates Amanda’s exceptional sales skills in
the pharmaceutical field.
Copy of invitation for Visiting Faculty Lecture Series. Amanda created
this event for the customers in her territory. This achievement demon-
strates her ability to organize and carry out large-scale workshops,
which is an important skill for institutional mangers to have.
228
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios

Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
229
R
E
S
U
M
E
Amanda Ferraro, MBA
23 Carpleton Rd, Raritan, NJ 07066
phone: (555) 555-5555; email: Aferraro@rxrep.net
Overview
Objective:
Professional sales representative with a diverse range of successful sales experience seeking 
Institutional Manager position within the pharmaceutical industry.
Personal Characteristics That Add Value:
Enthusiastic, dedicated, persistent, able to build lasting relationships. A leader who is also a
team player.
Professional Experience
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, NJ
June 1999−Present
Professional Pharmaceutical Representative
Promote the company’s products to a variety of private practice health care professionals in the New
Jersey and New York markets. Train and facilitate educational programs for health care
professionals in the assigned territory. Deliver oral and written presentations for medical meetings,
district meetings and day-to-day business operations. Attend and organize local and national
medical conferences as a representative of the company. Regional trainer of new hires/Regional
Product Manager/Fleet Safety Coordinator.
•
Experience:
Coordinating educational programs to meet the needs of customers
Personal and group training
Creating supplementary marketing tools to use in field.
•
Accomplishments:
Outstanding Regional Sales Representative of the Year
Great Idea Award
Consistently met or exceeded sales plan
•
Knowledge:
Keen understanding of the educational and training needs of pharmaceutical customers
MS Office, PowerPoint, Excel, Outlook, Navigator, Lotus Notes
•
Skills:
Selling
Convincing customers that having Rx Co. deliver educational workshops would be
beneficial
Adapting and delivering courses and training to target audiences
Developing innovative teaching materials and approaches
Oscar Hammer Food Products Corporation
New Brunswick, NJ
1993−1999
Account Manager
Responsible for marketing and sales of Oscar Hammer’s food products at retail level in major chains
and independent markets.
•
Experience:
Placing advertisements
Merchandising

230
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
R
E
S
U
M
E
Amanda Ferraro, MBA, page 2
Copiers Are Us, Inc.
Somerville, NJ
1989−1993
Account Representative
Responsible for selling and maintaining copiers in a large and diverse geographical area.
•
Accomplishments:
Top performer three consecutive years
Johnston Fischer University
Newark, NJ
1996−Present
Adjunct Faculty, Graduate School of Business
Teach both foundation and advanced management courses for evening sessions of MBA program.
•
Experience:
Teaching MBA courses to a diverse group of students
Managing and presenting to large, graduate-level classes
•
Accomplishments:
Developed the curriculum and materials for two new courses
•
Knowledge:
Principles of business management
Principles of marketing
•
Skills:
Teaching in a motivating way
Creating a learning environment
Education
MBA in Organizational Leadership
1996
Johnston Fischer University Newark, New Jersey
BA in Liberal Arts
1989
New Jersey State College
New Brunswick, New Jersey
Volunteer
Red Cross, Scouting
References & Portfolio Available upon Request
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Amanda Ferraro
23 Carpleton Rd.
Raritan, NJ 07066
December 21, 2001
Dear Amanda,
CONGRATULATIONS! Your dedication and persistence have paid off. Your goal of increasing your
market share to 24% this year has been achieved.
Amanda, this is a tremendous accomplishment and one you should be extremely proud of. You were
given a difficult objective and succeeded in accomplishing it. Our company has truly benefited from
your hard work.
I look forward to continuing to work with you.
Good Selling,
Frank DePeters
Frank DePeters
District Manager
Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
231
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, New Jersey 08867
P

232
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
P
Amanda Ferraro
23 Carpleton Rd.
Raritan, NJ 07066
May 20, 2002
Dear Amanda,
CONGRATULATIONS! on conducting a successful Visiting Faculty Lecture Series. In all there were
125 health care providers in attendance, which by any standard would be considered outstanding.
Given the turnout you got for this event, it is quite obvious that you have built and maintained
productive, long-lasting business relationships with your customers. I am confident that you will
reap the rewards of such a successful program.
As you are aware, the key here is to follow through with those in attendance and make sure they
completely understood our message. The spreadsheet you developed for tracking purposes is ideal
for this.
Again, congratulations! and keep up the outstanding work.
Good Selling,
Frank DePeters
Frank DePeters
District Manager
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, New Jersey 08867

Coach Plan—New Drug Post Launch*
Associate: Amanda Ferraro
Date of Session: May 15, 2001
Manager: Frank DePeters
Current Market Data:
Field Trip Objectives
1. Delivering Effective Core Message for Rx Sell on every call
2. Closing “EST” Engineering a Successful Trail with every customer
3. Multiple Product Presentations
4. Effective Planning & Routing
Overall Scoring 9/10
*Note to reader: This is a very favorable evaluation Amanda received from her boss after
he spent a day with her as she called on accounts in her territory. It continues on the
next page.
Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
233
E
QTD
ABC Drug
Rx Sel.
O-P
Overall Rank
Apr.
Share
Change
Share
Change
Share
Change
Nation
24.1
0.1
3
3
3.3
−0.3
Region
24.1
0.5
3.2
3.2
3.9
−0.1
5
District
20.4
0.4
4.2
4.2
2.0
−0.2
7
Territory
27.6
1.9
5
5
4
.5
1
Comments: Thank you for a good and productive day in your territory. Today is the
beginning of what should be a very fun and exciting year for us. The following is a
review of our time together.
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, New Jersey 08867

234
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
E
Skill 1—Effective Rx Sell Core Message
You consistently delivered the full suggested presentation on every call. Nice job pushing HCPs for
quality time. An example of this was seen at XYZ Hospital OB grand rounds when Dr. Ace gave you
10 minutes (15 MD’s in attendance). You did a great job communicating that this is not a niche
product and should be offered to all patients regardless of age and lifestyles (let them decide). Be
sure to clearly explain (in a non-defensive way) the fact that 26% of patients had 7 or more days of
nausea by keeping it simple (new definition that the FDA used). You need to routinely incorporate
the Rx Sell name when bridging from one page in the visaid to another (especially during your
summary). An example of this is when you say “the pill has excellent efficacy and it is well
tolerated”. Name recognition is critical to establishing this as a mainstream option.
Comments: 1. Continue to utilize the demo scripts on every call 2. Deliver a full Rx Sell message to
all staff members, nurses & doctors - enlist them to prescribe it early and often! No Niche
Skill 2—”EST”
# of calls: 5
% Demonstrated: 100%
Comments: Overall, you were able to utilize the EST close on all of your calls throughout the day.
Keep the order of the EST close simple and focused on a time commitment. Clarify and be very
DIRECT with what you are asking them to do. (Ex: regardless of age and lifestyles will you
offer...mainstream”) Make sure your customers commit to “offering Rx Sell to all patients for 2-3
months” before you show the sample kit. This will help you summarize what you want them to do
at the end of the call (dual close). Do not rush through the sample kit components—hand each
piece to the provider and let them get familiar with the contents. (Ex: Rxed in program, extra
script program). Stress the importance of sample management (1 per patient)—do not assume they
know what you mean—explain the rationale
Skill 3—Multiple Product Presentations
# of calls: 5
% Demonstrated: 100%
Comments: Overall, you effectively delivered a solid ABC message on every call. It was amazing to
see how much time you were able to get by leading off with ABC. Utilize your call continuum with
ABC on your next call and target a competitive product by incorporating the CSS model. EX: “The
last time I was in we discussed the performance & tolerability of ABC, today I would like to show
you how that compares to .... (competitive product). This remains a critical part of our business.
Skill 4—Review Planning & Routing
Comments: We talked about the importance of REACH vs. Frequency for the launch of Rx Sell.
Continue to set up grand rounds (Ex: Tuesday & Wed at City Hospital) in an effort to reach all of
your customers.

Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
235
Amanda Ferraro
23 Carpleton Rd.
Raritan, NJ 07066
December 15, 2001
CONGRATULATIONS! On being selected as the Regional Representative of the Year.
Amanda,
Throughout the year, you have executed excellent production and coverage reaching 89% of your MD
coverage throughout the year. Such coverage is consistent with a PCA over 6.8 and a TCA over 8.0.
Your sales numbers speak for themselves.
You also have been very diligent in your pharmacy work. In fact your training workshop at the last
district meeting was well received by the entire district. The workshop clearly demonstrated your
commitment to both teamwork and production—two very critical aspects of our business.
I am not alone in conveying this praise; the entire district feels very strongly about your
performance and teamwork and is very excited to be able to reward these accomplishments.
Congratulations on your being selected as this year’s Representative of the Year!
Sincerely,
Frank DePeters
Frank DePeters
District Manager
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, New Jersey 08867
A

236
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
A

A
237
T H I S
C E R T I F I C A T E
I S
P R E S E N T E D T O
Amanda Ferraro
FOR THE INITIATIVE AND
DEVELOPMENT OF THE VISITING
FACULTY TRACKING PROGRAM
RX PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY
Stephen Phillips
10/5/02
________________________
__________
Vice President Operations
Date
GREAT IDEA AWARD

238
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
K
Hospital Training Program*
Sample Curriculum for Management Education
Developed by Amanda Ferraro, MBA
Communication I II (February)
Understanding the Organization (March)
Selecting a Practice (April)
Specialist, Generalist or Primary Care (May)
Selecting a Practice Location (May)
Financial Planning I II (June)
Teamwork/Teambuilding (July)
Change/Future of OB/GYN and Medicine (August)
Interviewing (September)
Career Development/Portfolio Design (September)
Negotiation I II (October)
Negotiating a Contract I II (October)
Activity-Based Costing (November)
In-house Testing (December/January)
*Note to reader: This is the curriculum that Amanda designed in consultation with the director of
medical education at a major hospital in the territory she would get, if promoted. It is meant to be
an example of the kind of curriculum she could develop for institutional customers, if she were
promoted to the position of institutional manager. Developing and presenting these supplementary
management education workshops would give her an “in” at key accounts.

Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
239
S
E-mail Received from Dean of Admissions @ Johnston Fischer University
——- Original Message ——-
From: “Allan Frishman”
To: aferrraro@rxrep.com
Sent: Friday, November 03, 2000 4:32 PM
Subject: appreciation
Amanda,
I would like to thank you for allowing a very strong prospect to sit in on your class on Wednesday,
Nov. 1, 2000. He was undecided until he attended your class. He was more impressed with your
class and teaching style than the classes and professors he visited at other schools.
The best way to summarize: His application is in the mail.
Regards,
Allan G. Frishman, Ph.D.
Dean of Admissions
Graduate School
Johnston Fischer University

240
Part II: Examples of Targeted Portfolios
S
Amanda Ferraro
23 Carpleton Rd.
Raritan, NJ 07066
July 6, 2001
Dear Amanda,
Congratulations on getting the Township Community Hospital to adopt two of our company’s
recently introduced medications. You have proven the skeptics wrong and accomplished what most
said was impossible.
There is no doubt that your recent achievements will be spoken of for some time and that the
admiration for your accomplishments is felt by all of us within the company.
Please accept my heartiest congratulations for your success.
Best regards,
Joan Belmont
Joan Belmont
VP Therapeutics
Rx Pharmaceutical Company
Raritan, New Jersey 08867
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Amanda Ferraro: Getting That Promotion
241
S
New RX Options:
A Focus on the Medical Options
Visiting Faculty Lecture Series
Educational Objectives
After participating in this educational activity, the clinician should be able to:
1. Discuss the differences between efficacy of available methods in perfect and actual use.
2. Evaluate factors that women consider when choosing a particular method.
3. Identify new options.
4. Compare new and current options in terms of efficacy, side effects, convenience of use, and
patient adherence.
5. Review clinical trial data on the transdermal systems.
6. Discuss issues important to successful patient management.
Accreditation Information
Physicians: This activity has been planned and implemented in accordance with the Essential
Areas and Policies of the Accreditation Council for Continuing Education Credit (ACCEC) through
the joint sponsorship of the University of New Jersey and SnyerMed Communications. The
University of New Jersey is accredited by the ACCEC to provide continuing medical education for
physicians.
The University of New Jersey designates this educational activity for a maximum of 1.00 hour in
category 1 credit toward the AMA Physician’s Recognition Award. Each physician should claim only
those hours of credit actually spent in the educational activity.
Credit is also available for Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants, Pharmacists and
Nurse-Midwives.
Speaker:
James P. Leyden, MD
Affiliation:
Professor of Molecular Genetics Deputy Head
Dept. of Molecular Biology, Director
Division of Genetics
Daley University
Chicago, IL
Date/Time:
Wednesday June 27, 2001
6:30pm−9:00pm
Location:
Ambrea
16 Huntington Avenue
Newark, NJ 08878
Kindly confirm your attendance by calling: 800-555-5555 Ext. 5555
Jointly Sponsored by University of New Jersey and SnyerMed Communications
Supported by an educational grant from Rx Pharmaceutical, Inc.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX: WORKSHEETS
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

Career P.E.A.K.S.
Measurement Form
Name of Document:
______________________________________________________________
Description: ______________________________________________________________________
Code:
____________________________________________________________________________
SPECIFY
RATE: 1 TO 5
(5 = highest score)
Appendix: Worksheets
245
Personal characteristics
that add value
Experience
Accomplishment(s)
Knowledge
Skills
Total:

Career P.E.A.K.S
Master Summary Sheet
For Portfolio Categories
On a scale of 1 to 5, rate each item for its P.E.A.K.S. (5 being most important)
246
Appendix: Worksheets
Master Portfolio
Category:
P
E
A
K
S
Personal
Experience
Accomplishments
Knowledge
Skills
Characteristics
That Add Value
Totals

Job P.E.A.K.S. Worksheet
This worksheet should be completed after you have collected as much information as you can
about the P.E.A.K.S. that employers are evidently seeking in candidates who are applying for
a job that interests you. The P.E.A.K.S. you list below are meant to be your best guess, based
on the research you have done.
1.
Job Title and Brief Description:
2.
P.E.A.K.S. that employers are seeking in candidates applying for jobs in this
area:
Personal Characteristics:
Experience:
Accomplishments:
Knowledge:
Skills:
3.
Sources for the above P.E.A.K.S.:
Interviewees
Title & Organization
Appendix: Worksheets
247

Job P.E.A.K.S. Worksheet (Continued)
4. Assessment of the degree to which I have the desired P.E.A.K.S. for this job1:
The most desired job P.E.A.K.S. are:
My level of development for each is:
(From #2 above)
(10 = High; 1 = Low)
Personal Characteristics That Add Value:
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Experience:
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Accomplishments:
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Knowledge:
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Skills:
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
_____________________________________________ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
5. Based on this self-evaluation my next steps should be:
248
Appendix: Worksheets
1The issue here is the degree to which you have developed these P.E.A.K.S., not whether or not you have documents to
demonstrate that you have done so.

Informational Interview Debriefing Form
The following worksheet should be reviewed in preparation for an informational interview
and then completed after the informational interview has concluded.
Interviewee________________________________________________________________________
Title
______________________________________________________________________________
Company & address
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Name of Assistant/Secretary ______________________________________________________
Phone number ____________________________________________________________________
E-mail
____________________________________________________________________________
Job title(s) discussed ______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Contacts given:
Name
Title & Company
Telephone/E-mail
Next, complete the following:
1.
Unexpected information learned about the field/job/organization:
2.
Areas where I could make a real contribution in the field/job/organization:
Appendix: Worksheets
249

Informational Interview Debriefing Form (Continued)
3.
P.E.A.K.S. that, according to this person, employers are seeking in candidates applying
for jobs in this area:
Personal Characteristics:
Experience:
Accomplishments:
Knowledge:
Skills:
4. Other important things learned:
Next steps, based on this discussion:
250
Appendix: Worksheets
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Career P.E.A.K.S. Aspiration Worksheet
Aspiration Worksheet
This worksheet helps you identify the kinds of activities you will want to engage in to create
an ideal portfolio for your future. There is an explanation of how to use this worksheet on the
following page.
SPECIFY
RATE: 1 TO 5
(5 = highest score)
Proposed Activity:__________________________________________________________________
Items that would document this activity:___________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Appendix: Worksheets
251
Personal characteristics
that add value
Experience
Accomplishment(s)
Knowledge
Skills

How to Use the Aspiration Worksheet
Step One:
Under “Specify,” list in bullet form the P.E.A.K.S. you would like to develop. Do not fill in
any of the ratings to the right of this list and leave blank the “Proposed Activity” section
below.
Step Two:
Make several dozen photocopies of the above form that has your hoped-for P.E.A.K.S. filled
in.
Step Three:
Take a P.E.A.K.S. category you would like to develop and then start thinking about activ-
ities you might like to pursue that would give evidence of the P.E.A.K.S. you are hoping to
develop.
This effort is not as hard as it may at first seem. You will find that it is a lot easier to see
opportunities once you know what you are looking for!
You might get some ideas by reviewing the items listed in the “Examples of Portfolio Doc-
uments” table in Chapter 2.
You might also consult with friends and colleagues for their ideas.
Step Four:
Once you have an idea of an activity you might like to pursue, ask yourself: “Is this some-
thing I’d really like to do?” If the answer is yes, you will probably stick with it.
If you answered yes, write a description of this activity under “Proposed Activity.”
Step Five:
Think about things you would like to put in your portfolio about this activity and write
these down under “Items that would document this activity.”
Step Six:
Circle the P.E.A.K.S. associated with this proposed activity and, next to these, on the right,
rate (1 to 5) how strong you feel the circled P.E.A.K.S. would be for this item.
If you follow these steps, over time you can develop a set of proposed activities you are mo-
tivated to pursue that will generate the P.E.A.K.S. you would like to have in your future port-
folios.
You can file these worksheets under “Will-Do Portfolio.” Each time you successfully complete
one of these proposed activities and obtain a document associated with this, you will have a
new item to add to your Master Portfolio for future use in your Can-Do Portfolios.
252
Appendix: Worksheets

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Frank Satterthwaite, Ph.D., received his A.B. in psychology from
Princeton University and his Ph.D. in organizational behavior from
Yale University. He is a former director of the M.B.A. program at
Johnson & Wales University in Providence, Rhode Island, where he
currently teaches courses he developed in career self-management
and organizational leadership. Frank is also a principal in Career
P.E.A.K.S.™, LLC, a career coaching and executive development firm
based in Providence, Rhode Island. He has written numerous articles
for major national magazines, including Family Weekly and Esquire,
and has appeared on both network and public television programs in
the United States and Canada.
Gary D. D’Orsi, Ed.D., M.B.A., is a career coach and corporate
trainer who has earned numerous awards for his leadership and 
productivity. He has more than fifteen years of experience in sales,
marketing, and training, in a variety of areas including academic,
medical, pharmaceutical, and retail, most recently as an educational
liaison for Johnson & Johnson. Additionally, Gary teaches graduate
courses in career self-management and organizational behavior. As a
principal in Career P.E.A.K.S.™, LLC, his work involves executive 
training along with career and outplacement consultation. He holds
an M.B.A. in management and a doctorate in educational leadership.
He has done extensive research on the use and content of Targeted
Career Portfolios.
For workshops, career coaching, or to learn more about how to use
the Career P.E.A.K.S. system to enhance the human resource 
activities of your organization, contact Frank Satterthwaite 
(fsatterthwaite@earthlink.net) or Gary D’Orsi
(careerpeaks@cox.net).
Copyright 2003 by Frank Satterthwaite and Gary D,Orsi. Click Here for Terms of Use.

