
A  L  S  O   BY   S  T  E  P  H  A  N   T  A  L  T  Y
Empire of Blue Water
Captain Morgan’s Great Pirate Army,
the Epic Battle for the Americas,
and the Catastrophe That Ended
the Outlaws’ Bloody Reign
Mulatto America
At the Crossroads of Black and White Culture:
A Social History


For Asher and Delphine

Note to the Reader
In these pages you’ll find a handful of place-names and military terms specific to the
Napoleonic era. If you’re unclear about any of these, please consult the short glossaries
found at the back of this book.

Contents
     Dramatis Personae:
     Command Structures and Coalitions
     Introduction: Old Bones
 1  Incarnate
 2  A Portable Metropolis
 3  Drumbeat
 4  Crossing
 5  Pursuit
 6  Smolensk
 7  The Sound of Flames
 8  Smoke
 9  At Borodino
10  Clash
11  The Hospital
12  The Last City
13  Decision
14  Two Roads
15  Graveyard Trees
     Epilogue: Rendezvous in Germany
     Author’s Note: The Doorway of the Hospital at Tunis
     Glossary

     Notes
     Sources
     Acknowledgments


The Grande Armée
Command Structure
NAPOLEON
BERTHIER
Chief of staff

The Russian Army
Command Structure
TSAR ALEXANDER I
(Political head of Russia)
GENERAL MIKHAIL BARCLAY DE TOLLY
(Minister of War, acting head of army until August 20)
FIELD MARSHAL PRINCE MIKHAIL ILARIONOVICH KUTUZOV
(Commander in chief, appointed August 20)

Coalitions Against France During the Napoleonic Era
First Coalition (1792–97)
AUSTRIA, PRUSSIA, GREAT BRITAIN, SPAIN, AND THE PIEDMONT
Napoleon emerges from obscurity to conquer Italy. France gains
Belgium, the Rhineland, a partitioned Venice, and most of Italy.
Second Coalition (1798-1801)
RUSSIA, GREAT BRITAIN, AUSTRIA, THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE, PORTUGAL, NAPLES,
AND THE VATICAN
Napoleon returns from Egypt to defeat the Austrians at the Battle of
Marengo, France gains control of the Netherlands, and Austria accepts
French domain over Italy and territories as far north as the Rhine.
Third Coalition (1805)
AUSTRIA, GREAT BRITAIN, RUSSIA, AND SWEDEN
England smashes the French and Spanish fleets at Trafalgar and rules
unchallenged over the waters. Napoleon triumphs at Austerlitz against
Austria and Russia. The German states are organized into the
Confederation of the Rhine as a redoubt around France.
Fourth Coalition (1806–7)
PRUSSIA, GREAT BRITAIN, SWEDEN, SAXONY, AND RUSSIA
Napoleon crushes Prussia at the Battles of Jena and Auerstedt. The
French fight the Russians to a draw at Eylau. France occupies Prussia,
including Berlin. The Treaty of Tilsit gives France half of Prussia’s land
as well as the Kingdom of Westphalia. The Grand Duchy of Warsaw,
which includes most of modern-day Poland, is created.
Fifth Coalition (1809)
GREAT BRITAIN AND AUSTRIA
Napoleon triumphs at the Battle of Wagram. Austria loses Carniola,
Carinthia, and the Adriatic ports to France; Galicia to Poland; and Tyrol
to Bavaria.
Sixth Coalition (1813-14)
GREAT BRITAIN AND RUSSIA, JOINED BY PRUSSIA, SWEDEN, AUSTRIA, AND THE

GERMAN STATES
France is driven out of Germany and the nation is occupied. Napoleon is
exiled to Elba.
Seventh Coalition (1815)
GREAT BRITAIN, RUSSIA, PRUSSIA, SWEDEN, AUSTRIA, AND THE GERMAN STATES
Napoleon returns from exile but is defeated at Waterloo and is exiled to
St. Helena, where he dies in 1821.

I
Introduction: Old Bones
N LITHUANIA, LATE IN THE WINTER OF 2001, CONSTRUCTION crews began clearing a piece of
land in that part of the capital, Vilnius, known as Northern Town, digging trenches for
phone lines and demolishing the old Soviet barracks that had stood on the land for
decades. Vilnius was booming, with new money flooding in and decades of oppression
under Moscow and Berlin seeming at last ready to vanish along with the last physical
traces of imperialism. Real estate developers had snapped up the old troops’ quarters to
be made into luxe new homes for the computer programmers and regional managers
who would soon turn this forbidding collection of buildings into a sparkling hub of the
new Europe.
The work had gone smoothly until one bulldozer scraped up a layer of soil and
uncovered something white underneath its blade. The operator looked down and saw
bones, bones that were quite clearly human: femurs, ribs, skulls. One worker later told a
reporter that the white things “wouldn’t stop coming out of the ground.” There were
thousands of them.
Word spread to nearby neighborhoods, and men and women came hurrying across the
fields, their boots crunching in the hoarfrost and their breath blowing white. There had
been whispers for years about this place, rumors that the KGB had used the barracks as
torture chambers for political dissidents. Many believed that those who hadn’t survived
the questioning had been buried in mass graves somewhere on the grounds. Eight years
earlier, a grave filled with seven hundred KGB victims had been found a few hundred
yards away. The local people looked down into the freshly dug hole, looking for missing
lovers, sisters, or sons.
Or perhaps these were the corpses of Jews murdered by the Nazis. Hitler’s
bureaucrats had set up two ghettos in the city after occupying it in June 1941 and then
slowly drained them of men, women, and children, eventually killing 95 percent of the
country’s Jewish population.
When archaeologists from the University of Vilnius arrived, they saw that the bodies
had been stacked three-deep in a V-shaped trench and quickly realized that the men had
been buried in the same pits they had dug to defend themselves. Clearly, the men were

soldiers, not dissidents or civilians. And they were robust specimens, many of them tall
and broad-shouldered, most between fifteen and twenty years old, with a few women
mixed in—prostitutes was the early guess.
As they excavated the 2,000 skeletons, the archaeologists found a plaque that had
once adorned a helmet, decorated by an eagle and a cockade in faded red, blue, and
white. There were curious belt buckles inscribed in several languages, buttons with
regiment numbers such as “29” and “61.” And there were, crucially, 20-franc coins that
dated from the early 1800s. The remains were too old to be the victims of either Stalin
or Hitler.
After quickly calling to mind the history of Vilnius, called “the city built on bones”
because of its past as a minor bauble for conquerors and tyrants, the scientists realized
they could only be looking at the remnants of one force: the Grande Armée. One
hundred and eighty-nine years before, Napoleon had led 600,000 men into Russia in an
attempt to conquer his last major opponent on the Continent. These corpses were the
remnants of that invasion force.
The dead were from every corner of Europe—Holland, Italy, Spain, Germany,
Westphalia, and other duchies, kingdoms, and states. Napoleon had ruled all of them
and had in 1812 been at the coruscating height of his power, leading an army unlike
anything that had been seen since the days of the Persian conqueror Xerxes in the fifth
century BC. The soldiers were the paragons of their time, and on their march to Moscow
they had been considered unstoppable. But they had clearly encountered something
beyond their power to overcome or outrun.
What had killed these men? None of the remains had the crushed skulls or telltale
bullet holes of men who had been executed and dumped in mass graves. The bodies
were curled into the fetal position, the normal human response to extreme cold, which
had certainly played a part in their demise. Hunger, too, had ravaged the city in the
winter of 1812. The archaeologists remembered the stories of Napoleon’s troops
breaking into the local university and eating the human and animal specimens
suspended in formaldehyde. Some of these men had starved to death.
But something else had clearly been at play in that awful year. The soldiers had been
physical specimens, the toughest of a gargantuan, battle-hardened army who had
managed to escape the fate of their less determined or less robust comrades lying in
roadside graves all the way to Moscow and back. These men were the survivors of
something even more cataclysmic that had occurred many weeks earlier. In a sense,
they were the lucky ones.

The archaeologists drilled into the teeth of the corpses and extracted samples of
dental pulp, placed it on slides, and slid them under microscopes. In the DNA of a
number of the soldiers, they discovered the signs of the hidden killer that had done so
much to bury not only the Grande Armée but also Napoleon’s hopes of world
domination.
Older than France or Europe or homo sapiens themselves, its causative agent had
arisen millions of years ago. It had mystified— and slain—its scientific pursuers for
centuries, complicating the race to understand and defeat it. And it had a past as
fearsome as any of the mass killers of the twentieth century, only more illustrious and
strange.

I
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     1
Incarnate
T WOULD BE A REMARKABLE THING TO LOOK AT A MAP OF THE world in 1811 and not be
struck by how much of it was controlled by France and its forty-two-
year-old leader, Napoleon Bonaparte. His writ ran from the Atlantic
Ocean to the borders of Russia and from southern Spain to northern
Germany. Some 45 million subjects lived under his rule. One exhausts
superlatives in talking of his kingdom: He held sole command of a nation
that was the richest and most powerful on earth. His empire was larger
than the Roman emperors’ or Charlemagne’s, and it had every promise
of expanding in the near future. And Napoleon commanded it with such
rigor that no detail, down to the opening time of the opera in Paris,
escaped him.
The emperor had not only conquered territory, he had remade
societies. Coming of age during the reign of Louis XVI, Napoleon and his
generation grew disgusted with a nation where the accumulated layers
of tradition and artifice clogged one’s path in life, and money and
prestige flowed to the amoral and the cunning. They felt suffocated by
the weight of the past, its irrationalities, its injustices. After taking
power in France, Napoleon had streamlined the nation’s administration,
rationalized its civic laws and its economy to free up long-suppressed
energies, and exported these innovations to the satellite nations under
his control. He’d famously declared that careers should be open to the
most talented, and in many ways he’d succeeded in moving European
societies toward a future where merit, brains, and hard work counted.
When the young general took power, he was seen across much of
Europe as a kind of mythological creature: half warrior, half idealist. For

those with any progressive ideas whatsoever, he was the strong man
who would give order and structure to the best instincts of the French
Revolution. Emerging from the whirling blood feuds of the Terror,
during which thousands were executed on the slightest pretext, when
men ran through the streets hoisting the body parts of princesses stuck
on pikes, Napoleon had saved the nation.
Our politics today are divided between left and right, liberal and
conservative. But those notions gain their heat and shape from
Napoleon’s times. He came of age during the birth of those concepts:
between the French Revolution’s insistence on individual dignity, rights,
and 
freedoms, 
and 
the 
Anglo-American 
conservative 
response,
inaugurated by Edmund Burke in his landmark Reflections on the
Revolution in France (1790), which stressed the value of tradition,
caution, and social norms built up over time. The temperature of the
early 1800s burned much hotter than that of the early 2000s: the
eruption of the Revolution threatened to sweep away all accumulated
notions of social place and long-held values and to leave in their place
pure chaos. Rulers eyed their subjects nervously, and subjects eyed their
kings with the new idea that they were hateful and unnecessary. Europe
in Napoleon’s time seemed ready to fly apart.
This goes a long way toward explaining why Napoleon aroused such
intense admiration early on. Like George Washington, with whom he
was often compared, he had taken a hot revolution and cooled it into a
rational system without reverting to the abuses of the tyrant-kings.
“Peoples of Italy!” the young general had cried after beating the
Austrians there in 1796. “The French army comes to break your
chains…. We shall wage war like generous enemies, for our only quarrel
is with the tyrants who have enslaved you.” Words like that hadn’t been
heard in Europe before the Revolution. Even some monarchists swooned,
at first.
Napoleon took power in a 1799 coup d’état, midstride in a series of
wars that the French Republic claimed were fought to protect its borders
and export freedom. For sixteen years he ran roughshod over opposing
generals and kings. In 1797 the general had seized control of northern
Italy from the Austrians. In 1800 he returned to Italy and defeated the

Austrians; in 1802 he was named first consul for life; in 1804 he became
emperor; in 1806 Napoleon faced the Fourth Coalition—Russia, Sweden,
Great Britain, Saxony, and Prussia—and defeated them soundly; in 1807
he signed the Treaty of Tilsit with Tsar Alexander of Russia; in 1808 he
invaded Spain; in 1809 he stumbled against the Austrians but stormed
back with a punishing victory at Wagram.
Napoleon’s conquest had pitted him in a battle to the death with the
monarchies of Europe. But even the opponents who considered him an
Antichrist saw him as an almost miraculous figure. “He wanted to put
his gigantic self in the place of humankind,” wrote Madame de Staël,
and even the young tsar of Russia, Alexander I, at first regarded
Bonaparte with admiration bordering on a kind of worship.
It wouldn’t last.
THE EMPEROR’S GIFTS were numerous and mutually reinforcing: an exacting
self-discipline; a memory that was close to photographic; an ability to
read people and fit their unspoken desires to his aims; a gut-level genius
for inspiring men and leading them in battle; an openness to new ideas
so long as he could benefit from them; a farseeing, flexible, and often
breathtakingly daring mind. His less appealing qualities were clear but
not yet fatal: he was as superstitious as an old Corsican widow, petulant,
headstrong, and, most of all, increasingly blind to the flaws in his
thinking. His self-intoxication grew by the year.
Napoleon had come to power through the military, and his career
there was divided by a bright sharp line. There was before Italy and after
Italy. His unexpected victories there in 1796 against the Austrian army
as an obscure general had changed his idea of himself and launched him
into a career where he could seemingly do anything he set his mind to.
It hadn’t always been that way. Napoleon had emerged from his
Corsican boyhood as a solitary, workaholic dreamer with immense, far-
reaching gifts but a slim chance at greatness. He was also superstitious,
tetchy, and prone to childish rages, a man who rated his natural abilities
very highly and grew suicidal at the thought that, as an obscure gunner,
he would never get the chance to realize them. But Italy changed that,
confirming to him that he not only had genius but would be given a

chance to display it. “From that moment, I foresaw what I might be,” he
wrote later. “Already I felt the earth flee from beneath me, as if I were
being carried into the sky.”
Napoleon’s military capabilities began with a near-total knowledge of
tactics used in past wars; he was a walking database on every major
battle in history, and knew what had worked or failed and why. But the
young Corsican also reimagined the standard tenets of military science.
He constantly gathered intelligence and used it to formulate his plans.
He honed his communications systems to give his divisions an edge in
speed, and he specialized in flanking and enveloping maneuvers that
concentrated overwhelming firepower on the enemy’s weakest point.
Napoleon also organized his armies into independent corps that were
designed to march against and defeat enemy forces three times their
size, which they regularly did.
The Grande Armée also had a technological edge, especially in the
areas of infantry guns and lighter muskets. The French had long poured
money into developing better big cannons that could be maneuvered
into position more quickly and brought to bear on crucial zones on the
battlefield. And the carbines carried by the Grande Armée’s
sharpshooters, snipers, and forward skirmishers were state of the art (a
relative term in relation to notoriously inaccurate muskets of the
period), giving his units an advantage in marksmanship, especially in the
early stages of the battle where, under the pall and roar of an artillery
bombardment, Napoleon would send sharpshooters forward to take
down officers and members of the first line poised for the attack.
Napoleon’s classic approach to battle was kinetic and precise. He
designed a battle as a watchmaker would a fine chronometer. One corps,
usually heavily outnumbered so as to allow other units to execute the
rest of Napoleon’s plan, would engage the main body of enemy troops,
freezing them into position and often suffering horrible casualties. Then
other divisions, in sequences timed down to the minute, would pin down
the opponent from unexpected angles, isolating and cutting apart
individual divisions while at the same time cloaking from view a hidden
force that was marching rapidly to a weak flank or an exposed rear
guard. Then, at a crucial moment, Napoleon would drop these unseen

divisions into the battle, backed by cavalry and artillery, overwhelming
the enemy and scattering its forces to the wind.
To the outmatched generals who faced him, Napoleon’s armies always
appeared larger than they actually were, because the emperor
maneuvered them for maximum striking power on the battlefield. And
they were ghostly, appearing from behind a hill or over a ridge at a time
when they were supposed to be miles away.
Napoleon’s debut was a perfect illustration of his tactical brilliance as
a force multiplier. In the first Italian campaign, he took a demoralized,
ill-equipped collection of 100,000 soldiers and led them on a
breathtaking series of victories, cutting the Piedmontese-Austrian enemy
into its component parts and then chasing, catching, and defeating each
segment in turn. He captured 160,000 men, 500 cannon, 39 ships, and
wagon-trains worth of booty, including Michelangelos and Titians. Like
many geniuses, he seemed to have no apprenticeship. General Napoleon
emerged onto the world stage fully formed.
AS HE REVOLUTIONIZED THE big-picture aspect of war, Napoleon became a master
at motivating the individual soldier. “You must speak to his soul in order
to electrify him,” he famously said. But his attention went deeper than
oratory. He remembered hundreds and hundreds of his troops’ names,
tweaked their ears and joked with them during reviews, led them
brilliantly, and promoted and rewarded them on the spot for acts of
bravery that would have gone unnoticed under another general.
Stoked by a feeling of personal devotion to their leader, his soldiers
did things that no other men in modern European warfare had done,
things that modern Navy SEALs would struggle to equal. “The belief that
they were invincible made them invincible,” remarked Karl von Funck, a
German officer on Napoleon’s staff. “Just as the belief that they were
sure to be beaten in the end paralyzed the enemy’s sprits and efforts.”
During a stretch of four days during the first Italian campaign, one
division under the former cabin boy André Messéna, the son of a tanner
risen to general, fought three brutal pitched battles on successive days,
marched nearly sixty miles through darkness and snow, and killed or
captured thousands of the enemy. Messéna’s division helped Napoleon
turn a competent Austrian force of 48,000 men into a terrified mob of

13,000 in a matter of 120 hours. This was not an isolated incident:
Napoleon raised the standard of individual performance in the Grande
Armée to levels thought unachievable before he arrived.
.   .   .
BY 1811 THE EMPEROR was the undisputed master of the Continent, with only
the Portuguese, the Spanish rebels, and the old bugbear of England still
providing outright resistance to his dominion. By that time, too, the
patina of his early rhetoric had been rubbed through and now what
Europe saw, by and large, was bright steel: Napoleon’s promise to free
those he conquered had gone unfulfilled. He was more and more a
traditional conqueror.
By seeking further territories, Napoleon was reverting to a native
form. From the days of the illustrious “Sun King,” Louis XIV, in the late
seventeenth century, the French army was considered to be the vanguard
of a progressive society conquering backward nations in order to bring
them freedom, art, and science. For over a hundred years before the
ascent of Napoleon, France had seen itself as the citadel of civilization.
As expansionists and Christian visionaries would claim throughout
American history, empire building was more than an economic good. It
was a duty.
The makers of the French Revolution called a pause in the acquisition
of colonies and satellites, asking for an end to all “wars of conquest.” But
Napoleon, driven by a new utopian ardor, rampaging personal ambition,
and the need to safeguard his borders, reignited the drive to empire.
“The genie of liberty,” Napoleon wrote, “which has rendered the
Republic since its birth, the arbiter of all Europe, wishes to see it
mistress of faraway seas and foreign lands.” The 1798 invasion of Egypt
had been disguised as a scientific mission to rediscover the secrets of the
ancient world. But by 1812 the hostile response of many of the
recipients of their “liberation” had hardened French attitudes into
something far older and more recognizable: what one historian called
“egotistical nationalism.” Success had proved to the French that they
were better and stronger than their rivals, and that they deserved
whatever they could take. By the time they headed for Russia, the
banner of intellectual and cultural progress was faded and torn.

·   ·   ·
THE NORMATIVE NINETEENTH-century leader of a European empire would have
been more than satisfied with Napoleon’s achievements. His enemies
were chastened and his empire at least reasonably secure. Napoleon saw
things differently. Five-eighths of the world’s surface—the oceans—was
controlled by his enemy, England, whose navy outmatched France’s in
every way. His ally, Russia, “the barbarian North,” was slipping outside
of his sphere, having recently broken its agreement to stop English ships
from entering its harbors and trading with its merchants, a key defection
in Napoleon’s intent to strangle England commercially before defeating
it militarily.
Bonaparte didn’t compare himself to his contemporaries, none of
whom (except perhaps for the French diplomat Talleyrand) could match
his intellect or energy. Instead, he saw himself in a world-historical
continuum, with Alexander the Great and the Caesars of Rome as his
peers. “I am the successor,” Napoleon said, “not of Louis XVI, but of
Charlemagne.” He believed that he had been chosen to remake human
society. To do that, first he must grasp and then control the levers of
power. Ruthlessly, if necessary.
To accept peace and turn to the work of civic administration (which
he always claimed that he yearned to take up full-time) would be to
spurn his own gifts. Napoleon was enough a child of the Revolution to
see warfare not only as a practical means to power but as a test of
himself as a whole man. He believed that every person should exhaust
his possibilities, and his were near-infinite. To turn away before a perfect
empire was created, an empire stronger and more enlightened than any
that had gone before, was unacceptable.
England for the moment was out of reach. But Russia, too obstinate
and too powerful for its own good, was not.
ALEXANDER I OF RUSSIA was much closer to a recognizable nineteenth-century
monarch than his counterpart in Paris: bright but intellectually lazy; an
aesthete who played at military affairs and never really mastered the
basics; a vain man not cut out for leadership who could nevertheless on
very rare occasions take a position and hold it against everything. Raised

in the hothouse climate of the royal palace at Tsarskoye Selo, Alexander
had led a cosseted life unsettled only by the murderous strains between
his father and grandmother. He was more fluent in English and French
than he was in his native language and was completely unfamiliar with
the Russia of the steppes or the brutal degradation of the serfs on the
estates. Napoleon would say later that he found Alexander to be deeply
intelligent but that there was a piece of his character missing. The tsar
rarely had the will to carry out intentions to the end, no matter how
bitter. Deeply curious, he read prodigiously, but rarely finished a book.
Alexander led from fear: fear of the military, of his father’s fate, of his
mother, and of his people, who were so often a mystery to him.
Soon after Alexander’s accession in 1801, Napoleon attempted to pry
him from his alliance with the Kingdom of Prussia and neutralize Russia
as a player in the game for Europe. But Alexander, with his own
ambitions for empire, eventually came to regard Napoleon as all the
European monarchs did, as a usurper who had enslaved half of Europe
and unsettled the rest. He turned down Napoleon’s proposals and joined
forces with Austria for a climactic battle on December 2, 1805:
Austerlitz.
Austerlitz was Napoleon’s apogee. There he faced highly rated
generals and outthought them at every turn in a battle that unfolded so
seamlessly it was as if he had written out the events in longhand the
night before. His army proved to be deft and maneuverable, even
swelled to the then-unprecedented size of 75,000 men (a figure that
would be dwarfed by the Grande Armée in 1812). The emperor fought a
new kind of warfare, emphasizing speed, concentrated power, surprise,
and improvisation.
After another crushing victory over Russian forces at Friedland in June
1807, Napoleon and Alexander finally met at Tilsit the following month
for a peace conference and the emperor laid siege to him as if he were a
romantic conquest. The satanic elf that Alexander had been warned
about turned out to be a fascinating charmer, a seducer of great
intellectual skill and apparent honesty. Napoleon for his part allowed
himself to believe that Alexander was a kindred soul, at least for his
present purposes. “He is a truly handsome, good and youthful emperor,”

he wrote, and the two spent nearly two weeks firming up their alliance.
The main result was the humiliation of Prussia, which was cut down
to almost half its size, and an uneasy stalemate over Poland, which
Alexander and the political class in Moscow had always considered to
belong to the homeland. Napoleon wanted to keep Poland outside of
Russian control, as a buffer against any ambitions Alexander might have
on his empire. Not only that, he had proposed enlarging the grand duchy
with the 1.3 million citizens of western Galicia. This would turn Poland
into a significant nation-state and a staging ground for Napoleon’s
armies.
Despite himself, Alexander was swayed by Napoleon and left Tilsit
hopeful of a long-lasting alliance. But the return to Moscow dashed cold
water in his face. Almost every segment of his power base was against
the treaty—from his mother the empress, who hated Bonaparte to her
marrow; to the business class, worried about French merchants
expanding into their traditional markets in the Baltic; to the military
elite, largely French-speaking but traumatized by two wars in which
Napoleon had shredded their ranks. “Love for the Tsar has changed to
something worse than hatred, to a kind of disgust,” wrote a Russian
observer in his diary. There were warnings that Alexander would be
assassinated like his despised father. A wave of Russification swept
through the upper classes, with traditional arts and language finding a
new popularity in the face of what was considered a French humiliation.
Napoleon’s true target in courting Alexander was, of course, England.
He had contemplated an invasion of the British Isles almost as soon as he
came to power, but the inherent difficulty of the enterprise, and the
looming power of the Royal Navy, had foiled his plans at every turn.
What he’d failed to do militarily he tried to do commercially with the
Continental System, an economic blockade instituted in 1806 and
adopted by Alexander’s Russia after the Tilsit conference. But the
blockade was a failure. Smugglers carrying English goods regularly
skirted the French authorities and their lackeys and did a booming
business in Portugal, Spain, and Italy, often with the corrupt approval of
Napoleon’s handpicked rulers. Even his brothers Joseph in Naples, Louis
in Holland, and Jérôme in Westphalia, who had been placed on the

throne by the emperor, allowed British merchant ships into their harbors
to trade freely.
French manufacturers simply couldn’t supply the finished goods that
England did. Russia was hit especially hard: its thriving export market in
raw materials such as tallow, pitch, wood, corn, iron, and leather
collapsed under Napoleon’s regime. England responded with its own
blockade, a much more effective one, as it was enforced by the Royal
Navy. Rich barons in Paris had to smuggle in tobacco and coffee, and
even aristocratic families hung a single lump of sugar from their ceilings
on a string and allowed their members only a single dunk of the
sweetener into their coffee. In Hamburg, all but three of the city’s four
hundred sugar factories closed as a result of the embargo, and one of
Napoleon’s administrators there had to turn to England to get warm
uniforms for the emperor’s troops, without which they would have
“perished with the cold.” England had woven itself into the fabric of
international life, and even Bonaparte couldn’t unravel its ties.
In December 1810, the young Tsar Alexander, under pressure from his
merchants and after watching the value of the paper ruble fall 50
percent, opened Russian ports to ships from neutral countries (which
were sure to be filled with British goods) and slapped steep tariffs on
French luxury products. The Continental System was effectively dead in
Moscow. The blockade was almost universally hated, but it was
Napoleon’s only real weapon against En gland. If he let Russia openly
flout the embargo, it would become an “absurdity,” in the emperor’s
opinion. That couldn’t be allowed to happen. “Sooner or later we must
encounter and defeat the Russians,” Napoleon had written as early as
1806, and now the case for him became even more pressing.
For his part, the tsar eventually saw Napoleon clearly, not as a
monster or a soul mate (a notion he had briefly entertained) but as a
conqueror who demanded obedience, pure and simple. Concessions on
Poland and the embargo were Napoleon’s main demands now, and
Alexander knew he couldn’t relent on the first issue. “The world is
clearly not big enough for us,” he wrote in the buildup to the war, “to
come to an understanding over that country.”
The emperor was intensely frustrated by Alexander’s stubbornness.

From speaking of the young man as an underrated ruler, Napoleon
began to revert to the old chestnuts of anti-Russian invective: Alexander
was inscrutable, a Tatar, a barbarian. He repeated to his advisers
ridiculous stories and accounts of conspiracies hatched by the Russian
imperial court to overthrow or undermine him. Perhaps as in every war,
the enemy used many of the same tropes in describing Napoleon,
especially that of a barbarian.
But disillusionment with Alexander didn’t necessitate war with Russia.
The tsar was flouting the embargo on English goods, but so were
Napoleon’s own brothers. Poland was still securely in the French sphere,
and Alexander had been sufficiently cowed by two defeats not to attempt
anything in the near future. Still, Napoleon (like Alexander) had
domestic concerns that would be alleviated by a new war: the nobles
were pressing the emperor for reform, and a crop failure in 1811 had
exacerbated tensions and depressed the economy. Fresh victories would
turn the public’s mind away from the increasing authoritarianism of his
rule.
There are a hundred theories as to why Napoleon began to
contemplate war with Russia, from Freud’s speculation that he was
driven by guilt over his recent divorce from the empress Josephine to
mental complications from his declining health. Napoleon said that the
speculation that swirled around him even during the lead-up was
frivolous. “I care nothing for St-Cloud or the Tuileries,” he said of two of
his magnificent residences. “It would matter little to me if they were
burned down. I count my houses as nothing, women as nothing, my son
as not very much. I leave one place, I go to another. I leave St-Cloud and
I go to Moscow, not out of inclination or to gratify myself, but out of dry
calculation.” Dry calculation, of course, in the service of a fantastic
ambition.
LETTERS FLEW BETWEEN Paris and Moscow in 1810 and 1811, the tone getting
progressively colder and more threatening. War drew closer and
Alexander knew it was going to be costly. “It is going to cause torrents of
blood to flow,” he wrote. In addition to the disagreement over the
blockade, Alexander fumed at Napoleon’s refusal to divvy up the
Ottoman Empire as promised; his installation in 1810 of Jean-Baptiste

Bernadotte as king of Sweden, which Alexander viewed as an aggressive
French threat on his border; and France’s swallowing up of the Duchy of
Oldenburg in northwest Germany, which was supposed to fall to
Alexander’s brother-in-law. These actions inflamed age-old stereotypes
of French arrogance and gave an increasingly hostile Alexander little
room to maneuver with his nobles or military advisers. He felt that war
was coming and that it would decide the fate of his empire.
France was already at war with Spain and England on the Iberian
Peninsula, a vicious, seesaw campaign that gave birth to the concept of
the guerrilla war. Spain had included some brilliant successes, but over
the course of three years it had shown Napoleon’s weakness as a political
strategist: he repeatedly concluded that the revolt had been quashed
when it hadn’t, never comprehended the nationalistic fervor of the
rebels, and failed, crucially, to set up an adequate supply system for his
350,000 troops. His “live off the land” philosophy had worked in the
emperor’s blitzkrieg victories, but when extended over time, it led to an
embittered populace, fueling the resistance.
The quagmire of Spain only made a fast victory in Russia seem more
attractive. But this war would be different from all the other Continental
campaigns Napoleon had fought: the musket cartridges that, as 1811
ended, were being packed into knapsacks from Brittany to Rome would
be superseded by a force being carried to the battlefield by the soldiers
themselves, secreted in the folds of their clothes. The killing agent that
the scientists would discover two hundred years later in Vilnius was
already present in the Grande Armée’s ranks.

T
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     2
A Portable Metropolis
HE ARMY THAT THE EMPEROR MOBILIZED TO THREATEN Russia was enormous: all told,
690,000 men were under arms, including reserves, of whom between
550,000 and 600,000 would actually cross the Niemen River into
Russian territory. Over the corps of veterans had been layered green
recruits, who would hopefully learn enough from their peers to make it
to and then over the battlefields. It was a staggering collection of men
from a dozen different nations and duchies and kingdoms, speaking a
babel of languages, overseen by a legendary administration that could
move semaphore signals at 120 miles per hour and staffed by veterans
who had fed, clothed, and nursed Napoleon’s armies from Italy to Spain
to Egypt.
As it assembled, the army and its trail of approximately 50,000 wives,
whores, sutlers, and attendants represented more people than lived in
the entire city of Paris. (To accomplish that today would take over 2.1
million men.) It formed the fifth-largest city in the world, after Tokyo
and before Istanbul. The Grande Armée had become a portable
metropolis, with its own courts of justice, its own criminals, its own
hospitals and patois. The small mercenary armies that had fought in
Europe at the service of kings for centuries were gone, replaced by a
behemoth.
Most of the men were, unlike their mercenary predecessors, motivated
to serve under Napoleon by more than compulsion or gold. It wasn’t a
volunteer army by any means—Napoleon had sent teams to force French
conscripts from their town halls and homes—but many of the men
wanted to have an adventure, to squeeze some loot out of their enemies,

to honor France or their own brief lives, or to write their name in glory
on the battlefield. Napoleon guaranteed that one could burst from the
ranks and become an officer for a single act of bravery, and that spoke to
many of his soldiers.
The Grande Armée was divided into three components. The 250,000-
strong First Army Group was made up of three battalions, along with the
Imperial Guard and the cavalry. The Second and Third Army groups,
totaling 315,000 men, would play a mainly supporting role, guarding
supply lines, patrolling the rear, and being called on to reinforce
depleted battalions.
Napoleon led the Imperial Guard of 50,000 handpicked troops known
as the “immortals.” These were the reserves, to be utilized to tilt a battle
at the crucial moment. The Imperial Guard, essential to the outcome of
so many battles past and to come, were Napoleon’s elite: Each had to be
able to read and write and stand above five foot six (in a time when
most Frenchmen were closer to five feet). Each had served in at least
three campaigns and bore the scars of at least two wounds. They looked
the part of the military beau ideal in their two-foot shakos: mustached,
young, and strapping.
If you wanted to find living, breathing examples of what changes
Napoleon had wrought, you could do worse than look to the ranks of
this army, especially the men who led them, his marshals. They were the
new aristocracy. The title of “marshal” had existed before the Revolution
as part of the vast system of favor currying and court intrigue that had
so depressed the young Napoleon and his peers, but the emperor
refashioned it into an order of real accomplishment, open to anyone. He
named twenty-six marshals between 1804 and 1815. In Louis XVI’s time,
many of them would have toiled away in obscurity. Under Napoleon,
they made his army even more formidable. Among them, Davout, Murat,
and Ney, along with General Junot, stand out.
Louis-Nicolas Davout was the exception among the four: he would
most likely have played a leading role in the French army if Napoleon
had never been born. A strict taskmaster and disciplinarian, he was
descended from a blue-blooded line of patrician warriors that extended
back to the Crusades. Known as the “Iron Marshal,” the balding general

was the archetype of the committed professional soldier that forms the
backbone of any great army. Many commanders envied him, as Davout
had been the first among them to achieve fame in France. He was as
hated for his perfectionism and his temper as he was admired, but his
troops knew at least that he would see to their every need and would
suffer every hardship they suffered. He commanded I Corps.
Joachim Murat was a different kind of personality entirely. He had
grown up around horses, working in the stables of his father, a country
innkeeper, until he was sent away to join the priesthood, a perfectly
respectable career. But it was the wrong one for Murat, who with his
almost feminine good looks and thirst for fame wanted a career in the
cavalry. Murat ran away to join the King’s Chasseurs at the age of
twenty and became Napoleon’s aide-de-camp in the Italian campaign.
Dressed in his trademark outré costumes—scarlet thigh-high leather
boots, a tunic made of cloth of gold, a sky blue jacket, and a sword belt
crusted with diamonds was a typical combination—he consistently
matched his daring on the field with an instinctive flair for tactics,
especially in a brilliant flanking maneuver in Egypt that won him his
own division. Napoleon once snapped at the young general, “You look
like a clown,” but he favored boldness in his generals and Murat
exemplified it.
Murat did lack Davout’s almost genetic loyalty to his leader. He had
flirted with Josephine, and he was thrown into a fit of depression and
jealousy when Napoleon failed to name him king of Spain, instead
awarding him Naples. The former seminarian was a brilliant field leader
but nakedly ambitious and often reckless to a dangerous degree. He
commanded the Grande Armée’s cavalry units.
At the head of III Corps, Michel Ney was known even before Russia as
“the Bravest of the Brave.” His father was a poor cooper who couldn’t
afford to set him up in a profession, so Ney took up arms. Imperturbable,
vulgar, badly educated, he rose by a native talent for battlefield strategy
and sheer fearlessness. One of his typical exploits dated from 1799,
when Ney entered a town occupied by enemy Austrian units disguised as
a Prussian civilian. Wandering the streets, he took note of every guard
post and every tent, then strolled back across the picket lines to plan his

offensive. Had he been caught, he would have been executed as a spy,
but Ney seemed indifferent to the danger. The outnumbered French
regiment attacked the next day and took the town easily.
A peasant in the best sense, Ney was also difficult to command and
sometimes rash in his hurry to engage the enemy, but the emperor
couldn’t resist his toughness. “That man is a lion,” he remarked to his
staff at the Battle of Friedland as Ney marched by with his troops. From
the emperor, it was high praise.
One key player without a marshal’s baton was Jean-Andoche Junot,
who had been with Napoleon from 1793, and had been seriously
wounded in the head at Lonato in 1796. Erratic, fearless, and loyal,
Junot hated the fact that he had never become a marshal. Some said that
the head wound had altered his personality. But Napoleon stood by him.
It would prove to be a risky decision.
The men Napoleon had assembled to lead the Grande Armée in Russia
had all proved themselves in battle and believed in daring over caution.
Napoleon had no pure theorists or rear-echelon generals in his key
commands. His leaders had risen largely through their own instincts, and
they, like their leader, loved risk. They were an apt expression of his
reign, and no one had been able to match them.
THE MAKEUP OF DIFFERENT units varied based on availability of men, casualties,
illness, and the role of the particular force, but certain parameters were
common throughout the Grande Armée. The smallest infantry unit was
the company of 100-140 men. Six companies on average formed a
battalion, which averaged around 600 men (but which could fluctuate
down to 300 and up to 1,200). Four battalions made up a regiment of
approximately 2,500 men. Two regiments on average made a division of
5,000 men or so, including an attached artillery unit. The largest force in
the Russian campaign was the corps, made up of several divisions, allied
with cavalry units and artillery.
The size of the corps varied from the 10,000-strong force under Prince
Eugène, Napoleon’s stepson (from his marriage to Josephine) and ruler
of Venice, to Murat’s 40,000 cavalrymen to Davout’s mammoth I Corps,
which fielded 70,000 men at the start of the campaign, more troops than

many armies had put into the field a generation before, and a force that
underlined Napoleon’s confidence in the Iron Marshal. Attacks were
most often carried out at the corps and division level, depending on how
broad the field of battle was.
Napoleon was the undisputed head of the Grande Armée. Beneath him
on the command chart was his chief of staff, Louis-Alexandre Berthier,
who was closer to an exalted secretary, dispensing his orders and
running the organization. Under Berthier were the marshals and a few
high-ranking generals, each commanding one of the eleven corps put
into the field. Each marshal or corps commander had a complete
hierarchy under him: generals, majors, down to the commanders of the
individual infantry battalions, artillery units, and cavalry regiments.
In all, Napoleon commanded 522,300 infantry, 94,000 cavalry, 47,000
artillery, and 21,000 miscellaneous troops. Some 449,000 of these were
first-line troops intended for battle.
The deeper statistics were telling: Two-thirds of the troops were non-
French. Napoleon had insisted that his allies bear a large share of the
burden of his ambitions. That 80,000 were mounted on horseback
indicated that Napoleon intended to strike fast and end the war quickly.
(But with a sure hand—all the corps were commanded by French
generals or marshals, apart from the Polish and Austrian forces.) The
unprecedented size of the army meant not only that it would be a
monumental task to keep it fed and organized, but that Napoleon, who
had throughout his career maneuvered his regiments like an admiral
commanding a fleet of highly maneuverable light cruisers, darting and
speeding to arrive at an unexpected position at a crucial moment in
time, was now at the helm of a massive and unwieldy ship.
These figures make Napoleon’s uncanny relationship with his soldiers
even more impressive. Most of his troops, it has to be emphasized, were
from nations he had conquered by force. The emperor had humiliated
Austria in war after war, and yet its men fought for him; he had forced
Holland to accept his brother Louis as its king (later to remove him), but
the Dutch would have enthralling moments in Russia. Certainly he had
coerced their leaders, but most of his troops ought to have been
sabotaging him at every turn, or performing only well enough to avoid

being shot for desertion. But they would fight, for the most part, like
lions. It was as if, in 1945, General Patton had convinced the conquered
Germans to fight the Japanese in the South Pacific. Very few leaders
throughout history could have done it.
Some have suggested that the emperor’s army was, in fact, too large.
Napoleon biographer Frank McLynn argues that Napoleon had become
an expert in winning with armies of 100,000 troops, “which permitted
the speed and flexibility that produced an Austerlitz.” McLynn suggests
that Napoleon failed to do the correct math: increasing his army’s
striking ability sixfold increased his command and supply problems not
by a similar number but exponentially. “It was an impossible dream,”
McLynn writes, “something impracticable before the advent of railways
and telegraph.”
But had Napoleon begun with one-quarter of the force he assembled
and not won a quick and devastating battle, the killing agent that would
turn up in those bones in Vilnius, and which was already filtering
through his ranks, would have quickly whittled those numbers down to a
pittance. Each strategy, in retrospect, had its risk.
ALEXANDER’S FRONTLINE FORCES in the beginning numbered only about 162,000,
giving the French a three-to-one advantage at the beginning of the war.
His army was strong at the bottom, dissolute in the middle, and often
chaotic at the top. The ordinary Russian soldier was typically poorly fed,
poorly equipped, but decently trained and ferocious in battle, especially
in a defensive posture. Nowhere else would Napoleonic troops encounter
soldiers who fought as fanatically or bravely when defending a position;
a famous epigram said that you not only had to kill the Russian soldier,
you had to then push him over.
The officer corps was a glaring weakness. Officers gambled, whored,
and drank when they should have been drilling their men. Commanders
weren’t held to account for the performance of their troops or junior
officers. They treated the common soldiers more like automatons or serfs
they had inherited than men to be inspired and led.
And the Russian high command, although it contained some brilliant
officers, was riven with dissension. “The headquarters of the Emperor

were already overrun with distinguished idlers,” wrote Carl von
Clausewitz, the brilliant German strategist attached to the Russian
headquarters staff. Petty intrigues, nationalist posturing between the
Russians and Germans and Austrian commanders, coteries and cliques all
contributed to an atmosphere where decisions were made and unmade
in hours. Alexander lacked the backbone to stop the intriguing that
every general, sensing the chance to mold the tsar to his wishes, engaged
in.
The Russian army was divided into two forces. General Mikhail
Barclay de Tolly led 160,000 men of the First Army in a line opposed to
Napoleon’s northern positions. Barclay was an unspectacular but highly
competent general, a straight-backed, balding, reserved man who
suffered from several disadvantages in the position and historical
moment he found himself in: He was descended from a Scottish clan and
spoke German as his first language, deeply suspect credentials for a man
defending a country that was whipping itself into a nationalist fervor.
And although he had made his name in a thrilling battle during the 1809
Finnish war by marching his army over the frozen Gulf of Bothnia, an
exploit worthy of the young Napoleon, he was conservative by nature.
The man who would quickly emerge to be his closest rival was
General Pyotr Bagration, a hot-tempered nationalist eager for a
confrontation with Napoleon. Bagration commanded the 60,000 troops
of the Second Army, which would face the French positions in the south.
Four years younger than Barclay, he was a firebrand, tetchy, capable of
plunging into ecstasies of despair or joy depending on the progress of the
battle (and of his career). He was as ambitious for himself as he was for
his nation, and in his deeply emotional responses to the progress of the
war, he would prove to have an innate understanding of the Russian
mind that the phlegmatic Barclay often lacked.
Napoleon planned to drive between them east along the Orsha-
Smolensk-Vitebsk land bridge, which would lead him almost directly due
east toward Moscow, should he need to go that far. His plans were
straightforward: keep the two armies separated; drive forward and
encircle them separately; cut off their supply, communication, and
reinforcement lines to the east; force them into a defensive posture near

Grodno; and then annihilate them. Napoleon continued to believe that
Alexander would sue for peace after a convincing French victory.
But in one respect Napoleon had radically misjudged Alexander. He
was thinking in terms of empire. Alexander was mobilizing his people
for another kind of conflict entirely. The tsar was convinced he was
facing an Antichrist, a millennial figure who would destroy Russia itself.
For him, the coming war was a religious crusade.
TWO ANCIENT WARS set the stage for the kind of conflicts the two men planned
for and mark the vicious debut of the lethal pathogen that was already
deeply embedded in the Grande Armée.
In 1489 the Catholic monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella fought a

decisive battle with the Islamic forces of the Moors. The Moors had ruled
Spain ever since crossing the Strait of Gibraltar in A.D. 711, leaving only a
few lonely outposts of Christians in the north of Spain along the Bay of
Biscay. The Christian warriors bided their time, taking advantage of
dissension among the Muslim rulers, looking to the Crusades for
inspiration in their slow war of toppling one Islamic stronghold after
another. By the late 1400s, only the citadel of Granada was left.
During the siege of the city in 1489, a third combatant entered the
field: a “malignant spotted fever” began carrying off Spanish soldiers at
a fast clip. When the Catholic forces mustered their soldiers in the early
days of 1490 to regroup, their commanders were shocked to learn that
20,000 of their men had gone missing. Only 3,000 had fallen in battle
with the Moors, meaning that a full 17,000 had died of the mysterious
disease. In an age when small armies of 30,000 to 40,000 were the rule,
that figure represented a devastating loss of fighting power.
But this was the illness’s first foray into war, and it didn’t have the
decision-changing impact it would later carry. The Spanish recruited
more soldiers to replenish their ranks and returned to the campaign. On
January 2, 1492, the last Muslim ruler of Granada, Abu ’abd Allah
Muhammad XI, departed the ancient province and left Spain to the
Christians. January 2 remains a black day in the minds of Islamicists
today.
Ferdinand and Isabella had fought a religious war in the context of
empire (or, equally true, a war of empire in the context of religion). It
was a template that fit Alexander’s view of the battle to come. The
Spaniards had overcome the fatal disease that struck their armies
primarily by luck and persistence: The battles were being fought on their
territory, meaning their commanders could quickly replace troops lost in
the epidemic. Alexander, whose religious mania exceeded that of the
Spanish king and queen, would have the same advantage against the
despoiler from France.
FORTY YEARS LATER, THE MALADY that would meet the emperor on the road to
Moscow emerged from the shadows to fulfill its role as an arbiter of
empires.

The conflict drew together the depressive King Charles of Spain, the
greatest power on the Continent; King Francis I of France, a young ruler
who wished to retrieve ancestral lands claimed by Charles (and his two
sons, held for ransom in a previous war); and King Henry VIII of
England, who had territorial ambitions in the war but also sought, by
taking control of Italy and Rome, to gain control over Pope Clement VII
and to obtain a divorce from Catherine of Aragon so that he could marry
Anne Boleyn. Drawing in the continent’s three most powerful monarchs,
this was a war for control of Europe’s future.
King Charles expressed the ethos of the war they would fight. It was a
contest between honorable knights, and Charles longed to live up to the
code they shared:
Therefore I cannot but see and feel that time is passing, and I with it, and yet I
would not like to go without performing some great action to serve as a monument
to my name. What is lost today will not be found tomorrow and I have done
nothing so far to cover myself with glory.
It was a passage that Napoleon could have written nearly three centuries
later.
In 1527 the forces of King Francis (bolstered by a contingent from
Henry VIII) met Charles’s mercenary army at the Italian port city of
Naples, the French army with 30,000 men, the Imperial army of Charles
with 12,000. If Francis could destroy the army inside the walls, Spain’s
power, so dominant for so long, would be broken at least for the near
future and perhaps for centuries.
But then a pathogen appeared in the ranks and began to kill wantonly.
“There originates a slight internal fever in the person’s body,” wrote one
ambassador, who later died of the illness, “which at first does not seem
to be very serious. But soon it reappears with a great fervor that
immediately kills.” It was the same inscrutable microbe that had
emerged at the Spanish siege of Granada.
Bodies began to pile up. The Italian sun beat down on men who had
fallen into stupors or raving fevers. Each day brought more cases, and
soon the sick began to die in terrible numbers. “The dangers of war are
the least we have to think about,” wrote one commander. The French

lieutenants, convinced the air in the plain had turned bad, urged their
commander to retreat to the hills, where the atmosphere was cooler and
fresher. But he refused and the epidemic “literally exploded.” Desertions
increased; men faked illness to get out of the death zone. Out of a force
of 30,000, only 7,000 were fit for duty. Soon two out of every three of
the soldiers had died, most of them from the nameless pathogen.
At the end of August, the French forces broke from their camps and
fled in panic, leaving their artillery and their sick comrades behind. The
siege was broken. Charles’s forces ran them down on the road from
Naples to Rome, stripping, robbing, and killing the remnants. “Without a
doubt,” one observer wrote, “one would not find in all of ancient and
modern history so devastating a ruin of such a flourishing army.”
Francis’s men were skeletal, sick, some of them clothed only in tree
leaves. The disease claimed more on the way and bodies could be seen
heaped on the side of the road. Of the 5,000 who started the retreat,
perhaps 200 arrived safely in the holy city; from there, some French
troops were forced to walk all the way back to their native land.
The effects unspooled for years. Spain dominated the Continent, King
Francis was humiliated and France radically weakened. Pope Clement
VII rejected Henry VIII’s petition for divorce as a direct result of the
defeat. Infuriated, the king broke with Rome and led his country into the
Church of England.
Even today, a believer kneeling to pray in a High Anglican Church
worships, at least partly, in a structure built by an invisible microbe.
The conflict revealed crucial aspects of the epidemic disease: It seemed
to need large groups of people to thrive. It left dark spots on the torsos
of many of its victims, sparing the hands and face (making it harder to
detect in men who wore full uniforms). It had a terrifying mortality rate,
up to 95 percent, among the highest of any epidemic disease known to
humankind. And it had a decided predilection for war. It was almost as
if nature had invented a biological sleeping agent to combat the wishes
of ambitious men.
NEARLY THREE HUNDRED YEARS after the siege of Naples, Napoleon reclaimed
Francis’s sword after conquering Spain and brought it back to Paris in

glory. He’d revenged the monarch’s humiliation. And now Napoleon
imagined he was about to embark on a war that would share in the same
codes of war.
The historian David Bell has argued persuasively that in the years
1792-1815, the modern concept of “total war” came into being, ushered
in by Enlightenment ideas about the perfectibility of society and the
political upheavals that followed the French Revolution. The “culture of
war” was transformed so that the struggle between France and the
successive coalitions against it became, in the words of one French
supporter, “a war to the death, which we will fight so as to destroy and
annihilate all who attack us, or be destroyed ourselves.”
The description fits Alexander’s view of the coming battle. The
transformation of national conflicts into all-out, apocalyptic duels, a
notion that has come cleanly down to us as a clash of civilizations in
which one side must win or die, would be realized on the road to
Moscow. And there, as in the modern version, faith would play a huge
role.
Certainly Napoleon endorsed such an all-encompassing view of war,
especially early in his career. Still, he genuinely imagined the coming
invasion would have certain limitations, especially in the endgame. He
believed Alexander was a nobleman who would fight, be measured on
the battlefield, and then settle according to the results of arms, as had
Francis I and Charles of Spain. The emperor had badly misjudged the
situation in Russia.
But his war machine made the error seem irrelevant. If ever there had
been an armed force built for total, annihilating war, it was the Grande
Armée. No divisions on earth, arrayed against it in a straight-ahead
confrontation, had a remote chance of winning.
Except if they had a hidden, undetectable ally in the fever that had
burned at Naples.

A
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     3
Drumbeat
S WAR APPROACHED, ADVISERS BEGAN TO WARN NAPOleon. His statistical expert, a
Captain Leclerc, looked at the demographics and resources of Russian
society and told the emperor that, if he invaded, his army would be
“annihilated.” Others recounted in detail the deprivations suffered by the
last army to invade the Russian hinterland: that of the strapping and
enigmatic Charles XII of Sweden, whose forces were almost completely
wiped out by cold, Cossacks, and disease in 1709. Charles would come
to haunt Napoleon, as he paged through Voltaire’s history of the
campaign on his way to Moscow. But more and more a smashing victory
seemed an answer to Napoleon’s problems. By the first months of 1811,
the emperor had ordered his Topographical Department to supply him
with accurate maps of western Russia.
Early in 1811, Napoleon assured both his advisers and Alexander’s
representatives that his intentions were peaceful. “It would be a crime
on my part,” he told Prince Shuvalov in May, “for I would be making
war without a purpose, and I have not yet, thank God, lost my head. I
am not mad.” But he contradicted himself by returning to the language
of threat and provocation again and again. Indecision, which would
plague every phase of his conduct of the war, also muddied his thinking
when it came to starting it.
The first unit to move on his command was a Polish cavalry regiment,
which left Spain on January 8, 1812. On January 13, Napoleon ordered
his War Administration department to be ready to provision an army of
400,000 frontline troops for fifty days. That broke down to 20 million
rations of bread and 20 million rations of rice, along with 2 million

bushels of oats for the horses and oxen. Some 6,000 wagons, either
horse-or ox-drawn, were requisitioned to carry enough flour for 200,000
men for two months. The customary card index, which Napoleon kept on
all opposing armies, detailing strengths and weaknesses down to the
battalion level, was quickly pulled together.
The emperor wrote Alexander on February 28, 1812, warning him to
abide by the Continental System or face dire consequences, a threat that
Alexander brushed off by saying he was only protecting Russian business
interests. Alexander included a list of demands required for his return to
the Continental System, including a French evacuation of Prussia, which
Napoleon regarded as impertinent. The emperor railed at his advisers
and predicted that a prospective war would last only twelve days. “I
have come to finish once and for all with the colossus of Northern
barbarism,” he shouted. Napoleon’s advisers were horrified. He had
never approached a campaign with so few backing opinions from those
around him.
“Whether he triumphs or succumbs,” observed the German-Austrian
diplomat Count von Metternich, “in either case the situation in Europe
will never be the same again.” The emperor ratcheted up the rhetoric
against Alexander, and he began to embroider his vision of a quick war
with grand designs: if the tsar fell or was assassinated, the Grande Armée
could pivot south and march to the Ganges, taking India and its rich
markets and dealing a crushing blow to English maritime commerce,
crippling the trade that funded the British Empire. Napoleon was
wandering even deeper into self-delusion.
The emperor wasn’t the same man he had been ten years before. He
had grown stout, his skin had turned sallow, the lean, hawklike face had
developed the hint of jowls, and his almost forbiddingly intense
expressions had mellowed and grown more querulous. “He spoke more
slowly and took longer to make decisions,” writes historian Adam
Zamoyski. “Something was eating away at the vital force of this
Promethean creature.” Whether this decline was caused by the effects of
middle age or physiological problems, but Napoleon was a less
commanding figure, physically and intellectually, just as he began his
most exhausting mission.

IN RUSSIA, THE CALLS for war escalated almost monthly. The country was, in
its own way, deeply imperialistic, a rising power probing west (in
Sweden) and south (toward the increasingly feeble Ottoman Empire) for
new sources of wealth and territory. Its upper classes and its army officer
corps were fluent in French, the only language many of them spoke, and
their bookshelves were lined with volumes of Voltaire and Montesquieu.
Still, they deeply resented Napoleon’s encroachment upon Russian power
and national pride.
As rumors of war spread, waves of revolt rippled through the society.
French tutors lost their jobs and it became fashionable for boyars and
aristocrats to spice their conversations with Russian phrases. When
Alexander appeared on the Kremlin’s Red Steps, he was greeted by
thousands of ordinary Russians shouting, “We will die or conquer!”
In the early months of 1812, Napoleon’s armies began streaming
toward the Polish border from France, Italy, Hungary, and other
garrisons. Even the Austrians and Prussians were forced to contribute
30,000 and 20,000 men, respectively, to face their former ally. Napoleon
had clearly made up his mind on war, though he kept his target a secret
from the general public and even his own marshals.
But Alexander stole a march on the emperor. In quick succession, he
formed an alliance with his old adversaries the Swedes in the north and
signed a peace treaty with the Ottoman Turks in the south, securing his
most troublesome borders and eliminating the possible division of his
armies for war on two fronts. Napoleon meanwhile dithered and made a
halfhearted attempt to sign a treaty with the British in Spain, without,
however, offering much of anything to end a disastrous war. The British
sensibly refused. In the months before the Moscow campaign, it was
Alexander who looked like the master political player and Napoleon who
looked like a distracted novice.
ON MAY 9, 1812, the emperor left Paris and began a processional through
his client kingdoms, a display of his wealth and power that he’d
remember as the happiest time of his life. He traveled with an army of
300 carriages filled with crystal, plate, tapestries, and his own personal
furniture, sweeping into the king of Saxony’s castle and putting hundreds
of chefs to work creating a Pan-European menu that was testament to his

reach. Nobles, kings, and queens came to pay homage.
The German poet Heinrich Heine remarked on how the army’s
veterans, passing in review before the emperor, “glanced up at him with
so awesome a devotion, so sympathetic an earnestness, with the pride of
death.” The army itself was a pageant, gaily outfitted in all the colors of
the peacock. Cuirassiers, the cavalrymen who were the successors of
medieval knights, pranced on their chargers, their mirrorlike steel
helmets capped by black horsehair manes. The carabiniers were dressed
in crisp white jackets, while the lancers wore crimson shapkas with
white plumes a foot and a half high. The rapid-response chasseurs wore
kolbachs with green and blood-red feathers, while the hussars strutted in
their tall peaked shakos topped with red feathers. Dragoons sported
turbans cut out of tiger skin and brilliant red coats, and the grenadiers of
Napoleon’s elite unit, the Imperial Guard, wore the traditional French
blue uniform covered by great bearskins, the sun glinting off their gold
earrings.
AS MORE AND MORE units from the empire marched toward the Niemen River
to assemble for the invasion, in Germany one of the millions who would
be deeply affected by Napoleon’s decisions prepared to leave. Franz
Roeder was a captain in the First Battalion of the Lifeguards of the
Grand Duke of Hesse, a German principality. Roeder was typical of the
soldiers who would form the core of any assault on Russia: he was non-
French; experienced in battle, having nearly died in the Russo-Prussian
War; and fiercely loyal to his men and his reputation, if not to the
emperor. Roeder was handsome, with a long aquiline nose, an intense
gaze, wavy hair that fell over his collar, and a mouth that seemed to be
holding back some outrageous remark. He had entered the barracks after
punching a schoolmaster as a boy and running from a flogging, never to
return. And as war approached, he was trying to get on with his life
despite the rumbles from Paris. The captain expressed as well as any
soldier readying for battle what it would mean in the terms of a single
life.
For Roeder, the most pressing dilemmas were romantic: His beloved
wife Mina, a direct descendant of Martin Luther, had died of
consumption that year and he was left with two young children to care

for. Still steeped in grief, he was nevertheless thinking of asking a young
woman named Sophie, who lived in a city miles from his hometown, to
marry him. His children needed a mother, and he, in his loneliness,
needed someone to love. Letters and short visits added up to a courtship
against the gathering clouds.
As Napoleon rattled his saber, Roeder read the signs. “Nobody believes
that it will really come to war,” he wrote in his diary. “This hope helps
the good souls to overcome the pain of parting and obscures for them
the danger which looms so close, which may well lead, not to long
absence, but to parting forever.” One night, feeling a departure
approaching, he rushed to the neighboring town where Sophie lived,
pulled her out of the opera between the second and third acts, and asked
her to marry him. He didn’t even have a ring to offer her, but she said
yes. The veteran campaigner was relieved. At least the children, if he
died, wouldn’t be orphans.
BY APRIL, CAPTAIN ROEDER was marching his 181 men through the roads of
eastern Germany. In the bigger towns, his men were feted at balls, and
Roeder, although just married to a new wife and haunted by a dead one,
flirted with the local beauties. His men were mostly healthy but
suffering from diarrhea, “which may be partly caused by the water,” he
wrote from the German town of Doberan, “through which they
frequently have to march up to the knees.” A more worrying case was
that of his quartermaster, who, on May 21, died of “creeping nervous
fever,” most likely an early sign of the approaching epidemic.
But the general mood was good. “I share the thoughts of the whole
army. It has never shown itself more impatient to run after fresh
triumphs,” wrote Captain Louis-Florimond Fantin des Odoards, a veteran
grenadier who had fought at Austerlitz and Friedland. “Its august leader
has so accustomed it to fatigue, danger, and glory that a state of repose
has become hateful. With such men we can conquer the world.” Roeder,
too, despite his love for Sophie, relished being out with his men,
throwing his cape under a tree and falling asleep under the stars. Many
of the young recruits saw the 1812 campaign as the finale in a long link
of adventures, the last chance for rapid advancement and glory. Some
10,000 wills were drawn up by Parisian notaries before the

commencement of hostilities, and the famous coachbuilder Gros Jean
churned out carriage after carriage for the marshals and generals.
·   ·   ·
NAPOLEON PLANNED FOR a spring/summer offensive that would allow the fields
to ripen with oats for his horses and wheat for his men. As he attended
to the thousands of details necessary for a campaign involving half a
million troops and more, he made a shocking discovery. His much-
vaunted medical service was in disarray, with even the basic necessities
for a campaign—dressings, linens, splints—in short supply. His surgeon
in chief, the legendary Dr. Dominique-Jean Larrey, rushed from Paris to
Mentz, Germany. But the forty-six-year-old surgeon was being sent
“doctors” so inexperienced that he was forced to give them crash courses
in battlefield medicine.
Despite Larrey’s sterling reputation (“the worthiest man I know,” the
emperor once said), Napoleon didn’t trust doctors. He could be
progressive when it came to new techniques, such as Edward Jenner’s
smallpox vaccine, discovered in 1796, which the emperor embraced,
even having his two-month-old son inoculated and spearheading a
vaccination campaign for the young and new army recruits. But for the
most part he despised physicians, shouting at his guests “Medicine is the
science of assassins!” during one memorable party. He was a fatalist
when it came to epidemics. He believed that if one wasn’t strong enough
to resist disease, it would claim you. Mental fortitude was the only
remedy.
These attitudes were rooted in Napoleon’s youth. At the age of twenty,
while walking across the Ajaccio salt flats near his birthplace, he’d come
down with a serious fever, but he had survived with no aftereffects.
While stationed in Auxonne as a poverty-stricken junior officer,
Napoleon had survived a bout of malaria while still managing to put in
eighteen hours of study every day. A second wave hit after the first had
subsided, and Napoleon blamed it on the miasme (or “bad air”) from a
river close to his lodgings. Still, he worked furiously through the
headaches and pain. “I have no other resource but work,” he wrote. “I
dress but once in eight days; I sleep but little since my illness; it is
incredible.” For the young Corsican—penniless, friendless, obscure but

driven—those days were his refining fire. Disease had been just another
test. Why couldn’t other men overcome it?
Instead of physicians he believed in portents, lucky omens, as any true
Corsican of the time would have. March 20 and June 14 were
particularly good days for him; he hated Fridays and the number 13. He
had a “familiar” called Red Man, a conduit to his lucky star, which
visited him only on important occasions. In Egypt, the Red Man had told
him that success was guaranteed despite his reversals, and in Italy, at
Marengo, the spirit assured him that he was soon to be emperor of
France. As he contemplated the invasion of Russia, the ghost had
appeared to him and told him the war was a mistake, but after
considering the warning, he disobeyed. To rebel even against the spirit
world would prove he was equal to the gods themselves. “I’m trying to
rise above myself,” he confided to his officers on the campaign. “That’s
what greatness means.”
Later in his career, he learned to use disease. When the English took
the island of Walcheren off the coast of the Netherlands in 1809, he
refused to send his troops in. “Walcheren has for its defense fever and
poor air,” he told his marshals. “In this season the island is one of the
unhealthiest places on earth.” The British fell in droves to Walcheren
fever, a mixture of dysentery and assorted fevers. “Health is
indispensable in war” became one of the emperor’s maxims.
Napoleon had actually overseen a host of advances in war medicine,
including Larrey’s invention of the “flying ambulance,” which, combined
with his insistence that doctors bring their field hospitals close to the
lines of battle, reduced the time that doctors could reach and treat
wounded men from many hours to fifteen minutes. (For these
innovations, and his policy of treating enemy wounded in the same way
he treated French ones, Larrey is often considered the spiritual father of
the modern Red Cross.) The doctor was genuinely loved by the soldiers;
when in 1808 a rumor shot through the Army of Spain that Larrey had
been killed by enemy fire, the troops of the elite Imperial Guard broke
down and swore to avenge him. The rumors turned out to be untrue.
But when it came to funding his army, Napoleon’s prejudices came
through. On the Russian campaign, the surgical corps was a shell of its

former self. Young men unfit for army service, the dregs of the French
population, could get an appointment as a junior regimental surgeon
after only three months at a medical school. One medical student
remarked on how many of his classmates were “hunchbacks and
cripples.” Napoleon had systematically cut at the control that doctors
had over their own work, handing supervision over to bureaucrats and
even stripping physicians of the epaulettes they had worn on their
uniforms. A significant portion of his doctors were regarded as cowards,
malingerers, or hacks.
THE FRENCH HAD FACED the killer that was gathering power in its ranks before.
It had struck the French army during the wars in Spain (where 300,000
of Napoleon’s men died of disease, and only 100,000 in battle). The
pathogen had aided them immensely at the siege of Saragossa in the
summer of 1808, when 54,000 of the city’s 100,000 citizens died of the
disease, along with 18,000 of the 20,000 Spanish soldiers within its
walls, forcing the city to surrender. After Austerlitz, a bout of the illness
struck that Dr. Larrey described in the complex nosological formulation
of the day as “a malignant, nervous and putrid hospital fever
(adynamicoataxic).” During the epidemic, a Polish officer, Heinrich von
Brandt, caught the disease and was taken to a military hospital. “[The
dead] were thrown from the windows stark naked,” he wrote, “and they
fell, one on top of the other, with a muffled thud just as though they
were sacks of corn.”
In 1796, during the siege of Mantua, Italy, the malady, along with
malaria, killed or incapacitated 14,000 of Napoleon’s force of 24,000.
The French still managed to prevail during the Italian campaign, but
afterward one army surgeon reported the cost. “Like an enormous fire
[the illness] is sweeping our hospitals,” he wrote. “That mortal plague
afflicting all campaigning armies is caused by the filth of these quarters,
the lack of fresh air, the negligence of the troops, and the total lack of
concern by our own general staffs.”
Public health officials in France knew the disease. Spanish prisoners
sent back from the ongoing war there brought the pathogen with them;
they were forbidden to fraternize with the local French inhabitants, and
after they left the straw they had slept on was burned and their barracks

fumigated. The precautions weren’t thorough enough, however: in one
hospital, the nuns who nursed the prisoners, the guards, the porters, the
gendarmes who guarded the convoys, the medical students, the chaplain,
and even the secretary of the War Commissioner—nearly everyone who
came in contact with the Spanish patients even for the briefest time—
caught the illness. Many of them died.
During the Wars of the First Coalition, while Napoleon was making his
name, an especially lethal strain swept through the Prison du Bouffay in
Nantes, killing twenty-one of twenty-two sentinels and most of the
committee sent to investigate. Even the grave diggers hired to bury the
victims succumbed. Any doctor with long experience in France would
have been familiar with the disease. In a popular medical journal, a
physician wrote in April 1812: “I warn all military physicians not to
congregate all their fever patients in a single room by themselves, for
few would come forth from such a room alive.”
In its encounters with French society, the pathogen had confirmed
further clues about itself: Once entrenched in a population (how it
achieved that was still a mystery), it appeared to be highly contagious.
And the evidence showed that it was, as the army surgeon suspected,
intimately connected with hygiene. Those two simple facts could have
given Napoleon’s doctors a key insight into the malady’s nature and
radically altered their approach to it, if they had learned the correct
lessons from the outbreaks. Those bits of information would, a century
and a half later, help to solve the riddle of the disease’s origin, a riddle
unraveled by a French doctor at another hospital in another far-flung
colony of empire.

T
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     4
Crossing
HE FIRST OF NAPOLEON’S SOLDIERS CROSSED THE NIEMEN River into Russia on a
beautiful summer’s day. Napoleon’s army, the greatest he had ever
led, in fact the greatest since the time of the Persian conqueror
Xerxes, tramped above the rushing waters that marked the border
between Poland and Russian Lithuania on June 24, 1812. Crossing the
river was itself the signal, the trigger for war. It would take only hours
for the news to reach Tsar Alexander I, reclining in a chair at a party
scented by groves of orange trees in bloom, seventy miles to the east.
Anticipation and uncertainty and dreams of riches swirled in the
minds of everyone from the emperor to raw privates pulled away from
sleepy Normandy farms. The towns in Germany, the natural staging
ground for an attack on Russia, had for months been full to bursting
with troops waiting to know if it would be war or not. In his diary,
Captain Roeder, the veteran Hessian soldier with a new wife back home,
wrote how he was drinking in a restaurant when a passing Frenchman
cried out on seeing him. They had tried to kill each other five years
before at the Napoleonic Battle of Altenkirchen, when they were fighting
on different sides. But the emperor’s reach was now so all-encompassing
that ancient enemies marched shoulder to shoulder. The two men fell
into each other’s arms.
In the noise and billowing clouds of dust and the percussive tramping
of thousands of horses’ hooves, the shouts and orders in a half-dozen
different languages, the men who staggered out of the ranks and
collapsed by the roadside were hardly noticed. A few remarked on the
bodies. No one was unduly alarmed. Napoleon was already ensconced in

his richly appointed carriage, pulled by six horses and equipped with
volumes of history and literature, scores of maps, a writing table, and
candles for reading.
The deaths could easily be attributed to exhaustion or bad alcohol.
The Grande Armée had swelled enormously beyond its core of veterans
for the attack on Russia, and the new recruits weren’t as well
conditioned as the survivors of Austerlitz and other campaigns. Cossacks,
long distances, the Russian winter: these were the things that worried
the men, if they worried at all. Supremely confident in its leader, the
army bore down on its enemy.
For the sick, falling behind and watching their regiments disappear
into a cloud of dust, the disease announced itself in various, even
contradictory ways. Some victims felt at first a brush of giddiness; they
became dizzy and light-headed with an almost pleasant sensation, as if
they had taken a quick drink of schnapps after a long march. But this
was often followed by “a very uncommon feeling …which is impossible
to describe,” as if the pit of the stomach had dropped suddenly and the
heart had stopped for a few seconds, then began vibrating instead of
beating. Afterward, the symptoms could disappear for hours at a time,
and the person would feel perfectly healthy and perhaps dismiss the
episode as a spell of heatstroke or something equally benign. But the
sickness was only gathering strength, and when it returned, as it always
did, its wounding and malignant nature was impossible to miss.
A blinding headache shut the men’s eyes tight. Nausea and chills
racked the entire body, soon followed by “universal pain,” body aches so
excruciating, especially in the back muscles, that they could drop a man
to the ground. Heat followed cold, as after three or four days a “river of
fire” spread from the stomach upward across the chest and then shot
along the pectoral muscles to the fingertips. The heat pulsated like a
bonfire onto which fresh timber was being thrown every few hours or so;
dying down, it was replaced by chills that could cause the teeth to knock
together, then the river of fire would flame up again. A fever arrived and
the temperature rose quickly to 105 degrees or higher (109 was
recorded), where it would stay for days. Some patients grew so weak
that they could barely move their head or stick out their tongue when

asked by a physician. Others raved or laughed uproariously.
The army’s doctors could do little for the men. The disease was feared,
but little understood. The best the physicians could offer was bleeding
and folk cures such as bark or other herbs. The men were carried to
hospitals along the route or put up in houses of local peasants, so filthy
that they shocked even the poor French farm boys who had enlisted for
adventure or a chance at an army career. In their beds, the symptoms
appeared, disappeared, mutated, reversed into new areas of the body,
drawing on a seemingly unlimited repertoire of agonies. Sunlight caused
knifelike jabs in the eyes; “flying, wandering, or shooting pains” arced
across the body, especially the groin and back; the voice coarsened and
dropped; the face grew darker and puffy; the eyes lost their affect and
appeared corpselike. Some patients reported “sensations of gnawing or
tearing” in their bodies, and the headache was constant. “It felt to me as
if an immense weight were pressing down the bones of the head,” wrote
one survivor of the disease, “and as if the brain were reacting against
this pressure by violent and rapidly successive throbs.”
As early as the second or third day, the mind began to be affected,
with men muttering to people who weren’t there or singing nursery
rhymes in ghastly voices. Complete exhaustion set in; if raising a cup of
water to his lips could have saved his life, one sufferer recalled, he
couldn’t have managed it. Others during the brief respites found it
unbearable to stay in their beds and wandered constantly. The appetite
disappeared and the men began to lose weight. Around the fifth day,
tiny red spots usually appeared and spread from the chest and groin all
over the body, except for the face and the palms of the hands.
These are the classic, unmistakable signs of a disease known by many
names: 
famine 
fever, 
the 
Hungarian 
disease, 
hospital 
fever,
hauptkrankheit (“head disease”), and the most famous alias, “war fever.”
But it is most commonly known as epidemic typhus.
After ten to twelve days, the illness entered its crucial phase. Some of
the severely affected saw their toes and fingers blacken with gangrene.
Death came slowly. “Spotted typhus is beyond description, the patient
wastes to nothing under your eyes,” wrote one woman watching her
famous lover die in a Russian epidemic. “Of the illness I can scarcely

write—there was so much pain.” Guessing who would die was a kind of
hobby. One theory held that the number of tiny spots on the body could
predict the end: the more there were, the deadlier the strain. Another
school held that it was the color of the spots that gave the best clue: the
closer the pea-size eruptions came to purple, the more certain it was that
the patient wouldn’t survive. It was a long, often terrible death.
Gathering the ill together and mixing them with men afflicted with
other, milder ailments was the worst thing Napoleon’s doctors could
have done. The mistake was compounded by the fact that the bodies of
the dead (left unburied in heaps in the army’s haste) were often stripped
by local peasants and the clothes sold or worn. Many recipients of the
uniforms soon fell ill and died; entire families were found dead in their
homes. In the clothes was the answer to the riddle that had eluded
doctors and thinkers for centuries, the cause of the deadly illness that
was incubating in the Grande Armée as it advanced toward Moscow.
For centuries, typhus had excelled in attacking large armies. Now as
Napoleon attempted to force Tsar Alexander to heed his singular rule,
the signs of a new epidemic began to appear.
And Napoleon’s doctors could do almost nothing to stop it.
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT the Grande Armée’s doctors were thinking as they tried
to save these dying men, one must understand the complex and often
contradictory state of medical thought on disease in the early nineteenth
century. The theory of the humors developed by Hippocrates in the fifth
century B.C. was still the dominant mode of understanding health and
sickness. According to it, black bile, yellow bile, phlegm, and blood were
perfectly balanced in the healthy person. When diet or routines
introduced an excess or a shortage of one of the humors, disease
appeared.
But competing theories, superstitions, and straight-out quackery were
layered over this belief. Medicine was very much an intuitive art as
opposed to a rigorous science, and what treatment one received could
vary widely, depending on what school of thought one’s physician
favored. There was no universal cure for certain diseases. Age,
occupation, living situation, physical build, and even temperament were

key factors in determining the cause and cure for diseases. In addition,
one had to consider the circumstances under which the victim had fallen
ill: Was a northwest wind blowing? Was he depressed? Had he been
exhausting his vitality by drinking to excess? Each patient was a world
unto himself. This was a concept called “specificity.”
Specificity was fatal to the idea of common diseases and common
treatments. One man’s cure was considered useless for the next patient,
who had a different set of life factors to consider.
When it came to infectious diseases, there were two working theories:
miasmism and contagion. Miasmism remained the dominant disease
theory of the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries. The
influential English doctor Thomas Sydenham championed the idea
beginning in the mid-1600s and developed the notion that noxious
vapors emerged from the earth’s rotting center and infected the air of
towns and villages, which were then struck by epidemics. It was a dark
view of Mother Earth, much different from our own. Odor was a telltale
sign of danger to one’s health. “All smell is disease,” wrote the English
sanitary activist Edwin Chadwick.
The theory dissipated through European and American life. In Jane
Eyre, the orphan asylum where Jane and her sisters live sits in a forest
dell that is a “cradle of fog and fog-bred pestilence” and that eventually
causes a typhus epidemic that kills a number of the girls. Edgar Allan
Poe’s 1839 short story “The Fall of the House of Usher” contains perhaps
the most palpable description of miasmism in modern literature. The
twenty-first-century reader might interpret the passage as a gothic
premonition of death, but the nineteenth-century one would also see
something else—a realistic portrayal of airborne disease:
But the under-surfaces of the huge masses of agitated vapor, as well as all terrestrial
objects immediately around us, were glowing in the unnatural light of a faintly
luminous and distinctly visible gaseous exhalation which hung about and
enshrouded the mansion. “You must not—you shall not behold this!” said I,
shuddering, to Usher, as I led him, with a gentle violence, from the window to a
seat. “… The air is chilling and dangerous to your frame.”
The doctors who advocated miasmism weren’t only following
tradition, they were obeying common sense. Who could believe disease

was spread by invisible organisms that somehow floated from body to
body, instead of the odors from rotting corpses that one could smell and
even taste on the tongue? Which made more sense? The idea of
contagion was more radical in its view of a hidden world of germs. The
miasma theory fell in easily with centuries of folklore about the
dangerousness of swamps and bogs, and it chimed with the evidence of
one’s own senses. It’s no wonder that it proved remarkably resilient.
Contagion—the idea that disease spreads by direct or indirect contact
—was the father of modern germ theory. Its roots went back to the
Muslim statesman and medical thinker Avicenna in the eleventh century.
By the nineteenth century, it had many supporters but just as many
detractors.
MOST OF NAPOLEON’S doctors followed the categories of illness invented by
Philippe Panel, a groundbreaking French specialist in mental illness, in
Nosographie philosophique ou méthode de l’analyse appliquée à la médecine
(1798). Panel divided illness into five categories: fevers, phlegmasias
(inflammations), hemorrhages, neuroses, and organic lesions. Fever was
divided into antiotenic, meningogastric, adenomeningeal, adynamic,
ataxic, and adenonervous, each with subdivisions and each requiring its
own course of treatment. But as to cause, the miasmatic model ruled.
During the Egyptian campaign of 1798-1801, Napoleon’s future
surgeon general, Dr. Larrey, spoke of winds “loaded with the putrid
effluvia of animal and vegetable substances decomposed by the heat in
the lakes.” A hot southwest wind was believed to bring the plague, while
a brisk wind from the north brought health. In a study of the 1806-7
Prussia-Poland campaign, an army doctor reported that “one cannot give
a good history of the diseases which are epidemic in the army without
having first described the medical topography of the theater of war and
the state of the atmosphere whilst the army was in the field.” The doctor
had to be an amateur surveyor and meteorologist to diagnose an
epidemic.
But Larrey also conceded that once plague had rooted itself in the ranks,
it could become contagious. The rapid spread of the plague in Egypt, in
differing meteorological circumstances and across different terrains,
made it clear that disease wasn’t just arising from bad air. He and other

doctors borrowed from both theories to fit the patterns they observed.
CRUCIALLY, THERE WAS no accepted way to test which theory was true. Nor was
there a way to find out which treatments worked best: the rest cure, the
bark cure (using the outer layer of trees, the original source of aspirin),
the cold-water cure, cupping, bleeding, and the split carcasses of small
animals applied to the body—all of these were common treatments for
typhus in the early 1800s, each with its own followers and detractors.
There were fad causes and fad cures. In 1811 the American doctor Elisha
North was compelled to study typhus by the dread it was causing in his
patients. “Upon [its] first appearance,” he wrote, “in any place, so many
fall sudden victims to the jaws of death, that a universal terror seizes the
minds of all, and of physicians among the rest.” He began to study the
illness.
After months of research, he published his results. The disease wasn’t
the result of outside causes, North found, of bad air or invisible creatures
passed from victim to victim. Instead, he blamed “the typhus
temperament.” Certain qualities made a person susceptible to the
disease: a vigorous constitution, a rich and highly seasoned “animal
diet,” living in a dry environment, and frequent alcohol intake, along
with an “ardent spirit.”
The idea took its place in the medical literature. But no one could
definitely say what was true and what was bunk.
One physician had attempted to change that. On May 25, 1747,
twenty-two years before Napoleon’s birth, an experiment took place on
board the Royal Navy warship Salisbury that would change the course of
medicine.
The doctor’s name was James Lind, and he was a Royal Navy surgeon
and a specialist in diseases that affected mariners. Just thirty-one, the
Scottish-born doctor had sailed all over the world as a surgeon’s mate,
watching men die from typhus and scurvy from the west coast of Africa
to the ports of Jamaica. He knew that the two maladies killed far more
sailors than the king’s enemies ever managed to. Lind would do
remarkable work in the understanding of both.
Lind’s 1747 experiment looked at scurvy. Twelve sailors who had the

illness were divided into six groups. The accommodations and diet of all
the sailors were identical, but each received a different remedy: one
group received cider; one got seawater; another, “elixir of vitriol”; the
fifth group, two oranges and a lemon; and the sixth, a mix of spices with
barley water. It was the first documented clinical trial in medical history.
“I shall propose nothing dictated merely from theory,” wrote Lind.
“But shall confirm all by experience and facts, the surest and most
unerring guides.” This in itself was revolutionary, in an age when so
much superstition and ancient theory overlay the world of medicine.
When the sailors who received the citrus recovered completely, and the
others did not, Lind had proved that orange and lemon juice was the
true and universal corrective for the disease. He had created a blind test
whose results were irrefutable.
It wasn’t the oranges and the lemons that constituted the
breakthrough, as using citrus had been one of the folk remedies against
scurvy for well over a century. And, in fact, Lind didn’t propose that
scurvy was a deficiency disease caused by lack of a mineral (vitamin C,
as it turned out) contained in the fruit. He thought that moist air blocked
the pores in scurvy patients, and that lemon juice helped toxins escape
the body through the skin. But he didn’t need to know why the cure
worked so long as he knew that it did. This is what the blind test proved.
He had invented a way of evaluating medical knowledge.
When it came to the other great killer of mariners, typhus, Lind made
a signal contribution in a 1763 paper. The Royal Navy at the time took
anybody for its ranks, often by force: slums, criminal courts, and taverns
were swept for new recruits, who often came to the ships infested with
lice and bacteria. The surgeon recommended that the newcomers be sent
to a receiving ship and quarantined there for a few weeks to see if any
diseases revealed themselves. They were given hot baths, and their old
clothes were thrown away and a fresh set provided. By the time the men
went on board their new ships, the sick had been culled from their
ranks.
The British Admiralty didn’t implement the typhus-defeating
quarantine until 1781 and didn’t fully provide an allotment of citrus
until the 1790s, but when these measures were implemented piecemeal,

the results were astonishing. In the months before the 1795 Battle of
Quiberon, Lind instructed that provision ships carrying fresh vegetables
and citrus fruits be ferried to the twenty-three ships of the line
blockading French ports. On the day of battle, out of 14,000 men, only
about 20 were listed as sick and unfit for duty, an unheard-of number for
an eighteenth-century fleet. One of Lind’s biographers estimated that his
recommendations added the equivalent of six warships to the British
fleet that day, in which the British decimated the French. The Royal
Navy’s policy of blockading ports, so devastating to Napoleon’s plans for
defeating the English commercially, would have been unthinkable had
scurvy or typhus been allowed to ravage its crews.
Taking Lind’s warning about noxious air seriously, British captains
paid attention to the cleanliness of their ships, regularly airing them out
and scouring the bedding and sailors’ clothing. The incidence of typhus
in the Royal Navy dropped dramatically. Lind remarked that for the first
time in history, sailors “enjoy a better state of health upon a watery
element, than it can well be imagined so great a number of people would
enjoy, on the most healthful spot of ground in the world.”
The navy’s procedures proved that a large military institution could
keep infectious disease at bay indefinitely. In a sense, typhus had been
“cured.” But there were many times when the mystery of typhus was
believed to be solved; in fact, it was “solved” over and over again, but
the insight kept slipping away.
Why didn’t Lind’s insight hold? Why didn’t Dr. Larrey and his
colleagues adopt Lind’s protocols for preventing typhus? And why, at the
very least, didn’t they use his idea of the blind test to evaluate different
treatments and prevention methods?
Simply put, because the breakthrough Lind ushered in—the idea of an
empirical test that measured the effects of disease on all men uniformly
—went so radically against the reigning ideas of the time: specificity and
miasmism. The blind test entered a different mental and theoretical
world than exists today. Medicine was not the uniform place we know,
where a discovery in Berlin or California is tested, reviewed, published,
put through clinical trials, and then adopted worldwide. Lind couldn’t
with one stroke realign centuries of thought on the humors, on the

origins of different kinds of fevers and the effects of the weather.
Medicine was a spooky art, and Lind’s insights would need many
decades, and further breakthroughs in the areas of disease theory, to
change history.
In 1812, his theory was one among many. If Lind had found success
with strict hygiene and quarantine, Dr. Larrey could point to his
colleagues’ work that produced results through other methods (although
he himself was not averse to keeping patients clean and their clothing
disinfected). Standard practices for avoiding and treating diseases did
exist, but they were far less ironclad than they are today, and a doctor
was free to pick and choose among them. Medicine was still a bespoke
pursuit, still decades away from being a true science.
And even if Larrey, convinced that the Englishman was right, had
come to Napoleon with a plan for defeating contagious diseases—which
would have slowed the Grande Armée down and required a huge
infrastructure and an infusion of money—he would have been dismissed
out of hand. A century later the Russian army, knowing the cause of
typhus, would be unable to stop it during World War I. Lind’s protocols
were far easier to implement in a fleet of ships than in a massive,
multinational army.
So the pathogen that the English surgeon had successfully revealed
and defeated was free to strike again.
AND NOW SOMETHING never noted by Dr. Lind was happening within the army.
The massing of an unprecedented number of troops meant that typhus
suddenly had an almost unlimited selection of potential hosts, and an
easy way to infect them. The disease was spreading fast and becoming
deadlier by the week.
After millions of years, the fatal mechanism had found its most
efficient form, its ideal expression.

W
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     5
Pursuit
HEN THE ARMY CROSSED THE NIEMEN ON JUNE 24,1812, a shocked Alexander
wrote Napoleon a hurried note as he scrambled to retreat. The tsar
had been preparing for the possibility of war but still couldn’t quite
believe Napoleon had initiated it. His note offered a solution: If the
French turned around and retired behind the Niemen, the two sides
would settle their problem amicably. “Alexander is laughing at me,”
Napoleon said, astonished at the apparent mock-naïveté of the letter.
The Grande Armée swept east. X Corps headed northeast to confront
General Barclay, the German-speaking commander of all the tsar’s
forces, while V and VII Corps, at the southernmost tip of Napoleon’s
lines, moved east toward the Berezina River, chasing the Russian
divisions under General Peter Wittgenstein, which were now in full
retreat. Napoleon and the main body of troops headed for Vilna
(modern-day Vilnius), where Alexander had attended a ball among the
fountains and cultivated gardens of a country estate. The emperor
arrived there on June 28 and found signs that the Russians had prepared
to defend the city but then had left hastily, burning the bridge over the
Vilia River as they retreated. The bridge was the first tangible evidence
of Alexander’s evolving strategy of retreat-and-lay-waste, the first sign of
total war. But Napoleon believed the withdrawal could be the prelude to
a counterattack that would give him a chance at a quick, decisive
victory. He had much to learn about the young campaign.

The timing of the invasion had come as a surprise to Alexander, and
his forces were too widely dispersed to mount a serious defense. Nor did
he have accurate information on the numbers or positions of Napoleon’s
forces. The analytical General Barclay, knowing that he would be
annihilated if he attempted to stand and fight, ordered the hotheaded
General Bagration in the south to fall back and avoid contact with the
French, already causing friction with his rival. Napoleon’s forward units
managed brief encounters with the fleeing troops, but anything

resembling a decisive battle evaded Napoleon in the first weeks of the
campaign.
Alexander, whose words to his people during the campaign were
consistently more effective and rousing than the French emperor’s,
issued a proclamation telling the Russians what Napoleon had done: “He
has come with treachery in his heart and loyalty on his lips to enslave us
with the help of this legion of slaves. Let us drive this plague of locusts
out! Let us carry the Cross in our hearts, and steel in our hands! Let us
pluck the fangs out of the lion’s mouth and overthrow the tyrant who
would overthrow the earth!” The biblical imagery was clear. The fusing
of the campaign into a combination of nationalist struggle and holy war
had begun.
The Grande Armée’s mood was buoyant, even though a series of bad
omens had plagued the beginning of the march. When Napoleon went to
review the army, huge thunderheads rolled in, hail pelted down, and the
sky darkened so that soldiers could see only by the flashes of lightning.
“I have never witnessed so horrific, so frightful a storm,” wrote Dr.
Larrey. Napoleon, superstitious to a fault, canceled the review. But it
would be hard to overestimate the faith that Napoleon’s veterans placed
in his leadership, and the lengths they were willing to go to win him
another victory.
Alexander had placed all his hope in a strategy devised by his German
general Karl Ludwig von Phull, who had settled on the idea of creating a
fortresslike camp at Drissa, 140 miles northeast of Vilna, which would
tempt Napoleon into a disastrous siege. Once the French, eager for a
single overwhelming victory, attacked this impregnable position, the
emperor’s flanks would be crushed from the north by General Barclay
and the First Army and from the south by General Bagration and the
Second Army. For eight months before the invasion, fortifications were
built and entrenchments dug at a spot devoid of a natural defensive
feature—a hill or a stream—to give the Russians an advantage against
the hordes that would sweep down on it. When the German strategist
Carl von Clausewitz was sent to inspect Drissa, he reported to Alexander
on July 8 that the work had been a complete waste of time and that the
camp offered no tactical advantages to the troops who would defend it.

Drissa was a trap not for Napoleon but for the Russians.
The tsar was crushed. Phull had left him defenseless against an
invader already on the march. On July 12, he ordered his bewildered
troops to abandon Drissa and retreat west to the city of Vitebsk, near the
border of modern-day Latvia.
Napoleon could hardly contain his joy. The Italian general Rossetti,
who was assigned to the cavalry corps under the dashing Marshal Murat,
gave the emperor the news of the Russian withdrawal from their
defensive prize, and Napoleon began striding back and forth, galvanized,
preening. “You see, the Russians no longer know how to make peace or
war!” he cried. “It’s a degenerate nation. What! They abandon their
‘palladium’ without striking a blow! Let’s go! Let’s go! One more final
push and my brother will repent for having followed the advice of my
enemies.”
As the Russian defense collapsed, typhus and other diseases were
beginning their work. The army’s health had been excellent when the
soldiers began their march to their rendezvous in Germany. The Belgian
doctor J. L. R. de Kerckhove accompanied III Corps led by “the Bravest
of the Brave,” Marshal Ney, and kept a lively diary that would closely
mirror the condition of the troops. At the beginning, he rated the men
highly: “The army was not only the most beautiful,” he wrote in his
medical account of the campaign, “but there was none which included
so many brave warriors, so many heroes.” During the march to the
Niemen River, he had noted “with astonishment” how low the sick rate
was in such an immense army. “Nothing announced a disastrous future.”
The bountiful food of the Dutch lowlands and Germany had delivered an
unusually fit force.
But when they were deep into Poland, Dr. Larrey reported disturbing
news. He noted in his memoirs, “60,000 [troops] were admitted by their
commanding officers to be sick. The true figure was probably double
this.” Clausewitz, on the Russian side, was also hearing disturbing
reports about the French forces. “The French, in the first weeks of their
march,” he wrote, “had undergone an enormous loss in sick and
stragglers, and were in a state of privation which gave early warning of
their rapid consumption.” The Bavarian soldiers of VI Corps, to choose

one element of Napoleon’s forces, were hit hard: one colonel reported a
“terrible epidemic” had swept through their ranks, infecting almost
every last recruit and killing thousands.
When the normally imperturbable Marshal Ney of III Corps reviewed
his infantry, which had yet to fire a shot, he was shocked to find that
half the effective troops had vanished. Sir Robert Wilson, a British
soldier of fortune who had been expelled from Russia for spying, only to
return to fight against Napoleon in the 1812 invasion, wrote that in late
June, the Grande Armée “was already stricken with a calamity which
seemed to be a prelude to its future catastrophe.” He estimated that
30,000 men had already fallen out of their ranks after “numbers fell
sick.” Nor was this a matter of leaving garrisons along the route they had
passed, as the French had “scarcely made” any such arrangements.
Soon after crossing the Niemen, the Belgian surgeon de Kerckhove
reported that a crowd of soldiers had separated from their regiments
and, unable to keep up with the blistering pace, “dragged themselves
behind” the main group. By Vilna, nunneries and churches were
converted into makeshift hospitals, without bedding or adequate
supplies or basic provisions. Napoleon was losing 4,000 to 6,000 soldiers
a day, and 30,000 sick packed every inch of space in the converted sick
houses, which were really staging grounds for fresh infection. Another
30,000 men (and possibly many more) had deserted the ranks.
Based on journals of the army doctors, memoirs of the soldiers
themselves, and epidemiologists’ subsequent analysis of the campaign,
the Grande Armée was clearly under attack from a host of pathogens. By
July it had become a vast petri dish in which microbes competed for
supremacy. Pleurisy, jaundice, diarrhea, hepatitis, enteritis, and other
ailments all preyed on the tired, hungry men. But it was dysentery and
“nerve fever” (fièvre nerveuse), as typhus was often called by the French
doctors, that rose to epidemic conditions during the summer. “Under
these circumstances,” wrote one lieutenant, H. A. Vossler of the
Würrtemburg Chasseurs, “it wasn’t surprising that within two or three
days of crossing the Niemen the army and in particular the infantry was
being ravaged by a variety of diseases, chief among them dysentery,
ague, and typhus.”

Dysentery ruled for the first weeks, with 80,000 sick by the beginning
of August. The bloody diarrhea that the men suffered from was causing
“the most horrible infection in our hospitals,” as the men were packed so
closely together, with little available cloth to wash them or keep them
clean. Epidemic dysentery is caused by a bacterium, Shigella dysenteriae
type 1, which enters the system through contaminated food or via
contact with an infected person. Its telltale symptom is bloody diarrhea,
with rectal pain, fever, and abdominal cramps also frequently present.
But even at its deadliest, dysentery most often has a mortality rate of 5
to 15 percent (although recent outbreaks in Africa have found that
raised to 30 to 40 percent), which doesn’t match up with the huge
numbers of sick who were dying on the march. And one of the most
common symptoms mentioned in diaries and memoirs of soldiers on the
road to Moscow—extreme exhaustion and stupor—is not common to the
illness.
Dysentery certainly killed men early on. Johannes von Scherer, a
surgeon with the Württemberg regiments, would later write his
doctorate on the 1812 campaign and included details of the diseases
racking the men. At one hospital, where he served for six weeks, the
doctor recorded 902 dysentery patients, of whom 301 died during the
first three weeks. When the care and nutrition improved in the next
three weeks, only 36 died. The doctors used anything they could find to
treat the soldiers, including the huckleberries and root of tormentil, as
well as plants such as common sweet flag, which has been used for
thousands of years.
Typhus would soon overtake its rival infection. De Kerckhove
remembers the beginning of the epidemic, painting it as an example of
pure miasma.
Typhus was present among us. It first appeared spontaneously from the dirtiness of
the clothes, which one could not change or even take off at night, and from bad
food, from deprivations, from exhaustion, from tiredness and congestion. It became
more frequent and more serious as a result of the large assemblies of men. We were
breathing putrid smells all the time along roads that were full of dead bodies and
rotting animal remains…. Typhus began to stand out because it was so infectious.
The French commanders were appalled by the losses but felt powerless

to stop them; the bulletins and hurried conferences called to address the
epidemic that one would expect from a modern army simply never
happened. Illness and hunger were a cost of making war in the
nineteenth century. Disease, in the miasmatic worldview, was an
inescapable part of conquering backward territory full of gloomy
swamps swept by drenching rains and towns pocked by filthy,
malodorous hovels. One major, Friedrich Wilhelm von Loss-berg, who
saw thousands of troops dying by the roadside and fell desperately ill
himself, became convinced that it was merely a case of simple
callousness on the part of an emperor who believed he had men to spare.
“Napoleon doesn’t give a damn how many of his soldiers collapse by the
roadside,” he wrote to his wife.
Most Napoleonic historians have noted the drastic reduction of the
French forces on the road east, attributing it to a combination of
sickness, hunger, and thirst—and the last two certainly played a
significant part. But almost no histories of the war, or of Napoleon’s fall,
probe deeply into the outsized role of typhus. The disease, as it
preferred, remained remarkably hidden, both to the army itself and to its
chroniclers.
AS THE GRANDE ARMÉE marched east, the sun burned down during the day,
with cold and thick fogs moving in at night. Rains drenched the roads,
turning them into rivers of mud. Artillery guns had to be dragged
through marshes and along rutted lanes. The marching became brutally
hard, but nothing worse than Napoleon’s troops had seen crossing the
Alps. The army’s horses were dying in greater numbers than its men:
they needed almost twenty pounds of oats a day to survive and weren’t
getting anything close to that. When their own supplies ran out, the
cavalry and supply units substituted the local rye, which was green and
unripe, causing the animals to die by the thousands. Their swollen
bodies lined the route and threw off a noxious odor as they decomposed.
It was a heavy blow for an army that depended on animal power to pull
what supplies remained to the next camp and for the lightning cavalry
charges that Napoleon expected to turn the tide in upcoming battles.
The French, growing desperate, often turned friendly locals into
enemies within a matter of hours. Nobles who offered the troops the

ancient welcome of bread and salt found that the troops had soon
harvested and eaten their rye, stolen their cows and horses, and pillaged
their homes for anything they could use. “The path of Attila in the age of
barbarism cannot have been strewn with more horrible testimonies,”
wrote one Polish officer. The mistake that Napoleon had made by not
promising the Poles their freedom was compounded on the ground by
men acting as if they were conquering territory instead of liberating it.
Captain Roeder, the diarist-soldier with the Hessian Lifeguards, was
shocked by what he saw on the march. He passed bodies along the road
and kites and vultures feasting on the eyes and entrails. The locals were
poor to begin with, but the movable city that was the Grande Armée had
taken everything they owned. “What misery prevails already in these
wretched houses and hovels,” Roeder wrote in his diary. One day he
came across a town swept by smallpox. “The parents were ready to tell
the Lord God in secret how many children they wished Him to leave
them,” Roeder recorded. “And looked upon it as a blessing if He took a
few to Himself, especially in these hard times.” The soft-hearted captain
gave out a few loaves of bread to the peasants and kept his men moving.
To his wife Sophie, he wrote about the extreme youth of those around
him, so different from other campaigns, and told her that many of the
eighteen-year-olds were already in the hospital. Roeder, despite his
fearlessness in battle, was “obsessed by the fear of falling sick” (as his
niece would later attest) ever since nearly dying during the 1807 Russo-
Prussian War. “Beloved, it is so hard to be parted from you,” he wrote to
Sophie from the road, “harder still not to know if it is only for a little
while or if we have lost each other forever.”
The enemy took careful note of what was happening inside Napoleon’s
ranks. Alexander’s spies and scouts reported on the thinning of the
Grande Armée’s numbers. “This did not remain concealed from the
Russians,” wrote the German strategist Clausewitz, who was close to the
decision makers at headquarters. “General Schuwalow …returned to
Widzy full of astonishment at the state of the route of the French army,
which he found strewn with the carcasses of horses, and swarming with
sick and stragglers.” French soldiers captured by Cossacks or peasants
were questioned, and the reports hardened Alexander’s resolve to fight.

Napoleon began to feel the mounting pressure. “I am already in Vilna
and I don’t know what we’re fighting over,” he told a Russian emissary
after arriving in the city on June 28.
In terms of sheer military momentum, Napoleon was succeeding
brilliantly, driving his enemy before him. Epidemiologically, he was in
mortal danger. A month after Sir Robert Wilson’s estimate of 30,000
deaths from sickness and desertion, Clausewitz wrote that already by the
time he reached Vilna, less than a week into the campaign, Napoleon
had lost 100,000 men, a full quarter of his frontline forces.
BUT DISASTER FOR the French represented an unprecedented success for the
pathogen. It was fulfilling its own biological destiny.
Every epidemic disease from plague to cholera has its own patterns.
Malaria is ancient and familiar, the tropical cliché, a carryover from the
time of humankind’s ape relatives, limited by its heat-loving vector, the
mosquito. Bubonic plague, with a top mortality rate of 75 percent—one
of the few epidemics that can compete with typhus in sheer killing
power—seems designed to terrorize, with its victims turned to a
gangrenous pulp. Just as ruthless, typhus was now ready to join the
ranks of the major pathogens.
It’s not inappropriate to talk about the “mind” of a contagious disease.
Its habits, preferences, strategies, and alliances with the natural and
human world result in a pattern that resembles strategic thought. Typhus
favored chaos, deploring the stability of the towns and the nation-states
that could enforce quarantines. It hated prosperity, for its ability to raise
living and cleanliness standards, although it favored the movement of
traders, which carried it to new population centers. The disease was
enamored of mariners and seafarers, because they carried the bacillus
around the world, truly founding its global empire but it despised
learning, as its secrets were so obvious, so exposed, that it seemed that
at any moment medical thinkers would discover the root of its power.
Curiously, typhus formed an alliance with doctors, who tended to gather
patients together with the uninfected, accelerating the pathogen’s
spread, as was already happening on the road to Moscow.
Typhus was closely allied with the poor and criminals and the corrupt

wardens that kept them in filthy hellholes that formed a reservoir where
the disease could build its strength for mini-epidemics. It favored cold
snaps, when people gathered in their hovels and wore layers of clothing,
where its accomplices could burrow. It was fervently pro-religion, as
religion was the spur to war after war, while priests and ministers
lectured their followers that bathing was an indulgence and nakedness a
mortal sin. If pressed, it favored Catholicism, which abhorred washing,
over Protestantism. Politically, it was a monarchist to the core (there
was really no other choice in the early nineteenth century) and favored
corrupt kings who went to battle to replenish their coffers and drove
their people to famine and misery. Typhus was, above all, a lover of war,
the single greatest propagator of its survival and its rapid spread. The
disease hungered for new territory. It had, in this way, the mind of a
conqueror.
It’s also fair to say that typhus was inherently conservative, or at least
pessimistic. It placed large bets on the belief that tradition counted: Men
who made war on each other yesterday would continue to make war on
each other tomorrow. They would continue to commit crimes punishable
by prison terms and those terms would be served in filthy cells. Societies
would fall victim to famine and the poor would always be with us. That
humanity was basically incorrigible was a gamble written into its genetic
code. If nations such as France made a head-spinning moral turn and
stopped invading each other’s borders, and if men stopped committing
felonies, typhus’s core constituencies would disappear.
Jails and ships and villages were the basis, in a way, of typhus’s
domestic policy. There would always be a population there to infect and
form a stable reservoir to keep the microbe alive. But those populations
were unlikely to spread far enough to appreciably expand the microbe’s
range. War and conquest, then, formed the center of its foreign policy.
Along with shipborne trade, they were the most effective ways it could
extend its reach to the corners of the earth.
By this quirk of the mind, the preference for attacking armies, typhus
had acted as a check on great power. King Francis I’s mercenaries had
been stopped by it in the plain that lay before Naples. Napoleon,
however, was a different kind of ruler in a different time, driven by more

audacious motives. Crucially, too, he led soldiers who would follow him
anywhere, even into a raging epidemic.
But this was something typhus, in its very makeup, had wagered on:
that war would prove irresistible to certain leaders. That insight was life
itself to the microbe.
FROM THE MOMENT the first soldier died of typhus, a clock began ticking. Now
that the scourge had arrived, the question of the hour became: Would
the pathogen leave Napoleon enough time to catch and destroy
Alexander’s army?

A
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     6
Smolensk
T VILNA, NAPOLEON CALLED A HALT TO THE MARCH AND began meeting with Polish
emissaries looking for a promise of independence. At the same time,
he mulled over Alexander’s intentions. “It was truly heartbreaking for
him to have to give up all hope of a great battle before Vilna,” wrote his
former ambassador to Russia, the perceptive Armand de Caulaincourt.
“He was anxious for trophies …and no one sent him any.” The first real
doubts about the offensive had snaked into Napoleon’s mind by this
time, but he wouldn’t allow himself to believe that he was engaged in a
new kind of war.
Meanwhile, his southern forces under his youngest brother, Jérôme,
king of Westphalia, along with three corps of Polish, Westphalian, and
Saxon troops, were in pursuit of Russia’s Second Army under the
hotheaded Bagration. The Russian commander on June 28 began moving
north to link up with General Barclay, but a week later his scouts
brought the information that the ever dependable Davout, the “Iron
Marshal,” had dived south from Vilna and was moving southeast to force
a battle.
Each was hoping to reach the Russian city of Minsk, approximately
110 miles southwest of Vilna, before the other. The French won the race.
Bagration was now caught between Jérôme and Davout and faced the
possibility of a pincer battle he was sure to lose. As the Second Army
raced to escape, Jérôme failed to spring the trap, complaining to
Napoleon that the roads were impassable and the weather brutal.
Napoleon was furious with his brother, but many of the mistakes were
his: Jérôme had started from a rear position and even on good roads

couldn’t have been expected to march the hundred miles to stop
Bagration’s retreat in the time given him. The emperor had also failed to
coordinate the command structure between Jérôme and Davout, which
resulted in conflicts between the two, wasting valuable hours. Bagration
took advantage of the delay and ducked away south and out of the two-
sided snare.
Napoleon blew up. “You know nothing, and not only do you consult
nobody, you allow yourself to be guided by selfish motives,” he wrote
his brother. The outraged Jérôme, who was commanding his first army
in battle, turned around with his squad of guards and headed for home,
abandoning the campaign on July 16.
The pattern was set for the first part of the war: French advances,
minor clashes in which the Russians won as often as the French, and
retreat of both Russian armies toward a unified stand deeper in the
heartland. Napoleon’s decision to drive a wedge between Russia’s First
and Second armies instead of herding them together against the Drissa
River and then fighting a decisive battle had failed. And the Russians by
mid-July had sussed out the French strategy, prompting Tsar Alexander
to give orders for the two armies to withdraw to Vitebsk and unite there.
Almost by accident, a Russian strategy had emerged: withdraw and suck
the Grande Armée deeper and deeper into a ravaged landscape.
After Vilna, Napoleon headed northeast to try to outflank General
Barclay, hoping to place himself between the two Russian armies and
snap the First Army’s supply and communication lines to the country’s
heartland. When the Russians fled from their fortified camp at Drissa,
Murat and his cavalry turned south and then east again, hoping to cut
them off before they reached Vitebsk. On July 25, the flamboyant, hard-
charging marshal confronted the Russian rear guard of 12,000 men at
Ostrovno. Dressed for battle in a powder blue coat laced with gold braid,
cinched tightly at the waist by a silk cord, and a fetching hat covered
with feathers over his lustrous black curls, Murat charged into the
Russian lines, driving his horse forward with the enormous gold spurs he
wore on his deerskin boots. The first real blooding of the campaign, the
encounter left about 3,000 dead on each side. The French broke through
the Russian line several times and captured Russian artillery pieces, but

the bruising battle allowed Barclay to slip away toward Vitebsk.
As Napoleon approached that city on July 27, he was thrilled to see
the First Army arrayed for battle. French advance elements sent ahead
were met with volleys of musket balls in a series of skirmishes that broke
out throughout the evening. Still not convinced of his ability to take on
Napoleon, the cautious Barclay was anxiously waiting for word from
Bagration and the Second Army, who he hoped would arrive just in time
to reinforce his ranks. But that night Barclay received dispatches telling
him that the Second Army, which had been hurrying north, had finally
encountered Davout. The Iron Marshal wouldn’t let Bagration pass
without a clash.
Davout, as loyal and competent as ever, had complied with Napoleon’s
orders to engage the enemy wherever and whenever possible.
Attempting to stop Bagration’s northward flight, he dug in on a high
bank near the Dnieper River and waited for the Russians to attack.
Already the depletion of the ranks by disease and other factors was
telling: Davout’s original 70,000 men at the crossing of the Niemen had
been reduced by illness—and a contingent of 28,000 men sent to Murat
—to 30,000 by July 8. Now, as the fiery Bagration approached with
about 45,000 men, the Iron Marshal was down to 17,000 soldiers, partly

due to skirmishes and garrisoning towns along the way. But most of his
losses had come from illness and desertion. “Each night of rest does
extraordinary harm,” wrote one of his men, “and costs us many men sick
and horses dead. Misery has brought on many suicides, and our column
resembles more a transport of sick than of warriors.”
The Russians appeared at the Dnieper and Bagration sent one of his
divisions smashing into Davout’s line, which crumpled in several places
and then re-formed, beating the enemy back. Some 3,400 men fell on the
French side to the Russians’ 2,400. Unwilling to test Davout further,
Bagration looped south and then turned northeast toward Smolensk. The
Iron Marshal had prevented the two Russian armies from linking up, but
he had only delayed Bagration. He had failed to stop him or even
significantly decrease his fighting power. With the men left to him, he
could hardly have been expected to.
For the first time, typhus and the other diseases in the French ranks
had a clear tactical impact on the battlefield and on the campaign.
Without the troop strength to attack Bagration’s main body, Davout was
unable to stop the Second Army from escaping. The Russians slipped
away toward a rendezvous with the First Army.
With Bagration delayed, Barclay and his 80,000 men faced the
prospect of a two-front battle against Napoleon in the west and Davout,
who was now rushing toward Vitebsk from the south. It was a recipe for
annihilation. After convincing Napoleon that July 28 would bring the
long-awaited battle, Barclay slipped his forces out of Vitebsk during the
night and stole eastward. As clear-minded as always, Barclay knew he
faced impossible odds; the numbers were not with him.
Once again the Grande Armée was being drawn deeper into the
Russian heartland. But the constant retreat was also fraying nerves on
the Russian side, especially between the conservative Barclay and the
firebrand Bagration, who wanted desperately to score a blow against the
French invader, if only a symbolic one.
A GRAPH OF THE troop strength of both armies would have shown the French
line, which had started at a very robust level, steadily diving, with the
Russian line, which had commenced at a low point, rising weekly.

Russia’s army was close to its supply depots and to an almost
inexhaustible supply of reinforcements. Napoleon surely knew that the
lines would have to cross eventually and his crushing numerical
advantage would be gone.
Numbers hadn’t been crucial at the beginning of the campaign; with
no major battle, it was the Grande Armée’s lack of maneuverability and
Napoleon’s missed chances that let the Russians escape. But going ahead,
that would change. “Nothing is more dangerous to us than a prolonged
war,” Napoleon said. Total war demanded masses of men, and the
French were hemorrhaging them at an alarming rate.
Suicides became more frequent, a result of the lack of food and the
“terrifying” increase in the sick rolls, according to the Belgian doctor de
Kerckhove. Those who couldn’t keep up with the main body of troops
faced being left behind to the mercy of the Russian serfs. And that was a
grim option.
The attitudes of the peasants toward the invaders were complex.
Ninety percent of the population were serfs who could be beaten, killed,
transported away from their family, or sold for a gambling debt or as
collateral for a loan (a healthy male at the time would fetch between
200 and 500 rubles in the Moscow market; a good-looking young female,
several times that). Before the invasion, Napoleon had threatened to free
the serfs, but it was a ploy. He needed to make peace with the royal
families of Europe, and igniting a social revolution in Russia would have
deepened their hatred of him.
Any rabble-rousers among the serfs were routinely killed or
imprisoned, but the prospect of an invasion by the forces of
Revolutionary France inspired freedom-minded peasants to act. The
historian Adam Zamoyski found records of sixty-seven minor uprisings
across Russia in 1812, more than twice the average amount. Clearly,
there was a deep reservoir of anger within the serf population, much of
it directed at their masters.
But once the Grande Armée arrived to ransack the peasants’ hovels,
steal their rye, and rape their women, that rage was increasingly vented
on their supposed deliverers. The atrocities committed by the peasants
on the French during the advance were trifling compared with what

awaited them on the retreat, but no Frenchman wanted to be caught out
along the road by a band of Cossacks or the local villagers.
Church officials, aristocrats, and Alexander himself painted the
invasion as a desecration of the homeland, an attack by an Antichrist on
the Orthodox Church and the religious traditions of Russia. One
Bavarian officer recalled the reaction he got when he and some members
of a cavalry regiment swept into a small village called Rouza. The
peasants, armed with poles and scythes, were quickly scattered by
volleys of musket fire, but the mayor of the town stood his ground.
“How can I survive the dishonor of my country,” he cried. “Our altars
are no more! Our empire is disgraced! Take my life, it is odious to me!”
Armed only with a small dagger, he bellowed at the invaders to kill him.
The upper classes were firmly behind the tsar’s war policy. When
Alexander, who remained far back from the front lines throughout the
war, traveled to Moscow’s Sloboda Palace in late July to address the
assemblies of nobles and merchants, the former pledged men— 10
percent of their serfs for the cause, as well as provisions to feed them,
totaling 50,000 men—and the latter contributed huge sums of money.
Fresh funds poured in: 2.4 million rubles were donated to the tsar’s
coffers. Count Mamonov, whose father had risen rapidly in the military
ranks due to his liaison with Catherine the Great, only to betray her with
a sixteen-year-old, pledged 800,000 silver rubles and a cache of
diamonds.
ON JULY 29, Napoleon marched into the recently abandoned Vitebsk, an
ugly, depressing city partially redeemed by its beautiful churches. He
delayed here, unable to make up his mind whether he should keep
moving forward or stop for a time, allowing his food trains to catch up,
knitting together his lines of communication, and giving his men a
much-needed rest and the sick a chance to recover. The diplomat
Caulaincourt, along with Murat and his other advisers, urged Napoleon
to station the army in the city of Smolensk, sixty miles to the northeast,
until the coming spring. His forces were simply too small and run-down
after their harrowing in the field, and the prospect of wintering in
Moscow, should he conquer it, gave him no strategic advantages against
an army that could renew itself over a long winter.

The condition of the army was one of the main topics of debate, as it
would be at each stop during the campaign. “War’s a game you’re good
at,” the head of Napoleon’s commissariat snapped at the emperor. “But
here we aren’t fighting men, we’re fighting nature.” “Nature” here refers
to the lack of food, the weather, and distance—and disease, which
emanated from the bogs and swamps.
With the momentum of the invasion momentarily stilled, Napoleon
spent hours reviewing statistics from the various corps, detailing the
losses to their ranks and the reinforcements flowing to each division.
Many believed his generals were downplaying the deaths to typhus and
other causes, hoping to escape charges of neglect or mismanagement
(and fearing that, undermanned, they would be left out of coming
battles). Dr. Larrey mentioned discrepancies between actual and
reported number of sick, and one officer wrote darkly of “the cruel way
in which [Napoleon] was being deceived by the reports made to him.”
The emperor contemplated stopping at several points during the
advance. This was as close as he came to addressing the losses to typhus,
as part of an overall plan to give his men a chance to recuperate. The
lack of a strong response mystifies the modern mind, but Napoleon was
ill-informed and his options were vanishingly small. He also knew that
even diagnosing the problem as an epidemic would solve nothing. The
army had no proven weapons to combat typhus or any other contagious
disease.
For a time the emperor seemed to have settled on a break in the
advance. He met with his advisers and unstrapped his sword, clattering
it down on a table covered with maps. “The campaign of 1812 is
finished,” he told them. “The campaign of 1813 will do the rest.” But
soon his mood changed and he lashed out at his coterie, bitterly accusing
them of wanting to avoid battle and return to their mistresses in Paris.
Napoleon seemed to change his mind by the hour. During one bath, he
decided that he must advance at that very moment and dashed out of
the water stark naked to give an order. But soon he went back to his
maps for further study, countermanding the order.
The emperor took a tour of the hospitals, talking with the sick and
wounded, awarding medals and handing out small gifts to the soldiers.

Dr. Larrey was close at hand, but Napoleon didn’t speak a word to him
as he walked through the wards, an ominous sign. Napoleon kept up a
cheerful banter with his men; still, he was clearly appalled at the
conditions and the lack of supplies that forced the surgeons to tear up
their own shirts for bandages. At the end of the tour, Napoleon erupted
in rage at the doctors. “I shall send you back to Paris to care for the
inhabitants of the Palais Royal,” he threatened. “You, whom I have
charged with tending to the needs of our soldiers, you want to sleep in
white sheets!” He even rounded on Larrey and chastised him for the lack
of medical supplies. The surgeon in chief took the abuse, but when he
finally spoke up to defend himself, Napoleon turned and left. Larrey was
furious. He wrote Napoleon a passionate letter detailing the failures of
his own supply administration to get bandages and medicine to the
front, and the two soon reconciled.
But the strain of the huge sick lists was clearly showing. The surplus of
men Napoleon had brought with him had provided a kind of insulation
against disaster, but the excess was being burned away. He needed a
decisive battle and a surrender soon.
Trying to decide on his next move, Napoleon paced hour after hour,
singing snatches of French songs, chatting absentmindedly about the
weather, and mumbling questions to aides who happened into his tent.
“Well, what are we going to do? …Shall we stay here? …Shall we
advance? …How can we stop now on the road to glory?” He was in a
dialogue with himself, and one senses that the outcome was never really
in doubt. When he finally announced the advance, it was with a sense of
fatalism. “The danger pushes us toward Moscow,” he wrote. “The die is
cast. Victory will vindicate us.”

His nature, his career, his philosophy all favored boldness. Napoleon
decided to pursue.

T
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     7
The Sound of Flames
HERE WAS A DRENCHING SERIES OF THUNDERSTORMS ON August 11 as the army marched
out of Vitebsk, providing the soldiers with an extra source for
drinking water. The supply trains had caught up to the main body of
troops in the city, so the men had been able to eat their fill and even
stuff a full seven days of rations into their knapsacks for the days ahead.
Thirst and hunger fluctuated, but disease had become a constant. One
hospital even had a “dying chamber,” where hopeless cases were left on
the straw to expire in peace. By mid-August, typhus was exploding in the
ranks. “The number of sick people increased overwhelmingly,” wrote de
Kerckhove, the Belgian doctor. “They were crawling along on the roads,
where many of them died.”
Caulaincourt, the former Russian ambassador, was sent to inspect the
hospitals and pass out money to the wounded. He was genuinely
appalled at what he found. “Never was there such a situation more
deplorable,” he wrote, “or a spectacle more heartrending for those who
could think, and who hadn’t been dazzled by the false glamour of Glory
and ambition.” He found most medical and supply officials indifferent to
the suffering around them, governed by a “spirit of inexplicable and
unpardonable meanness.” Caulaincourt found the emperor was only
intermittently in touch with the looming disaster. He would
acknowledge the problems and fly into a rage at an official from the
commissariat, then be distracted by some report of a minor battle or the
arrival of a fresh supply of ammunition, instantly reverting to his “old
illusions” of conquering Russia, throwing the tsar out, pushing on to
India, and crippling Britain’s mercantile trade. The diplomat had never
seen a wider gap between unfolding reality and Napoleon’s grasp of it.

BUT THE SITUATION on the Russian side was hardly ideal, either. In the face of
a seemingly endless retreat, Alexander resorted to propaganda to placate
his subjects, churning out a steady stream of bulletins trumpeting
imaginary victories against the French and instructing the leaders of the
Orthodox Church to rally the faithful to the cause. But news of the
French advance got out via soldiers’ letters sent home, from gossip
passed east from peasants who had watched the Grande Armée march by
unimpeded, and with the arrival of refugees, all of which spread “fear
and despair.” The mood of the country darkened whenever the actual
facts of the war escaped.
Finally, on August 2, the Russian First and Second armies met in
Smolensk. “This news filled everyone with extraordinary joy,” wrote
Nikolai Mitarevsky, a young Russian artillery officer. “We thought there
would be no more retreating and the war would take on a different
character.” Pressure was by now intense on General Barclay and on the
tsar to confront Napoleon. Alexander’s high command, the soldiers
themselves, and average Russian citizens were growing impatient and
increasingly suspicious of Alexander’s motives. And rumors about the
German-speaking Barclay were already beginning to spread—why didn’t
he turn and fight?
Smolensk was a small town of 12,600 citizens, a site without great
strategic interest, but it had acquired a significance for Russians out of
proportion to its size, due to the presence of the revered icon of
Hodegetria (literally, “she who shows the way”), supposedly painted by
Saint Luke in the eleventh century. The miraculous portrait of the Virgin
Mary and Jesus made Smolensk one of Russia’s “holy” cities, and the
legacy of several battles between the Poles and Russians in the
seventeenth century gave the place a nationalist pedigree as well. It was
a maxim of Russian military history that “he who has Smolensk also has
Moscow.” The city was, all in all, a fitting arena for a showdown with
the invader.
Napoleon, of course, wanted nothing more than a confrontation, and
on August 7 he got exciting news. Cossacks had attacked Count Horace
Sebastiani’s 3,000 mounted troops at the town of Inkovo, halfway
between Vitebsk and Smolensk, and dealt them a serious blow. Finally

bowing to the political situation, Barclay sent three columns to attack
Ney, “the Bravest of the Brave,” and the dashing Murat, who were
believed to be in advance of the main body of troops around the town of
Rudnia. During the offensive, scouts reported that the French had been
spotted to the north. Barclay turned his troops toward the French forces,
but the new orders never got through to his cavalry. They continued
advancing along the original lines and at Inkovo ran into the enemy
cavalry, still in their tents. The Russians attacked at dawn, sweeping
through the camp, spreading chaos, and capturing 200 prisoners.
The attack had acted as a trip wire. Now Napoleon knew where the
Russians were, and he concluded that the main body of troops had
gathered at Smolensk. He moved quickly to pin them down for a large-
scale battle, moving his corps to the Dnieper River. Believing that the
First and Second armies were southeast of him, he was engaging in a
classic Napoleonic technique: he would circle around and get behind the
Russians at Smolensk, cut off their line of retreat, and then crush them.
The hoped-for alliance between Bagration and Barclay had never
materialized on the ground. Bagration, a Russian hawk to his highly
excitable nerve endings, lobbied for a battle, while the careful Barclay
was still terrified of being crushed by one of Napoleon’s surprise flank or
rearguard attacks. Finally, Barclay agreed that a confrontation with
Napoleon was necessary, and he marched northwest from Smolensk to
find the French. But a confusing and contradictory series of orders was
sent to Bagration, miles to the south, the last of which ordered him to a
rendezvous. The Second Army’s leader had grown exasperated by the
blizzard of directives and now refused the command to turn around for
another pointless march. Instead of joining forces with Barclay, his
troops continued toward Smolensk. Barclay was forced to abandon his
offensive and turned back toward the city. The rift in the Russian high
command was now deep and wide.

Confusion—and Napoleon’s own reputation—worked against Barclay,
denying him the decisive battle he needed. Barclay didn’t believe that
his opponent’s tactical skills had deteriorated. The Russians repeatedly
suspected a Napoleonic strike would come wheeling in from some
unexpected direction, and so they chose again and again to retreat away
from the invisible presence they sensed over the next hill.
On August 14, Napoleon sent Davout rushing to Smolensk from the
southwest, followed by Ney and Murat. “At last! I have them!” he cried
when Marshal Ney reported back that he had the entire Russian army in
sight. The emperor decided on a classic frontal assault against a fortified
position, just the kind of warfare he had seemed to make obsolete in
victories such as Austerlitz. The time for finesse was gone.
But now that Napoleon needed the kind of massive army he had
assembled in Germany, his numbers were falling fast. He was down to
175,000 effective fighting troops, with 100,000 others on the sick or
missing lists. Ney’s corps had been reduced from 39,342 men at the start
of the campaign to 16,053 troops fit enough for battle. The medical
situation was grim.
The German foot soldier Jakob Walter saw his company dwindle to 25
men as they marched toward Smolensk. “One man after another

stretched himself half-dead upon the ground,” he wrote in his diary.
“Most of them died a few hours later; several, however, suddenly fell to
the ground dead.” He attributes many of the casualties to thirst but
reports no symptoms. It’s likely that typhus and dysentery were killing
as many as, if not more than, dehydration was.
As he approached Smolensk, Napoleon decided against sending an
encircling force to block any Russian retreat, allowing the road to
Moscow at the Russian forces’ rear to remain clear. Some historians have
theorized that he expected a decisive battle in which no retreat would be
possible, but it’s also likely that the emperor felt he needed every
available man for the assault and couldn’t spare a containment force. He
could have bypassed the city and crossed the Dnieper farther down, and
the German adviser Carl von Clausewitz for one was astonished and
appalled when he failed to do so. But second-tier cities were less
important to Napoleon than Russian casualties and prisoners—the key,
he felt, to getting Alexander to the negotiating table.
Smolensk lies in an oval bowl, surrounded by hills in the south (which
the French commanded) and the north (held by the Russians). Below
their feet spread out thickets of birch and open spaces, slanting down to
the dwellings that marked the city’s outer suburbs, bisected by two
streams that fed the Dnieper River. The city walls were whitewashed and
studded with thirty bastion towers. It was a fortress, decrepit in places,
but still a formidable target for a head-on attack. Inside the walls and
arrayed through the suburbs were the 17,000 men of Nikolai Raevsky’s
VII Corps. Barclay and Bagration were rushing to reinforce them.
On August 15, the French soldiers cooked their meals and then
gathered around their campfires, talking quietly. “The thought of the
coming day alternated with fitful sleep,” wrote Jakob Walter, “and in
fantasy the many dead men and horses came as a world of spirits before
the last judgment.”
Early on August 16, Marshal Ney and his corps attacked the Russian
cavalry, which retired in short order behind the walls. Napoleon rode up
at nine in the morning and ordered a light bombardment of the city as
he waited for the main body of his troops to arrive. In the meantime, the
Second Army under Bagration streamed into the city, bolstering

Raevsky’s units and changing the face of the battle. Barclay, after an
exhausting thirty-mile march, arrived with the First Army hours later.
The action resumed in earnest the next day. Napoleon had 140,000
men to throw against the Russians, with Eugène and Junot’s corps still
making their way to Smolensk. Ney took up the left position, Davout
held the center, and General Józef Poniatowski, with his Polish troops,
formed the right along with Murat. The Guard, as always, stood back to
act as a reserve.
The two armies probed each other. French infantrymen went
streaming through the suburbs with bayonets fixed and ran straight into
the Russian infantry, who counterattacked and drove them back with
volleys of case shot, which “shattered great heaps of them to the
ground,” leaving the French casualties “weltering in their own blood.”
Townspeople, even Russian priests, one of whom sighted an artillery
piece, emerged out of the ramparts and fought off the attackers.
Seeing the stiff resistance, Napoleon eagerly awaited an all-out
counteroffensive by the forces inside the city, but Barclay held them
back. The emperor stared and stared at the gates, willing the Russians to
emerge. Meanwhile, the French artillery was raining shells into the
fortress, hoping to kill as many enemy troops as possible and drive the

rest outside the forty-foot walls. The Russians fired back, their ball
slamming into the French gun carriages, sending shrapnel into the
gunners, killing them. Wagons exploded, deafening nearby troops and
sending chunks of flesh from the dray horses spinning across the slope.
As the Russian barrages rained down, the French noticed they were
using a new variety— a triple-vented shell that spewed fire as it
descended.
From the Russian side, Captain Eduard von Löwenstern watched line
after line of French infantrymen charging the guns.
A second earlier these poor victims of battle had advanced with fixed bayonets and
pale faces. Now most of them lay dead or mutilated. Another column soon
advanced and, with a hail of bullets, avenged the death of their comrades. Many of
our artillerymen were shot.
By that afternoon, Napoleon knew that he wouldn’t get his battle in
open ground and ordered the entire front line of his forces to take the
city. Two hundred guns erupted into a thunderous barrage, and three
corps of troops—under Ney, Davout, and Poniatowski— went shouting
toward the walls and their three gates, their peacock uniforms visible for
everyone to see.
The topology of Smolensk forms a natural amphitheater, with the
action centered between the feet of two facing slopes, as if on a stage.
Workers from the Grande Armée’s baggage trains came up to watch the
action, calling out to units in danger below their feet and crying
“Bravo!” at small acts of bravery. The regimental bands— made up of
one piccolo, one high clarinet, sixteen clarinets, two trumpets, one bass
trumpet, four bassoons, two military serpents (a distant and fantastically
shaped ancestor of the tuba), four horns, three trombones, two snare
drums, one bass drum, one triangle, and two pairs of cymbals—played
their martial tunes at maximum volume, and observers on the rim of the
bowl could hear snatches of the music between the cannon volleys, with
the trumpeters playing flourishes and the drummers hoisting their
instruments high into the air.
The cavalry moved first, charging at the Russian dragoons and killing
scores of them before the remainder fled in panic. The French infantry
fell on the troops holding the suburbs and then pushed their way toward

the fortress walls. The action was unusually close and vicious. The
Russian soldiers seemed to be enraged, and officers had to beat them
back with the flat of their swords to stop them from breaking ranks and
charging at the enemy without orders.
Stabbing upward with their bayonets and picking off defenders at
close range, the French troops marched relentlessly up the far bank.
“The drums beat the attack,” remembered one soldier from the 7th Light
Infantry. “And everyone dashes forward at the double, driving
everything before him.” After three hours of exhausting combat, the
French pushed the enemy back to the fortress wall, repelling ferocious
counterattacks along the way. Over their heads arched round after round
of artillery fire, their trails glowing in the darkening sky, while the
Russians lobbed projectiles into the French battalions. One cannonball
blasted at the flank of an advancing regiment smashed through the line,
killing 22 men.
When the French troops reached the walls, many of the defenders
dashed inside. “Everything which doesn’t make haste to follow suit
perishes,” reported Captain Karl von Suckow. “Even so, our columns, in
mounting to this assault, have left behind them a long broad trail of
blood….” The foot of the fortifications became a slaughterhouse, with
men slashing at each other with bayonets and French soldiers climbing
on top of one another’s shoulders, attempting in vain to gain a hold on
the ancient walls. But once they cleared the battlements of enemy
troops, stalemate. The French had no ladders to climb the bulwark and
no information from spies as to where the breaches and weak points
were.
As nightfall approached, the guns on both sides fell silent. The soldiers
panted for breath at the foot of the brick fortifications. Startled by the
sudden silence, they looked around in wonder, then began to hear
through the forty-foot-thick walls the sound of crackling wood. The city
was in flames.
The wooden homes of Smolensk had caught fire from the constant
shelling and were now burning out of control. The orange flames threw
into silhouette the inhabitants searching desperately for shelter and the
Russian soldiers rushing up to the walls to repel the latest charge as

chunks of the brick wall crumbled and slammed to the ground. Unable
to sleep, at two in the morning Caulaincourt was watching the
conflagration and listening to its dull roar when a hand slapped him on
the shoulder. He found Napoleon next to him, apparently invigorated by
the spectacle. “An eruption of Vesuvius!” he cried. “Isn’t that a fine
sight?” The diplomat, horrified by the carnage in service of no strategic
aim, replied, “Horrible, Sire.” Napoleon waved his hand. “Remember the
words of a Roman emperor: ‘A dead enemy always smells sweet.’” He
felt victory was near.
Surrounded by hills and open to bombardment, Smolensk wasn’t
defensible in the long term, and Barclay, as clear-sighted as ever, knew
it. Once he had secured the road to Moscow late on the night of August
17, the Russian commander began shuttling troops out of the city. He
wanted to initiate the retreat before Napoleon did the obvious and
crossed the Dnieper, cutting off his escape route. With the city’s famous
icon placed on a gun carriage and the remaining structures and
provisions inside the walls fired by the departing troops, the Russians
made their exit. At the point that the armies broke off contact, the
French had lost 19,000 men; the Russians, 14,000, including two
generals.
The retreat caused a firestorm among the Russian command. Generals
rushed up to Barclay and shouted that Smolensk must be defended to the
last man. “You German, you sausage-maker, you traitor, you scoundrel,
you are selling Russia,” Count Levin August von Benningsen taunted him
in one memorable sally that reflected the common soldiers’ distrust of
Barclay. But the general, correctly, refused to sacrifice his army for a
point of pride and ordered the retreat to continue.
Bagration was beside himself with fury and helplessness. “It is painful
and sad and the entire army is in despair, because they gave up the most
dangerous place and all for nothing,” he wrote a friend. “Barclay is
irresolute, cowardly, senseless, and slow …the army weeps and curses
him to death.”
Smolensk’s remaining wooden structures burned over the shoulders of
the retreating Russians. “The flames became more intense,” remembered
the illustrator and soldier Christian Wilhelm von Faber du Faur,

watching from the French side “forming a ball of fire that turned night
to day and lit the countryside for miles around.” The reflection of the
flames turned the surface of the river orange and the light and shadows
played along the surface of the brick walls. But inside the city was a
burnt-over slaughterhouse.
It was hardly the smashing victory Napoleon had hoped for. “The
mirage of victory,” commented Comte Philippe-Paul de Ségur, the
general who would go on to write a popular history of the campaign,
“which lured him on, which he seemed so often on the point of grasping,
had once more eluded him.”
The French entered Smolensk the next day. Few were ready for what
they encountered. One soldier told a friend: “Never can you form an
adequate idea of the dreadful scene which the interior of Smolensk
presented to my view, and never during the whole course of my life can
I forget it. Every street, every square, was covered with the bodies of the
Russians, dead or dying. The flames shed over them a horrible glare.”
About half of the city’s structures had burned, their copper roofs lying
rolled up on the ground. The fire had carbonized the corpses of the
Russian soldiers and townspeople, shrinking them to the size of children.
Men stepped over the corpses and even the old veterans vomited in the
gutters. The dead were no longer recognizably human, the burnt flesh
fusing with the iron of muskets and swords into grotesque black
concretions. Others had been “literally grilled,” the heat shriveling their
lips and burning away their eyeballs until red sockets remained. The
French had to step around the wailing survivors, just discovering their
dead in the first light.
The memoirist Captain Roeder—sick with dysentery and the first signs
of fever, he had missed the battle—toured the battlefields outside the
city and wrote almost the only benign thoughts recorded at the site.
“And yet, maybe they did not really hate each other so much after all,”
he wrote in his diary, “for now Frenchman and Russian lie peacefully
side by side.” Nicholas Pisani, an Italian officer who passed through the
town days after the battle, came across a French corpse with a book
open in his hand. Pisani approached the body and found that the volume
was a medical text on the treatment of wounds. The desperate soldier

had carried the text with him hundreds of miles, but the instructions had
failed to save him at the crucial moment.
The sick and wounded were herded into fifteen makeshift hospitals,
many of them stone civic buildings that hadn’t burned. “Here the
wounded were lying often on top of each other, without any straw, food,
or bandages, whimpering in terrible pain,” wrote the medical historian
Wilhelm Ebstein. To a miasmist, the reason for the spreading illness was
clear: “terrible deprivations, the excessive heat, and the terrible smell
from dead bodies” were the culprit. In fact, the hospitals should bear
much of the blame. The wounded would have been better off staying
where they were instead of being installed elbow-to-elbow with the
infected.
NAPOLEON RODE THROUGH the city at dawn, then camped out at one of the gates
facing the Dnieper, where the black lines of retreating Russian troops
were still visible. With his marshals, he sat on mats, intending to review
the situation but instead launching into a diatribe against Barclay. “What
a disgrace … to have given up without fighting, the key to Old Russia!”
he cried. All the time, the bullets from the retreating Russian infantry
whipped by the emperor’s head as he stared down at the enemy.
Barclay wasn’t out of danger yet. He still had to make good his escape
east along the Moscow road. To do this, he held the northern bank of the
Dnieper as long as possible, abandoning it only on August 19 and then
sending his men north to avoid further bombardment from French
artillery, which could sight anyone retreating along the thoroughfare
and target them with ease. His army would then swing south to find the
Moscow road again.
The French rushed to cut off the army they had failed to destroy in
their best chance of the campaign. As the Russians retreated, the bulldog
Ney had a chance to repair the major bridges at Smolensk and hurry his
troops across to the Moscow road, followed by Murat and the cavalry.
The star-crossed General Junot, who had yet to play a major part in the
campaign, crossed the river ahead of him and set off in pursuit.
One column of Russians unfamiliar with the small roads they were
forced to march along at night got lost and fell behind. Ney stumbled on

them and the Russians turned and attacked. Both armies rushed in
reinforcements. Napoleon galloped to the scene and, assuming this was
simply a rearguard action designed to cover Barclay’s retreat, ordered
Davout to throw a division into the fight. Across the battlefield, Barclay
himself appeared on the front lines and, in a rare moment of charismatic
leadership, cried out “Victory or death!” and threatened to shoot any
commander who retreated. Unlike Napoleon, he knew this was more
than a delaying action. His army had struggled to move its artillery over
the country roads north of the Moscow road and was now vulnerable to
a breakthrough from the rear. Outnumbered two to one, the 20,000
troops fighting Ney had to hold or the army would never reach the
capital. The two sides pushed each other up and down the thoroughfare,
with neither able to achieve a decisive breakthrough.
The key became Junot, who had crept up behind the Russian forces
and was poised to unleash a devastating offensive from a left-rear
position. Napoleon sent the attack order, but Junot hesitated. Napoleon
had first taken to the young commander because of his fearlessness and
his devil-may-care wit. Junot was handsome, sarcastic, an aristocratic
nihilist who nevertheless looked up to the Corsican leader as a demigod.
But alcohol and cynicism had worn away Junot’s dash, and now when
called upon, he froze. Despite Napoleon’s express order, the general
simply stared down at the action unfolding in front of him while his
Westphalian troops fumed and shouted for orders to march. Furious, the
clearly unstable general threatened to have any protesters shot on sight.
When the outraged Murat galloped up to find out what was delaying
him, the two got into a spit-flying argument, with Junot claiming that he
had no orders to attack and that his cavalry was too afraid to go on the
offensive. “You are unworthy to be the last dragoon in Napoleon’s
army,” Murat shouted at his fellow general, then turned his horse
around and charged back into the battle, while Junot sallied off to a
nearby house for breakfast. Some of his troops, in his absence, were
called into action, but they didn’t fall on the Russians with the
devastating weight a unified attack would have carried. The moment
passed. Fighting as if Russia itself depended on the outcome, the
Russians held the French off and Barclay escaped.
The landscape told the story of the battle. “Amidst the stumps of

trees,” remembered the historian-general Ségur, “on ground trampled by
the feet of the combatants, furrowed with balls, strewed with the
fragments of weapons, tattered uniforms, overturned carriages, and
scattered limbs.” The Russians had lost 5,000 men; Napoleon, around
8,700.
Napoleon gave a rousing victory speech to his men and was unusually
generous in bestowing decorations and promotions and small gifts of
cash, which “rained down like hail.” Wherever he went, Napoleon left
deeply grateful troops eager to fight again, a talent he never lost. Men
who hadn’t dreamed of an officer’s rank were quickly commissioned:
with the dead from the battle and the rising epidemic, this was
becoming an army in which one could advance rapidly.
It must be pointed out that the soldiers themselves often had a
different attitude toward death—especially death in battle—than
prevails today. The men of the Grande Armée felt themselves to be
participants in something larger and much older than themselves: a
living tradition of personal glory. “Death is nothing,” Napoleon himself
had written, in a phrase many of his men would have seconded. “But to
live defeated and inglorious is to die daily.” Battle swelled their difficult
lives with possibility, with historical dimensions, with the possibility of
immortal life in the memory of their nations and loved ones. “Even if
one had to die, what did it matter?” wrote Alfred de Musset about the
Napoleonic campaigns. “Death was beautiful in those days, so great, so
splendid in its crimson cloak. It looked so much like hope …the very
stuff of youth.”
Were sentiments such as these fictions designed to shovel lower-class
youths into the ranks of imperialistic armies? Certainly. Were men more
expendable in the early 1800s, before the notion of individual rights and
equality had fully taken hold? Yes. But much of the reverence for a
courageous death was given freely by the men themselves. The notion
that to die well was worthy of the highest effort was as palpable to the
soldiers at Smolensk as it was to the Spartans over two thousand years
before.
An aide watching Napoleon hand out medals thought he didn’t do it in
the old, hearty way, but out of an “imperative need … to react against

melancholy thoughts.” And away from the men, the emperor alternated
between rage and depression. “Junot has let them escape,” Napoleon
screamed at his advisers. “He is losing the campaign for me.” The
inscrutable Junot would grow increasingly unstable and—some say
haunted by his failure at Smolensk— would die a suicide a year later.
The strategist Clausewitz points to the failure to surround Barclay at
Smolensk as Napoleon’s greatest error in the campaign. It meant that
everything would now escalate rapidly: the length of the supply and
communication lines; the distance his reinforcements back in Germany
had to travel; and, especially, the number of sick. The war before
Smolensk was almost reasonable; it resembled other campaigns
Napoleon had fought. Had the Russians stood and fought, Napoleon’s
strategy could have worked. After Smolensk, his approach became
increasingly incoherent.
Napoleon’s troop totals were being reworked by another number: the
mortality rate of epidemic typhus. “The terrible deprivations,” wrote
Chamrey, a doctor on the Russian campaign, “the excessive heat, and the
terrible smell from dead bodies everywhere around Smolensk causes an
infectious disease which kills more men in a short time than the wounds
of battle.”
ALEXANDER CELEBRATED SMOLENSK as a great victory and ordered a Te Deum to be
sung at a cathedral in St. Petersburg. Rumors spread through Moscow
that the French had lost 30,000 men, including 13,000 taken prisoner.
The idea of a despotic invader repulsed by a heroic resistance was
increasingly effective, as the French troops could attest, since they were
encountering increasingly bitter and violent peasants in their marches.
Napoleon was disgusted. “They lie to God as well as to men,” he
remarked. Post-Smolensk, a note of panic crept into a Napoleon
communiqué. He dashed off a set of orders to his chief of staff Berthier,
blaming the loss of men on problems with the supply line. He wasn’t
only worried, he was misinformed:
Write to the generals in command of army corps, and tell them that we are losing
numbers of men every day, owing to the disorderly way in which foraging is
conducted; that it is urgent that they should concert measures with the various
corps commanders for ending a state of things which threatens to be fatal to the

army…. You must write to the King of Naples [Murat] …that it is indispensable for
the cavalry to give adequate protection to foragers and to secure the detachments
on this duty from the attacks of Cossacks and enemy cavalry…. Finally you must
inform the Duke of Elchingen [Ney] that he is losing more men in a day than if a
battle was in progress.
Cossacks and villagers were certainly attacking foraging parties, but
the main body of Russian troops was in full retreat and in no position to
mount operations. These minor skirmishes were in no way as lethal to
his men as sickness was, and one wonders at his information, or his
interpretation of it. First Larrey had blamed rotten cognac. Now
Napoleon blamed marauders, who were certainly killing his soldiers but
not in the massive numbers that were actually being lost.
Miscommunication was masking the real problem. The most virulent
source of the unfolding tragedy was cloaked, invisible to the eyes of the
army’s leaders.
The misdiagnosis was potentially significant. Mistakes in the foragers’
protection could be corrected: more squads sent out and discipline
enforced on the distribution of the provisions. But an epidemic of typhus
couldn’t be stopped by his medical authorities. Other armies in the past
faced with the pathogen had retired from the field whenever possible
and taken up the campaign when the epidemic had passed. Had
Napoleon known (or acknowledged to himself) the true reason for the
astonishing casualty rate, he might have considered a winter rest in
Smolensk.
Considered and then probably plunged ahead anyway. There is little
in Napoleon’s record to indicate he would have interrupted the invasion
and then resumed the campaign the next year. Allowing disease to stop a
campaign would have been particularly galling to him, as the experience
of Egypt showed. To the emperor, it would have been succumbing to an
unforgivable weakness. But, in Haiti when yellow fever had proved too
lethal for his army, he withdrew and then promptly sold off the
Louisiana Territory, believing it to be infected with the same microbe.
And he did seriously consider the wintering option along the road to
Moscow, a move Caulaincourt and others backed. A correct estimation of
typhus’s rising strength would have certainly argued against a long
march (228 miles as the crow flies, 310 miles by road) to Moscow.

Napoleon again hesitated in his pursuit of Barclay, telling
Caulaincourt that he would rest the army at Smolensk, firm up his
supply and communication lines, bring the reserve units stationed back
at the Dvina River under his own command, and raise additional
regiments in Poland. In the spring, his army would be even more
formidable and he could choose between taking Moscow or St.
Petersburg as a prelude to negotiations. Caulaincourt, his former Russian
ambassador, who should have known better than to believe in the
emperor’s cautious mood, was ecstatic. He told Napoleon that in
stopping at Smolensk, he was refusing to play Alexander’s game of
drawing the French into the interior and letting the climate and the
distance eat up his battalions.
A captured Russian officer was sent back to the enemy lines with a
message for the tsar: Napoleon desired peace. As grateful as he was for
the repatriation, the officer still gave the emperor the thoroughly
unwelcome opinion that he doubted there would be a treaty with the
French still occupying Russia. Once the messenger was sent off, the by
now supremely irritable Napoleon began to waver. Smolensk hadn’t
changed anything in the strategic situation. The thousands of Russian
dead would be replaced tenfold if he gave Alexander months to recover,
and the tsar would very likely receive additional regiments from
Moldavia and Finland. England could supply money and material to his
enemy. The domestic situation back in Paris would grow more
precarious without his presence, and the fragile chain of riders carrying
his bulletins and orders to his ministers back home, so vital to a
commander away from his seat of power, would become even more
vulnerable.
Added to that, the infamous winter was only a matter of months away,
and there were disturbing reports of Russian victories in the field.
Throughout the advance, General Wittgenstein and his corps had been
kept as an independent force able to attack the advancing Napoleon
from the north, opening a second front. Napoleon had used his Bavarian
corps to shield himself from those divisions. Now Wittgenstein and
Count Alexander Tormasov had proved sharp adversaries in skirmishes
and were toting up victories that worried the emperor.

Nevertheless, Napoleon snapped at anyone who spoke of retreating;
when his long-suffering chief of staff, Berthier, mentioned the risks of
advancing to Moscow, Napoleon lashed out, “Go back to France, I do not
force anyone.” The emperor grasped at any news that indicated that a
quick end to the nightmare was at hand. When Murat reported that the
Russians were conducting a disciplined retreat, instead of a pell-mell
rush, and even stated that Barclay was already preparing fortifications at
a site only a day’s march away, he brightened. But the dashing Murat,
eager for a fight, was as fanciful as his emperor. There were no
fortifications. Still, Napoleon took the news to mean that Alexander was
only searching for a more favorable spot for a climactic battle. “Once
more the gauntlet was thrown down,” wrote Caulaincourt. “And the
emperor was not the man to turn back.” Besides, the small momentum
gained by Wittgenstein and Tormasov was reversed when the French
dealt them quick defeats in the field. The emperor turned to the Russian
lieutenant-general Nikolai Tuchkov, who had been captured after
Smolensk, and asked him to write a letter to the tsar offering peace at
almost any price. The letter went unanswered.
After wavering for days, Napoleon decided for Moscow. “The wine has
been poured,” he told his marshals. “It must now be drunk.” The
epigram was one of the fatalistic sayings he favored after having made a
decision. It was as if he had exhausted his powers and now gave himself
over to destiny. His reasoning mixed in fantasy with reckless optimism.
“We have gone too far to turn back. Peace is in front of us; we are but
ten days’ march from it. So near the goal, there is nothing more to
consider. Let us march on Moscow!”
He left Smolensk on August 25, rushing his troops out at one in the
morning, as if the morning light might cause him to reconsider.
Caulaincourt was drained. “Once again we set off in pursuit of the glory,
or rather the fatality,” he wrote, “which relentlessly prevented the
Emperor from holding to his good intentions.” Leaving the city, his army
was down to 149,000 men, less than a third of his original front line
force. “The two armies converged toward the point of equalization,”
wrote the German tactician Clausewitz. Napoleon’s bludgeon was gone,
taken away by pathogens and hard Russian fighting.

IF NAPOLEON HAD NEVER encountered an opponent quite like typhus, the
opposite was also true. Many leaders would have looked at their losses
at this point in the campaign and called the retreat. It was the only
reasonable decision. The contest with Napoleon was different from
almost any other the disease had found itself in during its long history.
Other armies, such as those under King Francis, had almost all
disintegrated or retired from the field in the face of the pathogen. It was
a tribute to the hold that Napoleon had on his men that despite the
ravages of typhus, the Grande Armée not only fought on but remained
the aggressor.
It would be overstating the case to say a microbe revealed the
emperor’s innermost drives. But the disease did expose how fanatical
was Napoleon’s devotion to his mission, to his own glorification through
conquest. Without typhus, his losses would have been acceptable, in line
with past wars, and his army would have been in no real danger of
vanishing. With it, he was being tested in a new, macabre fashion.
Would he really sacrifice an entire army larger than the population of
Paris to a sense of his own rightful destiny?
The emperor marched on.

A
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     8
Smoke
N AUTOPSY CONDUCTED ON A TYPHUS VICTIM IN THE LATE 1700s found the disease’s
work everywhere: “… the blood vessels, turgid to an extraordinary
degree, give an appearance of commencing gangrene …[and] are
found to contain little or no red blood, the ventricles and all of the
interstices are full of water, and the whole substance appears pale, and
as if it were macerated [softened by immersion in a liquid]. The lungs …
appear to be suffocated or oppressed, resembling a sponge filled with
black blood; they also appear in some cases to be irregularly inflamed …
spotted in the back parts.” The disease had run rampant through the
vascular system, imploding the body’s delivery systems as it went.
The doctors of the Grande Armée had no time to perform autopsies on
the thousands of men lying all the way back to Poland. But beneath their
blue tunics and their mottled skin, the same damage would have been
evident. Typhus (from the Greek word typhos, meaning “smoke” or
“stupor”) was a highly consistent killer.
AS THE DISEASE appears center stage in the invasion, it warrants a deeper
biography. To call the disease ancient is to insult its pedigree. “Ancient”
in epidemiological terms summons up images of the Black Death of the
1340s or the Plague of Athens in 430 BC (a devastating epidemic for
which typhus remains a suspect, though recent studies have favored
typhoid fever, a different disease, as the culprit). The microbe that
causes 
typhus—called 
Rickettsia 
prowazekii—is 
older 
than 
our
understanding of disease allows. When it was born, the Europe that
Napoleon had conquered didn’t exist as a landmass. To get a fix on its
origins, one must think in terms of geological epochs.

Two billion years ago, the earth was cooling after its violent birth.
Radioactive material had sunk and compressed to form the earth’s heavy
core, along with vast deposits of iron oxide, leaving only traces that
would be mined to make the Grande Armée’s muskets. Lighter material
moved outward, forming layers of crust and mantle. Gases, in particular
nitrogen and carbon dioxide, spewed from the hot core through the
volcanoes that pocked the planet’s surface. The water vapor that had
most likely arrived in our atmosphere from comets that smashed into the
planet hung above its surface, before condensing and falling to earth,
forming the oceans. Cratons, the protocontinents that would merge and
then split into the landmasses we know today as Asia, Africa, and so on,
had begun rooting themselves into the deep mantle. And the earliest
forms of life were spilling out near the deep oceanic vents.
Among them was a simple organism that would give us a pair of
intriguing offspring. Scientists haven’t yet identified this bacteria-like
creature, but researchers know it existed because of its descendants.
Sometime in the Proterozoic era, this microbe produced both the
organelle known as the mitochondrion and the ancestor of the microbe
we now call Rickettsia prowazekii. In terms of their effect on humankind,
two more different progeny could hardly be imagined.
Mitochondria are often called the engines of cellular life; they use
oxygen to produce the chemical energy called ATP (adenosine
triphosphate), 
which 
allows 
cells 
to 
transfer 
energy 
during
photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Without mitochondria, there
would be no plant or animal life.
The other descendant of the mysterious organism was the tiny rod-
shaped organism that causes epidemic typhus in humans. Rickettsia
denotes the microbe’s genus, placing it in the bacteria family in the
planet’s taxonomy; the name derives from the American pathologist
Howard T. Ricketts, who studied—and succumbed to—typhus in 1910.
Prowazekii pays tribute to the researcher Stanislaus von Prowazek, an
Austrian bacteriologist who also died of typhus in 1915 while trying to
unlock its secrets. The fact that the cellular power plant that generates
life shares a common ancestor with the pathogen that has killed millions
of humans points up how closely life and death are intertwined both in

evolutionary history and in cellular biology.
Over time, Rickettsia came to rely on the host cells it invaded for most
of the metabolic machinery necessary for life. The first scientists to look
at its genome found it resembled “a molecular theater of war, with dead
genes strewn among the living,” full of “junk” (or noncoding) genes that
had slowly atrophied as the Rickettsia came to depend on its cellular
victim. Twenty-four percent of the microbe’s genome consists of genes
abandoned in favor of the host’s DNA, the largest percentage found in
any microbial genome to date. This is called “reductive evolution,” and
Rickettsia is one of its past masters.
Looking at the rickettsial genome, one of the most compact (meaning
containing the fewest bits of DNA) known to science, one catches one’s
breath. Here is a predator millions of years in the making. Before our
ancestors were using fire or learning to hunt, the organism had become a
conqueror, not killing its prey, but invading and feeding off it. Rickettsia
shaped itself to function only as a hunter; and not only a hunter, but a
hunter that had to study and mimic life in order to live. The creatures it
would inhabit in modern times were countless mutations away from
being born, so the pathogen would have to survive almost the entire
span of Darwinian evolution even to have a chance of altering history
beginning that day in 1812.
To look at it alongside its evolutionary cousin the mitochondrion, one
may be forgiven for anthropomorphizing the two and thinking of Cain
and Abel. One “father” who ushered two progeny into a new world, two
very different fates for humans coded in their genes.
THE FINAL TEST of a pathogen’s power is the ability to go epidemic: to infect
large numbers of humans in short, intense spurts, where it radiates from
a small initial infection to spread its life force over an entire city,
continent, or planet. Only a handful of diseases have achieved this
capability: influenza, plague, and smallpox are among them. To go
epidemic, typhus would need an effective vector: it couldn’t “jump” from
human to human by itself, and so it needed an agent to transport its
genome.
It found its final vector in Pediculus hutnanus corporis, the six-legged

common body louse. By choosing it, Rickettsia found a nearly
universalized transport system. The mosquito that carried the yellow
fever pathogen could only infect in its limited habitat. The rat, which
transported bubonic plague, and the louse, which carried typhus, were
despised but accepted presences in almost every human society,
although the latter could travel places (such as the Arctic) where even
the rat couldn’t survive. The tiny parasite was so common that it was
practically invisible, and so made a perfect agent for Rickettsia’s spread.
Lice have been with humankind from our earliest history. In Exodus
8:16-19, when Moses threatens Pharaoh should he refuse to free the
Jewish people, the parasites are the third plague unleashed on the
Egyptians:
And the Lord said unto Moses, say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the
dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust
of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land
became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
As repellent as the louse is, it is a miracle of perfect adaptation; it will
starve to death before feeding on an unfamiliar host. Even its dislike of
heat worked in Rickettsia’s favor. A rise of four or five degrees can be
fatal to the louse, so when a patient infected with typhus runs a fever,
lice move away from layers of clothing closest to the hot skin or migrate
to men and women with cooler body temperatures. This exports
Rickettsia to a fresh supply of carriers, a process that is repeated until all
available human hosts are exhausted. The parasite even camouflages
itself in the appropriate hue for world travel: the body louse in Africa is
black, the North American Indian is bronzed, the Eskimo is a pale
brown, and the European is gray-white. No other pest is as symbolic of
humankind’s dominion over the world as this infinitely adaptable
creature.
The louse isn’t a reservoir for Rickettsia, as the microbe is inevitably
fatal to it. Lice become infected after feeding on a sick human, turn
bright red, and then expire about five days later. Rickettsia thus has only
120 hours to transmit to humans or to another louse, but the fact that
nineteenth-century humans often carried thousands of lice in their

clothes, and only one infected one is needed to pass the pathogen on,
made them highly effective carriers.
RICKETTSIA PROWAZEKII LIVES in the cytoplasm of the louse, the semitransparent
fluid outside a cell’s nucleus. Specifically, the microbe found a home in
the epithelium that lines the stomach. Transmission to humans occurs in
two ways. The first is through the louse feces, which can penetrate the
skin, through an open wound. Or it can enter through scratching: when
the louse bites (as a blood eater, it must feed several times a day) and
the victim scrapes the skin, the infected contents of the louse’s system
spill out and are rubbed into the open wound, pouring Rickettsia
prowazekii into the bloodstream.
Once it enters the human bloodstream, Rickettsia incubates for four to
fifteen days, churning out millions of copies of its DNA, replicating and
then invading the endothelial cells that line the veins and capillaries
through the entire body, in the same way the microbe parasitized its
original one-celled hosts. The host cells swell with the infection, fluid
leaks out, and the blood vessels begin to spill their contents into the
surrounding tissue. In the brain, the attack often leads to encephalitis,
which results in the swelling of the brain and causes excruciating
headache, as well as stranger effects. “These thunders, sudden noises;
these eclipses,” wrote the poet John Donne, who barely survived a bout
of the illness in 1623, “this darkening of the senses; these blazing stars,
sudden fiery exhalations; these rivers of blood.” As the swelling and
inflammation of blood vessels in the brain continue, typhus can induce
hallucinations, stupor, and, finally, a deep coma. The blood pressure
drops, as the ravaged veins can no longer carry the same volume of
nourishment to the organs.
The decreased oxygen carried by the blood turns the face dusky. The
massive infection of the blood vessels and arterioles in the hands and
feet causes them to blacken and rot with gangrene. The tiny spots that
are the most famous of typhus’s symptoms are the outward markers of
the vascular damage that riddles the patient’s interior.
Death can come in different ways: Rickettsia devastates the small blood
vessels of the lungs, filling air pockets with fluid, and the patient dies of
rickettsial pneumonia, his blood starved of oxygen. Or the comatose

patient loses his gag reflex, allowing saliva filled with deadly bacteria to
flow into the lungs, triggering pneumonia. The sieve-like veins left after
a rickettsial attack can lose so much blood volume that the patient goes
into hypotensive shock: the tissues and organs can’t get enough of the
nourishing plasma and shut down. Comatose patients left unattended
can simply die of dehydration. Or the heart, trying to pump blood
through vessels that are perforated by a million holes, simply exhausts
itself and fails.
AS A PATHOGEN, Rickettsia was attracted to great events: wars, migrations,
and famines (due to the masses of people forced out of their homes in a
search for food, giving infected lice a chance to spread). Throughout
human history, it had a hundred faces and names reflecting the
conditions during which it attacked. “Ship fever” attacked the men
crowded onto unsanitary boats, and “jail fever” devastated prisons and
courtrooms. “Hunger fever” struck when the crops failed; more Irish
would die of typhus than of starvation during the Great Famine in 1845-
49, earning the disease another name, “the Irish ague.”
It was in the Middle Ages that typhus arrived in Europe. Recent
evidence points toward the New World as the source: For decades,
scientists had believed that the explorers carried the louse and Rickettsia
to the Americas. But the discovery of lice in 1,000-year-old mummies
recently found in Peru reverses that migration; typhus was most likely
not the explorers’ curse on the New World. Instead, it was America’s
revenge on the Old World.
There had been possible sightings of the disease, especially a
description of an outbreak of a mysterious illness in 1083 in the Spanish
monastery of La Cava. “There spread a severe fever with peticuli and
parotid swellings,” wrote a chronicler of the epidemic, remarking that
the disease was “clearly different from the Pest,” or plague. During the
Middle Ages, typhus most likely lurked in the background of more-
famous illnesses, contributing its power to epidemics led by plague and
other diseases. It was often unrecognized as a separate illness and
classed instead with other “pestilential fevers” that seeded the length
and breadth of Europe.
Christian culture must bear some of the responsibility for its

widespread success in those early centuries. The Catholic Church
frowned upon bathing, which was considered “an indulgence, an
invitation to illness, or even a sin.” Female saints were praised for never
washing, as being naked for even a moment in one’s own private home
was thought to be indecent. The poor could barely afford a change of
clothing, and the close quarters that cold weather necessitated for the
sharing of body heat gave the louse an ideal point of transfer. Even the
aristocracy lived with the parasite all their lives. The death of Thomas à
Becket gives an example of how completely the louse had infiltrated
every corner of society. After his murder at the altar of Canterbury
Cathedral in 1170 (on the orders of King Henry II), the body of the
archbishop was prepared for burial. Layer upon layer of clothing was
removed: a mantle, a surplice, a lamb’s wool coat, another and then a
third, the black Benedictine robe, a shirt, and then a haircloth. When the
final garments were removed, the lice that had lived in the clothes near
to the warmth and nutrition of the body “boiled over like water in a
simmering cauldron, and the onlookers burst into alternate weeping and
laughter.”
As the typhus expert Hans Zinsser has pointed out, disease and
Christian culture had a curiously symbiotic relationship: When
epidemics struck, huge numbers of Europeans flocked to the local
churches and converted. Priests pointed to calamities as an example of
God’s wrath for wickedness and disbelief, increasing the Church’s rolls
and spreading its message far and wide. For its part, Christian doctrine’s
aversion to basic hygiene gave diseases such as typhus a leg up in the
race for their own converts. Each entity found a way to thrive in the
other’s culture.
ONE CONFLICT IN PARTICULAR, the Thirty Years’ War (1618-48), seeded the road
to Russia with disaster, and in fact spread Rickettsia throughout the
length and breadth of Europe two hundred years before Napoleon
marched on Alexander. This mammoth conflict at the beginning of the
seventeenth century perhaps did more to seal Napoleon’s fate than any
stratagem he devised. Hans Zinsser called the conflict “the most gigantic
natural experiment in epidemiology to which mankind has ever been
subjected.”

The armies marching to battle and then returning home to their far-
flung lands carried Rickettsia prowazekii across Europe. Stragglers,
hangers-on, deserters, and traders spread the pathogen to places that had
no experience of typhus. Poland and Russia, where the disease had been
well established since the mid-1500s, suffered from epidemics that
entrenched the microbe even deeper into the native population. For the
first time, the disease entered France with strength. Some 60,000
perished in Lyon alone, and even decades after the war ended,
devastating epidemics would hit towns in Burgundy and elsewhere. It’s
unlikely that these were the first instances of typhus in France, but the
pathogen was spread widely in the population, where it would remain
until the time of Napoleon.
After typhus struck in the south of France in 1641, a poet described its
impact and the confusion that followed in its wake:
Throughout all the people of Burgundy and the cities which the slow-floating river Araris
irrigates, broke out an unusual fever, which attacked the bodies with red spots (sad and
incredible to say) …
That same fever ruined the people of Italy …and raged across the whole of Europe. Some
people blame it on the rain waters, and the fall, extremely humid for the blowing of the
wind, which corrupts the air with its marshy blow, and generates the contagions of the
spreading plague.
Some others believe that spoiled food had produced the poison deadly to humans, which
caused the noxious humor in the rotten veins with the attached disgrace. From there came
the diseases, from there the massive devastation among the oppressed people and the
military camps.
This described the situation all over the Continent. Before the war,
typhus was a minor regional power in several pockets of Europe,
especially the Balkans. Afterward, it was an empire.
In those it didn’t kill, Rickettsia prowazekii often lay dormant,
occasionally flaring up in a mild condition known as Brill-Zinsser
disease. This latent infection kept the pathogen alive, ready to pass from
its host to a louse to fresh victims. If enough new hosts were available,
the bacteria could spark a new epidemic—as was happening now in the
Grande Armée.

FROM 1529 ON, typhus was present in some degree at almost every major
European conflict. It hamstrung armies and stopped offensives during
the English Civil War (1642-51). It killed tens of thousands of soldiers
during the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48), and it would keep
its potency into the Crimean War (1853-56), which pitted Russia against
France, England, and the Ottoman Empire, where it wreaked havoc on
the French army and killed hundreds of thousands of soldiers and
civilians.
The same agonizing symptoms that had attacked millions of
Europeans for hundreds of years were being described in diary after
diary of common soldiers and doctors marching toward Moscow. But Dr.
Larrey and the upper reaches of the French military machine virtually
ignored them as typhus swept through the ranks, killing wantonly. Now
the cost was coming due.

A
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     9
At Borodino
S THE ARMY STREAMED PAST SMOLENSK AND ON TO AN uncertain future, the Hessian
captain Roeder was sick but marching, every mile away from home
increasing his ardor for lost things. He wrote in his diary to Mina, his
dead wife: “Beloved, is it that I am soon to visit you among your airy
clouds? Will our spirits soon fly to each other and embrace, or must we
both dissolve forever? My body begins to waste away already.” But the
Russian campaign wasn’t yet completely devoid of the pleasures of
soldiering, not quite.
Roeder wrote with relish of camping after a long day’s march,
dropping onto the soft turf, wrapped in his warm cloak, and falling
asleep under the stars to the sound of his horse contentedly munching on
corn cut from nearby fields. He kissed a girl he met on the road and
complimented her on her “fresh” appearance, recording the innocent
encounter in his diary, which he sent to Sophie. She wasn’t a veteran
military wife used to such flirtations and responded angrily. Roeder
wrote back, full of regrets, with eleven florins for her to buy a new hat.
But the campaign was wearing him down; he felt the first touch of a
fever at the end of August, and others were suffering, too. “My former
Lieutenant, Bechstatt, and my present Lieutenant, Pfaff, have both been
ill for several days,” he reported. A major in the Württemberg corps told
him that they had left home with 7,200 infantry soldiers but, although
fighting just one engagement (Smolensk), were now down to 1,500. By
September, according to typhus researcher Hans Zinsser, both typhus
and dysentery were becoming “more and more intense.”
The road to Moscow was broad. Artillery and supply wagons could

ride two or three abreast, flanked on both sides by columns of infantry
and, outside them, the cavalry. The fields they marched through were
most often burned to the ground, and windstorms drove dust into their
eyes. One soldier remarked that it seemed as if Mother Earth herself
were rising up against the invaders. Some troops cut crude sunglasses
out of bits of stained-glass window and wore them; others masked their
faces with handkerchiefs or bits of cloth. The soldiers drank filthy water
and horses’ urine.
Many of the green youths who had signed up in Paris and elsewhere
with such hopes of romance and glory, the boys who had caused the
veterans to smile wanly, were now dead. The older campaigners, who
were fitter and physically tougher, had survived in proportionately
greater numbers. “You could make them out by the martial cast of their
features and the way they talked,” wrote the general and historian
Ségur. “War was the only thing they remembered and it was all they
could look forward to.” Captain Roeder, who had nearly starved on a
previous campaign, was eating less than he should have been on the way
to Moscow, but he barely remarked on it in his journal.
Napoleon put the best possible face on the damage wrought by typhus
and the other obstacles. “This poor army is sadly depleted,” he told an
aide-de-camp after Smolensk, “but what remains is good.” The remark
contained a hidden barb: Napoleon, with his moral idea of disease
resistance, perhaps believed that the dead had not been good enough,
not determined enough, to survive.
·   ·   ·
ON THE RUSSIAN SIDE, General Barclay sent reconnaissance squads ahead on
the Moscow road to find a favorable spot for a battle. They reported
back with two possibilities: one near the far bank of the Usha River, and
the other close to the town of Gshatsk. Barclay arrived at the first spot
on August 22 and ordered Bagration, whose Second Army had left
Smolensk early to secure the Moscow road and had remained out in
front of the First, to return for a climactic battle.
Bagration, close to open mutiny, again refused. He got into a heated
argument with Colonel Karl Friedrich von Toll, who had chosen the site

for battle and threatened to put “a musket across your shoulders,” that
is, have him demoted to a common infantry soldier. Clausewitz, the war
strategist, wrote that Bagration was simply unhappy with the defensive
possibilities of the position, but there may have been other, darker forces
at work. Barclay knew that his constant retreating was interpreted as a
slow treason by his fellow generals and a majority of the officers and
troops, but he couldn’t know how deep the rancor went. The fervent
nationalist Bagration may have been avoiding battle to increase the
pressure on Alexander to dismiss his commander and replace him with a
“true” Russian. Bagration and his cohorts had been sending missives
back to the tsar emphasizing the desire of the men to fight and the
“foreign” plot led by Barclay that was preventing them from a glorious
battle.
With dissension clouding every decision, the same pantomime
unfolded at the second position chosen by Colonel Toll. The Russians
stopped, started digging in, and then fell backward.
Finally, the two generals agreed on a battle position: Tsarevo-
Zaimishche, a swamp only a hundred miles from the gates of Moscow.
The two armies began to dig trenches and build fortifications on August
29, but politics intervened. A new general had arrived to take charge of
the campaign, a true Slav, as the people demanded. General Mikhail
Kutuzov would conduct the final showdown with Napoleon.
Alexander possessed a gut dislike for the charismatic, lazy Kutuzov, a
dislike complicated by history. Kutuzov had dined with the tsar’s father
the night he was murdered, and the guilt-ridden Alexander suspected the
general knew the truth of his own tacit involvement in his father’s
assassination. And Austerlitz, where Kutuzov had acted as a military
strategist for Alexander, still stung deeply. “I was young and
inexperienced,” he told others. “Kutuzov should have advised me.” The
general had advised him, to retreat, but the tsar pursued the opposite
strategy and lost.
The battle-scarred general had been elected by his genes more than
anything else. Ensconced at his summer home on Kamenny Island,
Alexander had done everything he could to avoid the general’s
appointment. Like Lincoln before finding Ulysses S. Grant, the tsar

needed for domestic political reasons as much as anything else to find a
commander who would fight. Bagration, he felt, “has no idea” of
military strategy, and Barclay, whom he had thought the lesser of two
evils at the beginning, had forfeited command by “committing one
stupidity after another at Smolensk.” The arrival in Moscow of refugees
from that battle, which terrified the population, the letters from his
brother Constantine, which vilified Barclay at every turn, and the
“unanimous clamor” from the higher reaches of the Russian command
down to the gossip in the street forced his hand. “I had no other course
than to yield,” he wrote his sister.
Kutuzov’s roots were deep in the Russian aristocracy; no other general
could rival his claim to being a native son or his popularity with the
people. His ancestors had served in the army of Alexander Nevsky, and
his father had fought for Peter the Great. Kutuzov had the common
touch, whored alongside his troops, and grew fat on endless meals.
Russians put off by Barclay’s German reserve saw Kutuzov as everything
their former commander wasn’t: a hedonist, suspicious of official
bureaucracy, instinctual, charming but often deliberately coarse. An
English diplomat once sketched the milieu he had emerged from:
The nobility …live in the voluptuous magnificence of eastern satraps; after dinner
they frequently retire to a vast rotunda, and sip their coffee, during a battle of dogs,
wild bears, and wolves; from whence they go to their private theaters, where great
dramatic skill is frequently displayed by their slaves…. The aristocracy enjoyed
Molière and Racine in these private theaters, yet the best households would also
keep dwarfs and cretins on their staff for knockabout amusements.
A prejudiced portrait, but it speaks to the complexities that Kutuzov
lived out. He was also far more practiced in conspiracy and subterfuge
than was Barclay, skills that a Russian army career practically
demanded.
His daughter asked the general if he hoped to defeat Napoleon. “No,”
he replied. “But I hope to deceive him.” Cunning had other uses than
advancement through the ranks.
IT WAS KUTUZOV’S PERFORMANCE during the Turkish wars in 1806-12 that had
made his name. The commander had received a message from his

general congratulating him on taking the fortress of Ismail, which stood
at the top of a steep bank on the Danube River. It was a perverse
incentive; in fact, the citadel was still held by the Turks and Kutuzov’s
men were exhausted and terror-struck after wave after wave of assaults
had left the fortress intact, producing horrendous casualties. Instead of
correcting the messenger, Kutuzov had crossed himself, muttered “God
help us!” and led a final charge on the bastion. His men smashed into
the enemy lines, fighting a series of brutal close-range engagements.
They finally overtopped the walls and bayoneted their Muslim enemies
in a show of suicidal bravado. That is the kind of man the Russian
soldier would follow to the death.
When this native paragon became their leader, the troops were, in
general, overjoyed. “The day was cloudy, but our hearts filled with
light,” wrote one Russian soldier, A. A. Shcherbinin. His peers were less
enthusiastic. General Benningsen, Bagration’s chief of staff, called
Kutuzov “old, broken, and ill.” He and other staff officers considered
Kutuzov to be gifted but incorrigibly lazy (Benningsen went so far as to
say that the general was “disgusted” by hard work). His victories were
attributed to his officers, while he was considered passive and timid
when left to his own devices. Sir Robert Wilson, the British adviser to
the Russian high command, saw him as a bon vivant more interested in
diplomatic solutions than in fighting battles, especially now that he was
sixty-seven years old. “Shrewd as a Greek” was Wilson’s estimation, who
felt the general was the wrong man to drive Napoleon back over the
Niemen River. Alexander himself never wavered in his opinion of
Kutuzov as “a hatcher of intrigues and an immoral and thoroughly
dangerous character,” hardly a vote of confidence in the man whom he
had picked to save the motherland. Still, it hardly mattered. “The evil
genius of the foreigners was exorcised by a true Russian,” noted
Clausewitz dryly.
Kutuzov didn’t disappoint his followers. Immediately after receiving
command on August 20 in St. Petersburg, the general told his driver to
head to Our Lady of Kazan Cathedral, an imposing stone cathedral in the
shape of the Latin cross, designed by Russian architects and finished just
the year before. Inside the church, he took the medals and decorations
from his long career from around his neck and set them in front of the

cathedral’s icon, a family heirloom of the Romanovs themselves, which
was believed to work miracles. Fat and out of breath, he knelt on the
marble flags, closed his eyes, and prayed for victory as the candles
flickered and illuminated his bowed head. Word spread quickly to the
nearby neighborhoods and Russians came running to see the nation’s last
hope. When he finally got up, grunting from the effort, and made his
way out of the church, the crowds raised their hands in the air in
supplication and solidarity and cried out “Save us! Save us!” The general
wept. It was an iconic moment, and so ingrained itself in the Russian
memory that the church would become a repository for mementos and
captured trophies of the 1812 campaign, a fitting monument to the
union of faith in God and motherland that the war represented.
Meanwhile, things were less sanguine in Moscow. Muscovites had
been cheering along the Russian troops in their imaginary victories, but
once the truth about the battle of Smolensk became widely known, the
citizens panicked. Wagons and carriages appeared at front doors of
mansions and servants began loading trunk after trunk into them. Those
without vehicles to carry them began streaming out of the city on foot.
Cash was king, as merchants and noble families sold jewelry and fine
furnishings at fire-sale prices, fearing that whatever remained would be
burned or pillaged by the French. Paranoia blossomed, and men
clustered on the streets talked darkly of plots to sell Russia out. Anyone
perceived as supporting the invasion stood in danger of losing his or her
life: A Russian laborer who spoke of Napoleon as a liberator was beaten
and then thrown in jail. Two months earlier such sentiments had been
fairly common; now they were treasonous.
On hearing the news from Smolensk, Fyodor Rostopchin, the military
governor of Moscow, was “plunged in grief.” His fourteen-year-old
daughter, Natalya, recalled finding the volatile count, his head bowed,
considering the fate of his city. He stared gloomily at her, then directed
her to take a dispatch from Barclay to his wife. “Smolensk has fallen,” he
told her. “We shall soon have the enemy at the gates of Moscow.”
The nobles led the way out of the city, fleeing to their country dachas
or to relatives farther east, taking with them carts heaped with
tapestries, ancestral portraits, fine furniture, and other rarities. People

began to hoard food and plan escape routes in case the enemy stormed
the city. Neighborhoods filled with wooden structures were abandoned
as the fear of a conflagration spread, and people took refuge in stone
palaces that offered a fireproof sanctuary. Men escaping the city dressed
up as women to avoid the insults of residents who had sworn to stay and
fight, or who had nowhere to go and were venting their rage on the
lucky rich. Governor Rostopchin organized a civic rescue project, carting
off the city’s icons, gold scepters, rare manuscripts, and other cultural
treasures from the city’s churches, museums, and convents. The distance
between the tsar’s propaganda and the reports from eyewitnesses only
increased the terror. Now every wild rumor had the feel of believability.
NAPOLEON LEARNED OF Kutuzov’s appointment from a captured Cossack officer,
and he was thrilled with the news. Not only did he know his nemesis
from Austerlitz, he felt that the general was overrated: Kutuzov had led
the “finest army the Russians had ever had on the Danube” but had
failed to force a treaty from the Turks. Now, in Napoleon’s eyes, Kutuzov
led a much less able and less motivated body of troops, completely
discounting the almost fanatical Russian nationalism that stoked the
common soldier. But the emperor was even more encouraged by the
change at the top because he knew the firing of General Barclay was a
sign that Alexander knew he had to turn and fight. Napoleon would get
his all-out battle, and soon.
Kutuzov had learned war at the knee of Peter Alexander Rumyantsev,
a brilliant commander in the 1768 Russo-Turkish War (and rumored to
be a bastard son of Peter the Great) who had advanced all the way to
Bucharest and occupied it, becoming the foremost war hero of his time.
He wrote three books of military strategy, which deeply influenced
Russian martial thought in the decades to come, and shaped Kutuzov as
a battlefield thinker. What Rumyantsev preached was force preservation:
never fight a battle unless the odds of victory were high, never sacrifice
troops for territory, and keep the army intact. “The objective,” he wrote,
“isn’t the occupation of a geographical position but the destruction of
enemy forces.” It was a military maxim suited to an immense country,
but it was rapidly being made politically untenable by Napoleon’s march
through the heart of the nation.

On taking command, Kutuzov immediately began assessing potential
sites for battle. Tsarevo-Zaimishche was favorable, but he felt that the
army didn’t yet have enough men to face Napoleon, especially as
deserters had left many regiments understrength. They would have to
move closer to Moscow and await reinforcements that were said to be en
route. Bagration’s chief of staff, General Benningsen, sent Colonel Toll
out again to search for a defensive position, a tall order in a flat
landscape without hills or valleys that would offer a natural redoubt.
The best of a bad assortment of positions was just outside the village
of Borodino, only seventy miles west of Moscow. There was a crescent of
high ground here that in the north ran along the banks of the Kolocha
River and was topped with small thickets of pine and birch, with the
ground rolling slowly down to a plain that was clearly visible from the
elevations where Kutuzov could spread his regiments. The location’s
appeal was enhanced by the fact that the new Smolensk road led straight
toward it. If Napoleon took the bait, the broad avenue would feed
French troops directly into the heart of the Russian defenses.
Kutuzov ratified the choice on September 3 and began placing the
bulk of his defenses: four corps, or half his men, were arrayed around
the new Smolensk road, on the northern half of the line. “I hope that the
enemy will attack us in this position,” Kutuzov wrote Alexander, “and if
he does I have great hopes of victory.” But the topography on the
southern half of the line was less favorable: a flat area dotted with
hazelnut and juniper bushes that lacked any natural defensive terrain.
Kutuzov would give up slightly higher ground to the French, who could
use the old Smolensk road, which ran straight past the Russian left flank,
to bring up forces. He acknowledged to Alexander that if Napoleon chose
this route of attack, all bets were off. But there was very little else
between here and Moscow with even these modest topographical
features, and Kutuzov resolved to plan for battle at Borodino.
The Russian army went to work, chopping down trees, digging
massive earthworks, and building two fortifications, the first in the
middle of the line, known as the Raevsky Redoubt, two straight walls on
each side with a half circle in the middle. Thousands of troops worked
furiously to build a trench twenty-five feet wide by five feet deep to

delay any attack on the bulwark and give the soldiers targets to hit. A
hundred paces forward of the redoubt they also dug “wolf pits” to snap
the legs of horses on a cavalry charge. A battery of 8-and 12-pound
artillery guns was wheeled in and earthworks were dug, reinforced with
thick logs, to protect them, while two sets of wooden palisades covered
the rear of the redoubt. At 420 feet long, the bulwark was the heavy
anchor in the Russian center.
Farther south the Russians built the octagonal Shevardino Redoubt far
out in advance of the left side of Kutuzov’s line. In addition, three
flèches were built in front of III Corps under Bagration on the banks of a
small stream, to firm up the defenses and allow the troops some
protection from cavalry and infantry charges. (A flèche is a thick
wooden wall, or redan, in the shape of a shallow V pointed at the enemy
and open at the back, a less formidable structure than the massive
redoubts.) On the right side of the line, four batteries of artillery were
dug in behind earthworks. The entire defensive line stretched 11,000
yards.
Artillery would play a central part in the drama to come, as it did in
most Napoleonic battles. The guns were very similar to the replicas that
tourists pose atop at forts in America and Europe: blackened brass
barrels supported by wooden carriages with two wooden wheels at the
side and maneuvered from the rear by a wooden tail. The various
models were identified by the ball they shot: a 4-pounder lofted a 4-
pound cast-iron ball; the formidable 12-pounders used a 12-pound ball.
The ball was for long-distance work, arcing over one’s own ranks and the
neutral ground into the body of the enemy. There it acted like a gigantic
circular bullet, clipping off heads or legs as it shot through the ranks,
often wounding or killing multiple victims. The alternative short-range
option was the canister round: a cylinder of thin metal packed with
musket balls. When fired, the cylinder would split open and release its
deadly charge in a V-shaped fusillade that could stop a cavalry charge or
shred a company of onrushing troops.
At Borodino, the Russians held the upper hand in terms of firepower.
They could array 640 artillery pieces against Napoleon’s 584. In
addition, the Russians were stronger in the battalion pieces—8-and 12-

pounders, which could do far more damage at longer ranges than the 4-
or 6-pounders, which traveled with their assigned units and were used
for short-range cannonades during infantry charges. Many of the French
battalion pieces lay rusting all the way back to Poland, abandoned by
the side of the road when the carriage horses died or the mud roads
proved impassable.
As he waited for the French, Kutuzov assumed he would face a force
of 165,000 men. The estimate was high. Napoleon was now down to
134,000 men, having lost more than 200,000 men in just ten weeks. His
stepson, Prince Eugène, had 18,000 from an original 52,000. The forces
under the “Bravest,” Ney, had gone from 35,000 to 10,000. The cavalry
under the beau ideal Murat had been cut in half, to 20,000.
Still, the Russians scrambled for every man and artillery piece they
could borrow or commandeer. On August 30-31, 15,600 reinforcements
arrived after only the most rudimentary training, and on September 3,
16,000 more marched into Kutuzov’s camps. These recruits were even
greener than most, ex-serfs dressed in peasant blouses and leather belts,
with crosses sewn into the caps that covered their newly shaved heads,
the mark of the Russian recruit. They looked more like farmers on a
pilgrimage than capable soldiers, but Kutuzov put them to work
constructing the entrenchments and wooden bulwarks.
The Russian commander even requested a secret weapon that was to
have been deployed early in the war: a gigantic balloon designed to float
over the approaching French and detonate, vaporizing the enemy in one
blinding flash. (Another report that reached Napoleon stated that the
balloon was going to be used to assassinate him in “a rain of fire and
steel.”) Rostopchin, the military governor of Moscow, was an
enthusiastic supporter of the death zeppelin and met with its inventor, a
German named Franz Leppich. “This invention will render the military
arts obsolete,” he wrote Alexander. “Free mankind of its internal
destroyer, make you the arbiter of kings and empires and the benefactor
of mankind.” The device, however, had trouble getting into the air, as its
wings kept breaking off during tests, plunging the balloon to the ground.
It never saw action in the campaign.
Despite the other positions that the Russians had taken, only to

quickly abandon, Napoleon believed that Kutuzov would have to fight.
Bloodshed was necessary in order to silence the nobility, which was
clamoring for a battle—not necessarily a victory, but a battle. “In a
fortnight,” the former Russian ambassador Caulain-court wrote, relating
the emperor’s thinking, “the Tsar would have neither a capital nor an
army.” Napoleon had come to believe that annihilating the Russian First
and Second armies and taking Moscow was the only way to force
Alexander into a treaty; his plans had subtly taken on the rhetoric of
total war. The emperor even floated the suggestion that Alexander was
engineering a battle he couldn’t win, so that he could claim he defended
Moscow with honor, and then quickly make peace without being
reproached by his various constituencies. The analysis completely
misread the depth of Alexander’s anger and his commitment to the war.
The French hurried forward, with Napoleon so anxious to catch up to
the Russians that he ordered the destruction of any vehicles that were
slowing the artillery train. When he spotted several officers’ carriages, he
ordered his bodyguards to chase them down and burn the leading
vehicle. The owner objected, saying that it could ferry any officers who
lost a leg in the coming battle. Napoleon snorted. “It will lose me a lot
more than that if I have no artillery,” he shot back, and ordered straw
and wood to get the fire going. After seeing the blaze was lit, he sped
off.
THE ADVANCE GUARD of the Grande Armée under Murat arrived in front of the
Russian positions on the morning of September 5. The marshal set up
temporary headquarters at a monastery at Kolotskoie and called
Napoleon to inspect the enemy fortifications. Humming an “insignificant
tune,” the emperor arrived and began scouring the topography in front
of him with his telescope, like a master jeweler examining a diamond
with his loupe. The flaw was soon clear: the southern line.
As a preliminary to an all-out attack, the “Iron Marshal” Davout was
ordered to smash the 18,000 troops from the 27th Infantry Division
clustered around the Shevardino Redoubt, left out in advance of the
main line—mostly cavalry and light-infantry jaegers valued for their
marksmanship at close range. Davout sent the Polish V Corps in a
sweeping movement through the lightly forested terrain to the south of

the Russian line and sent a division to attack the redoubt head-on. As at
Smolensk, the two armies looked on as the first act of the drama
unfolded. The French marched forward in battalion columns under a
setting sun and then waded into the fight, pushing the Russian infantry
back with salvos of musket fire and barrages of chain shot from their 4-
and 6-pound guns. The Russians held, then relented, but Kutuzov wasn’t
ready to concede the poorly sited fortification. Reinforcements rushed up
to the battle and, firing their guns at point-blank range, managed to
evict Davout’s regiments from the battery.
As day turned to night, the momentum shifted back and forth, with
soldiers in the blackness judging the strength of approaching cavalry by
their hoofbeats, a terrifying way to face the onrushing enemy. The
Russians, as always, proved to be formidable with a fortification at their
backs, but soon the Polish corps had cut through their flanks and were
advancing. A retreat was called. The soldiers of the 61st Line Regiment
reentered the wooden walls of the redoubt and found that “gunners,
horses, every living thing had been destroyed by the fire of our voltigeurs
[light infantry].” The French began stripping the Russian corpses of their
flasks. Inside was peppered brandy.
Finally, around eleven o’clock, the redoubt was secured. The Russians
had lost 5,000 badly needed men in a pointless engagement. The French
had lost 2,000 troops. When Napoleon rode up to the bulwark after it
had been cleared of the enemy, he asked the location of the Third
Battalion, who had led the initial charge. “In the redoubt,” he was told.
None had emerged alive.
The encounter pointed out the weakness in Kutuzov’s strategy. The
Russian commander had weighted his northern position heavily along
the banks of the Kolocha and left his southern line and left flank lightly
manned. It was an exercise in wishful thinking: Kutuzov planned for an
attack ideally suited to his own strategy, which would have been
dangerous against any general, let alone Napoleon, who was renowned
for searching defects in defensive tactics, exploiting them to break his
opponent’s forces into their component parts, then isolating and
annihilating them. Kutuzov seems to have fallen victim to the kind of
reckless optimism that had plagued Napoleon’s entire Russian

expedition. One artillery officer, after surveying the two armies, made a
bleak prediction. “Mark my words,” he said, indicating the southern line.
“Napoleon will throw all his forces on this flank and drive us into the
Moskva River.” Even a mildly competent junior officer could have
devised a devastating battle plan for the positions Kutuzov had taken,
which were no secret to the French. The “innumerable” campfires that
the Russian troops lit on the night of September 5 gave Napoleon a
white-on-black map of troop allotments in different areas.
Now Napoleon knew he would have his battle. And the strain was
clear. His doctor reported that he was “eminently nervous” on the eve of
battle, “tormented” and subject to psychosomatic twitches and spasms.
Perhaps his body sensed what so far his mind had refused to admit: that
he needed a complete victory or his army and his reign would be in
mortal danger.
ON SEPTEMBER 6, the preliminaries over, the two armies finally stood face-
to-face. As the Russians dug the last pits in front of their flèches and
soldiers of both armies cleaned their guns, they could observe each other
closely. Napoleon had ordered his troops into full dress. The resplendent
colors of the regiments were spread across the rolling hills like layers of
fabric laid out in a store window. “Our outposts were barely a pistol-shot
distant from the enemy’s,” wrote Colonel Louis-François Lejeune, an
aide-de-camp to Berthier. Napoleon ordered five bridges built over the
Kolocha north of Borodino and sited the artillery batteries, then had his
to pographical experts prepare a final map of the battle field, with the
French and Russian units marked with red-and black-headed pins. The
emperor stretched out full-length on the huge maps to study a streambed
or a battery more closely, sometimes bumping heads with one of his
experts. The day passed in a flurry of adjustments and last-minute
directives.
The night before the battle, Napoleon sat in his tent issuing a stream
of orders. He was ill with dysuria, an agonizing infection that causes
difficulty while urinating. The pain had become so intense at points
during the campaign that the emperor found it impossible to ride and
had to step down from his horse. Now a cold and fever flared up,
muddling his thoughts at the worst possible time.

A portrait of his young son, an infant already named as king of Rome,
had arrived from Paris, and Napoleon delightedly set it up on an easel
for the Imperial Guard to admire. Then, changing his mind, he ordered
his aides to take it away. “He is too young to look upon a field of battle!”
he told them. The emperor alternated between optimistic banter and the
dark epigrams that so often came to him on the eve of great battles.
“Fortune is a shameless courtesan,” he told one general, “I have often
said it, and I am beginning to experience it.” That night, his asides were
peppered with these gloomy mutterings.
Night fell. The emperor retired to his tent but got very little sleep.
Obsessed with the possibility that the Russians would use the cover of
night to slip away once more, he got up repeatedly to check reports from
his outposts. The Russians hadn’t moved. The historian-general Ségur
would later write that it became clear the Russians were “determined to
root themselves to the soil and defend it; in short, there to conquer or
die.” It was exactly what the emperor wanted. His army was melting
away; every excess ounce of power had been drained away by
mismanagement and Rickettsia. He had to stun the Russians with an
overwhelming defeat whose aftershocks would be felt deeply in Moscow
and St. Petersburg.
The men of the Grande Armée were cold, hungry, and wet, but they
were ready. They had suffered and bled and starved for the kind of
epoch-making battle that was now straight in front of them. One French
officer, Eugène Labaume, remembered the night well:
There were many among us, so eager of glory, and so flushed with the hope of the
morrow’s success, that they were absolutely incapable of repose…. They gave
themselves up to profound meditation. They reflected on the wonderful events of
our extraordinary expedition; they mused on the result of a battle which was to
decide the fate of two powerful empires; they compared the stillness of the night
with the tumult of the morrow; they fancied that death was now hovering over
their crowded ranks, but total darkness prevented them from distinguishing who
would be the unhappy victims; they then thought of their parents, their country,
and the uncertainty of whether they should ever see these beloved objects again
plunged them into the deepest melancholy.
As Napoleon fretted and honed his plan of attack, Kutuzov and his

staff walked slowly through the camp along with Orthodox priests
carrying the Smolensk icon, which had been carted to Borodino on a gun
carriage. The procession wove its way from campfire to redoubt to
artillery battery as the priests swung their censers, sending out tendrils
of bittersweet smoke, and blessed the men with holy water. After
sharpening their bayonets and having a full dinner of buckwheat gruel
(unlike many of their French counterparts, who went hungry), the men
gathered around their campfires wrapped in their long coats against the
cold drizzling rain and singing the “monotonous, melancholy, dirge-like
yet not unpleasing” national songs that each remembered from home.
Other soldiers discussed in low voices the ominous names of the towns
and streams that surrounded Borodino: Ognik (“Fire”), Stonets
(“Groans”), Voya (“War”), and Kolocha (“Stab”).
ON SEPTEMBER 7, a cold dawn broke. The final Russian positions came clear
through the mist. The enemy were arrayed in four ranks: First, the
jaegers, or light skirmishers, spread along the Kolocha embankment and
throughout the brushwood (as tall as a man in many places) that
covered much of the ground. The infantry were behind them, in two
rows of battalion columns, followed by the cavalry pinned up close to
the infantry’s rear. The modest reserves were also tightly packed in
behind the cavalry. It was a powerful formation, allowing for quick
reinforcements and for massed strength against attack, but it left the
Russians open to artillery barrages that could destroy entire units at a
time. It was also a remarkably straightforward alignment; Kutuzov
presented the French with the entirety of his army, with no battalions
hidden away for surprise counterattacks or flanking maneuvers.
The one attempt at deception was quickly undone. Kutuzov ordered a
single corps to conceal themselves in a heavily wooded thicket near
General Bagration’s left flank, at the southernmost end of the Russian
position. Thinking Napoleon would try to turn the flank and roll it
northward, compressing the Russian forces in order to rake them with
artillery and destroy them, the Russian commander planned to unleash
the corps on the French and smash the flanking maneuver. But General
Benningsen, chief of staff to Bagration, responded to the concerns of the
jaegers, who had been left without close infantry support, and ordered
the corps out of the woods and back onto open ground behind the

skirmishers. Benningsen argued that only a tight, deep order of battle
could repel Napoleon’s fondness for concentrating huge numbers of
troops on perceived points of weakness and breaking through. So the
Russians revealed their hand to the French commander before the battle
had even begun.
In fact, Marshal Davout had suggested just such a flanking maneuver
with a force combining his I Corps and the Polish V Corps under
Poniatowski. The night before the battle they would use the darkness to
enter the thick woods to the south of General Bagration, steal around the
left flank and rear, attack northward in the morning, and put an end to
“the Russian army, the battle, and the whole war!”
Ten years before, Napoleon might have suggested the maneuver
himself, or perhaps an even more involved and ambitious one. But
Borodino, he felt, was different. He couldn’t afford to let the Russians
slip away again, and Davout’s sleight of hand could have sent Kutuzov
retreating toward Moscow. He could also lose the Polish regiments as a
fighting force if the rough, wooded terrain and darkness caused them to
lose their way. Some 1,500 miles from Paris, he was a far more cautious
general than he had been at any time in his career.
But the deeper truth was that Napoleon no longer had enough troops.
The French had about 126,000 men in the field, packed together at
42,000 per mile. But one has to subtract from this the 25,000 men of the
Imperial Guard, which Napoleon held in reserve. Taking into
consideration the habit of unit commanders to inflate their numbers,
Napoleon had only about 100,000 troops to throw into action without
risking the Guard. Facing him, Kutuzov had 155,000 men, or about
51,700 men per mile. In the climactic battle of a campaign he had begun
just ten weeks before with the largest army ever assembled, an army that
outnumbered its enemy three to one, Napoleon was now outmanned by
a ratio of three to two.
Battalion strength was down across the board. If the emperor had back
the 125,000-plus men that disease had pilfered from his ranks, he could
have afforded to let Davout gamble with 40,000 of them and still have
enough troops to smash into the Russian line head-on with hopes of
breaking it. But Rickettsia had produced an army that was much smaller

than it should have been for this kind of battle, and many of the
remaining men were already sick.
Attacking a partially dug-in enemy on elevated ground with fewer
cannon at one’s disposal than the enemy had was accepting inferior
odds, but with the troops he had left, Napoleon clearly felt it was his
only option. Typhus hadn’t only killed Napoleon’s men outright in the
tens of thousands, it had hamstrung him into fighting a very un-
Napoleonic battle. General Ségur, in his memoir of the campaign,
thought Napoleon was worried about the condition of his remaining
men. “Weak and starved as they are,” he wrote, “how could they stand
up to a prolonged and violent encounter?”
Kutuzov, too, was violating his most deeply held tactical belief: force
preservation. “The voice of the court, of the army, of all Russia forced
his hand,” wrote German theorist of war Clausewitz. The Russian
commander was propping his entire army in front of the French and
inviting them to wade into it, knowing that even in victory his army
would be shattered.
The compromises both men made to reality, and the terrain the
Russians had chosen to defend, led to a compact battlefield where most
of the men were in range of the enemy’s artillery. There were 250,000
men and more than 1,000 artillery pieces crowded into a small area. The
Russian line was three miles across, and the main action would take
place across only two miles.
It was a formula for mass slaughter.

N
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     10
Clash
APOLEON EMERGED FROM HIS TENT AROUND THREE IN the morning, worked with his
chief of staff Berthier on last-minute details, then rode with some of
his staff across the Kolocha and made his way to the Shevardino
Redoubt. He had taken the temperature of the ranks and found them
“strangely quiet—the kind of silence you associate with a state of great
expectation or tension.” He issued a proclamation trimmed toward the
pragmatic: “Soldiers! Here is the battle you have so much desired. Now
victory depends on you; we need it. Victory will give us abundant
supplies, good winter quarters, and a prompt return to our native land.
Conduct yourself as you did at Austerlitz, at Fried-land, at Vitebsk, at
Smolensk, and may the most distant generations cite your conduct on
this day with pride; may it be said of each one of you: ‘He fought in that
great battle under the walls of Moscow!’” It was a pedestrian effort, but
he knew the men were exhausted by the campaign and each would be
fighting for a return to his own hearth and loved ones. The men cheered
him as he rode slowly along, and he responded, crying out “March on!
We are going to break open the gates of Moscow!”
When the emperor arrived at the redoubt, a chair was brought to him
and he turned it around, sat, and placed his arms on the backrest. He
took his telescope and checked the Russian lines, still not completely
convinced Alexander’s forces would stand and fight. He remarked on the
cold and mentioned how the sun resembled the one at Austerlitz. That
place had been a constant theme of the past few days; Napoleon dearly
hoped for a repeat of his victory there.
Kutuzov rose early as well and issued a proclamation to the men that

was wonderfully stark in its simplicity and its sheer Russianness.
“Trusting in God, we shall either win or die,” he told his men. “Napoleon
is His enemy. He will desecrate His churches. Think of your wives and
children, who rely on your protection. Think of your Emperor, who is
watching you. Before the sun has set tomorrow, you will have written on
this field the record of your faith and patriotism in the blood of your
enemy.”
Like Napoleon, Kutuzov sat in a folding chair to observe the
battlefield. He appeared more relaxed than his counterpart and chatted
easily with his commanders and soldiers. He had at least chosen the best
site for a defense of Moscow: when Soviet generals prepared to repel
Hitler’s forces in 1941, they built their fortifications in the exact same
spot that the old general had chosen one hundred and thirty years
earlier. Kutuzov also had an abiding faith in the individual Russian
soldier, as neglected and abused and badly led as he often was.
The French plan of battle called for a main thrust led by the Iron
Marshal, Davout, against the Russian center, held by Bagration, who
would finally get the battle he so desired, behind the three flèches
(Napoleon, unable to see the enemy position clearly through his
telescope, believed there were only two of them). To Davout’s left, Ney
would lead his III Corps, supplemented with Junot’s VIII Corps against
the Russians’ northern positions; Napoleon didn’t want to risk letting his
erratic general go unsupervised after the debacle at Smolensk.
Meanwhile, a drastically modified flanking maneuver by Poniatowski
against the left flank would hope to turn the southern end of the Russian
line and begin pushing those troops into the center, where Davout and
Ney could finish them off. The maneuver would have to be done in
daylight, without enough soldiers for a shock victory, but the 5,000
Poles were eager for battle and Napoleon hoped they could make up for
the lost troops with their ardor.
On the left side of the French position, Napoleon’s stepson, Prince
Eugène, would smash through the Russian line, occupy the town of
Borodino, then proceed to neutralize the Raevsky Redoubt. Taking it
would eliminate a hefty portion of Russian firepower and break the
enemy line in the center. If one diagrammed the attack, it would consist

of the arrows along the French line pointing almost directly east, with
Prince Eugène’s forces at the top tilted slightly southward. A head-on
charge, with no niceties.
“Here we touched bottom,” wrote Ségur. “Here was the end, here
everything would be decided.”
THE THREE FRENCH BATTERIES opened up at six in the morning, followed
immediately by the Russian guns. The staccato reports built to a
crescendo in which individual cannons couldn’t be distinguished,
merging into one deep-throated roar and accompanied by billows of
black smoke that “darkened the sun, which seemed to veil itself in a
blood-red shroud.” Men likened the sound to hundreds of drums beating
rapidly, to the cliché of constant thunder, or to nautical broadsides at
close distance. Not only could the sound be heard over a mile away, it
was, even at that distance, enough to temporarily deafen the soldiers.
Although Napoleon had massed most of his troops on the center and
right, it was the left that made first contact. One division of Prince
Eugène’s IV Corps drove straight at the village of Borodino, marching
“with unbelievable speed” and catching the Russians off-guard. The
jaegers who held the thinly manned line fell back, retreating across a
bridge over the Kolocha River. Their ranks were so compressed that the
French sharpshooters began rapidly picking them off, with two more
divisions supporting them from behind. Within fifteen minutes, the
jaeger regiment had lost half its men and thirty of its officers. The
Russians counter attacked and drove the French back over the river, then
returned to their main line, burning the bridge behind them. When they
were done, bodies were layered at the smoldering pilings of the structure
three and four deep.

In the south, Davout marched forward with two divisions, aiming
directly at the flèches. The Russians waited until the French were in
range and then opened up with their regimental guns, spewing canister
shot that sliced through the enemy ranks, ripping off arms and legs and
disemboweling the onrushing troops. The French came on relentlessly
and finally stormed one of the wooden fortifications, diving over the log
walls as nearby Russian skirmishers poured fire on the French from the
cover of nearby juniper brush.
At one of the flèches, the 61st Line Regiment advanced and threw the
Russians back. As the enemy line retreated, one corporal named
Dumont, wounded in the arm, was looking for an ambulance when he
caught sight of the Spanish girl who traveled with the supply wagon. She
was frantically looking for her friends in the regiment.
When she caught sight of all the drums of the regiment strewn on the ground she
became like a madwoman. “Here, my friend, here!” she screamed. “They’re here!”
And so they were, lying with broken limbs, their bodies torn with grapeshot. Mad
with grief, she went from one to the other, speaking softly to them. But none of
them heard.
Among the dead and wounded, the pair found the Spaniard’s father, but
before she could help him, a musket round struck the crouching girl,

knocking her unconscious.
Lieutenant Roth von Schreckenstein surged forward with the 4th
Cavalry, fighting in a mixed unit of Saxons, Poles, and Westphalians.
Pursuing mounted Russian troops, he was stunned when his horse
suddenly went down after a barrage of case shot from his left, throwing
him to the ground.
Von Schreckenstein found himself in no-man’s-land: Russian
infantrymen were firing on the enemy cavalry as they shot past, and his
own unit, intoxicated by the success of their charge, quickly left him
behind. The lieutenant watched the enemy troops move closer; there was
no sign of the four cuirassier regiments that were supposed to follow in
the cavalry’s wake. As panic rose in his throat, the German officer felt
his grasp on what was a linear battlefield— the French to the west, the
Russians to the east—slip. “Owing either to an illusion stemming from
fear, or else because they were really there, I could see enemies on all
sides,” he remembered. He scanned the field for another horse to get
him out of danger and found a Russian mount standing untended. Von
Schreckenstein jumped in the saddle and whipped the reins around, but
the horse refused to move. The German dug his spurs into the animal’s
flanks; still, it stood as still as a monument, clearly terrified by the noise
of gunfire. The officer jumped down and unholstered his pistol, thinking
he would have to navigate his way off the battlefield on foot. But with
Russians seemingly approaching from every direction, he no longer
knew in which direction the French lines lay. The artillery barrages and
musket fire from both sides filled his ears with a constant roar of
unintelligible noise.
There are few things as frightening for a soldier as feeling lost in
enemy territory without a clear route to safety, especially after one has
heard stories of stomach-turning enemy atrocities for weeks. “The
thought of being captured and ill-treated overwhelmed me,” von
Shreckenstein wrote, “and I gripped my pistol in much the same way as
a person who is drowning clutches at the nearest straw.” Even as basic a
battlefield as Borodino, with two huge armies ramming straight at each
other in straight lines, could quickly descend into blurred chaos.
Just then a regiment of the Grande Armée’s mounted troops came

flashing by, their white jerkins and white leather breeches and billowing
white wool cloaks a shock against the dun-colored landscape and the
billows of smoke and dust. Among their outsize black and brown horses
the lieutenant spotted a riderless mount. He ran after it and managed to
catch the horse before the regiment sailed past. Running alongside, he
gripped its bridle and with a deep breath vaulted into the saddle in
midstride. He rode with the Lifeguards toward the Russian lines, safe for
the moment.
As the day wore on, the lines of battle became increasingly confused.
The troops’ rushing forward and falling back through the curtains of
smoke inevitably led to the kind of disorientation von Schreckenstein
experienced. When French troops crossing behind the attacks on the
flèches saw other units rushing out at them from the pall of smoke, they
mistook them for Russians and fired, reloaded, and fired again.
As the early morning went on, Napoleon was waiting anxiously to
hear the reports of gunfire from Poniatowski’s Polish unit to the south,
which had found the terrain more difficult than they had imagined and
didn’t encounter the Russian lines until eight in the morning. A fierce
battle ensued, with the Poles driving the first line of Russian grenadiers
back and taking the town of Utitsa, which marked the southernmost
extreme of the battlefield. Napoleon sent units from General Junot’s
forces to firm up the line, where fierce Russian charges had brought the
two armies within arm’s length, battling hand to hand, stabbing with
their bayonets and sabers. At the flèches, the French drove their way
inside, but the Russians quickly brought up reinforcements and launched
a counterattack.
The Poles were rewarding Napoleon’s confidence in them. If they
forced their way through the second Russian line, they could then turn
north and begin rolling up the enemy flank, forcing their opponents to
fight on two compact fronts simultaneously. Kutuzov, finally realizing
that the main brunt of the French attack would be in the south, ordered
units guarding the Kolocha River at the northernmost end of his line to
turn and march toward the musket fire. When their commander asked an
officer from the besieged jaeger units how the battle was proceeding, he
was told, “We are finished if you don’t hurry up.” The units sneaked

behind the Russian line and rushed toward the sound of battle.
NAPOLEON WATCHED THE BATTLE unfold from his chair, uncharacteristically silent
and still. His aides stared at him with amazement and growing anger.
The emperor was usually in constant motion during battle, riding on his
horse to see engagements more clearly, looking for the weak spot in a
line where a breakthrough might change the momentum, rallying or
abusing 
his 
troops—Napoleon’s 
paint-peeling 
tirades 
against 
a
commander or unit he felt wasn’t performing up to expectations could
motivate as well as any call to glory. In effect, the emperor sought to
understand the kinetic battlefield so that he might master it at the right
time.
But now he sat, “sluggish, apathetic, and inactive.” Officers would ride
in, dismount, and run to report to him the latest change on the ground,
and Napoleon would listen to them impassively and then dismiss them
without a word. He studied the battlefield through his telescope,
although the smoke and dust kicked up by horses and troops obscured
the most important parts of the terrain; stood up to pace for a few
moments; and then sat again. He was clearly ill, but the officers resented
his passivity when many of his men in the field were sick, hungry, or
already wounded.
The emperor’s armies had always been things of speed. But now
Napoleon stalled, complaining he had to “see more clearly on this
chessboard.” No issue was more critical than that of reinforcements:
specifically, committing the Young Guard, the cream of that year’s
conscripts, and Imperial Guard, now massed behind Napoleon, to the
battlefield. Marshal Ney was furious when Napoleon told him to wait for
any supporting units. “What’s the Emperor doing behind the Army?” he
erupted at the messenger. “There he is within reach only of reverses, not
of successes.”
The first call for reinforcements came at the flèches. The Russians had
counterattacked and thrown the French out of the southernmost
earthwork. The general leading the charge was quickly wounded four
times in rapid succession, two spent balls bruising him before dropping
to the ground, a third shot tearing up his sleeve and grazing his arm, and
a fourth smashing into his hip, dropping him from the saddle, the

twenty-second time he had been wounded in battle. The Russian 7th
Combined Grenadier Division, waiting on reinforcements themselves for
the dead that were piling up inside the flèche, charged the oncoming
troops and were swept by volleys of shot from the mobile French guns.
The leader of the grenadiers reported that his defense of the flèches
ended only when his division “ceased to exist.” The 4,000-strong unit
had suffered a 90 percent casualty rate.
When Napoleon saw his wounded general from the battle being
carried back to his headquarters, he cried out, “What is going on up
there?” The commander told him of the desperate fight the Russians
were putting up and said that the only way to take the flèches was to
send in the Young Guard: fresh men to overwhelm the enemy defenses.
But Napoleon felt the thinness of the forces between him and Paris
keenly. He not only needed to win the war with Alexander with what
typhus and the other diseases had left him, but he also had to keep
control at home and intimidate his many enemies waiting to see the
outcome of the Russian campaign. “No!” he told the general. “I will take
good care to see that the Guard is not used. I will not have them
knocked to bits. I’ll win the battle without them.” It would become a
theme of the day: field commanders rushing to the emperor to request
the troops standing at Napoleon’s back, to put them over the top in some
part of the battlefield, only to be told they were too precious to commit.
Instead, Napoleon moved units from other parts of the line to the
flèches, throwing units from Davout’s corps at the fortifications, along
with three divisions of Ney’s troops, Junot’s entire corps, and elements
of Murat’s troops. This one feature of the battlefield would eventually
absorb 40,000 French troops and 30,000 Russians.
Had Napoleon committed the Guard, giving the French a onetime
boost in manpower and firepower, they would have most likely been
able to take the flèches, drive through to the second line of
reinforcements that was feeding the constant Russian counterattacks,
and neutralize them in one climactic battle. Instead the three
fortifications became slow-motion meat grinders, each side committing
just enough troops to take the trio of defenses, but not enough to hold
them permanently or to end the battle. The flèches were taken and then

given up to the enemy seven times on the morning of September 7,
costing Napoleon thousands of soldiers.
Inside the earthworks, the scene was bestial. Troops were packed
inside the walls, being raked by canister fire and attacking each other
with bayonets, swords, musket butts, and even ramrods. When Murat,
arrayed in his battlefield finery, led the First Württemburg Jaeger
Battalion and the 72nd French Infantry to the southernmost flèche to
retake it, the Russians mounted a fierce counterattack. The marshal was
quickly surrounded by cavalry troops. Just as Russian soldiers closed in
to capture him, Murat managed to jump over the earthen walls to the
flèche’s interior. He was shocked by what he found: many of the men
inside had been cut down, and only a few were left “completely out of
control and racing wildly around the parapet.” Equal to the moment,
Murat grabbed a weapon, took his signature plumed hat off his head,
and held it aloft as a sign that he was in charge. He began calling out in
broken German for the men to hold. The dapper marshal mangled the
unfamiliar language so badly that the Germans merely laughed at his
words, but his high-spirited gesture kept the soldiers focused on holding
the flèche until Murat could be rescued.
The marshal was at his finest during Borodino. Standing tall in the
saddle and dressed in his customary outrageous colors (dominated by a
pale blue jacket crossed by a gold sash), he dashed from sector to sector
leading cavalry attacks and rallying exhausted soldiers. “With his
thundering artillery and the immense cloud of smoke into which he
disappeared entirely …,” wrote his aide-decamp, “he resembled one of
those terrible gods of Olympus.” When one of his officers, seeing his men
being cut down by grapeshot and shells, ordered a retreat, Murat rode
up to him, grabbed him by the collar, and shouted “What are you
doing?” over the deafening roar of artillery. Shocked that it even needed
explaining, the colonel gestured to the landscape around them covered
with his dead and dying, a full half of his contingent. “Surely you can
see we can’t hold out here any longer,” the officer shouted back. Murat
looked at the carnage and announced that he was staying put. As his
men waited for his answer, the colonel stared at Murat bitterly, then
turned and shouted to his retreating men, “All right, soldiers, about face!
Let’s go get ourselves killed!”

ALTHOUGH THE SOUTHERN END of the battlefield had erupted in every kind of
encounter—cavalry charges, canister barrages, musket fire, and bayonet
assaults—most of the soldiers on both sides were, at eight thirty that
morning, enthralled observers. Having received no orders to march, they
lived in fear of the cannonballs that were raining down on both lines.
As the action in each sector escalated or died away, cannon rounds
from both sides never let up. “The shells burst in the air as well as on the
ground,” wrote one Russian soldier, “while the solid shot came buzzing
from every side, ploughing the ground with their ricochets and smashing
into pieces every object they encountered in their flight.” The most
conservative estimate of the number of French artillery shells of all
descriptions fired on the enemy is 60,000, 10,000 more than the
Russians, who had the advantage in artillery pieces—a tribute to the
efficiency of the French gunners under Napoleon, the ex-artilleryman.
The total cartridges fired was about 1.4 million musket shots. That
equals about 3 cannon shots and 38 musket rounds per second on a
crowded battlefield.
Leading his troops in the center of the battlefield, the volatile General
Bagration was hit by shrapnel, shattering his shinbone. He tried to
disguise the wound, but he slumped forward and toppled off his horse.
His officers carried the general to a medical tent, where doctors tended
to his wound. “Tell General Barclay that the fate and salvation of the
army depends on him,” he told an officer, in what must have been a
bitter moment. Rumors immediately began circulating that in fact the
charismatic general was dead, and the morale of the men plummeted.
Barclay, expecting a French attack on his line at any moment, couldn’t
send reinforcements or take personal command of the Second Army, as
Bagration had requested, but he sent two generals to direct the troops.
The Russian infantry fought heroically to hold the flèches and, behind
it, the town of Semeonovskoie, under assault from the main French
thrust in the center. When their muskets were shattered by French shot,
they used the stocks as bludgeons, then took out their swords. But it was
a lost cause. By noon, the French had taken the fortifications and the
shattered town and held them.
Ney and Murat again called for reinforcements to finish off the left

side of the Russian line. They could see the demoralized units of the
enemy’s second and final line through the burning huts of
Semeonovskoie. But again Napoleon refused to send the Imperial Guard.
“And if there is a second battle tomorrow, what shall I fight it with?” he
asked.
It has to be emphasized that Napoleon had never considered the
Guard to be untouchable before the devastation of the march to Moscow.
At Austerlitz, at a key moment, with his center line in danger of being
overwhelmed by oncoming Russian infantry, Napoleon had ordered
Murat’s cavalry to rush through the hole, followed by the mounted
divisions of the Imperial Guard. The maneuver had saved the day,
allowing the infantry units of the center to hold long enough for
Davout’s corps to storm in and repel the Russians. But at Austerlitz, he
hadn’t lost a third of his army to disease.
IN THIS NEW, stationary combat involving huge numbers of troops fighting
over the same ground that would so accurately foretell the set pieces of
the Somme, there were only glimpses of the past, of King Francis and
knightly warfare that Napoleon still saw himself as part of. Each side
spoke with awe of the sheer relentlessness of the other. The French
compared the Russians to “moving fortresses that gave out flashes of
steel and flame-bursts.” For his part, Bagration, a Russian nationalist to
the core, was sufficiently moved by the French troops forming and re-
forming as barrage after barrage of canister fire cut through the ranks
that he began applauding and calling out “Bravo! Bravo!” But the sheer
numbers of troops engaged in a small area and the heavy use of field
artillery ensured that the action more resembled large-scale butchery
than it did any romantic ideal of combat.
There were a few instances of mercy in a savage day. Franz Ludwig
August von Meerheimb, a colonel with the Saxon Guard cavalry, was
knocked unconscious during hand-to-hand fighting on the battlefield and
woke up to find his pockets being rifled by a number of Russian
cuirassiers. He might not have survived if it hadn’t been for an older
soldier who chased the robbers away, bandaged the saber wound that
had punctured a vein beneath von Meerheimb’s jawline, found him a
horse, and lifted him into the saddle. Walking his captive back through

the Russian rear, the cuirassier passed peasant vigilante groups looking
for French soldiers to “escort” (their actual fate, the soldier implied,
would have been much darker) and soldiers with beards so thick he
could see only their noses and eyes. Von Meerheimb must have felt he
had traveled back in time, but the old man soon found a sympathetic
Swiss medic, taking with him only his gold-colored helmet, which he
might have thought was made of real bullion. The cavalryman was
eventually transported to Moscow and received excellent care for his
numerous wounds, in all probability better care than he would have
received behind French lines.
AS THE FRENCH FOUGHT to control the northern line, without having the
numbers to smash through and annihilate the Russian reserves, the
action in the center was intensifying. Prince Eugène had reorganized his
units after the attack on the village of Borodino, which he had finally
taken after fierce opposition. Now Napoleon ordered him to advance to
the earthworks, anchored by the eighteen heavy guns that looked down
over the slope.
Opposing him was the Russian general Raevsky, after whom the
central redoubt was named. Wounded in a freak accident (gashing
himself badly on a bayonet left carelessly lying on the back of a cart), he
was quickly learning that being the last position to be attacked presented
its own challenges: requests to send his men as reinforcements to the
south were constant. His forces were already spread thinly behind the
redoubt and to the plains to the south, and he had lost four regiments
sent to hot zones on the battlefield before repelling a single enemy
soldier.
Prince Eugène softened up the position with an artillery barrage
beginning around nine thirty. The Russians could only hold their ground
and wait. Half an hour later, they saw the first units sweeping up from
the ravine at the foot of the rolling slope. They waited until the French
had crossed it before opening up with their regimental guns filled with
grapeshot. The veteran Captain Charles François of the 30th of the Line
jumped into the air with his men to avoid the cannonballs that followed.
“Whole files, half-platoons even, went down under the enemy’s fire and
left huge gaps,” he recalled. The captain was hit in the leg but, kept

upright by will and adrenaline, charged ahead with his men. Russian
infantrymen had come from behind the redoubt to form a line; at thirty
yards, the French took aim with their muskets and broke through,
running toward the earthworks. The wolf pits, hidden by the smoke,
caught a number of the soldiers, who tumbled atop Russian jaegers
snagged in their own traps.
When the French reached the redoubt, they poured through the
embrasures cut into the structure. The redoubt itself was packed with
the enormous cannon and their gunners; the artillery took up so much
room that there was no space for infantry. Blackened by the powder and
smoke, the gunners had no muskets to defend themselves and were
doomed the moment the redoubt was breached. But instead of
surrendering, they attacked the onrushing troops with rammers and
handspikes. Captain François cut down one after the other with his
sword. “I had been through more than one campaign,” he remembered,
“but I had never found myself in such a bloody melee with such
tenacious soldiers as the Russians.”
The captain ended up fainting from loss of blood and was carried to
one of the few field ambulances as the French finally took the redoubt.
But the first push had exhausted the French attack: as in the south, there
were no units following the front line to drive through and complete the
victory by smashing the Russian reserves. Raevsky, unrecognized,
managed to limp out of the fortification on his bad leg and found himself
among panicked troops from the 18th, 19th, and 40th jaeger units, who
were “putting up no resistance at all.” The Russian general later
remarked that had that original charge been backed by a significant
force, the center would have collapsed and the battle would have been
over by midmorning. But all over the battlefield, the French were finding
they had the men to take and retake positions but not to do the one
thing that might force Alexander to capitulate: destroy the Russian army.
If Napoleon was passive and uncertain in the early stages of the battle,
he was at least following a tactical plan in his head, even if he refused to
reveal it to his aides. In contrast, now that his hope that the French
would base their assault on the new Smolensk road clearly hadn’t come
true, Kutuzov struggled and failed to come up with a defensive strategy

other than patching the holes in his line. Clausewitz, the strategist
attached to the imperial staff, was appalled. “He appeared destitute of
inward activity,” he wrote, “of any clear view of surrounding
occurrences, of any liveliness of perception, or independence of action.”
The Russian leader allowed his generals free rein to implement their
own tactics, without integrating the maneuvers into an evolving plan of
battle. Sketchy reports from the front lines, which implied that the
flèches had been stoutly defended and the French repelled— along with
a wild rumor that Marshal Murat had been captured— led the general’s
staff’s morale “to blaze up like lighted straw.” Kutuzov celebrated the
news with a hearty picnic lunch. Clausewitz began to see the Russian not
as a general in any traditional sense of the word but as a kind of
impresario, a confidence man, who went around proclaiming victory,
instilling the Russians with hope after the long retreat by proclaiming
one thing: “the bad condition of the French army.”
General Barclay and Kutuzov’s other generals stepped in to fill the
leadership gap as best they could. The pattern of the flèches repeated
itself at the redoubt. The chief of staff for the First Army had been
rushing past the rear of the central fortification to take the injured
Bagration’s men in hand, but he was shocked by how thoroughly the
Russian line had been broken at the center. Ignoring Kutuzov’s orders,
he rallied a battalion of infantrymen, took the jaegers under his
command, and, along with elements from the 12th and 26th divisions,
turned to counterattack, marching in line to the beat of a drummer. The
French had suffered heavy casualties on the attack, particularly from
grape-and canister shot, and couldn’t hold off the Russian attack. Some
of them turned and ran, and the only sustained fire the advancing troops
experienced was from the regimental gunners. The Russians took the
redoubt back in ten minutes. The French had lost 3,850 men in the failed
attempt to secure it.
When the primitive fort was retaken around midday, there was a lull
in the French forays against the Russian line. Even with his galvanizing
battlefield leadership, Marshal Murat couldn’t push forward in the center
without fresh troops, and his position was being raked with fire from the
elevations of Semeonovskoie, which was constantly receiving fresh
supplies of troops from Kutuzov’s right. Napoleon again agonized over

whether to send in the Imperial Guard. He finally gave permission for
the Young Guard’s artillery to move forward and begin shelling the
village, and even agreed to send the elite troops themselves to join the
battle, giving the French a chance to regroup and push toward the
Russian reserves. But just as the units began to march toward the action,
the emperor suddenly changed his mind, claiming that the existing
troops were sufficient to hold the French line at Semeonovskoie. The
Young Guard returned to its place behind the emperor.
In the south, starved of reinforcements, the French slowly began to
give way to the bulging Russian line pushing down from the village.
Murat sent another emissary to Napoleon, begging for troops. The officer
pointed out the clouds of dust on the ridge at Semeonovskoie, under
which the Russian cavalry was advancing. But just as the Young Guard
prepared to move out, Napoleon reversed himself once more and halted
their advance. Perhaps Napoleon was afraid that the Poles on the
extreme right would let the Russians past, where they could circle
behind Ney and Murat and annihilate those corps. Or perhaps Napoleon
thought he could be outflanked on the left. Whatever the reasoning, he
threw no more troops into the crucial engagement.
KUTUZOV DID ATTEMPT one daring foray against the French lines. Alerted that
morning by the commander of the Cossacks that his horsemen had
managed to ford the Kolocha River north of the French position, the
Russian commander had sent a contingent of 8,000 hussars, Cossacks,
and dragoons on a flanking maneuver against Napoleon’s left. General
Barclay, delighted with the idea of outmaneuvering the French genius,
had called the attack a “decisive blow.” But the Cossacks, known for
their brilliance in harrying small groups of enemy soldiers, were going
up against deployed lines of experienced soldiers, against which they
were notoriously useless.
The mounted soldiers managed to panic the Bavarians holding the
flank and cause a pell-mell retreat, news of which quickly made its way
to Napoleon. But the attack ended up as more of a feint than a serious
attempt to roll back the left flank. Without infantry to support the
cavalry charges, the Russians satisfied themselves with scaring off the
Bavarian horses and making a few passes at the 13th Infantry Division

near Borodino, which formed up in squares and refused to wilt. With
riders being dropped right and left by grapeshot and musket fire, the
Cossacks and cavalrymen turned and raced back to their lines. The raid
reinforced the idea that the Russians were past masters at defense but
lacked the confidence or skills (especially the Cossacks) to press home an
audacious offensive strike. What Napoleon lacked in men, the Russians
lacked in tradition and mind-set.
The probing startled Napoleon, and clearly contributed to his decision
to hold his reserves back. Marooned at the Shevardino Redoubt, he
wasn’t convinced he knew what the Russians were up to. “My battle
hasn’t begun yet,” he told his aides.
Most of the Grande Armée was held in suspended animation as
Napoleon debated the endgame, alternately pacing and peering through
his telescope. During the lull, however, men continued to die. The most
outrageous waste came in Murat’s cavalry, which had been moved up
around noon to fill the gaping hole in the line that opened up when
Prince Eugène turned north to deal with the Cossack feint. The change in
position had put these elite horsemen in range of the Russian 12-
pounders at the Raevsky Redoubt.
The results were gruesome. The men sat in their saddles for several
hours, serving as gorgeously dressed targets for the enemy gunners.
Lieutenant von Schreckenstein, back with his Saxon cavalry brigade,
watched as his comrades dropped amid the exploding shells. “For strong,
healthy, well-mounted men a cavalry battle is nothing compared with
what Napoleon made his cavalry put up with at Borodino …,” he wrote.
“There can have been scarcely a man in those ranks and files whose
neighbor did not crash to earth with his horse, or die from horrible
wounds while screaming for help.” Shattered bits of helmet and iron
breastplates came hurtling through the rows of horsemen, along with
bits of bone and flesh. One cuirassier remembered that they could
actually see the Russian artillerymen sighting their guns at their units.
The troops had to remain unmoving as the guns were primed, loaded
with ball, and then fired.
Captain Jean Bréaut des Marlots stood under the barrage with his
men. “On every side one saw nothing but the dying and the dead,” he

wrote. Twice during the three hours des Marlots reviewed his men,
giving them encouragement and trying to judge who was holding up
under the strain and who was slowly losing his nerve. He was chatting
with one young officer who said all he wanted was a glass of water when
the man was cut in two by a cannonball. Des Marlots turned to another
officer and had just finished saying how awful it was that their comrade
had been killed when the man’s horse was hit by a cannonball, knocking
him to the ground. Writing an account for his sister, the captain told her
how such random deaths from above gave him a deep sense of fatalism
that carried him through. “I said to myself: ‘It is a lottery whether you
survive or not. One has to die sometime.’” He vowed to be killed with
honor rather than run from the field.
TRYING TO REGAIN the initiative, Napoleon ordered the artillery of the Guard
to be wheeled from their positions forward to the edge of the plateau
above Semeonovskoie. He would commit guns, but not the reserve itself.
The 12-pounders added their reports to the unceasing roar.
A few minutes after two o’clock, Napoleon gave the order for a fresh
assault against the Raevsky Redoubt in the center, which had become
the Russians’ stronghold on the battlefield. He directed a three-pronged
assault: three divisions of infantry would attack the structure head-on.
From the French left, the III Corps of cavalry would move against the
northern end and rear of the fortifications; from the right would come II
and IV Corps, attacking the southern end and veering into the rear as
well. Napoleon’s orders to General Auguste de Caulaincourt, the younger
brother of his former Russian ambassador, were “Do what you did at
Arzobispo!,” the 1809 battle where Caulaincourt had executed perfectly
a daring encircling maneuver that won the day for the French. Now the
general galloped off to lead his cavalry in a very different assignment: a
frontal assault into withering artillery fire. Before the general left, he
told his brother, “The fighting has become so hot that I don’t suppose I
shall see you again. We will win, or I’ll get myself killed.” The elder
Caulaincourt, knowing that his brother’s old war wounds caused him so
much pain that he often wished for death, was shaken by the words.
Across the battlefield, General Barclay watched the enemy forces
assemble. “I saw they were going to launch a ferocious attack,” he

remembered. He called for the 1st Cuirassier Division to be brought up
from the second line, a unit he had “intended to hoard for a decisive
blow.” But his messenger returned to report that the division had been
ordered (by whom, no one knew) to the extreme left flank to support the
troops battling Poniatowski. It was symptomatic of a command structure
where generals grabbed regiments whenever they could find them and
stuck them in to fill holes, without coordination by Kutuzov. All Barclay
could find were two regiments of cuirassiers, which he felt would be
slaughtered in the first few moments of battle. He held them back until
more units could be found.
As the clock ticked toward three o’clock, the Russians were forced to
stand under a ferocious bombardment from the batteries around
Semeonovskoie. Finally, the French infantry marched out, but the
cavalry swept past them and reached the redoubt first. A squad of Polish
and Saxon cuirassiers had been trotting from sector to sector all
morning, avoiding the Russian guns and waiting impatiently to be called
to action. Now they charged up the steep slope toward the battered
earthworks and slipped their horses through the slots cut for the cannon,
or wheeled their horses around the palisades and entered from behind,
followed by the 5th Cuirassiers. Leading the 5th, General Caulaincourt
was killed as he charged the walls, a musket shot cutting through his

jugular. The Saxons and Poles smashed through the Russian defenses
first, leaping over the bayonets of the defenders and chopping at the
gunners with their sabers.
The first horsemen over the wall were met by musket fire but plunged
into the enemy ranks regardless, and were met by bayonets, which the
infantrymen stabbed up into the riders, breaking the blades on their iron
breastplates or cutting blindly into thighs and groins. A roar went up
from the French soldiers watching the action from the rear as they saw
the sun wink off the cuirassiers’ helmets inside the distant redoubt. “It
would be difficult to convey our feelings as we watched this brilliant feat
of arms,” wrote Colonel Charles Griois, a cavalry officer, “perhaps
without equal in the military annals of nations.” The Russians cut down
the vanguard of cavalry, but more and more mounted troops poured in
every available entryway and rushed in from behind, slashing at the
enemy with their swords. Hopelessly outnumbered, the Russians fought
to the death.
The body of one Russian gunner was decorated by three medals. “In
one hand he held a broken sword, and with the other he was
convulsively grasping the carriage of the gun he’d so valiantly fought
with,” remembered one of his adversaries. But most of the dead were
horribly chopped up and contorted, piled at the entrances, in the wolf
pits outside the palisade walls, and trampled by horses or mixed in with
dying mounts cut by bayonets and unable to stand. The fort was an
abattoir in which the piles of dead told the story of the day like
alternating layers of sedimentary soil. One soldier described the action
inside as a “frenzy of slaughter,” with men slashing at each other or
bludgeoning the enemy with musket stocks.
Barclay watched the action, rushing troops to fill the gaps the French
were gashing in his front line. As the French attack progressed, he was
conferring with another general when he looked up to see an enormous
cloud of dust rolling over the turf toward the redoubt from the north.
The Russians formed squares, with Barclay inside one, and waited for
the cuirassiers to come within range. When the French appeared, the
Russians fired and then advanced. One Russian general remembered
what happened next:

It was a march into hell. In front of us was a mass of indeterminate depth, even as
its front was impressive enough. To the left, a battery …and everywhere, French
cavalry, waiting to cut off our way back…. We went straight for the enemy mass,
while the huge battery hurled its ball at us.
The redoubt was taken by three thirty in the afternoon. General
Caulaincourt was carried out on a white cloak clotted with blood, soon
to be one of the heroes of Borodino. When word reached his brother, the
diplomat began to weep silently and Napoleon offered to let him retire
from the field. Caulaincourt said nothing but touched his hat in
acknowledgment of the gesture.
The small number of Russian prisoners, only 800, testified to the
implacable nature of the defense. Prince Eugène gathered up the
remnants of the different cavalry units and sent them at the Russian
reserves that Barclay had formed into a line. But again, a lack of
manpower doomed the effort and the Russians retreated in good order,
managing to take a number of the Raevsky guns with them.
Napoleon was incredulous that so few prisoners had been taken, even
sending orderlies to the redoubts to make sure none were being held
there. “These Russians let themselves be killed like automatons,” he
complained. The prisoners would suffer terribly in the hands of the
French. “Taken to Smolensk,” the illustrator Faber du Faur recalled.
“They were dragged toward the Prussian frontier, tormented by hunger
and deprived of even the most basic necessities.” Few of the captives
would ever see Russia again.
The last push for a breakthrough occurred on the right. Spurred by the
attack on the redoubt, Poniatowski and his Polish regiments renewed
their assault on the town of Utitsa, which marked the southernmost
point of the advancing French line, pushing around the sides of the hill
with combined cavalry and infantry attacks. The Russians, seeing their
position grow untenable, retreated from the hill and left it to the
triumphant Poles. A last-ditch counterattack of 650 men was cut to
pieces by the French and the battle on the extreme left was over. The
Poles had managed to expel the Russians from a stronghold but failed
again to break through the line or turn the flank.
The artillery on both sides continued to fire, but when Poniatowski

broke off contact with the enemy, the action at Borodino ceased. Finally,
at six o’clock, the guns too fell silent.
THE FIELD OF BATTLE was now a landscape gashed and cratered by artillery
shells and covered from nearly one end to the other by corpses, body
parts, dead or dying horses, regimental flags, the immense detritus of
war. The Würrtemburg lieutenant H. A. Vossler walked across the field
and saw men and horses “gashed and maimed in every conceivable
way.” Studying the faces, he wrote that one could see the last emotions
to pass over their faces before dying. For the French, “desperation,
defiance, cold, unbearable pain.” Among the Russians, “passionate fury,
apathy, and stupor.”
Napoleon, too, rode out to survey the landscape and witnessed the
carnage firsthand. The men cried out, “In the name of God, take care of
the wounded,” but there was little that could be done for the
catastrophic injuries that characterized Borodino. One of his officers’
horses stepped on a dying Russian soldier: it was almost impossible to
avoid on grounds tightly packed with casualties and body parts.
Napoleon erupted in rage, to which one of his staff replied that it was
only a Russian. “There are no enemies after a victory, but only men!” he
shouted, a reversal of his remark to Caulaincourt at Smolensk. He
ordered his men to fan out and assist the wounded in any way they
could.
“They lay one on top of the other,” wrote one Captain von Kurz,
“swimming in pools of their own blood, moaning and cursing as they
begged for death.” The scene at the Raevsky Redoubt was indelible. “It
was horrible to see that enormous mass of riddled soldiers,” wrote the
Prussian baron Wolzogen when he came across it. “French and Russians
were cast together, and there were many wounded men who were
incapable of moving and lay in that wild chaos intermingled with the
bodies of horses and the wreckage of shattered cannon.” Even the men
who had escaped the Russian bullets looked spectral: their uniforms
were ripped here and there by bullets and bayonets; their faces were
ashen from the black powder used in their muskets. As miserable as they
were, the men called out to the emperor, congratulating him. But the
victory was only half-achieved. The Russian army was still visible,

massed within musket shot, and the droves of prisoners that usually
signaled a great triumph were nowhere to be seen.
The worst places were near the bottom of the ravines that snaked
across the battlefield. Soldiers had been hurled back from cavalry
charges or blasted by canister shot and ended up in the streambeds.
Others had come crawling in search of water. One soldier, horribly
mutilated, whose legs and one arm had been blown away, looked so “full
of hope, even gaiety” that officers were moved to try to save him. As
they carried him off, he complained of pain in the missing limbs. There
is no record of his fate, but it would have been a miracle if he had
survived his wounds, especially in the fetid “hospitals” that sprang up
after the battle. Men were found living in the shelter of stacked corpses,
and one legend of Borodino is that a single Russian soldier crawled into
the still-warm carcass of a disemboweled horse and survived by eating
its raw flesh.
The emperor returned to his tent dejected and in physical pain. At ten
o’clock, Murat, his gaily colored tunic torn and dirtied by powder and
dirt, barged in to request the Imperial Guard once more, claiming that a
disorganized and vulnerable Russian army was retreating across the
Moskva and that a surprise attack would finish them as a fighting force.
Napoleon sharply reprimanded him and never seriously considered the
pursuit.
The German strategist Clausewitz was surprised that Napoleon, having
shredded the Russians’ front lines and pushed their reserves into a
compact, vulnerable mass against the Moskva River, didn’t deliver the
coup de grâce. “It is another question whether Bonaparte, who had time
and fresh troops sufficient, should not have made greater exertions on
the 7th, and have raised his success to the pitch of a complete victory,”
he wrote. “He might have …achieved the utter destruction of the
enemy.” The fact that Napoleon had in the past thrown in the reserves
and attained dazzling victories made the decision at Borodino even more
inscrutable to Clausewitz. He attributed it to the “consumption, rapid
beyond all expectation” of the Grande Armée.
Barclay, too, expected the final blow to fall at any moment: Napoleon
had taken the major fortifications and the Russian army was exhausted,

its reserves depleted and many of its key officers— from generals down
to the regimental commanders—out of action, dead or badly wounded.
Murat estimated that he needed only 10,000 infantry soldiers to break
the Russian center.
Napoleon knew that his officers, and historians a hundred years later,
would focus on the question of the Imperial Guard. After dinner, he
chatted with an officer and his secretary of state. Napoleon asked about
medical facilities for the wounded, attended to some other minor
matters, and then fell asleep after an exhausting day. Then, suddenly,
twenty minutes later, as if prodded by a dream, he woke up and began
defending his rationing of the Guard. “People will be surprised that I did
not commit my reserves in order to obtain greater results, but I had to
keep them for striking a decisive blow in the great battle which the
enemy will fight in front of Moscow,” he told his startled aides. “The
success of the day was assured, and I had to consider the success of the
campaign as a whole.”
As a chilly night settled on Borodino, and the wounded crawled on
their elbows and knees toward the campfires or resigned themselves to a
lonely death, the French and Russians began to count their dead. The
French had lost 28,000 men, including 49 generals; the Russians, about
45,000, roughly half of their entire front line troops, including 29
generals. It was the deadliest engagement in the annals of warfare to
that date. It would take a hundred years, until the Battle of the Somme,
for the totals to be exceeded.
Neither side at the Somme was hampered by a lack of men; each had
millions to throw into a futile confrontation. But typhus had stolen
precious thousands of troops from Napoleon, and with them, the battle,
the war, and the future of his empire. If he’d had the tens of thousands
of men who had fallen to Rickettsia, he would most likely have broken
the Russian army as a fighting force and put immense pressure on
Alexander to reach a settlement—or inspired a pro-peace party to unseat
the tsar and negotiate in his stead. Even if he hadn’t gotten a treaty, he
would have marched out of Russia at the head of a significant army, by a
far more tenable route than he eventually took, and may well have
fended off the swarming attacks on his regime that were soon to follow.

The pathogen destroyed any chances for that.
The emperor, fatally wounded, limped away from Borodino toward an
utterly different future for himself and for Europe.

T
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     11
The Hospital
HE WOUNDED ON BOTH SIDES WERE LEFT IN A DESPERATE situation. Dr. Larrey had
ordered five of the six light ambulance divisions to remain at
Smolensk to care for the thousands of ill and wounded, leaving only a
rudimentary medical staff to care for the thousands of patients at
Borodino. “There was virtually no sanitary service or activity,” one
officer remembered.
All the villages and houses close to the Moscow road were packed full with
wounded in an utterly helpless state. The villages were destroyed by endless fires
which ravaged the regions occupied or traversed by the French army. Those
wounded who managed to save themselves from the flames crawled in their
thousands along the high road seeking some way to prolong their pitiful existence.
The Russian soldiers were remarkably stoic. A French colonel who
walked through the battlefield after the last guns had fallen silent was
surprised to find the enemy troops, even those with terrible wounds,
mostly quiet, avoiding the hooves of passing horses. They took the
religious medals from their necks and held them in their hands,
sometimes praying to them. The most popular was Saint Nicholas, the
Miracle Worker of the Orthodox Church, protector of the poor and
powerless. The Russian saying “If anything happens to God, we’ve
always got Saint Nicholas” was particularly appropriate to the men’s
situation as night closed in.
If one was a soldier unlucky enough to find himself sick or wounded
the morning of September 8, he was at the beginning of a searing,
uncertain journey. Doctors were scarce, patients uncountable. The dawn
was cold, wet, and violently windy, the sun obscured by heavy fog as

soldiers picked their way through the battlefield, the heavy mist
cloaking most of the carnage but revealing here and there a shattered
ammunition wagon, a dead horse with an enormous, bloated stomach,
abandoned pistols and muskets, sabers twisted or impaled in the dirt,
and the corpses of soldiers missing heads or entrails, pieces of men and
animals seemingly thrown violently against the ground, their blood
smeared in the dirt. Each small tableau was uncovered and then
obscured by the fog.
The injured soldiers walked toward the field hospitals rumored to
have been set up in houses and stone buildings nearby; the medical
services were already a shambles and reliable information was hard to
come by. The men fell in line with the parade of wounded and healthy
trudging on the rutted lanes, their faces blackened by powder and mud,
their tunics ripped by ball or streaked with mud and gore. If they had a
friend willing to help them, they slung an arm around the other man’s
neck. Solitary figures used shattered musket stocks as canes or rifles as
crutches.
On the side of the road, men who had begun the journey but were
unable to go on cried out. “Mercy, please!” they shouted or called out
their unit number looking for a mate. There were attempts at humor.
One man called out to a soldier whose lower leg was mangled, “If thy
foot offend thee, cast it away!” But mostly men cried for water, doctors,
and their mothers in a half dozen languages.
The surest way to find a doctor would have been to follow one’s nose:
a putrid smell meant bodies, and bodies meant hospitals. The odor
carried for hundreds of yards, a mix of the smell of clotted blood, of
putrefying flesh, of feces and the musty stench of filthy dressings. The
flying ambulances from the battlefields, which looked like large coffins
fixed to the back of two-horse wagons, could guide the soldiers but they
rushed ahead, too fast for anyone to keep up with. Every house on the
road to Moscow, no matter how ramshackle, were filled with wounded.
But only a few had doctors.
Imagine the journey of a wounded soldier staggering from the
battlefield on September 8 and coming upon one of these hospitals.
When at last the destination came into view, it would most likely have

been a local nobleman’s house or a church, the most substantial
structures around, taken over by the army to house the wounded. Men
clustered around the entrance, begging to be let in. Corpses littered the
yard in front; some of their shirts had been torn off to use as bandages.
Others were naked and dogs had gotten to their exposed flesh. Horses
lay disemboweled in the mud, pieces of their flanks cut away for food.
There was shouting and cries of pain coming from inside the building.
Orderlies carried in men with their heads drooping off the ends of the
stretchers.
There was a standing order in the Grande Armée stating that any man
with serious wounds was to be saluted—a remnant of the original
Revolution’s fervor for the common man. It had long fallen into disuse;
the numbers were too overwhelming. And the decree that stated that
enemy soldiers were to be given equal treatment, which was symbolized
in the doctors’ uniforms with the word “Humanité” inscribed on the
buttons, was also void. Around the back of the hospital, Russian patients
had been dumped into the garden to die.
If you were an officer, you would have stood a better chance of
making it inside the typical hospital. Rank and birth, whatever
Napoleonic rhetoric stated, still mattered. The men stumbled through the
lines of patients littering the floor. Some lay on filthy straw taken from
nearby barns, others used corpses as pillows; in places men had toppled
on unconscious soldiers and lay there, too exhausted or sick to move.
Those sick with typhus would have desperately looked for a place to
lie down. The energy had been sucked out of their muscles and they felt
faint, their heads splitting with headache that made it difficult to open
their eyes. They collapsed anywhere they could. But after a battle, the
wounded took precedence over the ill when it came to medical attention.
Typhus patients would be among the last to be seen, and the grunts and
cries from the next room told them that the surgeon was busy with
casualties from Borodino.
The surgery would have been the center of the typical hospital. Pale
men still in shock, their limbs sometimes hanging from a ribbon of flesh
or muscle, flowed toward it in a steady stream, and bandaged or dead
men flowed out. At the center of the room was a stout wooden table

surrounded by assistants. Amputations were almost the only thing on
offer. Some leading doctors advocated waiting a day or two before
operating on a damaged limb, but Dr. Larrey and his staff were firm
believers in amputating quickly. The patient was often already in shock
from the wound and would feel less pain, and the impact of the wound
actually lowered the blood pressure, meaning he would bleed less during
the operation. The risk of gangrene—deadlier to the soldier than the
bullet itself— would be minimized if the limb was gotten off quickly.
Speed was highly prized.
The table would have been covered in blood, bits of tissue, and
uniforms. The surgeon didn’t wash his hands between operations, or
clean his instruments; perhaps he dipped them in a bowl of bloody water
between procedures, but that was it. Beside him on the table were his
tools. The typical traveling surgeon’s case of the early nineteenth century
would have contained everything from scalpels to elevators used to lift
bones in skull fractures to trepanning braces and drills for penetrating
into the skull to spreaders for peeling back the rib cage, encompassing
twenty to thirty instruments in all. But the French doctors, prodded to be
quick, had reduced it to the bare minimum: On the table lay different-
size knives for cutting through skin and major muscles, a large bone saw
made of steel and horn with a stout solid blade for cutting through
femurs and humeri, and a smaller version for tibiae, fingers, and more
delicate work.
The soldier’s friends would have hoisted the injured man onto the
table and held him down. The doctor then examined the wound,
sometimes probing the hole with his filthy finger to see if the bullet was
close to the surface. If the wound was to an arm or a leg and the patient
was conscious, the doctor rattled off a quick diagnosis, usually
recommending the limb come off. Officers were typically given the
choice of amputation or a patching-over of the wound. In counseling one
general whose arm had been shattered by a musket round, Dr. Larrey
spelled out the options: “Doubtless we might have some chance of
success if we tried to save your arm,” he explained. “But…numberless
fatigues and privations still await you and you’re running the risk of
fateful accidents.” Namely, infection. (The general refused the
amputation.) Average soldiers, however, could find their limb removed

without any kind of consultation. If the soldier insisted on keeping his
limb, the doctor simply shrugged, patched the wound with a bit of linen,
and nodded for the man’s friends to take him to nearby rooms, where he
was lowered into a bed or, more likely, a bit of straw on the floor. When
the soldier agreed to an amputation, a leather tourniquet was tied
around the top of the limb, cinching off the major blood vessels, and the
other end was tied to a leg of the table. The man was given a bullet or a
bit of wood to bite on; officers were offered a quick shot of liquor if any
was available.
Growling for the friends to grip the man tight, the surgeon would have
cut down to the muscle with one of the knives, making the incision all
around the circumference of the limb. Then he grasped the larger knife
and, leaning into the patient’s body, began sawing to the bone. Some
patients cursed and bucked from the pain, but others, tensed and stoic,
only stared up at the ceiling. It was considered bad form to scream.
The amputation of a leg at the thigh would have taken around four
minutes, but if one got to the operating table late in the day after the
surgeon had worked on dozens of men, the bone saw would have been
perceptibly dulled and the operation would have taken much longer.
Unconscious men came to in the middle of the procedures and began
screaming. One British officer whose arm was amputated during the
Napoleonic Wars raged at the surgeon as the blunted blade of the saw
took twenty minutes to cut through the bone. Many of the heavy Russian
balls had not only cut through muscle and broken bones but also
shattered them, sending shards into the tissue. The doctors had to probe
the wounds for these pieces. “The muscles were lacerated and reduced to
the consistency of jelly,” Dr. Larrey observed in a typical patient
suffering from a wound from a musket ball.
Once the limb was off, the surgeon would have sewn the flaps of skin
together with black thread to give the man a stump that stood a fair
chance of healing. Then a piece of linen or cloth dipped in water was
wrapped around the stump and the man was lifted off the table and sent
out of the room. The limb he left behind was tossed into a pile with the
others: by the end of the day, the jumble of arms and legs would reach
the ceiling.

The propensity of the artillery balls to bounce waist-high through a
regiment resulted in countless disembowelments, and men would have
been brought into the hospitals holding their intestines in their hands.
The bloody mess was simply cleaned off as best as possible and stuffed
back in the body cavity, then covered with a wrap of linen. In a torso
injury, any wound where the bullet had penetrated deeper than the
length of the doctor’s finger was deemed inoperable. An injury caused by
a ball to the chest, the lungs, or the intestines was often waved away as
being too dangerous for surgery. The hopeless cases—“horribly
disemboweled or mutilated …motionless, with hanging heads, drenching
the ground with their blood”—were left to die.
Surgeons worked nonstop as more patients were brought in. Dr. Larrey
himself performed 200 amputations in twenty-four hours after Borodino,
an average of 8 per hour, but he would have been examining patients,
triaging, and supervising the field hospital at the same time, and a good
surgeon working steadily could have easily doubled that number. Larrey
recorded some exceptional cases in his memoirs, including one Russian
colonel who had his nose cut off by a musket ball and a soldier who had
a piece of mortar shrapnel hit him in the right calf, ricochet and travel
upward through the thigh muscles, and then shoot out of the top of the
leg, having sheared the man’s calf muscle off and shattered both bones
of the leg. But the vast majority of what a surgeon did at Borodino was
butcher’s work.
AS EVENING FELL, wax tapers would have been lit in the dark rooms. Men’s
faces were thrown into sudden illumination by the flickering candles and
then covered by darkness again. The stench was overpowering: the fetid,
rotting-meat smell of gangrene, the sickly odor of suppurating wounds,
and the coppery tang of fresh blood, as well as the smell of feces and
urine. The rooms were so dark that when orderlies came through with
the evening meal, unconscious men lying in the straw were sometimes
missed and died from thirst or simple inattention.
As the night progressed, some typhus patients would have entered
their own worlds. Long-dead friends appeared and the patients struck up
conversations with them, or they screamed at phantoms only they could
see, or stared unblinking at sights or visions that, even after they

recovered, they found impossible to put into words. Sometimes the
patients had never before seen the fever-people that visited them and
couldn’t account for how they had pictured them so vividly. Typhus
patients had been known to reenact scenes from their past lives: a young
cowherd imagined that the other patients were his cattle and called to
them constantly with the cry used to move cows into their pens; thieves
bragged again and again of the same accomplices, the same heists. A
thick noxious film covered their tongues and their teeth turned black;
observers remarked on their resemblance to breathing cadavers. The
rooms echoed with dry, urgent coughs. Sometimes a man’s cheek flushed
a deep red color and then, hours later, the color drained away and
appeared in the other cheek. The men often gave off a peculiar odor that
smelled like ammonia or “putrid animal matter,” though that could have
been an olfactory projection by observers, as it was widely believed that
decaying plants and animals caused the infection in the first place.
As the night wore on, infected lice from the dead and dying would
have crawled off the bodies and through the straw, seeking warmth.
When they found a new host, they would feed almost immediately.
Rickettsia feasted on the wounded.
If the doctor had run out of amputations and surgeries to perform, he
would have made his rounds and done what he could for the men
suffering from typhus. The Belgian surgeon de Kerckhove described what
it was like to move among these men who seemed only half alive. “The
face was sometimes red,” he wrote, “sometimes pale, the eyes dark and
sad, often lifeless or tearful. Their ideas were incoherent, their smell and
hearing was weakening, deafness at intervals.” Some of the patients
shivered uncontrollably, others tried to tear off their clothing for relief
from fever. Men stared, their eyes gleaming in the candlelight, their
chests pumping up and down in fast, shallow breaths. “Tendon jolts”
sent arms and legs snapping into the air, while other men, overcome by
sudden terror attacks, tried to make it to the door, stumbling over bodies
and being cursed in guttural voices. Patients cried out for someone to
blow their brains out.
The hospital doctor would have moved among them, administering
cool drinks where he could, herbs known as “vomitories” to those who

seemed strong enough to bring up what were believed to be noxious
substances in their stomach. Doctors on the march often veered into the
forest searching for tonics, certain barks and plants such as elder
blossom and mint. If the doctor had managed to hoard some of his
primitive anesthesia such as tincture of opium or Hoffman’s drops (a
combination of alcohol and ether), he gave it to the patients raving with
pain. The supplies simply hadn’t arrived from Paris, so the surgeons
were forced to scavenge what they could. Some of the doctors at
Borodino made futile attempts to separate the typhus patients from the
wounded. “If it was possible, I put the men suffering from typhus in
spacious rooms, well-aerated and cool,” wrote de Kerckhove. But the
ancient preventive remedy of quarantine was impossible in mass-
casualty situations.
Quarantine had been used throughout history to stop an advancing
microbe such as Rickettsia. The practice goes back at least to Justinian’s
Plague in 541-2, when the Roman ruler instituted a new law to stop
travelers from plague-infected areas from entering unscathed towns.
Lepers were regularly isolated from the healthy by societies around the
world. In times of plague, vessels from infected regions weren’t allowed
to dock in “clean” harbors. Guards were posted on roads twenty miles
from town and forced unhealthy-looking peddlers and workers to turn
around. Those who tried to skirt the blockade could be executed.
Quarantine hospitals were built on the outskirts of cities to house people
suspected of having the disease, who were watched carefully for any
symptoms for forty days.
Other doctors in the Grande Armée tried to get as far from the infected
men as possible. Among them were the hated cbirurgiens de pacotille
(“junk doctors”), cowards from the medical service who grabbed the first
lightly wounded man they saw on the battlefield and dragged him to a
hospital, their ticket to survival. There was, theoretically, a stiff penalty
for cowardice under fire. Napoleon at the beginning of his career had
ordered that any health officer caught abandoning a first-aid station in
battle or refusing to care for a patient suffering from a contagious illness
was to be court-martialed. “Whatever his station,” wrote the emperor, in
an edict dripping with contempt for doctors, “no Frenchman shall fear
death.” One surgeon who had refused to treat plague patients in

Alexandria had been arrested, stripped of his citizenship, and then
dressed in women’s clothes and paraded on a donkey through the city
streets, with a sign on his back that read “Afraid to die, unworthy of
being a Frenchman.”
As he tended to the ill patients, the Belgian doctor de Kerckhove had
no doubt what was killing them. He described how the disease appeared
among the troops and found it “generally the same as other typhus
epidemics that affect armies in wartime.” The symptoms began with a
general malaise, then a state of “languidness,” a slow pulse, and then a
puffy and affectless visage (what the doctor called “a deterioration of
facial features”). The patient became unable to move—the men called
this stage of the illness “broken limbs”—and total exhaustion set in.
Appetite disappeared, the subject became giddy, a whitish coat covered
the tongue, and fever began shaking the patient’s body with pulses of
strong heat, followed by the chills; thirst became “inextinguishable” and
the brain became “congested.” The vision began to suffer as the disease
spilled blood into the brain; the eyes became “dark and sad,” and then
simply lifeless. Hearing and even the sense of smell weakened, with
some patients going completely deaf. As the days passed, the men
became shadows of their former selves. They would whisper in nearly
inaudible voices; they became indifferent to their condition or their
futures; their breathing speeded up and they suffered from “absolute
insomnia.” Giddiness turned to full-blown hallucination and delirium,
alternating with sudden fits of panic. Three days after the fever
appeared, the men would become completely prostrate, unable to rise or
walk. The small purplish spots appeared and spread over the body, along
with what de Kerckhove called “black rusts and passive hemorrhages,”
bleeding beneath the skin that he half-accurately diagnosed as being
“caused by the decrease of vital energy of the vascular system.” In fact,
that system was beginning to break down, threatening the heart, lungs,
and brain. He found that the disease was most contagious in the fourth
to tenth day.
In the final stage, the burning skin became cooler, the patients
appeared better in the mornings but deteriorated at night, and “the eyes
were turning off and sinking into eye-sockets.” The face became “deeply
altered,” pale with exhaustion. The body began to stink, as if it were

decomposing while the man was still alive; indeed, de Kerckhove wrote
that the men’s figures had a “dead-body look and seemed ready to
dissolve themselves.” The limbs blackened with gangrene, especially
where vests or tight clothes prevented blood from circulating.
The physician found that the typhus epidemic, rooted in the “reeking
places” the men were forced to occupy, was almost weirdly potent.
“Here,” he wrote, “it often happened that men died in a lightning-fast
way.” For this, he blamed the exhaustion of the men and the conditions
in the hospitals strung back to Poland like a filthy necklace. In a final
burst, looking back on those days, he called the hospitals “plague-filled
cloacae,” diseased sewers. One feels the even-keeled de Kerckhove
straining for vile effect, eager to fleck his reader’s eyes and ears with the
awfulness of what he had seen.
Often, those typhus patients in the typical hospital who were seen by a
doctor would have been bled and cupped to draw noxious substances
away from the vital organs. Bleeding was a classic Hippocratic approach
to restoring humors that had gotten out of balance, but it was a
particularly awful solution to typhus, where the veins are already having
trouble delivering blood to the body. Bark was given when available, as
well as water reddened with wine, but there was so little of that to go
around that few patients would have received even a taste.
Of the several courses of treatment de Kerckhove administered, the
one he called “the stimulating method” gave the best results. This
consisted of administering herbs to get the patient to vomit (if de
Kerckhove deemed him strong enough) and then administering
stimulants “if the skin was not too dry or burning.” He would give them
water mixed with wine and lemonade, light tonics to cool their thirst.
It was a minimalist approach, to say the least. The doctors who tended
to the poet John Donne two centuries before would have found it
appallingly lacking in imagination and proactive measures; there were
no split pigeons to apply to the skin, no bleeding to drain away the
putrid blood, no complex formulas for balancing the humors. But de
Kerckhove and his fellow physicians had few supplies, brutal conditions
to work in, a largely indifferent medical administration, and patients
worn out by epic marches. De Kerckhove was certain his men could

stand little else besides a purging and a decent bed, if one could be
found.
WHATEVER THE CONDITIONS of the specific hospital a wounded or sick soldier
ended up in, the majority of them feared infectious diseases. The medical
authorities might debate the idea of contagion, but the soldiers believed
in it. “Typhus, sir,” says one doctor to Count Rostov in Tolstoy’s War and
Peace, which chronicles the invasion of 1812, as he tries to enter a sick
ward. “It’s death to go in.” It was an accurate reflection of what the
soldiers felt.
The great difference between the French doctors struggling to come to
grips with typhus at the hospital at Borodino and later researchers—or
ourselves, watching them struggle blindly as thousands died—was the
arrival of germ theory in the mid-1800s. In 1835, Agostino Bassi traced
an epidemic killing Italian silkworms to infectious spores he observed
under a microscope and became the first to formulate the idea of living,
contagious agents as the cause of disease. John Snow’s tracking of the
source of the 1854 London cholera epidemic, ending with his
identification of the famous Broad Street Pump as the source of the
contaminated water, advanced the cause of contagion, and Louis Pasteur
proved in the early 1860s that spontaneous generation was superstition.
But it was Robert Koch in 1876 who connected a pathogen—in this case,
Bacillus anthracis—and a disease, anthrax.
As the medical historian Charles-Edward Amory Winslow has pointed
out, by 1812 the key elements for a germ theory of disease had been in
place for almost two hundred years. Antoine Philips van Leeuwenhoek
had used primitive microscopes to identify bacteria in the human mouth.
Athanasius Kircher had originated the idea of living organisms capable
of transporting disease. Francisco Redi had demonstrated that piles of
rags and other inanimate objects didn’t give rise to living things (there
was no way, for example, that rats and insects could materialize from
decomposing matter). As Winslow writes, “If an openminded and
imaginative observer had put the work of these three pioneers together,
the germ theory of disease could have been developed in the seventeenth
century instead of the nineteenth.”
The great-man theory of medical history, the idea that progress

against illness is one long string of discoveries by a series of geniuses,
gains support not only from pioneers such as Pasteur or Curie but from
absences such as the physician who with a flash of insight could have
assembled the available evidence into an airtight case for contagion—the
physician who, in the seventeenth and early eighteenth century, didn’t
exist.
Dr. James Lind, the British surgeon who had invented the blind test
and drastically reduced the incidence of scurvy and typhus in the Royal
Navy, wasn’t that great mind. He had essentially skipped the “Eureka”
moment and moved to a way of evaluating treatments and thereby found
a remedy without knowing how it cured. Had that phantom genius been
present to codify the work of others into germ theory, Lind could have
contributed the method of proving it.
Rickettsia profited from the competition among theories of disease. In
the hunt for the secret of typhus, a key element wasn’t only an attempt
to understand what caused the epidemics but to understand how to
understand the evidence in front of one’s eyes. The most important clues
would remain in plain view for hundreds of years. Generation after
generation of doctors and generals, swayed by culture, conflicting
evidence, and a lack of systematic thought, would confront the same
evidence with the same theories and make their gambits. Those who
read the evidence correctly, and there were some, survived and often
prospered, for the fact is that, centuries before Napoleon faced typhus, it
had been stopped dead in its tracks more than once, only to reappear
and outwit its next opponent. The case of typhus illustrates how difficult
and hard-won knowledge truly is.
It was Napoleon’s misfortune that the political evolution of warfare
had outpaced medical thought. War had become total war, with
Napoleon as its first great practitioner. But medicine lacked an
equivalent genius who might have revolutionized disease theory the way
that he had battlefield tactics.
THE MEN PACKED shoulder to shoulder in that hospital at Borodino knew
nothing of the debates and missed opportunities that had left Rickettsia
to strike freely as the wax tapers burned. They were certainly aware of
how drastically Napoleon had cut back on the medical service, and now

had a chance to bitterly regret it. But neither they nor their doctors
knew that the lice soundlessly fleeing from the dead bodies in the middle
of the night and climbing up the sleeves of uninfected men were the
vectors for the blossoming epidemic. The cries of the grievously
wounded and dying men they understood as part of the rigors of war.
But the ranting men who gibbered to unseen faces in the fetid little
hospital, or laughed uproariously for no reason, were no doubt odd and
worrying.
Those who died were carted away and tossed in open graves or simply
piled by the side of the road. The officers and the well-connected often
received small gestures at their death. One soldier requested that his
brother’s heart be cut out and placed in a small beaker of wine, to bring
back to France as a keepsake for his family. The body itself was then
placed in a coffin, escorted by twenty-five gunners, and entombed in a
stone wall in the nearby town of Mozhaisk with the notation “The body
of Ferdinand Gaston de Lariboisière, lieutenant of Carabiniers, killed at
the Battle of the Moscowa, Sept. 1812. His father recommends his
remains to the public piety.” But most corpses were left to molder.
The doctors would come again in the morning, and orderlies would
bring food and water. In the hospitals at Borodino, one prayed to see the
dawn.

T
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     12
The Last City
HE FRENCH SOLDIERS KNEW THEY HADN’T WON THE NEEDED victory. “We had never
suffered such heavy losses,” wrote Colonel Raymond de Montesquiou,
who took charge of the 4th Regiment of the line after its commander
had been killed. “Never had the Army’s morale been so damaged. I no
longer found the soldiers’ old gaiety.” Instead of the songs that usually
echoed around the campfires after even the most bruising engagements,
Montesquiou heard only “gloomy silence.”
The Russian army was in perilous shape. On the night of September 7,
Barclay sent Colonel Ludwig von Wolzogen to report to Kutuzov and
receive any orders—in writing, as Kutuzov could be both wily and
mentally lazy. On the way, Wolzogen met a lieutenant resting with 30 to
40 men behind the front line and ordered him to rejoin his regiment.
“This is my regiment!” the man cried. He had lost approximately 1,250
men. Ironically, an almost identical exchange occurred on the other side
of the lines, when Napoleon found an officer in charge of 60 to 80 men
standing near the Schevardino Redoubt, well behind the front line. The
emperor was annoyed that an officer was allowing his men to linger
behind their unit. “Rejoin your regiment,” the emperor called. “It is
here,” said the officer, pointing to the dead heaped around the
fortifications. Confused, Napoleon shouted at him to catch up to his
men. The officer spat out the same reply, and a junior officer had to
explain to the commander that the six dozen soldiers were all that
remained of the unit.
Colonel Wolzogen found Kutuzov on the Moscow road miles from the
frontline troops, surrounded by aides and aristocratic scions who hadn’t

come near the artillery barrages. He reported on the state of the
battlefield: all the redoubts had been captured and the troops were
“extremely tired and shattered.” Kutuzov’s reply showed how out of
touch he had become during the course of the day.
With which low bitch of a sutler have you been getting drunk, that you come giving
me such an absurd report? I am in the best position to know how the battle went!
The French attacks have been successfully repulsed everywhere, and tomorrow I
shall put myself at the head of the army to drive the enemy without more ado from
the sacred soil of Russia!
But Colonel Toll went out to survey the ranks and soon returned with
bad news: Wolzogen’s estimates had been accurate. In addition, the
artillery was nearly out of shells and the guns themselves were battered,
their carriages held together with rope. Kutuzov soon ordered a tactical
retreat to a more defensible position. The fact that he could muster only
45,000 effective troops the next morning shows how badly the Russian
forces had been mauled, and how close they were to breaking.
THE NEXT DAY, the sun rose on thousands of corpses still covering the field of
battle. Napoleon’s clerks were sent out to compile casualty reports. In
one German regiment of the Grande Armée, they “used a dead horse as a
writing table, and the orderlies even dragged up a few Russian corpses to
act as chairs for the scribes.” The cadavers would still be there weeks
later when the artist-soldier Faber du Faur marched through with his
artillery regiment and sketched the mournful scene.
Both Napoleon and Kutuzov wrote home to their wives, claiming
victory. The Russian commander, who the night before had
contemplated a morning attack on the enemy, also wrote Alexander a
letter filled with half-truths, saying that he had inflicted greater losses on
the French than they had on the Russian forces and that “the enemy did
not gain a single yard of ground.” Badly in need of reinforcements, he
ordered a retreat of six miles to the town of Mozhaisk.
The Russians who had survived the battle were, on the whole, in high
spirits. “Everyone was still in such a rapturous state of mind, they were
all such recent witnesses of the bravery of our troops, that the thought of
failure, or even only partial failure, would not enter our minds,”

remembered Prince Piotr Viazemsky. These men had a very modest
definition of success when facing the great Napoleon. Simply to have
stood up to his legendary army was enough. They’d banished the image
of the French as supermen and proved themselves at least their equals in
terms of courage. The order to fall back was a blow, but nothing could
dampen the enthusiasm of the ordinary troops.
As the Russians retreated toward Moscow, Napoleon followed. At
Mozhaisk, Napoleon’s quartermasters found the emperor a just-built
house, so new the doors hadn’t been installed. Here they established the
imperial headquarters. Napoleon went to work, but his cold had now
completely robbed him of his voice and he could only furiously scribble
order after order to his aides, who struggled to decipher his handwriting
while he raced on to the next directive, banging on his desk for the
orderlies to collect the latest batch.
When the Grande Armée reached Mozhaisk, it found the city packed
with Russian casualties and its heights commanded by the Russian rear
guard and squads of Cossacks. The dashing Murat, now a favorite with
the Cossacks because of his flamboyance and bravery, soon put the
Russians to flight and the troops swarmed into the town. Bodies were
stacked in the doorways of burned-out buildings or left lying in the ruins
of collapsed buildings.
Many of the enemy wounded were tossed out of the makeshift
hospitals to make room for the Grande Armée’s casualties. When the
food ran out, desperate Russians left behind by their comrades resorted
to cannibalism. Alexandre Bellot de Kergorre, a French commissary,
remembered: “Six hundred wounded Russians had fallen in the gardens
and here they lived on cauliflower stalks and human flesh. Of this there
was no shortage!”
French commissaries struggled to keep 3,000 wounded men fed.
Foraging parties headed out into the countryside, bringing back grain
and corn to be milled and made into bread. Even fleeing townspeople
and soldiers were stopped on the Moscow road and ordered to give up
part of their provisions for the wounded.
Napoleon lingered in the town while the army lumbered slowly after
the Russians, who were moving toward Moscow. The emperor now

expected, and prayed for, yet another “climactic battle” at the gates of
Moscow. The very name of the city seemed to have acquired a talismanic
power for the emperor, and he repeated it at every turn. When the
names of the generals killed at Borodino were read out, Napoleon
stopped the recitation and cried, “One week of Moscow, and this will not
matter any more!” To him, the idea that the Russians would fail to
defend their capital was as unimaginable as Frenchmen abandoning
Paris. Moscow was the sum of Russia, and taking it would mean that
Alexander could no longer deny him victory.
In the week after Borodino, Kutuzov was still maintaining that he
would make a stand in front of the capital. He sent General Benningsen,
Bagration’s chief of staff, to survey the terrain for a suitable defensive
position and, like Colonel Toll, the general found the available sites to be
few and far between. He finally settled on Poklonnaya Hill, the two
summits of which provide the highest elevation for miles around the
capital. Barclay, who rose from his sickbed to survey the site, quickly
saw that the uneven, fissured ground was a death trap for an army that
might have to retreat quickly. The majority of Kutuzov’s generals and
advisers agreed with the levelheaded Barclay, but the question of
whether Moscow would be actually defended still hung in the air.
Kutuzov met with the bombastic governor of Moscow, Rostopchin,
who would soon come to despise the general as a schemer. The Russian
commander boasted that he was preparing to give battle to Napoleon on
the ground under their feet. Rostopchin was astonished. He pointed out
that the terrain was unfavorable, and that any breakthrough of the first
line would leave nothing at the army’s back but a rolling slope into the
streets of Moscow, precipitating a disastrous retreat. Even a military
novice could see the speciousness of Kutuzov’s claims. On his way out of
army headquarters, Rostopchin encountered Barclay, who did nothing to
allay his fears. “You see what they want to do,” Barclay told him. “The
only thing I desire is to be killed if we are mad enough to fight where we
are.” The governor warned the generals that if the army abandoned
Moscow, he would set it ablaze.
On September 13, Kutuzov called his commanders together to decide
whether or not to make a stand. In a shabby peasant hut, the generals

gathered around a table covered with maps. Kutuzov framed the matter
in a way that told the others what he was thinking: “Is it proper to await
the enemy’s attack in this disadvantageous position or to abandon
Moscow to the enemy?” The staff was split, with Barclay, Toll, and
others favoring retreat and General Benningsen putting forth the idea
that the Russian army shouldn’t only turn and face Napoleon but attack
his right flank, where Poniatowski’s Polish regiments had been
decimated. It was an audacious proposal, indicative of how keen the
Russian fighting spirit remained.
The debate was, as one might expect, heated. Kutuzov was most likely
looking for political cover for the decision to abandon Moscow than real
options for defending it. But the generals strained to change his mind.
Benningsen argued that the sacrifices of Borodino would be meaningless
if they didn’t defend the capital. Barclay, ever the voice of reason,
pointed out the hard facts: the regiment-level leaders needed to lead an
attack on the French lines were lying in the fields near the Raevsky
Redoubt, as were many of the men needed to execute it.
Kutuzov dismissed his generals and mulled over the options. When he
made his decision on the night of September 13, he phrased it in the best
possible light. “Napoleon is like a torrent which we are still too weak to
stem” was his famous justification. “Moscow is the sponge which will
suck him in.” The order for a retreat went out, startling citizens and
enraging the army. Kutuzov decided to head south, toward the rich
farmlands around Kolmna, where his troops would find plenty of food.
With a typical flourish, he presented the abandonment of the nation’s
capital as an unorthodox offensive tactic, but he couldn’t disguise the
fact that Russia was unable to protect its jeweled city.
Alexander, now ensconced in St. Petersburg, was oblivious to the
unfolding debacle. He’d reacted to Kutuzov’s bulletin from Borodino and
a second that claimed the Cossacks had pushed Napoleon’s rear guard
seven miles from the battlefield—a complete lie—with an outpouring of
honors: the general was awarded a marshal’s baton and 100,000 rubles.
St. Petersburg was swept up in a patriotic ecstasy: the city echoed with
the ringing of church bells, strangers embraced on the streets, residents
pressed for a glimpse of the tsar at a celebratory mass at St. Alexander

Nevsky and cried thanks to God for delivering them from the Antichrist.
Governor Rostopchin reacted to the final edict with despair. “The
blood boils in my veins,” he wrote his wife. “I think I shall die of grief.”
But he delayed only a few moments before issuing a blizzard of
directives. The Muscovite police went through the taverns, puncturing
the vats of vodka and spirits; the city’s 2,100 firemen prepared the city’s
fire pumps for evacuation, so that the French wouldn’t be able to use
them; wagons were arranged for the wounded who could be safely
transported; and a stream of notables with a dizzying list of requests—to
find a lost relative or for an escort through the mobs—were seen to.
The governor also assembled a crew of policemen, nationalists, and
street thugs for committing mass arson once the French had occupied the
city. Ironically, one of Kutuzov’s pet devices, the dirigible that was to fly
over the Grande Armée and incinerate it in a massive fireball, figured in
the plan. The unused fuses and combustibles that the builders had left
behind would be used to set Moscow alight.
The residents who had stayed in Moscow and vowed to fight were
horrified by the order to abandon the city. Rostopchin had pledged that
Muscovites would form citizens’ brigades armed with pitchforks and old
muskets at the back of the Russian army, but now burghers and peasants
alike raced for the city gates.
The city’s population during peacetime fluctuated between 250,000
and 350,000 people, the latter number accounting for the aristocrats and
their households returning to the city after their summers in the
countryside. Now entire blocks emptied within hours. Soldiers weeping
from shame and anger marched through the streets, abandoning the half-
dug entrenchments they had been constructing to meet the French, while
families rushed from sector to sector looking for loved ones who had
been off on an errand when the news arrived. Criminals, easily
recognizable by their half-shaven heads, were let out of their prison cells
and joined the crowds, and the walking wounded streamed out of the
hospitals, leaving their bedridden comrades behind, while inmates of the
local insane asylums wandered about or gibbered on street corners.
Looters broke the locks on basements and cellars and got drunk on the
wine and vodka inside, even going as far as licking the paving stones dry

of the liquor that had spilled from the vats. All joined in a roiling scrum,
vengeful, despairing, and as eager for scapegoats as they were to reach
safety.
Louise Fusil, a French actress and performer, was holed up with a
collection of artists in a palace belonging to a prince on the eastern edge
of the city. “We kept on climbing to the top of the house,” she
remembered, “where we could get a long view, and one evening we
spotted bivouac fires. Our servants came into our rooms in great alarm
to announce that the police had been knocking at every door to urge the
occupants to leave, as the city was going to be set on fire, and the fire-
pumps had been taken away.”
It was dangerous to be French, rich, or insufficiently patriotic in the
city now. The poor threw stones at gaudy carriages as they flew by, and
nativist mobs roamed the boulevards looking for traitors. One political
agitator released from prison was quickly surrounded by an enraged
crowd and literally torn limb from limb.
The memoirist and general Philippe Ségur records one scene from the
lower depths of Moscow. A French citizen who called Moscow home had
gone into hiding as Napoleon approached. Early in September, she’d
come out of her sanctuary and wandered through the empty streets,
puzzled as to where everyone had gone. Then a “far-off mournful
wailing fell on her terrified ears.” Frozen with fear, she watched as a
great wave of poor men and women approached, dragging whatever of
their ragged possessions they could carry. They held up icons to bless
their escape and led their children away, following the priests who
headed the procession. The rich had contacts and mansions in other
towns, salable treasures. But it was these poor people on whom the
burden of Napoleon’s invasion fell. The woman watched as this biblical
river of misery passed her by, pausing only to look back once “and
seeming to bid farewell to their holy city.”
Hidden in various quarters of the metropolis, the firebugs waited for
word to begin their work. Napoleon would be allowed to occupy the
city, but Rostopchin hoped the city walls would become a trap in which
to consume him.
TO GIVE THE RUSSIAN army and the remaining citizens time to traverse the

approximately 
six-mile 
breadth 
of 
the 
city, 
General 
Mikhail
Miloradovich, who was in charge of the rear guard, sent a messenger to
Murat under a white flag. He asked for twenty-four hours to arrange his
troops for surrender and threatened stiff resistance if he didn’t get it.
Murat agreed; he could use the time to rest his men and bring up any
available matériel, as his men’s pouches contained only enough musket
cartridges for one day’s fighting. The temporary truce granted, Murat
waited for the peaceable surrender to be finished. No one among
Napoleon’s marshals could yet imagine the lengths that the enemy were
willing to go to defend the homeland.
Two of Kutuzov’s battalions decided to play their way out of the city,
marching past the Kremlin with their band in full voice. General
Miloradovich, an unflappable soldier known for his dry wit under the
direst conditions, rode up and snapped at their commander, “What
blackguard gave you orders that the band should play?” The lieutenant
general replied that it was tradition since the time of Peter the Great that
a garrison surrendering a fortress marched out with accompaniment.
“But where in the regulations of Peter the Great,” Miloradovich replied
acidly, “does it say anything about the surrender of Moscow?”
Nearly four hundred miles away, Alexander got the news from
Moscow in small, agonizing doses. With Kutuzov having mysteriously
cut off communication, Rostopchin dashed off a note to the tsar on
September 13 announcing the plans for the abandonment of the capital.
“Moscow has been taken,” it read. “There are some things beyond
comprehension.”
The ordinary Russian soldier left his capital full of bitterness and
regret. Cries of “Where are we being led?” and “Where has he brought
us?” murmured in the ranks. The savior’s glow around Kutuzov had
dissipated in the minds of his men, and soldiers pestered by fleeing
civilians about the military state of affairs could only shrug. They knew
nothing except that they were retreating and that mother Russia had
again been betrayed by a coterie of rich generals. Rostopchin told his
son, age sixteen, who had seen action at Borodino, “Salute Moscow for
the last time. Within an hour it will be in flames.”
NAPOLEON REMAINED AT MOZHAISK, still unable to speak and racked by fever.

(Although it’s possible that the emperor had caught a light case of
typhus, there were many types of fever present in the Grande Armée,
and he developed no other symptoms of the disease.) The emperor kept
seven secretaries busy with his orders and dispatches. His main concern
at this point was manpower. He instructed his chief of staff to write
urgently to the duke of Belluno, who was stationed in Poland with
reinforcements guarding against any Russian attack on the territory.
“The enemy, struck to the heart, no longer busy themselves with
extremities…. Tell the Duke to send everything, battalions, squadrons,
artillery, and detached men to Smolensk, whence they can come to
Moscow.” Regiments were called up from all over Europe: 140,000 from
France, 30,000 from Italy, and more from Poland, Bavaria, Lithuania,
and Prussia. “Not only do I want to have reinforcements sent from all
quarters,” Napoleon wrote, “I also want those reinforcements to be
exaggerated, I want the various sovereigns sending me reinforcements to
publish the fact in the papers, doubling the numbers they are sending.”
He ordered the French, German, and Polish troops of IX Corps from
Germany to Moscow and sent dispatches to many of the detachments
strung out behind him to make their way to the front line. Knowing that
the Russians had almost inexhaustible resources of men to draw from,
the emperor was desperate to get as many bodies as possible.
On September 12, he set out to catch up with the leading elements of
his army. He rode slowly toward the city, still anticipating a fierce
battle. Napoleon could see evidence of abandoned earthworks, and as he
approached his advance units he expected to find the Russian army
around each turn. Scouts and guards combed through the forest ahead of
him, looking for the first line of jaegers that would signal the Russian
position. But they passed through without encountering a single enemy
soldier.
Finally, on September 14, his entourage came to Poklonnaya Hill, the
same outcropping where Kutuzov had proposed to site a last defense of
the city. Riding up, Napoleon and his men crested the top and pulled up
to find Moscow spread out before them like a gleaming carpet
embroidered with gold and silver. It wasn’t the slate-and brick-colored
cities of Germany or even the darkly romantic skyline of Paris. It was a
riot of colors and shapes, a city of turrets and steeples and cupolas in

shades of blood red, sky blue, and the dominant jade green. The men
had marched for months through raw provinces and filthy little villages,
but here was a great city, delighting the men with its richness and alien
forms. They ran forward and broke out in spontaneous applause, calling
out “Moscow! Moscow!”
“It was two o’clock,” wrote General Ségur, the soldier-memoirist. “And
the sun made the magnificent city twinkle and shine with a thousand
colors…. At the sight of this gilded city, this brilliant capital uniting
Europe and Asia, this majestic meeting place of the opulent, the customs,
and the arts of the two fairest divisions of the earth, we stood still in
proud contemplation.” Napoleon rode up and the men swarmed around
him. The capture of this place, many felt, made their sacrifice
worthwhile. For a moment, before the pillaging began, the soldiers of
the Grande Armée felt that the bestial campaign had been transformed
by this exquisite prize.
Napoleon was expecting a procession of the city’s notables to greet
him with the keys to the city and the opening gambits of a peace
negotiation. He scanned the city’s gates for signs of them, and scoffed at
reports from scouts who said that the mansions and streets were empty.
They couldn’t find a single Russian official to bring to the emperor. The
troops had seen graffiti scribbled on the walls that made them wonder:
“Good-bye,” and “Farewell, delightful haunts that I leave with so much
sadness!” The emperor studied a large map laid out on the grass as he
questioned each returning scout or prisoner and interrogated them about
what they had witnessed and in which sector: the bazaar district,
Chinatown (where the long caravans from the Orient deposited their
exotic wares for sale), the white town, the German suburb, and the
“earth town” (named for the earthworks built there in the late 1500s).
Only the French expatriates who had hidden from the mobs came out to
greet them, eager to tell stories of terror and the city’s rapid
abandonment.
The men looking down on the capital grew increasingly nervous.
“They will wait a long time,” said one soldier. “All those Russians will
emigrate to Siberia rather than surrender.” Napoleon studied the streets
through a telescope balanced on one of his aide’s shoulders. “The

barbarians!” he shouted. “They are leaving all of this to us! It isn’t
possible!” Finally, the emperor ordered Count Daru, the head of his
commissariat, to search the city and bring him the boyars.
Meanwhile, Murat’s cavalry penetrated farther into the city and found
only silence. The men, spooked by the empty districts, rode quietly
ahead, hearing only hoofbeats echoing back to them off the stone
buildings. When they did find Russians, they were looters breaking into
the Moscow arsenal or soldiers hurrying for the eastern gates. There was
scattered resistance at the Kremlin walls, accompanied by drunken
curses from the men and women who baited the French, but it was
obviously unorganized and quickly put down with a cannonade.
Every scout returned with the same message: the Russian army had
withdrawn under the cover of the truce, along with the city’s notables
and most of the citizenry, leaving only the lowest of the low. Napoleon
was intensely frustrated. “It would be difficult to describe the impression
made on the Emperor by this news,” wrote the diplomat Caulaincourt.
“Never have I seen him so deeply impressed…. His face, normally so
impassive, showed instantly and unmistakably the mark of his bitter
disappointment.”
Napoleon appointed Édouard Mortier, commander of the Young
Guards, governor of Moscow and told him if the army looted the capital,
he would pay with his life. The emperor, now thoroughly depressed,
settled for the night in a local inn outside the city’s gold-colored walls.
Squads of Young Guards were sent in to secure the city, and they were
accosted by sad remnants of Rostopchin’s citizen army: one old man
with a flowing beard appeared on the Dorogomilov Bridge as the Guard
marched over it, thrusting his pitchfork at a drum major, who avoided
the prongs and sent the elderly defender tumbling into the river with a
well-timed kick. There was no enemy worthy of the name to stop the
French advance.
THE LOOTING BEGAN almost immediately, out of necessity. Some of the men
hadn’t eaten in days. Sergeant Adrien Bourgogne of the Imperial Guard,
along with his squad mates, battered down the doors of the local
mansions and helped themselves to whatever had been left behind: flour,
vodka, jarred fruit, which they quickly consumed or bartered away.

Once their hunger had been satisfied, the proper sack began, the kind of
bacchanal that the men had dreamt of since first signing up. Silks,
leather boots (a real find for many of the men who had been shoeless for
weeks), paintings of boyars and their ancestors all started to come out of
the homes and into the streets. Sergeant Bourgogne found “a small
machine for gauging the force of powder,” an obscure luxury that he
pocketed anyway. Dressing as “Russian boyars, Chinamen, or French
marquis,” the men draped women’s clothes across their chests to the
laughter of their friends, but these capes and heavy cassocks made for
the Russian winter would later become fiercely guarded valuables once
the bitterly cold weather arrived. “Even the gallery slaves concealed
their rags under the most splendid court dresses,” remembered Eugène
Labaume of IV Corps. Prostitutes, criminals, and serfs joined in the
scramble for loot.
The strict hierarchy of Moscow housing—where mansions inhabited
by counts and princes were surrounded by modest houses and hovels
occupied by their servants—was re-created as the Grande Armée’s
officers took possession of the finer accommodations, the mansions with
silk tapestries still on the wall, and the ordinary soldiers pitched their
rucksacks in the homely coach houses and stables. There was, at last,
plenty of food, both in the larders of the abandoned homes and in the
fields surrounding the city. One soldier remembered finding beets “as
round and large as bowling balls,” but there were ample supplies of
pork, mutton, and other meats as well. The Grande Armée hadn’t been
so well fed since leaving Germany.
As the French advance guard secured the main squares, the firebugs
were prowling the outer districts. Led by the police superintendent,
Voronenko, they began setting fire to shops and houses. The first
sighting of flames came around noon, in the commercial district of Kitai-
Gorod, and was confined to a few paint and upholstery stores. Hours
later, more pillars of dark smoke appeared in the same district, and then
in the early evening, near the governor’s palace. Troops were sent to
extinguish the flames.
Napoleon had been hearing stories of a coming conflagration from
expatriates who had emerged from cellars and attics, but he had refused

to believe them. Now as the night progressed, “sinister reports” flowed
in: fires were sprouting at points around the city, and mobs of thugs had
appeared on the streets, burning everything in their path. Near midnight,
a tremendous boom echoed through the darkness as a munitions dump
exploded in the east, near the Yaouza River. One Swiss officer was
strolling through the dark city when a French officer charged at him.
“Run for it!” the man shouted. “There’s a band of brigands behind me.”
The Swiss soldier peeked around the next corner to find a terrifying
sight: a gang of arsonists, 50 to 60 strong, flaming torches in their hands.
The emperor gave the order to shoot firebugs on sight. Sergeant
Bourgogne and his unit nabbed one in the act, fired a bullet into his side,
and left him to die. Hours later, some of his fellow troops reported that
they had returned to the scene of the “dreadful execution” and found a
young woman sitting beside the body, cradling the young man’s head in
her lap, gently stroking his face and kissing him. She told the French
soldiers she planned to stay with the body for three days, supposedly
fulfilling a Russian tradition.
Napoleon entered the city on September 15 and set up headquarters at
the Kremlin. Buoyed by the sight of the Romanov throne and the cross of
Ivan the Great, he sat down to write Alexander a peace proposal. But
soon news of the fire overwhelmed everything. Dr. Larrey watched the
flames sweep toward the Kremlin. “It [would be] difficult, under any
circumstances whatever, to present to the eye a more horrific spectacle
than that, which it was so melancholy to behold…. The flames, driven in
all directions, and propelled by the violence of the winds, were
accompanied, in their ascent and rapid progress, by an awful hissing
sound and dreadful detonations, resulting from the combustion of
powder, salt-petre, oil, resin, and brandy, with which the great part of
the houses and shops were filled.” Wooden houses caught fire, and the
heat was so intense that beams of fir shot from the structures and set
alight buildings several streets away.
The emperor rose from his desk and watched the city burn. To him,
the blaze was a symbol of the utter foreignness of the Russian mind. “It
was the most grand, the most sublime, and the most terrific sight the
world ever beheld!” he would later write. Torching one’s own capital

was something no Frenchman, not even Napoleon, could imagine; it was
outside their psychological reach. The fact that the Russians had dared
to do it elicited a certain horrified respect.
The sparks from the fire fell on the exteriors and roofs of nearby
houses and began to smolder while the buildings’ contents were being
systematically looted from inside. The pillaging had become frenzied.
Thousands of men prowled the streets brandishing Turkish scimitars
inside their leather belts or sporting enormous fur hats or bits of Tartar
costume. Great heaps of swag made their appearance: a jewel-encrusted
spittoon from a prince’s palace, silver candlesticks and icons from the
local churches, silk Persian shawls threaded with gold, bracelets thick
with emeralds and diamonds, enormous rugs and even embroidered
armchairs from the finest salons found their way to the impromptu
markets that had sprung up and bartering was soon under way.
On the morning of September 16, the fires began to approach the
Kremlin walls. Sparks and burning cinders floated in from the burning
districts and landed on the roof of the apartments where Napoleon was
staying. The heat pressed against the building until the windowpanes
were hot to the touch. Napoleon was uncharacteristically agitated by the
inferno, pacing frantically, throwing himself down in an armchair and
then springing up to look at the flames again. The fire was no longer
“the most sublime …sight” in the world but a threat to his future. When
a Moscow police officer who had set the nearby arsenal tower ablaze
was interrogated, Napoleon learned that the Kremlin had been targeted
for destruction, another indication of Russian resolve. “He was extremely
restless,” remembered the Italian general Rossetti, “his gestures short
and vehement revealed a cruel distress. He ran at every moment to the
windows to observe the progress of the fire. Finally, abrupt and brief
exclamations escaped from his overburdened heart: ‘What a frightful
sight! They did it to themselves. So many palaces! They are Scythians
…’” Napoleon’s staff and his marshals begged him to leave, but he was
fixed to the spot.
The fire was now so close that its roar deafened them and the
superheated air scorched their faces and lungs. Furious and despairing,
Napoleon fled with his staff. Breathing in the ashes, they found the exit

blocked by “an ocean of fire” and turned down a narrow passage that
enabled them to escape from the golden walls. The conflagration had
swept around the Kremlin, engulfing the streets around it. Houses
imploded in showers of hot sparks, ceilings and floors collapsed inside
the burning facades, and sheets of the metal facing and roofing bounced
off the streets. “The flames that were noisily consuming the buildings on
both sides of the street rose high above the roofs and were caught by the
wind and curled down over our heads,” remembered the general and
historian Ségur. “Thus we were walking on a floor of fire, under a sky of
fire, between walls of fire.” Finally, the imperial party came across some
soldiers pillaging nearby buildings before the fires could claim them, and
the looters led them to safety.
The realization that it was “wild-looking women and men in rags with
hideous faces” and Russian policemen who had initiated the blaze was a
relief to the marshals, who had originally suspected their own troops of
starting the fires. But for Napoleon, it was the thing that tipped him into
blazing anger and then depression. People who would burn their own
city to the ground were clearly not prepared to negotiate. “This forbodes
great misfortune for us!” he said while watching the fires burn on
September 17 from the safety of the Petrovskie Palace. There would be
no delegation of nobles knocking at his door.
The fire raged through the night of the 16th and into the 17th, so
bright that it was said one could read a book five miles from Moscow by
the light of the flames. Finally, on the 18th, the inferno subsided and
Napoleon made his way back to the Kremlin. The four days since they
had first looked down on the unearthly city had transformed it utterly:
from an Eastern masterpiece of gold turrets and centuries-old wealth to a
burned-out, blackened shell where everything and everyone was covered
with soot and mud.
THERE WERE A VARIETY of options open to Napoleon at this point: Leave a
strong garrison in Moscow and march north toward St. Petersburg to
storm the seat of Russian government, freeing the serfs along the route
to bring added pressure down on Alexander. Head southwest and
confront Kutuzov once again in hopes of demolishing his army, and take
the famous arsenal and munitions factories of Tula, near where the

Russian army was now positioned. Winter in Moscow and prepare for a
spring campaign. Retreat.
Crucial to any offensive plans were the reinforcements pushing across
the Moscow road, which should have bolstered the Grande Armée’s
strength. But many of them were shirkers, deserters pressed back into
the ranks and men marking time until they could make their way back
home. And a great many of them were sick. Rickettsia fell on the fresh
troops as a fire would on old wood. It was now raging out of control. In
Moscow’s Foundling Hospital, which had been turned into a sick ward
for officers, 40 of the 45 patients died from typhus. Later, during the
withdrawal, a contingent of 10,000 German reinforcements joined the
main body of troops, only to be infected. Some 3,000 of them died on
the return. “Want, sickness, and an enraged peasantry inflicted terrible
reprisals and caused a daily fearful reduction of numbers,” wrote Sir
Robert Wilson, the British mercenary attached to the Russian imperial
staff. “Which successive reinforcements could not adequately meet and
replace.” The 6th Chasseurs were an extreme example. They received a
contingent of 250 reinforcements from northern Italy, but not a single
one of the new men would survive the war. The troops who had been on
the campaign from the start and had survived cases of typhus had
developed immunity to the disease, but the new recruits had no defenses
in their bloodstream to protect them from the pathogen.
The sudden availability of food and decent housing would seem to
have held out the promise of better health for the Grande Armée, but the
field doctor de Kerckhove reported differently. “During our first days in
Moscow,” he wrote, “we observed how harmful it is for health to change
physical conditions suddenly…. Typhus and dysentery were very strong
within our ranks.” And according to Ebstein, typhus “ripped into” the
army at Moscow, at times so intense that it exhibited a “plague-like
character.”
AS HE DEBATED his next move, the emperor was fast drawing new victims
into an epidemiological tempest. In Moscow, although the troops were
well fed, the hospitals were packed with victims of typhus, “slow fever,”
and diarrhea. “Thousands of sick soldiers took refuge in gutted houses,”
reported de Kerckhove. “And many of the big buildings that didn’t burn

were turned into hospitals.” Convoys of sick arrived from the units along
the route of march and the men were carried into whatever domicile had
a space available on the floor.
The diseases awakened by the war had by now spread to the Russian
troops and villagers. The partisan leader Denis Davidov met a peasant
named Theodore from the town of Tsarevo who left his wife and
children hiding in the forest to fight against the French. When he
returned two years later to look up his comrade, Davidov found he had
died “from contagion, along with many other people who had sought
refuge in the woods during the hostilities.” Davidov never identifies the
epidemic, and one can never rule out a local, unreported bout of a
different illness, but typhus has to be a leading contender.
As for the army, exact numbers are contested, with some authors
arguing that Kutuzov’s ranks were only lightly touched by the epidemic.
One report detailing casualties between October 20 and December 14
specified that of the 61,964 men missing from the ranks, 48,335 were
sick in military hospitals with typhus, and few of those survived. “In 45
days,” writes Bernhardy, “three-fifths of Kutuzov’s army perished.” There
was certainly disease in the ranks. Carl von Clausewitz, the strategist
attached to the imperial staff, referred to the Russian army in November
and December as “decimated by sickness,” and the army melting away in
Kutuzov’s hands.
Even though they fought only one major engagement with the French,
the Russians lost half their effective troops between Tarutino and the
army camps south of Smolensk. Only the fact that he was being
constantly reinforced saved Kutuzov from mirroring Napoleon’s fate.

A
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     13
Decision
LEXANDER WAS SHATTERED BY THE NEWS OF WHAT HAD happened in Moscow. On
September 20 came the overdue letter from Kutuzov, which
confirmed the handover of the city to the French, and added news of
the fires that had engulfed the capital. Despite his horror, he sent
Kutuzov’s messenger back to the commander with a message of defiance,
swearing that even if every soldier was to be killed, he would organize a
citizens’ army of nobles and serfs and march to meet the Grande Armée.
In St. Petersburg, the tsar issued a proclamation in which he admitted
what the nation already knew: Moscow had been surrendered to the
“haughty destroyer of kingdoms.” He called on Russians to redouble
their efforts to expel Napoleon and make Moscow a tomb. And he
mocked the remnants of the Grande Armée. “Look at the condition of
this enemy,” he wrote. “He entered Russia at the head of more than
three hundred thousand men, but…half the army is destroyed by
Russian valour, by desertion, by want of discipline, by sickness and
hunger!”
In the days before Napoleon had entered Moscow, according to
General Baron de Marbot, the Cossacks had captured 100 sick French
troops, who had been sent to Moscow for treatment. Instead, Governor
Rostopchin had paraded them through the city streets, where some of
the prisoners had collapsed and died on the spot. As they lay on the
pavement, Russian policemen read out a proclamation from the mayor
claiming that the entire Grande Armée was as weak and disease-ridden
as these pathetic men. As despicable as the gesture was, General de
Marbot acknowledged that “our strength diminished daily owing to
sickness and the increasing cold.”

Kutuzov ordered a new call-up and men as old as seventy joined the
ranks. His devastated units were quickly replenished. In one month, the
Russian army had added over 48,000 troops to the 40,000 who had
escaped Borodino alive.
Rage at the loss of the capital and the lies told by the tsar’s
propaganda machine began to bubble to the surface in St. Petersburg.
The Council of Ministers took the unprecedented step of demanding a
full accounting of Kutuzov’s decisions, beginning with the sketchy and
often inaccurate communiqués that declared victory, only to be followed
by reports from other sources of huge losses and retreats. These nobles
were simply vocalizing the whispers from the streets and drawing rooms:
How could Borodino have been a victory if it had led to the destruction
of Moscow?
Napoleon, too, kept a steady stream of cheerful news flowing back to
Paris in the famous Bulletins—war dispatches sent under the emperor’s
name—packing them with staccato accounts of French victories and
Russian weakness. But, unlike Frenchmen 1,500 miles away, the Russian
people could see and hear evidence that contradicted their leaders’ rosy
visions.
Napoleon’s hope—that Alexander would be dethroned— became for
the first time a hotly debated topic. The loss of Moscow convinced many
of the ambassadors and foreign observers resident in St. Petersburg that
a treaty with Napoleon was inevitable, and they had their counterparts
within the Russian nobility. The “French party” counted among its
members Alexander’s tempestuous brother, the Grand Duke Constantine,
who had for years been an appeaser when it came to Napoleon. After the
Battle of Preussisch-Eylau in 1807, Constantine had screamed at
Alexander: “If you do not wish to make peace with France, then give a
loaded pistol to each of your soldiers and ask them to blow their brains
out!” He had warned that antagonizing the emperor would inevitably
result in an invasion of Russia by an army “trained for battle and always
victorious.” Constantine, an inveterate schemer, had changed sides after
the Battle of Smolensk and pushed for a to-the-death battle with the
French, but now the burning of Moscow had convinced him that
Napoleon was indeed unstoppable. Many others agreed.

Quietly, the same early signals that had forecast the arrival of the
Grande Armée at Moscow’s gates began to be seen in St. Petersburg.
Carts and wagons were seen at the entrances to the finest mansions,
being loaded with trunks filled with silk dressing gowns and fine china.
Mansions, libraries, and archives holding the nation’s treasures were
slowly emptied of their paintings; anyone looking through the nearly
2,000 windows of Catherine the Great’s Hermitage Palace would have
seen empty spaces where the Titians and Raphaels had hung, the
masterpieces now packed up and heading north on barges. The glittering
nightlife of the capital, the banquets and soirees attended by counts and
foreign diplomats, went dark. Those without connections were left to
wonder about the strange happenings in their city and to stew in their
own anxiety.
As the tension escalated, the neurotic Alexander even began to feel
that he might follow in his murdered father’s footsteps. When the
anniversary of his coronation arrived, the tsar’s coterie strongly urged
him to abandon his plans for arriving at Kazan Cathedral on horseback,
something he had always done, and instead suggested the safer confines
of the empress’s carriage. Alexander heeded their advice. One
noblewoman who was part of the procession to the cathedral
remembered the sullen, silent faces of the men and women arrayed
along the streets, so different from the usual cheering crowds that had
promised Alexander they would die for him. “One could have heard the
sound of our footsteps,” wrote Mademoiselle Stourdza, “and I have never
doubted that one spark would have been enough, at that moment, to
produce a general conflagration.” When she looked over at the anxious
face of Alexander, she felt her knees start to give way.
Even the tsar’s own sister chastised him for the loss of Moscow. “It is
not just one class that is blaming you,” she wrote him, “but all of them
together.” Alexander became so concerned by the change in the people’s
mood that he had the police arrest anyone caught spreading rumors
about the invincibility of Napoleon or the coming abandonment of St.
Petersburg.
Kutuzov kept up a stream of optimistic dispatches, writing the tsar
that he was rebuilding the army and keeping watch on Napoleon. “I

have taken my stand on the flank of the enemy’s long line of operation,
holding it blocked by my detachments. From here I can keep an eye on
their movements, protect the resources of the empire, and reform my
army.” Alexander no longer trusted the upbeat missives of his
commander, and Rostopchin gave him ample reason for doubt: he
reported that the army had dissolved into a brawling, drunken mass of
thieves and murderers who were preying on the local peasants.
NAPOLEON SPENT his leisure hours assiduously reading Voltaire’s history of
Charles XII’s disastrous invasion of Russia in 1708. The Swedish invader
had chosen the coldest winter in living memory to take on his Slavic
neighbor; for months, temperatures plunged so low that in the Nordic
countries elks were found frozen to death standing in the fields and in
Venice the canals were rimed with ice. But the deadly weather that
spelled doom for Charles hadn’t arrived until December, and now, as
Napoleon waited for a response from Alexander, the air was practically
balmy. He joked that Moscow was warmer than Fontainebleau.
Awaiting the emperor’s decision, the French spent their days in a
strange holiday in the burned-out shell of a city. It was a grotesque
scene:
At every step one trod on dead and scorched people, and the corpses of incendiaries
hung from many half-burnt trees. Amid all this horror one could see the wretched
inhabitants, who had come back and had no roof over their heads, collecting iron
or lead which had once covered the roofs of palaces…. They did this so as to build
huts …and they stilled their pangs of hunger with raw vegetables which our
soldiers had overlooked.
The soldiers spent their days scrounging for swag, gambling, brawling,
robbing peasants who came in from the countryside to sell their
produce, and recovering from the rigors of the march. They whored with
girls from decent families who had been somehow left behind and who
sold their bodies out of sheer hunger. These freshly minted prostitutes
took over the mansions of families who had fled, wearing the fine
clothing they found, accepting stolen silver baubles and expensive
dresses looted from homes down the block. The men slept on altar cloths
from the Orthodox churches and drank punch out of porcelain china.
The city was lit at night by enormous watch fires in the middle of once

elegant avenues, around which the French partied and gossiped.
Meanwhile, Muscovites cut strips of flesh from the corpses of horses and
even dived to the bottom of the Moskva River to retrieve handfuls of the
wheat dumped there by retreating Russian forces.
Few soldiers or officers did anything to prepare for the approaching
winter. A few caches of furs were found and men could be seen parading
through the blackened streets in the latest foxes and minks—men’s or
women’s, it didn’t matter—and some enterprising troops had new boots
made up out of bearskin. But mass preparations (acquiring heavy winter
clothing, reshoeing the remaining horses for icy roads) were largely left
for another day. “Nothing was done to guard against the rigors of
winter,” confirmed Labaume. Caulaincourt called it a time of “dreaming
dreams.” Napoleon quietly acknowledged that his gambit for a quick
peace treaty had failed, and he admitted to his intimate advisers that his
former enemies, the Austrian and Prussian troops, now forming the rear
guard and directly in the line of any retreat, could be easily turned into
fresh adversaries “if we met with the slightest reverse.” As in Paris
before the invasion, he delayed and delayed and hoped for the best. But
days passed without any response to the peace proposal the emperor had
sent to Alexander before the firebugs torched the capital.
THE LULL IN HOSTILITIES was broken on September 21. Pressed by his advisers
and determined to reenergize his troops’ morale, Kutuzov had turned
west on the 16th, onto the road to Tula, the center of the firearms
industry. He reached Podolsk, a town along that road, on the 18th. The
maneuver was completed under the eyes of a complacent Murat, who
had been sending Napoleon reports of the Russian army’s deteriorating
condition (when in fact it was gaining men and supplies on a daily basis)
and even claimed that the Cossacks were amenable to changing sides
and fighting under his banner. Instead, Kutuzov had maneuvered himself
to a strong position to jab at Napoleon’s rear guard and strike at his
connections to Paris.
The Russians now began to utilize hit-and-run tactics, probing and
harassing the outlying French units and communication lines. Cavalry
units struck the Moscow-Smolensk road to disrupt Napoleon’s famously
efficient couriers, who could do the 1,500 miles of the Paris-Moscow run

in an astonishing fourteen days. Supply caravans were attacked as well;
a train of munitions wagons was hit outside Moscow and fifteen caissons
were wrecked and 200 horses stolen. On September 24, Cossacks and
regular troops clashed with 150 French dragoons and cut the key road
completely. The major in charge of the dragoons was taken prisoner,
along with some of his officers and men. “All certain communication
with France was cut off,” the ex-ambassador Caulaincourt noted. “Vilna,
Warsaw, Mayence, Paris were no longer in daily receipt of their orders
from the Sovereign of the Grand Empire.” Napoleon was in the habit of
pouncing on dispatches from his far-flung holdings, and the loss of
communications frustrated him intensely. The mail line was soon
reestablished, but it was clear Kutuzov had learned how to fight while
rebuilding his forces.
As winter approached, Napoleon stirred. On October 3, he presented
his marshals with a bold plan: a joint force consisting of four divisions
from IX Corps, now garrisoned at Smolensk, and an attack force led by
Napoleon departing out of Moscow would converge north of Vitebsk,
smash into Kutuzov’s forces (which he contemptuously numbered at
around 32,000, when the real figure was tens of thousands higher), and
then head north to take Novgorod on their way to the gates of St.
Petersburg. The audacity of the plan, of putting the spear point to the
administrative 
heart 
of 
Alexander’s 
empire, 
excited 
Napoleon
enormously.
After his stepson Prince Eugène read out the details of the plan, the
emperor turned his eyes toward his marshals, who were sitting in what
must have been shock at the news. “What?!” he cried. “You, you are not
inflamed by this idea? Has there ever been a greater military exploit?!”
Napoleon taunted them with the idea of capturing the two great
northern capitals in the span of three months. Again, he was thinking in
terms of places such as Austerlitz, of exploits to be emblazoned on a
monument. It was as if he couldn’t conceive of the dirty war of attrition
he was now engaged in.
The counterarguments were obvious, and the generals made them.
Winter was coming; the terrain was difficult and supplies for men and
horses couldn’t be guaranteed. Even if they did take St. Petersburg, there

would be no guarantee of a Russian surrender, and the army would be
stranded even farther from home than it was now.
Napoleon called Caulaincourt and informed him he was sending the
diplomat to St. Petersburg with another proposal for ending the war, his
second try at peace while in Moscow. Caulaincourt forcefully declined.
“These overtures will be useless,” he told Napoleon. The weather and the
condition of the Grande Armée were turning to Russia’s advantage.
Napoleon dismissed him and pushed the mission on the Marquis de
Lauriston, Caulaincourt’s replacement as ambassador to Russia. He sent
him off with a manic last few words: “I want peace, I must have peace, I
want it absolutely!” Lauriston sped toward Kutuzov’s camp for
permission to proceed but was turned away.
Finally, Napoleon ordered his administrators to begin preparing for a
possible retreat: troops started to gather every wagon, carriage, and cart
to move the thousands of sick and wounded who were now packed into
makeshift Moscow hospitals, and on October 8 a massive harvest began
of all the locally available produce, mostly cabbages and potatoes, to
sustain the Grande Armée on its way back to the friendlier terrain of
Lithuania and Germany.
Napoleon whiled away the days, tortured by indecision. Although he
was used to rushing through his meals and then turning back to work, he
now stretched his dinners out, overeating and lingering silently at the
table. When General Georges Mouton tallied the latest troop strengths
for the various corps, Napoleon refused to believe he had lost so many
soldiers since Borodino and claimed the counts were off. His ability to
focus exclusively on a problem now tormented him. The problem had no
solution, but the emperor couldn’t stop turning it over in his mind.
There were frenetic bursts of activity. He wrote up a proclamation of
freedom for the serfs early in October, though he never intended to
actually enforce it. The edict was another probe into Alexander’s mind,
as Napoleon hoped the threat of a social revolution would force him to
the peace table. But St. Petersburg remained silent. On October 12, he
suddenly decided on an excursion to Murat’s advance guard, then
changed his mind, then reconsidered again and announced he would go
in a few days and initiate a new attack on the Russians. The impulse

drained away, however, and Napoleon stayed put. The arrival of the first
real snowstorm on October 13 dampened his enthusiasm for maneuvers.
Sleet and rain had pelted the capital for weeks, but now winter moved
in. On October 15, three inches of snow fell, making it clear that a
decision on the army’s plans had to be made and made quickly.
NAPOLEON HAD NEVER lost a major campaign central to his reign. Egypt and
Haiti were peripheral battles in the scheme of Continental power. Now
he felt the world watching him for a single slip, when they would unite
to crush him. He agonized to Count Daru: “What a frightful succession of
perilous conflicts will begin with my first backward step! In affairs of
state one must never retreat, never retrace one’s steps, never admit an
error …”
The winter of 1812 would take on sinister forms in the French
imagination, as a kind of Asiatic dervish. The French novelist Hilaire
Belloc introduced the cold this way:
A thick fog descended. The sentries felt for the first time no longer discomfort even
of that acute and gnawing sort which seems to those who read of it under civilian
conditions to be a hell; what they felt as the night advanced was a thing new to
them, and perfectly intolerable to humankind—a thing no Westerner among them
had yet known—the winter advancing from out of Asia, from the frozen steppes.
Finally, Napoleon called his advisers in to announce the withdrawal
from Moscow. In the spring, he believed, a refreshed and reinforced
army could then storm northward and conquer St. Petersburg. The
emperor issued a stream of orders: Lauriston was sent back to Kutuzov’s
headquarters in the hopes that Alexander had agreed to receive him.
General Baraguay d’Hilliers headed to Yelnya, fifty miles east of
Smolensk, with directions to put together a supply base and garrison to
support the retreat. The reinforcements heading toward Moscow on the
Smolensk road were turned back to clear the route, and the sick and
wounded in Mozhaisk were readied for travel. Those who couldn’t be
moved were gathered at the Foundling Hospital, and Russian casualties
were mixed in with them to afford them some protection.
On October 16, the Grande Armée marched out of Moscow. Napoleon
pointed to the bright sky and told his aides that the sun was his star,

shining the way to fresh conquests.
TYPHUS HAD INITIATED a cascading series of events and decisions that had
crippled the 1812 campaign. The offensive was finished, even if the
emperor clung to his illusion of fighting in the spring. Now, with only
his reputation and a shockingly reduced army to threaten his enemies,
he was beginning the battle to save his throne.
Napoleon had done remarkably well against his human opponents. He
had outfought the best generals of Europe, outthought the military
strategists, charmed enemy princesses into his bed, and won over
soldiers who likely would have revolted if another general had put them
through his campaigns. But with natural opponents he had a mixed
record, and they had slashed the size of his empire.
In the south, his 1798 invasion of Egypt and Syria had been an
outright disaster. He had been unable to bring the two Ottoman
strongholds to heel during a chaotic campaign that, had all the details
been fully known back in France, would have left his military reputation
in tatters. And in the West, he had lost his grip on Haiti, and through it,
the New World, after a disastrous 1803 campaign plagued by a different
pathogen.
In Egypt plague had swept through the ranks of his army of 38,000
men, killing thousands and blunting the army’s effectiveness. The
campaign was poorly planned, underequipped, and strategically
incoherent, so the war would probably have failed without the microbe’s
intervention. But Napoleon had further stained his reputation when he
ordered the euthanasia of hundreds of the most seriously ill patients
before the French abandoned the campaign. And when the emperor tried
to blame the disease for his defeat in Egypt, his chief doctor on the
campaign had reacted furiously, citing the cover-up as an example of
Napoleon’s “oriental despotism” (the Chinese emperors being symbols of
despotic rule in the French mind). The disease had hurried the Egyptian
debacle to its close and almost buried Napoleon’s career with his
unfortunate men. Only the political failings of the Directory in Paris,
which opened the way for a coup, saved him.
One gesture in Egypt belied his cruelty there. The French leader had

shown great bravery by entering the plague hospital set up by his
doctors and touching the dying men, even helping to carry out a corpse.
Touching plague victims was simply not done, except by medical
professionals, as the disease was suspected to be extremely infectious.
The incident had become an essential part of the Napoleonic mythos.
Antoine-Jean Gros’s painting of the scene portrays Napoleon as a
modern-day Jesus, with the ability to heal the sick with the touch of his
finger.
In Haiti, the disease had been yellow fever and the effect was even
more devastating. Spread by mosquitoes, yellow fever (also known as
“yellow jack” and “the American plague”) is an acute viral disease noted
for its ability to inflict pain, especially in the back and abdomen. The
pathogen attacked the French forces and was quickly putting 30 to 50
men into the sick ward every day. “The mortality continues and makes
fearful ravages,” wrote the twenty-nine-year-old commander to
Bonaparte. The fact that the disease simultaneously hit units spread over
different parts of the island, in different climates, and walking over
different types of topographical features was especially terrifying. One
staff officer wrote about the suspected causes. A soldier only had to:
…expose oneself at length to the hot sunshine, be caught in a draught when
perspiring, neglect to change one’s rain-drenched clothes, undertake a taxing
journey on foot or on horseback, breathe the burning air in churches during the
great religious ceremonies, be bled needlessly, take excessive baths or drugs, be
frightened, depressed, homesick, agitated by a passion such as rage or love or
simply experience some strong stimulation .   .   .
In other words, one could get sick doing practically anything. One senses
in the passage the paranoia that swept through the ranks as the fever
vectored in from every direction.
The disease attacked the French from the beginning and grew in
waves until it was said that troops went straight from their transport
ships to the grave. Within a few months, 14,000 men were dead and the
fighting had degenerated into terror on both sides. The French
commander died of yellow fever in November 1802, and a year later the
invasion had failed.
The defeat shocked Napoleon. Fearing that yellow fever was also

endemic to the Mississippi Delta and surrounding regions, he sold
France’s holdings of 530 million acres of land to Thomas Jefferson at the
fire-sale price of under 3 cents an acre. For $15 million, the fledgling
republic got Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska,
Minnesota south of the Mississippi, and the bulk of North and South
Dakota, along with parts of New Mexico, Texas, Montana, Wyoming,
Colorado, and all of Louisiana, including the city of New Orleans.
America had become a behemoth, while Napoleon had forsaken his best
hope for a westward empire, all because of an obscure pathogen.
By 1812, the map of Napoleon’s ambitions had been circumscribed by
disease: yellow fever in the far west, plague in the far south and now in
the north, the most implacable sickness of all.

B
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     14
Two Roads
Y THE BEGINNING OF NOVEMBER, NAPOLEON HAD ONLY 75,000 of his original 440,000
front line troops—365,000 troops had died in a little over four
months. He had lost an average of 3,000 men every day of his
campaign. The majority of those deaths, perhaps as many as 200,000,
were from disease, with typhus the lead killer. One doctor called it a
dying-off that “had scarcely a parallel in the history of the world.”
The Grande Armée didn’t keep precise statistics of cause of death, so
how can one be sure that typhus was responsible for so many casualties?
By sifting through the various theories and comparing them with the
descriptions given by the soldiers themselves, one can discern the main
causes of death on the road to and from Moscow with some clarity.
The response from the top ranks of the medical corps was confusion.
Dr. Larrey noticed the men stumbling out of the ranks and falling down
dead in the road, but in his memoirs, he makes a startling claim about
what was killing them: not disease, Larrey claimed, but exposure,
constant rains, and hard drinking. “These unfavorable circumstances,”
Larrey wrote, “in conjunction with the immoderate use of chenaps (the
brandy of the country), proved fatal to a large number of the conscripts
of the junior guard.” As the diagnosis of the chief French medical
authority, it deserves some investigation.
There is no question that some young recruits were getting blind
drunk on the corn brandy that Polish peasants had left behind or were
relieved of by French troops. But Larrey makes no case that a bad or
poisoned batch was making the rounds, simply writing that the
“stupefying power” of liquor was killing men by the score. That is, the

men were dying from liquor that the peasants drank without any
apparent harm to themselves. The surgeon in chief recorded the
symptoms: loss of muscular movements, vertigo, drowsiness, half-closed
eyes, lethargy, and even “gangrenous spots on the feet and legs.” All
were consistent with late-stage typhus.
But perhaps there was a kernel of truth in Larrey’s diagnosis. It’s
possible the brandy was interacting with disease to kill the men. A
doctor on the campaign, Scherer, reported that three of his patients had
found bottles of brandy in the hospital cellar and quickly downed them.
Soon the men “fell down senseless” and began vomiting, crying nonstop,
and suffering uncontrolled bowel movements. They were dead within six
hours, and on their abdomens, necks and chests, and especially the feet
there were gangrenous spots. Exactly as Larrey had reported. There is
very little literature on the interaction of alcohol and typhus patients,
but the liquor would most likely have worsened the condition of
exhausted patients infected with Rickettsia. The rapid death of soldiers
after drinking a pint of brandy might have suggested to onlookers that
the liquor was the culprit, but the more likely explanation is that the
alcohol only accelerated the progress of typhus or another disease.
Another theory mentioned in the accounts of several soldiers was
exposure, or hypothermia. Hypothermia is caused by a drop in core body
temperature, which renders the body unable to perform normal
metabolic functions. The patient stumbles frequently and has trouble
controlling his movement. Shaking becomes violent. The face, lips, toes,
and fingers lose their natural color and may show tints of blue. The mind
becomes clouded. In the final stages, the patient appears confused and
drowsy; hallucinations and amnesia set in. The pulse drops, breathing
slows dramatically, and the organs begin to fail. Death soon follows.
The staggering gait and blue skin match some of the descriptions of
dying soldiers, but the conditions necessary for Stage 3 hypothermia
simply didn’t exist in the early stages of the campaign. Most of the
soldiers had access to blazing campfires at night; they had warm cloaks
and overcoats; and the nights were described as “chilly” or “cool” but
not downright arctic. Hypothermia can occur in temperatures above
freezing, but those cases usually involve people dressed in light

garments, with their skin exposed to the cold air. Some of the soldiers
who had imbibed enough brandy could have lain out during the chilly
nights without their overcoats, but unit cohesion was still strong within
the Grande Armée and it was highly unlikely that entire units were left
sprawled out half-dressed away from their mates and campfires long
enough to expire from advanced hypothermia.
By blaming rotten liquor and exposure, Larrey may have been
protecting his reputation. Death by poisoned chenaps could be attributed
to incorrigible soldiers out on a spree and not to failures by the medical
staff. The doctor was undoubtedly courageous on the field of battle and
deeply concerned about the health and lives of his men—there was
probably no more beloved figure among the ranks of the common
soldiers—but he was also famously tetchy about his reputation and
prone to exaggerate his own accomplishments.
The historian Jean Morvan compared Larrey’s surgical memoirs of
various campaigns with the diaries of soldiers and found that the good
doctor had consistently overlooked symptoms of illnesses racking the
army and declared the men to be in good health when in fact many of
them suffered from a variety of dangerous conditions. Throughout his
career, Larrey regularly dismissed clear evidence of widespread illness.
·   ·   ·
THE GERMAN ARTIST and soldier Faber du Faur would survive the holocaust to
come, one of only 100 soldiers of the Kingdom of Württemberg to return
out of an original contingent of 15,000. His portraits in the beginning
noted the rough beauty of the countryside, and the occasional skirmish,
but on July 31 the tenor of his work changed. On the Road between
Beschenkovitschi and Ostrovno shows two bootless soldiers collapsed on
the ground, while four others dig a grave. The commentary by Faber du
Faur and his collaborator, the officer Frederich von Kausler, emphasizes
how common such scenes were: “The two days of march …presented an
unforgettable glimpse of the shocking state of the army …exhausted
soldiers oblivious to exhortations, threats or punishment. At each halt,
each camp, we noticed that the number of effective troops had
diminished. The vast majority of these exhausted soldiers soon turned
into corpses.”

Laymen who recorded the deaths in their diaries and memoirs often
attributed them to two causes: “want,” or hunger, and exhaustion.
Hunger is mentioned again and again in memoirs of 1812. But is it
possible that young and relatively fit men were actually starving to
death on the road to Moscow? How long does it in fact take for a healthy
man to die of malnutrition? The answer varies according to the person’s
general health and reserves of body fat, but it would take several weeks
before a reasonably fit and originally well-nourished soldier on the
march would succumb.
Admittedly, food had become a pressing issue early in the campaign.
The green, inexperienced troops gorged themselves on their rations;
supplies meant to last four days were consumed in one. Again and again,
the high command’s preparations proved inadequate or based on faulty
information: The barges loaded with provisions found the Vilia River too
shallow to navigate. Corrupt officials in charge of food distribution often
withheld supplies from troops to sell them on the side for astronomical
profits. One Westphalian officer wrote home to his wife that he was
passing a detachment from Davout’s corps on July 29 when he saw
soldiers execute a commissary who had been found selling off supplies
meant for the troops. Fights broke out between commanders and their
regiments competing for their daily rations, and carts full of wheat were
dumped by the side of the road, as there were no horses or oxen to pull
them.
This wasn’t unprecedented. Napoleon’s armies in Italy and Spain had
never had adequate supplies pushed from Paris to fill their needs, and
armies going back to Francis’s in the sixteenth century and beyond had
extracted what they needed from local peasants. They lived off the land,
by the ancient code of pillage. But Poland along the Smolensk road
presented a bleak picture to the scavenger. It was filled with forests,
swamps, and marshes, with few cultivated fields, and small villages with
tiny stores where the local populace lived just above subsistence level.
This wasn’t Italy, where family farmers tilled fields, raised cattle, and
produced fresh cheese and wines. Invading that country, the emperor
had promised his men “the most fertile plains on earth …rich provinces,
wealthy towns.” In Russia the troops encountered miles of swamp,
forest, and poor villages of hovels the lowliest French peasant would find

unlivable. Napoleon had been warned about the scarcity of food along
the route, but he had brushed the advice aside. Now he was paying
dearly for his self-delusion.
What crops and stores did exist along the Smolensk road often lay
smoking in ruins by the time the Grande Armée arrived. Barclay and
Bagration had ordered their troops to destroy everything that could
sustain the French: crops were set alight, food depots were ransacked
and burned; cattle and horses were slaughtered; entire villages were put
to the torch to deny Napoleon’s men basic shelter. The weather was so
hot and the air so dry that Cossacks could ride by a hamlet, fire bullets
into the thatched roofs, and start a blaze without even stopping.
The starving man goes through a long process of catabolism, where
the body begins to break down the fat and muscle reserves and convert
them to energy to keep the vital systems functioning. In the famous
“starvation experiment” at the University of Minnesota in 1944-45, the
food intake of the thirty-six volunteers (all fit young men, like the troops
that made up most of Napoleon’s army) was reduced to about 1,500
calories per day, roughly half of what was needed to keep the men’s
weight at preexperiment levels. The test subjects were slowly starved for
twelve weeks. The volunteers lost fat and muscle, on average about 25
percent of their body weight. They became obsessed with food, highly
irritable, and depressed (one volunteer, Number 20, even dropped a
Packard on his hand and then amputated three fingers with the chop of
an ax to get out of the study.) Their energy levels dropped precipitously.
But none of them came close to dying, especially in the ways described
in the memoirs: men stumbling and then suddenly keeling over dead, or
never waking after a night’s sleep.
What most of the soldiers who left records of the campaign report is
scarcity, not starvation. On the stretches of the road where supplies had
become hard to find or had been gorged on by the lead troops, some
would go a few days without a solid meal— gnawing on a biscuit or a
handful of rye through the day—before they were able to forage or
pillage a substantial amount of food. By the time the Grande Armée
reached the Smolensk road in late July, the landscape had changed once
more to ripe fields of wheat dotted by flocks of cattle (though it is true

that the frontline regiments often ransacked these and left little for their
comrades). There are few passages relating a complete absence of any
food for weeks at a time, or the physical wasting-away of the body, the
emaciation of the face and body, the intense irritability, the slow descent
into a coma-like state, and the hysteria that characterize true starvation
and would have been clearly evident to the sufferer’s comrades.
Certainly men were weakened by the loss of a steady intake of protein,
but there is almost no evidence of deaths purely from hunger on the
advance to Moscow.
It’s far more likely that the conditions and the pace Napoleon was
setting weakened the men’s constitution and gave an opening to disease.
Typhus survivors had been known to succumb to even mild infections
during their recovery, as their vascular systems and hearts had been so
ravaged by the disease that they typically became susceptible to other
“chronic disorders.” Even those it didn’t kill, typhus often fatally
weakened.
Exhaustion is the other cause given by nonmedical men and physicians
alike. But this diagnosis, too, fails to hold up to close scrutiny.
The recruits for the Grande Armée came from a mainly pastoral
society, drawn from villages and farms, where outdoor work would have
given most of them a vigorous, if occasionally malnourished,
constitution, used to long days full of demanding work. As for the
veterans, they were specimens: lean, rugged men who could march or
ride for miles on end without complaint. Nor did those men who were
suffering from hunger have to keep up with the intense marching that
the army was experiencing; they could quite easily drop back to the
mini-army of stragglers that had quite quickly appeared behind the main
body of troops.
It is actually very hard to march men into their graves, even hungry,
tired men, without complicating factors such as heatstroke, heart
ailments, or extreme dehydration serving as the real cause of death.
Dehydration would plague the troops later in the march, but as yet, it
wasn’t a major factor, and the days were certainly hot, but no hotter
than the army had experienced during Italian or Spanish summers.
Fatigue could certainly have weakened men suffering from an

undiagnosed illness, but the assertion that large numbers of troops
simply dropped dead from exhaustion is almost certainly false in the vast
majority of cases. Something else was at work, something that would
show up in the bones of the men who were lucky enough to reach
Vilnius, 488 miles away.
THE ARMY LEFT MOSCOW a shadow of its former self. Anyone watching the
regiments depart would have noticed two things: The men were often in
terrible physical shape, “crawling rather than marching.” And they had
grabbed an enormous pile of loot, which they had loaded onto every
available cart, droshky, chaise, and carriage: trophies such as flags
captured from the Turks and the cross of Ivan the Great from the
Kremlin, Oriental rugs, entire wardrobes, ornate furniture, even
ornaments used in the coronation of the tsars and a gem-encrusted
Madonna. Most officers commanded a single cart, while generals had six
or more to haul their swag. Common soldiers had packed their
knapsacks with anything jeweled or golden (though many mistook gold
leaf for solid gold artifacts) for resale back home or exotic dresses and
capes for their wives or girlfriends. Some of the hams, mutton, shoe
leather, and fur caps necessary for a march of 2,000 miles through
hostile and often barren country were also loaded on carts, but far less
than was needed. The more enterprising of the soldiers had bullied
Russian peasants into carrying their take; these long-bearded men were
the final pieces of booty the army was carrying back to Paris. The
carriages jostled for room, five across on the road.
The army was depleted physically, but the soldiers still carried
themselves as conquerors, “one of those armies of antiquity laden with
spoils and slaves, returning from some horrible destruction,” as Ségur
wrote. Behind the caravans came an assortment of refugees: French
actresses, Russian whores, servants, sutlers, and criminals fleeing the
prisons. As many as 50,000 stragglers accompanied the Grande Armée
on its way out of the blackened city.
The enormous cavalcade inevitably led to delays. One officer
estimated that the army took six hours to travel a distance that a single
carriage would have covered in one. But there was an air of carnival to
the day. “It was afterwards justly said,” Eugène Labaume wrote, “that

our retreat commenced with a masquerade and ended with a funeral.”
With Moscow being abandoned for a second time, 1,850 of the sick
awaited their fate in the Foundling Hospital. Captain Thomas-Joseph
Aubry of the 12th Regiment of Chasseurs, who had been wounded at
Borodino and caught typhus while recovering in Moscow, described how
the past few weeks had gone:
The typhus made appalling inroads in our ranks. We were forty-three officers in our
ward. All of them died, one after the other, and delirious from this dreadful disease,
most of them singing, some in Latin, others in German, others again in Italian—and
singing psalms, canticles, or the mass. When this happened they were nearly always
in their death agony .   .   .
As soon as the Young Guard, forming the rear of the retreating army,
had cleared the Moscow gates, the patients looking out the hospital
windows saw vigilantes combing through the abandoned buildings
looking for stragglers. Frenchmen were run through with bayonets and
their bodies dumped in the Moskva. When the Cossacks reached the
hospital entrances, the sick troops fired down on them with the muskets
left by their beds.
According to Aubry, 1,800 of the 1,850 French soldiers in the hospital
died from typhus—a nearly 100 percent mortality rate. Aubry himself
escaped the epidemic and recovered fully in Siberia. But almost all of the
sick patients who were surrendered to the Russians perished.
The evacuated men typically fared little better. The winnowing of
baggage began almost immediately on the army’s escaping the suburbs
of Moscow. Men opened their knapsacks and dumped out whatever they
thought expendable: often the ammunition and cleaning equipment or
spare uniforms went first and the baubles survived. But the sick, too,
were excess weight, and drivers frequently sped over bumps in the road
in order to knock them off their carts. They would lie by the side of the
rode, delirious, stretching their hands out to the passing troops. The
Russian captives who had been used to haul the loot and who strayed
back to the rear guard because they were too weak or hungry met a
more merciful fate. They were shot in the back of the head, smoke
wafting out of the fresh bullet holes as the French soldiers glanced
quickly down and then marched on.

And the army was barely out of Moscow.
The Emperor’s forces left by two routes: the main body went
southward down the old Kaluga road, while IV Corps marched in a
parallel line down the new Kaluga road to the west. Napoleon had
prepared assiduously for the march to Moscow, collecting books,
topographical surveys, and atlases on everything Russian, but his
research on the current route was incomplete. The generals found their
maps were often inaccurate and they had to blunder their way through
towns and hamlets with unpronounceable names. One unit actually
kidnapped a peasant and forced him to act as their guide, “but he was so
stupid that he only knew the name of his own village.” Once reached,
the thoroughfare presented its own problems. The mud surface quickly
became deeply rutted, and the narrow bridges resulted in bottlenecks
when they held up or in long delays when the timbers snapped under the
loads. A few days into the retreat, a torrential rain turned the road into a
swamp, and travel times decreased again.
Three retreat routes would eventually be considered by Napoleon: the
southern route that would bring them through virgin territory toward
the city of Kaluga; the due-west Moscow-Smolensk road that the Grande
Armée had used to reach the capital; and a third way, southwest to the
town of Medyn, with a dogleg that would eventually lead the army back
to Smolensk. Each had its advantages and risks: The untouched Kaluga
route would provide fresh supplies of rye and livestock, but the Russian
army blocked the way. The Smolensk route would allow Napoleon to
avoid a confrontation with Kutuzov, but it had been stripped bare of all
supplies on the approach. And the Medyn route promised sustenance to
the remaining men, but it was unfamiliar terrain, risking unpleasant
surprises and a possible encounter with the enemy.
Now it was Napoleon who avoided battle. Two days into the march,
he suddenly swerved from the old Kaluga road and marched westward to
join up with Prince Eugène and IV Corps, which was headed toward the
key junction town of Maloyaroslavets. He had intended to freeze
Kutuzov into position and then skirt along his left flank and secure the
resources-rich depots of Kaluga before the Russians could catch him. He
even sent a colonel to Kutuzov to follow up on Lauriston’s request for a

meeting with Alexander, as if his armies were still waiting patiently in
Moscow instead of hurrying south. But Kutuzov had Cossacks, peasants,
and French informers to keep him abreast of the emperor’s movements.
Definitive evidence that Napoleon was in retreat came on October 23,
when a messenger reported to Kutuzov that information from captured
officers indicated that the French had abandoned Moscow and that the
emperor and his staff were camped at Fominskoye, forty miles from the
capital. The Russian commander knew instantly that the campaign had
turned in his favor. He wept and, turning to face an icon of Jesus
mounted in the corner of the room, cried a few words of thanks: “Oh
Lord, my creator! At last you harkened to our prayer, and from this
minute Russia is saved!”
However damaged, Moscow was returned to its inhabitants and
Napoleon was on the run. But before the last soldiers of the Imperial
Guard quit the capital, they received final orders instructing them to
destroy the Kremlin with explosives. They began rigging the ancient
buildings, hurrying to escape the vigilantes and Cossacks now slipping
back into the city. On the road, a French captain near the town of
Charopovo heard a “tremendous report” from the north; had many of the
explosives not failed to ignite, the sound would have carried miles
farther. It was an act of rage and spite on Napoleon’s part, revenge for
the inhuman war he felt the Russians had pursued. Eugène Labaume
regretted the action and pitied Moscow. “She experienced from the
native of an obscure and remote island the most lamentable of human
vicissitudes,” he wrote. To him, it was a signal that Napoleon’s claim to
be fighting a civilizing war—bringing French culture and ideals to the
savages— was finally acknowledged to be a fiction.
AT MALOYAROSLAVETS, THE LEAD elements of both armies clashed, turning the
town into a blood-spattered hellhole. The French won the encounter, but
Kutuzov retreated only two miles away to the city of Kaluga. Now
Napoleon had to choose which route to take.
The emperor quickly called a conference with his marshals. After a
heated, almost violent discussion, Napoleon dismissed his marshals with
a dejected air and sat alone to make the decision. As at Borodino, the
key issue became manpower: Napoleon no longer had the troops to

sacrifice in a bruising push through Kutuzov’s lines on the way to
Kaluga. The Grande Armée was like a sick man whose every ounce of fat
had been burned away by fever: there was little or nothing to spare. And
about a third of his forces were now spread out on missions: 10,000 of
the Young Guard and other troops were still guarding the evacuation of
the last units from Moscow; 8,000 members of VIII Corps were trudging
the route along the Smolensk road; and the valiant Poles under
Poniatowski were on their way to secure Vereya and Medyn. He was
down to 72,000 effectives and the number decreased daily due to
disease. “The time has come now for us to turn all our thoughts to
saving the remains of the army,” Napoleon told Davout. He had sworn
that he would never return to Germany by the “desert we ourselves
created.” Finally, he decided on the Smolensk road.
Rickettsia had again deprived him of live options. Had the Grande
Armée finished off the Russians at Borodino, they could have retreated
at their leisure down the Kaluga road and eaten their fill. Or, had
Napoleon not lost thousands more since Borodino, he might have
considered his army strong enough to break through the Russian lines.
But those possibilities had vanished. Now his men would have to
traverse a moonscape.
The French turned their heel on the Russian army and headed directly
north, toward Borowsk and then Mozhaisk, where they would swerve
west and head toward Smolensk (two hundred miles away) and finally
Vilna, both of which cities were supposed to hold enormous depots of
food and ammunition, as well as structures that could shelter the army
from the winter, which wouldn’t stay over the horizon forever. After
that, there was the Niemen River, the fateful border, and then Germany
and France. It was an incredibly conservative decision for the emperor,
one that showed how dispirited the offensive genius had become. Both
commanders flinched from another engagement, but it was Napoleon
who would pay dearly for his decision to preserve the remaining troops.
The Grande Armée was the emperor’s personal guaranty of power, and
he wanted to save as many men as possible. He ordered Poniatowski to
abandon the Medyn route and head for Smolensk by the burned-over
road, and Ney and Prince Eugène followed suit.

The imperial party made it to the outskirts of Mozhaisk on October 28,
and here Napoleon was confronted with the sight of the wounded left
after Borodino and fresh numbers of sick arriving from Moscow. He
refused to leave them behind and ordered they be placed “wherever they
could hang on”: on top of wagons, inside the carts sent out on foraging
missions, on commandeered droshkies. But the sick men weighed down
already overburdened vehicles and slowed their journeys over the rutted
roads. “We were going back to the deserted and devastated road by
which we had come full of illusion of enthusiasm,” wrote one
Frenchman. Drivers were pushing their horses fifteen hours a day and to
lighten the load did everything to knock the patients off their wagons.
Caulain-court estimated that of the hundreds loaded onto vehicles, only
20 made it to Vilna in Lithuania. No one wanted to be left behind; for
many of the sick, it wasn’t if they were going to die, but how. And being
taken by Cossacks or peasants was the worst imaginable fate.
Captured soldiers were now being routinely executed by the Russians,
with General Aleksey Yermolov enforcing a particular personal hatred
against the Polish troops. At Viazma, 50 French troops were burned alive
“by a savage order.” The choice of the Smolensk road also meant that
the army was retracing its steps through hamlets and villages that it had
raped, pillaged, and terrorized its way through on the way forward. Any
trace of sympathy for Napoleon as a potential liberator was gone. Many
areas now boasted peasant militias. If the battles between Kutuzov and
Napoleon still retained shreds of the knightly code in treatment of the
wounded and respect for bravery, the mini-guerrilla war that the Grande
Armée now experienced was without rules, red in tooth and claw.
The Russian peasants actually paid the Cossacks to get their hands on
French soldiers (2 francs a head was considered a fair price) and made
the prisoners the center of a grotesque revenge. There were several
popular methods for brutalizing the prisoners. Men were hoisted on
pulleys with their hands and feet tied together. After the soldier was
suspended high in the air, the rope was let go and the prisoner smashed
to the ground, snapping bones and causing grave injuries to the internal
organs. The soldier would be hoisted and dropped repeatedly until he
became a jellied bag of bone and viscera.

Other captives were marched naked through nights of -4 degree
weather. They were burned alive and their skulls caved in with rifle
butts. They were thrown into mass graves while still alive and then
buried by peasants. (Sir Robert Wilson saw a drummer boy exempted
from such a fate jump into the pit to die with his comrades.) The sack
method was also popular: Prisoners were wrapped in sacks dipped in
water, with a pillow underneath to partially shield the man’s organs,
prolonging his agony. The townspeople would be handed hammers and
rocks and invited to bash at the man’s midsection, until he died of
internal bleeding. But perhaps the most bestial “game” had naked French
soldiers spread-eagled and tied across huge logs, their heads extended
over the edge. The serfs would dance and sing, and when they passed
the captive they would smash his bowed head with cudgels until the
skull broke open. Denis Davidov, the legendary partisan fighter, recalled
what happened when he captured some elite French troops. Another
leader named Figner arrived on the scene and begged Davidov to allow
some new Cossack recruits to kill the prisoners, so that they would be
“blooded.” An appalled Davidov refused.
One of the few instances of mercy came when the Cossacks captured
an officer of the Imperial Guard. They immediately stripped him of his
fur coat and were about to take his uniform as well when, “to his
boundless astonishment,” they stopped, staring at one of the medals
pinned to his jacket. Others were summoned, and seeing his awards
nodded in confirmation. The Cossacks satisfied themselves with a little
money and a few pages from his diary and then let him go. They had
mistaken the Hessian Order of Merit for the Tsar’s Order of Vladimir, a
highly prized award created by Catherine II in 1782, which featured
identically colored ribbons. A bit of silk had saved the man’s life. Even
Napoleon feared capture by the peasants. After a close encounter with
Cossacks near Maloyaroslavets, he carried a small bag of poison around
his neck.
The nights were growing frigid, and men slept around roaring
campfires, those farthest from the flames waking with hoarfrost coating
their capes and mustaches. Mozhaisk is generally regarded as the turning
point, where suffering overwhelmed all human and regimental bonds.
The soldiers now barely resembled human beings. Captain Charles

François painted a portrait of his mates: “Our heads were hideous, our
faces yellow and smoke-begrimed, filthy with the soil of our bivouacs,
blackened by the greasy smoke from conifers; eyes hollow, our beards
covered with snot and ice.” The sound of corpses being “ground to
pieces under the horses’ feet” became the routine music of the retreat, as
did the voices of the unfortunate. “On all sides we heard the cries and
groans of those who’d fallen and were struggling in the most terrifying
death-throes,” wrote one soldier, “dying a thousand times while waiting
to die.”
The Imperial Guard’s Sergeant Bourgogne came across a family led by
a grizzled soldier and his wife who had lost everything, including two of
their children. The wife was sitting in the snow with her dying husband’s
head resting in her lap. “She didn’t cry, her grief was beyond that,” he
recorded and then passed on. As the mercury plunged even further, to 30
below, in addition to the almost benign sight of typhus victims lying by
the road were added more hideous ones: Naked men gathered around a
burning hut, the flesh on their backs roasted when they attempted to
warm them; men feasted on strips of meat cut from the body of a dead
comrade they had cooked over a fire. A newborn child was ripped from
her mother’s hands and thrown into the snow. Men staggered into
campfires, thinking they would get warm, and were immolated.

On October 29, Napoleon arrived in the town of Gzhatsk, the roads
leading to it littered with dead Russian prisoners. These men had been
taken by the Grande Armée at Borodino and Moscow and either used to
pull wagons or carry enormous packs, or simply treated as traditional
POWs. The alternative was letting the captives starve to death. If they
had been set free, they would have become spies reporting how
desperate, ill-nourished, and ripe for attack the French forces were.
The Grande Armée was strung out along the Smolensk road, with
Napoleon traveling quickly at the head of the retreat, followed by the
Imperial Guard, Junot’s VIII Corps, III Corps, and Prince Eugène and his
IV Corps, with Davout and I Corps bringing up the rear. The route was
icy and filled with hollows that the horses slid down and then were
unable to climb out of, finally sinking dejectedly into the cold mud at
the bottom. This was the signal for the soldiers following the convoy to
fall on the animals and slash them with their knives and bayonets,
tearing off chunks of flesh to be roasted over open fires. Napoleon, who
had begun his career as an artillery officer, insisted that the remaining
guns not be abandoned, even though dragging them through pits of mud
and up and down icy hills slowed the retreat. He maintained the illusion
that he was leading a conquering army instead of a desperate rabble,
and so the gunners would find other horses, sometimes unhitched from
the officers’ own wagons, and fasten them to the heavy guns. Troops
harnessed themselves to the iron pieces and pulled alongside the horses,
even as the Cossacks— their cannon loaded onto sleds—lobbed shot onto
the roadway.
On October 28, elements from the vanguard had marched past
Borodino, where thousands of rotting bodies were still strewn across the
field of battle. The Polish officer Heinrich von Brandt noted not only
“this cursed place, still covered in corpses” but the mass graves that
looked like “an immense flock of giant sheep.” Lieutenant Mailly-Nesle
of the 2nd Carabiniers, who was traveling with the imperial staff, passed
close enough to see the faces of the cadavers, remarkably preserved.
“Almost all had their eyes fixedly open,” he remembered. “Their beards
had grown out of all measure for this epoch. And a bricklike and
Prussian-blue color, marbling their cheeks, gave them an abominably
filthy and messy aspect.” The wounded from the Battle of Borodino who

had been installed at the abbey of Kolotskoe “let out lugubrious and
heartbreaking screams” or threw themselves at the wheels of the
caravans as their comrades passed them by.
There was a spectrum of illnesses and chronic maladies now
competing on the return march: acute rheumatism, “lung catarrh” and
tuberculosis, enteritis, pneumonia, and even scurvy. Snow blindness
caused the men’s eyes to bleed and often led to their wandering off the
road. But typhus remained the dominant killer.
The diary of the Belgian surgeon de Kerckhove reads like a report
from a plague year. “Typhus strongly advancing. We left behind a huge
crowd of sick and dying men…. Typhus and dysentery making the most
murderous ravages…. Ney had with him …seventeen thousand sick,
wounded, and lonely men.” In the frigid weather, he noticed a new
development. Typhus victims who were exposed to very cold
temperatures looked fully recovered. All the symptoms seemed to retreat
except for dryness of tongue and the zombie-like stupor that marked so
many cases. It was only when the sufferer found shelter and a warm fire
that “fever appeared violently, along with all the symptoms of the
disease.” The men would topple over and die.
Intriguingly, there is strong evidence that the common soldiers
suffered a worse fate than officers: many of Napoleon’s top generals and
majors escaped the epidemic, and there are anecdotal accounts of
officers surviving while their men perished from disease. There are
several reasons why this might have been true: The officers had better
access to food, lodging, and medical services, which helped them remain
healthy. And officers often traveled and slept separately from their men:
they had their own carriages and their own tents during bivouacs,
meaning that infected lice had far fewer opportunities to find their way
into their clothing.
ON OCTOBER 31, AS HE reached Viazma, Napoleon was greeted with more bad
news. To the north, battles had been ongoing between his Bavarian VI
Corps and Russian forces under General Wittgenstein. The duel had spun
off into a small, almost separate war. Now the Bavarians had been
whittled down by hunger and disease to just 5,000 soldiers and along
with II Corps had been pushed out of the city by Wittgenstein in a

ferocious battle. The Russians had paid dearly for the victory—12,000 of
their soldiers had been killed—while the French had lost only 6,000. But
now Wittgenstein was free to descend from the north and cut off the
retreat at any number of choke points.
Napoleon was quite literally losing the army itself. Headcounts were
disastrously low. “You want to fight,” Marshal Ney told him in
exasperation, “yet you have no army!” Napoleon had 40,000 men left.
He would pick up more from garrisons and detached forces as he headed
west, but they couldn’t come near to replacing the lost soldiers.
Smolensk, as Moscow had before it, now took on an oversize
importance in the mind of Napoleon and his men. It was to be their
salvation, and the sick and wounded, especially, made “superhuman
efforts” to reach it. Napoleon abandoned the idea of a confrontation with
Kutuzov and raced toward the city that would harbor the survivors of a
rapidly unfolding debacle.

O
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     15
Graveyard Trees
N JULY 8, 1941, THE FOURTH PANZER ARMY OF THE THIRD Reich rolled into the town
of Borisov, in what was then the Soviet Union. One of its
commanders, General Gunther Blumentritt, found himself on the road
to Moscow, without a Soviet soldier in sight to oppose his tanks. With
some other staff officers, the general strolled down to the banks of the
Berezina River and stared meditatively at the surging waters,
remembering their history and what had happened here. One of his
underlings pointed out something in the clear water, what appeared to
be wooden struts sunk below the surface. They puzzled over what the
structure could be, until it came to them that these were the remnants of
bridges built by Napoleon’s engineers a hundred and thirty years earlier.
A chill must have run down Blumentritt’s back; he knew the story of
Napoleon’s campaign. He had been opposed to the invasion of the Soviet
Union from the beginning and here was a reminder of a leader far more
brilliant than Hitler who had poured out the lifeblood of his army on a
nearly identical campaign. Armies had been marching back and forth
across these lands for hundreds of years, leaving their detritus—bones,
medals, buttons—in layers of soil beneath Blumentritt’s feet.
The path seemed almost fated to destroy armies. One reason was
Rickettsia. The other was winter.
THE BUGBEAR OF the campaign’s critics, the Russian winter, arrived in force
on November 6. Soldiers noticing a change in the quality of light tilted
their faces to the sky and found it changing from cerulean blue to
menacing gray-black as a cold mist swept in from the marshes. The mist
grew thicker and suddenly snowflakes were falling, at first lightly and

then in driving sheets. The carts bogged down in the wet snow and the
landscape changed, the hollows soon covered by deep drifts. Men
wandered off the road and fell through the crisp white surface and were
lost. The icy wind picked up and drove the snow horizontally, until the
men had to turn and march backward, their thin uniforms freezing on
their bodies from sweat and melted snow. Many of the soldiers were still
dressed in light summer trousers, with no gloves to protect their hands
and shoes that were falling apart.
Landscape became destiny. Writer after writer in their memoirs
recalled the bleak, elemental scenery against which the disaster
unfolded, as if designed for the purpose. The historian Ségur saw the
snow as “an immense winding sheet” slowly enveloping the army, while
Captain Eugène Labaume of IV Corps wrote that “the farther we
advanced the more the earth seemed to be in mourning.” Other soldiers
used to the well-cultivated French countryside, where one always
seemed to find evidence of humankind’s hand or a tolerant nature,
remarked on how the world itself seemed drained of color and life, a
bled-out corpse. Snow covered the ground in drifts whose distance it was
impossible to gauge, the line between earth and sky disappeared, the
line of sight pierced only by black-trunked firs, which the men called
“graveyard trees.” The last touch was the swarms of crows circling
overhead, swooping down to feast on fallen men, staining the snow with
blood flecked from their beaks.
With the snows came the end of command structure for many of the
men on the Smolensk road. Many never received an order after
November 6; for all intents and purposes, they were no longer members
of an army but individuals trying to return home on their own. Carbines
lined the route, tossed away by soldiers who couldn’t bother to carry
them anymore. “A great number of sick or wounded or men too feeble to
keep up with their units are just throwing away first their packs, then
their muskets,” reported Césare de Laugier, an adjutant major with IV
Corps. Doctors were rarely sighted and food wagons and depots were
raided by the troops in the advance guard, leaving nothing for the rest.
Men shot and smothered each other for food, stole at will, and even
impersonated Russians, calling out the Cossack war cry of “Hurrah!” to
scare competitors away from homes that might contain a bit of grain or

the promise of shelter for a night.
This became the iconic image of the 1812 campaign: ragged soldiers
wandering through the snowy wastes of the Russian hinterland. But by
the time winter arrived, Napoleon had lost 85 percent of his frontline
soldiers. The snow would cover a multitude of sins and mistakes; it was
a white mantle drawn over the final act of a tragedy. The retreat now
had as much in common with disastrous expeditions such as Ernest
Shackleton’s Antarctic adventure as it did a military exploit. Ice,
hypothermia, starvation, and disease stalked the men; at times, the
enemy was an afterthought.
The other piece of bad news that arrived with the blast of arctic air
was a bulletin from Paris. There had been a coup attempt led by a half-
mad general and ex-governor of Rome named Claude de Malet. He and a
coterie of republicans had attempted to seize control of the government
in a coup that often resembled opéra bouffe. He had managed only to
arrest two of Napoleon’s ministers and the prefect of police before being
himself clapped in chains, but the rumors of the emperor’s death that
were regularly sweeping through Paris and letters home from soldiers
detailing the unfolding disaster had given the conspirators enough
momentum to challenge Napoleon’s rule.
The ditches beside the Smolensk road began to fill with the booty of
Moscow. Men desperate to reduce the amount of calories they were
burning tossed away the things that once were going to ensure a
comfortable retirement. Along the road one saw silver candelabra, gold
crucifixes, the Complete Works of Voltaire bound in Moroccan leather,
wall hangings laced with silver thread, “cases filled with diamonds or
rolls of ducats.” Carts and droshkies stuffed to the roof with swag were
abandoned or pushed off the road by military police to speed up the
march. Lieutenant Nicolas-Louis Planat de la Faye recalled one sutler’s
wagon being overturned, out of which a beautiful set of books and a
magnificent harp spilled out, “to a great burst of laughter from all
present.” The enormous harp had represented the lifestyle the men had
expected to sink into once they reached home; now, tumbling into a
snowbank, it was a token of present realities. An even more outrageous
artifact was lost by Davout when his wagon was commandeered by a

band of Cossacks. Tucked inside was a map of India, which had been a
possible next stop after the conquest of Moscow.
The men were thin from hunger. They slept rough in the open air or
built flimsy huts made of sticks and tree branches. They marched like
automatons, the tips of their noses growing marble white with frostbite.
“We resemble our lackeys,” wrote the novelist Stendhal, an officer in the
commissariat, who was still among the luckiest men on the retreat,
having preserved his carriage. “We are far removed from Parisian
elegance.” And they had donned whatever relic of the Moscow bazaar
they had left. Gaunt soldiers wore silk dresses over their uniforms; fur
capes and throws; chartreuse, lilac, or white satin capes. “If the
circumstances hadn’t been so sad,” wrote Louise Fusil, a famous French
actress who had fled her Moscow theater, laughter would have greeted
the sight of an “old grenadier, with his mustache and bearskin, covered
in a pink satin fur.” Some wore remnants of carpets stolen from glossy
Muscovite floors. Many of the greatcoats were singed by the campfires or
sported black-edged holes where embers had fallen on sleeping soldiers
and burned through.
Soldiers who had only weeks before been eating caviar and reclining
on fur cloaks in Moscow were now turned into omnivores, “starving
lunatics.” Everything went into the cooking pot. One colonel had
managed to corral eighty head of cattle and his regiment marched with
them and butchered them as needed, but the vast majority of the troops
were reduced to a meager diet consisting of anything that fell into their
path: Russian dogs, the native white bears, cats, rock-hard cabbages and
roots, leather dipped in water to soften it, even human flesh. The men
ate their own fingers that had been amputated because of frostbite, and
drank their own blood. Horse meat was the staple, and sometimes men
who had no knives and whose hands had become frozen solid would
kneel at the side of a fallen steed and tear at the flesh with their teeth
“like famished wolves.”
“I have never suffered so much,” Dr. Larrey wrote his wife. “The
campaigns in Egypt and Spain were nothing when compared to this one;
and we are by no means at the end of our troubles.” As he approached a
small town late in November, the Russian partisan leader Denis Davidov

saw “mountains of dead men and horses …piles of enemy soldiers,
barely alive, lay in the snow or sought shelter in the carts.” One could
hear the impact as the runners of his sleigh snapped arm bones and
crushed the skulls of the French lying in the road. Later, wagoners would
stuff corpses into ruts and potholes in the road, paving the road with
carcasses. The dead were used as tables, chairs, road-building material,
and insulation. Doctors stuffed cadavers into cracks in hospital walls and
across windows whose panes were broken, to keep out the wind.
The only things that seemed to thrive in the subfreezing temperatures
were lice. As the temperatures plunged, the parasites burrowed closer to
the skin, invading the armpits and the groin, and then emerging at night
by the thousands. “As long as we were out in the cold and walking,
nothing stirred,” wrote one lieutenant, Karl von Suckow, “but in the
evening, when we huddled round the campfires life would return to
these insects which would then inflict intolerable tortures on us.” The
body louse was demonstrating what a brilliant choice Rickettsia had
made in selecting it as a vector. It was able to thrive when even the
famously hardy black rat would have perished.
After a soldier died, the parasite had three and a half days (the longest
a louse can survive without feeding) to find another host. The fact that
fellow soldiers and Cossacks stripped dead men for their clothes,
providing a fresh meal for the louse, meant that it was one of the
creatures on the retreat best equipped to survive the intense cold.
REMARKABLY, FEW OF THE soldiers cursed Napoleon for the situation they now
found themselves in. Cries of “Vive l’Empereur!” were now rarely heard,
but the luster earned at Austerlitz still held. “No one among us dreamed
of reproaching him for our setbacks,” wrote Captain François
Dumonceau of the 2nd Guard Lancers, “and in our eyes he still retained
the prestige of a supreme arbiter.”
One can only marvel at the generosity of the soldiers. It wasn’t so
much the hazy political motives behind the Russian invasion or the dead
left scattered all over the line of march that gives rise to a suspicion that
Napoleon had broken faith with his troops. Members of the Grande
Armée weren’t primarily concerned with whether wars were just or
unjust, whether the empire was truly threatened by Alexander or not.

They didn’t evaluate the worth of their sacrifice by the political goals of
the campaign. It was in the fighting itself, in the personal camaraderie
and the opportunity to perform heroically that they sought meaning and
even joy, and in this arena Napoleon had always been exemplary: He
maneuvered his soldiers brilliantly for victory, rewarded valor with
immediate promotions, and fought close to his men, consumed by the
intricacies of the battle, his body and spirit given over to the
engagement. His men were content, even proud, to starve and suffer and
march hundreds of miles over impossible terrain to die in legendary
battles for a man like that. But in Russia, he had been intellectually lazy,
negligent in the basic things that allowed the men to get to the
battlefield for their chance at honor, and instead had allowed them to
die ingloriously of cold, want, and Rickettsia, the afflictions of criminals.
And yet most of the men never abandoned their idea of him as a great
commander.
On November 9, Napoleon entered Smolensk, now covered in layers of
snow. He had expected his commissariat to have assembled enough
supplies here to last for months, giving him the option of wintering in
the city while receiving reinforcements from Paris and his allies. But he
found that the enormous stores that had been stockpiled in the city had
been eaten away by the stragglers left behind on the advance, by the
15,000 sick and wounded who had been installed in the city’s bursting
hospitals, and by reinforcements on their way to Moscow. Cattle had
died on the way, caravans had been intercepted, and the surrounding
countryside hadn’t yielded nearly as much wheat and beef as Napoleon
had estimated it would. In short, there were enough supplies at
Smolensk for a brief break in the march, but nowhere near enough to
sustain an army for an entire season.
More bad news arrived at a dizzying pace: An infantry brigade filled
with new reinforcements from France had been intercepted on the
Medyn road and forced to surrender. Vitebsk, where another massive
supply of food had been directed, had fallen to the Russians. When
Berthier, Napoleon’s chief of staff, heard the news, he muttered over and
over again, “Not possible, not possible.”
The emperor’s reaction was considerably more pointed. He burst out

in a tirade against his commanders, especially Davout and Marshal
Claude Victor, who had been stationed with his IX Corps in Smolensk as
an emergency reserve force: “See how they sacrifice the safety of my
armies to themselves! All of them, do you see? Davout’s half-mad and of
no further use. Victor comes to Smolensk to destroy to no purpose the
stores prepared here…. No, no, there isn’t one of them one can entrust
with anything…. If I dared to, I’d have them all shot.”
The soldiers’ hopes of an end to their suffering had been dashed and
disappointment quickly turned to rage. Troops turned bandit and forced
commissary officials to hand over food at gunpoint. Units squabbled
over sides of beef and bags of flour and stragglers banded together to rob
fellow soldiers of supplies. General Rossetti noted in his diary: “This city
where we thought to find the end of our sorrows cruelly deceived our
most dear expectations, and became, on the contrary, the witness to all
our disgrace and despondency.”
Typhus and dysentery victims had willed themselves to the city,
freezing on top of open wagons or hobbling through miles of mud for a
chance at a bed and a doctor. But they were turned away. “The
hospitals, the churches, and other buildings couldn’t hold the sick who
showed up in the thousands,” wrote Rossetti. “These unfortunate ones,
exposed to the rigor of a freezing night, remained on carts, in caissons,
or died looking in vain for refuge.” Corpses piled up in the streets.
Disease was spreading even more quickly now that troops were pouring
into the city. Lamurzier reported that patients suffering from exhaustion
were “stuck together with contagious patients,” and some were even
lying among the dead bodies. Infected lice would have been pouring off
those bodies in the thousands, looking for new homes. “A horrible,
death-dealing stench …was poisoning the air,” wrote a French
commissary. “The dead were killing the living.”
If Mozhaisk was the generally acknowledged beginning of the intense
suffering experienced on the march, Smolensk was the gateway to
disorder and a rising panic. The Imperial Guard grabbed much of the
remaining supplies for themselves, increasing the bitterness of the
regular troops. As more and more regiments poured into the outskirts of
Smolensk and set up camp around the burned-over city, temperatures

plunged to -10 and lower. Men sold their last remaining pieces of loot
from Moscow in a thronging bazaar that sprang up, bartering necklaces
and bracelets studded with gems for bread or a small cut of meat. Those
without anything to trade broke into food depots, which had to be
guarded around the clock.
Napoleon spent five days in Smolensk, a delay that was more a
function of his continuing indecision than an effort to allow his men to
find what sustenance and rest they could. He was still thinking of finding
a secure place to winter and assemble his forces for a spring campaign.
On November 14, the vanguard marched out toward Borisov. Marshal
Ney had now taken up the rearguard position, just behind Davout and
Prince Eugène. But the road was clogged with the flotsam of Napoleon’s
mammoth army: he had brought so many troops to Russia that he now
had to drive through the sickened remainder. The bedraggled mix of
unit-assigned soldiers, stragglers, troops-turned-bandits, riffraff from
Moscow, hangers-on, wives, girlfriends, streetwalkers, French refugees,
and servants began the next leg of their journey without a beacon like
the promise of Smolensk.
One well-born French soldier from Breton dying of “fever,” most likely
typhus, begged his mate to carry a note back to his family in France. It
was an elegy reduced to the barest details.
Farewell, good mother,
   My friend;
   Farewell, my dear,
   My good Sophie!
   Farewell Nantes, where I was born;
   Farewell, beautiful France, my fatherland;
   Farewell, dear mother:
   I am going to die—
   Farewell!
The ranks grew thinner every morning. On November 12, the Hessian
memoirist Captain Roeder took a count of his company (which had
marched into Russia with 442 men and 26 officers) and recorded the
results: “Missing: 1 drummer, 2 schutzen [infantrymen], 43 guardsmen.
Absent sick: 31 guardsmen, 1 sergeant, 2 bandsmen. Present sick: 10

guardsmen, 2 sergeants. To march out: 8 sergeants, 1 drummer, 7
schutzen, 42 guardsmen.” The final numbers included men who had
fallen in with his company from other units; of his original contingent of
468 men, only 34 troops were left.
On November 15, as he led the vanguard to the next major town on
the Smolensk road, Krasny, Napoleon and the Guard had to batter their
way through Russian forces, who had cut the route ahead of him. The
Guard were now like a bullet shot into water: the Russians would give
way to the irresistible momentum of a superior fighting force, but once
the corps was through, the surrounding forces would immediately close
up behind them as if nothing had happened.
Prince Eugène was caught in one such attack: the Russians cut off his
units from the main line of troops. Facing certain extermination, he
followed the advice of a Polish colonel and, starting at ten o’clock at
night, led his men off the road and through the nearby woods to circle
around the enemy. Marching through deep snow in silence interrupted
by the muffled exclamations of men tumbling into hidden ravines and
the metallic snick of gunmetal scraping across belt buckles, the survivors
expected at any moment to be ambushed. When a Russian scout
challenged the half-visible unit that loomed toward him in the blackness,
the Polish colonel barked, “Shut up, you fool. Can’t you see we’re
Ouvarov’s corps and that we’re off on a secret expedition?”
Miraculously, the ruse worked and the men made it to safety.
Only Ney, who had taken on the suicidal mission of guarding the
extreme French rear, remained separated from the rest of the army.
Eager to reach the supplies and protection of Orsha, seventy-five miles
away, Napoleon marched on, leaving Ney and the rear guard to fend for
themselves. Ney was apoplectic when he realized that he had been
abandoned, left with 6,000 men and six cannon to face 80,000 Russian
infantry and a robust artillery. Ordered to surrender, Ney drove his men
at the center of the Russian formation, with artillery shells tearing
through the ranks. “At each step, death was becoming more inevitable,”
wrote Colonel Fezensac, who was leading the 4th Line into battle. “Yet
our march wasn’t slowed down for a single instant.” Entire divisions
such as the 2nd disappeared as the Russians raked the charging men

with canister and grapeshot.
As night fell, Ney was in danger of being wiped out the following day.
The road to France was blocked by a force he couldn’t hope to outfight.
Napoleon, days ahead in Orsha on the Dnieper River, waited for news of
his rear guard, sending messenger after messenger inquiring about the
marshal and telling his advisers that he would give the 300 million
francs in his treasury to have Ney with him again. For four days there
was no word. The men of the Grande Armée, which had found enough
food and shelter in the river town to stave off hunger, now brooded on
the fate of III Corps. “The wreck of the army …,” Ségur wrote, “shared
Napoleon’s grief.”
Like Prince Eugène, Ney had decided to use the darkness in a last-gasp
effort to escape almost certain annihilation. The marshal aimed for the
Dnieper River, taking a substantial risk that his men would be able to
find the right road in the darkness and that, once arrived at the
riverbank, they’d find the water frozen and fordable. Marching out as
dusk was falling and temperatures plunged, Ney luckily happened on a
lame peasant who directed the French to a riverside town. Camped out
in the frigid cold, they could hear the river ice creak and snap. In the
morning, there was a rush for the other bank. Scrambling down the icy
incline, the men searched in the diffuse morning light for routes where
the ice seemed thick enough to support them. Horses and their riders
plunged into the icy water and were never seen again. Others who had
broken through the ice cried out to their comrades. “Their complaints
tore at our hearts, already overwhelmed by our own perils,”
remembered General Jean-David Freytag. Water splashed on the men
immediately began to freeze, and when they reached the opposite bank,
the soldiers found it was twelve feet high and coated with ice. Many
tried to make the climb but, exhausted, slipped down to the foot of the
slope and waited for death.
The next day and night the French troops who survived the crossing
picked their way across the Russian countryside and endured terrifying
raids by Cossacks and barrages of grapeshot from pursuing Russian units.
The ranks were winnowed down and the Russians who swept past their
flanks called out for them to surrender. The column was twice

surrounded by Russians, but Ney marched them out through gaps in the
line before the enemy had a chance to fall on them. Trapped at one point
with their backs to a thickly wooded forest, low on cartridges, the
French saw a messenger advancing under a white flag. The envoy
brought a message, saying the French were surrounded by 100,000 men
and faced only death. To the request to lay down their arms, Ney
replied, “Go and tell your general a Marshal of France never surrenders.”
The men had not eaten for days, their boots were waterlogged, and they
were racked by illness, but Ney got them through the Russian lines by
sheer force of will.
Finally, on November 20, they reached Orsha, completing one of the
most intrepid marches in military history, a feat achievable only through
Ney’s indefatigable leadership. Prince Eugène rushed to Ney and threw
his arms around the marshal, while his soldiers broke ranks and rushed
to embrace the spectral men. “In this moment we forgot past ills, men’s
egoism, the cruelty of fate and future perils,” wrote Césare de Laugier,
the adjutant major in IV Corps. Napoleon’s regiments were thrilled with
the news, “drunk with delight,” as the diplomat Caulaincourt wrote, and
the emperor himself was visibly moved by Ney’s feat.
But the relief was only momentary. Even Napoleon now saw clearly
the suffering of his men. “The misery of my poor soldiers breaks my
heart!” he said at Orsha. “But where can we rest, without ammunition,
food, or artillery? I am not strong enough to stay here.”
SERGEANT BOURGOGNE OF Napoleon’s elite Guards was one of those poor
soldiers who had fallen ill. On arriving at the Berezina, approximately
sixty miles west of Orsha, he collapsed on the riverbank and found that
he was feverish. His body shook and his mind began to travel far from
the grim scene around him. “I was delirious for a long time,” he
remembered. “I fancied I was at my father’s house, eating potatoes,
bread and butter à la flamande, and drinking beer.” Near to the campfire
was another soldier who had put on his full dress uniform as if he were
going on parade. Bourgogne asked him what he was doing, but the man
laughed and said nothing. “That laugh was the laugh of death, as he
succumbed during the night.”
Bourgogne was now traveling with two regiments, down from a force

fifteen times that size only two weeks before. To their ailments was now
added snow blindness and eye problems caused by men sitting too close
to smoky fires for hours on end. The sightless men had companions
guiding them along the road, or if they had no friends to be their eyes,
they were left to blunder off into the drifts.
Dr. Larrey, now stumbling along on foot with the rest of the troops,
still had no real idea of what was killing them. His latest theory was ice
water: “The snow and icy water that the soldiers swallowed, hoping
thereby to allay their hunger, or to quench their thirst,” he wrote,
“produced by irritation of the mucous membrane of the stomach, largely
contributed to the death of these individuals, since the little heat left in
the viscera was absorbed.” It was certainly possible to lower one’s core
temperature by gulping large amounts of frigid water, but that can
hardly account for the mass dying-off that had occurred in the ranks.
The doctor did offer up some contrarian sociophysiological thoughts on
who lived and who died: “I noticed that people with dark hair and an
emotional, labile temperament, mostly from the countries of southern
Europe, stood up better to the severe cold than did fair-haired men of
phlegmatic temperament and coming for the most part from northern
countries,” he wrote. “The circulation of the first group is no doubt more
active; their vital forces have more energy; it is likely, too, that, even in
conditions of extreme cold, their blood retains much better the principles
of 
animal 
warmth 
identified 
with 
their 
pigmentation.” 
The
Mediterranean temperament also allowed the men to remain more
cheerful than their dark-browed brothers from the north, according to
the doctor’s observations. But if there were significant differences
between the survival rates of different racial groups, it’s more likely it
had to do with the preparation and resourcefulness of their officers, the
thickness of their coats, and the fitness of the soldiers.
Heinrich von Brandt and his Polish regiment, which would be reduced
from 2,000 to just 60 after the retreat, reached the city of Borisov on the
banks of the Berezina River on November 15, ahead of Napoleon and the
Imperial Guard. They were marooned there for five days as they waited
for the word to advance. Rumors flew that the Russians controlled the
other bank of the river. The town was filled with refugees, terrified
civilians, troops that had become separated from their units or whose

units had ceased to exist, and “a clutter of scoundrels who filled the
cafés and bars and did nothing but drink and play at cards.” There was
no rule of law, no command structure, and the town had degenerated
into the kind of frontier anarchy in which von Brandt and his
companions occasionally had to draw their weapons in order to survive.
Von Brandt and his troops fled the town before the French expatriate
general Count Charles de Lambert and the Russians took it on November
20, and they found themselves in Bobr, which was filled with deserters
and stragglers, “marauders of the most dangerous kind.” The Grande
Armée, he concluded, “to all intents and purposes, no longer existed.”
As he approached Borisov, unaware that it had been taken by the
Russians, Napoleon turned his thoughts toward the Berezina. It was the
last river to ford, and one of the last choke points, before reaching Vilna
and then, seventy-five miles on, the Niemen, where all his troubles had
begun. When he studied the maps, a familiar name jarred his memory:
Poltava, where the Swedish army had been massacred in 1709. “Ah yes!”
he cried. “Poltava! …Like Charles XII!” It was black humor, but he had
read Voltaire’s account of the Swede’s disaster intently and knew how
close he was to sharing that fate.
The various Russian armies—the headstrong Admiral Pavel Chichagov
in the southwest, Wittgenstein in the north, and remains of the First and
Second armies along with the Cossacks tailing Napoleon—were all
poised to converge at Borisov. The depots at Minsk had already fallen to
Chichagov’s 60,000 men. All signs pointed toward a Russian pincer
movement at the river, where Kutuzov would spring his long-delayed
trap and annihilate the French army before it could escape to Lithuania
and the Niemen.

“Kutuzov is leaving me alone now in order to head me off and attack
me,” Napoleon said. “We must hurry.” He knew there was only a single
bridge at Borisov, guarded by a single Polish division. If the Grande
Armée didn’t reach it in time, they could find their way blocked and
their escape thwarted. In one of the statements that give the measure of
Napoleon’s sangfroid, he remarked, “This is beginning to be very
serious.” It had, of course, been serious for many weeks, but Kutuzov’s
incompetence as a strategist and as a fighter gave the emperor some
hope of outmaneuvering the Russians. Still, the numbers and the terrain
were wholly in favor of the enemy.
Napoleon didn’t realize he’d been beaten to the choke point by
Lambert’s men. The Russians, believing their lines secure, then found
shelter and relaxed their guard. Unknown to them, French troops were
streaming toward the city, and when they arrived they found the
Russians unprepared for an attack. The fighting was savage but one-
sided: the Russians lost 9,000 men and in their negligence would have
handed Napoleon a golden opportunity to slip over the Berezina
unmolested had they not torched the single bridge as they fled to the
western bank. The river, packed with mushy, unstable ice, was
effectively unfordable. New bridges would have to be built under the
guns of the Russians and the old one quickly repaired.

On November 23, the French command received the news while they
were just under forty miles from the Berezina. Napoleon briefly
considered a thrust northward to surprise Wittgenstein’s army and then a
turn west. But the roads were unfamiliar, the terrain was marshy and
rough, and his troops were in no condition for the maneuver. Instead he
decided to race to Borisov and attempt to rebuild the destroyed span,
throw some pontoon bridges across the river, and get away before
Kutuzov could smash his forces against the icy water. “The names
‘Chichagov’ and ‘Berezina’ passed from mouth to mouth,” remembered
Captain Johann von Borcke. The lead elements of the French forces
arrived in Borisov on November 23, with Napoleon a day behind. The
engineers tasked with building pontoons for the thousands of troops
rushing up behind them gaped at the currents sweeping great tumbling
chunks of ice downstream.
But French cavalry units had stumbled on a point in the river seven
miles upstream that the army might be able to ford en masse. Their
general lobbied Napoleon to change course and head for the crossing
point. If the army could ford the Berezina there, Napoleon might be able
to squeeze his armies between Chichagov in the south and Wittgenstein
in the north instead of fighting his way through.
Bad information and the lack of coordination among the Russian
commanders allowed the French this small window of opportunity. As
Napoleon made his move northward, Chichagov was receiving contrary
reports about the French intentions. His scouts reported sighting enemy
units below Borisov, and bulletins from both Kutuzov and Wittgenstein
warning him of a possible attack on his southern flank, combined with
eyewitness reports from villagers of Frenchmen gathering logs and other
bridge-building materials in the area, confirmed the impression that
Napoleon intended to ford the river below the town. He stationed 1,500
of his men in Borisov, then led the rest of his troops out of the town and
turned due south. The log gatherers were actually cuirassiers sent on a
jaunt to trick Chichagov. The ruse worked.
What should have been a classic pincer movement became a trap
clattering open, at least momentarily. But it would still be a perilous
escape. Knowing this, Napoleon burned the reports from Paris that had

reached him on the retreat and created a new personal security detail,
the “sacred squadron,” made up of 500 commissioned soldiers, to protect
him from the very real possibility of becoming a prisoner of state.
The French troops hurried north and managed to get 750 sappers to
the crossing point on November 24 to begin the construction of two
bridges, one for the cavalry, wagons, and artillery and the other for the
infantry. With them they had six wagons packed with essential materials
that were almost abandoned earlier in the retreat: hammers, crowbars,
and iron sheets, along with four wagons packed with coal and portable
forges to make the nails and cross braces. Wood came from the huts and
stables in the village, which were torn apart to provide planks; steel rims
from the abandoned wagons were turned into clamps and spikes.
Carrying them over their heads, the pontoneers walked out into the
dangerously cold river, about a hundred feet wide and six feet deep at
this point, their boots slipping over the smooth rocks on the river
bottom. Fifteen minutes was all that any soldier could stand in the
currents, and many succumbed to hypothermia or stumbled and were
carried away by the river. The Dutch soldiers worked knowing that on
the elevations across the river, Cossack pickets were patrolling the far
banks, and their bobbing heads were easily within Russian cannon
range.
The Cossacks spotted the pontoneers at their work, setting trestles in
water up to their chins, and sent riders to Chichagov with reports of the
suspicious activity. If the messengers returned with Chichagov’s main
force, using the heights of the opposite bank to sweep the river with
canister and musket fire, the Grande Armée would have been lost. But
Chichagov, notorious for refusing to admit his mistakes, took the activity
for a feint and stayed where he was, prowling the banks south of Borisov
for a sign of Napoleon.
The emperor remained calm as the work progressed. Marshal Ney
remarked that if Napoleon got the army out of this fix, he would never
doubt the emperor’s luck again. But Murat, more high-strung than his
colleague, bent under the strain, bursting in on Napoleon as he worked
in a house on the riverbank. “I consider it impossible to cross here,” he
burst out. “You must save yourself while there is still time!” The

emperor brushed the suggestion aside as beneath him. He was eager to
reach Paris, but abandoning the army at a choke point while the enemy
lurked all around would have been a black mark on his name.
At dawn on November 26, the French watched the opposite bank, half
expecting to see Chichagov’s ranks serried back from the water’s edge.
Surely the incessant pounding of the sappers’ hammers and the shouts of
the engineers had brought the main body of the general’s forces to the
crossing point. But the light revealed only abandoned campfires and a
black line of troops curling into the tree line on the road south to
Borisov. “It isn’t possible!” Napoleon cried in astonishment. But it was.
Chichagov had abandoned the position. The emperor sent 100 chasseurs
and Polish lancers to drive off the handful of Cossacks left behind and
later secured the bank with 400 troops ferried over on rafts.
By noon, the first bridge was finished. The second, intended for the
cavalry and wagons, would take four more hours. Napoleon sent cavalry
and infantry units across to cover the retreat’s southern flank, in case
Chichagov changed his mind and moved northward. The Guard followed
soon after, followed by the “sacred squadron” with Napoleon in its
midst, then Davout, Ney, Murat, and Eugène. The men hurried across the
rickety bridge, whose planks rested just inches above the water, with the

trestles that anchored the bridge sometimes sinking under the weight of
the troops, dipping the planks into the frigid water. Horses had to cross
at intervals, for fear that their cumulative weight would collapse the
“matchbox” structure. From the woods, the thousands of stragglers
watched for their chance to make it across, their numbers growing as the
hours passed. The wheels of the carriages, artillery pieces, and officers’
wagons rattled along the uneven roadway of the second bridge, scraping
off the pine branches and horse dung that had been used as a surfacing
material.
Trestles sank or tumbled over on both bridges, planks cracked, and
sappers rushed back into the water to improvise a fix and keep the
soldiers moving, bashing the ice floes away with their axes. The anxious
men fought over their place in line, shoving each other back from the
first planks. As the day progressed, a north wind picked up and snow
began to fall, at first gently, then in sheets. Napoleon, dressed in his
campaign uniform with white breeches and a gray overcoat, his boots
freshly shined, watched from the shore.
The bulk of the army had made it to the western bank by evening on
November 27. Only a few units and Marshal Victor’s brigades, who were
arriving at the Berezina after battling Wittgenstein, remained. The
military police who had guarded the entrance to the bridge and
controlled the flow over it began letting the stragglers onto the structure,
but they weren’t rushing to cross, not yet. There was no sign of a Russian
attack and it was safer to cross the bridges, which increasingly sagged
and buckled as the crossing went on, during daylight.
On the morning of November 28, the window began to close. A
contingent of 30,000 Russian soldiers, sent north by Chichagov,
encountered French forces on the western bank of the Berezina. Shells
splintered trees and musket fire clipped off pine branches as the Russians
pressed to close off the escape route toward Vilna. Ney rushed some of
his 13,000 men as reinforcements, but Chichagov, now fully convinced
that Napoleon had duped him, was sending his entire army north and
the volume of enemy fire directed toward the French seemed to increase
by the half hour.
The Grande Armée, bone-thin and riddled with disease, turned to stop

the attack. Cries of “Vive l’Empereur!” echoed through the forest as
Polish, Swiss, Croat, Portuguese, and Dutch troops held off the
numerically superior Russians. When the Swiss regiments ran out of
ammunition, they leveled their bayonets and plunged through the knee-
deep snow, scattering the Russian infantry as they went. One Swiss
soldier, Louis de Bourmann, was advancing with his 2nd Regiment when
an officer dismounted ahead of him to lead his men on foot. “A Russian
musket ball went through his throat,” recalled one of his men. “He gave
a cry, stifled by blood, and fell backwards into my arms…. Without
losing consciousness, he said these simple words to his fellow-citizen:
‘Bourmann, I’ve died here as a Christian.’” The soldiers’ efforts stood out
on one of the Grande Armée’s finest days. The Swiss charged the
Russians seven times with only bayonets to defend themselves. The
mysterious bond that held Napoleon’s army together despite every
incentive to disintegrate held fast.
At the same time, Wittgenstein was descending on Victor’s men on the
eastern bank, the long-awaited pincer finally closing on the French.
Wittgenstein had already rolled up one of the brigades that had held
Borisov until November 27, then blundered north into the Russian lines.
Now he concentrated an artillery barrage against the 8,000 remaining
troops and the mini-city of stragglers and human flotsam that huddled
amidst the gray smoke of the campfires. Rumors had been circulating
since three in the morning that an attack on the rear guard was
imminent, and the entrance to the first bridge had become jammed with
thousands of men, women, and children desperate to avoid being
captured and being sent to camps in the frozen North.
The bombardment only increased the frenzy. The mass of people
rippled and surged, throwing men into the icy river and packing the
crowd so tightly that no one could move forward or back. One was
simply carried along, feet never touching the bridge. Karl von Suckow of
the Württemburg III Corps found himself “surrounded on all sides,
caught in a veritable human vise…. Everyone was shouting, swearing,
weeping, and trying to hit out at his neighbors.” The road leading to the
bridge became littered with corpses of men and horses, their flesh
pulverized under the hordes pressing toward the river. All the while
Russian round shot struck the crowd, leaving craters of mud and severed

limbs. The stragglers rushed from one bridge to the other, battling
crowds headed in the other direction.
Observers on the western bank could hear a constant bellowing, “like
the distant roarings of a tempest at sea, cries, yells, wagons exploding,
an undefinable uproar which filled us with terror.” The Imperial Guard
began directing cannonades at the Russian batteries, and finally Marshal
Victor and his IX Corps mounted an attack that pushed the guns out of
range. They managed to hold their ground as night fell and the Russian
fire lessened. The lanes leading to the bridge were cluttered with piles of
cadavers and dead horses; Victor and his men had to cut a route through
them with their sabers while military police pushed back the despairing
mobs of stragglers who had failed to cross during the day. By six o’clock
that night all of his troops were across except for some mounted troops
and 200 soldiers bringing up the rear.
Astonishingly, although the bridges were now open, some of the
hangers-on elected to spend another night on the eastern bank, despite
the entreaties of IX Corps’ Marshal Victor and General Jean-Baptiste
Eblé, who even went around the campfires warning the people that the
bridge was about to be blown up to slow the Russian pursuit. The
hopeless men and women simply looked at Eblé, past comprehension or
caring. The general tramped back across the bridge and made ready the
cache of combustibles that would destroy the crossing at seven a.m.
The next morning, Eblé waited on the western bank, watching the
scene unfold across the river. After sleeping under the falling snow, the
remaining soldiers had again rushed to the bridges’ entrances and
clogged them as the Russians closed in. Men slashed their way through
the mob with bayonets, and the roar resumed. Finally, as the Russian
gunners began to find the range of the rear guard waiting to blow the
bridge, Eblé ordered the fuses lit, and planks shot into the air as the
western reaches of the bridges exploded. One soldier, miles away from
the Berezina, remembered hearing a collective scream from the doomed
multitudes when they saw the explosives ignite.
The last of the stragglers were tipped into the water and froze to death
or were killed by the Russian grapeshot that kicked up sprays of water.
The blue-lipped bodies of women and children, some of them newborns,

floated downstream, a sight remembered by many of the retreating
soldiers, and clotted masses of bodies were grouped along each shore.
The Cossacks arrived on the riverbank and began stripping the bodies of
the dead and the living. Many of the sick and wounded who had
somehow managed to survive the ghastly trip from Borodino or Moscow
never made it over the bridge.
Crossing the Berezina cost the Grande Armée and its followers about
25,000 dead, while the Russians lost some 15,000. The Russians took
entire regiments prisoner, with Wittgenstein’s units capturing 13,000
men, leaving Napoleon with only about 40,000 men (his ranks having
been swelled by garrisons, stragglers who had rejoined the march, and
Victor’s and Marshal Gouvion Saint-Cyr’s men). Even with the scenes on
the bridge that haunted many survivors’ memories more than any other
aspect of the retreat, it’s still remembered as something of a miracle, a
late, brilliant flashing-out of Napoleon’s genius. His maneuvering was
clever, but it was now his men that were the vessels of his reputation.
Without being whipped to it, his soldiers fought for him with something
more than the robotic stupor of half-dead men guarding the only route
to survival; they performed with an esprit de corps that transcended
nationality and the ridiculous piling-on of misfortune. But the fact that
such a nightmare is counted as a victory of the campaign shows the
perilous state that the Napoleonic enterprise had reached by November
29.
“THE ARMY IS LARGE, but in a state of terrible dissolution,” the emperor wrote
on November 29, emphasizing that the troops needed to find plentiful
supplies in Vilna in order to have a chance. “Food, food, food! Without
that there is no atrocity that this undisciplined mob will not visit upon
the city.” Napoleon was still considering some kind of garrison within
Russian territory—Vilna was the last possibility—to be reinforced for a
spring offensive. He was also beginning to think strategically about how
to best present the disaster that had overcome his army to his allies and
enemies in western Europe. He ordered all foreign diplomats out of
Vilna, so they couldn’t report on the state of his troops, and instructed
his commander there to proceed as if the retreat was orderly and the
Grande Armée in robust health. But the emperor knew that word of his
defeat must be spreading through the capitals of Europe.

On December 3, he issued the 29th Bulletin, the first in almost three
weeks. For the first time, he revealed the “frightful calamity” that had
occurred, and blamed it mostly on weather and the lack of food. There
were hints that the dead had been at fault for dying so easily. “Those
men, whom nature had not sufficiently steeled to be above all the
chances of fate and fortune, appeared shook, lost their gaiety—their
good humor, and dreamed but of misfortunes and catastrophes; those
whom she has created superior to everything, preserved their gaiety, and
their ordinary manners, and saw fresh glory in the different difficulties
to be surmounted.” Napoleon famously ended the dispatch with the
assurance that “His Majesty’s health has never been better.”
By December 5, Napoleon had decided to return to Paris. There he
would raise a new army of 300,000 men and return to Russia to finish
the war. The hardened survivors of 1812 would become the core of the
offensive of 1813. He brought his marshals together and gave his final
speech of the campaign, for the first time admitting his own culpability
to his generals in apologizing (according to some present) for leaving
Moscow too late. But he was still breathing the last fumes of his Russian
dream, believing that the Polish population would rise up and attack the
Cossacks besieging the garrison at Vilna, that the French army would
triple in size once food and clothing was supplied to the survivors and
reinforcements arrived, and that the Russians would find it hard to
supply the forces around the city. He told the marshals that he felt he
had stayed away from Paris as long as possible; if things turned for the
worse, there could be another coup attempt or his fragile alliances with
Austria and Prussia could collapse. Then as now, defeat in the military
sphere meant a realignment of power elsewhere, especially in political
relations with allies whose interests and ambitions ran counter to
France’s. Disguised to avoid capture, the emperor departed at ten that
night, with his former Russian ambassador, Caulaincourt, in a carriage
guarded by mounted Neapolitan and Polish soldiers.
THE ARMY FAILED to realize Napoleon’s vision of a miraculously revived force.
Some 20,000 more men died on the road to Vilna, and troops began
burning entire houses on the route to stave off the cold, which reached
its nadir at -36 degrees. The remainder of the troops, looking like
survivors of some medieval famine, surged into the sophisticated city of

shops and stylishly dressed merchants, which was quickly looted and
trashed by the half-crazed throngs. The thirteen-year-old son of a French
surgeon described it as “nothing but a vast hospital, with men arriving
sick with typhus and dysentery.” The floors of one hospital were covered
with the feces of the soldiers, “dying there in great numbers.”
Some 20,000 troops entered Vilna; only 10,000 marched out. One
parish reportedly had 8,000 dead dumped in its churchyard, the vast
mound hurriedly disguised with snow.
By the time they reached Kovno in central Lithuania, the disappearing
army was down to 7,000. And when they crossed the Niemen back into
Germany, with the indestructible Ney the last man over the bridge
before it was burned, there were only a few thousand left of Napoleon’s
frontline troops (other reserve forces had crossed earlier), many of them
infected with Rickettsia, journeying home as fatal messengers, only to
infect the loved ones who had waited for them for so long.

W
EPILOGUE
Rendezvous in Germany
ord of the French defeat electrified Europe. When the diplomats and Polish officials and
aristocrats f who had been herded into Vilna saw the emperor’s forces in person, the news
could be held in no longer: Napoleon’s army had mostly vanished. In Germany, students
and ragamuffins paraded through the town streets chanting a ditty that mocked the once-
fearsome Grande Armée:
Drummers without drumsticks
    Cuirassiers in female garb,
    Knights without a sword,
    Riders without a horse!
    Man, nag and wagon
    Thus has God struck them down!
“It seems to me that the spell has been broken as far as Napoleon is concerned,” wrote the
Dowager Empress Maria Fyodorovna. “He is no longer an idol, but has descended to the rank of
men, and as such he can be fought by men.” The glamorous balls and state receptions that
Napoleon initiated on his return to Paris couldn’t muffle the rumblings of disaster that emanated
even from within his own ministries.
The emperor tried to sweep the details under the rug, claiming that only 400,000 of his troops
had crossed the Niemen and that only half of those were French, which allowed him to peg his
own casualties at an absurdly low 50,000. It was a fantasy, and few believed it.
As the survivors marched west and south, they were “shunned like lepers,” as word of the
epidemic in their midst spread before them. Many of the troops were quarantined in the various
towns they traveled through, and the locals often locked them in for the night so they couldn’t
spread the contagion. When the German infantryman and diarist Jakob Walter caught typhus
along with his brothers-in-arms, the good people of a small settlement near Stuttgart, Germany,
escorted them to the town hall, then bolted the door. When the lads escaped and made their way
to a local inn, alarm bells rang and the citizens threatened to call the local militia to bring them

back to their quarters at gunpoint.
The men, no matter their nationality, were called “Russians” and “Moscow bums.” The diarist
and Württemberg lieutenant H. A. Vossler remembered:
Wherever we went we were gaped at like freaks, for we were among the few who
had escaped the universal disaster. Everywhere we were made to give, over and
over again, an account of our own adventures, of the plight of the army, and of the
appalling hardships we had suffered. Yet such is human nature that there were
always some who felt our tale was not harrowing enough and argued that we could
not therefore have experienced the campaign and the retreat in its entirety.
Dr. Larrey, who had, in one of the heartening scenes at the Berezina, been passed by hand over
the heads of his cheering troops to the western bank, finally noted in his memoirs that
contagious disease had impacted the Grande Armée. “Epidemic maladies successively attacked a
great part of those who had escaped the foregoing catastrophe,” he wrote. Days later, he
succumbed on the way back to Paris. “I had scarcely concluded my arrangements, when I was
suddenly seized with symptoms of the catarrhal fever attendant on congelation, a species of
typhus having the greatest analogy to hospital fevers…. This malady made rapid progress, and
rendered in a very few days my situation extremely dangerous.” He barely survived. For other
soldiers who came down with the disease, he prescribed leeches, cupping, bleeding from the
jugular vein, and “application of the skin of an animal flayed alive.”
When he reached Leipzig, Larrey received a panicked letter from a commander from the
Russian invasion who was alarmed at the rapid spread of typhus. His suggestions to combat the
outbreak were rather shocking, as they came so late in the game. “My report…pointed out the
hygienic measures to be adopted for impeding the development of this fever,” he wrote, “for
arresting its progress, and preventing its contagious influence.”
Captain Roeder, the passionate widower whose diary mirrored the experience of so many men
on the march, somehow survived the campaign. When he reached Vilna, he was astonished to
still be alive. “It is morning and I have slept in a bed, completely undressed!” he wrote in his
diary. “Great God! Is it possible I have survived all these hardships! …Father in Heaven, how I
thank thee! Look, oh look in mercy on thy grateful son! Help me to reach the frontier. Let me see
my own again!”
But typhus caught up with him and by February 6 he was writing his beloved Sophie a farewell
note.
I feel that I shall not be able to recover from this sickness and that I cannot live
another week unless my feeble constitution can perform another miracle, and how
can one reckon upon that in a town where death is everywhere? So I must take

leave of you, beloved Sophie; once I dreamed that I might have lived a few sweet
years with you. But it is not God’s will. My life is reaching the last link of a terrible
chain of misery, and indeed I am infinitely weary of it.
He survived, somehow, but to reach Sophie he had to run a gauntlet of spies, corrupt officials,
smugglers, and murderous criminals. A Jewish innkeeper smuggled him across the Russian
border into Poland, and he found himself packed into a doss-house full of peasants, one of whom
repeatedly pointed a loaded gun at him for amusement. Escaping to Prussia (now under the
control of Sweden after Napoleon’s defeat), he was thrown into prison as a spy and held for
months.
Finally, in June, the captain was released and made his way back through a seething northern
Germany that was now free of Napoleon’s control and on the verge of an uprising. “Matters have
almost reached the point where they were in France at the outbreak of the rebellion,” he wrote
nervously in the city of Bergen. On June 25, Roeder reached his home in Göttingen, one of a tiny
number of survivors of what he now called “that accursed Russia.” He gave his overjoyed
children all that was left of the immense bounty taken from Moscow: a silver ruble and a single
Swedish krona. To his wife, Sophie, he records at the end of the diary that “to her all I had to
give was myself.” He was an incomparably lucky man.
AS NAPOLEON HURRIED back to Paris, one of the last enigmas of the 1812 campaign unfolded.
Riding in sleighs and carriages with Caulaincourt, the emperor had fluctuated in mood from
pensive to jovial throughout the journey, but the closer he got to Paris the more buoyant he
became. As he left the town of Glogau in a freezing sleigh and traveled across northern Germany
on the night of December 13, Napoleon began wondering what would happen if they were
captured, and he remembered the fate of a predecessor whose dreams were canceled by typhus.
“If we are stopped,” he told Caulaincourt, “we shall be made prisoners of war, like Francis I.” He
and Caulaincourt checked their pistols and kept them close by. Despite the danger, Napoleon’s
mood soared: at times the walls of the sleigh echoed with the pair’s uncontrollable laughter.
The episode of the sleigh ride is justifiably famous, used by many camps in the field of
Napoleonic studies, either as a testament to the emperor’s heartlessness or his mental instability,
or as a leading example of Bonaparte as existentialist. Caulaincourt thought he was fully
delusional at times. How could he be so giddy when his army lay shattered back in Vilna and his
empire hung by a thread? But it’s impossible to reduce those hours to a single set of causes; they
display the astonishing range of Napoleon’s character, his unparalleled response to life. One
moment he was expressing deep bitterness at his betrayal by friends and allies, the next he was
breathless with laughter at the thought of being displayed in a Prussian cage like a captured
macaque. After months of being trapped in a traveling mausoleum, the emperor could feel life—a
new army, fresh enemies, sex, Paris, challenges, and appetites— approaching with each freezing

mile. Perhaps he was even thrilled at the thought that he was again the underdog, and would
have to strain every fiber of his being to produce miracles with which to astonish the world. It’s
hard to escape the conclusion that he had been bored on the Russian campaign. What was said of
Junot— that his eye “no longer lit up at the sight of a battlefield”—was also true for the
emperor. But now, he had to remake his legend over again. To the forty-three-year-old Napoleon,
it must have tasted something like youth.
·   ·   ·
THE FINAL NUMBERS of the campaign of 1812: Between 550,000 and 600,000 members of the
Grande Armée (including reinforcements) crossed the Niemen. About 100,000 were captured by
the Russians, of whom only 20,000 eventually were repatriated to their home countries. The
total number of dead among the Grande Armée can be conservatively put at 400,000 (although
other estimates range as high as 540,000). Less than a quarter of them died as the result of
enemy action. The rest of this magnificent force, the majority of Napoleon’s effectives, died of
disease, cold, hunger, and thirst. Individual regiments and corps saw the majority of their
members dead or missing. Incredibly, the cosseted Imperial Guard emerged from Poland with
only 1,500 of its original 47,000 members.
As author Adam Zamoyski has pointed out, the losses were made more painful by the small
populations of European countries at the time. A figure of 300,000 French casualties would be
the equivalent of 700,000 today. The Polish losses of 75,000 would translate to 750,000 in
modern terms, and one can extrapolate such terrible numbers for most of the nations that took
part. The Russians lost an equivalent number of soldiers, slightly more of them in battle, and the
death of civilians by disease, famine, and violence easily lifts the number of dead for the 1812
campaign well over the 1 million mark.
The Grande Armée didn’t keep precise statistics of the manners of death of its soldiers. It is
impossible to pin down the number of typhus victims, but it’s clear that disease was the lead
killer on the campaign, and typhus the most lethal disease present. And typhus had not only
killed men outright. By encouraging Alexander to avoid a treaty (as he felt the French army was
dying on the march), by hamstringing Napoleon at Borodino and Maloyaroslavets, and by greatly
weakening the survivors, it had initiated a series of calamities that killed more men on the
retreat. Rickettsia, not Kutuzov and not “General Winter,” had tripped the emperor’s army into its
Russian grave.
Napoleon still had resources and talents to draw on for the battle for his empire he now knew
was coming. But the invasion of Russia had given Rickettsia its greatest spurt of life in a thousand
years, a dark flower of death spread across Europe. It wouldn’t release its hold on the continent,
or the emperor, so easily.

THE DEBACLE IN RUSSIA acted as fresh oxygen on buried embers, especially in Germany, where
militias sprang up and young Germans vowed to overthrow the French usurper. On March 13,
1813, the new alliance of Russia and Prussia declared war, and the losses in Russia echoed in
France: many of Napoleon’s best officers and veteran soldiers were dead, and their green
replacements couldn’t match their experience or hardiness. And to get those new recruits,
Napoleon was forced to new extremes, including an April 3, 1813, edict that required each son of
a noble family to recruit and equip his own unit of soldiers, which cost him crucial support
among the richest families. Younger and younger boys were drafted, but Rickettsia and the
Russian army had simply decreased the pool of eligible and willing troops. The emperor’s 1813
recruitment target was 650,000 men. He got 137,000. France’s appetite for war was sated.
Napoleon eventually cobbled together an invasion force of 200,000 and marched in April
1813. He managed two quick victories, a brilliant tour de force at Lützen and a difficult one at
Bautzen in May. But typhus reappeared in the ranks almost immediately and carried away tens of
thousands of men, again hobbling his forces.
His enemies united in the Sixth Coalition ultimately assembled 800,000 men to Napoleon’s
eventual total forces of 650,000. An armistice was signed on June 4, and Napoleon was
presented with terms that would have been unthinkable before Russia. The French Empire would
be dissolved, and Napoleon would retreat to the nation’s pre-1792 borders, threatened on all
sides by enemies. With 90,000 men on the sick list, Napoleon signed.
The downfall was swift. Sweden broke its alliance with France and then, on August 12,
Napoleon’s most important ally, Austria, switched sides. Napoleon attacked the Russians and
Austrians on August 26 and won a brilliant victory at Dresden. But two quick defeats followed,
leading to the crucial Battle of Leipzig on October 16, where 500,000 troops fought outside the
historic city, the largest single battle until the beginning of World War I. According to the
military surgeon and scholar Von Linstow, by the time of the engagement Napoleon had lost
105,000 men on the campaign by forces of arms, but 219,000 to disease, chiefly typhus. Now he
had to face an allied force of 320,000 men with half that number in his own ranks. On the 1813
campaign, Napoleon had occasionally equaled the verve and brilliance of his greatest battles, but
Rickettsia again sapped him of vital strength.
Napoleon lost 46,000 men at Leipzig in a horrendous defeat and retreated across the Rhine
with only a rump force of 40,000. Paris fell on March 31, 1814, and six days later Napoleon
abdicated the throne, which was returned to the Bourbons in the form of the gout-afflicted,
thoroughly unimpressive Louis XVIII. The disgraced Corsican was sent into exile on Elba. His
1815 return to power ended on June 18 at Waterloo, where he was defeated by the Duke of
Wellington in his long-sought confrontation with the British, and he was again exiled, this time
to St. Helena.

His last days were spent in sickness. His aide recalled the former emperor, weak and feverish,
days before his death:
Tears came into my eyes when I saw this man—who had been so feared, who had
so proudly commanded, so absolutely—beg for a spoonful of coffee, ask for
permission to have it…. At present, he was as docile as a little child.
Despite several rescue efforts, including one launched from Texas, Napoleon died on May 5,
1821, most likely from stomach cancer. On St. Helena, the emperor had been working on his
memoirs, but he hadn’t yet reached the year 1812.
WHAT IF THE CAMPAIGN of 1812 had been typhus-free? If Napoleon had utterly destroyed the
Russians at Borodino and Alexander had capitulated?
The consequences would have radiated out through time and territory. Napoleon would have
marched back to Paris at the head of a triumphant army of several hundred thousand men.
Russia would have been neutralized as a threat for a number of years and his Continental
enemies—Prussia, Portugal, Spain—would have been cowed into submission. There would have
been no Sixth Coalition to face him in 1813 and Napoleon’s grip over Europe would have been
firm.
On his return to Paris, Napoleon’s attention would have turned to the rebellion in Spain and to
his ultimate nemesis: England. Certainly his ego would have expanded to gargantuan dimensions
and ambitious plans would have consumed him. Eventually, a showdown with England was
inevitable, but Napoleon would have been in far better shape than he was at Waterloo, a battle
he should have won. He could conceivably have finally defeated his nemesis and marched into
London, utterly changing the face of nineteenth-century world affairs.
No doubt, he wouldn’t have stopped there. In 1813, Napoleon had eight more years to live and
with England and Russia in his grasp—two nettlesome captives, to be sure—he would have
looked west and east for new conquests. An expedition to India would not have been out of the
question, nor would an invasion of South America. Napoleon’s claim that he wanted nothing
more than to sit peacefully at Versailles and administer his existing empire peacefully should not
be taken seriously.
Hubris and self-willed blindness played a huge part in Napoleon’s debacle in Russia, and it’s
possible that they could have led him into fresh disasters. The English occupation would have
made the Spanish one seem tame. German nationalism would have bubbled to the surface, and
Prussia would not have stayed quiet forever. The emperor would have had a contentious eight
years, but there’s little doubt that, with his major enemies vanquished, Napoleon would have
reshaped European history in his remaining time.

As for Russia, a defeat would have spooled out a rich carpet of new patterns and shapes. If
Alexander had signed a treaty with Napoleon, he could very well have been overthrown, either
in a coup led by members of the aristocracy and military elite, or—the cataclysmic option—in a
true peasant uprising. With his military in disarray, the tsar would have been powerless to
prevent it and he would most likely have suffered the same fate as his hated father. The freeing
of the serfs and the toppling of the imperial system could have arrived a hundred years before
they finally did, and Lenin and Stalin could have been born into a nation already transformed by
revolution from below.
This is pure speculation, a few possible outcomes among hundreds that could have proceeded
from a typhus-free invasion of Russia. Napoleon’s all-in approach to the campaign made it a
high-stakes historical moment, and guaranteed that the results of the war would unroll for
decades. But there is no question that the emperor’s defeat altered history in a thousand ways.
And so there can be no doubt that Rickettsia, in helping to achieve it, shaped our modern world.
THE EPIDEMIOLOGICAL LEGACY of the Russian campaign resonated for years. As the army had swept
through Lithuania and Russia, it had acted both as fresh material for the spread of typhus and as
a conduit, a multiplier, spreading the disease to previously uninfected hamlets and cities along
the way. The civilian epidemic began in the summer of 1812, and by the time Napoleon turned
and began his retreat, it was advancing through populations near the French route. Russians
would bury or incinerate 243,612 corpses during the early part of 1813.
“We found whole families stricken down with typhus,” wrote the Prussian army doctor Krantz,
“in whose dwelling soldiers, showing no signs of disease, had stayed overnight.” In Berlin, there
was an almost poignant reminder of what could have been had Larrey and his fellow doctors
instituted at least some hygienic practices. As the typhus brought into Germany by the returning
soldiers took hold and began to rage through the city, the Charité Hospital instituted a rigorous
program to stop the disease within its own corridors. Typhus patients were given their own ward
on the second floor, and special grating was installed to bar uninfected patients from entering
while still allowing fresh air to enter. The clothes of the sick brought to the hospital were
removed and soaked in hydrochloric acid for days, before being tossed into vats filled with
boiling water and lye. The patients were dressed in fresh linen and placed in the typhus ward,
which was thoroughly cleaned and disinfected daily. The doctors and nurses, before entering the
ward, donned special black capes made of glazed linen (which, in theory, any infected material
would have trouble sticking to), and as they exited, they doused their faces and hands in cold
water and also gargled. As a result, Rickettsia was confined to the typhus ward and the rest of the
hospital and its staff remained free from infection.
The Belgian doctor de Kerckhove, as acerbic as ever, contemplated the spread of Rickettsia. “It
was a fatal present which we gave them,” he wrote, “and which caused such a high mortality

among the inhabitants of the country through which we passed. Wherever we went, the
inhabitants were filled with terror and refused to quarter the soldiers.” Rickettsia visited a new
level of suffering on civilians during wartime, which had in the past largely escaped the military
carnage if they weren’t in the direct route of the armies or weren’t trapped with defenders in
besieged cities. Distance from the line of march had brought relative safety. In terms of civilian
impact, the available armaments had not yet caught up with the creation of mega-armies, but the
very size of these new forces extended both their geographic reach and the lethality of the
pathogens they carried. Epidemics did the work that would be later taken over by the V-2 rocket
and the night raids of B-52s.
The northeast of France, near the border with Germany, was particularly hard hit by the
epidemiological aftermath of the Russian campaign. One town named Mors was almost
depopulated by the epidemic. In December 1813, the microbe reached the town of Pont-à-
Mousson, a city of abbeys that would be ravaged by Luftwaffe bombing raids in 1945. But now it
was the pathogen that struck with the arrival of the sick and wounded from Napoleon’s latest
campaign. A Frenchman remembered:
Who of us will not remember as long as he lives those harrowing scenes, which one
cannot describe without shuddering? Who will ever forget those hundreds of
wagons filled with unhappy wounded men who had no medical care since Leipzig;
and packed in with them were sick men suffering from dysentery, typhus fever,
etc., almost all of them succumbing to inanition, weakness, and filth, as well as
disease. Those unfortunate men begged only for a place in a hospital already filled
with dying men, only to receive in reply a forced refusal. And so they were under
the cruel necessity of going further to pass away, with the result that they infected
all the towns and villages along their route, wherever they were granted a gracious
hospitality.
Typhus brought the war home to thousands of villages and towns throughout Europe and
traveled thousands of miles. It was, for the microbe, its greatest triumph in five centuries of
conquest.
Then, inexplicably, it disappeared.
After 1814, the disease ceased to be a major epidemic killer in Europe, outside of Ireland and
the eastern border countries. The contagion moved to the more vulnerable populations of the
planet in Africa and the Middle East, especially. It was as if, having spurred the downfall of the
greatest conqueror it ever faced, it now retired from the field.
And its pursuers followed it. The search for the killer’s nature would be picked up again far
from the nations it had tormented for so long.

I
Author’s Note:
The Doorway of the Hospital at Tunis
N JANUARY OF 1909, IN THE SMALL VILLAGES MILES FROM THE capital of Tunisia, men began
to fall sick. The symptoms were fever, headache, lethargy, and spots on the trunk,
legs, and arms. The relatives of the stricken men knew from experience that there was
little to do but wait the disease out. Death would take those it wanted.
In the spring, the disease started to appear in the city itself. Men—it seemed mostly to
be men, and young men especially— began turning up at local hospitals or were found
prostrate in the “Moorish” cafés frequented by locals, as well as in the zaouias, the Sufi
spiritual schools where people from the countryside traveled for instruction in mystic
Islam. Men would wander into the local hospitals and collapse, their faces puffy and
darkened, their eyes staring or manic, days from death. In April, the numbers rose
steadily; in May, there was a sudden spike in cases. Doctors sent the overflow patients
to a lazaret outside of the city, as their wards were overwhelmed. Some 4,000 Tunisians
caught the disease, 836 in the capital. And 32.6 percent of them died.
Typhus was endemic in Tunisia. It had become a part of the natural cycle, as expected
a part of the seasons as rain or the raising of crops. But 1909 was different for two
reasons: Typhus had bloomed into a serious epidemic. And Charles Nicolle was waiting
for it.
Nicolle was a French doctor who had come to Tunisia to head up the Pasteur Institute
and make his name. He was a scientist to the marrow, a believer in the precise inductive
reasoning that had led the master to his great contributions to germ theory that finally
banished miasmism as a medical philosophy. Nicolle even admitted he wished to
become the “next Pasteur.”
Sailing for the North African colony, Nicolle was in one way following in the footsteps
of Napoleon; the Pasteurians saw themselves as benign imperialists, venturing to the
corners of the earth to spread rational French science and culture by persuasion and not
war. The “civilizing mission” that Napoleon had marched under, promising progress and
liberty when in fact he most often brought tyranny, was the same banner that brought

Nicolle to this outpost of the French Empire.
Nicolle began his pursuit of the disease’s cause only a year after arriving in Tunisia,
when he and two colleagues planned a research trip to one of the small villages,
Djouggar, about fifty miles outside the capital, that acted as incubators for the disease.
But days before their departure, Nicolle began spitting up blood and was unable to
make the journey (the illness, a lung ailment, turned out not to be serious). His
collaborators, the doctor in charge of the village and his servant, set out for the outlying
town. While there, both caught typhus, and when they returned, after days of agony,
both died of the disease. Rickettsia had claimed two more of the countless pursuers it
had killed without granting them a basic insight into its secrets. “Without this incident,”
Nicolle later wrote, “my first contact with typhus would doubtlessly have been my last.”
Nicolle soon learned that most of the doctors in Tunisia eventually caught the disease,
and one-third of them died of it. This was made even more disturbing by the fact that
animals never seemed to succumb, so that one couldn’t study typhus safely in lab
specimens or keep the pathogen alive between epidemics. Humans alone seemed to
carry the pathogen and die from it, and to get close to it one had to take the chance of
catching it. Nicolle needed to figure out typhus’s modus operandi not only to make his
name but also to have a fair chance of staying alive. And despite hundreds of years of
study and millions of victims, the accumulated scientific knowledge of the disease’s
cause was near zero. Humankind essentially knew nothing definitive about what caused
the disease, how it spread, or how to stop it.
For three years, the expatriate doctor had been following the clues that typhus left in
its annual cycle. It arrived in the rural districts outside Tunis in winter, then spread to
the “doss-houses and the prisons” of the small villages and towns by early spring. From
there it would reach into Tunis itself through the jails and the tightly packed
neighborhoods populated by natives. By June or July it was gone. It favored a particular
type of person: Many of the victims belonged to the underclass of the French colony—
single men who worked as day laborers or farmhands, or begged in the streets for alms,
barely able to live on the small coins dropped in their hands. Women and children were
far less likely to come down with the disease. And curiously, one of the established facts
about typhus’s spread, that it flourished in confined spaces, seemed exactly the opposite
of what was happening in Tunisia. The disease spread across the country not in winter,
when families stayed in their closely packed homes and villages, but in the spring, when
people began to move and travel. Why?
And, if the pattern of infection was so consistent and followed a perennial route, why
did the disease reach epidemic proportions in some years (such as 1906 and 1909) but

not in others (1907 and 1908)? After looking at other factors that affected the poor—
especially food supplies and weather—Nicolle and his collaborator, Ernest Conseil,
realized that the most severe typhus years coincided with famines that sent unemployed
single men flocking to the cities.
The local hospitals were known to be flash points, as so many of the doctors and staff
who came in contact with typhus victims eventually died from the disease. That argued
for person-to-person infection. But when Nicolle and Conseil looked more closely at the
data, they realized that not everyone in the hospitals was catching the disease; even
though typhus victims were mixed in with other patients, the other patients failed to fall
ill with the fever. There was clearly a dividing line over which the pathogen didn’t
cross. It was killing people in the receiving wards, but somehow it was stopped before
reaching the upper floors.
Clearly, the microbe wasn’t spread by simple human-to-human contact. Nicolle began
to suspect that the vector was an insect. Following the postulates developed by the
pioneering researcher Robert Koch, he began injecting monkeys with blood from
infected patients in 1906. The first trials failed, and Nicolle theorized that it was the
fault of the test subjects: monkeys were too distant from their human cousins to have
the same susceptibilities to disease. He sent for a chimpanzee, physiologically the
creature closest to man. The chimp had to be imported from Marseille at the exorbitant
cost of 550 francs. As Nicolle waited for the Pan troglodytes to reach Tunis, June arrived
and the number of typhus cases began to fall off. The epidemic, as it did every summer,
was fading; if the chimp didn’t arrive soon, Nicolle would have no infected blood with
which to inoculate it, and he would have to wait until the next plague swept Tunisia.
Finally, the chimp arrived in its crate and Nicolle quickly injected it with blood from
an infected thirty-five-year-old Tunisian man. Now he watched and waited. At first,
nothing happened. The chimpanzee stared back at the French scientist with its warm,
placid brown eyes, revealing no signs of sickness. Nicolle went home and dropped off to
sleep. When he returned in the morning, the chimp still regarded him with the same
bored and perfectly healthy gaze. But twenty-four days after receiving the infected
blood, his test subject began to display unmistakable signs of fever. The chimp was the
first nonhuman vertebrate victim of Rickettsia ever observed.
Nicolle worked quickly. He took blood from the chimp and infected a macaque, a
Chinese monkey. Nothing happened. For twelve days, Nicolle watched the macaque
closely. On the thirteenth day, the monkey’s eyes began drooping and a thermometer
revealed that he was running a high fever. Nicolle had isolated the microbe. Now he
had to locate the vector.

The doctor had narrowed his search for the typhus carrier to one insect: the common
body louse. In Tunisia, especially in the rural districts, lice were the only parasites
universally found on the body and clothing of “the wretches” who spread the disease.
Nicolle placed a number of healthy lice on the fur of the sick Chinese monkey. After
giving them time to feed on their host, he transferred the lice to a healthy monkey.
Within days, it had fallen ill with typhus. Nicolle had proved that the body louse had
been from time immemorial the carrier of the fatal disease.
IN HIS SPEECH accepting the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1928, Nicolle compressed years
of medical detective work into a flash of understanding. “Often, when going to the
hospital, I had to step over the bodies of typhus patients who were awaiting admission
to the hospital and had fallen exhausted at the door,” he wrote. But once upstairs these
febrile men infected no one. “The contagious agent was therefore something attached to
his skin and clothing, something which soap and water could remove. It could only be
the louse. It was the louse.” Perhaps this image—the scientist suddenly struck by a
world-changing idea while stepping over the bodies of the poor and desperately ill—
made for a more thrilling story. Perhaps Nicolle felt the pressure to give the solving of
the riddle a classic “eureka” moment in line with public expectations of how medical
breakthroughs were made. But the process had been far more involved and much more
a classical inductive pursuit than the story expressed.
Nor did Nicolle mention his most controversial step. Attempting to create a simple
vaccine, he ground up the bodies of infected lice and mixed them with the blood serum
of men who had survived typhus. He injected the vaccine into his arm, but didn’t
develop any symptoms. Driven to complete the holy grail of typhus research, he then
walked up to the children’s ward of the hospital and injected the mixture into two Arab
boys, without advising them or their parents of what was happening. The two fell sick
but luckily survived.
The protocol was complete. After five hundred years, Rickettsia’s secret was out.
Had it not been for Nicolle’s discovery, the pathogen would have soon had one more
chance at a battlefield coup: World War I. As the doctor wrote in his Nobel speech:
If in 1914 we had been unaware of the mode of transmission of typhus,
and if infected lice had been imported into Europe, the war would not
have ended by a bloody victory. It would have ended in an unparalleled
catastrophe, the most terrible in human history. Soldiers at the front,
reserves, prisoners, civilians, neutrals even, the whole of humanity would
have collapsed.

The last phrase is speculative, of course, but Nicolle had solid evidence of a possible
conflagration should typhus have run un checked during the war. Unable to delouse
their army with the same proficiency as the Allied forces, the Russians saw the scourge
revisit the towns and cities of Russia in the first great epidemic since the Crimean War,
when 900,000 had died from Rickettsia. During 1914-18, it hit the armies of the Balkans
and Russia itself and as many as 3 million troops and civilians died. If typhus had
burned through western Europe as well, with the size of the armies roaming the
Continent, that number could have risen to 10 million or more. (As it turned out, the
Allies were spectacularly successful at combating the pathogen: only 104 cases of typhus
were reported among Allied troops during the entire conflict.) After the war, Lenin
declared, “Either socialism will defeat the louse, or the louse will defeat socialism.” In
fact, the contest was a draw. Stalin and his minions couldn’t control the disease, and it
went on killing.
The Red Army had been shocked at the ferocity of the epidemic and decided to try to
harness the power of the tiny microbe that had nearly collapsed their eastern front. In
1928, a secret program was initiated to weaponize Rickettsia under the auspices of the
GPU, which later became the KGB. They decided that the best way to spread typhus in
enemy armies would be to spray them with an aerosolized version of Rickettsia dropped
from airplanes.
The Red Army’s scientists first inoculated chicken eggs at the Leningrad Military
Academy. According to the epidemiologist Ken Alibek, who defected from the former
Soviet Union in 1992, thousands of chicken eggs arrived at the institute every week
during a time of widespread hunger in the country. The researchers also injected rats
and other test animals in their labs, let the Rickettsia multiply in their bodies, then
extracted the pathogen and mixed it with liquids in huge blenders. The concoction was
turned into a powder and a liquid, ready to be inserted into bombs that could be
dropped over the enemy.
In 1938, the USSR’s defense commissar warned that the Red Army stood ready to use
typhus “against an aggressor on his own soil.” What nature had achieved spontaneously
against Napoleon the Soviets were now ready to deploy as a man-made weapon. The
United States responded by beginning its own biological weapons research at Fort
Detrick in Maryland, under the leadership of George Merck of the famous
pharmaceutical company.
We have no reliable evidence that the Russians ever used typhus on the Germans. But
one group of Polish resistance guerrillas apparently did utilize the pathogen against the
Nazis: in a report from the Polish Secret Army to the Combined Chiefs of Staff of the

Allied Forces dated September 7, 1943, the liaison officer (using the wrong name for the
pathogen) detailed under “Activities of retaliation” the use of “typhoid fever microbes
and typhoid fever lice” in a “few hundred cases.” If true, the rickettsial weapon most
likely came from Russian stockpiles.
For the Germans, typhus became a tool. The disease ran rampant in the concentration
camps, where the Nazis deliberately used it as an instrument of genocidal germ warfare.
Scholar Naomi Baumslag estimates that 1.5 million prisoners of the camps died of the
disease, and it was at Bergen-Belsen that typhus would claim its most famous victim in
five hundred years.
Anne Frank arrived at the concentration camp on October 28, 1944. She had barely
escaped death at Auschwitz earlier in the fall, where, having just turned fifteen (the
cutoff for immediate death), she was spared a trip to the gas chambers and was
separated from her father. Her head was shaved, and she was stripped naked,
disinfected, and tattooed with her camp number. When she was later transported to
Bergen-Belsen, she arrived already ill and malnourished along with her sister Margot.
Anne survived, working in the bullet factory and sleeping in the unheated, desperately
crowded barracks, until March 1945, when just weeks before the Allied liberation of the
camp, a typhus epidemic raged through the camp. About 1 in 5 of the 500 prisoners in
her barracks caught the disease. Near the end, Anne told the barracks leader, Irma
Sonnenberg Menkel, “I am very sick” and soon was unable to make the roll call. “She
didn’t know that she was dying,” Menkel remembered. Anne soon fell into the coma-like
stupor that marks the final stage of the disease. Along with Margot, she was among the
approximately 17,000 men and women who perished in the epidemic.
TODAY, RICKETTSIA STILL roams the poorest sectors of the Third World, claiming victims
especially in the cold mountainous regions of South America and Africa, where infected
lice burrow into the clothing of villagers too poor to afford decent medical care. It is
now rare in the industrialized world, but in a startling development a new vector has
been discovered for the pathogen: Glaucomys volans, the flying squirrel, common in the
continental United States. Nesting in attics, these rodents are the only known vertebrate
reservoir for Rickettsia other than humans, and they have caused small outbreaks of
epidemic typhus across the country. The furry, nocturnal animal that can be seen
gliding from tree to tree, especially in gloaming of Southern moonlight, has been for
thousands of years humankind’s brother under the skin.
Typhus will never roam the planet as it once did. A plague of flying squirrels might be
the plot of a B horror flick, but rickettsial hordes of them are unlikely to invade the real
world. The only threat that typhus realistically still poses is as a weaponized biological

agent. Defectors have reported that North Korean leader Kim Jong Il has experimented
with Rickettsia, along with anthrax, cholera, and the bubonic plague, research conducted
at the appropriately sinister-sounding Germ Research Institute of the General Logistics
Bureau of the Armed Forces Ministry. Various intelligence services report that the North
Koreans have even conducted live experiments with biological agents on islands off the
country’s coast. One defector claimed that she was present at an experiment in which 50
inmates of the regime’s concentration camps were exposed to biological agents and died
horrifying deaths.
If the stories of North Korean stockpiles are true, it’s a fitting end for Rickettsia, stored
in the vaults of a tiny, grotesque dictator, a cut-rate Napoleon. The microbe has always
encountered men with lurid ambitions. Emperors, kings, and generals found that their
armies could conquer everything except this one last natural barrier to the thing they
wanted most.
But things have reversed themselves. Rickettsia’s nemesis, science, which conquered
the microbe after five hundred years of pursuit, has now saved it. The pathogen has
been processed into powders and aerosols, uniting the ancient and the new, and giving
Rickettsia its only hope for a return to the wider world. It waits for what it has always
waited for. War. Disaster.
The organism that helped stop Napoleon on the road to the fabled capital of Russia
now exists in the most neglected areas of the world, places so poor as to be hardly
worth conquering. But it also sits, close to extinction, locked in dark, infrequently
visited rooms, filling at the end of its life the opposite role that it played in 1812: not as
a barrier to power but as a dazzling weapon, one dark day, to seize it. Its wager on the
incurably violent human race hasn’t quite played out.

Glossary
boyar: A member of the Russian nobility.
carabinier: A cavalryman.
chasseur: A rapid-reaction infantryman.
cuirassier: A cavalry soldier wearing a cuirass, or breastplate armor.
droshky: An open, four-wheeled carriage.
flèche: An earthwork with angled walls in the front and an open back
where troops could assemble.
flying ambulance: A small, enclosed ambulance pulled by horses and
designed to advance onto the battlefield for evacuating the wounded.
jaeger: A sharpshooter or skirmisher often deployed in front of the main
line of troops.
lazaret: A hospital, especially one specializing in infectious cases.
pontoneer: A member of the bridge-building corps of troops.
redan: A V-shaped defensive earthwork.
sapper: An explosives expert.
MAJOR PLACE-NAMES
Berezina: A western tributary of the Dnieper River, now part of modern-
day Belarus.
Dnieper: A major Russian river that flows from a point 160 miles west of
Moscow south to Odessa on the Black Sea.
Niemen: A river that previously formed the border between Poland and
Russian Lithuania and now bisects the southwestern corner of Lithuania.

Saxony: A duchy and kingdom in the southeast region of modern-day
Germany.
Smolensk: A major city in western Russia, located on the Dnieper River.
Vilia: An east-west tributary of the Niemen.
Vilna: Modern-day Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania.
Vitebsk: A city now located in Belarus, near the northeastern border
with Russia.
Westphalia: An early-nineteenth-century kingdom located between the
Rhine and the Weser rivers in the north-central part of modern-day
Germany.
Württemberg: An early-nineteenth-century kingdom located in the
southwestern part of modern-day Germany whose traditional capital was
Stuttgart.

Notes
Introduction: Old Bones
3 “‘wouldn’t stop coming out of the ground’”:
“Reading 
the 
Bones” 
by 
Eve 
Conant,
Newsweek, September 9, 2002, p. 1. 3 “There
had been whispers”: Ibid., p. 1.
3 “a grave filled”: Ibid., p. 2.
4 “Or perhaps these were the corpses”: Ibid. 4
“When archaeologists”: Ibid., p. 2.
4 “As they excavated”: “Napoleon’s Lost Army:
The Soldiers Who Fell,” by Paul Britten-
Austin, www.bbc.co.uk/history.
5 “None of the remains”: “Reading the Bones,”
p. 2.
5 “Napoleon’s troops breaking into”: “Digging
Napoleon’s Dead,” by Jarret A. Lobell,

Archaeology, Sept/Oct. 2002.

Chapter One: Incarnate
8 “when men ran through”: Herold, Age of
Napoleon, p. 37.
9 “‘He wanted to put’”: Quoted in Herold,
Mistress to an Age, p. 214.
10 “‘From that moment’”: Quoted in Duggan, p.
11.
12 “‘The belief that they were invincible’”:
Quoted in Zamoyski, p. 84.
13 “‘The genie of liberty’”: Quoted in Conklin, p.
11.
15 “Napoleon would say later”: Napoleon to
Metternich, quoted in Troyat, p. 94.
16 “‘He is a truly handsome,’”: Quoted in Horne,
p. 2.
16 “‘Love for the Tsar,’”: Quoted in Cronin, p.
305.
17 “French manufacturers”: McLynn, p. 495.

17 “even aristocratic families”: Horne, p. 233.
17 “‘In Hamburg’”: Ibid., p. 296.
18 “‘Sooner or later’”: Schom, p. 436.
18 “‘The world is clearly’”: Ibid., p. 475.
19 “‘I care nothing,’”: Quoted in McLynn, p.
499. 19 “‘torrents of blood’”: Quoted in
Troyat, p. 139.

Chapter Two: A Portable Metropolis
21 “The army that the emperor”: The number of
men encompassed in the invasion of Russia is
the subject of perennial disputes. I have
depended most heavily on the work of Adam
Zamoyski in Moscow 1812 for estimates of
troops.
21 “semaphore signals”: McLynn, 344.
21 “It formed”: The number of Napoleon’s
troops and hangers-on who crossed the
Niemen is estimated at 600,000. The figures
for Tokyo and Istanbul are circa 1800;
Tokyo’s 
population 
was 
685,000 
and
Constantinople’s total was 570,000. Chandler,
Tertius. Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth:
An Historical Census. New York: Edwin Mellen
Press, Ceredigion, 1987.
22 “Each had to be able”: Horne, p. 98.
22 For an extended discussion of Napoleon’s
marshals, see Chandler, David A., Napoleon’s
Marshals.

25 For a discussion of unit sizes in Napoleon’s
armies, see Muir.
26 “‘which permitted the speed’”: McLynn, p.
505.
27 “‘It was an impossible dream’”: Ibid., p. 506.
27 For a discussion of the Russian officer class,
see Cate, p. 115.
27 “‘The headquarters of the Emperor’”:
Clausewitz, p. 3.
30 “‘malignant spotted fever’”: Villalba, quoted
in Zinsser, p. 243.
30 “Only 3,000”: Ibid.
31 “The conflict drew together”: This account
draws mainly from Arfaioli’s The Black Bands
of Giovanni.
31 “‘Therefore I cannot but see’”: Quoted in
Brandi, p. 220.
33 “Nearly three hundred years”: Seward, p.
136.
33 “The historian David Bell”: See Bell’s The
First Total War for an explication of his ideas
about the evolution in the culture of war.

34 “‘a war to the death’”: Ibid., p. 3.

Chapter Three: Drumbeat
35 “His statistical expert”: McLynn, p. 496.
35 “By the first months”: Ibid.
35 “‘It would be a crime’”: Quoted in Zamoyski,
p. 72.
36 “‘I have come,’”: Caulaincourt, Memoirs, p.
129.
36 
“‘Whether 
he 
triumphs’”: 
Quoted 
in
Zamoyski, p. 79.
37 “‘We will die or conquer’”: Troyat, p. 46.
38 “The army itself was a pageant”: For a
discussion of uniforms, see Haythornwaite,
Philip and Chappell, Mike, Uniforms of
Napoleon’s Russian Campaign, London: Arms &
Armour Press, 1996 and Haythorn waite and
Fosten, 
Bryan, 
Napoleon’s 
Line 
Infantry,
London: Osprey, 1983.
39 “and the grenadiers”: Quoted in Nicolson, p.
24.

39 “Franz Roeder was a captain”: For an
account of Roeder’s service, see The Ordeal of
Captain Roeder.
40 “‘which may be partly caused’”: Roeder, p.
50.
40 “‘creeping nervous fever’”: Ibid., p. 51.
40 “‘I share the thoughts’”: Brett-James, p. 11.
40 “10,000 wills”: Ibid., p. 13.
41 
“But 
the 
forty-six-year-old”: 
For 
the
inexperience of the novice doctors, see
Larrey’s letter of January 1812, quoted in
Howard, p. 69.
41 “‘Medicine is the science’”: Quoted in
Fournier, p. 163.
41 “‘I dress’”: Quoted in McLynn, p. 37.
42 “‘I’m trying to rise’”: Quoted in Cronin, p.
314.
42 “‘Walcheren has for its defense’”: Quoted in
Howard, p. 64.
43 “‘hunchbacks and cripples’”: Howard, p. 24.
43 “The pathogen had aided”: Prinzing, p. 101.

43 “‘a malignant, nervous and putrid’”: Howard,
p. 201
43 “‘[The dead] were thrown’”: Ibid., p. 164.
44 “‘Like an enormous fire’”: For a description
of typhus at Mantua, see the testimony of
Napoleon’s surgeon J. Baptiste-Turiot, quoted
in Schom, p. 62.
44 “Spanish prisoners”: Prinzing, p. 103.
44 “During the Wars”: Ibid., p. 96.

Chapter Four: Crossing
46 “In his diary”: Roeder, p. 62.
47 “In the noise”: Accounts of soldiers falling
out of the ranks and dying are found in
Larrey’s memoirs and Kerckhove’s account,
among others.
47 “Some victims”: The description of the
symptoms 
are 
collected 
from 
firsthand
accounts of typhus victims in the medical
literature. 
The 
description 
of 
“a 
very
uncommon feeling” is from Dr. Smyth’s own
experience of the disease in The Description of
the Jail Distemper. Other symptoms come from
Johnson’s description of his own illness in
Practical Illustrations of Typhus and Other
Fevers, as well as Bartlett, Smith, et al. All of
the accounts are listed in the bibliography
under Primary Sources.
49 “‘Of the illness’”: The patient is John Reed,
the journalist and Bolshevik activist. The
writer is his wife, Louise Bryant, in a letter

dated November 14, 1920, published in The
Liberator, February 1921. Reed died of typhus
on October 19, 1920, with Bryant by his side.
He was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis.
49 “The mistake was compounded”: Prinzing, p.
102.
50 “To understand what”: This brief overview of
nineteenth-century attitudes toward disease is
informed by several sources, including Roy
Porter’s The Greatest Benefit to Mankind, J.
Rosser Matthews’s Quantification and the Quest
for Medical Certainty, McNeill’s Plagues and
Peoples, and several essays, including “Fevers
and Science in Early Nineteenth Century
Medicine,” by Leonard Wilson.
52 “‘loaded with’”: Quoted in Howard, p. 201.
53 “In 1811”: See North’s A Treatise on a
Malignant Epidemic.
53 “The doctor’s name”: For an account of
Lind’s experiments, see Winslow, p. 295 and
Roddis, pp. 57-64.
55 “One of Lind’s”: Roddis, p. 64.
55 “‘enjoy a better’”: Quoted in the article

“Thumpers!” by Henrik Bering, Policy Review,
June-July 2005.

Chapter Five: Pursuit
60 “‘He has come’”: Ségur, p. 27.
60 “‘I have never’”: Larrey, p. 12.
62 “The Belgian doctor”: All quotes from de
Kerckhove are from his Histoire des maladies
observées à la Grand Armée française, pendant
les campagnes de Russe en 1812 et d’Allemagne
en 1813, Janssens, 1836. Translated for the
author by Rose-Marie Coulombel.
62 “‘Nothing announced’”: de Kerckhove, p. 8.
62 “‘60,000 [troops]’”: Larrey, Surgical Memoirs.
62 “‘in the first weeks,’”: Clausewitz, p. 110.
62 “‘was already stricken’”: Wilson, p. 29.
63 
“‘dragged 
themselves 
behind’”: 
de
Kerckhove, p. 30.
63 “Napoleon was losing 4,000 to 6,000
soldiers”: McLynn, p. 511.
63 “Another 30,000”: Zamoyski, p. 163.

63 “Pleurisy, jaundice”: de Kerckhove lists these
and a few other diseases as being present on
p. 20.
63 “‘Under these circumstances’”: Vossler, p. 51.
63 “Dysentery ruled”: The timing of the
dominance of each disease is impossible to
chart with absolute precision, but both de
Kerckhove and Ebstein (pp. 42-4), quoting the
doctor Lamazurier, support the late summer
as the time when typhus became strongest.
“In the second half of August,” Ebstein writes,
“typhus became the dominant disease, but it
didn’t yet reveal its terrible contagiousness.”
63 “with 80,000 sick”: Zinsser, p. 162.
63 “although recent outbreaks”: Jane Perlez, “A
Stubborn Killer of Refugees: Dysentery,” New
York Times, August 5, 1994.
64 “At one hospital”: von Scherer’s findings are
summarized in Rose, p. 15.
64 “‘Typhus was present’”: de Kerckhove, p. 48.
65 “One major”: This letter is contained in Paul
Britten Austin’s monumental collection of
eyewitness accounts of the invasion, which

will be referenced throughout. P. 238.
65 “‘Napoleon doesn’t give a damn’”: Austin,
The March on Moscow, p. 238.
66 “‘What misery’”: Roeder, p. 94.
67 “‘This did not remain’”: Clausewitz, p. 110.

Chapter Six: Smolensk
70 “‘It was truly heartbreaking’”: Caulaincourt,
p. 50.
73 “‘Each night’”: Quoted in Dodge, p. 501.
73 “3,400 men”: Riehn, p. 192.
75 “‘terrifying’ increase”: de Kerckhove, p. 65.
75 “between 200 and 500 rubles”: Parkinson, p.
3.
76 “One Bavarian officer”: Labaume, p. 69. 76
“50,000 men”: Cate, p. 205.
76 “800,000 silver rubles”: Ibid.
77 “‘War’s a game’”: Austin, The March on
Moscow, p. 159.
77 “‘The campaign of 1812’”: Ségur, p. 19.
78 “‘I shall send you’”: Cate, p. 170.
78 “‘Well, what are we’”: Ségur, p. 22.

Chapter Seven: The Sound of Flames
80 “‘The number of sick’”: de Kerckhove, p. 41.
80 “‘Never was there’”: Caulaincourt, p. 66.
81 “‘This news filled’”: Quoted in Zamoyski, p.
207.
84 “He was down to”: McLynn, p. 511.
84 “‘One man after another’”: Walter, p. 44.
85 “‘The thought of the coming day’”: Walter, p.
49.
86 “‘shattered great heaps’”: Brett-James, p. 86.
87 “triple-vented shell”: Austin, p. 194.
87 “‘A second earlier’”: Brett-James, p. 86.
87 “The regimental bands”: The lineup is for a
line infantry band of 1802, which would have
been largely unchanged for 1812. See Grove’s
Dictionary of Music and Musicians, by Eric
Blom, George Grove, and Denis Stevens, 1955,
p. 770.

88 “One cannonball”: Ségur, p. 32.
88 “‘Everything which doesn’t make haste’”:
Austin, p. 196.
89 “‘An eruption’”: Caulaincourt, p. 77.
89 “‘You German’”: Quoted in Zamoyski, p. 219.
89 “‘It is painful’”: Quoted in Cooper, p. 95.
90 “‘The flames became’”: du Faur, p. 54.
90 “‘The mirage of victory’”: Ségur, p. 33.
90 “‘Never can you’”: Labaume, p. 54.
90 “The fire had carbonized”: Nicolson, p. 56.
91 “‘And yet’”: Roeder, p. 145.
91 “Pisani approached the body”: See Pisani’s
account of Smolensk in Con Napoleone nella
Campagna di Russia, beginning on p. 124.
91 “‘Here the wounded’”: Ebstein, p. 20.
93 “‘You are unworthy’”: Brett-James, p. 83.
93 “‘Amidst the stumps’”: Ségur, p. 35.
94 “‘Even if’”: Quoted in Horne, p. 145.
94 “‘imperative need’”: Brett-James, p. 98.

95 “‘The terrible deprivations’”: Ebstein, p. 62.
95 “‘Write to the generals’”: Cooper, p. 89.
98 “‘Once more’”: Caulaincourt, p. 82.
99 “‘Once again’”: Ibid., p. 83.
99 “‘The two armies’”: Clausewitz, p. 131.

Chapter Eight: Smoke
100 “An autopsy”: The dissection was carried
out by Dr. Robert Jackson and the description
is included in his wonderfully detailed An
Outline of the History and Cure of Fever, 1798.
101 “Among them”: For a detailed discussion of
the origins of Rickettsia, see Gray, Michael W.,
“Rickettsia, Typhus and the Mitochondrial
Connection,” Nature, November 12, 1998, p.
109-10.
102 “‘a molecular theater’”: For a discussion of
the Rickettsia genome, see Friedman, Roberta,
“Bacterial Revelations,” Natural History, June
2001.
104 “The body louse in Africa”: Ibid., p. 177.
105 “‘These thunders’”: Donne, Devotions.
106 “more Irish would die”: Porter, p. 29.
106 “But the discovery”: See Wilford, John
Noble, “Lice from Mummies Provide Clues to
Ancient 
Migrations,” 
International 
Herald

Tribune, February 6, 2008.
106 “a mysterious illness in 1083”: Zinsser, p.
242.
106 “During the Middle Ages”: The discussion of
typhus’s early history is informed, among
other sources, by Zinsser, pp. 242-81.
108 “‘Throughout all the people’”: Translated
from the original Latin for the author by Luco
Grillo.

Chapter Nine: At Borodino
110 “‘Beloved, is it that’”: Roeder, p. 125.
111 “now down to 1,500”: Roeder, p. 138.
111 “eating less than he should have”: Riehn
sees a drastic change in available supplies
once the army crossed from Poland into old
Russia: “The march now led through fertile
regions, where the rye stood tall in the fields.
… food was not a problem.” pp. 232-3.
111 “‘This poor army’”: Quoted in Parkinson, p.
137.
113 “‘I was young’”: Ibid., p. 91.
113 “‘one stupidity’”: Brett-James, p. 110.
113 “‘I had no other course’”: Ibid., p. 110.
114 “‘The nobility’”: Quoted in Parkinson, p. 47.
114 “‘But I hope’”: Ibid., p. 1.
115 “‘The day was cloudy’”: Quoted in
Zamoyski, p. 249.

115 “‘a hatcher of intrigues’”: Quoted in
Parkinson, p. 118.
116 “‘plunged in grief’”: Brett-James, p. 148.
117 “Men escaping”: Cate, p. 261.
118 “‘The objective’”: Parkinson, p. 14.
121 “The Russian commander”: Cate, p. 284.
121 “‘This invention’”: Rose, p. 45.
121 “The device”: Ségur, p. 91.
121 “‘In a fortnight’”: Caulaincourt, p. 90.
121 “The emperor even”: Napoleon touched on
this idea in an interview with the Russian
emissary Count Orlin. Cooper, p. 90.
122 “‘It will lose me’”: Caulaincourt, p. 92.
124 “‘Our outposts were’”: Brett-James, p. 121.
125 “‘Fortune is a shameless courtesan’”: Ibid.,
p. 120.
125 “‘There were many’”: Labaume, p. 70.
126 “Ognik (‘Fire’)”: Parkinson, p. 137.
129 “‘Weak and starved’”: Ségur, p. 62.
129 “‘The voice of the court’”: Clausewitz, p.

142.

Chapter Ten: Clash
130 “‘Soldiers! Here is the battle’”: Quoted in
Zamoyski, p. 265.
131 “‘Trusting in God’”: Quoted in Nicolson, p.
74.
131 “when Soviet generals”: Ibid., preface.
134 “‘When she caught sight’”: Austin, p. 279.
134 “Lieutenant Roth von Schreckenstein”:
Brett-James, p. 124.
137 “‘sluggish, apathetic’”: Ségur, p. 69.
137 “‘What’s the Emperor’”: Ibid., p. 71.
138 “‘ceased to exist’”: Parkinson, p. 142.
138 “‘No!’ he told’”: Ségur, p. 65.
139 “When one of his officers”: Ségur, p. 68.
140 “The most conservative”: The figures are
from Zamoyski, p. 287.
141 “‘And if there is’”: Quoted in Ségur, p. 72.

142 “Franz Ludwig August von Meerheimb”:
Brett-James, p. 135.
143 “‘Whole files,’”: Ibid., p. 127.
144 “‘I had been through’”: Ibid., p. 128.
144 “The Russian general later remarked”:
Zamoyski, p. 273.
144 “‘He appeared destitute’”: Clausewitz, p.
141.
145 “‘the bad condition’”: Ibid., p. 142.
147 “‘My battle’”: Ségur, p. 68.
147 “‘For strong, healthy’”: Austin, p. 296.
148 “the captain”: Brett-James, p. 129.
149 “‘Do what you’”: Austin, p. 300.
151 “‘It would be difficult’”: Quoted in
Zamoyski, p. 278.
151 “‘In one hand’”: Austin, p. 306.
153 “‘gashed’”: Vossler, p. 67.
153 “‘It was horrible’”: Quoted in Dyer, p. 234.
155 “‘It is another question’”: Clausewitz, p.
168.

155 “‘People will be’”: Brett-James, p. 130.

Chapter Eleven: The Hospital
157 “‘All the villages and houses’”: Quoted in
Howard, p. 133.
159 “Imagine the journey”: This account of a
typical hospital is drawn largely from the
memoirs of Larrey, de Kerckhove, and
common soldiers, as well as the eyewitness
accounts collected in Brett-James and Austin
and Howard’s study of the Grande Armée
medical service.
163 “‘horribly disemboweled’”: Austin, p. 311.
163 “As the night progressed”: The description
of typhus patients is drawn from the same
primary sources listed in the second note for
page 49.
164 “The men often gave off”: The odors are
mentioned specifically in Bartlett, p. 189,
where 
the 
author 
writes 
of 
“pungent,
ammoniacal and offensive [smells] especially
in severe cases, and in fat, plethoric
individuals; sometimes, for a few days before

death, the smell resembled that of putrid
animal matter.” Similar descriptions are given
in other firsthand accounts.
164 “‘The face was sometimes’”: For de
Kerckhove’s description of typhus symptoms,
see his memoir, pp. 406-9.
165 “opium or Hoffman’s drops”: Austin, The
March on Moscow, p. 176.
165 “chirurgiens de pacotille”: Howard, p. 2.
166 “As he tended”: de Kerckhove’s description
of his treatment regimen starts at page 406 of
his memoir.

Chapter Twelve: The Last City
172 “‘We had never suffered’”: Brett-James, p.
109.
173 “‘With which low bitch’”: Ibid., p. 133.
173 “‘used a dead horse’”: Parkinson, p. 159.
174 “‘Everyone was still’”: Quoted in Zamoyski,
p. 284.
175 “‘Six hundred wounded Russians’”: Brett-
James, p. 142.
176 “‘You see what they want’”: Ibid., p. 155.
179 “‘We kept on’”: Ibid., p. 150.
180 “‘What blackguard’”: Ibid., p. 160.
181 “140,000 from France”: Zamoyski, p. 311.
181 “‘Not only’”: Ibid., p. 312.
183 “‘Farewell, delightful haunts’”: Troyat, p.
153.
183 “‘They will wait’”: Brett-James, p. 172.

184 “‘It would be difficult’”: Caulaincourt, p.
113.
185 “‘a small machine’”: Bourgnone, p. 23. 185
“‘Even the gallery slaves’”: Labaume, p. 91.
185 “There was, at last”: Memoirists from de
Kerckhove to Ségur to Jakob Walter recount
the abundance of food in Moscow.
185 “‘as round and large’”: Walter, p. 57.
186 “‘It [would be] difficult’”: Larrey, p. 44.
188 “The fire was now so close”: For an account
of Napoleon’s escape from the Moscow fire,
see Ségur, pp. 109-11.
189 “a contingent of 10,000”: Ebstein, p. 40.
189 “‘Want, sickness’”: Wilson, p. 57.
190 “They received a contingent”: Howard, p.
219.
190 “The troops who had been on the
campaign”: Rose, quoting the Prussian doctor-
memoirist Krantz, attests that reinforcements
or rear units who came in contact with the
main body of the Grande Armée often fell ill
almost immediately. “The Prussian soldiers of

York’s corps had not been with the Grand
Armée in Moscow, and there was no typhus
among them until they followed the French
on their road of retreat from Russia. [Krantz:]
‘From this moment on, however, the disease
spread with the greatest rapidity in the whole
Prussian army corps,’ and this spreading took
place with a certain uniformity among the
different divisions … In the first East Prussian
regiment of infantry, when it came to the
Vistula, there was not a single case of typhus,
‘while after a march of 14 miles on the
highway which the French had passed before
them there were 15 to 20 men sick in every
company, every tenth or even every seventh
man. In those divisions which had been
exposed 
to 
infection 
while 
in 
former
cantonments, the cases were much more
numerous, 20 to 30 in every company.’”
190 “‘During our first days’”: de Kerckhove, p.
88.
190 “typhus ‘ripped’”: Ebstein, p. 48.
190 
“‘Thousands 
of 
sick 
soldiers’”: 
de
Kerckhove, p. 88.
190 “The diseases awakened by the war”: For

estimates of Russian casualties from disease,
especially typhus, see Bernhardy’s report,
quoted in Ebstein, p. 66. For Davidov’s
account, see In the Service of the Tsar Against
Napoleon.

Chapter Thirteen: Decision
193 “General de Marbot acknowledged”: See
The Memoirs of General the Baron de Marbot.
Published 
online 
at
http://www.fullbooks.com/The-Memoirs-of-
General-the-Baron-de-Marbot8.html, 
section
8.
195 “‘One could have heard’”: Quoted in Troyat,
p. 155.
196 “‘At every step’”: Brett-James, p. 187.
197 
“‘if 
we 
met 
with 
the 
slightest’”:
Caulaincourt, p. 145.
198 “‘What?!’ he cried”: Ségur, p. 120.
199 “‘I want peace’”: Ibid., p. 122.
200 “‘What a frightful’”: Ségur, p. 126.
200 “‘A thick fog descended’”: from Hilaire
Belloc: An Anthology of His Prose and Verse,
London: R. Hart Davis, 1951, p. 233.
202 “‘oriental despotism’”: Schom, p. 180.

203 “‘The mortality continues’”: Parkinson,
Wenda, p. 190.

Chapter Fourteen: Two Roads
205 “By the beginning of November”: Zamoyski
estimates Napoleon’s forces as he departed
Moscow at “no more than 95,000 and
probably less.” Riehn’s estimate is rather
higher, at 109,000. Clausewitz recorded
90,000.
205 “‘had scarcely’”: Howard, p. 214.
205 
“‘These 
unfavorable 
circumstances’”:
Larrey, p. 6.
206 “There is no question”: Ségur.
207 “The historian Jean Morvan”: Howard, p.
36.
210 “In the famous”: These facts are drawn from
The Great Starvation Experiment: Ancel Keys
and the Men Who Starved for Science, by Todd
Tucker, Minneapolis, Minn.: University of
Minnesota Press, 2008.
211 “‘chronic disorders’”: See, for example,
Smyth’s Description of a Jail Distemper, p. 14,

where the doctor writes: “Even those who
escaped from the more immediate danger of
the disease recovered in general very slowly,
were a long time weak and subject to returns
of fever, or they fell into chronic disorders
which in the end proved no less fatal.”
211 “they could quite easily drop back”: There
are numerous accounts of this mini-army of
stragglers trailing the main body of troops,
among them Ségur, who wrote, on p. 21, at
Vitebsk, “The interminable lines of sick and
stragglers must be given time to rejoin their
regiments or get into hospitals.”
213 “‘The typhus made’”: Brett-James, p. 210.
214 “The generals found”: Labaume, p. 120.
216 “‘She experienced’”: Ibid., p. 121.
217 “‘The time has come’”: Ségur, p. 145.
218 “‘We were going’”: de Kerckhove, p. 100.
219 “‘to his boundless’”: Roeder, p. 188.
220 “‘Our heads were hideous’”: Austin, p. 213.
221 “‘On all sides’”: Ibid.
221 “‘She didn’t cry’”: Bourgogne, p. 147.

222 “‘let out’”: de Kerckhove, p. 100.
222 “‘Typhus strongly advancing’”: Ibid., pp.
142, 155.
224 “‘You want to fight’”: Quoted in Zamoyski,
p. 407.

Chapter Fifteen: Graveyard Trees
225 “On July 8”: Cooper, p. 1.
228 “‘We resemble our lackeys’”: Brett-James, p.
230-1.
228 “‘If the circumstances’”: Austin, p. 98.
229 “‘old grenadier’”: Austin, p. 98.
230 “‘As long’”: Quoted in Zamoyski, p. 451.
230 “‘No one among us’”: Austin, p. 101.
232 “‘See how they’”: Austin, p. 123.
233 “‘A horrible, death-dealing stench’”: Quoted
in Ségur, p. 185.
234 “‘Farewell, good mother’”: Bourgogne, p.
199.
234 “On November 12”: Roeder, p. 168.
236 “‘Their complaints tore at our hearts’”:
Austin, p. 197.
237 “‘The misery of my poor soldiers’”: Ségur, p.
206.

237 “‘I was delirious’”: Bourgogne, p. 196.
238 “‘I noticed,’”: Larrey, p. 68.
239 “‘Ah yes!’”: Ségur, p. 231.
240 “‘This is beginning’”: Caulaincourt, p. 235.
246 “‘A Russian musket ball’”: Austin, p. 290.
246 “‘surrounded on all sides’”: Ibid., p. 300.
250 “‘nothing but a vast’”: Austin, p. 366.
Epilogue: Rendezvous in Germany
253 “‘Drummers without drumsticks’”: Quoted
in Cate, p. 392.
254 “As the survivors marched”: For an account
of the attitudes of townspeople toward the
infected soldiers, see Walter, p. 108.
254 “‘Wherever we went’”: Vossler, p.99.
255 “‘Epidemic maladies’”: Larrey, p. 67.
255 “‘application of the skin’”: Ibid., p. 88.
255 “‘It is morning’”: Roeder, p. 191.

255 “‘I feel that I’”: Ibid., p. 207.
256 “As Napoleon hurried”: For Caulaincourt’s
account of the sleigh ride, see his memoirs,
pp. 271-323.
258 “It is impossible”: That disease was the lead
killer in the Russian campaign is supported
not only by the accounts of doctors and
common soldiers on the campaign, but by a
second wave 
of medical 
historians. 
In
Napoleon’s Doctors, Martin writes, “In Russia,
typhus can be easily identified in the
eyewitness accounts of an army which lost
perhaps over 200,000 soldiers solely from
disease.” And that typhus was dominant
among a host of contagious illnesses is
confirmed by specialist secondary authors
such as Prinzing, in his excellent Epidemics
Resulting from Wars, who writes that “the most
common disease even in Moscow was typhus
fever” (p. 116). The analysis is seconded by
Zinnser, who writes that “typhus remained the
dominant disease” during the invasion (p.
163). Zinsser does perhaps overemphasize the
rate of infection at the end of the campaign
when he asserts, “The vestiges of the army

which escaped from Russia were almost
without exception infected with typhus.”
There are accounts of units that were free
from the disease on the march home, and the
DNA evidence from the skeletons at Vilnius
don’t support an infection rate that high.
260 “According to the military surgeon”: For an
extended discussion of typhus’s effects on the
armies of 1813-14, see Prinzing, pp. 127-34.
He writes: “After the battle of Dresden
(August 26-27) from which Napoleon again
emerged victorious, but especially during the
short siege of Dresden (from the middle of
October to November 11), the epidemic
increased in both extent and fury. The
increased mortality went from 184 in January
to 960 by November. In the course of the year
1813, no less than 21,090 soldiers died in
Dresden, while in the same year 5,194
residents died.”
260 “‘Tears came’”: Quoted in McLynn, p. 654.
263 
“‘We 
found’”: 
This 
quote 
is 
from
Bemerkungen ueber den Gang der Krankheiten
welche in der königlich preussischen Armee vom
Ausbruch des Krieges im Jahre 1812 bis zu Ende

des Waffenstillstandes (im Aug.) 1813 geherrscht
haben. (Remarks on the Course of the Diseases
Which Have Reigned in the Royal Prussian Army
from the Beginning of the War in the Year 1812
until the End of the Armistice [in August] 1813).
The text is included in Rose (unpaginated).
263 “In Berlin”: Prinzing, p. 125.
264 “‘Who of us’”: Ibid., p. 153.
Author’s Note: The Doorway of the Hospital at
Tunis
267 This account draws mainly from Kim Pelis’s
biography of Nicolle.
271 “In his speech”: The text can be read in full
at
http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/l
lecture.html
272 “During 1914-18”: The “3 million” total is
not uncontested, and some analysts believe it
is overstated. But the Statistical Bulletin of the
Metropolitan 
Life 
Insurance 
Company,

quoting 
a 
Russian 
physician 
and
epidemiologist, estimated that there were 25
million cases of typhus in Russia, with more
than 3 million deaths, in the years 1918-1922
alone.
273 “‘Either socialism’”: Quoted in The Western
Medical Tradition: 800 BC–1800 AD, by
Lawrence 
Conrad, 
Cambridge, 
Mass.:
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
274 “The Red Army’s scientists”: For a full
account of the Russian biological weapons
program, including the typhus experiments,
see Ken Alibek and Stephen Handelman’s
Biohazard: The Chilling True Story of the Largest
Covert Biological Weapons Program in the World
—Told from the Inside by the Man Who Ran It,
New York: Dell, 2000.
275 For Irma Sonnenberg Menkel’s account, see
“I Saw Anne Frank Die,” Newsweek, July 21,
1997.

Sources
Primary Sources
Armstrong, John. Practical Illustrations of Typhus and Other Fevers. Bedlington, Boston, Physician to the Fever
Institution of London.
Bartlett, Dr. Elisha. The History, Diagnosis and Treatment of Typhoid and of Typhus Fever. Lea and Blanchard,
Philadelphia Brett-James, Antony. 1812: Eyewitness Accounts of Napoleon’s Defeat in Russia. MacMillan,
London, Caulaincourt, Armand de. Memoirs of General de Caulaincourt, Duke of Vicenza. Cassell and Co.,
London Caulaincourt, Armand de. With Napoleon in Russia. William Morrow, New York
Clausewitz, Carl von. The Campaign of 1812 in Russia. Da Capo, New York,
Davidov, Denis. In the Service of the Tsar Against Napoleon: The Memoirs of Denis Davidov, 1806-14 Greenhill
Books, London Dimsdale, W. p. Extract from an account of cases of typhus fever, in which the affusion of cold
water has been applied in the London House of Recovery. London, Printed for the Society for Bettering of the
Condition of the Poor, W. Bulmer & Co., London Donne, John. Devotions Upon Emergent Occassions
originally published 1624, Cosimo Classics Ebstein Wilhelm. Krankheiten im Feldzuge gegen Russland
(1812). F. Enke, Stuttgart, Faur Faber du. With Napoleon in Russia. Greenhill Books, Newbury
Hunter William The Serbian Epidemics of Typhus and Relapsing Fever in 1915. Reprinted from the
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 1919, vol. XIII, John Bale, London, 1920, pp. 29-158.
Jackson, Dr. Robert. An Outline of the History and Cure of Fever, Endemic and Contagious, More Expressly the
Contagious Fever of Jails, Ships and Hospitals. Mundell & Son, Edinburgh Kerckhove J.L.R. Histoire des
maladies observées à la Grand Armée française, pendant les campagnes de Russe en 1812 et d’Allemagne
en 1813. Janssens, 1836.
Labaume, Eugène. A History of the Invasion of Russia by Napoleon Bonaparte. Adamant, Chestnut Hill Larrey
Baron DJ. Surgical Memoirs of the Campaigns of Russia, Germany and France. Translated by John Mercer.
Casey & Lea, Philadelphia North Elisha A treatise on a malignant epidemic, called spotted fever; with remarks
on the nature of fever in general. T&J Swords, New York Pisani Filippo Con Napoleone nella campagna di
Russia; memorie inedite di un ufficiale della grande armata, pubblicate, con introduzione e note, a cura di Carlo
Zaghi. Istituto per gli studi di politica internazionale, Milan Robertson Dr. Robert. Observations on Jail,
Hospital, or Ship Fever. From the 4th April, 1776 until the 30th April, 1789. Made in various parts of
Europe and America and on the Indeterminate Seas. Self-published. Greenwich, MDCCLXXXIX.
Roeder Franz. The Ordeal of Captain Roeder. St. Martin’s, New York,

Ségur Count Phillippe-Paul de. Napoleon’s Russian Campaign. Time Inc., New York
Smith Dr. Nathan. Practical Essay on Typhous Fever. E. Bliss and E. White, New York Smyth James Carmichael
M.D., FRS, Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Physician Extraordinary to his Majesty. The
Description of the Jail Distemper, as it appeared amongst the Spanish prisoners at Winchester, in the year 1780.
J. Johnson, London Villalba Joaquin. Epedimiologia española o historia cronologica de las pestes, contagios,
epidemias y epizootias que han acaecido en españa desde la venida de los cartagineses, hasta el ano 1801. Don
Mateo Repulles, Madrid Vossler H.A. With Napoleon in Russia 1812. Translated by Walter Wallich.
Constable, London Walter Jakob The Diary of a Napoleonic Foot Soldier. Introduced by Marc Raeff.
Doubleday, Garden City Wilson Leonard “Fevers and Science in Early Nineteenth Century Medicine.”
Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 1978 XXXIII(3): 386-407.
Wilson Sir Robert Narrative of events during the Invasion of Russia by Napoleon Bonaparte. Murray, London
Secondary Sources
Arfaioli Maurizio The Black Bands of Giovanni: Infantry and Diplomacy during the Italian Wars, 1526-28.
Pisa University Press, Pisa Austin Paul Britten 1812: Napoleon’s Invasion of Russia. Stackpole, Pennsylvania
Baumslag Naomi Murderous Medicine: Nazi Doctors, Human Experimentation and Typhus. Praegar, Westport
Bell David The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin, New York
Bell Madison Smartt Toussaint Louverture. Pantheon, New York
Bourgogne Adrien Memoirs of Sergeant Bourgogne. 1812-13. William Heinemann, London Brandi Karl The
Emperor Charles V. Jonathan Cape, London
Cartwright Frederick Disease and History. Thomas Y. Crowell, New York
Cate Curtis The War of the Two Emperors: The Duel Between Napoleon and Alexander, Russia 1812. Random
House, New York Chandler David A. The Campaigns of Napoleon. Macmillan, New York
Chandler David A. Napoleon’s Marshals. Weidenfeld Military, London
Conklin Alice L. A Mission to Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in France and West Africa, 1895-1930.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA Cooper Leonard Many Roads to Moscow: Three Historic Invasions.
Coward-McCann, New York Cronin Vincent Napoleon. HarperCollins, New York
Diamond Jared Guns, Germs and Steel. WW Norton, New York
Dodge Theodore Ayrault Napoleon: A History of the Art of War. Houghton, Mifflin, New York Duggan William
R. Napoleon’s Glance: The Secret of Strategy. Nation Books, New York Dunn-Pattison, R.p. Napoleon’s
Marshals. Empiricus Books, London
Dyer Gwynne War: The Lethal Custom. Carroll & Graf, New York
Elting John Swords Around a Throne. Free Press, New York
Fournier August Napoleon I: A Biography. Henry Holt, New York

Gordon Benjamin Lee. Medieval and Renaissance Medicine. Philosophical Library, New York Herold J.
Christopher The Age of Napoleon. American Heritage, New York
Herold J. Christopher Mistress to an Age: The Life of Madame de Staël. Grove Press, New York Horne Alistair
How Far from Austerlitz? Napoleon 1805-1815. St. Martin’s Press, New York Howard Dr. Martin R.
Napoleon’s Doctors: The Medical Services of the Grande Armée. Spellmount, Stroud Johnson Steven. Ghost
Map: The Story of London’s Most Terrifying Epidemic—and How It Changed Science, Cities and the Modern
World. Riverhead, New York Karlen Arno Man and Microbes: Disease and Plagues in History and Modern
Times. Tarcher/Putnam, New York MacDougall J.D. A Short History of Planet Earth. Wiley, New York
Major Ralph Fatal Partners: War and Disease. Doubleday, Doran and Co., Garden City Matthews J. Rosser
Quantification and the Quest for Medical Certainty. Princeton University Press, Princeton McLynn Frank
Napoleon: A Biography. Arcade, New York
McNeill William H. Plagues and Peoples. Anchor Books, New York
Muir Rory Tactics and the Experience of Battle in the Age of Napoleon. Yale University Press, New Haven
Murchison Charles A Treatise on the Continued Fevers of Great Britain, third ed. Longmans, Green, London
Nicolson Nigel Napoleon 1812. Harper & Row, New York
Parkinson Roger The Fox of the North. David McKay, New York
Parkinson Wenda This Guilded African: Toussaint L’Ouverture. Salem House, London
Pelis Kim Charles Nicolle, Pasteur’s Imperial Missionary: Typhus and Tunisia. University of Rochester Press,
Rochester, N.Y
Porter Roy The Greatest Benefit to Mankind. Norton, New York
Prinzing Dr. Friedrich Epidemics Resulting from Wars. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, London Raoult D.
Dutour O. Houhamdi L. Jankauskas R. Fournier P.E. Ardagna Y. Drancourt M. Signoli M. La V.D. Macia Y.
Aboudharam G. “Evidence for louse-transmitted diseases in soldiers of Napoleon’s Grand Army in Vilnius.”
Journal of Infectious Diseases. January 2006. 1; 193(1): 112-20.
Raoult D. Woodward T. Dumler J.S. “The history of epidemic typhus.” Infectious Disease Clinics of North
America. 2004 Mar; 18(1): 127-40.
Richardson Glenn Renaissance Monarchy: The Reigns of Henry VIII, Francis I and Charles V. Oxford University
Press, New York Riehn Richard 1812: Napoleon’s Russian Campaign. Wiley, New York, 1991.
Roberts, A. “The Fifth Little Horseman.” Nursing Times. Nov 2-8, 1983; 79(44): 49-53.
Roddis Louis H. James Lind, Founder of Nautical Medicine. Henry Schumann, New York Rose Dr. Achilles
Napoleon’s Campaign in Russia Anno 1812, Medico-Historical. Self-published. New York Schom Alan
Napoleon Bonaparte. HarperCollins, New York
Seward Desmond Prince of the Renaissance. The Golden Life of Francois I. Macmillan, New York Siraisi Nancy
G. The Clock and the Mirror: Girolamo Cardano and Renaissance Medicine. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, N.J.
Troyat Henri Alexander of Russia: Napoleon’s Conqueror. Dutton, New York
Weir Alison Henry VIII: The King and His Court. Ballantine, New York
Winslow Charles-Edward Amory The Conquest of Epidemic Disease: A Chapter in the History of Ideas.
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison Winslow Charles-Edward Amory Man and Epidemics. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Yeomans, A. Typhus Fever. Oxford University Press, New York
amoyski Adam. Moscow 1812. HarperCollins, New York
Zinsser Hans. Rats, Lice and History: The Biography of a Bacillus. Little Brown, Boston

Acknowledgements
My first pilgrimage in researching this book was to the Countway Library of Medicine at
Harvard University, whose staff proved immensely helpful. Jack Eckert, in particular,
was patient and knowledgeable on a wide variety of arcane subjects. I’d also like to
acknowledge the New York Academy of Medicine and its fabulously deep archives. And
Keith Oliver, research officer at the Napoleonic Association, was a close and insightful
reader of the manuscript.
Thanks to my agent, Scott Waxman, for his typically ardent efforts on behalf of my
work. And to Rick Horgan and Julian Pavia at Crown, who sharpened the story’s focus
and made it cleaner and tighter.
Love and thanks, as always, to my wife, Mariekarl, and my children, Asher and
Delphine. Finally, I’d like to acknowledge the encouragement of Jerry Hodson, the
brother-in-law every writer dreams of having.

About the Author
STEPHAN TALTY is the author of the critically acclaimed Mulatto America and the
bestselling Empire of Blue Water. A widely published journalist, he has contributed to
The New York Times Magazine, GQ, Men’s Journal, and Details, among others.

Copyright © 2009 by Stephan Talty All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Publishers, an imprint of the
Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
CROWN and the Crown colophon are registered trademarks of
Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Talty, Stephan.
The illustrious dead / Stephan Talty.—1st ed.
1. Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1811—Campaigns—Russia.
2. Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1815—Campaigns—Russia—Medical and
sanitary affairs. 3. France Armée—History—Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1815.
4. Napoleon I, Emperor of the French, 1769-1821—Military leadership.
5. Russia—History, Military—1801-1917. I. Title.
DC235.T27 2009
940.2′742—dc22                    2008050646
eISBN: 978-0-307-45975-6
v3.0

