
The Philosophy of
Schopenhauer

Continental European Philosophy
This series provides accessible and stimulating introductions to the ideas of
continental thinkers who have shaped the fundamentals of European
philosophical thought. Powerful and radical, the ideas of these philosophers
have often been contested, but they remain key to understanding current
philosophical thinking as well as the current direction of disciplines such as
political science, literary theory, comparative literature, art history, and
cultural studies. Each book seeks to combine clarity with depth, introducing
fresh insights and wider perspectives while also providing a comprehensive
survey of each thinker's philosophical ideas.
Published titles
The Philosophy ofGadamer
Jean Grondin
The Philosophy of Merleau-Ponty
Eric Matthews
The Philosophy of Nietzsche
Rex Welshon
The Philosophy of Schopenhauer
Dale Jacquette
Forthcoming titles include
The Philosophy ofDeleuze 
The Philosophy ofHusserl
Peter Sedgwick 
Burt Hopkins
The Philosophy ofDerrida 
The Philosophy of Kant
Mark Dooley and Liam Kavanagh 
Jim O'Shea
The Philosophy ofFoucault 
The Philosophy of Kierkegaard
Todd May 
George Pattison
The Philosophy ofHabermas 
The Philosophy of Marx
Andrew Edgar 
Mark Neocleous
The Philosophy of Hegel 
The Philosophy of Rousseau
Allen Speight 
Patrick Riley, Sr and Patrick Riley, Jr
The Philosophy of Heidegger 
The Philosophy of Sartre
Jeff Malpas 
Anthony Hatzimoysis

The Philosophy of
Schopenhauer
Dole Jacquette
McGill-Queen's University Press
Montreal & Kingston • Ithaca

© Dale Jacquette 2005
ISBN 0-7735-2980-2 (hardcover)
ISBN 0-7735-2981-0 (paperback)
Legal deposit second quarter 2005
Bibliotheque nationale du Quebec
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention.
No reproduction without permission.
All rights reserved.
Published simultaneously outside North America
by Acumen Publishing Limited
McGill-Queen's University Press acknowledges the financial support of
the Government of Canada through the Book Publishing Development
Program (BPIDP) for its activities.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Jacquette, Dale
The philosophy of Schopenhauer / Dale Jacquette.
(Continental European philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7735-2980-2 (bound).—ISBN 0-7735-2981-0 (pbk.)
1. Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1788-1860. I. Title.
II. Series.
B3148J33 2005 
193 
C2005-900986-1
Designed and typeset by Kate Williams, Swansea.
Printed and bound by Biddies Ltd., King's Lynn.

Contents
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Pre/izce
Acfewow/edgeraewts
A note on texts and terminology
Abbreviations
Introduction: Schopenhauer's life and times
Schopenhauer's idealism
Empirical knowledge of the world as representation: from
natural science to transcendental metaphysics
Willing and the world as Will
Suffering, salvation, death, and renunciation of the will to life
Art and aesthetics of the beautiful and sublime
Transcendental freedom of Will
Compassion as the philosophical foundation of morality
Schopenhauer's legacy in the philosophy of Nietzsche,
Heidegger and the early Wittgenstein
Notes
Bibliography and recommended reading
Index
vii
X
xi
xiii
1
11
40
71
108
145
180
203
234
265
281
291
V

For Tina, as always, with love

Preface
I came to Schopenhauer indirectly through a prior interest in the philosophy
of Wittgenstein. In particular, I wanted to understand what Wittgenstein
means in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 6.4211, when he says that "Ethics
is transcendent. Ethics and aesthetics are one." The secondary literature
hinted that Schopenhauer's philosophy might provide the key. While this was
a tantalizing clue, it did not by itself resolve my uncertainty, but only led to
more and more careful reading and rereading of Schopenhauer's works. It
was not long in this process before my original motives for studying
Schopenhauer ripened into a lasting involvement with all aspects of his
thought on its own terms and for its own sake.
As an undergraduate I read Schopenhauer's Fourfold Root of the Princi-
ple of Sufficient Reason and both volumes of The World as Will and Repre-
sentation in translation. This first exposure to Schopenhauer gave me a
rough idea of his philosophy and its relation to the philosophies of Plato and
Kant, just as at the time I had only a rough idea of the philosophies of Plato
and Kant. It was insufficient background later on to help me clarify what I
now see as the early Wittgenstein's debt to Schopenhauer's transcendental-
ism, not only in the identification of ethics with aesthetics and his concept
of the metaphysical subject or philosophical I, but in every aspect of his
philosophical semantics and its applications in the Tractatus^ including the
sign-symbol distinction and picture theory of meaning.
What I discovered in reacquainting myself with Schopenhauer is the
explanatory power of his dual aspect conception of the world as Will and
representation. However useful the study of Schopenhauer has been to my
understanding of later episodes in the history of philosophy, it is his philo-
sophical system standing on its own that has meant increasingly more to my
own reflections in metaphysics, ethics and aesthetics, and in my efforts to
come to terms with all the comedy and tragedy of the human condition.
Schopenhauer combines mid-nineteenth-century scientific philosophy with
vn

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Eastern mysticism and a penetrating if grotesque insight into the problems
of life. The author's captivating philosophical prose, the extraordinary
rancour and passion that shine through on every page, and the ingenious
fitting together of so many diverse kinds of knowledge from so many differ-
ent branches of study, contribute to making Schopenhauer's thought a most
audacious philosophical enterprise, with an astonishing array of implications
for metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, political philosophy, aesthetics,
philosophy of logic, mathematics, science and religion. We delve into
Schopenhauer's life work not merely as indispensable to a complete under-
standing of the Western tradition, or of nineteenth-century German ideal-
ism, but because Schopenhauer's reflections, if true, no matter how abstruse,
offer something that philosophy in our more cynical and still positivistic age
has abandoned as beyond the reach of responsible enquiry: a single key to
unlock all the philosophical difficulties and religious and psychological
mysteries surrounding the facts of life and death.
I approach Schopenhauer critically, as a logician and dyed-in-the-wool
analytic philosopher. I do so, however, I believe, with more genuine sympa-
thy for his project and its conclusions than most scientifically trained scholars
typically take away from his pages. While there are numerous excellent
introductions to Schopenhauer's thought, and new studies on special topics
in his philosophy appear every several years, I devote more attention than I
have seen in other expositions to Schopenhauer's main and most controver-
sial contribution to metaphysics - the arguments by which he hopes to prove
that thing-in-itself is Will. My reason for examining Schopenhauer's reason-
ing in such detail is that it is specifically by these considerations that he claims
to have surpassed Kant as the greatest of all his philosophical precursors.
Schopenhauer enthusiastically adopts Kant's distinction between phenomena
and thing-in-itself. He nevertheless rejects Kant's attempt to demonstrate the
existence of thing-in-itself, and, in the process, more significantly, he denies
Kant's conclusion that thing-in-itself is unknowable, merely conceivable,
noumenon. By offering a glimpse of the hidden nature of thing-in-itself as
Will, Schopenhauer goes far, perhaps too far, beyond his teacher. He thereby
sets in motion a cascade of implications for other fields of philosophy in the
understanding of science, natural history, religion, art and every phenomenal
and transcendental aspect of social and political reality. Schopenhauer pur-
sues many of these finer points in his later writings and revised editions of his
major works, all of which can be understood as supplements to The World as
Will and Representation.
The unified synthesis of so many different lines of thought and their
sweeping consequences makes Schopenhauer's philosophy, if correct in its
principal assertions, one of the most groundshaking, all-encompassing
worldviews ever to appear in the history of ideas. It is this elephantine if,
vm

PREFACE
however, that repeatedly draws readers back to Schopenhauer's writings, to
understand more clearly the remarkable chain of inferences by which he
proposes to identify thing-in-itself as Will.
Dale Jacquette
IX

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the series editor, John Shand, for inviting me to contribute
this volume on Schopenhauer to Acumen's series on Continental European
Philosophy. The material for this book was first presented in seminar lectures
on Schopenhauer's philosophy at The Pennsylvania State University in spring
2003. The chapters were drafted in the summer immediately thereafter dur-
ing the course of a bicycle trip through southern Germany along the
Romantische Strafie from Wiirzburg to Fuessen, and completed in the win-
ter of 2004 while serving as Director for Penn State's Athens Abroad Program
in Greece. I am indebted to David Cartwright for perceptive suggestions for
improvement of an earlier draft of the book, and to Dana Van Kooy and the
Center for British and Irish Studies at the University of Colorado, Boulder,
for assistance in tracking down elusive sources. I thank my wife and cycling
partner Tina for her boundless patience and wise loving counsel.

A note on texts and terminology
Schopenhauer's masterwork, Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, was pub-
lished as a single volume in 1818, and reissued in a revised and expanded
two-volume second edition in 1844, followed by a third edition the year
before his death in 1859. In its English translation as The World as Will and
Idea or The World as Will and Representation, the book's title indicates
Schopenhauer's division of the world into two aspects. The world presented
to thought and known to empirical science is the world as representation
(Vortsellung), while as it exists independently of thought it is the world as
"Will" (der Wille). The world as Will is Schopenhauer's interpretation of the
Kantian concept of thing-in-itself, whose hidden inner nature he maintains
is revealed for the first time only in his transcendental idealist philosophy. I
adopt the convenient English device of marking the distinction between
empirical "willing" and the individual empirical or phenomenological "will"
or "will to life" (der Wille zum Leben) in the phenomenal psychology of
individual thinkers in lower-case letters, in contrast with Schopenhauer's
concept of the transcendent thing-in-itself, which I capitalize in every
instance as "Will". In Schopenhauer's German, all uses of any noun, includ-
ing "der Wille", with either connotation are capitalized as a matter of ortho-
graphic convention. The fundamental distinction between Will as thing-in-
itself and phenomenal will in the sense of desire or intention, so important
to Schopenhauer's system, is indicated consequently in the original German
only by context. The translations of Schopenhauer's writings by E. F. J. Payne
similarly do not distinguish between "will" and "Will", but render both with-
out capitalization simply as "will". I have not altered these two uses of the
term in quoting from Payne, despite my practice of disambiguating
Schopenhauer's concepts as "will" and "Will" everywhere in my own
commentary. The Payne translations additionally convert Schopenhauer's
expanded phrase for the individual phenomenal will as the "will-to-live".
Where I have occasion to discuss this concept in Schopenhauer, I use the
XI

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
literally correct, and I think philosophically more accurate, formula "will to
life", treating "Leberi" with its capitalization in Schopenhauer's original text
as a noun rather than as the infinitive form of the corresponding verb. Again,
I have not modified Payne's English to fit my preference in quoting from his
translations, but ask the reader to recognize throughout the equivalence in
meaning of the two phrases wherever they occur.
xn

Abbreviations
BM Schopenhauer: On the Basis of Morality (1995).
CPR Kant: Critique of Pure Reason (1965).
FFR Schopenhauer: The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Rea-
son (1974).
FW Schopenhauer: Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will (1999).
HN Schopenhauer: Arthur Schopenhauer: Manuscript Remains in Four
Volumes (1988).
PP Schopenhauer: Parerga and Paralipomena (1974).
VC Schopenhauer: On Vision and Colors: An Essay (1994).
WN Schopenhauer: On the Will in Nature: A Discussion of the Corrobo-
rations from the Empirical Sciences that the Author's Philosophy has
Received Since its First Appearance (1992).
WWR Schopenhauer: The World as Will and Representation (1966).
xin

Therefore, in a certain sense, it can also be said that the will is knowl-
edge a priori of the body, and that the body is knowledge a posteri-
ori of the will. 
(WWR 1:100)

INTRODUCTION
Schopenhauer's life and times
For when I entered life, my genius offered me the choice of either
recognizing truth but then of pleasing no one, or with others of
teaching the false with encouragement and approbation; and for me
the choice had not been difficult... Accordingly, I became the [man
in the] iron mask... of the profession of philosophy, secluded from
air and light so that no one would see me and my natural claims
might not gain authority. But now the man who was killed by the
silence of the professors of philosophy, has risen again from the
dead, to their great consternation, for they do not know at all what
expression they should now assume.
(PP1: 135-6)
An idealist synthesis
Arthur Schopenhauer crafted one of the most comprehensive philosophical
systems the world has ever seen - not that the world paid much attention,
at least at first. Schopenhauer weaves together ideas of Plato, Kant and Asian
religions into an encyclopedic worldview that combines the empirical science
of his day with mystic wisdom in a radically idealist metaphysics and
epistemology.
The fundamental distinction in Schopenhauer's philosophy marks a
dualistic conception of the world as representation, as it appears to thought,
and as thing-in-itself, considered independently of all concepts and catego-
ries of mind. Schopenhauer identifies thing-in-itself as Will, which he further
characterizes as blind urging or uncaused, unmotivated, objectless and
subjectless striving or desire. This alleged discovery and its implications have
earned Schopenhauer a unique but often misunderstood place in the history
1

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of philosophy. The basis for all of Schopenhauer's system is his theory of
knowledge, which he refers to as the fourfold root of the principle of
sufficient reason. The principle divides explanations for any occurrence in
the world as representation into four types of lawlike generalizations,
including all logical, mathematical, causal and moral or motivational
phenomena. The fourfold root thereby serves as a criterion demarcating the
limits of possible explanation, distinguishing between the represented world,
for which any object or event in principle is capable of being explained,
and thing-in-itself, which cannot be explained at all by any part of the
principle. Schopenhauer's epistemology and idealist metaphysics, finally,
underwrites a doctrine of moral pessimism, with a unique perspective on
traditional problems of ethics, aesthetics and a reinterpretation of the
perennial quest for freedom, salvation and immortality that are distinctively
Schopenhauerian.
Schopenhauer's debt to all three main sources, including Plato, Kant and
the ancient religions of India, is profound. Above all, in his philosophy he
stands as the self-professed successor to Kant. Schopenhauer regards his main
contribution to the history of thought as something he achieves by standing
on Kant's shoulders, seeing farther and more clearly and consistently than
anyone had previously done in a direction toward which Kant had only
obliquely pointed. The appeal of Schopenhauer's philosophy is largely due
to the simplicity of what Schopenhauer refers to as his "single thought" that
the world divides into the two fundamental aspects of representation, as it
appears to the thinking subject, and as thing-in-itself (WWR 1: xii, xv-xvi).
Schopenhauer believes he surpasses Kant in the most important part of his
metaphysics by offering insight into the hidden nature of thing-in-itself as Will.
Biographical sketch
The facts of Schopenhauer's life leading to the period of his greatest
philosophical creativity illustrate the culture and times in which late-
eighteenth- to mid-nineteenth-century German philosophy flourished.
Schopenhauer's middle-class family background was not unusual for a young
person aspiring to an academic or literary career in his day, although the story
of Schopenhauer's life reveals personality traits that can be seen retrospec-
tively in the later outcome of his philosophy.1
Schopenhauer was born on 22 February 1788. His family lived first in
Danzig, a mercantile Hanseatic city on the Motlawa River, which was then
part of the Prussian Confederation, and has since been restored to Poland
as the city of Gdansk. The Schopenhauers moved to Hamburg in 1793, and
2

INTRODUCTION
with the birth of Schopenhauer's sister Adele, in 1797, the household was
at least temporarily complete. Schopenhauer's father, Henrich Floris
Schopenhauer, a moderately successful merchant of Dutch extraction, is
believed to have committed suicide for unknown reasons on 20 April 1805.
Schopenhauer's mother, born Johanna Trosiener, later became a popular
novelist whose name, to Schopenhauer's chagrin, was more widely recog-
nized in literary circles than his own. Schopenhauer died on 21 September
1860, in Frankfurt am Main, where he had lived for the last 28 years of his
life and produced and revised many of his most enduring philosophical
writings.
The events of Schopenhauer's life are neither remarkable nor dramatic.
When compared, say, with those of other great philosophers, such as Plato,
Aristotle, Descartes, Hume or Wittgenstein, Schopenhauer, in keeping with
his intellectual predecessor, Immanuel Kant, led the life of a quiet scholar.
Unlike Kant, however, Schopenhauer had no need or opportunity to work
for a living as a university philosophy professor. Schopenhauer tries to make
a virtue of this necessity, having failed to win a permanent place as philoso-
phy instructor at the University of Berlin. He argues, as this chapter's
epigraph indicates, that as an independent thinker he was free to pursue the
truth without concern for the popularity of his ideas or for pleasing an
audience. By living frugally within the means afforded by a modest inherit-
ance from his father's estate, Schopenhauer, who never married, was able to
devote all his time and energy to a lifetime of philosophical scholarship.2 He
makes an implicit but thinly veiled comparison between himself and Socra-
tes. Both thinkers were professionally unemployed philosophers engaged in
a vigilant search for truth in supreme contempt for the pandering sophists
of their day:
How could philosophy, degraded to become a means of earning
one's bread, generally fail to degenerate into sophistry? Just because
this is bound to happen, and the rule "I sing the song of him whose
bread I eat" has held good at all times, the making of money by
philosophy was among the ancients the characteristic of the soph-
ist... My guiding star has in all seriousness been truth. Following
it, I could first aspire only to my own approval, entirely averted from
an age that has sunk low as regards all higher intellectual efforts, and
from a national literature demoralized but for the exceptions, a
literature in which the art of combining lofty words with low
sentiments has reached its zenith. 
(WWR 1: xx-xxi)
The few anecdotes recounted from Schopenhauer's life have entered
into philosophical legend as candid images of an apparently unpleasant
3

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
personality. These add a human dimension to a portrait of the philosopher,
typifying Schopenhauer's negative philosophical outlook and unsociability
toward the greater part of humanity.
After his parents moved from Danzig to Hamburg in 1793, Schopenhauer
was apprenticed to a merchant to learn his father's trade. He appeased his
family at first by agreeing to follow in his father's footsteps and abandon his
intentions to follow a scholarly career. In exchange, he was offered a
summer's travel in England, the Netherlands, France, Switzerland, and
Austria. Previously, between 1797 and 1799, Schopenhauer had lived in
France with his father on an extended business visit to Paris and Le Havre,
where he perfected his French and gained an appreciation for French culture,
theatre and literature. The elegance of Schopenhauer's German philosophi-
cal prose, its musical qualities, clarity and skilful use of metaphor, are
generally attributed to the time he spent during his youth in England and
France. There he absorbed distinctively non-Germanic models of expression
that characterize his mature literary style, avoiding the ponderous, digres-
sive and mannered writing of his contemporaries.3
The first insight we have into Schopenhauer's moral sensibility and philo-
sophical awakening at this period is offered in an autobiographical remark
included in his so-called "Cholerabuch", where he recalls:
When I was seventeen, without any proper schooling, I was affected
by the misery and wretchedness of life, as was the Buddha, when in
his youth he caught sight of sickness, old age, pain, and death ...
The result for me was that this world could not be the work of an
all-bountiful, infinitely good being, but rather of a devil who
summoned into existence creatures in order to gloat over their
anguish and agony ... [I concluded] [a]bove all, [that] suffering is
certainly the purpose of life, just as if it were the work of a devil,
but this purpose is not the final one, it is itself the means of grace,
and therefore as such ... is contrived by ourselves for our true and
ultimate good. 
(HN: 4, para. 36)
We recognize here, perhaps with the distortions that sometimes affect
distant memories of formative events in one's early life, a story that as
Schopenhauer says is reminiscent of the awakening to the suffering of others
by the historical Buddha. When he was still a prince, leaving the shelter of
his wealthy family's protection where at first he knew only happiness, kind-
ness and pleasure, young Siddhartha was exposed to the misery that existed
outside the manor walls and experienced a sudden overwhelming compas-
sion for the poverty, pain and suffering of others.4 Schopenhauer, in the year
that his father died, seems to have undergone a similar jolting awareness of
4

INTRODUCTION
the plight of humankind. He draws an explicit comparison between his
discovery of widespread suffering and the moment of the Buddha's disillu-
sionment with the superficial joys of what until then had been an artificially
insulated life.
What Schopenhauer adds to the account that does not seem to be part of
the Buddhist legend is the attribution of the world's misery to a devil or evil
force. He evokes the philosophical problem of theodicy, of understanding
God's divine justice in a universe where natural evil prevails. Schopenhauer's
remarks anticipate almost verbatim Nietzsche's later autobiographical
comments in the opening sections of On the Genealogy of Morality, in which
he grapples with a similar problem. It is worthwhile to compare
Schopenhauer's remarks with what Nietzsche has to say about his early
impressions of the source of evil. Nietzsche's contributions to philosophy
after publishing The Birth of Tragedy, as we shall see, were dedicated to revers-
ing Schopenhauer's denial of the will to life, which Nietzsche refers to deroga-
torily as a kind of "European Buddhism". Nietzsche, like Schopenhauer, was
equally stirred in his youth to philosophical reflection by his encounters with
the fact of evil, but, unlike Schopenhauer, the early Nietzsche attributes
rampant evil directly to God:
In fact, the problem of the origin of evil haunts me as a thirteen-year-
old lad: at an age when one has "half child's play, half God in one's
heart," I devoted my first literary child's play to it, my first philo-
sophic writing exercise - and as to my "solution" to the problem
back then, well, I gave the honor to God, as is fitting, and made him
the father of evil.5
In his moral philosophy, many years later, Schopenhauer makes the feeling
of compassion for the suffering of others the foundation of his ethics. The
morality of compassion in Schopenhauer is contrary to Kant and in stark
opposition to what would eventually become Nietzsche's uncompromising
advocacy of the will to power. Schopenhauer, like the historical Buddha, sees
suffering in all life, and finally identifies life with suffering. To live is to suffer,
and to suffer is to experience the insatiability of individual empirical willing
or will to life. Schopenhauer concludes that the soul's only attainable
salvation from suffering is to renounce and to whatever extent possible deny
and suppress the will to life in the interests of knowledge, to which willing
is diametrically opposed.
Two years after his father's death, in 1807, Schopenhauer considered
himself at last to be free of his promise to enter business, and embarked on
the scholarly career he had always desired. He entered the gymnasium at
Gotha, was expelled for writing satirical verses about a local social figure,
5

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
and completed his preliminary studies for the university degree at a second
gymnasium in Weimar. He began university studies in medicine at Gottingen,
where he also attended philosophy lectures, and was advised by his teacher
Gottlob Ernst Schulze to limit his reading primarily to Plato and Kant.
This was a suggestion Schopenhauer faithfully followed, a decision that
was to colour deeply every aspect of the future development of his philoso-
phy. From 1811 to 1813 Schopenhauer relocated to Berlin, where he
attended philosophy lectures by Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich D. E.
Schleiermacher and Friedrich August Wolf. He fled Berlin in May 1813,
when he feared that Napoleon Bonaparte was about to attack the city,
and took refuge in Rudolstadt, Thuringen. At the end of this period
Schopenhauer wrote his dissertation, awarded in absentia from the Univer-
sity of Jena in October 1813, on topics in the history and philosophy of
epistemology. The thesis was subsequently published in the same year as Uber
die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde [On the Fourfold
Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason].
After bitter disagreement with his aspiring socialite mother in Weimar,
Schopenhauer broke off relations with her and moved to Dresden, where he
lived from 1814 to 1818. His mother's literary salon, for as long as
Schopenhauer could tolerate it, had afforded him the valuable opportunity
to meet Wolfgang Johann von Goethe and other important thinkers, writers
and artists. Schopenhauer corresponded for a time with Goethe, and Goethe's
theory of colours in his Farbenlehre inspired Schopenhauer to write one of
his earliest short books, Uber das Sehn und die Farben: Eine Abhandlung [On
Vision and Colors: An Essay]. Mother and son were frequently at odds over
Johanna's administration of Schopenhauer's paternal inheritance, a respon-
sibility with which she had been charged after 1809. It is in connection with
these early business transactions that we discover another episode illustrative
of Schopenhauer's implacable will and dogged abrasiveness. Along with other
surviving members of his family, Schopenhauer was engaged in a prolonged
lawsuit over some of his father's unrepaid investments. After a few years his
mother and sister gave up and settled for a tiny fraction of the amount they
were owed, but Schopenhauer persisted with unbending determination, and
eventually triumphed, receiving the entire sum for which he had sued.
It was also during this time that Schopenhauer undertook some of his most
important philosophical research. He wrote and published his aforemen-
tioned short treatise, On Vision and Colors, in 1816, and completed the
manuscript for his great treatise, Die Welt als Wile und Vorstellung [The World
as Will and Representation}, published in 1918 with a 1919 copyright date.
In 1820 Schopenhauer returned to Berlin and was accepted as Privatdozent,
enabling him to offer fee-paid lectures in philosophy. The University of Berlin
was also the home of G. W F. Hegel. Schopenhauer vehemently disagreed with
6

INTRODUCTION
Hegel's philosophy and was undisguisedly contemptuous of Hegel's ideas and
of the man personally. Hegel was already a well-established, widely discussed
and respected philosopher with an enthusiastically admiring local audience
of students, and an enviable and, to Schopenhauer's mind, unbearably
inflated, international reputation.
Schopenhauer's invectives against prominent contemporaries provide
both an amusing and pathetic sideline to the course of his philosophical
career. He takes no prisoners in his very first mention of Hegel, when, in
the Preface to the Second Edition of his main treatise, he refers to "Hegel,
that intellectual Caliban" (WWR 1: xxi). Later, in a similar moment of
vituperative spleen, he writes that: "the times have become ... degraded and
crude through the stupefying influence of Hegel's sham wisdom" (WWR 1:
223). Nor is this an extreme case of the polemical potshots he is willing to
take against the major figures of German idealism. In Chapter 24, "On Physi-
ognomy", in his later Parerga andParalipomena, his collection of aphorisms
and short essays, he goes so far as to maintain:
I would, therefore, like to advise my discriminating countrymen that,
when they again feel inclined to trumpet abroad for thirty years a
commonplace head as a great mind, they will not choose for the
purpose such a publican's physiognomy as Hegel's, on whose coun-
tenance nature had written in her most legible handwriting the words
"commonplace fellow", so familiar to her. 
(PP 2: 640-41)
Schopenhauer's resentment of Hegel is epitomized by an infamous
debacle. During his brief appointment at the University of Berlin,
Schopenhauer was so convinced of the superiority of his work that he sched-
uled his lectures for precisely the same time as Hegel's. Schopenhauer seems
to have assumed that the students in Berlin would appreciate the value of
his ideas so much more than Hegel's that they would flock en masse from
Hegel's lecture classroom to his own, providing a striking demonstration of
the power of his philosophy over Hegel's. What must have been his humili-
ation, then, to learn that at first only a few curious students and soon no one
at all was sufficiently interested in what he had to say to fill a single seat. The
students, forced to choose between the two philosophers speaking at the
same time, voted with their feet for Hegel against Schopenhauer, migrating
to Schopenhauer's prestigious rival, and further fuelling his lifelong personal
animosity toward Hegel's thought. Dependent as he was on students paying
fees to attend his lectures, Schopenhauer had to cancel his course, and the
incident effectively ended his hopes for a professional university career.
The situation was aggravated by the fact that Hegel and, to a lesser extent,
Fichte and Schelling, gained widespread international recognition for
7

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
theories that Schopenhauer considered to be shallow and confused. All the
while, Schopenhauer's own philosophy during the greater part of his life was
neglected, and the works in which he believed he had communicated the
most profound and previously unknown truths of metaphysics were almost
entirely ignored. The disappointment he encountered in Berlin was not the
cause of Schopenhauer's bitterness towards Hegel. It was occasioned instead
by a prior sense of outrage that Hegel's philosophy should have achieved
worldwide fame despite Schopenhauer's conviction of its philosophical
misdirection and obscurantism. For this reason Schopenhauer refers to
himself somewhat self-indulgently as the philosopher in the iron mask. The
lectureship fiasco seems to have reinforced his prior inclination to despise
popular philosophical opinion, which had overlooked his revolutionary
discoveries in favour of what he considered to be a palpably inferior
philosophy.6
During this time Schopenhauer became entangled in yet another
scandal. He lived in rented rooms in Berlin, where he was accustomed to
working on philosophy in the morning and early afternoon, writing at his
desk in full concentration and intolerant of disturbances. Schopenhauer
was so preoccupied with the topic that in his later collection of aphorisms
and short essays, the Parerga and Paralipomena, he includes a set of
remarks "On Din and Noise", in which he complains of the "knocking,
hammering, and banging [that] has been throughout my life a daily tor-
ment to me" (PP 2: 642). A seamstress and neighbour of Schopenhauer's
in the apartment building was engaged in conversation in the anteroom
one day when Schopenhauer was trying to work. He repeatedly asked her
to quieten down, but she continued to annoy him until Schopenhauer, not
exactly following the Buddha's enlightened path of compassion, took
hold of her physically, kicked and beat her with his fists, and physically
removed her from the room. She sued Schopenhauer in court and won
her case, upon which Schopenhauer was required as penalty to pay her a
yearly stipend. When after several years she died and Schopenhauer was
relieved of further obligations, he reportedly wrote in his ledger book
(some accounts say it was on the letter in which he received the news)
"Obit anus, abit onus", meaning "The old woman (or ass, in the anatomi-
cal rather than zoological sense, the Latin being nicely ambiguous in this
regard) is dead, the debt is cancelled" - a sign of his poetic wit, perhaps,
but also an indication of his lack of remorse over the incident. It might
further be construed as a window onto his cantankerous personality as
someone capable of taking such an action in the first place. His later
response when the court-ordered duty to the woman had ended was
merely a sense of gratitude that he no longer needed to pay her, suggest-
ing that he never doubted that his mistreatment of her was deserved.7
8

INTRODUCTION
In August 1831 Schopenhauer fled Berlin to escape the cholera epidemic
that was sweeping the city, a scourge to which Hegel among others fell
victim. Schopenhauer lived in Mannheim for about a year, and then settled
in Frankfurt am Main. Here he spent the remaining 28 years of his life,
extending and refining his philosophy. During this time he notably wrote his
1839 Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences prize-winning essay, Uber die
Freiheit des menschlichen Willens [On the Freedom of the W/7/], and in 1840,
Uber die Grundlage der Moral [On the Basis of Morality]. The latter essay
was submitted for a Royal Danish Society of Scientific Studies competition.
In the event, Schopenhauer's paper did not win the Danish prize, even
though it was the only submission entered. Schopenhauer devoted his
energies during his last period to searching out confirmations and applica-
tions of the ideas he had formulated earlier in life. He published these as
addenda to the second and third editions of The World as Will and Repre-
sentation in 1844 and 1859, to the second edition of The Fourfold Root in
1847, and to the voluminous and absorbing, although largely unstructured,
Parerga und Paralipomena, published in 1851.
Schopenhauer died peacefully in Frankfurt one year later in 1860, appar-
ently as a result of pulmonary-respiratory failure, at the age of 72. It was only
in the last several years of his life that he began to receive the recognition
from the philosophical community that he had always sought, but of which
toward the end he seems finally to have despaired.
Schopenhauer's life in many ways exemplifies his thought. To a great
extent, he suppressed desire and individual willing in favour of scientific and
philosophical knowledge and the appreciation of fine art. He developed his
talents as polymath and devoted himself to many different kinds of in-depth
study related to his distinction between the world as Will and representa-
tion. We can see the inner force of will and salty apprehension of the true
state of the world etched on his face, particularly in his eyes, as depicted in
portraiture. The 1815 oil painting of the youthful Schopenhauer by Ludwig
Sigismund Ruhl (reproduced on the cover of this book) shows a handsome
intelligent confident young man in a lacy white collar and greatcoat of the
period. He appears the sort of early-nineteenth-century romantic figure who
could have portrayed Goethe's tragic hero in The Sorrows of Young Werther,
contemplating life as he loads his pistol and pours a final glass of wine,
mourning a failed love affair. Schopenhauer himself suffered through sev-
eral such tragedies of unrequited love, notably in 1807 and 1821. We then
turn to admire Elisabet Ney's 1859 plaster study and marble bust of
Schopenhauer as an older man, presented almost in the manner of the bust
of a Roman senator, completed just one year before his death. Or, from
roughly the same period, we might consider Angilbert Gobel's 1857-59
canvas "Portrait of the Philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer". The great
9

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
curmudgeon is depicted sporting a bemused almost mischievous scowl,
wisely seeing through the superficial vanity of the world, his face framed by
massive muttonchop sideburns and an unruly shock of white hair surround-
ing his bald, expansive and sourly thoughtful forehead. We recognize the
same frowning elder statesman of philosophy captured in sepia daguerreo-
types from around 1852 to 1859, seated at a table and holding a watch, or
standing with his hand tucked in his vest, now collected and displayed in the
Schopenhauer Archives at the City and University Library in Frankfurt. It
is tempting to see in this progression of portraits Schopenhauer's mounting
disillusion with the world and its reluctance to accept or even give fair hear-
ing to the main principles of his philosophy. It was a situation about which
he first became increasingly embittered and eventually resigned.8
10

CHAPTER ONE
Schopenhauer's idealism
Accordingly, true philosophy must at all costs be idealistic; indeed,
it must be so merely to be honest... It is quite appropriate to the
empirical standpoint of all the other sciences to assume the objective
world as positively and actually existing; it is not appropriate to the
standpoint of philosophy, which has to go back to what is primary and
original. Consciousness alone is immediately given, hence the basis
of philosophy is limited to the facts of consciousness; in other words,
philosophy is essentially idealistic. 
(WWR 2: 4-5)
A world in thought
To open the first pages of Schopenhauer's treatise The World as Will and
Representation is to encounter an outrageous view of reality. We may easily
be stunned into a sense of incredulity. Can Schopenhauer really be saying
such things? Does he literally mean that the world of physical objects exists
only in the mind?
Schopenhauer tells us in no uncertain terms that the world we experience
in sensation exists entirely in thought, that everyone on reflection already
knows this and that the world begins with the awakening to consciousness
of each individual mind and ends with each thinking being's death. The
implications of this radical commitment to the physical world's mind-
dependence are as astonishing as they are intriguing. To understand
Schopenhauer's metaphysics and epistemology with all their implications
requires that we first try to make sense of his extreme idealism.
Introducing his philosophical system, Schopenhauer begins the book with
the startling pronouncement:
11

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The world is my representation: this is a truth valid with reference
to every living and knowing being, although man alone can bring
it into reflective, abstract consciousness. If he really does so, philo-
sophical discernment has dawned on him. It then becomes clear and
certain to him that he does not know a sun and an earth, but only
an eye that sees a sun, a hand that feels an earth; that the world
around him is there only as representation, in other words, only in
reference to another thing, namely that which represents, and this
is himself. 
(WWR1:3)
With admirable if disconcerting aplomb, Schopenhauer calls attention to a
proposition that he insists we all already know at some level. He claims that
even non-rational animals and all living perceivers possess such knowledge,
even if they are incapable of becoming aware of its truth or reasoning about
it abstractly. He asserts that the world is my representation, a thesis he
significantly puts in first-person formulation. What I am supposed to know
without further proof is that the world is my representation, meaning that
it is something that belongs to me and resides within my mind as a feature
of my personal subjectivity.
Remarkably, Schopenhauer claims that the same knowledge is available
to every thinking subject. How can this be? If the world is not only my
personal representation, but is identical to each thinking subject's distinct
representation, existing in each individual's thoughts, then it appears that
the physical world cannot be one single and unitary thing. Instead, there must
then be as many different distinct physical worlds as there are thinking
subjects that represent the world, in each of whose thoughts the world is
somewhat differently represented. Idealism is the thesis that the world
consists of ideas, and thus exists within the mind as dependent on thought.
Schopenhauer embraces idealism in this sense, while still insisting that the
subjectivity implied by the world as representation is not philosophically
objectionable. But how can it not be? The problem of multiplying the
existence of as many worlds as there are perceivers is only one of the
difficulties facing idealism. It is notably a problem, moreover, that does not
arise for opposing theories of metaphysical realism. The standard view
concerning the nature of reality (sometimes patronizingly designated
"naive"), realism, is that there is a unitary external physical world consist-
ing of diverse objects and states of affairs existing objectively outside the
mind. In metaphysical realism, the world exists independently of thought
as something about which different perceiving subjects can have different
ideas that are represented subjectively in their thoughts in different
ways. This Schopenhauer flatly denies. His commitment to idealism is
unequivocal:
12

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
Therefore no truth is more certain, more independent of all others,
and less in need of proof than this, namely that everything that exists
for knowledge, and hence the whole of this world, is only object in
relation to the subject, perception of the perceiver, in a word,
representation. Naturally this holds good of the present as well as
of the past and future, of what is remotest as well as of what is near-
est; for it holds good of time and space themselves, in which alone
all these distinctions arise. Everything that in any way belongs and
can belong to the world is inevitably associated with this being-
conditioned by the subject, and it exists only for the subject. The
world is representation. 
(WWR 1:3)
In the second edition, he says much the same. He qualifies the assertion
that all thinkers recognize the truth of first-person idealism once they
understand it, but remarks that not everyone immediately understands what
it means to say that the world is their personal subjective representation. We,
too, might not yet fully understand exactly what Schopenhauer means when
he states:
"The world is my representation" is, like the axioms of Euclid, a
proposition which everyone must recognize as true as soon as he
understands it, although it is not a proposition that everyone under-
stands as soon as he hears it. To have brought this proposition to
consciousness and to have connected it with the problem of the
relation of the ideal to the real, in other words, of the world in the
head to the world outside the head, constitutes, together with the
problem of moral freedom, the distinctive characteristic of the
philosophy of the moderns. 
(WWR 2:3)
It is unclear at first what could possibly entitle Schopenhauer to speak in
the singular of "the" world or "this" world. If the world is representation
and more particularly "my" representation, and if there are many represent-
ing subjects, then it would appear that there must be as many different worlds
as there are perceivers. The fragmentation of the world into many distinct
subjectively existing worlds is nevertheless at odds with common sense and
Schopenhauer's own pronouncements.
The trouble is that Schopenhauer is no mad solipsist. He is not so deluded
as to imagine that he is personally the only representing subject. If that were
his position then his idealism would at worst be implausible, but not logically
inconsistent. He affirms the existence of many living knowing thinkers,
including but not limited to what are ordinarily taken to be the other minds
of numerous other human beings. He holds that if each thinking subject
13

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
could express thoughts in language, then each could equally say, and justi-
fiably admit as a certain truth, that, in his first-person way of putting things,
"The world is my representation". Since there appears at least superficially
within our representations of the world to be more than one "I", more than
one thinking subject, there is presumably more than one representation.
How, then, if the world is identical to each subject's representation, can there
be only one world?
We are consequently deep in philosophical difficultities before we have
even completed the first paragraph of Schopenhauer's treatise. There are two
main problems to be addressed in understanding Schopenhauer's idealism.
Each concerns a different direction in time, backward to the past or forward
to the future, and the existence of the world before or after the existence
of a representing subject. We must try to make sense of Schopenhauer's
contentions that the world as representation:
• begins to exist only when a first representing subject has a first repre-
senting experience, even though there is good reason to believe that
there must have existed a past and prior physical world in order to
produce and sustain the first representing subject
• ceases to exist when any individual representing subject dies or in
another way becomes totally cognitively inactive, even though there is
good reason to believe that in the normal course of things other repre-
senting subjects for whom the world as representation continues to exist
survive the death of any individual representing subject.
We shall need to clarify several aspects of Schopenhauer's theory and its
background in Kant's metaphysics before we can return to answer these
problems.
We know that representing subjects are born at different times, that they
become conscious at different times and that some die while others remain
alive. Moreover, we believe that the world existed at a time before there were
any conscious beings. Schopenhauer acknowledges that there were planets
and stars and such non-thinking entities as rocks and trees before there were
even the simplest thinking subjects. We can equally project a future time
when all consciousness might be extinguished, in which no thinking world-
representing subjects survive. In such a scenario, we naturally expect there
still to exist a non-thinking world of planets and stars, rocks and trees, that
by hypothesis are not represented by any existent thinking subject, but in
which living things and representing subjects might later again eventually
evolve.
Are these convictions simply mistaken? Is it Schopenhauer's mission to
disabuse us of a comforting but ultimately incorrect naive realism? The
14

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
answer is complex. Schopenhauer makes conciliatory concessions to our
common-sense conception of the world as one and as existing in some sense
before and after the birth and death of any individual perceiver. He likewise
hopes to do justice to generally accepted beliefs about the historical
emergence and possible future annihilation of all perceiving subjects. He
considers no inconsistency to hold between these assumptions and the prin-
ciples of radical idealism. He believes in spite of these intuitive truths that
the physical world is mind-dependent representation, that it exists subjec-
tively in each thinking subject's first-person thoughts, and that it originates
and perishes respectively with each thinking subject's first and last moments
of consciousness.1
Idealism and Kant's thing-in-itself
What appears to save Schopenhauer's idealism from outright logical incon-
sistency is his dual-aspect metaphysics. The world for Schopenhauer is not
only representation, but Kantian thing-in-itself. The mind-independence of
thing-in-itself makes it possible for Schopenhauer to argue that thing-in-itself,
existing outside the mind, is a single unified world that is differently repre-
sented to different minds. The world itself as thing-in-itself is not fragmented
into as many different worlds as there are representing subjects in a plural-
ity of mind-dependent subjective realities. Thing-in-itself, according to
Schopenhauer, is not subject to a principle of individuation or principium
individuationis. The world as thing-in-itself cannot be differentiated into
individual parts or moments existing in different minds as different thought
sequences. It exists outside the mind as just one thing.
Schopenhauer accepts a version of Kant's distinction between the world
as it is represented in thought, which he refers to as appearance (Erscheinung)
or representation (Vorstellung), much as Kant speaks of 
phenomena
(Phdnomene), and as it exists independently of thought, which, like Kant,
he speaks of as thing-in-itself or as it is in itself (Ding an sich). Schopenhauer
argues that we cannot describe what the world is like as thing-in-itself outside
all thinking, but only as it is represented to or within our thoughts. What-
ever we may try to say about the world as we know it in experience will
necessarily involve our thinking and hence our way of thinking about real-
ity, thus bringing the world under the concepts and categories of mind. If
we think that there must be something more to the world than the way in
which it appears to particular minds, then we may consider the world as
thing-in-itself. There is next to nothing we can say about thing-in-itself,
according to Kant, except that it exists and transcends the world of sense
15

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
appearance. This is the significance of Kant's referring to thing-in-itself as
noumenal. By this he means that it is intelligible only to mind as something
thinkable or conceivable, and is otherwise representationally unknowable.
Schopenhauer avoids the terms "noumenon", "noumena", and "noumenal"
in his own neo-Kantian metaphysics, although he retains Kant's other
terminology by referring to mind-independent reality as thing-in-itself
(WWR 1: 474-7). The importance of Schopenhauer's refusal to employ
Kant's word "noumenon" and its cognates is that Schopenhauer, who
regards Kant's distinction between phenomena and thing-in-itself as one of
the most important discoveries ever to have been made in the history of phi-
losophy, believes that he has achieved a groundbreaking advance over Kant's
metaphysics by penetrating into the hidden nature of thing-in-itself as Will.
Unwavering in his challenges to other prevailing forms of idealism in the
philosophy of Hegel, Fichte and Schelling, Schopenhauer is a thinker of an
entirely different stamp. As unwilling as he is to be associated with the other
representatives of the nineteenth century's greatest philosophical lights,
Schopenhauer is nevertheless not only a post-Kantian but, in his own
estimation, the only genuine post-Kantian. He believes that he is the only
philosopher who has remained faithful to the true spirit of Kant's most valu-
able metaphysical discovery in the Critique of Pure Reason. He argues that
he alone has properly understood Kant's essential distinction between the
phenomenal world of appearance and thing-in-itself as the mind-independ-
ent world existing outside all representation. He further believes that, having
better grasped Kant's fundamental metaphysical and epistemological
division, separating the world within and outside the mind, he has further
extended and improved upon Kant's principles. He offers insight into the
true nature of thing-in-itself, which Kant despaired of explaining, but about
which Kant, according to Schopenhauer, managed in unguarded moments
to say a great deal more than he was logically entitled to say.
Unlike Kant, Schopenhauer does not consider thing-in-itself to be merely
conceivable and otherwise absolutely inscrutable. He agrees that thing-in-
itself is representationally unknowable, but he maintains that it is possible
to uncover its nature in an unconventional way, by properly analysing the
content of ordinary episodes of willing. He argues that the world in reality
or as thing-in-itself is a blind urging or directionless, unmotivated and
uncaused, subjectless and objectless desire, which he refers to as "Will". The
world as thing-in-itself for Schopenhauer is in essential self-conflict. Thing-
in-itself as Will is a kind of disembodied hidden force or energy, one that is
not physical, measurable or describable, however, and that has no causal
efficacy. The world as Will transcends the world of experience for
Schopenhauer, and hence is not subject to explanation under the fourfold
root of the principle of sufficient reason. We cannot even correctly say
16

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
whether there is a distinct thing-in-itself in a plurality of things-in-themselves
corresponding to each represented object. The reason is that the principium
individuationis does not apply to thing-in-itself or world as Will, but only
to aspects of the world as it is represented within thought in its phenomenal
aspect. Despite these limitations, Schopenhauer holds that world as Will
manifests itself to representing subjects in innumerable objectifications in the
world of sense experience. Thing-in-itself expresses its character through its
phenomenal objectifications , which we can come to know by learning to
recognize the signs of its hidden inner nature.
If the world were only representation, then the existence of many differ-
ent subjects would have the immediate paradoxical conclusion that there are
as many worlds as there are representing subjects. The world in reality and
in the only sense in which it could be discussed would then be purely
subjective. The fact that thing-in-itself, unlike the world as representation,
cannot be divided into multiple worlds existing only subjectively in each
perceiving subject's thoughts, seems to be all that Schopenhauer needs to
avoid the unwanted conclusion that there are as many different worlds as
perceivers representing the world (WWR 1: 7-8).
Kant's refutation of idealism
By its very nature, Kant's Ding an sich is descriptively unknowable. In dis-
tinguishing the world as representation from thing-in-itself, Schopenhauer
makes thing-in-itself representationally unknowable, as a matter of defini-
tion. Knowledge of the world is limited to the phenomena of appearance
in the mind's conception.
For Kant, unlike Schopenhauer, there exists a physical reality as well as
thing-in-itself outside of consciousness. We get a sense of the differences in
Kant's and Schopenhauer's metaphysics, and of how radical Schopenhauer's
idealism is, by comparing it with Kant's more moderate form. In the section
of the Critique of Pure Reason on "The Refutation of Idealism", Kant
distinguishes his critical idealism from George Berkeley's "dogmatic"
idealism. The argument appears in the Transcendental Doctrine of Elements,
as part of the Transcendental Logic, in the First Division on Transcendental
Analytic. Kant does not propose to prove the existence of thing-in-itself, but
only at this stage to establish that there must exist something in the physi-
cal world outside of consciousness. Although Schopenhauer accepts Kant's
distinction between appearance and thing-in-itself, he rejects Kant's proof
for the existence of thing-in-itself. Schopenhauer's division of the world as
representation and the world as thing-in-itself is logically incompatible with
17

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Kant's critical idealism in so far as Kant's refutation of (Berkeleyan) idealism
is committed to the existence of a physical reality outside of thought. Kant's
"refutation of idealism" provides a useful segue to Schopenhauer's objec-
tions to Kant's proof for the existence of thing-in-itself, calling attention to
what Schopenhauer considers to be deep confusions in Kant's metaphysics.
Kant defends the following thesis: "The mere, but empirically determined,
consciousness of my own existence proves the existence of objects in space
outside me" (CPR: B275). The importance of proving the external existence
of spatial objects in the overall plan of Kant's Critique is that it provides the
basis for distinguishing critical idealism from problematic dogmatic or
material idealism. By showing, if the argument is successful, that space and
spatial entities exist outside of consciousness, Kant effectively refutes both
types of material idealism. He thereby clears the way for the development
of his own brand of critical idealism as distinct from Descartes's "material"
idealism and Berkeley's "dogmatic" idealism. Kant's proof that real physi-
cal objects exist outside of consciousness is supposed to demonstrate the
external existence of something permanent in perception, starting from the
fact that a subject can be conscious of his existence as determined in time.
He presents the following inference:
I am conscious of my own existence as determined in time. All
determination of time presupposes something permanent in percep-
tion. This permanent cannot, however, be something in me, since
it is only through this permanent that my existence in time can itself
be determined. Thus perception of this permanent is possible only
through a thing outside me and not through the mere representation
of a thing outside me; and consequently the determination of my
existence in time is possible only through the existence of actual
things which I perceive outside me. 
(CPR: B275-6)
Kant assumes that a subject experiences a stream of consciousness with
all its contents as determined in time. He argues that the occurrence of
consciousness could no more be determined in time by something within
thought as a part of consciousness than we could determine our location
along a river if we were to carry the distance-marking signposts along with
us in the boat. The reference point for the occurrence of thought must
accordingly be something other than thought - a thing outside of conscious-
ness, external to thought - if moments of thought are themselves to be
determined in time.
Schopenhauer agrees with Kant's main conclusions in the section on Tran-
scendental Aesthetic in the Critique. He shares Kant's view that space and
time are pure forms of intuition (perception), in that they cannot be derived
18

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
from experience, but must be brought by the mind to experience in order
for the world to be perceived as consisting of distinct spatiotemporally
individuated objects. Kant asks what must be true transcendentally in order
for the world to be experienced in this way. He maintains that space and time
are either derived by the mind from experience or else the mind is pre-
equipped with prior spatiotemporal concepts or categories. The mind cannot
derive space and time from experience because, if the mind did not already
possess and was not already able to apply these forms of perceived objects,
it would be confronted with a formless chaos of sense impressions that in
the absence of an innate concept of time could not even be characterized as
changing colour or shape from moment to moment. Space and time, if Kant
is right, are not acquired through or abstracted from experience, but
presupposed by the possibility of experiencing the world as divided into
distinct objects and events. If the mind were not already equipped with space
and time, then it would never be able to experience the world in a sufficiently
well-ordered way so as to be able empirically to acquire or extract spatio-
temporal concepts from the content of sensation in what Kant refers to as
the sensory manifold.
A physical entity outside of consciousness is not yet thing-in-itself, since
it exists in space and time. According to Kant, space and time, as pure forms
of perceptual intuition, belong to thought rather than to the world outside
of thought. They are innate mind-dependent features of sense perception,
even if they are not contained within the stream of conscious experiences.
The existence of thing-in-itself is another matter. Kant hopes to prove that
there must be thing-in-itself by means of another argument. Thing-in-itself
in any case is not supposed to be a physical entity existing outside of thought;
it is rather the presuppositional transcendental ground of all empirical
phenomena, including all perceivable physical properties of the physical
world.2
By arguing that there must exist something outside all consciousness in
order for the events of consciousness to be determined in time, Kant adopts
a tripartite metaphysics that contradicts Schopenhauer's dualistic concep-
tion of the world as representation and thing-in-itself. If Kant is right, then
there are three categories of existence-relevant factors superimposed on the
distinction between noumena and phenomena and. There are, first of all,
the phenomenal appearances of things experienced within consciousness that
Schopenhauer calls representations; secondly, there are physical existences
occurring outside of consciousness by which the events of consciousness are
fixed in time, but which are still mind-dependent because they presuppose
space and time as pure forms of intuition as well as other Kantian concepts
and categories of the understanding; and finally, thirdly, there is thing-in-
itself.
19

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer's idealism as a result is more radical, more Berkeley an, than
Kant's critical idealism. For Schopenhauer, unlike Kant, does not counte-
nance the existence of any occurrently unrepresented physical entity outside
the occurrent consciousness of an individual thinking subject. Where
Schopenhauer and Kant agree is that if there were no representing minds
whatsoever, then there would be no space or time or anything existent except
for thing-in-itself. Kant's refutation of Berkeleyan idealism assumes the
existence of an individual consciousness that is self-aware in the sense of
being conscious of its own events of consciousness taking place in time. From
this basis, Kant proposes to prove the existence of something physical in
space and time external to immediate ongoing conscious thought. The extra-
conscious physical reality of which Kant speaks is nevertheless presumably
an entity or event of which some thinker could in principle be conscious.
The spatiotemporal, causal and other categorical properties of any such
physical object would not be mind-independent, for Kant, as the Transcen-
dental Aesthetic is intended to show. Schopenhauer's idealism opposes
Kant's concession to common sense. His commitment to a more radical
idealism locates all physical phenomena within the world of each individual
representing thinker's consciousness. Schopenhauer thereby incurs the
burden of reconciling idealism with the fact that there are many different
consciously representing subjects, together with the view that the world
precedes the birth and continues after the death of any individual represent-
ing subject.3
Schopenhauer's criticism of Kant's proof
We must now consider Kant's argument for the existence of thing-in-itself.
Schopenhauer accepts a modified form of Kant's concept of an experience-
transcending reality. Where he sharply disagrees is with Kant's efforts to
provide the necessary proof, and with Kant's categorization of thing-in-itself
as noumenal. In "Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy", the Appendix to the
first volume of The World as Will and Representation, Schopenhauer outlines
his dissatisfaction with many aspects of Kant's thought, including especially
his reasoning concerning the metaphysics of thing-in-itself.
In the Critique of Pure Reason Kant maintains that since there are appear-
ances, representations that are given to experience as the starting-point for
philosophical reflections, there must be something that appears. Whatever
it is that appears cannot itself be appearance, but can only be something
outside appearance that constitutes the transcendental ground without which
the existence of the appearances of objects in relation to subjects within
20

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
thought would not be thinkable, and in that sense would not be logically
possible.4
The Transcendental Aesthetic decrees that not all properties of appear-
ances can belong to the appearances themselves. At least some properties of
appearances belong to the thinking subject as forms of intuition and concepts
and categories of the understanding. The refutation of Berkeley an idealism
in support of critical idealism is supposed to prove that not all of existence
can possibly belong to any particular individual consciousness. There must
then exist something beyond the appearances of things that is altogether
outside the mind and its conscious thoughts. The transcendental ground of
phenomena ostensibly discovered by Kant through this application of
transcendental reasoning is supposed to be thing-in-itself. He argues that
thing-in-itself is thinkable only in the most abstract terms, but is not descrip-
tively knowable. In Schopenhauer's terminology, thing-in-itself is non-
representable.
It is tempting to think of Kant's thing-in-itself as grammatically implied
by the concept of appearance. If there is appearance, as there unquestion-
ably is for thinking subjects such as ourselves, then presumably there must
be something other than appearance that appears. Kant refers to that which
manifests itself in appearances as thing-in-itself. The inference is not
obviously sound, but raises the critical question of whether it is appropri-
ate in the first place to speak of sense experiences as appearances. Why not
assume with the naive realist that we subjectively perceive in different ways
and from different perspectives all there is to the world of concrete exist-
ence? Perhaps what we encounter in any sensation is not an appearance of
the world but more simply and directly the world. Here it must be said on
Kant's behalf that he is on relatively firm ground by virtue of having argued
that space, time, causation, quantity, quality, relation and modality cannot
belong to appearances themselves, but must be pure forms of intuition or
categories of the understanding.
The Transcendental Aesthetic and the Transcendental Analytic are
supposed to break the hold of naive realism on the philosophical imagina-
tion. Kant's argument suggests that we cannot look to the content of
perceptions alone as the source of all that is needed in order to explain fully
the properties of perceptions and perceived objects. Kant, like other critics
of unreflective empiricism, can also argue that we know there are appear-
ances because we find even in ordinary perceptions sensory illusions of
various sorts. Things appear differently at different times under different
conditions to different subjects, so that their perceptually describable prop-
erties do not always concur. To consider only one familiar but suggestive
example, a table top appears trapezoidal from a certain angle, while from
another angle it appears rectangular. If we do not adopt this common mode
21

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of referring to the differing appearances of things, then we may have no
alternative but to hold implausibly that the table top is in fact at the same
time both trapezoidal and rectangular, at least to different perceivers.
Admitting this much, however, already commits us to the existence of
appearances in the form of the admission that the table appears differently
to different perceivers from different angles or under different conditions.
Otherwise we must implausibly conclude that from the standpoint of a single
perceiver the table top changes its shape through no other cause than the
perceiver's viewing it successively at different times from different angles,
or that the table top is successively replaced by differently shaped surfaces
as the perceiver changes viewing angles.
If it seems reasonable to believe that there are appearances of things then,
Kant maintains, there must be something that appears. The two ideas of
appearance and something that appears seem to go inseparably together. An
appearance by definition cannot also be that of which it is an appearance;
in Kant's language, it can only be the transcendental ground of appearance,
which he denotes as thing-in-itself. Schopenhauer agrees with Kant that
thing-in-itself must exist as distinct from the world as phenomena. In "Criti-
cism of the Kantian Philosophy" (WWR 1: Appendix), Schopenhauer first
indicates the extent to which his distinction between world as representa-
tion and thing-in-itself is indebted to Kant's transcendental metaphysics. He
offers these heartfelt words of praise: "Kant's greatest merit is the distinc-
tion of the phenomenon from the thing-in-itself, based on the proof that
between things and us there always stands the intellect, and that on this
account they cannot be known according to what they may be in themselves"
(WWR 1: 417). His reasons for rejecting Kant's argument for the existence
of thing-in-itself help us to understand the differences between their respec-
tive forms of idealism. With the words "It is true that Kant did not arrive at
the knowledge that the phenomenon is the world as representation and that
the thing-in-itself is the will", Schopenhauer anticipates the criticism he is
about to offer. "[Kant] did not deduce the thing-in-itself in the right way,"
he continues, "as I shall soon show, but by means of an inconsistency; and
he had to pay the penalty for this in the frequent and irresistible attacks on
this principal part of his teaching" (WWR 1: 421-2).
Schopenhauer's main objection to Kant's method of trying to prove the
existence of thing-in-itself is that it is opposed to the principles of Kant's
idealism. This is the "inconsistency" in Kant's proof of which Schopenhauer
complains: "However, the way in which Kant introduces the thing-in-itself
stands in undeniable contradiction to the fundamental, emphatic, and ide-
alistic view so clearly expressed in the first edition of the Critique of Pure
Reason" (WWR 1: 435). The contradiction in Kant's efforts to deduce the
existence of thing-in-itself occurs in the second or B-edition of Kant's
22

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
Critique (B67-8). Schopenhauer now explicitly relates his objection to Kant's
inconsistency in his proof of thing-in-itself to Kant's efforts to distance
himself from Berkeley in the refutation of idealism. "Without doubt this is
mainly why, in the second edition," Schopenhauer writes, "[Kant] suppressed
the principal idealistic passage previously referred to, and declared himself
directly opposed to Berkeley's idealism. By doing this, however, he only
introduced inconsistencies into his work, without being able to remedy its
main defect" (WWR 1: 435-6). The B-deduction of thing-in-itself in Kant's
Critique, as Schopenhauer interprets it, is vastly inferior to the A-deduction,
amounting to what Schopenhauer regards as a betrayal of a more philosophi-
cally respectable Berkeleyan idealism.
The fact is that Berkeley would surely have taken the greatest exception
to both Kant's and Schopenhauer's concept of thing-in-itself. He would as
much reject the possibility of a transcendental reality outside the mind as he
did Locke's theory of primary qualities and the je ne sais quois, the "some-
thing I know not what", that Locke posits as an unthinking material substra-
tum supporting the sensible qualities of things. He would say the same with
respect to comparable ideas in Galileo or Robert Boyle.5 Berkeley guaran-
tees objectivity for his brand of idealism only by relying on the existence of
God, who is supposed archetypally to perceive all sensible things at all times
that finite human thinking subjects only ectypally, or finitely, perspectivally
and discontinuously, perceive. Berkeley's effort to bring God into metaphys-
ics is completely unacceptable to Kant. Kant's own religious convictions are
ambiguous at best, but he would never have permitted Berkeley's appeal to
the divine as a basis for philosophical explanation, just as he would never
have accepted Berkeley's proposals to prove God's existence.6 As an avowed
atheist, Schopenhauer is more strenuously opposed to solving metaphysi-
cal problems by any Berkeleyan deus ex machina. We can accordingly
characterize Berkeley's idealism in Schopenhauerian terms as an uncompro-
mising commitment exclusively to what Schopenhauer describes as the world
as representation, together with an additional category for finite minds and
God as a divine infinite mind.
The nature of Kant's error, as Schopenhauer diagnoses the inconsistency
in his proof of thing-in-itself, is its reliance on an a priori but at the same time
subjective principle of causality. Schopenhauer finds it unacceptable to try to
deduce the existence of something that by definition is supposed to exist
entirely outside of thought from any a priori, and hence mind-dependent,
category of the understanding. This, Schopenhauer believes, is confused. It
is a contradiction that by itself does not invalidate the existence of thing-in-
itself. It is only a question of arriving at a proper proof (WWR 1: 436).
Schopenhauer interprets Kant as trying to demonstrate the existence of
thing-in-itself as the cause of appearance. Since causation is a category of the
23

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
understanding in Kant's critical idealism, and one, moreover, that presup-
poses space and time as pure forms of intuition, it cannot constitute a proper
basis for proving the existence of thing-in-itself standing entirely outside the
mind independently of all subjectivity. We cannot consistently prove the
existence of mind-independent thing-in-itself on the basis of anything that
is irreducibly mind-dependent. Kant's proof of thing-in-itself is thus tainted
in Schopenhauer's view. He begins instead with certain facts of conscious-
ness and deduces thing-in-itself as something that is presupposed by and
hence entirely independent of any act of consciousness. He rejects Kant's
method of proving the existence of thing-in-itself when he sees that the
argument trades on the mind's concept of causation, and thus on something
mind-dependent. Kant's argument is incoherent from Schopenhauer's stand-
point, because the existence of causal connections are themselves owing only
to thought, and by Kant's idealist metaphysics they do not exist in the world
outside the mind's concepts and categories.
Whether or not Schopenhauer accurately construes Kant's proof for the
existence of thing-in-itself as assuming that there must exist a causal
connection between phenenomal appearance and that which appears or of
which it is the appearance, it is clear that his interpretation makes Kant's ar-
gument guilty of a serious defect. More importantly, if it is true that Kant
bases his demonstration of thing-in-itself on the presupposition of a causal
connection between perceptual appearances and that which appears, then
Kant's concept of thing-in-itself and not just his attempt to prove its exist-
ence is woefully muddled. Thing-in-itself is supposed to be altogether
removed from the concepts and categories of thought, so that thing-in-itself
cannot coherently be supposed to cause anything whatsoever to occur. In
particular, thing-in-itself cannot coherently be imagined causally to bring
about the phenomenal appearances it objectifies. The problem in that case
is deeper than even Schopenhauer describes. It is not only Kant's argument
in support of the existence of thing-in-itself that is then flawed, but rather
Kant's concept of thing-in-itself as transcendental reality that is still capa-
ble of causing perceivable appearances. The causal inefficacy of thing-in-itself
makes its existence incapable of being proved as that which appears to mind.
It cannot be the cause of perceptual appearances. Thing-in-itself is supposed
to exist entirely beyond the spatiotemporal world as representation,
transcending the only realm in which causation applies. The crucial point
in Schopenhauer's criticism is the reminder that thing-in-itself cannot cause
or be caused, change or bring about change, and that thing-in-itself is
categorically incapable of causing anything to happen.7
Schopenhauer, with Kant, acknowledges a similar tripartite division of
metaphysical categories entailed by Kant's theory. The two sets of catego-
ries imply a disparity between Schopenhauer's interpretation of Kant's
24

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
doctrine of thing-in-itself, and the problem of relating Kant's refutation of
Berkeleyan idealism to his effort at proving the existence of thing-in-itself.
That a tripartite distinction of any sort seems to be required in Kant's
philosophy where Schopenhauer accepts only a dualism of metaphysical
aspects in the world as representation and thing-in-itself makes a Schopen-
hauerian criticism of Kant's critical idealism inevitable. The fact that there
is a tripartite division in Kant where there should only be an aspect dual-
ism is a clear sign for Schopenhauer that something has gone wrong in Kant's
endeavour to prove the existence of thing-in-itself. He argues:
In accordance with what has been said, the object of the categories
with Kant is not exactly the thing-in-itself, but yet is very closely akin
to it. It is the object-in-itself, an object requiring no subject, an
individual thing, and yet not in time and space, because not percep-
tible; it is object of thinking, and yet not abstract concept. Accord-
ingly, Kant makes a triple distinction: (1) the representation; (2) the
object of the representation; (3) the thing-in-itself. The first is the
concern of sensibility, which for him includes, simultaneously with
sensation, also the pure forms of perception, namely space and time.
The second is the concern of the understanding, that adds it in
thought through its twelve categories. The third lies beyond all
possibility of knowledge ... The distinction between the represen-
tation and the object of the representation is, however, unfounded.
(WWR 1:444)
It is obvious why Schopenhauer cannot abide any hint of a distinction
between representation and its object. A representation for his radical
idealism just is whatever object is represented, in the same way that the world
as representation is indistinguishable from whatever objects are represented
as among the contents of thought. Schopenhauer accordingly argues that
Kant's proposal to abstract thing-in-itself from appearance amounts only and
at most to a concept of object-in-itself.
There is not much difference in English or German between "object" and
"thing". In many contexts the two words are used synonymously. In the
context of Kant's or Schopenhauer's idealism, however, there is an impor-
tant technical distinction. The concept of thing-in-itself or Ding an sich is
that of mind-independent reality as it exists entirely outside of thought, with
no relation to any thinking subject. The concept of an object-in-itself or
Gegenstand an sich, a term that both Kant and Schopenhauer use only in
highly restricted ways in a few special contexts, is not, as Schopenhauer
observes, the same as thing-in-itself. The reason is that an object, even an
object-in-itself, is defined only in relation to a thinking subject, and, unlike
25

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
thing-in-itself, is always an object for a subject.8 In the second volume of The
World as Will and Representation, Schopenhauer makes this point unmistak-
ably clear:
It is also to be noted here that even Kant, at any rate so long as he
remained consistent, cannot have thought of any objects among his
things-in-themselves. For this follows already from the fact that he
proved space as well as time to be a mere form of our intuition or
perception, which in consequence does not belong to the things-in-
themselves. What is not in space or in time cannot be object-, there-
fore the being or existence of things-in-themselves can no longer be
objective, but only of quite a different kind, namely a metaphysical
being or existence. Consequently, there is already to be found in that
Kantian principle also the proposition that the objective world exists
only as representation. 
(WWR 2: 7)
Schopenhauer criticizes Kant's argument for the existence of thing-in-
itself as producing nothing more than a proof of an object-in-itself. He char-
acterizes the concept of an object-in-itself as "requiring no subject". The
problem is that an object-in-itself would need to be an object for no particular
thinking subject, while still remaining an object of thought and thinking. The
idea of an object-in-itself ought, therefore, to be dismissed as a blatant
inconsistency, an impossibility or contradiction in terms. The phrase might
at best denote an abstraction from the concept of a subject perceiving an
object in which the theorist tries as a thought experiment mentally to sub-
tract away the idea of the subject from the idea of the object. Schopenhauer
rightly remarks that object-in-itself does not constitute a genuine category
as distinct from the represented object of a thinking subject. The object of
representation as object-in-itself simply collapses into representation,
because the idea of an object-in-itself is logically incoherent, and there is no
difference generally between representation and object of representation.
Interpresuppositional subject and object
Schopenhauer rejects Kant's metaphysics of object-in-itself. He argues that
the division between subject and object does not imply their possibly exist-
ing independently of one another. Subject and object are conceptually
distinguishable only in abstraction, for Schopenhauer, and are otherwise
ontically inseparable. As a result, we can also say that subject and object are
interimplicative or interpresuppositional.
26

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
There can be no subject without an object, and no object without a subject;
the one implies or presupposes the other. To be a subject is nothing more nor
less than to represent an object in thought, whether perceptually, in memory
or in some other way. Similarly, there can be no object as distinct from thing
in-itself without its being actively represented in a representing subject's
thought. It is part of the concept of a subject that it represent an object, just
as it is part of the concept of an object that it be represented by a subject.
Another way of expressing the same conclusion is to say that a subject is
always a subject of or in relation to an object, and that an object is always an
object for or in relation to a subject. Representation, in turn, is always a
relation between a subject and an object. The two relata needed for represen-
tation always go together in Schopenhauer's metaphysics, and are never
found apart from one another; they form a single complex (WWR 1: 5).
The interpresuppositionality of subject and object provides the basis for
Schopenhauer's objections to Kant's proof for the existence of thing-in-itself.
It supports his critique of materialism and purely subjective idealism, and
deepens our understanding of Schopenhauer's version of transcendental
idealism. A single subject perceiving a single object is all that is minimally
needed for the world as representation to exist. When a single subject
perishes, therefore, Schopenhauer believes, the entire world of objects, the
world as representation, must immediately disappear, in spite of the fact that
in some sense we know, even if in thought we cannot represent the fact, that
there continue to exist other actively representing subjects.
The fact that we can only represent the bodies and motions of other think-
ing subjects is part of what Schopenhauer means when he remarks that the
subject does not reside in space and time, and is no part of the world as
representation. Schopenhauer does not accept Descartes's distinction
between material and spiritual substances. He regards any attempt at such
a division as a violation of the interpresuppositionality of subject and object.
He believes that it is impermissible to separate subject and object in meta-
physics, as though the one could exist without the other, as mind-body
Cartesian substance dualists have proposed. Schopenhauer is a materialist
with respect to the metaphysics of mind and body. He identifies the phenom-
enal mind that is popularly regarded as the soul or personality of the think-
ing subject as nothing other than the brain. Additionally, he believes that
there is a core of pure willing for each willing subject that is beyond the world
as representation and hence outside the spatiotemporal world of objects.
The pure willing subject for Schopenhauer lacks all personality, and has no
memory or expectations. It is nothing like what we ordinarily think of as
an individual soul, for it is outside the principles of individuation and suffi-
cient reason. The pure willing subject is Will, which Schopenhauer identifies
with thing-in-itself. All the particularity of individual psychology in
27

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer's materialist philosophy of mind is reduced to and explain-
able in terms of the phenomenal properties of brain.
Kant's critical idealism, like Schopenhauer's, implies that if there were no
thinking subjects, then there could be no world of spatiotemporal objects.
Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism is more extreme than Kant's. It
entails that if even a single representing subject dies or becomes incapable
of representing, enters a coma or deep sleep, then the physical phenomenal
world of objects must also immediately cease to exist.9 Such an implication,
to say the least, does not accord well with common sense. The inference
appears inescapable to Schopenhauer because no individual representing
subject can directly represent the representing states of any other represent-
ing subject. A representing subject, as a psychological entity, or its represent-
ing states, cannot be represented as such. At most, only the bodies and body
movements of subjects can be perceived as external spatiotemporal phenom-
ena. A subject's representational states pass into oblivion when the subject
becomes permanently incapable of representing.
From the limited perspective of the individual thinking subject it is
certainly true that if the soul does not survive death then the world disap-
pears at the moment of death. Schopenhauer's point is that the only repre-
senting states of which we are directly aware are our own, so that when we
become representationally incapacitated the only world as representation
that we can possibly know must as suddenly disappear. The world as repre-
sentation ceases to exist when the individual representing subject ceases to
represent. Schopenhauer maintains that no one can reasonably deny this
implication of idealism once it is understood, presumably because the propo-
sition amounts to a tautology. At the same time Schopenhauer, paradoxically,
recognizes that there exist other subjects for whom the world continues to
be represented and in whose thoughts the world as representation exists even
after any particular representing subject ceases to represent and the world
as representation for that subject ceases to exist.
Schopenhauer does not suppose that there would be no world if there
were no cognitive beings like ourselves. He maintains only that there would
be no world as representation. If thinking subjects and all of the perceiving
animal kingdom were to disappear from the universe, there would still be a
world as thing-in-itself. It would presumably be the same world that we
might otherwise like to say existed as thing-in-itself before the emergence
and after the demise of consciousness. Without thinking subjects to repre-
sent the world, there can be no world as representation. There could then
also be no objects, since subject-object interpresuppositionality implies that
we cannot have one without the other. The imaginary elimination of
representing subjects highlights another aspect of Schopenhauer's idealism.
If there are no thinking subjects, then there can be no individuation of the
28

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
world into objects separated by space and time. This is because the
principium individuationis applies only to the world as representation. Space
and time themselves Schopenhauer situates at what he calls the "boundary"
(Grenze) between subject and object as Kantian pure forms of intuition. The
physical dimensions of space and time, the objects into which the world as
representation divides, and the principium individuationis, all fit together
into one conceptual package in Schopenhauer's idealism. The reason is clear
when we reflect that within the world as representation all objects are
individuated one from another ultimately by virtue of their occupation of
distinct spaces and times.10
Space and time for Schopenhauer are part of the mind-dependent empirical
world cognitively represented in thought. Space and time do not limit or
otherwise belong to thing-in-itself, which, existing outside the forms of
perception and categories of mind, has no beginning or end. Thing-in-itself
as such provides no foundation by which to clock or chronicle the passage in
time of any event in the world as representation. This is why Schopenhauer
must reject Kant's refutation of idealism as proving the existence of a physi-
cal reality outside any given first-person consciousness; nor, for the same
reason, as we have seen in considering Schopenhauer's objection to Kant's
argument for the existence of thing-in-itself, is thing-in-itself subject to any
type of causation. It is neither actively nor passively involved in any causal
relation, and can neither act nor be acted on by any other entity.
Schopenhauer on materialism
and purely subjective idealism
In addition to distinguishing his transcendental idealism from Kant's critical
idealism, Schopenhauer's thesis of the intersuppositionality of subject and
object enables him to mount powerful criticisms against materialism and
Fichte's purely subjective idealism. He thereby distinguishes his philosophy
from a widely accepted kind of realism and an alternative type of idealism that
he rejects, both of which theories contradict subject-object interpresup-
positionality.
Materialism tries to advance a system of metaphysics based exclusively
on the objects of representations, without considering the subject as anything
other than just another object detached from all subjectivity. Fichte's purely
subjective idealism, at the opposite extreme from materialism, proposes to
reduce the material objects of experience to subjectivity detached from any
object. Schopenhauer's diagnosis of the poverty of both materialism and
purely subjective idealism eliminates these diametrically opposed theories,
29

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
and leaves his own transcendental idealism standing as the only moderate
alternative. If Schopenhauer is right about the interpresuppositionality of
subject and object, then there is no subject without object and no object
without subject. It then becomes a serious defect for any philosophy to try
to latch onto just one part of interpresuppositional subject-object as the
exclusive basis for an adequate metaphysics, as though the other half of the
partnership did not also need to exist.11
Schopenhauer observes that his metaphysics does not fall into either of
these opposed categories. He is a materialist with respect to the nature of
the phenomenal thinking subject or soul, identifying thinker with brain, but
not in his overall metaphysics. In the global metaphysical picture, he is partly
materialist, equating matter with causation, and partly transcendentalist,
with respect to that aspect of reality understood as Kantian thing-in-itself.
He avoids both materialist and subjective idealist traps by beginning with
neither object nor subject exclusively, but instead with representations as the
primary data given to philosophy's reflections, interpresuppositionally
involving both subjects and objects (WWR 1: 25). Materialism seizes upon
the objects of representation and tries to make the representing subject just
another material object among all the others it represents. Fichtean subjec-
tive idealism latches onto the opposite extreme, arguing that the subject is
the only reality, and offering to reduce the existence of material physical
objects to the mind's subjectivity.
Schopenhauer prefers his method of distinguishing subject and object
within representations. He maintains that this is the only proper way of
proceeding, one that sets his metaphysics apart "wholly and entirely from
every philosophy ever attempted" (WWR 1: 25). "All previous systems
started either from the object or from the subject," he declares, "and there-
fore sought to explain the one from the other, and this according to the
principle of sufficient reason. We, on the other hand, deny the relation
between object and subject to the dominion of this principle, and leave to
it only the object" (WWR 1: 25-6). Schopenhauer sees misplaced empha-
sis on the object to the neglect of thinking subjects as the source of error in
every purely materialist metaphysics:
The difficulties mentioned here only casually confront natural
science in its own province. Regarded as philosophy, it would be
materialism; but, as we have seen, it carries death in its heart even
at its birth, because it passes over the subject and the forms of knowl-
edge that are presupposed just as much with the forms of knowledge
that are presupposed just as much with the crudest matter from
which it would like to start, as with the organism at which it wants
to arrive. For "No object without subject" is the principle that
30

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
renders all materialism for ever impossible. Suns and planets with
no eye to see them and no understanding to know them can of
course be spoken of in words, but for the representation these words
are a sideroxylon, an iron-wood. 
(WWR 1: 29-30)
An iron-wood or Eisenholz, also referred to here in Greek transliteration
as sideroxylon, is a common term for a concept that is internally inconsist-
ent. It describes an impossible entity that is simultaneously uniformly made
of both iron and wood. At the opposite pole, Schopenhauer finds equal
grounds for objecting to pure subjectivism, because it ignores the comple-
mentary existence of represented objects presupposed by the existence of a
subject as to any form of reductive materialism. "Opposed to the system we
have discussed," Schopenhauer explains, "which starts from the object to
make the subject result from it, is the system that starts from the subject and
tries to produce the object therefrom" (WWR 1:31).
Schopenhauer finds equal fault with pure materialism and Fichte's
subjective idealism (WWR 1: 32-4). He believes that his transcendental
idealism avoids both of these mistakes. It does not begin with either the
subject or object, considered in themselves, but with representations, in
which there are only inseparably represented objects for representing
subjects. He congratulates himself on alone having rightly understood the
interpresuppositionality of subject and object in the world as representation
(WWR 1: 34). This, in Schopenhauer's estimation, is what is truly distinc-
tive about his theory of transcendental idealism.
The importance of Schopenhauer's criticism of both pure materialism and
Fichtean subjective idealism is not merely that it sets his own theory of tran-
scendental idealism apart from its competitors. The interpresuppositionality
of subject and object in Schopenhauer's metaphysics, and the objections to
materialism and subjective idealism that it supports, drive his enquiry to look
beyond representation for clues concerning the "inner nature of the world".
We cannot expect thing-in-itself to be exclusively either matter or Fichtean
subject, if subject and object presuppose one another and are distinct only
in abstraction and otherwise ontically inseparable. It is through the failure
of pure materialism and subjective idealism that Schopenhauer is driven to
look behind representations in order to search for thing-in-itself as the
underlying hidden reality transcending the subject's representation of
objects. Thing-in-itself cannot be subject or object if representation is decom-
posable into both of these complementary components. It must rather be
somehow altogether different from anything to be found within the world
as representation. The difference between appearance and that which
appears as objects appearing to a subject cannot be explained, therefore, by
any reduction of subject to object or object to subject.12
31

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
World as representation for other subjects
We turn now to consider the second main problem in Schopenhauer's
transcendental idealism. It is the challenge of accounting for the beginning
and end of the world as representation with the birth or awakening to
consciousness and death of the individual representing subject, and the idea
that the world must have existed before and will continue to exist after the
individual's birth and death.
What is paradoxical about Schopenhauer's idealism is that we are
generally predisposed to imagine that the world we know in experience
existed before we were born and will continue to exist for others even when
we are dead. According to Schopenhauer, despite the common-sense accept-
ance of realism about the represented world, no such conception is logically
coherent. The world as representation is represented in every case by an
individual representing subject. Schopenhauer adopts a kind of epistemic
methodological solipsism at just these interfaces between representing subject
and objects represented in his metaphysics of death.
When a subject dies, the world as representation ceases to be represented
by the only representing subject a representing subject can representationally
know. If the world as representation ceases to be represented by the only sub-
ject whose existence the individual thinker can representationally know, then
the world of represented objects presupposing the existence of a representing
subject must immediately cease to exist. What continues to exist, no matter
who lives or dies or whether or how or for how long they represent the world
in thoughts, is the world as thing-in-itself. This is what is real, the transcen-
dental ground, in Kantian terminology, of the empirical world. It is that which
appears to consciousness only as representation, a panoply of constantly
changing phenomena. When each representing subject dies, the world as rep-
resentation ceases to exist. At most we can imagine in the abstract the world
as thing-in-itself continuing to exist in the representational time and space of
other surviving representing subjects. Significantly, however, we cannot
adequately represent the world existing outside of our own representations.
Merely to think of the world as thing-in-itself being represented by other
representing subjects does not make the proposition true or philosophically
defensible. Schopenhauer leaves no doubt as to his thought in the matter,
when he says that the world as representation is the world as experienced by
the individual representing subject. It follows that when any individual
thinking subject ceases to represent, the world as representation, consisting
of objects for a subject, in the same instant and for the same reason, ceases
to exist.
Schopenhauer speaks freely of his transcendental idealist metaphysics as
one which "everyone knows" and "everyone agrees about". He dares to
32

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
make idealism, the most controversial part of his philosophy, appear as some-
thing obvious, undeniable. It is supposed to be known indisputably even to
philosophically untrained persons when they are being reflective and honest
with themselves about the nature of the represented world and its depend-
ence on their existence as representing subjects. What could be more obvi-
ous, Schopenhauer asks, than to see that the world as representation begins
and ends with the awakening to consciousness and cognitive death of every
individual representing subject? If we find the view implausible and extreme,
he will argue that this is only because we have entangled ourselves unnec-
essarily in conceptual confusions. If we think things through correctly, we
shall see that the world as representation begins with the opening act of our
own personal consciousness, and ends when the curtain falls on all our
representings at the moment of death.
What we can say about the phenomenal world is limited in just the way
Schopenhauer describes. If we try to go beyond the world as representation
by accepting the idea that the world as we know it in representation could
exist before we have risen to consciousness or after we have died, then we
must be confusing the world as representation, which presupposes the
existence of the only subject we can know as subject, with the world as thing-
in-itself that exists independently of all thinking subjects. If we keep these
metaphysical categories straight, and consider the problem carefully and
consistently, then, as Schopenhauer says, we should all agree without further
hesitation in accepting the idealist thesis that the world is my representation.
It is the world as representation, the world of perceptual experience, that
we think of as the actual world of spatiotemporally individuated physical
objects. Within that world, we each have knowledge only of the content of
our own individual representations, and not, except inferentially, of the
existence of any other representing subjects.
How, in that case, we may still want to ask, is it possible for more than
one representing subject to participate together in action? Working coop-
eratively seems to presuppose that there is a shared world held in common
by many persons. The world remains the same, or so we like to think,
through overlapping lifetimes of births and deaths, with new people being
born at different times while others die. How can the world as representa-
tion itself spring into being and cease to exist so many different times for
so many different thinking representing subjects? How can the world come
to be through a subject's representation, and then be extinguished in a single
stroke when just one representing subject ceases to think? How can this
happen over and over again with the birth and death of each individual rep-
resenting subject? The answer can perhaps best be found in placing the right
emphasis on the idea of representation. The world we know in experience
as a series of representations begins and ends with the terminating beginning
33

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
and endpoints of each individual's conscious life. It is within that narrow
compass that the only mental events that count as representations in con-
sidering these questions can possibly occur.
The world as representation exists only subjectively, idealistically, within
the thoughts of each individual subject. Without a representing conscious-
ness, there is no representing and hence no world as representation. This
proposition is merely another way of expressing Schopenhauer's inter-
presuppositionality of subject and object. It is the same thesis by which he
concludes that there can be no object without a subject for whom it
constitutes an object, and similarly and reciprocally that there can be no
subject in the absence of any represented objects for a subject to represent.
If we agree that subject and object always go together, then we must learn
to live with the idealist implications that the world of nature, the physical
universe and all spatiotemporal reality, begins and ends with the birth and
death of each representing subject.
When the first-person representing subject dies, when / die, Schopenhauer
unequivocally maintains not merely that the world as representation no
longer exists for me, whatever that might mean, but that it simply ceases to
exist for once and for all. There is then no past, present or future time, and
hence no possibility of the world as representation returning to existence on
any later occasion. Moreover, strange as it may seem if we have not thought
these things through as Schopenhauer has, the world as representation comes
to exist as though out of nothing and vanishes completely with the birth and
death of each thinking subject, over and over again, for as long as any subject
imagines rather than represents the prenatal and postmortem existence of
other representing subjects.13
Objectivity and the world as representation
The perceived world is objective, despite being my representation, because
it is subject to the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason.
Schopenhauer does homage to the common-sense view of the objectivity of
the world while not backing away from the full implications of his radical
idealism.
The law of causality applies to represented objects, which are experienced
as independent of subjective volitional control. The objects we encounter in
the world as representation and the lawlike succession of events in which the
objects participate or by which they are governed are not subject to individual
willing. I cannot stop a ball from rolling downhill simply by an act of will, or
make it roll uphill by force of mind. Although the world as representation may
34

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
exist only subjectively in my thoughts, I can know that it objectively obeys
laws that are independent of my will. Schopenhauer accordingly identifies
matter and physical reality with causality. He declares that: "the perceived
world in space and time, proclaiming itself as nothing but causality, is perfectly
real, and is absolutely what it appears to be; it appears wholly and without
reserve as representation, hanging together according to the law of causality.
This is its empirical reality" (WWR 1: 14-15).
Causality, on the other hand, exists only in and for the understanding of
the representing subject. The world as representation is conditioned by space
and time as pure forms of intuition, without which there can be no repre-
sented world. Schopenhauer defends the subjectively conditioned physical
world against naive realism or "dogmatism". "Not for this reason only," he
insists, "but also because in general no object without subject can be
conceived without involving contradiction, we must absolutely deny to the
dogmatist the reality of the external world, when he declares this to be its
independence of the subject" (WWR 1: 15). Although the world of objects
and the causal relations by which they are interconnected according to the
principle of sufficient reason are part of the individual subject's world as
representation, Schopenhauer argues that the world is not illusory, but has
the only sort of reality of which it is capable, by virtue of conforming to
lawlike regularities that are not of the subject's making. Thus, Schopenhauer
holds that:
The whole world of objects is and remains representation, and is for
this reason wholly and for ever conditioned by the subject; in other
words, it has transcendental ideality. But it is not on that account
falsehood or illusion; it presents itself as what it is, as representa-
tion, and indeed as a series of representations, whose common bond
is the principle of sufficient reason. 
(WWR 1: 15).
The world as representation is in the appropriate sense objectively real,
despite being conditioned by whatever is presupposed by the thinking
subject's mode of representing.
As to the existence of objects in the world prior to the historical emergence
of representing subjects, Schopenhauer makes an interesting concession to
common sense. The reality of the world as representation subject to the
lawlike regularities of the fourfold root implies that in a certain sense there
existed objects before the existence at least of any thinking subjects such as
ourselves. The reason is obvious when we consider that the objects and events
we encounter have a history. If they are governed by causal regularities, then
they must have been caused by events involving pre-existent entities that we
as individual subjects have not necessarily experienced. Schopenhauer
35

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
nevertheless remains steadfast in his commitment to the principles of his
idealism. He offers the crucial qualification whereby the world as represen-
tation can be understood to exist prior to the first thought and to continue
to exist after the last thought of any individual representing subject, even
though the world of spatiotemporal physical objects is supposed to exist in
and be conditioned by the requirements of each subject's representations. The
solution to the problem of the causes and past history of the representing
subject is now advanced:
Thus animals existed before men, fishes before land animals, planets
before fishes, and the inorganic before that which is organic; conse-
quently the original mass had to go through a long series of changes
before the first eye could be opened. And yet the existence of
this whole world remains for ever dependent on that first eye that
opened, were it even that of an insect. For such an eye necessarily
brings about knowledge for which and in which alone the whole
world is, and without which it is not even conceivable. The world is
entirely representation, and as such requires the knowing subject as
the supporter of its existence. That long course of time itself, filled
with innumerable changes, through which matter rose from form to
form, till finally there came into existence the first knowing animal,
the whole of this time itself is alone thinkable in the identity of a
consciousness. This world is the succession of the representations of
this consciousness, the form of its knowing, and apart from this loses
all meaning, and is nothing at all. Thus we see, on the one hand, the
existence of the whole world necessarily dependent on the first
knowing being, however imperfect it be; on the other hand, this first
knowing animal just as necessarily [is] wholly dependent on a long
chain of causes and effects which has preceded it, and in which it it-
self appears as a small link. 
(WWR 1:30)
Schopenhauer steps away from the extreme position that the entire world
as representation suddenly springs into existence when the first represent-
ing subject, even if it is only an insect, opens its eye upon the world. Indeed,
we must wonder how there could be a world upon which an insect could
open the first eye, how there could be an eye, and so on, if the world did
not in some sense exist before the eye's opening.
Schopenhauer is not entirely clear about the way in which the prior
existence of non-human animals and the inorganic world that supports the
existence alike of human and non-human animals is supposed to be recon-
ciled with the transcendental idealist thesis that the world is each represent-
ing subject's personal representation.14 The idea can nevertheless be
36

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
recovered from Schopenhauer's enigmatic pronouncement about the begin-
nings of the world before the opening of the first eye springing forth at that
very moment from the consciousness of the first representing subject.
Schopenhauer invokes a classic Greek myth to help explain the concept of
the past history of the world opening up from the first moment of represen-
tational consciousness of each representing subject. He writes:
Anyone who likes mythological interpretations may regard the birth
of Chronos (Xpovog), the youngest of the Titans, as the description
of the moment here expressed, when time appears, although it is
beginningless. As he castrates his father, the crude productions of
heaven and earth cease, and the races of gods and men now occupy
the scene. 
(WWR1:31).
The idea is comparable to the Big Bang theory in scientific cosmology. Past
time, like the perceptual form of space and time itself, is created along with
the complete prior history of the world at the boundary between subject and
object in the exact moment when the individual representing subject opens
the first eye. The world erupts into existence, according to Schopenhauer,
obeying the law of causality as an objective reality under the principle of
sufficient reason, in the very instant that an individual representing subject
first represents the world. Included in this explosion of all of reality into
consciousness is whatever might be required by the law of causality in order
to be able to explain the existence of inorganic nature from which the first
insect with its first eye emerges. There is a world that objectively exists before
the creation of the first representing subject, and that will continue to exist
as long as there exists any representing subject. The existence of the repre-
sentational world of objects depends for its present, past and future, and for
the objective causal and other explanatory laws by which it is governed, on
the existence of each individual representing subject. All space and time, and
whatever events of a historical past according to the law of causality are
needed for the existence of biological entities sufficiently complex to be
capable of representing the empirical world, are implied by the objectivity
of events in the world as representation, by virtue of falling under the
principle of sufficient reason.
Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism is in no way diminished by this
admission. Like Kant, Schopenhauer distinguishes between what we can
think about the world in the absence of overt contradiction within the
contents of our thoughts, and what we can intelligibly represent as a possi-
ble state of affairs. Thus, it is only for us abstract thinking human beings that
there exists a past and future. Non-human animals, as we ordinarily assume,
exist only in the present, with no understanding of the fact that there is a
37

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
history to the world or the possibility of its continuing beyond the moment
of their deaths. For, as Schopenhauer also reasonably says, non-human ani-
mals have no idea of death or expectation of their own deaths (WWR 2:5).
There is thus an answer, but not an obviously satisfactory answer, to the
two problems we have posed for Schopenhauer's idealism. Schopenhauer
recognizes that he must somehow account for the historical backdrop of the
physical world without which we cannot make sense of the development of
the material substances that over time produce the intelligent thinking
subjects capable of representing the world and thereby bringing the world
as representation into existence. Transcendental idealism embodies an
interesting asymmetry. When we think about the past we recognize the
necessary existence of something before our own empirical existences that
contributes to the emergence in time of representing subjects such as our-
selves. There must be something in the past that produces the first represent-
ing subject and enables it to open its first eye on the subject-conditioned
world as representation. The past itself, moreover, like all moments of time,
according to the Kantian Transcendental Aesthetic, is not and does not in
any way qualify thing-in-itself, but belongs to the individual thinking subject
as a pure form of intuition. Anticipating the demise of the last representing
subject at the last moment of time at some point in the future, Schopenhauer
draws a more startling conclusion. He argues in that case that the world of
spatiotemporal physical objects decisively comes to an end, upon which there
is no more world as representation, but only thing-in-itself.
This striking anomaly illustrates something important about Schopen-
hauer's idealism. The bursting forth of the world as representation from the
first representing thought of the first representing subject requires a history.
If the world as representation embodies causal laws, then there must at least
be a past that is created along with the inception of all time and space through
the agency of the individual representing subject's pure forms of intuition.
The world before the opening of the first eye must exist in order for the eye
to exist. This is true even if the events of the past leading to the evolution of
representing subjects are only something we can imagine as necessitated by
the objective law of causality. We imaginatively project the principle of
sufficient reason backward from any moment within a representing subject's
consciousness in order to recover the sense of past events causally responsi-
ble for the present. At the end of time, when there are no more representing
subjects, there seems to be no comparable need to project into the future the
continuance of any spatiotemporal physical entities or events. We do so only
qualifiedly in thinking about the continuation of the world beyond our
individual deaths when we suppose that there will still remain other repre-
senting subjects. We are free to imagine that the physical world will continue
when there are no more subjects to represent. Yet there is no forward-looking
38

SCHOPENHAUER'S IDEALISM
necessity to any such occurrences under the law of causality to account for
the existence of any facts concerning representing subjects who by hypoth-
esis will no longer exist within my representation. What then exists is only
thing-in-itself, transcending space and time, beyond individuation and expla-
nation.
Is it enough for Schopenhauer to allow that a past and future before and
after the first and last representing subject is thinkable but not representable?
We certainly cannot explain the emergence of representing subjects by
reasoning from a merely imagined past history of inorganic development.
There are no physical objects, no space or time, no causation and none of
the other applications of lawlike necessity predicated by the principle of
sufficient reason in the absence of a real physical world. Nor is it clearly
understandable how a first eye could open and thereby create the world as
representation if before that event there are no spatiotemporal entities or
events in time and space. As a thought experiment for Schopenhauer's
idealism we might ask what would have happened to the pre-representa-
tional world if representing subjects had not evolved. We should quickly see
that the question does not make sense. There are no objects or events, no
progression of material reality in time, and, in a word, no happenings, in
lieu of representing subjects.
Schopenhauer has the courage to embrace the assumption of transcenden-
tal idealism. He maintains that the world we experience can only be under-
stood as what he refers to as the world as representation. It is the world
whose objects and events and properties, space and time, individuation,
causality and all forms of explanation, presuppose the existence of a repre-
senting subject. The implications of this idealist proposition for the subject-
conditional existence of the empirical world make Schopenhauer's
philosophy unique even when compared to the most daring conclusions of
classical German idealism.15
39

CHAPTER TWO
Empirical knowledge of the world as
representation: from natural science to
transcendental metaphysics
We also find physics, in the widest sense of the word, concerned with
the explanation of phenomena in the world; but it lies already in the
nature of the explanations themselves that they cannot be sufficient.
Physics is unable to stand on its own feet, but needs a metaphysics
on which to support itself, whatever fine airs it may assume towards
the latter. 
(WWR2: 172)
Scientific explanation
It is only after Schopenhauer has explained the basic principles of his
transcendental idealism that he turns, first, to the question of empirical
knowledge of the world as representation, and secondly to thing-in-itself in
the transcendental metaphysics of the world as Will. This order of topics is
appropriate to Schopenhauer's exposition, given his thesis that the only
correct philosophical methodology is to begin, not with either the object,
in the manner of pure materialists, nor with the subject, as in Fichte's purely
subjective idealism, but with representations that are theoretically analysable
into interpresuppositional ontically inseparable subject and object. Schopen-
hauer is now prepared to begin a detailed investigation of the empirical
world as representation, to be followed by an analysis of thing-in-itself as
Will.
The world as representation for Schopenhauer is the realm where the
principium individuationis and fourfold root of the principle of sufficient
reason apply. It is also where epistemic criteria of empirical knowledge
concerning the world of appearance that are falsely assumed by materialists
and naive realists to constitute the only truths about the world find their
proper place. A vital part of Schopenhauer's theory of knowledge is devoted
40

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
to natural science, including physics, astronomy, biology, chemistry, psychol-
ogy and other scientific disciplines. Schopenhauer regards all of natural
science as providing a correct understanding of the empirical world. Natural
science is as important to Schopenhauer's complete picture of the world as
representation and the interpresuppositionality of subject and object as
his transcendental metaphysics of the world as thing-in-itself (WWR 2:
120-29).
The fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason
The essential background to Schopenhauer's philosophy of natural science
is his theory of the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason. This
is the topic of his doctoral dissertation, published as a separate treatise under
this title in 1813. The Fourfold Root is probably Schopenhauer's most
admired work by philosophers who otherwise have no sympathy for his
transcendental idealism and metaphysics of thing-in-itself as Will.1
Schopenhauer assumes a familiarity with his earlier study in all his later
work. Thus, in the "Preface to the First Edition" of The World as Will and
Representation^ he advises:
that the introduction be read before the book itself, although this is
not a part of the book, but appeared five years previously under the
title On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason: A
Philosophical Essay. Without an acquaintance with this introduction
and propaedeutic, it is quite impossible to understand the present
work properly, and the subject-matter of that essay is always presup-
posed here as if it were included in the book. 
(WWR 1: xiv)
Although Schopenhauer expects the reader to be familiar with his earlier
study, he does not say why. Perhaps it is because he believes that we can only
comprehend the dual nature of the world as Will and representation by
beginning with the world as representation. We have already found it
expedient to make use of Schopenhauer's concept of the principle of
sufficient reason and its division into four types of explanations in discuss-
ing his idealism and the distinction between the world as representation and
thing-in-itself. As such we are unavoidably participating in the non-linear
exposition of his system that he maintains must be followed. Methodological-
ly, we begin with perceptual and scientific knowledge of the empirical world.
It is the requirements for explaining natural phenomena in any possible
category in turn that are critically examined in The Fourfold Root.
41

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Placing undue emphasis on the objects that constitute the world as
representation might seem to contradict Schopenhauer's claim that it is a
mistake in metaphysics to focus exclusively on the subject or object. There
is nevertheless a fine line of difference. For while Schopenhauer argues that
metaphysics errs by beginning with any object to the exclusion of the subject,
he maintains that philosophy should rather begin with representations and
hence with representational knowledge analysable into interpresuppositional
subject and object. The natural sciences are not an appropriate way to
introduce the dual metaphysics of appearance and thing-in-itself, because
they do as a matter of fact treat the empirical order in reductively material-
ist or naive realist fashion as a realm of independently existing objects. We
shall need to look more closely at what Schopenhauer says concerning the
role of the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason in his system
before we can fully grasp why he believes that his early treatment of these
subjects is a necessary preliminary to understanding his idealist metaphys-
ics of the world as Will and representation.
Four kinds of why-explanation
The first division of Schopenhauer's philosophy concerns the perceptual
knowledge of objects in the world as representation. The second division
concerns insight into the subject in the doctrine of thing-in-itself or world
as Will. To begin, we consider Schopenhauer's theory of the empirical world
represented to thought in perception and studied in the natural sciences. This
is the experienceable world and everything that can be found therein as an
object of representational knowledge. It is the world we encounter in
sensation, consisting of objects individuated from other objects. These are
the ways in which the world appears to thought that can be explained by
appeal to laws and lawlike regularities in several categories. It is the world
that, in lieu of accepting the existence of Kantian thing-in-itself, we may
falsely think of as the only reality, in the manner of a metaphysical materi-
alism or naive realism.
Schopenhauer does not dispute the importance of this empirical aspect of
the world, or world as representation. He considers it to be the proper sphere
of application for the natural sciences, and as such a valuable source of
knowledge. With Kant, however, Schopenhauer denies that the phenomenal
order is the only aspect of the world, whose other unseen face is mind-
independent representationally unknowable thing-in-itself. Limiting atten-
tion only to the world as representation, to the principles of individuation and
sufficient reason, Schopenhauer is able to place the natural sciences in
42

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
perspective. Within the confines of the world as representation, Schopen-
hauer believes that the principles of natural science hold absolute sway, that
they explain all that can be representationally known about the natural world.
There are four ways in which we can explain things, four kinds of facts about
things that we can explain, in four modes of explanation. We can explain
naturally occurring phenomena in the world as representation in terms of the
laws of logic, mathematics, causation and motivation. What remains after
everything that can be explained has been accounted for under one or more
laws subsumed by the fourfold root is the hidden dimension of the world
known to Kant only as thing-in-itself. In that part of his philosophy concern-
ing only the world as representation, where every natural occurrence in
principle admits of a sufficient explanation, Schopenhauer gives empirical
science its due. We can expect to be able to explain everything that happens
in the world of experience, up to the very limits of the world where represen-
tation ends, and beyond which there remains only thing-in-itself.
The principle of sufficient reason is thus the epistemic foundation of
Schopenhauer's scientific philosophy of the world as representation (WWR
1: xiv; FFR: xxvi). Its importance is indicated by the fact that in 1847 he
substantially revised it for republication in a second edition while preserv-
ing its central themes, when without his knowledge or approval the text had
gone out of print for several years. There are frequent references to his dis-
sertation throughout Schopenhauer's writings, implying that over the years
his early reflections on epistemology never diminished in his opinion as the
foundation for his philosophical system.
"Nothing is without a ground or reason why it is"2 (FFR: 6) summarizes
Schopenhauer's principle of sufficient reason. He classifies every aspect of
the world as representation under four main categories. The concept of
sufficient reason does not originate with Schopenhauer, but can be traced
back under that terminology to at least the seventeenth century. Schopen-
hauer finds historical anticipations of the principle of sufficient reason in
Plato and Aristotle, and traces its modern formulations in particular to
Leibniz and Christian Wolff in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Schopenhauer credits none of these thinkers with an adequate grasp of the
principle, and accuses them with some justice of such elementary philosophi-
cal errors as confusing reasons with causes (FFR: 9-33). The doctrine in
Schopenhauer's hands offers a vantage point from which it is possible to levy
powerful criticisms against Spinoza's pantheological monism, as well as
Descartes's proofs for the existence of God. He disputes especially
Descartes's version of the so-called ontological argument, which had been
thoroughly discredited in Schopenhauer's opinion by the refutation of
Anselm's Proslogion in the section of Kant's Critique on "The Ideal of Pure
Reason" (FFR: 14-16, 20, 59-62).3
43

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The four roots, or four types of why-explanations of phenomena in the
world as representation, are further elaborated by Schopenhauer in the
following terms:
1. Causal laws that satisfy the sufficient reason of becoming.
2. Logical laws that satisfy the sufficient reason of knowing.
3. Mathematical laws that cover the sufficient reason of being, of space
and time, conceived as pure forms of intuition after Kant's analysis of
the Transcendental Aesthetic, as the basis, respectively, for geometry and
arithmetic.
4. Moral laws that satisfy the sufficient reason of acting, concerning the
empirical will or will to life and its motivations (FFR: 39-42).4
The categories roughly correspond to Aristotle's traditional "four causes",
although there are important differences.5 The four types of laws are
supposed to cover exhaustively the ways in which objects and events in the
world as representation can be explained. Each root of the principle of suf-
ficient reason provides the basis for a distinct kind of science concerned with
a distinct aspect of natural or social phenomena. Schopenhauer holds that
explanations become confused or frustrated in their purpose when they are
cross-directed towards another science's distinctive root of the principle, as
when a moral or motivational science attempts to give mechanical- or
efficient-causal explanations, or the reverse (FFR: 230-31).
The Fourfold Root demarcates everything that can be known and
explained by reference to broadly scientific principles. There is a sense of
completeness in Schopenhauer's list of four explanation types. It would be
reassuring, but unfortunately Schopenhauer does not provide the required
argument, to establish two essentially related claims: (i) That there are no
fewer than these four categories of explanation - that none of the four types
of explanation Schopenhauer mentions can be reduced to any of the others,
but that all are independently necessary; and (ii), that there are no more than
these four categories of explanation - that there are no other kinds of facts
to be explained that do not fall under just these four categories of explana-
tion, but that all four are jointly sufficient for all scientific explanatory needs
concerning all phenomena.
With respect to requirement (i), we might wonder whether Schopenhauer
can offer good reasons to show that mathematical explanations cannot be
reduced to logical explanations. There is a school of philosophical logic and
philosophy of mathematics in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth
centuries that took very seriously the idea that all of mathematics could be
reduced to logic. Logicism is generally thought to have been refuted in its
original optimistic or naive formulations, although these developments
44

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
obviously postdate Schopenhauer's discussion of the principle of sufficient
reason. There are nevertheless more sophisticated if in some ways less
ambitious logicist programmes at work even today in the philosophy of
mathematical logic. If any of these methods were to succeed, they might
suggest the possibility of collapsing two of Schopenhauer's roots of the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason into a single, perhaps appropriately designated
formal root, combining logical and mathematical laws into a single category
of logical-mathematical explanation.
Aristotle's famous four causes (aitia) makes an instructive comparison
with Schopenhauer's like-numbered fourfold root of the principle of suffi-
cient reason. In his treatise the Physics, Aristotle similarly distinguishes
between what he designates as (i) formal, (ii) material, (iii) efficient and
(iv) final causes. He illustrates the distinctions by the example of the expla-
nations that might be given for the existence of a statue. To fully understand
the statue, we must appeal to (i) the statue's form or shape and type, (ii) the
material substance of which it is made, (iii) the physical motions by which
it was produced from its raw material, including perhaps the striking blows
of a hammer on a chisel with a certain force and at certain angles against
the wood or stone and (iv) the reasons or purposes for which the statue was
fashioned, which could include the desire to express artistic ideas, to honour
the person or god depicted, or simply to earn a commission and gain renown
(Physics 194bl7-195a27).
Aristotle's four causes correspond roughly but imperfectly to Schopen-
hauer's fourfold root. Schopenhauer arrives at the same number of "causes"
as Aristotle only because in effect he divides one of Aristotle's categories in
two, and combines two of Aristotle's categories into one. He divides Aris-
totle's formal cause into logical and mathematical explanations rather than
combining these into a single mode of explanation. He collapses Aristotle's
material and efficient causes into a single category or mode of explanation,
which he describes simply as causation. His justification for combining these
categories of explanation is the theory that matter is nothing other than
action in space and time, equated with the motion of substances described
by Aristotle as efficient or mechanical causation.
We should ask whether Schopenhauer is justified in making either of these
revisions, not out of reverence for Aristotle, but as a way of gaining a better
understanding of why Schopenhauer divides up the field of scientific expla-
nation for the world as representation just in the way he does. Where logi-
cal and mathematical explanations are concerned, Schopenhauer does not
make reference to Aristotle or self-consciously deviate from Aristotle's four
causes, but seems to be thinking things through for himself and arriving at
his own set of explanation types. Although he might acknowledge that both
logic and mathematics are in some sense formal, it is probable that even so,
45

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
and even if he had been apprised of the logicist movement that gained
momentum only later in the nineteenth century, Schopenhauer would still
have wanted to distinguish between logical and mathematical explanations.
The reason is that Schopenhauer interprets logical explanation as provid-
ing a basis for judgement in another judgement (FFR: 157-8). Such an
account makes logical explanation a very general category, since the judge-
ments in terms of which a judgement is explained might be of various kinds,
including more specifically those that appeal to judgements about mechanical
causal, mathematical, and moral or motivational factors. They are in any case
not limited or essentially related to the mathematical.
The explanation of any given phenomenon need not fall only under one
category of explanation in the fourfold root. Schopenhauer maintains, on
the contrary, just as Aristotle does, that many if not most phenomena must
be fully explained in terms of more than one of the four categories of
explanation, and in some if not many cases by appealing to all four expla-
nation types. Schopenhauer nonetheless requires that logical explanations
as such, partly because of their greater generality, must be different from
mathematical explanations. The latter make specific appeal to the proposi-
tions of arithmetic and geometry concerning the numerical and spatial prop-
erties of things. A logical explanation can but need not also be mathematical,
which for Schopenhauer is enough to recognize these explanation types as
distinct categories.
If we find it curious that Aristotle does not include a fifth category of
logical causes, it might be because he regards logic as providing the form of
explanation rather than a category of explanation on a par with formal,
material, efficient and final causes. To the extent that such an approach seems
to offer a more natural division of explanations, we may conclude that
Schopenhauer's way of parsing the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient
reason should be faulted as containing too many categories, and perhaps as
confusing the concept of (logical) explanation generally with one of the
several particular types or categories of explanation available to science for
phenomena in the world as representation.
With respect to requirement (ii), whether Schopenhauer's four-part
division of explanation types includes enough categories to cover all phe-
nomena, we might again return to Aristotle by asking if Schopenhauer is right
to collapse material and efficient or mechanical explanation into a single
root. The justification for this from Schopenhauer's standpoint is that he
regards matter as nothing other than (efficient) causality. If Schopenhauer's
reduction of matter to causality is not defensible, then he does not seem to
make adequate provision for all the kinds of explanation needed to account
for every occurrence in the world as representation. Even if Schopenhauer's
theory of matter as causality is accepted, it might still be objected that the
46

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
fourfold root is not sufficiently fine-grained to recognize the difference
between matter as objectified causality and the mechanical or efficient causal
interactions by which complex material entities are created, modified or
destroyed.
Returning to Aristotle's statue, we might say that Schopenhauer should
recognize a difference in principle between explanations that focus on the
material properties of substances in addition to the physical forces and
mechanical actions through which material substances are physically
modified. We may then find it worthwhile to distinguish between an expla-
nation to be given of the existence of the statue as consisting of marble rather
than mercury or granite, and explanations of how it comes to have the
particular geometrical form it has as the effect of the mechanical processes
to which its matter is subjected by the sculptor. We may prefer this choice
of explanation categories, even if theoretically the metaphysics of matter,
as Schopenhauer believes, turns out to be fully explainable in terms of
efficient causation.
Schopenhauer argues that anything in the world as representation,
anything that presents itself to thought, can in principle be understood.
There always exists a sufficient reason, which, with enough patience, good
luck and the right methodology, we should be able to find. Equally,
Schopenhauer claims that whatever can be explained by laws falling under
the fourfold root can only belong to the world as representation. The
application of the principle thus turns out to be precisely coextensive with
the limits of the phenomenal world. Schopenhauer exploits this fact to
establish a sharp theoretical distinction between the world as representation
and thing-in-itself. Whatever can be explained by the four types of laws
belongs to the world as representation, and whatever cannot be explained
in any of these ways is thing-in-itself. The fourfold root as such is important
not only to Schopenhauer's epistemology, but more crucially as a criterion
for the most fundamental distinction of his metaphysics.6
The principle of sufficient reason carves a sharp delimitation between
empirical and transcendental reality. This implication rightly entitles the
fourfold root to the place of theoretical prominence Schopenhauer accords
it. To see the world as divided into representation and thing-in-itself, we need
precisely this sort of basis for distinguishing its two fundamental aspects
provided by Schopenhauer's application of the doctrine of sufficient reason.
When we have explained everything it is possible to explain, or at least
abstractly marked out those objects and events that might be explained as
falling under the principle of sufficient reason, then what remains left over
as unexplained and unexplainable is Kantian-Schopenhauerian thing-in-
itself.
47

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Intuitive versus abstract knowledge
Schopenhauer's epistemology distinguishes intuitive and abstract knowledge.
Intuitive knowledge is perceptual, and vision has an especially important
role. We read in Schopenhauer's 1816 essay On Vision and Colors, "All
intuitive perception is intellectual, for without the understanding [Verstand]
we could never achieve intuitive perception, observation \Wahrnehmung],
the apprehension of objects'" (VC: 10).
Although Schopenhauer regards the capacity for abstract knowledge as
distinctive of humanity, he regards intuitive knowledge as in every way
superior to abstract theoretical knowledge. He argues, indeed, that all theo-
retical knowledge is at bottom only abstracted from perception, in terms of
which a theory of any type must ultimately be validated, and without which
theoretical knowledge lacks a legitimating foundation. A bright person,
according to Schopenhauer, is one who can directly perceive that things go
together or that causality is at work in a certain way. The fool is someone
who either cannot grasp such interconnections, or is capable only of doing
so in practical circumstances at a greatly reduced speed, by pedantic inference
from theory. Such a person is lacking a full comprehension of the situation
when compared with the more perceptive among us, whom Schopenhauer
describes as more intelligent.
The distinction between intuitive and abstract knowledge is important to
Schopenhauer for a number of reasons. First, their hierarchical relationship,
in which abstract knowledge is dependent on intuitive knowledge, leads
Schopenhauer to describe human understanding as a continuation, exten-
sion and perfection of the sort of intuitive grasp of facts and situations that
are found even among members of the non-human animal kingdom. We
discover a natural progression from the awareness of the world as represen-
tation found among animals and the development from it through greater
intellectual powers of abstraction. The fact that Schopenhauer requires
philosophy to begin with perceptual experience, and hence with the world
as representation, is a reflection of his commitment to the priority of intui-
tive over abstract knowledge, as it constitutes the basis for a hierarchy of
epistemic categories in his philosophy. The superiority of intuitive to abstract
knowledge also turns out to be essential to Schopenhauer's central argument
for the proposition that thing-in-itself is Will. This vital conclusion cannot
be supported as an item of abstract knowledge for Schopenhauer, but only
as something we can know immediately in a certain way, through feeling,
rather than as a logically inferred consequence of abstract theory.
Where logic and mathematics are concerned, Schopenhauer holds that
it is only intuition or sense perception that leads to knowledge, through
which all axioms and deductions of theorems are ultimately justified. He
48

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
maintains that the rules of a logical system are not needed for correct
reasoning. He argues that formal principles can actually obstruct logical
inference in practice. They are accepted only in so far as they agree with
intuition, and they would be rejected or modified if or to whatever extent
they turn out to disagree with intuition, rather than the other way around.
He thinks of abstract knowledge as at best a convenience for the codifica-
tion, expression and communication of whatever knowledge is properly
gained and justified intuitively through perception (FFR: 197-206).7
Schopenhauer argues that "The main difference among all our represen-
tations is that between the intuitive and the abstract" (WWR 1:6). He
explains the distinction in the face of the prevailing assumption that all
knowledge is abstract or theoretical, a position he is concerned to overturn.
He accordingly classifies all knowledge as representation, but singles out
abstract knowledge as just one subcategory among the two basic kinds of
representations available to thought. He does not limit knowledge, or even
abstract knowledge, in principle, to human beings, but cautiously observes
that among the beings with whom we have acquaintance, only human
knowers are capable of abstract knowledge. "The latter constitutes only one
class of representations, namely concepts; and on earth these are the prop-
erty of man alone" (WWR 1: 6). He associates reason with abstract
knowledge, limited again among representing subjects in our experience to
the human species. Finally, he indicates his intention to begin by investigat-
ing the nature of intuitive representations, which he interprets primarily in
terms of vision, while recognizing the need to extend reference to any sort
of perception.
Given his emphasis on intuition over abstract theoretical knowledge, it
is natural that Schopenhauer should proceed in this order. He offers evidence
from many different kinds of considerations, including signs and ways of
thinking and speaking about intelligence. He interprets the manner in which
persons including theorists at the highest reaches of abstraction react to the
occasional conflicts that arise between intuitive and abstract representations
as a clue to the priority of intuition over abstract theoretical knowledge
(WWR 1: 22). Adding more substance to his account of the concept of
intelligence, he explains intuitive representation more fully as the percep-
tion of causal regularities. He identifies the perception of causal inter-
connectedness as the essence of intelligence in these terms. It is through the
perceptual grasp rather than theoretical undertanding of causality that
intelligence is able to design and build machines to accomplish certain tasks.
It is the same quality of intelligence in the form of the intuitive understand-
ing of causal connections by which Schopenhauer believes persons appro-
priately so gifted are able to motivate and manipulate other persons to obtain
their cooperation in the pursuit of their aims, and to avoid actions taken
49

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
against themselves by anticipating what is being planned and how another's
intentions might be used to their disadvantage.
There is agreement at least with ordinary ways of speaking in what
Schopenhauer says. We generally regard persons as stupid, however uncivil
it may be to say so in the wrong circumstances or to the wrong audience,
when they are unable to perceive or otherwise immediately grasp causal
connections in the situations they confront. The point is not to understand
stupidity, but to reveal its opposite qualities as the essential elements of
intelligence. We say of persons who are particularly slow on the uptake that
they do not recognize that others may have disguised reasons for acting as
they do. Such innocents are easily taken in by schemes and plots in which
agents are acting in concert against their interests. Schopenhauer regards
these characterizations as further evidence of his thesis that intuitive knowl-
edge is the indispensable basis and ultimate justification for secondarily useful
abstract theoretical knowledge. Even if it is not the only criterion for stu-
pidity, it is undoubtedly true that persons who lack a basic grasp of causal
interconnections either in general or in cases where we would expect most
individuals to be able to see cause and effect are typically regarded as pos-
sessing less than average intelligence.8
Intuition and abstract reasoning in logic and mathematics
Schopenhauer's reference to the understanding (Verstand) and its opposition
to reason (Vernunft) is significant in his theory of knowledge as representa-
tion. Understanding is the fruit of intuitive representation or perceptual grasp
of states of affairs among the world's appearances, and does not require
logical inference or appeal to abstract principles. This is why Schopenhauer
says that "Reason can always only know:, perception remains free from its
influence, and belongs to the understanding alone" (WWR 1: 25).
Logic and mathematics provide an important application of Schopen-
hauer's distinction between intuitive and abstract knowledge. It is a classi-
cal assumption of rationalist philosophers that in justifying knowledge,
reason and logical inference ought to have precedence over empirical
observations. Schopenhauer challenges this concept, as does Kant, on whom
Schopenhauer partly relies. Logic and mathematics as formal disciplines are
often taken as paradigms of reason in its most abstract, purest form. The
truths of logic and mathematics are supposed to be impeccably certain,
setting a high benchmark for exactitude and certainty in all areas of knowl-
edge. As such, logic and mathematics are often thought to belong to a very
different category than the deliverances of empirical perceptions. The
50

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
objection is that sensation in comparison can be vague, unreliable, subject
to illusion, contingent rather than necessary, and at best less certain than the
tautologies and deductively valid inferences of logic and the theorems of
mathematics.
Schopenhauer, contrary to rationalist preference for pure reasoning in the
formal sciences, is committed to the priority of intuitive over abstract
representation, of perceptual over theoretical knowledge, and of the under-
standing over reason. Accordingly, he relegates logic and mathematics to
subjects of secondary importance. He interprets them as products of rational
theory whose principles can only be discovered and justified by intuitive
representation, whose rules are subject to revision or rejection to whatever
extent they come into conflict with perception and intuitive knowledge
gained by sense perception. He draws a number of instructive comparisons
between logic and philosophy and other supposedly foundational sub-
disciplines with respect to their theoretical superstructures. He argues that
logic, mathematics and abstract theory generally can never be of practical
use, but are at most convenient ways of codifying and communicating the
relevant principles of knowledge.
The fact, if true, that logic in and of itself has no practical worth reinforces
Schopenhauer's position that reason takes a second seat to perception.
Intuitive representation in that case has epistemic as well as anthropologi-
cal priority over all types of abstract representation and theoretical knowl-
edge. If these assertions hold good for logic and mathematics, how much
more should they not also do so for any other branch of abstract enquiry?
Schopenhauer begins by asking about the utility of logical rules. He argues
that the rules of logical inference are of no use whatsoever in reasoning,
because no one, including professional logicians, actually consults them in
drawing logical inferences. Logicians and mathematicians are prepared in
principle to reject whatever rules are currently in place if they contradict
what intuitive representation in a particular case reveals as a correct or
incorrect deduction. The rules are expendable in light of recalcitrant intui-
tive knowledge, in terms of which the only principles that might be offered
are justified in the first instance as abstractions from particular episodes of
reasoning that the subject recognizes as intuitively correct without recourse
to theory.
Appealing to the distinction between theory and practice, Schopenhauer
concludes that the rules of logic can at most have theoretical importance,
and cannot possibly have any practical use. "[I]t is not necessary to load the
memory with these rules", he writes, "for logic can never be of practical use,
but only of theoretical interest for philosophy" (WWR 1: 44-5). He
compares the role of logic in philosophy to that of other supposed theoretical
foundations to practical activities. He makes the same point with respect to
51

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
the irrelevance of abstract harmony and music theory for the appreciation
of music, for theoretical ethics in moral conduct, and theoretical aesthetics
in the production of artworks. "For although it might be said that logic is
related to rational thinking as thorough-bass is to music," he continues:
and also as ethics is to virtue, if we take it less precisely, or as aes-
thetics is to art, it must be borne in mind that no one ever became
an artist by studying aesthetics, that a noble character was never
formed by a study of ethics, that men composed correctly and beau-
tifully long before Rameau, and that we do not need to be masters
of thorough-bass in order to detect discords. 
(WWR 1: 45)
He concludes that whereas theoretical knowledge in each of these areas can
be useful in communicating the results of intuitive knowledge, it plays no
part whatsoever in the successful practice of music, ethics, art or, finally,
logic.
It is hard to dispute Schopenhauer's argument at least with respect to these
analogies. Surely he is right to say that music was competently composed
long before anyone sat down to formulate the rules for correct composition.
It might even be said that to the extent that composers follow such rules
mechanically rather than pursuing their own artistic sensibility they are more
likely to produce only wooden and musically less interesting work. The same
is true of the relation between ethics and virtue, aesthetics and the plastic
arts. One does not become a virtuous person simply by learning a code of
moral rules, nor a great artist simply by memorizing and then trying to prac-
tise what purport to be rules for making great art. Whether or not
Schopenhauer is right about logic also fitting this pattern may be open to
dispute. He argues that logic is even less useful to philosophy and as a system
of rules of reasoning than moral or aesthetic rules:
Aesthetics and ethics also, though in a much less degree, may have
some use in practice, though a mainly negative one, and hence they
too cannot be denied all practical value; but of logic not even this
much can be conceded. It is merely knowing in the abstract what
everyone knows in the concrete. Therefore we no more need to call
in the aid of logical rules in order to construct a correct argument,
than to do so to guard against agreeing with a false one. Even the
most learned logician lays these rules altogether aside in his actual
thinking. 
(WWR 1:45)
The difference between rules for ethics and art and logical rules is that
the abstract knowledge codified as principles in these respective disciplines
52

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
is more immediate than the practical activities themselves. Where moral and
aesthetic rules are concerned, there is a definite substantive content that
remains directly associated with, even when it is abstracted for theoretical
purposes from, the respective practice. Logical rules, in contrast, are as far
removed as possible from the practice of reasoning, because logical rules,
due to their purely formal nature, are of necessity abstracted from any
specific content.
Whereas in sciences other than logic the truth of a particular case is always
tested by the rule, in logic the rule must always and can only be tested by
the particular case. Schopenhauer remarks that: "Even the most practised
logician, if he notices that in a particular case he concludes otherwise than
as stated by the rule, will always look for a mistake in the rule rather than
in the conclusion he actually draws" (WWR 1: 46). As a result, he maintains
that to try to make practical use of logic would be comparable to people
reading a book on mechanics in order to move the parts of their bodies, or
studying physiology in order to induce their digestive systems to function.
If Schopenhauer is correct, then not only are logical rules not needed in order
to reason properly, but they can be a definite encumbrance to reasoning. This
proposition, if true, casts even greater doubt on the utility of generalizing
purely formal rules from the competent exercise of reason as an abstract
system of theoretical principles.
The value of logic as a formal discipline, negligible or even detrimental
to the practical conduct of reasoning, is nevertheless interpreted as having
theoretical importance to philosophy in understanding the nature of reason.
Logic in this sense provides an abstract theory of what inferential thinking
is and how it works. We do not need the rules of logic in order to reason
correctly, any more than we need music theory rules to whistle a tune. We
can nevertheless better theoretically understand what music is from the
principles of music theory, and, Schopenhauer maintains, we can similarly
better understand the nature of reasoning at a theoretical level by arriving
at a correct set of logical rules (WWR 1: 46).
Pursuing this motif of the relative priority of perception and intuitive
representation as opposed to theory and abstract representation, Schopen-
hauer maintains that the conclusions of mathematics are equally perceptual
in origin and ultimate justification. Mathematics in Schopenhauer's day,
through the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, was divided into
classical arithmetic and geometry, including algebra and calculus. Kant's
proto-intuitionistic philosophy of mathematics relates mathematical
concepts intuitively to sense perception, and in particular to the pure forms
of intuition of space and time. Arithmetic is associated by Kant with the
experience of sequential order in time, as when we count off a series of num-
bers successively one after another. Geometry is associated in an even more
53

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
obvious way with perceptions of space and of objects in spatial relations,
including the shapes and volumes of things and distances from one place to
another in space.
Schopenhauer insists that some thinkers can only believe mathematical
theorems when their conclusions are verified by intuition. It is only when
the implications of a mathematical proof agree with what we can see and
feel or otherwise experience in sensation that we can confirm that the math-
ematical deduction is correct (WWR 1: 55). Schopenhauer does not insist
that intuition is the only mode of mathematical understanding, but he
acknowledges that some thinkers are more inclined to regard abstract math-
ematical demonstrations as convincing. He admits that such persons look
to mathematical inferences not as the ultimate source of mathematical truth,
which would be to confuse reason with understanding, but, as with all
abstract theory, merely for purposes of codification, communication and
application. There are different intellectual personality types, according to
Schopenhauer, for which reactions to mathematical demonstration is a litmus
test as to whether they are more intuitively or more theoretically oriented.
In neither case does Schopenhauer consider that there is a legitimate role
for mathematical demonstrations by which they are required for the
discovery or verification of mathematical truths.9
Schopenhauer regards proofs in logic and mathematics as powerless in
and of themselves to establish new results. He reduces all proof to Aristo-
telian syllogistic form, and he regards all syllogisms as a mode of present-
ing the conclusions in a chain of reasoning that receives its final validation
only from the direct evidence of intuitive representation. A logical or math-
ematical truth, once discovered and established by pre-theoretical non-
abstract reasoning, can always afterwards be expressed theoretically in the
abstract deductive form of a syllogism. The syllogistic proof of an intuitively
justified mathematical discovery then provides a compact unit for the sake
of recalling, sharing and applying the information it contains (WWR 1: 65).
The implication of Schopenhauer's treatment of logical and mathematical
inferences, and of the role of intuitive representation in the most abstract
sciences, is that even where knowledge seems to be furthest removed from
perception, it is still direct intuitive representation rather than abstract theo-
retical representation that is decisive in determining truth. The moral is that
mathematics as a systematic formal discipline by itself has no practical utility,
and that it is the immediate intuitive grasp of mathematical relations, rather
than abstract rules of mathematics, on which mathematical judgement is
properly grounded (WWR 1: 68-9).
As a final observation about the distinctive nature of mathematics,
Schopenhauer reminds us that mathematical truths are a priori (WWR 1: 76).
How can this be true if the ultimate justification for mathematics is intui-
54

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
tive representation? We are supposed to satisfy ourselves about the truth of
basic mathematical theorems visually, as when we compare a Euclidean theo-
rem with the confirmation we obtain by examining a corresponding diagram.
It is when we see that what the theorem states agrees with the appropriate
picture of concrete spatial geometrical relations that we recognize its truth.
If the picture or other intuitive representational evidence did not offer posi-
tive testimony in support of a mathematical proposition, then Schopenhauer
holds we would not reject the intuition, but should instead begin seriously
to question the theorem.
We should recall that for Schopenhauer not all intuitive representations
concern logically contingent a posteriori empirical relations. There can be
intuitive representations for any of the four categories of explanation falling
under the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason. Thus, we can
as easily have intuitive representations of logical and mathematical laws as
of causal and moral or motivational laws. What makes Schopenhauer an
empiricist in epistemology, at least in so far as it concerns the world as
representation, is the fact that he does not elevate the knowledge-conferring
status of pure reason above intuition, but insists in every case that intuitive
representations take precedence over abstract representations. Where the a
priori rather than a posteriori character of mathematical laws is concerned,
Schopenhauer avails himself of Kant's proto-intuitionist philosophy of
mathematics, in which space and time as a priori pure forms of intuition
provide a perceptual basis for the necessary truths of geometry and
arithmetic.
Pr/ncipium indiViduafionis, physics and
idealist metaphysics of space and time
There is an exact coincidence in Schopenhauer's idealism between the
perceived world, the field of explanation in which the fourfold root of the
principle of sufficient reason applies, and phenomenal objects and events in
the world as representation, distinguished from one another in space and
time by the principium individuationis.
Schopenhauer considers the world of discrete physical objects as an
objectification of thing-in-itself. The world as representation contains many
individuals, represented objects for representing subjects, that are separated
by space and time. It is only there and in this way that we come to know them
under the principle of sufficient reason. Schopenhauer maintains that "In
outer as well as in inner teleology of nature, what we must think of as means
and end is everywhere only the phenomenon of the unity of the one will so
55

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
far in agreement with itself, which has broken up into space and time for our
mode of cognition" (WWR 1: 161). Thing-in-itself is not literally broken up
into the individuated entities experienced in perception, but is objectified
in the world as representation for perceiving subjects as a multiplicity of
individuated objects. The principium individuationis consequently holds only
within intuitive representation for representing subjects as experiencing a
spatiotemporal division of represented objects.
The division of the world as repesentation into a plurality of different
things is accomplished by the subject's perceptual forms of space and time.
This is the effect of the principium individuationis, through whose a priori
spatiotemporal distinctions represented objects are distinguished one from
another as occurring at different times or different places in space. Schopen-
hauer explains:
We know that plurality in general is necessarily conditioned by time
and space, and only in these is conceivable, and in this respect we
call them the principium individuationis. But we have recognized
time and space as forms of the principle of sufficient reason, and in
this principle all our knowledge a priori is expressed. As explained
above, however, this a priori knowledge, as such, applies only to the
knowableness of things, not to the things themselves, i.e., it is only
our form of knowledge, not a property of the thing-in-itself. The
thing-in-itself, as such, is free from all forms of knowledge, even the
most universal, namely that of being object for the subject; in other
words, it is something entirely different from the representation.
Now if this thing-in-itself, as I believe I have sufficiently proved and
made clear, is the will, then, considered as such and apart from its
phenomenon, it lies outside time and space, and accordingly knows
no plurality, and consequently is one. 
(WWR 1: 127-8)
The principium individuationis distinguishes between the world as
representation and thing-in-itself in yet another way. The spatiotemporal
individuation of represented objects, made possible by space and time as pure
forms of intuition in the minds of representing subjects, divides the world
as representation from thing-in-itself.
Schopenhauer notes that if the principium individuationis applies only and
exclusively to the world as representation, then thing-in-itself is one. It
further follows, as Schopenhauer later maintains, that if thing-in-itself is Will,
then the world as Will, despite its many subjectively different objectifications
in the world as representation in the minds of different representing subjects,
is also and for the same reason one. It might be objected that if the principium
individuationis does not apply to thing-in-itself, but only and exclusively to
56

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
the world as representation, then thing-in-itself, whether or not it is also
characterized as Will, should be neither one nor many, neither an individual
nor a plurality of individuals. Schopenhauer evidently does not understand
the principium individuationis in this way, but concludes from the inappli-
cability of the principle to thing-in-itself that thing-in-itself, by virtue of being
indivisible into many things, must therefore be one.
The conclusion that thing-in-itself is one enables Schopenhauer to address
the problem previously considered concerning the identity of the world as
representation in the thoughts of many distinct representing subjects. If
thing-in-itself is one, then it can be variously represented in the thoughts of
many different subjects. The situation philosophically is much the same from
the standpoint of identity requirements and epistemic principles as what a
materialist or naive realist typically says with respect to the relation between
the objectively existing mind-independent world and the multiple perceptual
perspectives on the world available to a plurality of perceivers. There is no
necessity in either case, provided, as Schopenhauer is now prepared to argue,
that thing-in-itself is one, to conclude on the basis of Schopenhauer's radical
idealism that the world itself is a many-fragmented thing existing only within
the representations of many different representing subjects.
Schopenhauer's circle and the sceptic's demand for proof
Schopenhauer formulates the principle of sufficient reason with full gener-
ality, holding that every true judgement has a sufficient ground or reason
(FFR: 6, 33). This suggests a philosophical problem of self-application and
self-justification, and also, perhaps, of potentially infinite regress. Does the
principle of sufficient reason itself have a ground or sufficient reason?
Schopenhauer dismisses the question as circular in the sense that the
difficulty could not intelligibly arise unless it were already assumed that the
principle is true.
In The Fourfold Root., a form of the problem appears explicitly in a state-
ment of what might be called "Schopenhauer's circle". There Schopenhauer
argues:
The principle of sufficient reason is just the expression of this
necessity of a reason or ground for every judgement. Now whoever
requires a proof for this reason, already assumes thereby that it is
true; in fact he bases his demand on this very assumption. He there-
fore finds himself in that circle of demanding a proof for the right
to demand a proof. 
(FFR: 33)
57

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The attempt to justify the principle of sufficient reason raises a number
of questions. Can the principle of sufficient reason itself constitute an
exception to the principle of sufficient reason? If the principle of sufficient
reason is not supported by a sufficient reason, how can it possibly be true,
as Schopenhauer requires, that every true judgement has a sufficient reason?
Is it ultimately circular merely to question the truth of the principle of
sufficient reason? If it is circular to raise doubts about the principle, does
the circularity argument itself constitute a sufficient reason in support of the
principle of sufficient reason in any of its four categories of explanations?
What, on Schopenhauer's view, prevents sufficient reasons, justifications or
why-explanations from "going in a circle" or producing a circular truth-
dependence interrelation in the first place? Why, if they do so, would that
be a problem? Is the concept of sufficient reason necessarily committed to
an unacknowledged epistemic foundationalism that precludes any (broadly)
mutually sustaining "circular" coherentist explanations? How could such a
structural justificatory limitation possibly derive from the principle of
sufficient reason alone?
Schopenhauer's argument entails that it is circular to require a proof for
the principle of sufficient reason, because to do so is already to assume that
the principle is true. If it were not the case that "Nothing is without a ground
or reason why it is rather than is not",10 Schopenhauer urges, then there
would be no basis for demanding a proof of the principle that everything
admits of proof. To question whether the principle is true is to undermine
the demand for proof generally, and hence in particular for any proof of the
principle of sufficient reason. On the absurd assumption that a proof of the
principle could be given, the demonstration would immediately produce a
vicious circle, since a presentation of proof can only be motivated by a
demand that is utterly groundless unless it is presupposed from the outset
that the principle is sound. What, then, of the circularity argument itself?
What is its logical status, and what are its methodological implications for
Schopenhauer's system?
D. W. Hamlyn draws some interesting trans-systematic connections
between Aristotle's dialectical demonstrations of the principle of contradic-
tion and Schopenhauer's circle involving the principle of sufficient reason.
He writes:
Schopenhauer did not think that it was possible to provide an
argument for the principle [of sufficient reason]... Nor did he ever
attempt to set out such a proof and The Fourfold Root should not
be interpreted as doing so. Schopenhauer thinks that the principle
is in fact presupposed in any argument or proof; hence to ask for a
proof of the principle itself involves a circle, in that the principle is
58

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
presupposed in the very demand ... It might be suggested that this
very fact gives rise to the possibility of a proof of sorts - a proof that
is dialectical in the sense implied in what Aristotle says with regard
to the principle of contradiction. Aristotle suggests that in the case
of the principle of contradiction anyone who denies it can be shown
to presuppose it; the sceptic is, so to speak, refuted out of his own
mouth.11
Hamlyn then raises the difficult question as to whether Schopenhauer's
argument can be interpreted as a kind of Aristotelian dialectical proof of the
sufficient reason principle. He links the Aristotelian form of argument to
Kantian transcendental reasoning when he observes:
Aristotle's treatment of the principle of contradiction involves in
effect a version of what Kant was to call, although in a special
application to possible experience, a transcendental argument - an
argument to the effect that something must be so because the very
possibility of something else presupposes it. Could Schopenhauer
have allowed a transcendental argument for the principle of suffi-
cient reason?12
Even if it is historically problematic to identify Aristotelian dialectical
demonstrations with Kantian transcendental justifications, the logic of
Schopenhauer's circularity argument can be illuminated without invoking
the comparison. Schopenhauer recalls Aristotle's strategy in defending the
law of contradiction, and includes both non-contradiction and sufficient
reason as particular instances in the same general category of principles for
which proof neither can nor need be given (FFR: 32). "On the contrary,"
he explains, "Aristotle's remark applies to all those proofs ... namely where
he says: 'They seek a reason for that which has no reason; for the principle
of demonstration is not a demonstration'" (FFR: 32).13 Parenthetically, in
this context, Schopenhauer portrays Kant's purpose in offering transcenden-
tal arguments not as attempts at proof of validity, but instead of aprioricity,
and mentions Kant's method as an exception to the style of argument subject
to Aristotle's criticism.14
If Hamlyn's hypothesis is correct, and Schopenhauer means to advance the
circularity argument as an exercise in Aristotelian dialectical or Kantian
transcendental proof, then the circle is not supposed to justify the principle
of sufficient reason as valid or true, but only as a priori. Perhaps Schopenhauer
intends to treat all of Aristotle's dialectical and Kant's transcendental
arguments as proofs of aprioricity rather than validity or truth. Alternatively,
he might be understood as recognizing distinct roles for these kinds of
59

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
arguments, distinguishing among inferences within the category, some of
which are while others are not offered as demonstrations of a principle's
truth.
Schopenhauer provides no textual support for the hypothesis that
Aristotle or Kant regarded dialectical or transcendental proofs as anything
other than proofs of validity or truth. He quotes Aristotle in the Metaphys-
ics as saying that "They seek a reason for that which has no reason; for the
principle of demonstration is not a demonstration" (Metaphysics III, 6;
Posterior Analytics I, 3). What Aristotle says here, however, does not obvi-
ously substantiate Schopenhauer's point. He needs to say that the law of
(non-) contradiction is unsupported by reason, not that the principle of
demonstration (which Schopenhauer without further ado equates with the
principle of sufficient reason) does not admit of demonstration. Aristotle
merely asserts reasonably enough that the principle of demonstration is not
(itself) a demonstration.15
Schopenhauer's appeal to Kant's transcendental style of reasoning is
similarly ambiguous. He claims that Kant's transcendental proofs, at least
of the necessity of the law of causality, are not directed towards establish-
ing the truth or validity of causal law, but only its aprioricity (FFR: 32). We
should not accept this classification without taking note of some important
implications concerning which Schopenhauer is silent. Judgements in Kant's
philosophy are not a priori simpliciter, but a priori true or a priori false.16
Transcendental arguments construed as proofs of aprioricity in anything like
a Kantian framework must then demonstrate that a judgement is a priori true
or a priori false. This fact contradicts Schopenhauer's effort to drive a wedge
between demonstrations of truth or validity and Kantian proofs of aprioric-
ity. The proof of aprioricity is at once proof either of a judgement's validity
or truth, if the judgement is a priori true, or of the validity or truth of its
negation, if the judgement is a priori false.
There is no greater or more fundamental philosophical distinction between
arguments proving validity or aprioricity than there is between arguments
proving validity or truth and arguments proving invalidity or falsehood.
Furthermore, Schopenhauer explicitly accepts the principle of sufficient
reason as true. He does not banish it to a semantic no-man's-land of truth-
valueless constructions, but time and again refers to its validity or truth (FFR:
xxviii, 32-3,156-7). If the principle is true, and if there is a sufficient reason
why every true judgement is true rather than false, then how can there not be
a sufficient reason that justifies the principle of sufficient reason?
There is thus a relatively straightforward way to challenge Schopenhauer's
circle. All we need do is ask whether it is true that an absurdity or circular-
ity is involved in the demand for proof of the sufficient reason principle itself.
The circle is supposed to show that scepticism about the principle of
60

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
sufficient reason is irrational or unintelligible. We must therefore try to think
like a sceptic to determine whether the position is incoherent. Suppose we
doubt the principle, and want solid proof before we are willing to accept it.
Does it follow that in making this demand we are already implicitly
committed to the principle? No such conclusion can validly be inferred,
provided that we are being selectively sceptical. We may recognize that many
propositions, principles and theories are capable of proof, but this does not
oblige us to regard every true judgement as having a sufficient reason. In the
same way we can remain sceptical as to whether every event has a cause in
lieu of a decisive demonstration, which in another way questions the truth
of the principle of sufficient reason in its efficient causal root. We enquire,
in part as an expression of unsettled doubts as to whether in fact every true
judgement is supported by a sufficient reason, seeking to determine whether
or not the principle is true.
Schopenhauer assumes that if we demand proof in this instance, then we
automatically suppose that a positive proof is forthcoming. We thereby
presuppose the truth of the principle for which we disingenuously require
evidence. In one sense of "demand" this may well be so. The sense in which
we are entitled to demand such proof is the sense in which we demand proof
of any proposition put forward by proponents committed to its truth. If
someone asserts the truth of Goldbach's conjecture in elementary number
theory, that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two primes, then
we may naturally require that the thesis be proved before we accept it. Yet
surely in making this demand we do not assume or presuppose that the
conjecture is true; we call for proof precisely because we are not satisfied
that the proposition is true.
Not every demand or kind of demand presupposes even the logical
possibility of its own applicability. This is particularly so when the demand
for proof is issued from a sceptical standpoint about the proposition's truth.
It may nevertheless be imagined for a special category of principles, includ-
ing notably the principle of sufficient reason, the law of non-contradiction
in Aristotle's dialectical argument, and Kant's transcendental conclusions in
the exposition of his critical idealism, that scepticism is always circular,
absurd or self-defeating. Demanding proof of any of these, even from the
standpoint of an honest although possibly unreflective scepticism, is to
presuppose that the principles are true. If scepticism about the principles
themselves is unintelligible unless the principles are true or implicitly held
true, then to doubt them is irrational. How, on the other hand, can we
determine that there is such a category of principles, that the principle of
sufficient reason belongs to such a category, and that these preliminaries do
not constitute a proof for the truth (or aprioricity) of a principle that is
supposed to be unprovable?
61

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
We are confronted by several interconnected paradoxes of method. What
might Schopenhauer say about this situation? It appears that in order to
uphold the circle, Schopenhauer must implausibly argue that the principle
of sufficient reason is presupposed in every demand for proof. To ask for
reason or evidence for any assertion made by anyone under any circum-
stances is then tacitly to declare adherence to the principle that every occur-
rence or true judgement has a sufficient reason. The generality required to
carry Schopenhauer's conclusion is not found in and cannot be obtained
from the fact that every certified proof presupposes the principle. For this
is evidently compatible with a qualified acceptance of sufficient reason,
according to which some judgements are capable of proof, at least those for
which successful proofs have been given, as well as a cautious scepticism
about whether or not every true judgement can be explained by a sufficient
reason in terms of which the judgement is proved. If the principle belongs
to a special category of propositions that cannot intelligibly be doubted
without being presupposed, then even the sceptic is unknowingly commit-
ted to its truth in full generality. Hamlyn attempts to preserve the circle in
this way, when he contends in the passage referred to above: "Schopenhauer
thinks that the principle is in fact presupposed in any argument or proof;
hence to ask for a proof of the principle itself involves a circle, in that the
principle is presupposed in the very demand".17
Even if Schopenhauer's principle of sufficient reason is presupposed in any
argument or proof, blatantly begging the philosophically interesting question
here, and generating a vicious circle of its own, it still does not follow that the
sceptical demand for proof of the principle presupposes that the principle is
true. The demand for proof is not itself an argument or proof. If the demand
is not satisfied, that only contributes to scepticism about the principle's full
generality. Schopenhauer seems to believe that the right to demand proof can
only be licensed by the principle of sufficient reason. He claims that without
supposing every true judgement capable of proof the sceptic logically is not
permitted to doubt whether any particular true judgement, including the
principle of sufficient reason itself, is capable of sufficient reason or proof. If,
indeed, the principle of sufficient reason is false, then the sceptic's demand
for proof is not unintelligible, merely unsatisfiable.18
Schopenhauer's scientific method
The principle of sufficient reason supports a two-part application of scientific
method in Schopenhauer's philosophy. All occurrences in the world as
representation are capable of explanation, a reason why they occur rather
62

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
than fail to occur. Schopenhauer superimposes a taxonomy of tasks for
scientific explanation that is compatible with but not obviously necessitated
by his epistemology. He first distinguishes between descriptive and causal ex-
planatory tasks.
"Finally," Schopenhauer observes, "if we look at the wide province of
natural science, which is divided into many fields, we can first of all distin-
guish two main divisions. It is either a description of forms and shapes, which
I call Morphology; or an explanation of changes, which I call Etiology"
(WWR 1: 96). Although Schopenhauer considers morphology as the study
of "permanent forms", it is not clear that he need restrict the investigation
of types of objects belonging to a particular branch of science in terms of
their geometrical shapes. He subsequently expands the concept of natural
history to include the equivalent of a descriptive inventory of all the objects
appropriate to a science's specific subject matter. He clarifies the two
components in his division of scientific method:
The former considers the permanent forms, the latter the changing
matter, according to the laws of its transition from one form into
another. Morphology is what we call natural history in its whole
range, though not in the literal sense of the word. As botany and
zoology especially, it teaches us about the various, permanent,
organic, and thus definitely determined forms in spite of the inces-
sant change of individuals; and these forms constitute a great part
of the content of the perceptive representation. 
(WWR 1: 96)
"In natural history", he continues, "they are classified, separated, united,
and arranged according to natural and artificial systems, and brought
under concepts that render possible a survey and knowledge of them all"
(ibid.).
The idea is that for a natural science to proceed systematically the scientist
must first identify the range of objects that fall under its purview. Then specific
explanations of the relevant phenomena must be articulated under the
fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason. Science must explain
why such things exist and how they are interrelated, and devise ways to
predict their behaviour on the basis of the causal relations in which they
participate. In Chapter 12, "On the Doctrine of Science", in the second
volume and later edition of The World as Will and Representation^
Schopenhauer expands on his original two-part division of the tasks of natural
science. He explains the work of scientific method as a four-part project of
collecting data, forming abstractions that bring together under appropriate
heads the properties of the objects with which a given science is concerned,
examining and analysing the data and abstract concepts for the purpose of
63

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
"fully comprehending" them, and, finally, with this preparation in hand,
organizing the analysed abstractions into proofs constructed as syllogisms.
Thus, in this somewhat more complete but still naive characterization of
scientific method, Schopenhauer properly links together the two alternative
purposes of intuitive and abstract representation. The work of natural
science is offered as a systematic progression of specific objectives to be
undertaken in a definite order (WWR 2: 120). Intuitive representation enters
into a programme of scientific explanation in so far as it requires percep-
tion, judgement and intuitive classification. These factors are needed espe-
cially in the recognition of causal connections and the similarities between
individual objects and aggregates of objects. It is by virtue of such proper-
ties and causal interrelations that the objects of scientific study are classified
together under a single abstraction. The collection of data in the form of
perceived instances organized under abstractions makes it possible to
construct theories designed to explain the objects and events in question.
Such principles of explanation are at last structured into deductive syllogisms
for purposes of codification, communication and application.
The limitations of this caricature of natural science are transparent.
Anyone familiar with the way scientific research is actually conducted will
appreciate the crudeness of Schopenhauer's description. The naivety of his
philosophy of science is reminiscent of Francis Bacon's oversimplification
of the new method of investigating nature in Novum Organon. Bacon argues
that if we simply collect data about the world, the information will more or
less organize itself into specific categories ready for abstraction and hypoth-
esis.19 Schopenhauer is almost as myopic as Bacon about the extratheoretical
collection of relevant data and its virtually automatic organization into
abstract concepts and categories. He does not even consider the need for
hypothesis and testing in the confirmation or disconfirmation of hypotheses,
as an essential part of scientific enquiry. While Bacon, in the seventeenth
century at the very dawn of modern natural science, might be more easily
excused for misdescribing the difficulties confronting scientific theorizing,
Schopenhauer, more than two hundred years after the time of Galileo,
Descartes and Newton, in the context of early-nineteenth-century natural
science, has less justification for failing to recognize the real complications.
The fact that Schopenhauer limits theoretical scientific explanations to those
that can be formulated as syllogisms is another indication of his antiquated
view of scientific method.
Despite these shortcomings, Schopenhauer's philosophy of science offers
a valuable perspective on empirical observation and theory. The natural
world can be understood at least in part and at some level through percep-
tion, conceptualization, theorization and explanation. We should recall that
Schopenhauer began his university studies in medicine, and as such has more
64

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
than an average philosophical acquaintance with the methods and princi-
ples of empirical science as it existed in his day. Although Schopenhauer does
not properly recognize the roles of hypothesis and hypothesis testing, his
requirements for explanation, even if too narrowly construed in terms of
classical syllogisms as the only systematization of logical inference available
at the time, at least provides a framework for hypothesis construction.
Schopenhauer's concepts of intuitive and abstract forms of knowledge are
interrelated in his philosophy of science. He connects the two types of
knowledge as complementary moments in the scientific enterprise. His ideal
of scientific method begins with intuitive representation, observation,
perception and experience of the natural world of objects and events, and
concludes with abstract ideas, laws and principles formulated in logical
inferences for purposes of explanation. The principles of science, as
Schopenhauer also holds in the case of the rules of logic, music, art and
morality, can be presented syllogistically. They are not formulated for the
sake of arriving at correct judgements about the nature of reality, but for
convenience in codifying, communicating and applying the intuitively
justified conclusions of scientific theory.
An important example of the interpenetration of empirical observation
and transcendental metaphysics in Schopenhauer's philosophy of science is
seen in his ontological reduction of matter to causality. Schopenhauer relies
on the telescoping of matter into causality in endorsing a fourfold rather than
fivefold root of the principle of sufficient reason. "Now in just the same
way", he says:
he who has recognized that form of the principle of sufficient reason
which governs the content of those forms (of time and space), their
perceptibility, i.e., matter, and hence the law of causality, has thereby
recognized the entire essence and nature of matter as such; for
matter is absolutely nothing but causality, as anyone sees immedi-
ately the moment he reflects on it. 
(WWR 1:8)
The principle by which Schopenhauer proposes to reduce matter to
causality is to consider how matter figures into the scientific explanation of
physical substances. The analysis of matter as causality is not the discovery
of an open-ended enquiry on Schopenhauer's part. As a transcendental
idealist, he cannot countenance the external existence of mind-independent
matter. For Schopenhauer, as for Kant, causality is a category of the
understanding. It is as much a property of the representing subject as space
and time are perceptual forms or pure forms of intuition. If we think of
causation as a relation among spatiotemporal objects or events, then we can-
not separate causality from the mind's forms. "Thus [the] being [of matter]
65

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
is its acting", Schopenhauer adds; "it is not possible to conceive for it any
other being. Only as something acting does it fill space and time; its action on
the immediate object (which is itself matter) conditions the perception in
which alone it exists" (WWR 1: 8-9). Matter is nothing real in and of itself.
It is only known and only knowable, as in the equations of mathematical phys-
ics, in terms of its physical activity, which we can interpret in more contem-
porary terms by reference to energy and force fields. Schopenhauer's
reduction of matter to causality depends in part on epistemic considerations.
He argues that the only way we can come to know about the existence or
properties of matter is through whatever effects we discover are brought
about in events by observing the changes they produce (WWR 1:9).
There can be no special category for matter in Schopenhauer's metaphys-
ics. Material substance, like the rest of the world as representation, is always
an object for a subject. Matter is not thing-in-itself, and consequently cannot
coherently be supposed to exist independently of thought. It exists only as
representation within the representational thoughts of an individual repre-
senting subject. Matter, like space and time, is ideal. It nevertheless appears
at least superficially to be something solid and enduring. We naturally think
of it as beginning in time before and outliving the individual subject within
space and time. We believe it to be indifferent to perceivers coming and
going, observing the world of matter as something that exists independently
of thought from their particular perspectives.
Schopenhauer must effectively challenge this common-sense conception
in order to uphold his radical scepticism. He tries to do so by turning the
concept of matter in science against itself. Scientific explanations of material
substances are directly concerned only with what matter does, its activity and
power to bring about change. That is to say, with its causality. Causality,
however, Schopenhauer asserts on Kantian grounds, is a subjective,
ideational concept of the understanding. It is a product of thinking, and with-
out thinking subjects there can be no causation. There is no causality for
thing-in-itself, because causal relations take place in space and time, which
thing-in-itself transcends. Where thing-in-itself is concerned, there are no
objects or subjects, no interpresuppositional subject-object, and hence no
space or time in which the active powers to which matter reduces in
Schopenhauer's metaphysics can be engaged. If causality is nothing
independently real, but belongs only to the subject, and if matter is causal-
ity, then, as an idealist like Schopenhauer sympathetic to Berkeley's idealism
is compelled to argue, matter is nothing independent of thought. Rather, like
all other aspects of the world as representation, matter, and physical real-
ity generally, belong ideationally only to the thought processes of the
representing subject (WN: 85-97; FFR: 46-50, 56).
66

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
Limits of empirical knowledge
At its best, empirical science can do nothing to uncover the hidden nature
of the world. Natural science can explain any and every aspect of the world
as representation under the principle of sufficient reason. Science can do
nothing at all, on the other hand, to explain what lies beyond the world as
representation in or concerning the existence or character of thing-in-itself.
Schopenhauer builds on his prior reduction of matter to causality to
dramatize the limits of empirical science in explaining the world as repre-
sentation. The epistemic boundary of the fourfold root is the same as the
metaphysical boundary of the prindpium individuationis, and hence of the
world as representation. What lies on the opposite side, beyond the reach
of natural science, is scientifically unknowable thing-in-itself. A proper
etiological understanding of the causal mechanisms of physical phenomena
shows how little of metaphysical interest can be accomplished in scientific
explanation. Natural science, in its preoccupation with causal interrelations,
can only explain how objects and events within the world as representation
are arranged in regular succession, temporal order and spatial proximity or
propinquity, as David Hume observes concerning the origin of the idea of
causation in A Treatise of Human Nature.2®
Natural science cannot possibly hope to penetrate beyond the limits of
representation to reveal anything of substance concerning the hidden nature
of reality, which Kant and Schopenhauer refer to as thing-in-itself. The
scientific study of the world of nature, the representational order of things,
merely whets the metaphysician's appetite for something more. What is
kindled thereby is a desire for the kind of insight that is strictly needed in
order to understand fully the nature of reality that empirical science can only
partially disclose. If we thirst for greater insight into what is real, then we
shall begin to long for transcendence of the world as representation. We shall
then be moved to look beyond the principle of individuation and the four
types of explanation to which scientific explanation is inherently confined
in order to consider the nature of thing-in-itself.
"On the other hand," Schopenhauer states:
etiology teaches us that, according to the law of cause and effect,
this definite condition of matter produces that other condition, and
with this it has explained it, and has done its part. At bottom,
however, it does nothing more than show the orderly arrangement
according to which the states or conditions appear in space and time,
and teach for all cases what phenomenon must necessarily appear
at this time and in this place. 
(WWR 1: 97)
67

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The kinds of explanation available within natural science point toward some-
thing beyond the world as representation. They do so by virtue of the fact
that scientific explanations involve a universal form and a lawlike necessity
that are not validly derived from passive perceptual experience of the world
encountered only as representation.
"This is called a natural force", Schopenhauer explains, speaking of what-
ever hidden factors support empirical phenomena in the natural world as
representation, that "lies outside the province of etiological explanation,
which calls the unalterable constancy with which the manifestation of such
a force appears whenever its known conditions are present, a law of nature"
(WWR 1: 97). When we undertake etiological scientific enquiry, trying to
determine the nomic causal interrelations among occurrences, representa-
tional knowledge can only take us so far. We soon run into limits beyond
which we cannot expect empirical confirmation for the explanations we
would like to be able to give. We cannot peer beyond the constant regulari-
ties that constitute causal connections between event types, because to do
so would require lifting what Schopenhauer speaks of as the veil of Maya.,
invoking the Vedic myth of the cloaking of reality behind a tissue of illusion.
There is nothing for us empirically to discover beyond the constant conjunc-
tion of events, as Hume observes. Confronted with the brute facts of constant
regularity in successions of event types, we are driven to posit natural forces
and natural laws. These summarize the conclusions of our intuitive repre-
sentations in abstract form, but they offer nothing to explain why in the first
place such constant conjunctions of event types occur.
Mechanics is the natural science that most perfectly identifies the abstract
principles of mathematical physics. Schopenhauer remarks that even in this
branch of science, dedicated to discovering the regularities that govern the
motions of projectiles and planets, falling bodies and inclined planes, the
impact and repulsion of physical entities in collision, and the like, etiology
is capable of nothing more than abstracting regularities from observed
phenomena without offering the slightest explanation as to how or why such
regularities occur. The same is true to an even greater degree, according to
Schopenhauer, with respect to the less rigorously developed sciences of
biology or physiology (WWR 1: 97).
He summarizes the purpose of mechanics and other exact sciences as
establishing purely etiological interconnections among physical entities. As
such, there is no more for the natural sciences to do than to collect infor-
mation about regular recurrences among events. These are conveniently
expressed as the effects of natural forces and summarized as natural laws,
concerning which natural science can never hope to offer a deeper or more
penetrating explanation. The natural sciences, pressed as far as they can go
in trying to explain the world, run up against the invisible barrier that divides
68

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
the world as representation from thing-in-itself. The explanatory limitations
of empirical science in this way suggest the existence of a reality beyond
appearance that transcends the empirical spatiotemporal physical order, and
that is considered only superficially and etiologically even in the greatest
advances of mathematical physics (WWR 1: 97-8).
Where natural science fails, we can only proceed by turning to the prin-
ciples of transcendental metaphysics. It is in this context that Schopenhauer
proposes to explain thing-in-itself as that which grounds, objectifies and
manifests itself in the represented objects that appear within the thoughts
of representing subjects. Having confronted the limitations of the world as
representation by pursuing causal explanation under the fourfold root of the
principle of sufficient reason, and longing for further insight into the hidden
workings of things, we are moved to seek answers beyond the limits of the
phenomenal world as representation. Schopenhauer, accordingly, invokes
thing-in-itself as that which in Kantian terms appears and is known only
through the perception of its appearances in the phenomenal world, which
it transcends.
Transition from natural science in the
world as representation to metaphysics of the
world as thing-in-itself
We are now prepared with Schopenhauer to proceed from empirical
scientific investigations of the world as representation and a philosophical
appreciation of the limits of the only possible methodologies of natural
science to a yearning for deeper insight into what lies beyond. We under-
take in this way a transition from representational phenomena to non-
representational Kantian thing-in-itself. When we have exhausted the
possibilities of natural science and understood that its etiological explana-
tions under the principle of sufficient reason cannot account for the hidden
workings of natural forces or for how or why the causal regularities they
collect together as natural laws obtain, then we are ready to take the next
step from natural science to transcendental metaphysics.
In Chapter 17, "On Man's Need for Metaphysics", in the second edition
of The World as Will and Representation, Schopenhauer introduces the
concept of metaphysics as a speculative enterprise concerning the hidden
nature that transcends the world as representation. He describes the project
of metaphysics as taking thought beyond the limits of representation (WWR
2: 164). The transition from natural science to the metaphysics of thing-in-
itself is a continuation of the effort to demarcate the limits of empirical
69

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
knowledge and pure reason, in which Schopenhauer acknowledges his
intellectual debt to Kant:
I admit entirely Kant's doctrine that the world of experience is mere
phenomenon, and that knowledge a priori is valid only in reference
thereto; but I add that, precisely as phenomenal appearance, it is the
manifestation of that which appears, and with him I call that which
appears the thing-in-itself. Therefore, this thing-in-itself must
express its inner nature and character in the world of experience;
consequently it must be possible to interpret these from it, and
indeed from the material, not from the mere form, of experience.
Accordingly, philosophy is nothing but the correct and universal
understanding of experience itself, the true interpretation of its
meaning and content. This is the metaphysical, in other words, that
which is merely clothed in the phenomenon and veiled in its forms,
that which is related to the phenomenon as the thought or idea is
to the words. 
(WWR 2: 183-4)
We need metaphysics because, once we understand the inherent limita-
tions of natural science, we understand that it can never satisfy the desire
for knowledge that draws us to science in the first place. We want to know
that even our natural scientific explanations are based upon something more
fundamental than appearance, on something that is true and unalterably real,
as the metaphysical underpinning of science.
The entire first book of The World as Will and Representation is devoted
exclusively to the world as representation. There we are offered an inside
look at the workings of natural science, its scope and limitations. In princi-
ple we can discover a sufficient reason why everything exists, why everything
in the world of experience is as it is. There are no inexplicable phenomena
as long as we recognize that they are only phenomena. We must understand
that our explanations under the fourfold root can only take us so far. They
serve us well up to, but cannot help us to go beyond, the division between
the world as representation to which scientific explanations are necessarily
limited, and thing-in-itself. That is where Schopenhauer promises to pursue
his enquiry next. He offers insight into the world beyond representation,
beyond the principles of individuation and sufficient reason, and the
explanations of natural phenomena afforded by the most complete empiri-
cal science, to the non-representational insights of transcendental meta-
physics.
70

CHAPTER THREE
Willing and the world as Will
Here we already see that we can never get at the inner nature of
things from without. However much we may investigate, we obtain
nothing but images and names. We are like a man who goes around
a castle, looking in vain for an entrance, and sometimes sketching
the facades. Yet this is the path that all philosophers before me have
followed. 
(WWR1:99)
Thing-in-itself
We now stand ready with Schopenhauer to cross over from the world as
representation to thing-in-itself. Schopenhauer observes that no previous
philosophers had been able to make progress with respect to understanding
thing-in-itself, but have had to satisfy themselves with only negative
characterizations of it as unknowable. They have thought of it only as some-
thing other than the world of phenomena, as noumena, in Kant's critical
idealist terminology, or that which lies beyond the veil of Maya.
What shall we find on the other side? In one sense, we should have learned
from Schopenhauer's discussion of explanation in the world as representa-
tion that such a question as it would usually be understood is misplaced. We
are not literally travelling across a borderline where we can exercise our
ordinary methods of gathering information and verifying knowledge in the
transcendental world just as in the empirical. Schopenhauer states that we
cannot hope to acquire representational knowledge of thing-in-itself. The
most we can expect in transcendental metaphysics is insight, intuitive grasp
or inchoate understanding of thing-in-itself. He maintains that we can non-
representationally know the nature of thing-in-itself as Will. We must try to
understand what he means by this and why he thinks it is true, as it is key
71

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
to all the other conclusions in his idealist philosophy. Schopenhauer relates
his discussion of thing-in-itself to Kant's noumenal reality in these terms:
[T]o use Kant's language, time, space, and causality do not belong
to the thing-in-itself, but only to its appearance or phenomenon, of
which they are the form. In my language, this means that the objec-
tive world, the world as representation, is not the only side of the
world, but merely its external side, so to speak, and that the world
has an entirely different side which is its innermost being, its kernel,
the thing-in-itself. This we shall consider in the following book,
calling it "will" after the most immediate of its objectifications. But
the world as representation, with which alone we are dealing here,
certainly begins only with the opening of the first eye, and without
this medium of knowledge it cannot be, and hence before this it did
not exist. But without that eye, in other words, outside of knowl-
edge, there was no before, no time. For this reason, time has no
beginning, but all beginning is in time. 
(WWR 1: 30-31)
Again, Schopenhauer mentions the first eye opening as the defining
moment of the world as representation. The beginnings of things, their past
history, are projected backwards from within rather than originating at the
inception of time. Space and time come into existence with the first repre-
sentation, which presupposes the perception of a representing subject
through which the represented object also comes into being. This is not yet
thing-in-itself, which is something altogether different from the world as
representation, and consequently beyond all space, time and causality.
Schopenhauer does not speak of thing-in-itself as Kantian noumenon. The
terminological differences between Kant and Schopenhauer on this point are
important, because they indicate the extent to which Schopenhauer believes
he has surpassed Kant's critical idealism. Kant's term "noumenon" means
literally that which is known only to the mind as something conceivable. It
is at most a kind of X or blank space in Kant's metaphysics, because for Kant
we can know nothing more about it. Schopenhauer proposes to fill in the
blank with an explication of thing-in-itself as Will. He argues that in an
unexpected way we can move beyond Kant's distinction between the world
as it is represented to thought and thing-in-itself to gain a correct understand-
ing of reality beyond the world as representation.1
Schopenhauer proposes to take a giant step beyond the unknowability of
transcendent reality. While remaining truer, he believes, to the main lines
of Kant's philosophy than any of his contemporaries, he argues that the
world as thing-in-itself is Will. By this choice of term he proposes to convey
his insight that the world in reality, independent of its representation in
72

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
thought, is blind urging, undirected desire, or objectless and hence subject-
less, uncaused, unmotivated striving. Schopenhauer intends these pro-
nouncements quite literally. Ultimately, his doctrine of thing-in-itself as Will
identifies thing-in-itself as existing within the subject at the core of all
phenomenal willing. In a certain sense, thing-in-itself is identical with the
individual subject when considered as pure willing. Thing-in-itself in
Schopenhauer's transcendental metaphysics turns out, remarkably enough,
to be identical with the fundamental pure willing that underlies each
individual willing, knowing, representing subject.
World as Will
It may be worthwhile, before entering into Schopenhauer's reasons for
identifying thing-in-itself with Will, to reflect on the strangeness of his con-
clusion. Without trying to do justice to the implications of Schopenhauer's
concept of the world as Will, we can begin to appreciate the revolutionary
force of suggesting, even metaphorically or analogically, that the world in
reality, independently of the way it is represented to thought as a dynamic
spatiotemporal order of causally interrelated physical events and the empiri-
cally perceivable properties of empirically perceivable entities, is Will.
We are familiar with willing in the ordinary sense through everyday first-
person acts of volition. In willing to do something, we decide upon a course
of action, and then as a rule make an effort to carry out the intention in
practice. The idea is that in such instances we are engaged in the pursuit of
a desire that impels us to motion. We must be careful not to confuse the
properties of psychological willing as we experience it phenomenologically
or introspectively with whatever Schopenhauer means by the non-represen-
tational nature of thing-in-itself as Will. We glimpse what Schopenhauer has
in mind by this identification if we begin with a commonplace episode of
volition and try to think away from it the prominent features that may
otherwise seem to be essential to ordinary willing. These are the cause and
motivation for willing, the willing subject and with it necessarily the object.
If we can accomplish this conceptual feat, subtracting these factors from
phenomenal willing, we shall be left only with what is absolutely essential
to an everyday act of will. This is pure willing, willing itself or as it is in itself,
which Schopenhauer refers to as Will. Pure willing or Will in Schopenhauer's
transcendental metaphysics satisfies the conceptual requirements of thing-
in-itself, implying that thing-in-itself is Will.
Schopenhauer describes his revelation of thing-in-itself from behind
the veil of Maya as a way of gaining entrance to a fortress. Rather than
73

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
battering futilely against its ramparts, Schopenhauer seeks to enter by
subterfuge. If we confine ourselves to empirical investigations, we shall
inevitably remain outside the impenetrable fortress walls, excluded from
entry. We can circle the fortress repeatedly without finding a way in, just as
Schopenhauer says of conventional theorists who try to gain access to the
reality of things, to thing-in-itself, as though it was merely another subject for
empirical study. These deluded metaphysicians, as he thinks of them, limit
themselves to the external surfaces explainable only as features of the world
as representation to be known as intuitive or abstract theoretical representa-
tions. From Schopenhauer's account of the limits of empirical knowledge, we
recognize that such methods can never take us beyond the boundary that
divides the world as representation from thing-in-itself. A superficial
metaphysics can never lead us to an understanding of the mind-independent
world of reality beyond its mere appearances as objects in relation to a subject.
What we need in order to enter the fortress is a strategy like the one the
ancient Greeks are supposed to have devised to break the ten-year seige at
the battle of Troy. We need a way of sneaking into the fortress whose walls
we cannot otherwise breach. Schopenhauer in effect describes individual
willing as a kind of Trojan horse by which, through stealth, we can penetrate
the otherwise invincible curtain of the world as representation to reach thing-
in-itself on the other side. No matter what we study or how we try to study
thing-in-itself by the limited means available to science or conventional
metaphysics, we can only theorize the existence of explanatory connections
linking represented objects or events with one another. The Trojan horse that
we can think of metaphorically as Schopenhauer's proposal for entering the
fortress is none other than individual will in the sense of a volitional act as
we know it phenomenologically in empirical psychology. The fact that we
rational beings are capable of willing as well as knowing is exploited by
Schopenhauer as the point of entry he seeks. There understanding can cross
over from the world as representation to insight into the transcendental
metaphysics of thing-in-itself, which in the process he discovers to be pure
willing or Will.
First argument for thing-in-itself as Will
Schopenhauer offers what appear to be two distinct arguments, or perhaps
a single argument that lends itself to two different interpretations. The
inferences appear in the first and second volumes of The World as Will and
Representation. The chronology of their separate publication suggests that
in the intervening 26 years between the first and second editions of the text
74

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
Schopenhauer may have changed his mind. He may have rethought the
topic, or at least the exact presentation of the reasoning he intended, possibly
reconsidering what would provide the most acceptable basis for his conclu-
sion.
The first argument trades on what Schopenhauer describes merely as an
analogy between individual empirical willing and his interpretation of thing-
in-itself as Will. He begins where he left off in considering the explanatory
limitations of empirical science in the world as representation under the
fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason: "what now prompts us
to make enquiries", he writes:
is that we are not satisfied with knowing that we have representa-
tions, that they are such and such, and that they are connected
according to this or that law, whose general expression is always the
principle of sufficient reason. We want to know the significance of
those representations; we ask whether this world is nothing more
than representation. In that case, it would inevitably pass by us like
an empty dream, or a ghostly vision not worth our consideration.
(WWR 1:98-9)
Far from satisfying us, the most intimate familiarity with represented objects
gained through science only makes us wonder more urgently whether there
is anything more to reality transcending the bounds of sense. That which we
seek, if it exists at all, must take its principles from beyond the limits of
perception (WWR 1: 99).
Schopenhauer projects a quest for greater metaphysical understanding.
He describes a psychological perspective on the attitude that leads enquiry
from the limitations of the world as representation to the discovery of some-
thing more. Why are we so inclined? Schopenhauer's conjecture is that, in
the active contemplation of empirical phenomena, we eventually come to
the conclusion that if there is only appearance, then the physical world of
experience is essentially of no greater significance than an "empty dream"
or "ghostly vision" that passes by like a magic lantern show. He seems to
believe that we would be justifiably disappointed if the world should turn
out to be no more than such a parade of representations, with nothing more
substantial behind it. We are in any case properly motivated at least by sheer
curiosity to want to determine whether there is not another aspect of reality
that is not exhausted by the ways in which the world appears to perception
in empirical knowledge and scientific explanation. Schopenhauer's interest
in Plato's philosophy makes it natural to compare his remarks about the
limitations of the phenomenal world with what Socrates says in the Republic
concerning prisoners in the famous allegory of the cave. These unfortunates
75

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
are chained in such a way that they can never directly experience ordinary
physical things, but see only images made by a backlit fire that casts shadows
from the puppets and other moving objects displayed behind them along a
gallery.2
The person who is dissatisfied with limited knowledge of the empirical
world recognizes that the answers to questions about the hidden workings
of nature can only be found beyond the world of representation. The search
for greater understanding must consequently be directed toward something
other than the superficial representations of ephemeral things in the
phenomenal world of perception. Schopenhauer refers to this as the "inner"
or hidden nature of the manifestations that appear to the senses. He argues
that each knowing subject has the answer to the problem of thing-in-itself
within first-person knowledge.
He begins by distinguishing between internal and external self-knowledge,
as two kinds of knowledge of the human body. External knowledge is gained
through perception. It is the representation of the body in sensation, the
features of it we can see, hear, feel, smell, and taste, just as we can of any
other physical entity in the world as representation. The internal knowledge
we have of our own bodies is acquired through first-person experience of
willing and acts of will in action, directing the movements of the body from
within through volitional decision and resolve. Schopenhauer asks, "What
is this world of perception besides being my representation? Is that of which
I am conscious only as representation just the same as my own body, of which
I am doubly conscious, on the one hand as representation, on the other as
willl" (WWR 1: 18). Later, he maintains that the dual nature of our bodies,
and corresponding to it our dual knowledge of its nature, suggests the same
two ways of coming to know or understand the world at large. If the world
as a whole has both an inner and external side, if we can know about its
external representational side through perception, then, as we become aware
of the limitations of exploring and theorizing about the phenomenal world,
we may increasingly feel the need to turn from natural science to transcen-
dental metaphysics. It is only there that we can consider the inner knowledge
of our bodies in acts of will as a key to the inner hidden nature of the world.
By analogy, if inner knowledge of the body's actions reveals individual will,
as the hidden side of its parts and qualities known externally by perception,
then insight into or understanding of the hidden inner nature of the world
as thing-in-itself can similarly be referred to as Will. Schopenhauer explains:
He would then also call the inner, to him incomprehensible, nature
of those manifestations and actions of his body a force, a quality, or
a character, just as he pleased, but he would have no further insight
into it. All this, however, is not the case; on the contrary, the answer
76

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
to the riddle is given to the subject of knowledge appearing as
individual, and this answer is given in the word Will. This and this
alone gives him the key to his own phenomenon, reveals to him the
significance and shows him the inner mechanism of his being, his
actions, his movements. To the subject of knowing, who appears as
an individual only through his identity with the body, this body is
given in two entirely different ways. 
(WWR 1: 100)
The inner awareness of our bodies consists of direct experience of acts
of will through which we exercise control over our body movements. It is
this non-representational "knowledge" of the body that we obtain through
the inward direction and control of its motion when we choose to do some-
thing and then carry out the intent in voluntary activity.
The analogy crucial to Schopenhauer's first argument for thing-in-itself
as Will identifies thing-in-itself as the hidden inner side of the world as
representation, the non-representational understanding of which in both
cases provides insight into whatever it is that transcends perceptual experi-
ence of external appearance. Inner awareness of the individual will is a kind
of Trojan horse through which Schopenhauer proposes to disclose the nature
of thing-in-itself. The analogy implies that the world of representation is to
thing-in-itself as our external bodies experienced in sensation are to the inner
workings of our individual wills. We do not yet necessarily know whether
there is anything more to the world than we experience perceptually in its
representations and can explain scientifically within the limits of the
principle of sufficient reason. At this stage we are only asking out of
dissatisfaction with the limits of superficial investigation of the world as
representation whether or not there might not be something more, some-
thing deeper and hidden behind the veil of Maya.
There is nothing we are more immediately familiar with or know more
intimately than our own bodies. If there are only two ways in which we can
know our bodies - through perceptual representation of the body's external
appearance and inner understanding of the activity of will - then it seems
reasonable to consider these same two modes of knowledge with respect to
the world. The world is evidently divided into external and internal aspects,
appearance or representation and thing-in-itself. Perhaps, then, the same inner
faculty that produces one kind of knowledge of the body can also be used to
reveal the hidden inner nature of thing-in-itself. If we have just these two and
no other ways of knowing about our bodies, if we are so fortunately placed
as to have external and inner knowledge here in the microcosm of reality in
which the representing, knowing and willing subject is embodied, then we
might be justified in pursuing these same two modes of knowing to the
macrocosm of the entire world. The workings of the individual will are hidden
77

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
and representationally unknowable to ourselves and others. We do not see or
otherwise perceive the will in the bodies of other representing subjects. Nor,
for that matter, do we perceive or represent to ourselves our own personal
first-person individual acts of willing. We are directly aware of our own willing
in another, non-representational, way, through the very act of willing our
bodies to move and living through the motions that result as we exercise
inward control of our bodies' movements. Thing-in-itself, by analogy, as the
inner nature of the world as representation at large, is best understood as
something like the individual will actively functioning as the hidden princi-
ple of motion in the inner nature of the individual subject's representational
body. It is for this reason, in his first analogical argument, that Schopenhauer
concludes that thing-in-itself is appropriately designated as Will.
Schopenhauer leans heavily on the consideration that, in addition to
external knowledge by perception and inner awareness of the activity of will,
there is, in familiarity with our own bodies, no other known or even
conceivable mode of knowledge. Although he does not quite present things
in this way, it is natural to add that were it not for the fact that we happen
to be volitional as well as cognitive agents, willing as well as knowing beings,
we would not even have a dual-mode capacity for knowing about and
understanding the hidden inner nature of the world as representation and
as thing-in-itself. When we reflect on the epistemology supported by the
kinds of knowing subjects we are, in intuitive and abstract representation and
in awareness of willing and the wilful ("will-ful") active direction and control
of our body movements, we should ask whether we can make sense of
anything over and above these two ways of "knowing". It strengthens
Schopenhauer's inference to consider that these are the only two possibili-
ties conceivable to us, given our nature as thinking subjects. Schopenhauer
asks, in effect, what else could there be?
The double knowledge which we have of the nature and action of
our own body, and which is given in two completely different ways,
has now been clearly brought out. Accordingly, we shall use it
further as a key to the inner being of every phenomenon in nature.
We shall judge all objects which are not our own body, and therefore
are given to our consciousness not in the double way, but only as
representations, according to the analogy of this body. We shall
therefore assume that as, on the one hand, they are representation,
just like our body, and are in this respect homogeneous with it, so on
the other hand, if we set aside their existence as the subject's
representation, what still remains over must be, according to its
inner nature, the same as what in ourselves we call will. For what
other kind of existence or reality could we attribute to the rest of the
78

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
material world? From what source could we take the elements out of
which we construct such a world? Besides the will and the represen-
tation, there is absolutely nothing known or conceivable for us.
(WWR1: 104-5)
In the same way that individual willing expresses itself in the body's
actions, so thing-in-itself as Will expresses itself in the world as representa-
tion. The analogy turns out to be essential to every further implication of
Schopenhauer's philosophy built around the central distinction between
world as representation and thing-in-itself as Will. He concludes, as a result,
among other things, that there is a character of the world considered as the
expression of Will, in the same way that each subject has a moral psycho-
logical character. Individual character is reflected in action as the expression
of phenomenal willing. What is identified by analogy as the character of the
world as Will has startling ramifications for ethics, politics, aesthetics and
religious salvation, as well as the metaphysics of natural laws studied in
physics and the biological sciences (WWR 1: 107).
Schopenhauer recalls his previous distinction between intuitive and
abstract knowledge. We cannot have abstract knowledge of thing-in-itself,
but only an intuitive understanding derived from direct experience of our
own individual willing as we direct and control the motions of our bodies
in action. Schopenhauer has already warned us that the failure to grasp these
kinds of intuitive relations indicates a lack of high intelligence, and that it
is a mistake to substitute for such knowledge an appeal to abstract princi-
ples expressed in the form of a syllogism. Such demonstrations can at best
only come afterwards, when thought has arrived at an intuitive insight into
the relevant relations. We have already seen that Schopenhauer denies logic
any practical utility, arguing that it is useful only for codifying, communi-
cating and applying relations that have been independently intuited. The
same is now said to be true in the case of intuitively grasping the fundamental
metaphysical insight that thing-in-itself is Will. By analogy with our dual
external and internal knowledge of our bodies, Schopenhauer maintains that
we can directly and concretely come to feel that thing-in-itself is Will.
We misunderstand the purpose of his analogy if we suppose that the
argument is meant to be assimilated as an item of abstract theoretical
knowledge. Schopenhauer proposes instead to guide thought to the same
intuitive grasp of truth that led to his revelation of thing-in-itself as Will. We
know the body externally through perception in representational knowledge,
and internally from the effects of will on the body's actions. Schopenhauer
claims that everyone in principle has both types of knowledge at their
fingertips, if only it is pointed out to them. "From all these considerations",
he advises:
79

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
the reader has now gained in the abstract, and hence in clear and
certain terms, a knowledge which everyone possesses directly in the
concrete, namely as feeling. This is the knowledge that the inner
nature of his own phenomenon, which manifests itself to him as
representation both through his actions and through the permanent
substratum of these his body, is his will. 
(WWR 1: 109)
Schopenhauer's purpose in working out an abstract analogical argument
for the identification of thing-in-itself with Will is to bring to immediate
awareness something that everyone already "knows". He believes that
everyone possesses at least an implicit feeling that thing-in-itself is Will, and
that the world has the same internal-external duality as the body. The body
as a physical entity and wilful agent on this analogy is the microcosm of the
world at large, respectively, as representation and Will. Acting in a certain
way, we reveal in outward body language our inner character, which we
know more immediately from inner first-person volitional control of the
body's external movements. Schopenhauer relates the inner-outer
dichotomy in body knowledge to a parallel inner-outer dichotomy in the
world taken as a whole. There is a similar feeling concerning the relation
between external knowledge of the world as representation and the inner
non-representational "knowledge" or understanding, insight or feeling of
thing-in-itself as something willing or will-like, which he refers to here by
analogy in his first argument as Will (WWR 1: 109).
Schopenhauer indicates the analogical inference by which he proposes to
identify thing-in-itself as Will. He announces his intention to borrow the
terminology of willing from what he describes as the "most complete" of
thing-in-itself's phenomena, which he attributes to individual acts of willing:
Now, if this thing-in-itself(we will retain the Kantian expression as
a standing formula) - which as such is never object, since all object
is its mere appearance or phenomenon, and not it itself - is to be
thought of objectively, then we must borrow its name and concept
from an object, from something in some way objectively given, and
therefore from one of its phenomena. But in order to serve as a point
of explanation, this can be none other than the most complete of
all its phenomena, i.e., the most distinct, the most developed, the
most directly enlightened by knowledge; but this is precisely man's
will. 
(WWR1: 110)
The analogy in Schopenhauer's first argument identifying thing-in-itself
as Will raises several questions. There are conceptual problems affecting both
parts of the comparison on which it depends. First, the perceptual knowledge
80

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
of the body is not merely analogous to, but is precisely the same perceptual
mode of cognition as that involved in knowledge of the world as represen-
tation in its entirety. Perceptual knowledge of the body is not merely
analogous to knowledge of the world as representation as a whole, and hence
not a basis for analogical inference, but is rather a focus of perceptual
knowledge directed specifically to the individual knowing subject's body.
Secondly, the business end of the analogy concerning the relation between
the will as the body's inner principle and the Will as thing-in-itself for the
greater "body" of the world as representation is weak and conjectural.
What must be true in order for the analogy to hold? How are we supposed
to know that inner knowledge of the body in acts of will corresponds
analogically to thing-in-itself as inner principle of the world, and is there-
fore interpretable as Will? The will as we experience it introspectively or
phenomenologically is temporal if not spatial, directed toward specific
intended objects, motivated, purposive and individuated as the willing of a
particular subject. In particular, it is the willing of the knowing subject
reflecting on the analogy and considering its content in order to obtain
understanding of the hidden inner nature of thing-in-itself. Why should a
theorist conclude, as a result of Schopenhauer's analogy, that thing-in-itself
is Will, given that there are also significant disanalogies between the
individual will and thing-in-itself? What could possibly sustain the analogy
if Schopenhauer does not simply beg the crucial question? He seems to
assume rather than prove that thing-in-itself is sufficiently will-like to merit
referring to it as Will. He believes from the outset that thing-in-itself is an
active principle that moves the world from behind the scenes in something
like the way that the individual will exercises control over the body whose
motions it directs. The assumption is logically incompatible with Schopen-
hauer's insistence that thing-in-itself has no causal efficacy, as he complains
in criticizing Kant's proof for the existence of thing-in-itself.3
The individual willing subject exercises control over body movements by
possessing certain properties of agency that Schopenhauer denies can ever
hold true of thing-in-itself. The individual will, unlike thing-in-itself, is
motivated to act. It directs its actions toward intended objects, and so may
be caused to will by external events, while acting from within in turn to cause
the body to move. In view of these significant disanalogies, we cannot judge
whether or not the main part of the analogy holds without having prior
knowledge of thing-in-itself as Will, which is the very thing the analogy is
supposed to prove. If the most fundamental truths of metaphysics depend
only on a subjective "feeling" that thing-in-itself is one thing - if that is any
way to do philosophy - then why might not a critic reply that he or she feels
that thing-in-itself is God or matter or time or abstract form or something
entirely different? If it is reasonable to think of Schopenhauer's early
81

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
argument as an analogical inference, then it provides at best doubtful
grounds for his principal metaphysical thesis that thing-in-itself is Will.
Second argument for thing-in-itself as Will
The argument in the first edition of The World as Will and Representation
is not Schopenhauer's final word on the relation between individual will and
thing-in-itself as Will. In Chapter 18, "On the Possibility of Knowing the
Thing-in-itself ", in the second volume, he offers another style of proof. As
before, Schopenhauer clarifies his purpose as going beyond Kant's negative
conclusion that thing-in-itself is noumenal. He repeats that the effort to
explicate the nature of thing-in-itself is what is most important and distinct-
ive about his philosophy. "In 1836," he reports:
under the title Ueberden Willen in der Nature (second edition, 1854),
I already published the really essential supplement to this book,
which contains the most characteristic and important step of my
philosophy, namely the transition from the phenomenon to the
thing-in-itself, given up by Kant as impossible. 
(WWR 2: 191)
It is remarkable for Schopenhauer to refer in this context to his later 1836
work, rather than the first 1819 edition of The World as Will and Representa-
tion. For there, as we have seen, Schopenhauer presents a cogent if
inconclusive analogical argument for the proposition that thing-in-itself is
Will.
Although the introduction of On the Will in Nature contains a brief
summary of Schopenhauer's earlier statement of the conclusion, it does not
convey any new breakthrough arguments in support of the theory. Like most
of the second edition of The World as Will and Representation and the Parerga
and Paralipomena, On the Will in Nature is an album of afterthoughts
gathered as further evidence in support of Schopenhauer's primary meta-
physical discovery that thing-in-itself is Will. The book assembles findings
in the natural sciences in particular that Schopenhauer interprets as uphold-
ing the proposition that the character of Will is exemplified in the world as
representation. The purpose of the book is clearly indicated in its subtitle:
A Discussion of the Corroborations from the Empirical Sciences that the
Author's Philosophy has Received Since its First Appearance. This does not
sound like an advertisement for an entirely new contribution to Schopen-
hauer's idealism, but describes a supplementary verification of results he
believes he has already established.4
82

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
Returning to the second edition of The World as Will and Representation,
Schopenhauer sets the stage there for what appears to be a similar but notably
non-analogical argument for the identification of thing-in-itself as Will. He
emphasizes the limitations of approaching knowledge through representa-
tion alone, which he argues would constitute no advance over Kant (WWR
1:4). The problem is that if we try to limit metaphysics to phenomena, then
we have no choice but to collapse the real into the ideal. This is idealism of
a more Berkeleyan sort, albeit a Berkeley manque, without the objectivity
of the archetypal existence of sensible things guaranteed by God's infinite
knowledge. Kant, in the Critique, refutes Berkeleyan idealism by arguing that
there must exist spatiotemporal entities outside of consciousness in order
for thinking subjects to be conscious of their own existence in time. This,
Schopenhauer remarks, could not possibly carry Kant beyond the limits of
Berkeley's idealism, because Kant regards space and time themselves as pure
forms of intuition. Hence, space and time are every bit as subjectively ideal
as the contents of representation considered only, as Berkeley would clas-
sify them in his terminology, as congeries of ideas. Schopenhauer reasons that
thing-in-itself must be something altogether different:
However, if, without questioning further, we stop altogether at the
world as representation, then of course it is immaterial whether I
declare objects to be representations in my head or phenomena that
exhibit themselves in time and space, since time and space them-
selves are only in my head. In this sense, then, an identity of the ideal
and the real might still be affirmed; yet since Kant, this would be
to say nothing new. Moreover, the inner nature of things and of the
phenomenal world would obviously not be exhausted in this way,
but with it we should still always be only on the ideal side. The real
side must be something toto genere different from the world as
representation, namely that which things are in themselves-, and it
is this complete diversity between the ideal and the real that Kant
has demonstrated most thoroughly. 
(WWR 2: 193)
It is futile to attempt making contact with reality through even the most
complete and detailed knowledge of the world as representation. We are then
like the person Schopenhauer describes as trying to gain entrance to a fortress
by repeatedly circling its walls and drawing pictures of the fortifications as
they appear from the outside. "In consequence of all this," Schopenhauer
writes:
on the path of objective knowledge, thus starting from the represen-
tation, we shall never get beyond the representation, i.e., the
83

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
phenomenon. We shall therefore remain at the outside of things; we
shall never be able to penetrate into their inner nature, and investi-
gate what they are in themselves. So far I agree with Kant.
(WWR2: 195)
Where Schopenhauer hopes to carry his own transcendental idealism an
important step further than Kant's critical idealism is by explicating his
intuitive insight into the hidden inner nature of thing-in-itself beyond the
limits of representation (WWR 1: 82). What is noteworthy about Schopen-
hauer's later argument in the book's second edition is that in it the relation
between the knowing subject's individual will and thing-in-itself as Will is
not offered merely as an analogy among similar things, but as a strict numeri-
cal identity. The shift is subtle between these two versions of Schopenhauer's
argument, when he continues the original line of thought:
But now, as the counterpoise to this truth, I have stressed that other
truth that we are not merely the knowing subject, but that we
ourselves are also among those realities or entities we require to
know, that we ourselves are the thing-in-itself. Consequently, a way
from within stands open to us to that real inner nature of things to
which we cannot penetrate from without. It is, so to speak, a
subterranean passage, a secret alliance, which, as if by treachery,
places us all at once in the fortress that could not be taken by attack
from without. Precisely as such, the thing-in-itself can come into
consciousness only quite directly, namely by it itself being conscious
of itself; to try to know it objectively is to desire something contra-
dictory. 
(WWR 2: 195)
The change of perspective from the first to the second argument is
significant. Schopenhauer now maintains that we falsely believe ourselves
to be excluded from the fortress. The walls that seem to separate us from
thing-in-itself are only an illusion. The truth is rather that all along we are
already inside the gates, if only we recognize the fact that we are ourselves
thing-in-itself, or that thing-in-itself is identical with the pure willing within
us, identically at the core of every thinking, representing, willing subject. We
can then understand that we are already "all at once" within the fortress
whose walls we previously thought would require some sort of frontal
"attack" to break through, a tactic that Schopenhauer in company with Kant
acknowledges in any case could never possibly succeed.
Schopenhauer warns that we mistakenly impose the wrong cognitive
model on insight into thing-in-itself as Will if we try to think of thing-in-itself
as the individual will known by means of introspection. Inner perception
84

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
involves a subject-object dichotomy. It remains a type of phenomenological
representation in which willing and the individual will confronts the subject
psychologically, through its own acts of willing, taken as object. That, for
obvious reasons, given what Schopenhauer has said about the impossibility
of gaining access to thing-in-itself via knowledge of the world as represen-
tation, cannot provide the basis for a correct understanding of thing-in-itself.
Inner perception of individual willing is nevertheless the starting-point for
what Schopenhauer describes as a more complete method whereby thing-
in-itself is identified with Will. It is the intervention of this further interme-
diate process that justifies preserving the typographical distinction we have
observed throughout between "will" and "Will" (WWR 2: 196-7).
Thing-in-itself is a mystery even when we have identified it with Will and
recognized that the pure willing within each of us is thing-in-itself. If we put
all knowledge on the side of the world as representation, on the side of
explainable phenomena falling under the principium individuationis and
fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason, then there is nothing more
to be said about thing-in-itself. We cannot subsume thing-in-itself in any of
the categories of knowledge and explanation we are accustomed to apply
in the world as representation. At best, we may come to an insight through
what Schopenhauer refers to as an intuitive inner feeling as opposed to
outward or external understanding. We cannot explain thing-in-itself, but
only arrive intuitively at the insight that thing-in-itself is Will. The alterna-
tive is to admit that phenomena have a transcendental ground about which
nothing substantive whatsoever can be known. Schopenhauer believes that
we can attain non-representational insight into thing-in-itself in spite of these
obstacles. He characterizes thing-in-itself by this choice of term after what
he claims is the highest degree of thing-in-itself's objectification manifested
in the world as representation, within our own inner lives, where it occurs
as the foundational uncaused, unmotivated, objectless and subjectless willing
that underlies the will to life. It is the pure or raw willing that occurs
whenever in real time we will this or that.
The account of thing-in-itself in Schopenhauer's transcendental metaphys-
ics is more complicated than Schopenhauer sometimes makes it appear. It
is not that each act of will in the ordinary sense, as when we desire a drink
of water, is identical with thing-in-itself. Rather, it is within the desire for a
drink of water that pure willing or Will as thing-in-itself can be intuited at
the deepest core of ordinary episodes of phenomenologically experienced
willing. We can locate Will by thinking away all of the external trappings of
phenomenal willing to expose its pure naked form. Reflection then reveals
that pure willing satisfies the theoretical requirements of the Kantian thing-
in-itself. The pure willing or Will that underlies ordinary willing is not a mere
analogue or something similar or corresponding to thing-in-itself, but is
85

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
identical instead to thing-in-itself; it is the thing-in-itself itself. Pure willing
is non-representational, non-individualizable and, as a further sign of its
transcendence of the world as representation, it is not subject in any way to
the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason.
We must ask, how can this be? How can individual willing in each
individual willing subject fail to be individualizable? Why should we not be
able to identify my willing to have a drink of water, as opposed to yours,
and why should it not be individualizable precisely as my desire and no one
else's? How can there not be a sufficient causal and motivational explana-
tion of my willing to drink water, with logical and mathematical dimensions
as well, if under the circumstances I am thirsty, I have not imbibed any liquids
for a long time, my physiology is in such and such a state, I am not physi-
cally prevented or otherwise inhibited from drinking, and the like? If all
aspects of my individual willing are individualizable and explainable in the
manner of other representational phenomena, even if they are in this case
psychological, how can my individual willing possibly be directly related to
what is supposed to be non-representational thing-in-itself?
The pure willing or Will underlying any individual act of will is intuited
by means of a thought experiment. Consider any act of will, such as desiring
a drink of water. Schopenhauer instructs us to ask a specific series of ques-
tions. We start out with introspective representational recognition of willing
to drink, and ask why we will to drink. The answer could be this or that,
depending on the circumstances. A representing willing subject could have
any number of reasons for wanting to drink some water. Perhaps the reason
is to quench one's thirst, to wash down an accidentally swallowed bug, to
keep an oboe reed lubricated, to walk past the water fountain and try to at-
tract the attention of an interesting person, or any number of other possibili-
ties. The exact reason does not matter so much as the fact that as an event in
the world as representation the psychological act of willing to drink water
implies that there exists some kind of motivation for the act of will. This
much is already assumed by the assumption that all occurrences in the world
of representation can be explained by appropriate, including motivational,
laws, under the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason. Suppose
in a given case that the reason is because of thirst. Then we can ask regres-
sively: why does one will to quench one's thirst? If the answer is that we will
to quench our thirst because we will something else again, to survive, or to
be happy, or the like, then we can continue to ask: why do we will these
things? If Schopenhauer is right, then there is always a good motivational
reason to explain why we will each of these things at each step in turn, in a
complete account of the motivation for a willing subject's willing to drink.5
Schopenhauer further claims that the regress of motivations can proceed
indefinitely. Eventually, and often quite quickly, we reach a point where we
86

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
may decide to ask a slightly different question. Clearly, moreover, nothing
prevents us from asking this kind of question right away without further ado.
We can ask: why does one (simply) will? We will to drink because we are
thirsty. We may be thirsty for any number of complex reasons. But why do we
will? Why is it that we will anything, as opposed to not willing at all or will-
ing only this or that? Schopenhauer insists that this apparently legitimate
question has no correct answer. The fact that one wills can be deduced from
the fact that one wills this or that: to have a drink of water, or to own a house-
boat, or to become the Prime Minister of Cameroon. When one wills this or
that, one always does so for a reason aimed at a particular object and with a
particular motivation. Since motivational explanation is one root of the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason, it follows for Schopenhauer that a subject's willing
this or that is an explainable phenomenon, like other psychological events.
There is, by contrast, no correct answer to the general question why we
will, as opposed to why we will this or that. Pure willing or Will as such is
beyond the scope of explanation. If we reach back far enough, to the point
where it no longer makes sense to enquire into the motivations generally for
willing anything whatsoever, as opposed to willing this or that, then
Schopenhauer holds we have passed beyond the power of the fourfold root,
at which point we shall have crossed over to thing-in-itself. It is precisely
there and then that our reflections are met with the recognition of
unmotivated, uncaused willing that lies deep within us, at the heart of every
act of ordinary willing. Pure, undirected, objectless, unmotivated and
uncaused willing is not the willing of any particular object by any particu-
lar willing subject for any particular reason. As such, it is unindividualizable
and inexplicable; it is pure willing, plain and simple. If we know how to look
for it, we can find it at the core of any act of ordinary willing, when we dig
deep enough and think away the objects and reasons for willing in order to
arrive at willing in its purest form. It is because pure willing or Will is
unmotivated, undirected toward any objects, unindividualizable and
inexplicable by any of the modes of explanation available under the four-
fold root, that Schopenhauer regards it as satisfying the theoretical require-
ments of Kantian thing-in-itself.
The nature of thing-in-itself is thus found in the only place it could
possibly be located, deep within every act of willing. The pure unmotivated
willing that transcends my willing to drink water and your willing to drink
wine, or my willing to acquire a houseboat and your willing to acquire a law
degree, is indistinguishable. There is no difference between my unmotivated
willing and yours, in so far as it is simply willing. If we begin with individual
willing, and recognize that at the core of any act of willing this or that there
must always be pure willing for which no motivational explanation is avail-
able, then we shall have discovered that thing-in-itself is Will. There is pure
87

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
willing or Will underlying every particular act of will for every willing sub-
ject. Pure willing, moreover, must satisfy the requirements for thing-in-it-
self. Schopenhauer's argument can be divided into the following steps:
1. The only conceivable sources of insight into thing-in-itself are percep-
tual knowledge and inner acquaintance with individual willing, corre-
sponding to the only two conceivable ways in which we can come to
know our own bodies.
2. Perceptual knowledge is limited to representations, and cannot possi-
bly offer knowledge or understanding of thing-in-itself; it must there-
fore be excluded.
3. This leaves only inner acquaintance with individual willing as the only
possible source of insight into thing-in-itself.
4. Beginning with individual willing, we can abstract or think away from
it all object, direction, causation and motivation, mentally substracting
these features from individual willing.
5. What remains is pure willing or Will, which satisfies the requirements
of thing-in-itself as beyond the principium individuationis and fourfold
root of the principle of sufficient reason.
6. Hence, thing-in-itself is Will, taking its name from the highest and most
complete and immediate grade of thing-in-itself's objectification in acts
of individual willing.
Schopenhauer says repeatedly throughout his philosophical writings that
thing-in-itself is pure, uncaused, unmotivated, objectless and subjectless
willing, which he also describes as undirected striving or blind urging. If we
cannot imagine willing without its being directed toward a particular object
by a particular subject and without some motivation for its occurrence, it is
undoubtedly because we are stuck in the mould of thinking only about
willing this or that, rather than pure willing.
Will, as Schopenhauer interprets it in this context, is non-representational,
inexplicable thing-in-itself. It is Kant's Ding an sich, whose nature for Kant
is utterly unknowable beyond the mind's merely conceiving of its existence.
It exists within all of us at the bottommost foundation of every individual
act of willing in every exercise of individual will. It is not just that familiar-
ity with phenomenal willing suggests that thing-in-itself might be similar or
analogical, something wilful. Schopenhauer argues that Will as pure
uncaused, unmotivated, objectless and subjectless willing is identical with
thing-in-itself as the transcendental ground of every act of ordinary willing,
and ultimately of the entire world as representation.
The Trojan horse metaphor 
mentioned in connection 
with
Schopenhauer's first, analogical, argument to show that thing-in-itself is Will
88

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
is consequently inappropriate for the later argument. We cannot say, as
Schopenhauer unhesitatingly does in the first edition of The World as Will
and Representation, that individual acts of willing enable us by stealth to
enter the fortress walls that divide the phenomenal world as representation
from thing-in-itself. To speak more accurately, whenever and wherever an
act of individual empirical willing this or that occurs there also is to be found,
within or without the city's defences, thing-in-itself as pure willing or Will.
Considered only as such it exists for no reason, it is directed toward no
particular or general object, and belongs as an act of thought to no particu-
lar willing subject. Schopenhauer unsurprisingly drops references to circling
the castle walls in the second edition of The World as Will and Representa-
tion, and speaks instead in terms of our already being inside the fortress, of
having been there all along. We need only come to recognize that every act
of phenomenal willing already contains pure willing as thing-in-itself at its
core, transcending all representation within individual psychology, and hence
of the world as representation at large.
We may wonder whether Schopenhauer speaks literally when he describes
thing-in-itself in the first-person as "my" will. This parallels his idealist
designations of the empirical world as "my" representation, relative in
the first-person to each individual subject. Thing-in-itself, on the other hand,
by definition, is supposed to be non-individual and altogether non-
individualizable. It can no more be my will in particular than any other
individual thinking subject's will. It must rather be understood as pure will-
ing, as the Will that underlies all phenomenal acts of willing on the part of
individual willing subjects. Schopenhauer nevertheless writes unqualifiedly:
The inner reluctance with which everyone accepts the world as his
mere representation warns him that this consideration, quite apart
from its truth, is nevertheless one-sided, and so is occasioned by
some arbitrary abstraction. On the other hand, he can never with-
draw from this acceptance. However, the one-sidedness of this
consideration will be made good in the following book through a
truth that is not so immediately certain as that from which we start
here. Only deeper investigation, more difficult abstraction, the sepa-
ration of what is different, and the combination of what is identi-
cal can lead us to this truth. This truth, which must be very serious
and grave if not terrible to everyone, is that a man also can say and
must say: "The world is my will". 
(WWR 1: 4)
In adopting a first-person way of relating thing-in-itself to Will,
Schopenhauer means to emphasize the fact that thing-in-itself transcends
each individual subject's phenomenal acts of willing. We begin, in his
89

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
methodology, with each willing subject's personal acts of will. When the
enquiry is complete, we transcend all personality and individuality, gaining
intuitive insight into the hidden inner nature of thing-in-itself. We must, as
Schopenhauer remarks, undertake a "deeper investigation". If we have
accurately described his mode of transcendental reasoning, then the more
penetrating procedure he requires is to think away or abstract from willing
as inner knowledge of the body all objects of and motivations for individual
willing (WWR1: 164-5).
With a grain of salt, we can accept Schopenhauer's otherwise paradoxical
first-person statement that the world is "my" will. The pronouncement is
true enough, provided that the Will is understood to transcend each repre-
senting subject's individual acts of will. Thing-in-itself, in that case, uncaused,
unmotivated and objectless, also transcends all particular phenomenal
psychological acts of personalized individual willing, and hence all particular
subjects. It is subjectless because it is blind, undirected, or objectless, and
because there is no subject without an object. Schopenhauer's conclusion is
not that thing-in-itself is identical with my individual will or any of my
individual acts of willing. It is rather that each willing subject engaged in
abstraction - thinking away the particularity of their individual acts of willing
- can reveal thing-in-itself as pure willing through first-person individual acts
of willing. Will as thing-in-itself universally transcends each individual think-
ing subject's first-person acquaintance with personal acts of will.6
Why does Schopenhauer fasten onto acts of individual willing rather than
other equally "inner" psychological processes? Why does he not begin with
reason or passion and think away their individuality, causation, motivation
and the like, until he arrives at pure reason or pure passion stripped down
to satisfy the requirements of thing-in-itself? The answer is that we cannot
perform the same abstraction with reason or passion as with willing in order
to arrive at something that in its pure form is beyond the principles of
individuation and sufficient reason. Reason, for example, because of its
nature, even in its purest most abstract form, can never stand outside the
logical root of the principle of sufficient reason. It is for the same reason that
perception can never be so purified as to stand outside the causal root, and
no doubt the logical and mathematical roots as well, if perception by defi-
nition is always of something that occurs in space and time.
What, then, of passion? Can we not purify an individual experience of
passion to strip it of all its individuality? Can we not abstract from it all of
the same kinds of accidental qualities that Schopenhauer thinks away in
abstracting pure willing from phenomenal acts of will to arrive at Will as
thing-in-itself? Why could we not similarly arrive at pure passion as thing-
in-itself? Passion, needless to say, is something passive. As such, it is the very
opposite of willing, which Schopenhauer regards as an active force directing
90

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
and controlling the body's movements. This is what makes the considera-
tion of abstract passion so intriguing as the most extreme alternative to the
conclusions Schopenhauer wants to draw concerning Will as thing-in-itself.
If pure passion, or Passion, is not a suitable candidate for thing-in-itself
because it does not offer insight into the hidden forces that transcend phe-
nomenal appearance, then perhaps we should begin to be more sceptical
about the possibility of ever achieving such understanding of the relation
between thing-in-itself and the world as representation. If we are not quite
at that stage, it is only because we do not yet know whether or not Passion
is an acceptable rival to Will as thing-in-itself.
A moment's reflection shows that Passion does not seriously compete with
Will in Schopenhauer's uncovering of thing-in-itself. The concept of passion,
and hence of Passion, is inherently of something done to a subject, whereas
an action is something a willing subject does. We suffer passions as a result
of different sorts of interactions with the world. This makes the concept of
passion, individual or abstracted as much as possible from all individuality,
necessarily causal. Willing, in contrast, in its most pure abstract form, need
not be causal because willing as such need neither be caused nor causally
efficacious. If, on the contrary, we try to subtract from passion the fact that
the experience has been brought about or visited upon a subject, something
that has been caused to happen, often against the subject's will, then we have
either contradicted ourselves or are no longer talking about passion in the
proper sense of the word. The passive nature of passion is necessarily of
something caused or inflicted. This, in turn, makes it altogether unsuitable
for abstraction beyond the principle of sufficient reason, disqualifying it as
something other than Will to stand as a possible counter-Schopenhauerian
thing-in-itself.
If we try to think away from an act of phenomenal willing its cause,
motivation, object and therefore its subject, do we have reason to suppose
that there will be anything left at all? Is the situation not like that of peel-
ing all the layers from an onion only to discover at the end that there is
nothing more inside at the centre because an onion consists entirely of its
layers? Schopenhauer would have us believe that pure willing, Will as thing-
in-itself, is at the core of every episode of ordinary willing, of willing this
or that. The conclusion can be upheld if we suppose that the same four
factors of cause, motivation, object and subject attach to phenomenal
psychological occurrences other than willing. Pure willing remains left over
as distinctive of a phenomenal act of will in the process of subtracting these
factors, for otherwise there can be no way of distinguishing phenomenal
willing from phenomenal believing, doubting, suffering passion, being in
pain or the like. We can think away from these mental states the same four
factors, but what is left behind then, unlike the end result of the process
91

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
beginning with phenomenal willing, as in the case of passion or perceiving,
has no pretence of qualifying as thing-in-itself. Only pure willing seems to
meet the test, satisfying the requirements for Kantian thing-in-itself by virtue
of falling outside the principles of individuation and sufficient reason.
Character of Will as thing-in-itself in the
world as representation and as revealed in the
laws of natural science
An important implication of Schopenhauer's identification of thing-in-itself
as Will is that Will objectifies or manifests its inner character externally in
the world as representation. Schopenhauer upholds the inference by
acknowledging the same relation in the observable character of individual
will in an agent's body.
We sometimes say that a person's character is revealed in his or her
actions. Although we may not be able to experience immediately the will that
directs an individual's deeds, we imagine that whatever thoughts are moving
them to act are reflected either directly or through a distorting lens in their
observable behaviour. We additionally do not expect simply to be able to
read off an individual's character from any particular example of behaviour,
since we know that many people are capable of disguising their real inten-
tions and personality, at least for certain periods of time, and of dissimulat-
ing their intentions in interactions with others. Still, we generally believe that
if we had access to a wide variety of a person's behaviours in many differ-
ent circumstances, both among others and when they are by themselves, then
we would have many essential clues to their true underlying character.7
Schopenhauer argues that thinking subjects reveal their inner characters
in their external appearance, both in body and behaviour. He argues that
the same is true of the world as representation considered as a whole with
respect to its character reflected in all its representable features known to
empirical science. When we study the natural properties of the physical
universe, we are in effect inferentially learning as much as we can about the
inner character of thing-in-itself. We discover the character of Will as it is
revealed by its objectifications manifested in the world as representation. The
process is much the same as that by which we judge the character of an
individual willing subject as revealed by their appearance and actions. The
human being considered epistemically from dual aspects through knowledge
of external body and internal wilful action is a microcosm of the relation
between the hidden inner character of Will or thing-in-itself that is externally
expressed through its objectifications in the world as representation.
92

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
The transcendental metaphysics of thing-in-itself as Will reveals its
character. It is indirectly perceivable in every scientifically knowable aspect
of the world as representation. Although of necessity we cannot represent
thing-in-itself, or explain it or individuate it into distinctive entities, parts
or moments, we find suggestive clues and partial confirmation of the char-
acter of thing-in-itself as Will by scientifically studying its phenomenal
objectifications. The method is the same as that by which we seize on infor-
mation about an individual subject's will as manifested externally in their
body and behaviour. There is a character of the world as representation that
reflects its manifestation of thing-in-itself as Will, just as there is a charac-
ter of each individual willing subject that is reflected in actions construed
as external expressions of inner acts of will.
Considering the most familiar aspects of the world as representation
known to empirical science, Schopenhauer calls attention especially to those
features that are not fully or satisfactorily explained by the morphology and
etiology of the natural sciences. The principle of sufficient reason guaran-
tees explanations of any observable events exhibiting lawlike regularities. As
Schopenhauer frequently remarks, we cannot delve more deeply than this
to gain a more profound understanding of how or why the particular causal
laws of nature obtain or why natural processes function as they do. Where
empirical methods fail us, traditional Kantian transcendental metaphysics
can only attach the name of thing-in-itself to whatever lies behind and
beyond phenomena as something conceivable, the noumenon, while offer-
ing nothing contentful by way of insight into its hidden inner nature.
Schopenhauer believes he has outpaced Kant's vacuous concept of thing-in-
itself by identifying thing-in-itself as pure willing or Will. He approaches the
problem of the nature of the world as representation and the hidden nature
of thing-in-itself from two complementary directions, in much the same way
that one thinking subject can try to get to know another person's character.
Schopenhauer finds signs of the character of thing-in-itself in such physical
phenomena as gravity, electricity, magnetism, chemical attraction and repul-
sion, vegetable physiology, phototropism and photosynthesis, comparative
anatomy and so-called animal magnetism. He discusses some of these occur-
rences in relation to his metaphysics of thing-in-itself as Will in The World
as Will and Representation, and supplements them in his catalogue of
corroborative scientific testimony in On the Will in Nature. He collates the
discoveries of empirical science looking for indications that the world is Will
and for information concerning its inner non-representational character. The
world as Will projects itself imperfectly and in distorted but still discernible
ways through its objectifications in the empirical world as representation.
The knowledge of nature in both intuitive and abstract representation
takes us only so far. It helps us to identify distinguishable features of the
93

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
world, to be organized and systematically arranged, classified under cover-
ing laws and considered as causally related one to another. Schopenhauer
begins with what he considers to be the lowest grades of the Will's
objectification in the physical forces of gravity and attraction. "As we
proceed", he writes:
we shall see that this [natural force] belongs not to the inner nature
of the will, but merely to its most distinct phenomenon as animal
and human being. Therefore, if I say that the force which attracts a
stone to the earth is of its nature, in itself, and apart from all repre-
sentation, will, then no one will attach to this proposition the absurd
meaning that the stone moves itself according to a known motive,
because it is thus that the will appears in man. 
(WWR 1: 105)
We are puzzled by the reality behind the laws of nature. At best, the principles
of mathematical physics do not reveal the forces of nature in their deeper
essence, but only explicate how they work superficially in relating phenom-
ena to phenomena. What is concealed by such laws, according to Schopen-
hauer, is the fact that the forces described in natural science are expressions
of the inner character of the world as representation, of thing-in-itself as Will.
It is tempting to interpret such assertions metaphorically. The Will is
supposed to be blind urging, undirected desire and the inner principle of
motion of the world as representation. The same seems to be true at least
by analogy with respect to the individual will as the inner principle of motion
for the willing subject's body. If we consider the world as representation in
its entirety as a body, like the human body, with thing-in-itself as Will, like
the human will, then just as we can will to move a finger or toe, we can
picture the Will underlying all physical phenomena in the world as
representation as directing and controlling all natural events under its
unthinking blind objectless "direction" and "control" as transcendental
thing-in-itself. What is less easy to understand is how in that case Will as
thing-in-itself can objectify itself in many different ways in the world as
representation without willing this or that or anything in particular. Thing-
in-itself as Will is supposed to be blind, objectless, subjectless, undirected and
unmotivated. The will as the body's inner principle is able to control the
movement of limbs because the subject chooses to do something specific,
such as to move a body part in a certain way. The analogy breaks down if
we try to think of thing-in-itself as Will objectifying, expressing or manifest-
ing itself in the world as representation at large if it cannot also have specific
intentions and specific purposes to fulfil by bringing about specific changes
in phenomena. The problem is that Schopenhauer rightly disallows the
possibility of thing-in-itself having any sort of causal efficacy, or being
94

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
involved in any cause-effect relation. Will as thing-in-itself transcends and
is altogether outside any mode of explanation under the fourfold root of the
principle of sufficient reason, including, especially, causation.
Schopenhauer recognizes Will as the innermost transcendent nature of
reality objectified in the world as representation and manifested among other
ways as natural forces. The scientific investigation of the world as represen-
tation only partly satisfies the desire for knowledge that motivates philo-
sophical enquiry. When we have exhausted the explanations of natural
phenomena that can be given in terms of efficient causation, and by means
of logical, mathematical and motivational laws, when we have attained as
much superficial knowledge as we can of objects and events in the world as
representation, then we long to go beyond empirical representations to the
transcendental metaphysics of thing-in-itself. Although we cannot expect to
arrive at explanations in the usual sense, or of the sort that apply to repre-
sentational phenomena, recognizing that thing-in-itself is Will provides
insight into the transcendental metaphysics of such natural forces as grav-
ity and electromagnetism, principles of growth, nutrition and procreation
in living things and crystals, processes of animal and vegetable generation,
sexual energy, procreation rites and societal practices, cultural movements,
political intrigues and war. Schopenhauer claims to detect the objectification
of Will in mechanics, astronomy, biology, physiology, chemistry, psychology
and all other natural and social sciences (WWR 1: 110).
Quest for transcendental knowledge
If we question more closely the value of investigations of the world that carry
enquiry beyond phenomena to thing-in-itself, we may wonder whether such
metaphysical insights are truly satisfying. We should briefly take stock of the
reasoning by which Schopenhauer has brought us to this point.
We learn about the world through perception, but we are dissatisfied with
the superficial explanations to which we are limited by the principle of
sufficient reason. We can do no more than knit together phenomenal objects
and events into relations and regularities under lawlike principles, but we
can never discover what natural forces are or why they exist. Nor can we
learn why objects and events are ruled by particular natural laws other than
to refer again to the regularities that happen to prevail within the empirical
order of phenomena. Schopenhauer says that we are driven by natural
curiosity in that case to look beyond the world as representation, to ask
whether there is not after all something more to the world than a tissue of
appearances.
95

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Suppose, then, that we agree with Schopenhauer that there is more to the
world than representation, that there is also thing-in-itself, and that thing-
in-itself is Will. Since we cannot know anything more about thing-in-itself
other than the fact that it is Will, how does it help to satisfy our cravings for
a deeper understanding of the hidden nature of the world behind the veil
of Maya? Can we not still ask why there is thing-in-itself and why it is Will?
Schopenhauer will no doubt answer that there must be thing-in-itself because
there are representations and there must be something that is represented,
something that is objectified for representing subjects in the world as
representation. Of course, he will not agree with Kant, as he interprets his
argument, that thing-in-itself causes its representations. As to why thing-in-
itself is Will, we have two versions of Schopenhauer's answer. He offers
analogical reasoning concerning individual willing as inner knowledge of the
body, as the only conceivable source of knowledge other than perceptual
knowledge of the body's external representational properties, and of Will
or pure willing as what remains of phenomenal willing when its motivations
and objects, and hence all particularity, are stripped away in thought by a
process of abstraction.
Do appeals to thing-in-itself as Will truly satisfy our desire to know more
about the world, to progress beyond the superficial veneer of phenomenal
representations, to know that the world is also thing-in-itself and that thing-
in-itself is Will? If we believe Schopenhauer's proposition that the hidden
factor in gravity, electromagnetism, plant and crystal growth and the like is
Will as thing-in-itself, and that these are among the many ways in which Will
objectifies itself in the world as representation, does it really answer our
desire for a deeper more profound understanding of the hidden inner work-
ings of the phenomenal world? What is objectification, and what is it for Will
as thing-in-itself to be objectified in the world as representation, if there is
no causal or other explanatory connection between Will and representation?
Does transcendental idealism do anything more than attach a label to that
which we would like to understand? Schopenhauer anticipates the thrust of
this objection and tries to blunt its force:
I should be misunderstood by anyone who thought that ultimately
it was all the same whether we expressed this essence-in-itself of all
phenomena by the word will or by any other word. This would be
the case if this thing-in-itself were something whose existence we
merely inferred^ and thus knew only indirectly and merely in the
abstract. Then certainly we could call it what we liked; the name
would stand merely as the symbol of an unknown quantity. But the
word will9 which, like a magic word, is to reveal to us the innermost
essence of everything in nature, by no means expresses an unknown
96

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
quantity, something reached by inferences and syllogisms, but
something known absolutely and immediately, and that so well that
we know and understand what will is better than anything else, be
it what it may. Hitherto, the concept of will has been subsumed
under the concept of force; I, on the other hand, do exactly the
reverse, and intend every force in nature to be conceived as will.
(WWR1: 111)
The concept of Will, as Schopenhauer understands it, is supposed to have
the effect of a magic incantation that reveals to us the inner nature of the
world as representation. Does it really have this potential? Whereas other
theorists have tried to interpret phenomenal psychological will as a kind of
energy, Schopenhauer declares his intention to reverse this order, maintain-
ing on the contrary that natural forces are among the manifestations of Will.
This is an interesting statement of the priority Schopenhauer attaches to Will
in understanding the transcendental ground of natural phenomena. By itself,
however, it does not necessarily satisfy the desire for a more profound meta-
physical understanding of the phenomenal world.
We observe physical events in the world as representation in which forces
of attraction hold between physical objects, from planetary motion to such
mundane occurrences as an apple falling to earth as it drops from a tree. We
study the laws of gravity as Newton formulated them and, let us suppose,
we accept Schopenhauer's philosophical interpretation of natural laws as
summary statements of the regularities that obtain among empirical events.
Now we want to progress another step in understanding the hidden nature
of gravity and whatever physical phenomena are subject generally to the laws
of physics. We have the magic word "Will", as Schopenhauer says, and we
are told that beyond the limits of the world as representation there is thing-
in-itself, and that thing-in-itself is Will. We know that Will is blind, objectless,
subjectless, unmotivated, uncaused and undirected pure willing. It is what-
ever is left over when we have taken an individual act of willing as we
experience it in our own volitional direction and control of body move-
ments, as the inner knowledge of body, and then subtract away from it object,
subject, motivation and cause. It is pure willing, then, willing in its most
refined essence, or Will as thing-in-itself.
This is not an insignificant conclusion. Nor, as Schopenhauer says, is
"Will" merely a word for noumenal thing-in-itself. Whatever Kant's
noumenon is supposed to be, it does not add anything of substance to the
deeper insight we hope to attain of the natural forces such as gravity that
govern physical phenomena. We understand that there is more to the world
than the ways in which it is represented to thought. We expect that what
transcends phenomenal appearance is not just thing-in-itself under any
97

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
arbitrary name we might care to give it as a kind of blank space in transcen-
dental metaphysics. We may also agree with Schopenhauer that thing-in-itself
identified more specifically as Will constitutes an advance in our understand-
ing of the world's hidden inner nature. The Will is already intuited in direct
acquaintance within our own experience of wilful actions, shorn of all their
particularity, direction, motivation and causation. It is in this way that we
understand thing-in-itself as pure willing or Will abstracted from its purest
imaginable form. If Schopenhauer is right that thing-in-itself is Will, then
his conclusions concerning gravity and other natural forces as objectifications
of Will offer something that is more profound in understanding the world
as representation than we can hope to find within the empirical sciences or
conventional non-Schopenhauerian metaphysics.
If thing-in-itself is Will, then there is no hope of attaining any further
understanding of natural phenomena than to know that thing-in-itself as Will
transcends all aspects of the world as representation. Thing-in-itself neither
needs nor can possibly have any further transcendental ground, nor does it
provide any further occasion for speculation or desire for deeper or greater
understanding. We cannot sensibly ask why thing-in-itself is Will. There is
no further question beyond the fact that pure willing underlying individual
acts of will meets all the theoretical requirements of transcendental thing-
in-itself by virtue of being unindividualizable, unmotivated, uncaused,
objectless and subjectless. For, in that case, Will as thing-in-itself is also
inexplicable. When we have reached thing-in-itself, we have struck meta-
physical bedrock, just as in the world of representation we hit explanatory
bottom when we have ordered all occurrent phenomena under all the
possible relations and lawlike regularities permitted by the principle of
sufficient reason. It is the same pure willing that we find at the heart of any
individual act of phenomenal will, after which there is nowhere else to seek
further metaphysical understanding. We discover the answers within our-
selves, when we recognize that thing-in-itself in any first-person experience
of volitional activity in the inner knowledge of our bodies is the microcosm
of which the entire world as representation is the macrocosm.8
Platonic Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification
Schopenhauer finds a place for Platonic Ideas in his philosophy as grades
of the Will's objectification. Will is objectified in distinct grades, depending
on the degree of individuality or differentiation among similar objects
instantiating an Idea. The Ideas for Schopenhauer as a result are not abstract
entities existing in a Platonic heaven or museum of archetypes, but instead
98

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
are all of the possible grades of the Will's objectification. They are the many
ways in which Will can transcendentally ground the phenomenal appear-
ances of thing-in-itself as objects for subjects.
Schopenhauer identifies Platonic Ideas with distinct grades of the Will's
objectification, when he writes, "Now I say that these grades of the
objectification of the will are nothing but Plato's Ideas. I mention this here
for the moment, so that in future I can use the word Idea in this sense"
(WWR 1: 129). He is committed to this account of Platonic Ideas analysed
as grades of the Will's objectification as the only historically correct inter-
pretation of Plato's theory. "Therefore with me the word ['Idea'] is always
to be understood in its genuine and original meaning", he adds:
given to it by Plato; and in using it we must assuredly not think of
those abstract productions of scholastic dogmatizing reason, to
describe which Kant used the word wrongly as well as illegitimately,
although Plato had already taken possession of it, and used it most
appropriately. 
(WWR 1: 129-30)
He concludes, "Therefore, by Idea I understand every definite and fixed
grade of the will's objectification, in so far as it is thing-in-itself and is there-
fore foreign to plurality. These grades are certainly related to individual
things as their eternal forms, or as their prototypes" (WWR 1: 130).
Where Plato identifies a Form or Idea as a real abstract entity in Platonic
heaven, such as the archetype Dog, in which all individual dogs and kinds
of dogs participate or which they imitate or instantiate, Schopenhauer refers
to a specific grade of the Will's objectification, different in degree from any
other, corresponding to the general concept of Dog. He conceives of Platonic
Ideas as organized into a hierarchy, in which human beings occupy the high-
est rank. The justification for this honour is supposed to be that human
beings exemplify the highest grade of the Will's objectification by virtue of
possessing the greatest individuality. Schopenhauer's ordering of Platonic
Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification is reminiscent of pre-Darwinian
conceptions of the animal kingdom arranged in a strictly linear rather than
branching order, beginning with the simplest most primitive lifeforms and
proceeding upward teleologically to humankind as the glory of creation. He
writes:
Although in man, as (Platonic) Idea, the will finds its most distinct
and perfect objectification, this alone could not express its true being.
In order to appear in its proper significance, the Idea of man would
need to manifest itself, not alone and torn apart, but accompanied by
all the grades downwards through all the forms of animals, through
99

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
the plant kingdom to the inorganic. They all supplement one another
for the complete objectification of the will. They are as much presup-
posed by the Idea of man as the blossoms of the tree presuppose its
leaves, branches, trunk, and root. They form a pyramid, of which the
highest point is man. 
(WWR 1:153)
The Ideas for Schopenhauer might in principle be set down as belonging
alternatively to the world as representation or to thing-in-itself identified as
Will. Unlike Plato, Schopenhauer believes in the existence not of two worlds,
but of a single world with two aspects. As a result, Schopenhauer has a
problem about where and how to situate the Platonic Ideas that does not
touch Plato's original theory.
There is no prospect for Schopenhauer to consign Platonic Ideas to thing-
in-itself, because there are differences between the Ideas that make them
individual. Since there are many grades of the Will's objectification, there
are many distinct Ideas that are different and hence individualizable from
one another as Ideas. The Idea of Dog, for example, is not the same Idea as
the Idea of Horse or Cat. Platonic Ideas, as a result, cannot belong to the
world as Will, and so cannot call thing-in-itself home in Schopenhauer's
transcendental idealism. Nor does it appear at first that Platonic Ideas can
be appropriately situated in Schopenhauer's world as representation. Ideas
are not supposed to be spatiotemporal; they are usually assumed, at least in
Plato's theory as it is standardly interpreted, as the abstract entities that
individual things in the world of appearance only imperfectly "imitate" or
"strive", metaphorically speaking, to become, or in which they "participate".
Since these are the only two aspects of Schopenhauer's one and only world,
there is no third metaphysical realm or category to which he can plausibly
assign the Platonic Ideas, no place to which they can reasonably be said to
belong.9
Schopenhauer agrees with Plato in classifying Ideas as aspatiotemporal,
unsusceptible to alteration or change of any kind, and existing eternally
rather than involved in any process of becoming. "Accordingly," Schopen-
hauer says, speaking from the standpoint of widely received scholarship on
Plato's metaphysics, "what follows ... has already impressed itself as a matter
of course on every student of Plato ... Those different grades of the will's
objectification, expressed in innumerable individuals, exist as the unattained
patterns of these, or as the eternal forms of things" (WWR 1: 129). Signifi-
cantly, Schopenhauer then adds: "Not themselves entering into time and
space, the medium of individuals, they remain fixed, subject to no change,
always being, never having become. The particular things, however, arise and
pass away; they are always becoming and never are" (WWR 1: 129). His
solution is to situate Platonic Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification in
100

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
the objectified world as representation where they are in some sense perceiv-
able. This is an odd way to think of the Platonic Ideas that have always been
assumed to occupy a world distinct from all ephemeral phenomena.
Schopenhauer nevertheless insists that degrees of the Will's objectification
are as abstract as mathematical properties, which in a limited way can also
be perceived.10
Relation of Platonic Ideas to Kantian thing-in-itself
The concept of a Platonic Idea and the Kantian thing-in-itself may appear
at first to be diametrically opposed. There are numerous Platonic Ideas, we
are told, but for Schopenhauer there is only one thing-in-itself. Identified
by Schopenhauer as Will, thing-in-itself is not subject to the principle of
individuation; hence, there cannot be a plurality of things-in-themselves as
there are of Platonic Ideas. Platonic Ideas, moreover, are supposed to belong
to the world as representation, explainable by the laws subsumed under the
principle of sufficient reason. The Ideas, as distinct grades of the Will's
objectification, can therefore hardly be the same as Will. Finally, Schopen-
hauer maintains that thing-in-itself is not an object of perceptual knowledge,
whereas a passive apprehension of the Platonic Ideas in sensation is the goal
and substance of abstract general knowledge, and the first indispensable step
of aesthetic appreciation and artistic creativity.
Despite these discrepancies, Schopenhauer assimilates Platonic Ideas as
grades of the Will's objectification to the Kantian thing-in-itself as Will in
one crucial respect. He does not simply identify Platonic Ideas with thing-
in-itself, some of whose theoretical differences he acknowledges. Instead, he
proposes by way of shedding light both on Plato's Ideas and Kant's thing-
in-itself that the two concepts are distinct ways of addressing the same philo-
sophical problem from different but related perspectives. He sets the stage
for a comparison of Plato and Kant, taking preliminary steps toward a
synthesis of the history of two great streams of thought in Western philoso-
phy, brought together for the first time in Schopenhauer's theory of tran-
scendental idealism.
The basis for the analogy, which Schopenhauer describes as holding
between thing-in-itself and the Platonic Ideas, is something that has
frequently been recognized as essential to Plato's theory of Ideas. It is the
one-many relation, whereby a Platonic Idea, a one, is instantiated by many
different individuals that exemplify the Idea. This instantiation, Schopen-
hauer states, is reminiscent of a similar one-many relation, whereby the
Kantian thing-in-itself, as a unitary transcendent reality, is objectified in the
101

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
world as representation as many different perceivable entities. Plato's theory
of Ideas and Kant's thing-in-itself are aimed in different ways at the same
goal of articulating a metaphysics relating a one-many relation between a
transcendent unitary reality and its plurality of instantiations or objectifica-
tions in the phenomenal world. Schopenhauer accordingly discerns in Plato
and Kant a common effort to account for the appearances of many individual
things in relation to a unitary appearance-transcending reality. Many objects
of experience in both cases are brought into correspondence with a one. The
many individuals inhabiting the empirical world are related respectively to
a singular Platonic Idea or Kantian thing-in-itself. Schopenhauer believes that
only his theory of Will as thing-in-itself and Platonic Ideas as grades of the
Will's objectification, combining the best features of Plato's and Kant's
metaphysics, satisfies the need to correlate a unified transcendent reality with
a plurality of individual objects in the world as representation.
Schopenhauer synthesizes Plato's Ideas and Kant's thing-in-itself in a series
of steps. First, he calls attention to the one-many relation in Kant's transcen-
dental metaphysics whereby thing-in-itself corresponds to its many repre-
sentational objectifications. "Just as a magic lantern shows many different
pictures," he reasons:
but it is only one and the same flame that makes them all visible, so
in all the many different phenomena which together fill the world
or supplant one another as successive events, it is only the one will
that appears, and everything is its visibility, its objectivity; it remains
unmoved in the midst of this change. It alone is the thing-in-itself;
every object is phenomenon, to speak Kant's language, or appear-
ance. 
(WWR1: 153).
Schopenhauer is prepared on this basis to establish a significant commonality
between the Platonic Ideas and Kantian thing-in-itself. He refrains from
simply identifying the two philosophical concepts, but argues that they are
two similar but still different ways of attaining the same purpose. They both
venture to account for the plurality and diversity of individual objects in the
world as representation in terms of the relation of many kinds of objects to
something simple and unitary that transcends individuality in the phenom-
enal world. Schopenhauer interprets the leading concepts of the two great
philosophical traditions as dovetailing in his own theory of thing-in-itself
as Will and Platonic Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification.
Now if for us the will is the thing-in-itself, and the Idea is the
immediate objectivity of that will at a definite grade, then we find
Kant's thing-in-itself and Plato's Idea, for him the only OVTOX; 6v
102

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
["truly being"] - those two great and obscure paradoxes of the two
greatest philosophers of the West - to be, not exactly identical, but
yet very closely related, and distinguished by only a single modifi-
cation. The two great paradoxes, just because, in spite of all inner
harmony and relationship, they sound so very different by reason
of the extraordinarily different individualities of their authors, are
even the best commentary on each other, for they are like two
entirely different paths leading to one goal. 
(WWR 1: 170)
He suggests that even stylistic differences between Plato and Kant illumi-
nate more substantive similarities in their metaphysics. We need only look
beyond the superficial incongruities in Plato and Kant to see that they are
attempting in different ways to achieve the same end. They each propose in
comparable ways to explain the plurality and diversity of objects for subjects
in the phenomenal world. They do so, moreover, in comparable ways, by
relating perceived entities as a many to something transcendent that is not
merely another object among the totality of representations.
We must not lose track of the distinctions between Platonic Ideas and Kan-
tian thing-in-itself, even as Schopenhauer interprets these metaphysical
concepts in his transcendental idealism. He argues, however, that it is possible
"to bring Kant's expression even closer to Plato's", by saying "that time, space,
and causality are that arrangement of our intellect by virtue of which the one
being of each kind that alone really exists, manifests itself to us as a plurality
of homogeneous beings, always being originated anew and passing away in
endless succession" (WWR 1:173). It is vital to recall that for Kant, and more
explicitly for Schopenhauer, there can be no multiplicity of things-in-
themselves of different kinds. There is only indivisible non-individualizable
thing-in-itself as the one and only unitary reality transcending the world as
representation.
Schopenhauer is willing provisionally to overlook differences between
Plato and Kant for the sake of emphasizing what he sees as a philosophically
more interesting underlying commonality. Having emphasized the similari-
ties, Schopenhauer now owns up to some of the most telling differences
between Plato's Ideas and Kant's thing-in-itself. He mentions the fact that
thing-in-itself is supposed to be outside all forms of knowledge, which he
equates with either intuitive or abstract representation, as the Platonic Ideas
are generally said to be. He regards this fundamental epistemic distinction
as one of the principal divisions between Platonic Ideas and Kantian thing-
in-itself:
It follows from our observations so far that, in spite of all the inner
agreement between Kant and Plato, and of the identity of the aim
103

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
that was in the mind of each, or of the world-view that inspired and
led them to philosophize, Idea and thing-in-itself are not for us
absolutely one and the same. On the contrary, for us the Idea is only
the immediate, and therefore adequate, objectivity of the thing-in-
itself, which itself, however, is the will - the will in so far as it is not
yet objectified, had not yet become representation. For, precisely
according to Kant, the thing-in-itself is supposed to be free from all
the forms that adhere to knowledge as such. 
(WWR 1: 174)
He further specifies what he now proclaims as the only difference between
Platonic Ideas and thing-in-itself. The two cannot be identical because, on
Schopenhauer's interpretation of Platonic Ideas as grades of the Will's
objectification, Ideas by definition are in effect cognitive objects for a think-
ing subject.
There is more than a subtle note of understatement in Schopenhauer's
characterization of this distinction. To say that Platonic Ideas and Kantian
thing-in-itself are different only by virtue of the Platonic Ideas being perceiv-
able objects for subjects is comparable perhaps to saying that the only
difference between the living and the dead is that the dead are not living.
What greater difference could there be, it is tempting to ask, between
Platonic Ideas and the Kantian thing-in-itself, than for Platonic Ideas not to
be thing-in-itself by virtue of being a plurality of experienceable features of
represented objects for a representing subject? It is peculiar that Schopen-
hauer should devote his efforts to trying to establish similarities between the
Ideas (generally plural) and thing-in-itself (always singular) in view of such
overwhelmingly significant metaphysical and epistemic differences.
Schopenhauer answers the objection by calling attention to another
crucial basis of agreement. He maintains that, despite the real differences
between Plato and Kant, their convergence on a matter of such fundamen-
tal importance places their deepest metaphysical insights essentially in
harmony with respect to the question of the relation between individual
objects for subjects and thing-in-itself as appearance-transcending reality.
Between these, Schopenhauer insists, only Platonic Ideas intervene as the
Will's direct objectivity, since they do not take any special form "peculiar to
knowledge as such", other than that of "representation in general". This,
Schopenhauer holds, makes the Platonic Ideas the "most adequate objectivity
possible" of Will as thing-in-itself (WWR 1: 175).
If Schopenhauer is right that the Platonic Ideas are the only direct,
immediate or most adequate objectivity of thing-in-itself or Will, then he is
also presumably correct to conclude that the Ideas are just thing-in-itself
under the form of representation. In a sense, it could be said that represented
objects for representing subjects are also thing-in-itself under the form of
104

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
representation, since they are the expression, objectification or manifesta-
tion of thing-in-itself as Will in the world as representation. The main
difference between individuals and Platonic Ideas is the immediacy of Ideas,
the fact that they are subsumed only by the form of representation as such,
and not by any other form of knowledge. The same cannot be said of indi-
vidual represented objects, which in their full dynamic complexity naturally
fall under many different categories of knowledge. The Platonic Idea of Dog,
for example, is not any particular dog. There is consequently nothing more
to know about the Idea than its representational content concerning what-
ever it is that is general to the concept of Dog. By contrast, any chosen
individual dog presents indefinitely many possibilities for learning about the
dog's indefinitely many properties.
Schopenhauer does not say exactly why, but he clearly regards all such
ramifications of knowledge as distancing individuals further from thing-in-
itself than the corresponding Platonic Ideas. A Platonic Idea is so abstract,
interpreted simply as a specific grade of the Will's objectification, accord-
ing to Schopenhauer, so thin in terms of the knowledge it embodies, that it
is virtually indistinguishable from thing-in-itself. It is, finally, distinguishable
only in that it embodies a particular representational form, with none of the
dense informational content of any chosen represented object exemplifying
the Idea. Platonic Ideas are thus the next closest thing to thing-in-itself,
except for the fact, as Schopenhauer remarks, that Ideas are perceivable
features of objects in the spatiotemporal causal order, whereas thing-in-itself
is not. "The particular things of all particular times and spaces", he states,
"are nothing but the Ideas multiplied through the principle of sufficient
reason (the form of knowledge of the individuals as such), and thus obscured
in their pure objectivity" (WWR 1: 180).
The analogy is that between one among various Ideas and the plurality of
its instantiations and the one and only thing-in-itself with respect to its many
objectifications in the world as representation. As a further positive correla-
tion, Schopenhauer notes that "When the Idea appears, subject and object can
no longer be distinguished in it, because the Idea, the adequate objectivity of
the will, the real world as representation, arises only when subject and object
reciprocally fill and penetrate each other completely" (WWR 1: 180). The
comparison with thing-in-itself is obvious, since for thing-in-itself there is no
applicable distinction between interpresuppositional subject and object. An
Idea again is so abstract and general that it is not itself represented despite
residing in the world as representation as a specific grade of the Will's
objectification (WWR 1: 180). Thus, there can be no difference between
object and subject where thing-in-itself is concerned.
The point of recalling the non-objecthood and non-subjecthood of Will
as thing-in-itself is to dramatize the virtual assimilation of thing-in-itself and
105

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Platonic Idea. The Platonic Idea of Dog is independent of any particular dog,
and thus of any particular representing subject for whom any particular dog
might stand as a represented object. The situation in this limited regard is
precisely the same as for thing-in-itself as Will, although, as Schopenhauer
does not hesitate to remark, Ideas are themselves represented objects resid-
ing as grades of the Will's objectification in the perceivable objects consti-
tuting the world as representation. "As will", Schopenhauer continues:
outside the representation and all its forms, it is one and the same in
the contemplated object and in the individual who soars aloft in this
contemplation, who becomes conscious of himself as pure subject.
Therefore in themselves these two are not different; for in themselves
they are the will that here knows itself. 
(WWR 1:180)
"Plurality and difference", we are reminded, "exist only as the way in
which this knowledge comes to the will, that is to say, only in the phenom-
enon, by virtue of its form, the principle of sufficient reason" (WWR 1: 180).
It follows, for Schopenhauer, that individuality exists only in the world as
representation, where subject-object interpresuppositionality obtains, where
there are objects for subjects and subjects for objects. "Without the object,"
Schopenhauer concludes, "without the representation, I am not knowing
subject, but mere, blind will; in just the same way, without me as subject of
knowledge, the thing known is not object, but mere will, blind impulse"
(WWR 1: 180). This reasoning recapitulates Schopenhauer's argument for
the existence and hidden inner nature of thing-in-itself as Will. Take a
subject-object complex and think away either the subject or the object, and
there is nothing left but pure willing or "mere will" without the individual-
ity of subject that otherwise situates a thinking psychological entity as both
represented object and representing subject squarely in the world as repre-
sentation. Schopenhauer should probably have taken the inference one step
further and deduced that without the representation, without object, there
is no "I". "In itself," he explains,
that is to say outside the representation, this will is one and the same
with mine; only in the world as representation, the form of which
is always at least subject and object, are we separated out as known
and knowing individual. As soon as knowledge, the world as
representation, is abolished, nothing in general is left but mere will,
blind impulse. 
(WWR 1:180)
We are directed in this way back to Schopenhauer's primary justification
for identifying thing-in-itself as Will. It is the phenomenological method of
106

WILLING AND THE WORLD AS WILL
beginning with an episode of individual willing and thinking away from it
all individuality. Here, as Schopenhauer says, the process involves abstract-
ing the represented object from the representing subject. The thought
experiment leaves us with no correlated subject existing as a psychological
entity standing on its own within the world as representation. The proce-
dure isolates the pure willing or Will that transcends the act of willing.
Subtracting the object from the interpresuppositional subject-object in an
individual act of phenomenal willing entails that pure willing, Will, satisfies
the theoretical requirements of thing-in-itself by placing it outside the
principles of individuation and sufficient reason. The blind impulse that
remains when the object of willing is deleted in thought from a phenomenal
act of will yields Schopenhauer's characterization of the hidden inner nature
of the world through which he identifies thing-in-itself as Will.11
107

CHAPTER FOUR
Suffering, salvation, death,
and renunciation of the will to life
By virtue of such necessity, man needs the animals for his support,
the animals in their grades need one another, and also the plants,
which again need soil, water, chemical elements and their combina-
tions, the planet, the sun, rotation and motion round the sun, the
obliquity of the ecliptic, and so on. At bottom, this springs from the
fact that the will must live on itself, since nothing exists besides it,
and it is a hungry will. Hence arise pursuit, hunting, anxiety, and
suffering. 
(WWR1: 154)
Insatiable Will
The Will, Schopenhauer maintains, is hungry. This is its manifest character,
evidenced in all its objectifications. We see it all around us in the strife and
suffering that pervade every aspect of life, and even in the non-living mate-
rial world. There is nothing in existence besides Will as thing-in-itself and
its objectifications in the world as representation. The hungry Will, as a
result, can only feed on itself. The restless blind urging of Will, its pure want-
ing without wanting this or that, keeps the physical universe in motion with-
out any purpose or plan. Will as thing-in-itself is the hidden inner force of
gravity, electromagnetism, the principles of crystal growth, vegetation,
nutrition, the reproductive urge, and all other natural phenomena. Will non-
causally objectifies itself in these and countless other ways, but always as
competition, discord and the opposition of predator and prey.
The only field of action where the Will can feed on itself is the world as
representation. It is the arena where objectifications of Will face off against
each other in harsh competition for resources and, ultimately, for the most
precious commodities of space and time. There can never be release from
108

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
this relentless antagonism of Will feeding on itself, in which one objectifica-
tion of the Will is pitted against all other objectifications, because pure will-
ing must objectify itself in these ways. The fact that there is no prospect for
attaining lasting peace or satisfaction of the Will's endless demands for grati-
fication is the basis for Schopenhauer's notorious moral pessimism. There
is no philosophical justification for expecting the misery in the world ever
to be meaningfully alleviated, because the world in reality, thing-in-itself as
Will, is never satisfied. The psychological objectification of Will in each will
to life is correspondingly caught up in a never-ending cycle of suffering want,
frustration in its brutal confrontations with others, and boredom and
dissatisfaction when it temporarily attains its desires.
Thus, for Schopenhauer, as in the first of the Four Noble Truths of Bud-
dhism, life is suffering and existence a sin. "For this reason," Schopenhauer
explains:
we wish to consider in human existence the inner and essential
destiny of the will. Everyone will readily find the same thing once
more in the life of the animal, only more feebly expressed in various
degrees. He can also sufficiently convince himself in the suffering
animal world how essentially all life is suffering. (WWR 1:310)
The inevitable suffering for all willing beings occurs because of the neces-
sity of the Will's feeding on itself, setting itself in eternal opposition to itself
through its objectifications in the world as representation. Schopenhauer
describes the struggle that takes place between all living things as combat
between distinct forms of existence fiercely engaged in dispute for the means
of survival and advantage. He characterizes one source of suffering for
willing creatures in these terms:
Thus everywhere in nature we see contest, struggle, and the fluctua-
tion of victory, and later on we shall recognize in this more distinctly
that variance with itself essential to the will. Every grade of the will's
objectification fights for the matter, the space, and the time of
another. Persistent matter must constantly change the form, since,
under the guidance of causality, mechanical, physical, chemical, and
organic phenomena, eagerly striving to appear, snatch the matter
from one another, for each wishes to reveal its own Idea. This
contest can be followed through the whole of nature; indeed only
through it does nature exist... 
(WWR 1: 146-7)
The battle is seen not only in the non-human animal kingdom but in
human interactions of every kind. We can readily confirm what Schopen-
109

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
hauer means from even the most sheltered experience. Conflicts are rife in
virtually universal forms of sibling rivalries, efforts to gain parental atten-
tion and affection, confrontations with schoolyard bullies, competition for
grades, and later in life for jobs and assignments, contracts, preferences and
advancement, and from what we know of lawsuits, wars and territorial
disputes concerning everything of value for the sake of which we must strug-
gle and compete throughout our lives. All the while, every willing being
suffers the ups and downs of desire, frustration, the ennui of satiety and ever
greater and unsatisfiable desires, with no promise of relief.
Schopenhauer first addresses the world of animals, whose struggles are
more naked and unsublimated than those among members of our own
species. "Yet this strife itself is only the revelation of that variance with itself
that is essential to the will", he proclaims.
This universal conflict is to be seen most clearly in the animal king-
dom. Animals have the vegetable kingdom for their nourishment,
and within the animal kingdom again every animal is the prey and
food of some other. This means that the matter in which an animal's
Idea manifests itself must stand aside for the manifestation of
another Idea, since every animal can maintain its own existence only
by the incessant elimination of another's. 
(WWR 1: 147)
Every living thing feeds on other living things, or competes with them for
the possession and use of the inorganic world of substances. There is no
avoiding the endless aggression and vying for advantage that determines the
place of each objectification of Will in the world's mammoth foodchain. As
the poet Alfred Lord Tennyson describes the situation, nature is red in tooth
and claw.1 And not only nature, in Schopenhauer's view, but even and
especially in the most advanced human cultures and civilizations. We are all
a part of the struggle for existence, like it or not, as predator or prey. We
are in that regard the inevitable hapless creatures of the world as Will. The
inner character of thing-in-itself is revealed in the world as representation,
where the reality of Will is objectified as the law of eat or be eaten. In the
end, no matter what, it is the fate of all things ultimately to be eaten, at least
by bacteria or worms, or consumed by fire or another destructive element,
as yet another objectification of the hungry Will.
"Thus the will-to-live generally feasts on itself," Schopenhauer continues:
and is in different forms its own nourishment, till finally the human
race, because it subdues all the others, regards nature as manufac-
tured for its own use. Yet... this same human race reveals in itself
with terrible clearness that conflict, that variance of the will with
110

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
itself, and we get homo homini lupus ["Man is a wolf for man"
(Plautus, Asinaria)]. However, we shall again recognize the same
contest, the same subjugation, just as well at the low grades of the
will's objectivity. 
(WWR 1: 147)
What sustains each individual subject in the struggle for existence against all
other objectifications of thing-in-itself as Will, according to Schopenhauer,
is the Will's most immediate objectification known only inwardly in the guise
of individual willing, which Schopenhauer interprets in all of its activities
as the will to life.
Will to life
Schopenhauer's concept of the will to life is an expansion made for emphasis,
a redundancy, in fact, for what he otherwise speaks of more economically
as simply the individual empirical will or willing. To will in any sense at all
for Schopenhauer as a phenomenological occurrence or psychological
episode, whether consciously or merely dispositionally, is to will life or some-
thing required or thought to be required for life. As such, all phenomenal
willing is in every instance an activity of the will to life.
Interpreting the will to life in this way, Schopenhauer explains:
The will, considered purely in itself, is devoid of knowledge, and is
only a blind, irresistible urge, as we see it appear in inorganic and
vegetable nature and in their laws, and also in the vegetative part
of our own life. Through the addition of the world as representa-
tion, developed for its service, the will obtains knowledge of its own
willing and what it wills, namely that this is nothing but this world,
life, precisely as it exists. 
(WWR 1: 275)
Will as thing-in-itself is blind urging, as Schopenhauer frequently remarks.
"We have therefore called the phenomenal world the mirror, the objectiv-
ity, of the will", he repeats, "and as what the will wills is always life, just
because this is nothing but the presentation of that willing for the represen-
tation, it is immaterial and a mere pleonasm if, instead of simply saying 'the
will,' we say 'the will-to-live'" (WWR 1: 275). Will to life is, as Schopenhauer
likes to say, the most immediate objectification of Will. It is that from which,
in its purest form in our inner experience of willing, thing-in-itself takes its
name in Schopenhauer's metaphysics. We learn that every living thing
embodies and is driven internally in all its actions by a will to life. The activity
111

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of every living thing, according to its inner principle as objectification of Will,
is to engage relentlessly in life or death struggles with every other living thing
that equally embodies and is equally driven by the will to life, whose needs
and wants cannot be satisfied except at the expense of all other willing
subjects and all other non-willing physical substances.
Anticipating his subsequent detailed examination of the problem of death,
Schopenhauer argues that the will to life is guaranteed existence (WWR 1:
275). Schopenhauer believes that will to life as a phenomenal objectification
of Will cannot fail to exist as part of a more complete world that in turn is
sure to sustain it, at least until it is consumed by another objectification of
the hungry Will. Why should this be true? Why could it not be the case that
the individual willing subject is the only existent entity, the only objectifica-
tion of Will? Why should it not be the case that all other aspects of the world
be understood as mere illusion? Although Schopenhauer does not consider
a further explanation, it appears from the main principles of his idealism that
the external world is real in the only conceivable sense because it is governed
by natural laws under the principle of sufficient reason. As long as there is
will to life, individual phenomenal willing, there is subject. Where there is
subject, in turn, we know, for Schopenhauer, there is interpresuppositional
object, a world of objects. There is always in that case a world as represen-
tation that is equally the objectification of thing-in-itself interpreted as Will
to nourish the representing subject, as long as it exists. Since the Will is a
hungry Will, we can be assured that we are objectified along with whatever
we need to sustain us. For the Will feeds upon itself, each of its objectifica-
tions feeding on all others. We can also unfortunately be assured that we will
be there to be eaten by whatever it is that will eventually eat us.
This is not to say that we cannot perish, although Schopenhauer will soon
argue that death for related reasons is unreal. "It is true that we see the
individual come into being and pass away", he admits:
but the individual is only phenomenon, exists only for knowledge
involved in the principle of sufficient reason, in the principium
individuationis. Naturally, for this knowledge, the individual receives
his life as a gift, rises out of nothing, and then suffers the loss of this
gift through death, and returns to nothing. 
(WWR 1: 275)
How, then, can will to life be guaranteed to exist? It is only because, from
the standpoint of the world as Will and representation, death is not an event
through which a representing subject can endure or that it can representa-
tionally experience.
The beginning and end of the will to life as a result are equally unreal.
Schopenhauer argues that birth and death are the endpoints of life, and are
112

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
held in balance as mutual conditions (WWR 1: 275). Birth and death are the
poles of an essential duality that exists only in the phenomenal world as
representation and as necessary complements of the Will's objectification.
The Will must objectify itself in this among other ways, according to
Schopenhauer, because it must manifest itself in as many different ways as
possible. If we ask why there is birth and why there is death, it is because
the world is Will and objectifies itself according to its hidden inner princi-
ple, which we can only discover through its objectifications as clues to its
character. Schopenhauer again invokes an Asian myth for the duality of birth
and death. He observes that Brahma, the most sinful and lowest god of the
Trimurti, symbolizes generation, origination, and Vishnu stands for preser-
vation, while Shiva is generally represented in religious artworks not only
as wearing a necklace of skulls appearing as the counterpart of death, but
also the lingam, a stylized representation of the male generative organ,
symbolizing continuing life (WWR 1: 275-6). A single god that embodies
both creation and destruction, birth and death, is thus the perfect emblem
for the termini of the Will's objectification in the phenomenal will to life.
Much as subject and object are interpresuppositional for Schopenhauer,
so he maintains that birth and death are interimplicative aspects of the will
to life. He explains that even non-living objectifications of Will are in com-
petition, caught up like the rest of creation in a struggle for momentary
dominance, at the very least for the occupation of space and time. The natu-
ral forces of gravity, attraction and repulsion typify the violence and upheaval
in the constant processes that are at work in the universe to physically replace
one thing with another (WWR 1: 161). Beginning with living organisms and
the competition among individuals within species for the means of subsist-
ence, and finding parallel struggles even among inorganic things involving
natural forces, Schopenhauer describes all the Will's objectifications as in
competition with one another for exclusive occupation of the perceptual
forms of space and time. "The scene of action and the object of this conflict
is matter that they strive to wrest from one another," he writes, "as well as
space and time, the union of which through the form of causality is really
matter" (WWR 1: 161).
Thing-in-itself, the insatiably hungry Will that feeds upon itself in the
world of represented objects for representing subjects, leaves in its path a
wake of carnage and misery. With his eyes attuned to the suffering in the
world, Schopenhauer can see little else. He finds only temporary islands of
reprieve from the general pattern of pain, unfulfilled but tormenting desires
and bitter disappointments, as the only reward for when we do happen to
succeed temporarily in obtaining whatever it is we tell ourselves we need.
At the end, taunting us at every step, is the spectre of death as something
that threatens to take away whatever it is we might otherwise have achieved.
113

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
We dread death, despite its being nothing real, as the closure of both
representing subject and represented object, and hence of the entire world
as representation. The only release from the fear of dying lies in attaining
that rare form of philosophical wisdom that Schopenhauer offers as a
corollary to his idealism in emulating certain types of religious saints who
renounce the will to life.2
Suffering and ascetic salvation
The cause of suffering is not accidental, according to Schopenhauer, but the
world's most essential feature. We might imagine that suffering happens to
some persons who are unlucky or who make ill-advised choices. There is no
need for persons to suffer if they choose wisely in life, if they are lucky in
being born with good health and sound genes, raised in a supportive and
sufficiently affluent family and community, and then proceed to judge
intelligently how to conduct themselves, following life's path with skill and
good humour wherever it leads.
This, we might think, is all that one needs to avoid unnecessary suffer-
ing. As moral optimists, while recognizing that misfortune is always possi-
ble, we may look about to see numerous people who seem to be living just
such happy and satisfying personal lives. If there are also dangers, diseases
and reversals of happiness, on the whole we may assume that these are not
necessarily the lot of every person, and that a good life within its natural
limits is possible in principle for all. At the end of such a life, there may
further be the possibility of an eternal reward and the soul's salvation in an
afterlife, in which the trials and tribulations of the present existence will be
left behind and our spirits will remain active and content in a higher plane
of existence removed from all strife.
Schopenhauer admits none of this. He interprets all of life as a parade of
uninterrupted suffering from which there is no possibility of relief in this
world or in a life after death. His pessimism consists in the fact that he
regards thing-in-itself, the reality that lies hidden beneath the world as
representation in which our struggles occur, as Will in perpetual self-conflict.
Its objectifications in competitions of every kind, ultimately for matter
understood as causality, space and time, in one way or another pit every
represented object against every other. From plants seizing precious space
to root in stony terrain, water, light and soil, predator and prey, nourish-
ment, attraction of a mate and the raising of offspring, sibling rivalries, dog-
eat-dog business struggles and the battle of the sexes, to world wars and the
planetary push and pull of gravitational forces across vast distances of space,
114

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
the world as representation for Schopenhauer is pervaded by conflict. It is
a monstrous coliseum in which every existent entity, living or non-living,
tries, like a gladiator, to defeat every other existent entity. It must be so,
moreover, if Schopenhauer is right, because the world in reality, thing-in-
itself, reveals its character in the world as conflict, and is eternal and
unchanging in its self-opposition. The world as Will endlessly consumes itself
in the only way it can, according to Schopenhauer, objectifying itself in the
world as representation where every entity always tries to consume every
other.
Schopenhauer describes a pathetic cycle of desire, want and lack, satiety,
surfeit and boredom as the inevitable pattern of human suffering even for
the most fortunate willing subjects caught up in the life of desire. In all of
philosophical literature there is no more uncompromisingly negative
perspective than Schopenhauer offers on the prospects of existence. He
exploits the mythological imagery of many different cultures as illustrating
subconscious insights into human nature and the human condition. "Thus
the subject of willing", he concludes, "is constantly lying on the revolving
wheel of Ixion, is always drawing water in the sieve of the Danaids, and is
the eternally thirsting Tantalus" (WWR 1: 196). Without necessarily know-
ing why they did so, the ancient myth-makers intuitively devised tales that
resonated powerfully with their audiences because they were in touch with
something deeply revealing about the limits and problems of life.
Schopenhauer sees black comedy, but mostly tragedy, in human existence and
everywhere throughout the world as representation.
Whether he is right in viewing the world so pessimistically, it is clear that
Schopenhauer has fully anticipated the objection to be raised from the stand-
point of those who see the world more positively. Schopenhauer will say that
optimists have simply not lived long enough nor looked deeply enough into
the sufferings that surround them on every side, if only they would open their
eyes. What is misinterpreted as the bright future or highest potential for the
world and for human life, Schopenhauer maintains, is at best only a momen-
tary respite from an overall pattern of one objectification of the insatiably
hungry Will devouring another. If the true nature of thing-in-itself, the world
as Will, is to cannibalize itself by proxy through its objectifications in the
world as representation, then there must be give and take. There must be
times of eating for some and of being eaten for others. Eventually, however,
all things in one form or other must suffer the same destructive fate. The
cycle ends only when the world as representation ends, with the death or
permanent inability to represent of any representing subject.
An optimist, lacking the proper metaphysical foundation for understand-
ing the world as representation, adopts an unbalanced attitude based on
exclusive concern with the fate of those who, for a time, are privileged to
115

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
be eating rather than eaten, and mistaking these limited one-sided occur-
rences as typical of life. What optimists fail to appreciate is that for every
objectification of Will that is temporarily thriving, there are countless others
that must pay the price. If human life in a particular historical period is good
for many persons, the pleasure that occurs requires the desolation of many
other objectifications of Will that are sacrificed in the process. It involves,
among other things, the depletion of natural resources or pollution of the
environment to the disadvantage of future generations. For every success-
ful happy individual there must be many more individuals who are used and
consumed. Indeed, the suffering and exploited must always heavily outnum-
ber those who benefit by taking necessities away from others, living or non-
living. In the end, more importantly, the satisfaction of desires produces its
own intense dissatisfaction. Malaise followed by death, and often poverty,
humiliation and debility are waiting even for those who appear in the course
of life to have succeeded temporarily in gratifying their individual will to life.
The sober realistic view of life is therefore unqualifiedly pessimistic in
Schopenhauer's philosophy. Not only is life suffering, but there is no hope
for things to change for the better. The world as representation is necessarily
the objectification of an avaricious Will. Schopenhauer carefully defines the
distinction between happiness and suffering. Happiness is the satisfaction
of the goals of individual willing, and suffering is its obstruction (WWR 1:
309). The definition enables Schopenhauer to advance his thesis of univer-
sal suffering as the inevitable companion of individual willing, interpreted
as the immediate objectification of thing-in-itself as Will. The image is
disheartening in the extreme. Schopenhauer understands the role of
individual willing commonsensically as one of setting certain goals, experi-
encing desires that are lived through, causing suffering when they are not
satisfied, and then giving rise to new desires, new agonies of will as soon as
the previous wants are attained, in a never-ending cycle. It is the striving of
will that Schopenhauer identifies as the source of all suffering. If we did not
will, we would not suffer. Since the reality of the world as thing-in-itself is
Will, and individual willing is its most immediate objectification in the world
as representation, there is no avoiding suffering. To will is to strive, and to
strive is to suffer, even and especially when the will temporarily succeeds in
achieving that for which it strives. The reality of the world, thing-in-itself
as Will, reveals its inner character in the world as representation through its
most immediate objectification in the form of individual willing. The pain
of the world is due entirely to will, and ultimately to Will.
"Now absolutely every human life", Schopenhauer writes:
continues to flow on between willing and attainment. Of its nature
the wish is pain; attainment quickly begets satiety. The goal was only
116

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
apparent; possession takes away its charm. The wish, the need,
appears again on the scene under a new form; if it does not, then
dreariness, emptiness, and boredom follow, the struggle against
which is just as painful as is that against want. 
(WWR 1: 314)
Schopenhauer, accordingly, seeks salvation from the suffering that accom-
panies every activity of will, attaining indifference to the will to life through
knowledge. Willing and knowing stand opposed, since willing obstructs
knowing, and knowing alone offers relief from the sufferings attendant on
willing. "What might otherwise be called the finest part of life", Schopen-
hauer now essays, "its purest joy, just because it lifts us out of real existence,
and transforms us into disinterested spectators of it, is pure knowledge which
remains foreign to all willing" (WWR 1: 314).
Knowledge and will exist in limited proportions in every individual. For
gifted persons of extraordinary capacity, the suffering that willing otherwise
produces can at least be partially overcome through knowing. Knowing and
willing are in so basic an opposition that we can overcome the will and its
occasions for suffering only by cultivating knowledge. We, as human beings
generally, can transcend the will to life by pursuing knowledge along either
of two paths, although not every individual necessarily possesses the required
ability or discipline, by living the life of an ascetic saint or aesthetic genius.
The renunciation of the will to life is deliberately chosen by the saint for the
sake of attaining salvation. The aesthetic genius transcends the strivings of
will by a kind of enraptured perceptual knowledge of the Platonic Ideas
passively received as existing in beautiful and sublime objects of nature and
great works of art, when the will to life is suppressed. The life of the saint
and that of the artist are involved in radically different ways with the attain-
ment of a kind of knowledge that lifts the individual out of the cycle of
willing. Denying and transcending the will to life enables the true and
constitutionally committed seeker of knowledge at least to a certain extent
to avoid the pangs of suffering induced by every act of will.
The alternative, if in the end there is no hope of salvation from the
sufferings of will, is what Schopenhauer sees around him every day in the
unrelieved misery of human existence. Persons who seem superficially well
off, who are healthy and wealthy, and the beneficiaries of what otherwise
look to be all the blessings life has to offer, are in reality also suffering the
cycle of desire, frustration, greater desire, satiety and boredom, even in the
very best of circumstances. We only need consider our own lives to discover
confirmation of what Schopenhauer describes. The pattern of desire and its
fulfilment, followed by ever more ambitious desires, greater want and greater
suffering, followed again in turn by moments of dissatisfaction with the
fulfilment of desire, is all too familiar to any reflective person. If the true
117

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
character of thing-in-itself is to be discerned in the world as representation,
then it is hard to dismiss Schopenhauer's diagnosis of the woes of existence.
The misery of the world is then an unavoidable manifestation of thing-in-
itself. It is the insatiably hungry Will feeding on itself through the individual
wilful acts of aggression and competition among its objectifications in the
world as representation that makes all the world as representation a kind
of living hell.
Schopenhauer offers a mournful picture of the plight of human life. He
considers the Will as thing-in-itself manifesting its blind urging in objectified
form in the daily facts of our existence:
The ceaseless efforts to banish suffering achieve nothing more than
a change in its form. This is essentially want, lack, care for the main-
tenance of life. If, which is very difficult, we have succeeded in
removing pain in this form, it at once appears on the scene in a thou-
sand others, varying according to age and circumstances, such as
sexual impulse, passionate love, jealousy, envy, hatred, anxiety,
ambition, avarice, sickness, and so on. Finally, if it cannot find entry
in any other shape, it comes in the sad, grey garment of weariness,
satiety, and boredom, against which many different attempts are
made. Even if we ultimately succeed in driving these away, it will
hardly be done without letting pain in once again in one of the
previous forms, and thus starting the dance once more at the begin-
ning; for every human life is tossed backwards and forwards
between pain and boredom. 
(WWR 1: 315)
The inevitable result for all individual willing subjects, whose nature is
the most immediate objectification of thing-in-itself as Will, is to be
condemned to suffer. Suffering is unavoidable, although the less intelligent
among us may seem from time to time to live in blissful denial of the truth.
We may try ineffectually to distract ourselves with shallow momentary
pleasures that only disguise the true state of human existence. Only the more
saintly and artistically gifted among us can find relief from the sufferings of
will by transcending desire through self-renunciation in ascetic discipline or
loss of self in moments of aesthetic contemplation. Aesthetic genius attains
the saint's indifference to life and death in another form in a mystic absorp-
tion of personality and momentary dissolution of any immediate sense of
the subject-object distinction. The two ways of avoiding suffering, ascetic
and aesthetic, amount to at least a temporary suspension of the will to life,
in an indifference to life and death. Here we shall be concerned only with
Schopenhauer's remarks about ascetic sainthood, reserving the topic of his
aesthetics and philosophy of art for Chapter 5.
118

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
The ascetic saint renounces all pleasures in life and seeks to mortify the
flesh in order to suppress its desires. In extreme cases, ascetic saints reject even
the most basic life-sustaining necessities to the point of self-immolation,
sacrificing their lives in denial of the will to life. While Schopenhauer is no
Christian, he admires the lives of Christian saints, as he does the ascetic
practices of Buddhism and Hinduism. He is interested in positive analogies
between the concepts of asceticism found in extreme forms of these religious
traditions. He claims to see a common unspoken recognition of the same
effort to avoid the sufferings of will by denying the will to life. The very fact
that many religions promise their believers a heavenly afterlife is taken by
Schopenhauer as evidence that they recognize that life here on earth, as it
would be anywhere in the world as representation, is imbued with suffering
that we can only bear if we imagine that we shall eventually escape it to a
better place. Schopenhauer is concerned to distinguish his philosophy from
similar religions and ethical systems that have also approved a course of life
aimed at alleviating suffering.
Stoic philosophy is made a particular target of Schopenhauer's criticism.
He clarifies his view of salvation by distinguishing it from similar philosophi-
cal positions associated with classical Greek and Roman Stoicism and
Epicureanism. He argues that Stoicism and Epicureanism are logically inco-
herent moral doctrines that hold out the prospect of achieving indifference
to the world for the sake of pleasure in the absence of pain. This,
Schopenhauer believes, is both practically impossible and philosophically
misconceived. He finds more merit in the image of Christ of Nazareth as a
symbol of suffering, the man of sorrows or Schmerzenman, scourged and
crucified. "Compared with [the Stoic]," Schopenhauer proclaims, denounc-
ing a philosophy that subdues suffering for the sake of procuring happiness:
how entirely different appear the overcomers of the world and
voluntary penitents, who are revealed to us, and are actually pro-
duced, by the wisdom of India; how different even the Saviour of
Christianity, that excellent form full of the depth of life, of the great-
est poetical truth and highest significance, who stands before us with
perfect virtue, holiness, and sublimity, yet in a state of supreme
suffering. 
(WWR1:91)
The saints of every great world religion are edifying models of the intui-
tively grasped need to renounce the will to life. Religious asceticism dimly
glimpses but still confirms the true nature of the world and the conditions
of human life that Schopenhauer believes he for the first time has properly
understood. He is concerned especially to draw on religious doctrines and
rituals as support for his theoretical conclusions, to show that they are not
119

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
merely idle speculation. He maintains that his pessimistic moral philosophy
embodies a view of the world that religious saints and sages of many cultures
have recognized without the more rigorous trappings of abstract metaphysi-
cal principles (WWR 1: 383). He claims to be the first to elaborate system-
atically ideas that many religious thinkers intuitively grasped but were unable
to articulate concerning the sufferings we endure as a result of the power-
ful demands of the will to life (WWR 2: 164).
The fact that religions of self-denial and self-sacrifice have not merely paid
lip service to the renunciation of the will to life, but have practised extreme
forms of asceticism, has great significance for Schopenhauer. The life of self-
imposed suffering and denial of the will speaks more eloquently than any
abstract theory to the fact that the world is Will, that its objectification in
the phenomenal world of experience is the will to life, and that wherever
there is will there is suffering. It further supports Schopenhauer's conclu-
sion that the proper course for enlightened thinking is to renounce the will
to life through denial of desires for the sake of knowledge, and in every way
to overcome the demands of will. It is no accident, from Schopenhauer's
standpoint, that ancient Indian religious traditions distinguish between the
passing world of appearance and the real world obscured from our eyes by
the veil of Maya, and as a corollary emphasize the value of conquering the
will to life, denying desire and every pleasure for the sake of the higher
virtues of contemplation and understanding. These proto-metaphysical,
proto-ethical religious insights are mirrored in Schopenhauer's abstract
philosophical formulations, which he believes harmonize powerfully with
the proto-philosophical teachings of ancient Asian religions and Christian-
ity, and corrupted incoherently in Graeco-Roman Stoic and Epicurean
philosophy (WWR 1: 386).
The unworldliness of Christianity at its finest is in accord with
Schopenhauer's path of salvation from the sufferings of the will to life
through its renunciation (WWR 1: 386-7). He seems to favour medieval
monastic Christianity, with its practice of self-flagellation, hair-shirts,
penance and vows of poverty and silence as ways of overcoming the flesh.
For the sake of the comparison he wants to develop, he ignores, but can
hardly be ignorant of, the fact that in many documented instances the ascetic
practices and visions of saints in this period were as much a route to height-
ened sensuality and pride, and to a kind of unconventional eroticism, as
attempts to surmount the will to life. He may presumably be prepared to
distinguish, as many Christian apologists have tried to do, between those
who merely profess to be following the road to righteousness for ulterior
motives of their own, and those who, more in keeping with higher moral
principles, observe all the right practices for all the right reasons (WWR 1:
388-9).
120

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
The proper religious and philosophical attitude, in so far as religion and
philosophy converge, and the shortcomings and hypocrisy of so many of
whose practitioners Schopenhauer overlooks for the sake of their deeper
message, is to have compassion for every suffering being. We are to try to
relieve the sufferings of others, and in the meantime to deny the nagging urges
of the will to life by suppressing our desires. We should recognize that the
world in which we live is in some sense unreal, that it is not the end and
purpose of our lives to gratify our wants by the pursuit of pleasures and
material goods. The vicious cycle of desire, frustration, satiation and height-
ened cravings, as Schopenhauer says and as the ascetic religious sages of great
religions seem to have understood, only sustains and prolongs the suffering
that walks with will, from which salvation can only be gained by renouncing
the will to life.
The opposition between will and wisdom pervades Schopenhauer's
recommendation of religious-philosophical asceticism. We cannot pursue
knowledge effectively and sometimes not at all when we are caught up
in efforts to satisfy the requirements of will. We need quiet and contempla-
tion in order to attain knowledge. When we have genuine knowledge,
moreover, our desires are subdued (WWR 1: 397). The way to salvation
is therefore through the denial of the will to life. "True salvation," he
argues:
deliverance from life and suffering, cannot even be imagined with-
out complete denial of the will. Till then, everyone is nothing but
this will itself, whose phenomenon is an evanescent existence, an
always vain and constantly frustrated striving, and the world full of
suffering as we have described it. 
(WWR 1: 397)
Such knowledge, if we can attain it, is a form of metaphysical nihilism.
Schopenhauer believes that the world of experience is nothing. The world
as representation is an illusion, so that each person can say that the world
is "my" representation.
The implication of Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism is the denial
of the world as representation, in the recognition that the phenomenal world
is unreal. Schopenhauer agrees with Socrates and Plato in denying the real-
ity and ultimate value of the world of appearance. Hence, it is nothing
worthwhile for the thinking person to be absorbed in, concerned about, or
to forge deep attachments toward. "We freely acknowledge", he writes, "that
what remains after the complete abolition of the will is, for all who are still
full of the will, assuredly nothing. But also conversely, to those in whom the
will has turned and denied itself, this very real world of ours with all its suns
and galaxies, is - nothing" (WWR 1: 412).
121

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The profound insight of Christianity is its recognition of suffering and the
importance of salvation (WWR 2: 170). There is no call to be saved if the
world in principle is a friendly place where human satisfaction and happi-
ness can finally be attained. The need for salvation is pervasive, and what it
is we need to be saved from is ourselves. It is the will to life, an objectification
of the hungry Will, that is responsible for all the suffering that results from
the fact that every objectification of Will in the world as representation is
set against every other. The Will's insatiable appetite gives rise to the will
to the individual life's complex cycle of desire, frustrations and ever greater
desires, followed by the dissatisfaction of not attaining its wants, or by the
momentary satiety and the accompanying disappointment in how little and
how briefly the will to life can be made content. As products of the Will's
most direct and immediate objectifications, we need salvation from the
individual willing and will to life that characterizes our species in all but its
most exceptional members.
Death and immortality
Schopenhauer's philosophy often gives the impression of having been
composed expressly for the purpose of reconciling the phenomenal will to
the inevitability of death. All the apparatus of his main treatise, the funda-
mental distinction between the world as Will and representation, the concept
of thing-in-itself as beyond the principium individuationis, and fourfold root
of the principle of sufficient reason, can be understood as contributing to a
moral, metaphysical and mystical religious recognition that death is nothing
real and hence nothing to fear.
If Schopenhauer is correct, he proves that death is not an event, and hence
altogether unreal. Death is not an event in the world as representation, but
is rather an endpoint or limit of the world as representation, and in particular
in the first-person formulation as my representation. The world as repre-
sentation begins and ends with the consciousness of the individual represent-
ing subject. At the moment of death, all representation comes to an
immediate abrupt end, after which there remains only thing-in-itself. An
individual's death is not something that occurs in or as any part of the world
as representation. Nor can death possibly be in or a part of the world as
thing-in-itself or Will. There are no events or individuated occurrences,
nothing happening in space or time, for thing-in-itself, and in particular there
is no progressive transition from life to death or from consciousness to
unconsciousness. If with Schopenhauer we assume that there exists only the
world as representation and as thing-in-itself interpreted as Will, then there
122

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
is no place on either side of the great divide for death, no possibility for the
existence or reality of death.
Death is nothing whatsoever. It is unreal, and yet it is the purpose and
fulfilment of life. Like the Stoics and Epicureans, Schopenhauer argues that
death is nothing to fear. Nor, although it offers release from the sufferings
of the will to life, does death provide a meaningful form of salvation.
Schopenhauer attributes an implicit understanding of the unreality of death
to persons who are able to face each day of life without abandoning
themselves to despair, and to soldiers and other persons with dangerous
occupations who confront the challenges of each moment with courage. Such
persons act in practice just as though they understood in theory that death
is nothing real. At the moment of death, when consciousness runs up against
its limit in the last instant of life, at the final moment of consciousness,
Schopenhauer maintains that the world as representation, "my" represen-
tation, as each person can say, ceases to exist. The only world an individual
subject can possibly know ceases to exist as immediately and completely, and
in the only conceivable way, as any existent thing can ever be destroyed, at
the moment of death. There is nothing whatsoever left over when death
limits representation, except for thing-in-itself (WWR 1: 280).
Schopenhauer's Kantian and Platonic metaphysics is tempered by its
uniquely Buddhistic and Hinduistic, rather than Jewish, Christian or Islamic,
concept of the soul's salvation. The immortality of the soul is understood
by Schopenhauer as the indestructibility of Will as thing-in-itself, the pure
willing that transcends or underlies the empirical individual willing that
Schopenhauer refers to as the will to life. As thinking subjects we are immor-
tal only in the attenuated sense that Will willing purely within us can never
be destroyed. When the world as representation in its entirety, including the
representing subject's body, ceases to exist with the passing of the represent-
ing subject's last moment of conciousness, Will as thing-in-itself at the core
of each thinking subject alone remains (WWR 2: 215). There is therefore
something in each of us that is immortal. The part of us that survives death
is not, according to Schopenhauer, as some sects of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam have taught, the personality or self or soul of the thinking subject. It
is rather the impersonal Will within, the indestructible thing-in-itself,
transcending space, time and causality, that is in no way part of the world
as representation or subject to any sort of change.
The individual will as an objectification of thing-in-itself, of the world as
Will, has a dual nature. It is at once the ephemeral subject of life and death,
and the expression in the world as representation of thing-in-itself. "There
is something in us, however," Schopenhauer observes, "which tells us that
this is not so, that this is not the end of things, that death is not an absolute
annihilation" (WWR 1: 324). The thought at first makes it seem as though
123

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer is holding out the possibility for personal survival after death.
If death is not absolute annihilation, then some part of a living person must
persist through the event of death. This Schopenhauer admits, but only in
a limited sense that precludes the possibility of an afterlife for the empiri-
cal self.3 This is not the comforting sense of survival by which a particular
person with specific memories and expectations continues after the body's
death, promised by popular religions and mind-body dualisms in the
philosophy of Plato and Descartes. Schopenhauer offers only the metaphysi-
cal indestructibility of Will as thing-in-itself in the pure willing of any willing
subject. The non-finality of death is no more than the persistence of Will as
thing-in-itself that "endures" (WWR 1: 282-3). That death is not total
annihilation for Schopenhauer is true enough; yet death remains the total
annihilation of the self, soul, or subject in the psychological sense of the
individual will to life or particular empirical personality.4
Thus, Schopenhauer rejects the Socratic doctrine of immortality. The soul,
as Socrates describes it in Plato's dialogues, if it is to be capable of thought,
can neither belong to the world of Becoming nor to the world of Being
consisting of timeless eternal abstract Ideas. The soul, furthermore, with its
personality intact, has no mode of conveyance by which it can be transported
from the ephemeral world of Becoming to the eternal changeless and time-
less world of Being. Schopenhauer, unlike Plato, does not hold that the
individual's personality survives death. The sense of immortality that
Schopenhauer allows involves the identification of pure willing at the core of
every individual empirical act of will with thing-in-itself as Will. Immortal-
ity does not carry the individual over into a promised land. The only part of
the willing subject to survive death in Schopenhauer's metaphysics is its core
of pure willing or Will. It is only that which is left over after subtracting every
individuating factor from the phenomenal will to life that Schopenhauer
identifies with thing-in-itself. Thing-in-itself survives each individual death,
but it was never alive in the empirical biological sense in the first place. It is
the transcendent reality that exists independently of all thought, outside
individuality, space, time, causation and rational explanation.
Although we thinking subjects cannot be annihilated by the destruction
of our bodies, it is not what we ordinarily think of as "we" that survives.
Schopenhauer denies that any of our memories, expectations or aspirations
can persist through a moment of death and survive intact, crossing over to
the other side in an afterlife. The part of us that survives, the Will that
Schopenhauer identifies with thing-in-itself, is impersonal, indistinguishable
and non-individual. The Will that survives death outlasts its own spatio-
temporal objectifications, but does not do so in time or space, which cease
to exist at the exact instant that the individual representing subject closes its
representing eye for the last time on the world as representation. The part
124

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
of me that survives death, therefore, Schopenhauer believes, the Will that
transcends my individual willing, is no different from but exactly the same
as the pure willing part of you that survives death.
What is immortal in each of us is at most a kind of generic world-soul
that is not personally individualized, that does not entertain any succession
of thoughts, but is simply the Kantian thing-in-itself identified by
Schopenhauer as Will. It has no psychological episodes as we ordinarily
think of them occurring in time. It has no memories of a past embodied life
or expectations or ongoing experiences following the body's death. We as
thinkers share in thing-in-itself as the immortal part of our willing and
representing psychologies with every other thinker. If the Will surviving
death is in any sense a part of us, it is equally the same part of every other
representing subject, and not only of human psychological subjects, but of
every willing thinker, beginning with the simplest and most primitive
lifeforms capable of perceiving. The immortality in which we share has
nothing about it that is individual or empirical. It is not like going to heaven
and playing a lyre, feasting on ambrosia, or meeting and conversing
with God or with those who have already gone before us into death. It is
not like anything at all, because it is only the existence of thing-in-itself
outside space and time without the interpresuppositional subject-object
objectification in psychology that constitutes the world as representation,
and only as long as the individual representing subject remains conscious
(WWR2: 199-200).
Matters of life and death
Schopenhauer interprets death as the aim and purpose of life. He maintains
that the triumph of death is inevitable, and that existence is a constant dying.
Death for Schopenhauer is the denial of the individual will to life, and birth
and death as events in the phenomenal world are alike unreal, although
death is not complete annihilation. Suicide, although not morally objection-
able, is philosophically pointless because it only reaffirms the will to life
in desperate form. The paradoxes in Schopenhauer's reflections on the
nature of death must be understood in order to appreciate what he means
by the empirical will in its relation to Will as thing-in-itself (WWR 1: 275-
382 and passim).
What is death? How should philosophy try to explain the significance of
the extinction of individual consciousness? Schopenhauer's pessimism
consists in his affirmation of all phenomena as manifestations of Will in
essential self-conflict. The importance of the concept of death for his
125

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
philosophy is indicated even in his unpublished Berlin Manuscripts of 1818-
1830 on Adversaria §175, where he writes: "We abhor death, and as nature
does not lie and the fear of death is the voice of nature, there must yet be
some reason for this" (HN 3: 623). The purpose of Schopenhauer's reflec-
tions on death is to clarify its meaning in relation to his theory of the indi-
vidual will to life, to reach a philosophically sound understanding of what
death is and what it is not, of whether death is anything to fear or in any
case what a philosophical attitude toward individual death ought to be, both
metaphysically and morally.
Schopenhauer regards the attitude of hopeful expectancy that embraces
life as a deluded involvement with the most superficial aspects of the
phenomenal world. He celebrates death as a welcome release from the
individual will's condemnation to ineffectual suffering, of constantly willing
what we need or think we need, struggling in competition with others who
want many of the same things and who actively oppose us in the fulfilment
of our desires. It is the suffering of always desiring more, and having to cope
with the melancholy that inevitably follows acquiring what we first desire.
Schopenhauer not only paints a pessimistic picture of the prospects of life as
an objectification of the insatiably hungry Will, but criticizes what he con-
siders to be a philosophically unfounded moral optimism as failing to under-
stand the nature and limits of individual will to life in the world as
representation (WWR2: 584).
As a consequence also of his idealist metaphysics of time, Schopenhauer
argues that existence is a constant dying, a process of the individual empirical
will moving inexorably toward death as its final purpose. Dwelling as an
objectification of Will in the world as representation, an individual human
psyche is caught up in the flow of time whereby the present is continually
streaming into the past. Schopenhauer seems to conceive of the past as a kind
of repository of death, of no longer existent events, from which he concludes
that life, like sand in an hourglass, trickles through the narrow bottleneck of
the present moment into the dead past. Existence as a consequence is both
a constant process of dying and a momentary postponement of ongoing
death (WWR 1:311).
In the second edition and second volume of The World as Will and
Representation, Schopenhauer quotes Byron's Euthanasia with approval. He
regards the sentiment it expresses as congenial to his own outlook on the
nature of life and death, when Byron proclaims:
Count o'er the joys thine hours have seen,
Count o'er thy days from anguish free
And know, whatever thou has been,
'Tis something better not to be.5
126

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
At its best, according to Schopenhauer, life is delayed dying. Life is nothing
positive, but merely a temporary reprieve from death, toward which life from
the moment of conception is irrepressibly impelled. Considered in itself,
there is no value to life. Like the Asian sages he admires, Schopenhauer agrees
that life transpires in a comparatively unreal world of appearance, in the
world as representation. We can take heart only in the mercifully brief time
during which we are required to live. Suffering is unavoidable because the
will to life objectifies the internal self-conflict of Will as thing-in-itself. There
is nothing to look forward to as the meaning or final reward or consumma-
tion of life except its termination in death. Schopenhauer considers only a
dismal prospect of life leading finally to death, and of the fleeting duration
of life as its one redeeming virtue in ending at last the suffering of each
individual will to life.6
We learn about death by analogy. We see others die and draw the infer-
ence that death must also visit each of us. The further belief that death is the
cessation of consciousness and irreversible destruction of the self, or the
hopeful expectation of an afterlife in which the soul survives bodily death,
are reactions to the awareness of death in faulty philosophical reasoning and
religious faith. The awareness and anticipation of death distinguishes human
beings from non-human animals. "The animal learns to know death only
when he dies," Schopenhauer says, adopting a common-sense view of animal
versus human nature:
but man consciously draws every hour near his death; and at times
this makes life a precarious business, even to the man who has not
already recognized this character of constant annihilation in the
whole of life itself. Mainly on this account, man has philosophies
and religions ... 
(WWR 1:37)
We might object that in such passages Schopenhauer seems to lack a
sympathetic understanding of animal psychology. The close observation of
animal behaviour may suggest a recognition of potential death in the way
in which some non-human animals seem to act deliberately to preserve their
safety, as though at some level they understood the concept of danger and
the possibility of dying. Similar interpretations in field studies by natural-
ists suggest that the responses of higher non-human animals to the death of
other animals, especially their parents, offspring and siblings, may also evince
a primitive awareness of death. Schopenhauer, of course, in that case can fall
back, as many philosophers do, on the fact that animals have no language
by which to articulate their anticipations of death in order to maintain that
they have no corresponding concepts, or argue that we simply anthropo-
morphize animal instincts for self-preservation when we try to ascribe
127

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
human-like attitudes toward death to non-human animals. These would nev-
ertheless be difficult positions for Schopenhauer to uphold, given the em-
phasis in his epistemology on intuition over abstract reasoning, along with
his moral compassion for the sufferings of non-human animals.
Awareness of death appears to be neither a necessary nor sufficient
condition for self-consciousness, let alone for human self-consciousness.
Schopenhauer nevertheless strikes a resonant chord when he associates
philosophy and religion as distinctively human concerns motivated at least
indirectly by a preoccupation with the fact of death. He is surely right that
even if non-human animals have a limited awareness of death, they evidently
do not know about or live in anticipation of their own deaths in the same
way or to the same extent as human beings. The innocence of non-human
animals in the face of death stands in stark contrast with human understand-
ing of the inevitability of death and all its ramifications for the way human
beings pursue the will to life.
Schopenhauer explains the awareness of death as a combined outcome
of reason and self-consciousness. He interprets the expectation of death as
the origin not only of philosophy and religious belief, but more specifically
of what he defines as the characteristic need for metaphysics (WWR 2: 160).
He describes death as an essential precondition without which there would
be no philosophy. In "On Death and Its Relation to the Indestructibility of
Our Inner Nature", a supplement to the fourth book of The World as Will
and Representation, Schopenhauer appeals to Socrates' pronouncements
about death as the wellspring of all philosophical thinking: "Death is the real
inspiring genius or Musagetes of philosophy," Schopenhauer remarks, "and
for this reason Socrates [in Plato's dialogue, the Phaedo] defined philoso-
phy as OavccTOi) laeAeirj [preparation for death]. Indeed, without death there
would hardly have been any philosophizing" (WWR 2: 463).
Awareness of death is a strange kind of knowledge. The mind cannot
express its apprehension of death, according to Schopenhauer, because all
its concepts derive from the objectification of Will in appearance as the
individual will to life, of which death is the antithesis. He characterizes the
knowledge of death dialectically as an imagined interrogation of the will to
life in which the will is hypothetically questioned concerning its desire to
continue suffering. The conflict experienced by individual will can only be
conceived as ending when the empirical self is destroyed. The mind tries
unsuccessfully to represent death as the negation of its knowledge and
experience of life, as an altogether aspatiotemporal, objectless and subjectless
oblivion. All consciousness and the individual will at once then cease to exist,
and the world as representation that the subject had lived through as an
objectification of Will as thing-in-itself is destroyed. There is nothing left of
the world that had existed in thought when the individual dies; nothing, that
128

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
is, in Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism, but thing-in-itself, the Will
that transcends all space, time and causality, irreparably removed from all
individuality and all possibility of explanation. There is then as there had
been all along in reality only thing-in-itself, and everything else appears to
be no more than a compelling dream. The epistemic limitations of the world
as representation prevent us from adequately explaining the metaphysics of
death, except, Schopenhauer indicates, as the negation of experience and
knowledge of the represented world (WWR 2: 609).
Although of necessity we can have no positive representational knowl-
edge of death, nature conveys a concept of death in its beckoning toward a
release from the sufferings of will. The desire to sustain life, according to
Schopenhauer, is confused. The idea of death confronts each person not as
the representation of an event or state of being, but more abstractly as the
possibility of a definitive end to the individual will's perpetual suffering.
There is a conflict in the mind's effort to represent death when the suffer-
ing of the individual will induces it to improve its condition by willing its
own destruction. The contemplation of suicide, too, Schopenhauer hints but
does not explicitly argue, is part of the suffering endured by intelligent
willing subjects as part of the awareness of approaching death compounded
by the insistent demands of the will to life.
Schopenhauer in many places seems perversely to relish the inevitability
of death. He repeats the commonplace that every moment of life brings us
one step closer to the abyss. He observes that despite this fact we cannot
avoid taking an avid interest in life when death is not immediately at our
door, knowing all the while that in the end death must prevail. Here, as in
other morbid passages, he dwells at length on the problem of death:
Every breath we draw wards off the death that constantly impinges
on us. In this way, we struggle with it every second, and again at
longer intervals through every meal we eat, every sleep we take,
every time we warm ourselves, and so on. Ultimately death must
triumph, for by birth it has already become our lot, and it plays with
its prey only for a while before swallowing it up. However, we con-
tinue our life with great interest and much solicitude as long as
possible, just as we blow out a soap-bubble as long and as large as
possible, although with the perfect certainty that it will burst.
(WWR 1:311)
While Schopenhauer regards death as the purpose of life, he insists that death
is illusory. The distinction between the world as Will and representation, and
the theory of the individual empirical will as part of the world as represen-
tation, implies that life and death are alike unreal (WWR 1: 275).
129

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer, in effect, paints a verbal vanitas still-life, like a Dutch
canvas with a grimacing skull, pocket watch and an overturned wine glass,
to put existence in perspective and remind us that death awaits every will-
ing subject at the end of even the happiest life. He holds, as have other think-
ers of pessimistic outlook, that few persons would voluntarily choose to live
their lives over again, but that most gratefully look forward to death as a
release from life's sufferings (WWR 1: 324-5).
Schopenhauer's stance is in part an extrapolation from the ability of
suffering to "sanctify" the individual. The idea is one that many philoso-
phers and religious thinkers have described, in which suffering causes the
individual to withdraw from false attachment to the urgings of the
phenomenal will. If suffering can produce such detachment, the same result
can no doubt be achieved to an even greater degree by contemplating death.
A similar concept of separation from the will to life through prolonged
suffering or philosophical reflection on death is described by William James
in The Varieties of Religious Experience as anhedonia, a symptom of what he
calls "the sick soul".7 Extensive suffering eventually makes the will lose
interest in life, an outcome that Schopenhauer believes is even more
enhanced by a full awareness of the inevitability of death (WWR 2:
636-7).
There is a strange reciprocity between life and death in Schopenhauer's
pessimism. All life tends towards death, and could not be otherwise in light
of being swept along in the phenomenal flux of time. Life and death are
unreal in so far as they are merely objectifications of thing-in-itself within
the world as representation. The opposition between individual wills
by which thing-in-itself, the world as hungry Will, feeds on itself, unavoid-
ably causes suffering to every willing subject, culminating in death.8 He
maintains that unavoidable suffering makes life so miserable that only the
fear of death as the great unknown restrains most individuals from self-
destruction; while if life as a whole were enjoyable, the idea of death as its
culmination would be intolerable. In his zero-sum philosophical book-
keeping, Schopenhauer concludes that we can find extraphilosophical
comfort in the fact that death is sometimes welcomed as a deliverance from
suffering (WWR 2: 578-9).
This is not a rosy outlook on life, death or the human condition.
Schopenhauer does not affirm life as a positive value, but holds that death
and birth alike are merely phenomenal endpoints limiting both ends of the
world as representation. The philosopher or mystic who understands the
unreality of death has no reason to fear it, while knowledge of the unreality
of life removes any philosophical justification for the reluctance of non-
philosophers to accept death as a merciful release from suffering. "How-
ever," Schopenhauer adds:
130

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
he will be least afraid of becoming nothing in death who has
recognized that he is already nothing now, and who consequently
no longer takes any interest in his individual phenomenon, since in
him knowledge has, so to speak, burnt up and consumed the will,
so that there is no longer any will, any keen desire for individual
existence, left in him. 
(WWR 2: 609)
As a final consideration relevant to Schopenhauer's general treatment of
death, we should recall that for Schopenhauer death is known only analogi-
cally through representation of the deaths of others, and in particular of the
end of animation and destruction and decay of their bodies. Does this not
indicate the extent to which we believe in the existence of other minds,
despite not having direct access to or inner acquaintance with the willing and
representing psychologies of other thinking subjects?
What shall we then say of Schopenhauer's argument that the world as
representation ends when the individual representing subject dies or ceases
consciously to represent? We are supposedly not entitled to know that other
representing subjects will survive our death. We have knowledge only of their
bodies and actions as represented objects for the one and only representing
subject, which is each of us considered in the first-person, such that each of
us can truthfully say that the world is "my" representation. If this represen-
tational knowledge of the existence of other minds is not sufficient for us
to know that the world as representation continues after our individual
deaths, why are we so moved and alarmed by what is also merely represen-
tational knowledge of the death of representing subjects other than our-
selves? Why do we not simply assume that death will at worst visit other
persons and never ourselves?
Schopenhauer does in fact reach the conclusion that death is unreal for the
individual representing subject. His reasons are consistent with the proposi-
tion that we know of death only by inferring the probability of its occurring
also to each of us, given our representational knowledge of what befalls the
bodies of others. He maintains that death is nothing real because we cannot
live through or experience death representationally in our own case or as the
cessation of consciousness of any other thinking subject. We have no direct
access to the thinking processes of others in the first place, but can only know
about them indirectly through body language and verbal behaviour. The same
limitations of representational knowledge that require us to infer the exist-
ence of other minds equally require us to infer only analogically that there is
such a thing as death. Thus, we are prepared to agree that death for each
individual representing subject is not a real event nor an occurrence that can
be visited upon each subject as something each in turn must eventually
endure. Schopenhauer in this spirit can sympathetically echo the words of the
131

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
great ancient Stoic philosopher Epicurus, in his Letter to Menoeceus, that
"Death, the most terrifying of ills, is therefore nothing to us, for when we are
death is not come, and, when death is come, we are not".9
Suicide no solution to the problem of willing
In confronting incurable pain or unbearable humiliation or ruin, a person
considering suicide in ignorance of Schopenhauer's metaphysics of Will as
thing-in-itself is caught up in the contradiction of trying to annihilate the
individual will to life, while also affirming the will to life by acting to remove
pain through the irreversible elimination of consciousness (WWR 1: 313).
Suicide, like death from any other cause, brings down the curtain on
individual willing and on all the world as representation. What remains is only
thing-in-itself. Suicide is therefore no exit from suffering in the sense a poten-
tial suicide may hope to achieve. Schopenhauer identifies individual charac-
ter with will to life as the source of all suffering. There is no escape from
individual willing to be found in the individual's willing to end his or her life.
To do so is only to express another aspect of the suicide's character and indi-
vidual will to life, from which the suicide cannot escape by the act of self-
destruction. Schopenhauer depicts individual willing as a kind of prison from
which suicide provides no way out. If we are to avoid the suffering brought
about by the phenomenal will, the solution is not to end life, but to enter on
one of the two paths of ascetic self-denial or aesthetic self-absorption that
offer release from the torments of willing by renouncing, transcending or
otherwise overcoming will to life for the sake of knowledge. He explains:
Death (the repetition of the comparison must be excused) is like the
setting of the sun, which is only apparently engulfed by the night,
but actually, itself the source of all light, burns without intermission,
brings new days to new worlds, and is always rising and always
setting. Beginning and end concern only the individual by means of
time, of the form of this phenomenon for the representation.
Outside time lie only the will, Kant's thing-in-itself, and its adequate
objectivity, namely Plato's Idea. Suicide, therefore, affords no
escape; what everyone wills in his innermost being, that must he be\
and what everyone /s, is just what he wills. 
(WWR 1: 366)
"To be or not to be, that is the question" for Shakespeare's Prince Hamlet.
Schopenhauer sees in the dramatist's perspective the desperation of human
suffering that drives some weary souls to contemplate ending their lives.
132

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
Schopenhauer interprets the famous soliloquy in terms afforded by his
pessimistic moral philosophy. The most important remaining lines of
Hamlet's speech are worth quoting as illustrating the kinds of attitudes
toward suicide that Schopenhauer wants to emphasize:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;
No more; and by a sleep to say we end
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;
To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life;
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn
No traveller returns, puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment
With this regard their currents turn away,
And lose the name of action. 
(Hamlet, III.i.64-77, 86-96)
The resistance that drags Hamlet back from the precipice is not just the will
to life asserting itself in spite of his sufferings. It is rather the tacit recognition
that there is more to the world than its phenomenal appearances marked by
pain and misery, and that to end life does not resolve the deep and interest-
ing problems of existence. Taking one's life as a result does not provide release.
It does not save us from ourselves, from the individual character within each
of us, unless or until we find a way of overcoming the will. Schopenhauer
further analyses the drama from the standpoint of his transcendental idealism:
The essential purport of the world-famous monologue in Hamlet
is, in condensed form, that our state is so wretched that complete
133

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
non-existence would be decidedly preferable to it. Now if suicide
actually offered us this, so that the alternative "to be or not to be"
lay before us in the full sense of the words, it could be chosen
unconditionally as a highly desirable termination ("a consummation
devoutly to be wish'd" [Hamlet, Act III, scene I]). There is something
in us, however, which tells us that this is not so, that this is not the
end of things, that death is not an absolute annihilation.
(WWR 1:324)
He identifies a subtle contradiction in the act of suicide that prevents it
from constituting any sort of philosophical solution to the problem of
suffering and salvation. The contradiction is that in order to avoid suffer-
ing we must somehow overcome the will to life. Suicide, however, is noth-
ing of the kind, but rather a drastic avowal of the will to life. The suicide
hopes to avoid further suffering by taking his or her life. In this act, no
transcendence of the will to life can possibly occur, because the desire to
avoid suffering qua desire is just another expression of the will to life.
Schopenhauer accordingly concludes that "far from being denial of the will,
suicide is a phenomenon of the will's strong affirmation" (WWR 1: 398).
If Schopenhauer is right that Will is thing-in-itself, then nothing anyone
does or fails to do, chooses or chooses not to do, can make any difference
to the individual's essential nature before or after death. In that case, there
can be no sound Schopenhauerian objection to philosophical suicide, pro-
vided that the willing subject is not deluded about what self-induced death
can accomplish. We cannot answer philosophical questions or resolve moral
metaphysical problems by committing suicide. Schopenhauer's reflections
stand in sharp contrast to what Albert Camus a century later maintains in
"An Absurd Reasoning" in The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays, when he
writes that "There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that
is suicide. Judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to answer-
ing the fundamental question of philosophy."10
Schopenhauer is sometimes wrongly interpreted as holding that suicide
is metaphysically futile because there can be no escape from Will as thing-
in-itself. Frederick Copleston, for example, in Arthur Schopenhauer: Philoso-
pher of Pessimism, states that: "Individual consciousness is indeed destroyed
[in the act of suicide], i.e. phenomenal existence, but man's inner nature,
identical with Will, persists and can never be destroyed".11 This is true
enough for Schopenhauer, as far as it goes, but it is by no means the basis
for his objection to suicide as affording no solution to the philosophical
problems of life and death. As we have seen, Schopenhauer believes that
there can be no real annihilation of the true as opposed to the apparent
phenomenal nature of the individual will to life. He develops the position
134

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
eloquently in "On the Doctrine of the Indestructibility of Our True Nature
by Death" in The World as Will and Representation, and again in his essay
"On Suicide" in Parerga and Paralipomena.12 Suicide affords no departure
from phenomenal willing, because the concept of escape implies the personal
survival or persistence of the individual soul from a worse to a better state,
which Schopenhauer regards as impossible.
The soul or psychological subject of individual willing, which Schopen-
hauer identifies materialistically with the brain, perishes along with the death
of the body. Something philosophically more interesting is suggested by
Schopenhauer's enigmatic remark that "what everyone wills in his innermost
being, that must he be; and what everyone is, is just what he wills" (WWR
1: 366). He seems to accept the proposition that the content of individual
willing defines each individual will as a unique entity. It is what he elsewhere
refers to as the moral character of each willing subject. This is part of
Schopenhauer's proto-existentialism that many commentators have attrib-
uted to his philosophy. It is not only the doom and gloom of modern aliena-
tion, the mental atmosphere of the insane asylum and concentration camp,
but the individual human body and the conditions of its existence as an
outward expression of the thinking subject. Where individual will to life is
concerned, we are what we desire and choose for ourselves, as classical
existentialism holds - it is that toward which we are impelled as the
objectification of our innermost character (WWR 2: 240).
Schopenhauer at first appears to position himself for an enthusiastic philo-
sophical defence of suicide. If to live is to suffer, and if life and death are
unreal anyway, why permit oneself to suffer needlessly? Why wait impa-
tiently for death to come if we can hasten its arrival? If life has death as its
aim and purpose, if life is only an ephemeral headlong descent toward death
swept along in the torrents of time, and if death is nothing to be feared, then
why should not every enlightened consciousness destroy itself immediately
in order to escape the sufferings of individual will and achieve life's purpose
more quickly and deliberately? Death is a blessing for those who have come
to see existence as ineluctable suffering in the phenomenal world, where the
brevity of life, contrary to popular will-dominated opinion, is its best feature.
Once we get the picture, why not make life even briefer?
Schopenhauer vehemently rejects any universal philosophical endorse-
ment of suicide. He regards self-murder as it is usually practised as an
unworthy affirmation of the will to life by those who wish to escape pain
rather than seek non-discursive awareness of the Will through suffering.
There is no salvation from individual willing to be found in individually
willed annihilation. We should rather endure suffering until death arrives
on its own to free us. Socrates says much the same in Plato's Phaedo 61e2-
62e7, interpreting self-destruction as an attachment to earthly desire by
135

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
which the soul is made impure. But why? Is Schopenhauer's position neces-
sitated by or even logically consistent with the concept of death he has elabo-
rated? Or is Schopenhauer, having offered a powerful motivation for
self-destruction, merely trying awkwardly now within the framework of his
pessimistic and avowedly nihilistic philosophical system to accommodate the
squeamishness of traditional morality, or, indeed, his own personal revul-
sion, concerning the act of suicide?
Schopenhauer falls far short of Kant's repudiation of suicide as a viola-
tion of the categorical imperative, when in a famous passage of the Foun-
dations of the Metaphysics of Morals, Kant considers:
A man who is reduced to despair by a series of evils feels a weari-
ness with life but is still in possession of his reason sufficiently to ask
whether it would not be contrary to his duty to himself to take his
own life. Now he asks whether the maxim of his action could
become a universal law of nature. His maxim, however, is: For love
of myself, I make it my principle to shorten my life when by a longer
duration it threatens more evil than satisfaction. But it is question-
able whether this principle of self-love could become a universal law
of nature. One immediately sees a contradiction in a system of
nature whose law would be to destroy life by the feeling whose
special office is to impel the improvement of life. In this case it
would not exist as nature; hence that maxim cannot obtain as a law
of nature, and thus it wholly contradicts the supreme principle of
all duty.13
Kant reasons that suicide for the sake of self-love is self-contradictory. The
categorical imperative in its main formulation requires that we ought always
to act in such a way that we can will the maxim of our action to be univer-
sal for every rational being. Here the "can" that enforces moral judgement
should be understood as logical possibility. We test the morality of an action
by asking whether it is logically possible for the maxim that justifies an act
to be accepted by every rational being. If our willing such universal accept-
ance is logically possible, if we can without contradiction will such a thing,
then the categorical imperative entails that we are obliged by duty to follow
the maxim. If as reasoning moral agents our willing universal acceptance of
the maxim is not logically possible, if and only if willing the universal
acceptance of the maxim implies a contradiction, however loosely construed
by Kant, so that we cannot will that the principle be universalized, then the
categorical imperative entails that we are forbidden to follow the maxim in
any of its consequences. Self-love, according to Kant, runs into a contradic-
tion when it tries to will that all rational beings should commit suicide when
136

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
"by a longer duration [life] threatens more evil than satisfaction", for it si-
multaneously seeks to improve and destroy.
This is not the place to dispute whether Kant's categorical imperative
forbids or ought to forbid suicide. Arguably, the maxim Kant considers, to
choose death merely when life offers more pain than pleasure, as opposed
to, say, in order to avoid excruciating incurable chronic pain, is too weak
to represent the kind of judgement a person actually contemplating suicide
is likely to entertain. With respect to Kant's formalist moral injunctions
against suicide as an implication of the categorical imperative, Schopenhauer
is unimpressed with the claim that moral reason cannot consistently will the
suicide's maxim to be universal law. He argues:
Moreover, in the examples given by him as an introduction to that
classification, Kant supports the duties of law first... by the so-called
duty to oneself, that of not ending one's life voluntarily when the
evils outweigh the pleasures. Therefore this maxim is said to be not
even conceivable as a universal law of nature. I say that, as the power
of the State cannot intervene here, this very maxim shows itself
unchecked as an actually existing law of nature. For it is quite
certainly a universal rule that man actually resorts to suicide as soon
as the immensely strong, inborn urge to the preservation of life is
definitely overpowered by great suffering; daily experience shows
us this ... At any rate, arguments against suicide of the kind put
forward by Kant... certainly have never yet restrained, even for one
moment, anyone who is weary of life. Thus a natural law incontest-
ably existing as a fact and daily operating is declared to be simply
unthinkable without contradiction, in favor of the classification of
duties from Kant's moral principle! 
(BM: 93)
Schopenhauer offers an analogous argument against suicide, in which he
describes the reasoning of the potential suicide as contradictory. In contrast
with Kant, Schopenhauer locates the contradiction in the suicide's simulta-
neous denial and affirmation of the will to life. More importantly, unlike
Kant, Schopenhauer, especially in his essay "On Suicide" in Parerga and
Paralipomena, finds nothing morally objectionable in principle to suicide (PP
2: 306-11). The first reference to such a contradiction appears in the first
volume of The World as Will and Representation, where Schopenhauer
detects an inconsistency in the Stoic concept of the "blessed life", counsel-
ling suicide for those in dire straits. Schopenhauer now protests:
we find a complete contradiction in our wishing to live without
suffering, a contradiction that is therefore implied by the frequently
137

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
used phrase "blessed life." This will certainly be clear to the person
who has fully grasped my discussion that follows. This contradic-
tion is revealed in this ethic of pure reason itself by the fact that the
Stoic is compelled to insert a recommendation of suicide in his guide
to the blissful life (for this is what his ethics always remains).
(WWR1:90)
He identifies a different kind of contradiction than Kant in criticizing the
usual rationale for suicide. In "On Suicide", Schopenhauer argues that:
We then of necessity hear [from "monotheistic" religious teachers]
that suicide is the greatest cowardice, that it is possible only in mad-
ness, and such like absurdities; or else the wholly meaningless phrase
that suicide is "wrong", whereas there is obviously nothing in the
world over which every man has such an indisputable right as his
own person and life. 
(PP 2: 306)14
Schopenhauer's objection to suicide, as many commentators have noticed,
is metaphysical rather than moral.
If we reach the level of Schopenhauer's insight into the world as Will and
representation, and if we see individual willing as inherently a life of suffer-
ing, then we cannot be satisfied with suicide as a philosophical solution to
the predicament of life. The objection is that there is a kind of contradic-
tion in the phenomenal will's wilfully seeking to exterminate itself as a way
of escaping the wretchedness of willing.15 Suicide ends life, true enough; but,
as the result of a wilful decision in the service of the individual will to life,
it cannot by its very nature altogether transcend willing.16 The only logically
coherent freedom to be sought from the sufferings of the will to life is not
to will death and set about wilfully to destroy the self, but to continue to live
while quieting the will, in an ascetic submissive attitude of sublime indiffer-
ence toward both life and death (WWR 1: 399^400). Similarly, in the essay
On the Basis of Morality, Schopenhauer argues:
What is usually laid down as duties to ourselves is first a line of
argument against suicide, which is greatly steeped in prejudice and
rests on the shallowest of reasons. Unlike the animal, man is a prey
not merely to bodily sufferings, restricted to the present moment,
but also to the incomparably greater mental afflictions that borrow
from the future and the past. By way of compensation, nature has
granted to man alone the privilege of being able to end his life when
he wishes, before she herself terminates it, and accordingly of not
living, like the animal, necessarily as long as he can, but only as long
138

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
as he will. Now whether he in turn has to forgo that privilege on
ethical grounds is a difficult question, which at any rate cannot be
decided by the usual shallow arguments. The arguments against
suicide, which Kant does not disdain ... I cannot conscientiously
describe as other than paltry and not even worth an answer. We are
forced to laugh when we think that such reflections could have
wrested the dagger from the hands of Cato, Cleopatra, Cocceius
Nerva ... If there really are genuine moral motives against suicide,
then at all events they lie very deep and are not to be reached by the
plummet of ordinary ethics. 
(BM: 59-60)
Suppose now that in contemplating suicide I simply will to end my life. As
a disciple of Schopenhauer's metaphysics of Will as thing-in-itself and of the
individual will to life as phenomenal objectification of Will, I will to end my
life not as part of a witless plan to benefit myself, nor with the idea of destroy-
ing even the Will as thing-in-itself that I objectify in my individual will to life,
but merely as a way of fulfilling my purpose, the goal or end of my life, by
terminating my individual consciousness and returning to Will as thing-in-
itself. This desire "in my innermost being", by hypothesis, according to
Schopenhauer, partially constitutes who and what I am. This is something I
cannot change or escape by ending my life, but something that I shall have
become as long as my will remains active. I am (in a certain sense eternally and
indestructibly) what I will, even if I will to cease willing. In that case, my moral
character playing itself out in my actions in life is that of a suicide.
Schopenhauer nevertheless regards destruction of the self as a pointless
and obstructive act that prevents us from attaining knowledge. It accom-
plishes nothing of value and answers no philosophical problems, and in the
meantime it cuts short the amount of time we might have better used to gain
knowledge through contemplation. He concludes:
Conversely, whoever is oppressed by the burdens of life, whoever
loves life and affirms it, but abhors its torments, and in particular
can no longer endure the hard lot that has fallen to just him, cannot
hope for deliverance from death, and cannot save himself through
suicide. Only by a false illusion does the cool shade of Orcus allure
him as a haven of rest. The earth rolls on from day into night; the
individual dies; but the sun itself burns without intermission, an
eternal noon. Life is certain to the will-to-live; the form of life is the
endless present; it matters not how individuals, the phenomena of
the idea, arise and pass away in time, like fleeting dreams. There-
fore suicide already appears to us to be a vain and therefore foolish
action... 
(WWR 1: 280-81)
139

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The point of a philosophically enlightened suicide for a Schopenhauer-
ian might nevertheless be the rationally justifiable desire to bring about an
end to the suffering of continued willing. The purpose is then merely to
eliminate personal consciousness and the phenomenal will to life that
through empirical circumstances no longer wills to live. This is a Kantian-
type contradiction only if Schopenhauer stubbornly requires that we
continue to designate whatever the individual will wills as will to life when
the content of what the individual will has come to will is rather the will-
not-to-live. It appears more plausible in such a case to speak of the will to
life having been replaced by a reluctant but possibly equally determined will
to death. That such a decision might be reached on Schopenhauerian
philosophical grounds, at some point in a philosopher's existence, moral
questions aside, may therefore not be as metaphysically confused as
Schopenhauer seems to think.17
It is tempting to interpret the disproportionate attention Schopenhauer
devotes to the question of suicide in light of the possibility that his father is
likely to have died at his own hand. Could Schopenhauer be trying to deal
morally and metaphysically with the personal implications of a parent's
decision to end his life, and concluding, as would not be difficult, that his
father the tradesman was acting unphilosophically, failing adequately to
grasp the meaning of existence?
Fatal renunciation of the will
Schopenhauer makes an interesting exception to his blanket objections
against suicide. He finds philosophically praiseworthy the suicide of ascet-
ics who in total renunciation of the will to life choose the extraordinary
course of slow death by starvation. In The World as Will and Representation^
he writes:
Thus [the saint] resorts to fasting, and even to self-castigation and
self-torture, in order that, by constant privation and suffering, he
may more and more break down and kill the will that he recognizes
and abhors as the source of his own suffering existence and of the
world's. Finally, if death comes, which breaks up the phenomenon
of this will, the essence of such will having long since expired
through free denial of itself except for the feeble residue which
appears as the vitality of this body, then it is most welcome, and is
cheerfully accepted as a longed-for deliverance. It is not merely the
phenomenon, as in the case of others, that comes to an end with
140

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
death, but the inner being itself that is abolished; this had a feeble
existence merely in the phenomenon. This last slender bond is now
severed; for him who ends thus, the world has at the same time
ended. 
(WWR 1: 382)
If we define suicide simply and unqualifiedly as any self-caused death, and
distinguish it as such from wilful or intentional acts, then Schopenhauer is
prepared to recognize as a philosophically justifiable and even morally
praiseworthy kind of suicide the ascetic saint's death by starvation. He argues
that we must separate from such incidents the religious fanaticism and
superstition that frequently accompany the ascetic's choice to avoid nour-
ishment resulting in death. What is essential for his praise of the ascetic's
suicide is that the saint end life as a result of a supreme indifference to the
will to life, an indifference to both life and death, that in the natural course
of things can only bring about the ascetic saint's death (WWR 1: 400^01).
The theme is first explored in Schopenhauer's early Manuscript Remains,
where he declares that "The highest degree of asceticism, the total denial of
the temporal consciousness, is the voluntary death through starvation; of this
only two instances have so far come to my knowledge". He continues, "From
absolutely pure asceticism we cannot think of any other death than that
through starvation, since the intention to avoid a long agony and affliction
is already an affirmation of the world of the senses" (HN 1: 74-5). His
approval of the ascetic's suicide by starvation is not entirely persuasive. If
we try to imagine ourselves in that situation, we are likely to think of the
overwhelming desire for nourishment that would accompany a prolonged
deathfast. This is hardly the kind of occurrence that is likely to help anyone
overcome the suffering of individual will. What Schopenhauer seems to have
in mind, and what in this kind of case could only excite his admiration about
the ascetic's decision, is a scenario in which the ascetic has so completely
renounced the will to life before this point that starvation is accepted without
succumbing to physical cravings. What is supposed to be noble about this
kind of suicide for Schopenhauer is not the death that it occasions, but the
subject's prior separation from all concern for the individual will to life. The
ascetic who embarks on a course of death by starvation presumably does so
as a manifestation of neither the will to life nor the will to death, but with
an absolute indifference to any object of individual willing.18
Still, there is another qualification that the starving ascetic must satisfy.
Schopenhauer contends that persons as self-conscious beings have an uncon-
ditional duty to place knowing above willing. The starving ascetic must first
attain the highest degree of philosophical wisdom, for there can be no
justified exception from such an epistemic obligation even for the saintly
suicide (WWR 1: 399-400). Schopenhauer indicates that the height of
141

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
knowledge required is achieved precisely as a result of this cruel manner of
death. The knowledge that every subject is supposed to seek is facilitated by
the ascetic's suppression of will. The denial of will in turn constitutes the
profound indifference to life and death that makes suicide by starvation at
first possible, and then inevitable. Schopenhauer depicts the saint's life as a
renunciation of will for the sake of obtaining a more valuable state of
understanding.19
The problems in Schopenhauer's philosophy of death are also revealed
by these implications. If the philosophically appropriate response to suffering
is to withdraw from the phenomenal will to life by entering into an ascetic
attitude of indifference toward both life and death, then why should death
be preferred? If we admire the starving ascetic, it is probably because we
suppose that starving oneself to death requires an extraordinary act of will,
rather than for Schopenhauer's explanation involving the total suppression
of will. Suspending the will to life to the extent necessary to starve to death
cannot occur as the result of a wilful decision. If the act is not deliberately
chosen, then in what sense can it be meaningfully attributed to the saint's
inner moral character? In what way does the "unwilful" suicide by starva-
tion through a supposedly exalted indifference to the will to life redound
creditably to the ascetic if the event is not the result of a conscious decision?
The best that Schopenhauer can say is that the denial of will and its oblit-
eration resulting from the ascetic's "unwilful" death through starvation is a
good thing. Such a death is not good because it results from starvation, but
only because it is generally better from the standpoint of Schopenhauer's
pessimism for the world to contain less willing and therefore less suffering.
The same might nevertheless be said of any death brought about by accident,
disease or even murder.20
Here the deeper contradictions underlying Schopenhauer's theory of
death begin to appear. If the goal of philosophy is to reconcile individual
will to the misery of existence as the end and purpose of unreal life, then it
appears impossible to explain why anyone should not prefer death to a life
of even the most acute turmoil, suffering and pain. If the aim of life is death,
and if death is unreal, then why should the philosopher not accelerate its
arrival? The moral obligation of the individual will that has attained to an
understanding of the world as Will and representation would seem to be to
eliminate individual willing by any means at its disposal in order, by the
destruction of consciousness, to return from its state of phenomenal misery
to thing-in-itself. The philosopher is not to choose suicide as a bad-faith
affirmation of the will to life in an abject effort to avoid suffering. Why, on
the other hand, according to Schopenhauer, should a person not do so while
enjoying good health, the love of family and friends, productive activity and
all of life's pleasures, precisely in order to fulfil life's purpose by ending it
142

SUFFERING, SALVATION, DEATH
for philosophical reasons immediately upon achieving realization of the
appearance-reality distinction?
If suffering sanctifies, and if sanctification is a good thing, should it not
then be wrong to avoid, let alone wilfully avoid, the vicissitudes of the will
to life, no matter how unpleasant? Despite himself, Schopenhauer appears
to rely on the repugnance the individual might naturally feel for life
construed as unmitigated suffering in order to uphold death as preferable
to the wilful continuation of life. Any sort of preference for anything
whatsoever is already at least a sublimated expression of the will to life,
even, paradoxically, when it embraces the idea of an ideal death. It is not the
same as a transcendent attitude of indifference to both life and death. The
difficulty in Schopenhauer's philosophy as a result is not the internal conflict
of will that it deprecates, but the inconsistencies in Schopenhauer's
pessimism as he tries in a more positive light to demystify the meaning of
death.21
Optimism versus Schopenhauer's moral pessimism
It is useful at this stage to ask whether Schopenhauer's pessimism is strictly
entailed by his metaphysics of the world as Will and representation, or
whether his moral pessimism is detachable from the speculative theoretical
foundations of his philosophy. Schopenhauer's generally sour outlook on life
might be more a matter of his personality than a logical consequence of his
transcendental idealism. We approach the problem by asking as a thought
experiment whether it would be possible to build something entirely differ-
ent, a moral optimism rather than pessimism, grafted onto Schopenhauer's
distinction between thing-in-itself and the world of represented objects for
representing subjects.
Suppose for the sake of argument that Schopenhauer had a happy rather
than unhappy perspective on life, a personality prepared to see optimism
rather than pessimism prevailing or at least possible through good luck and
the right sort of prudent decision-making in the world as representation.
Might he not then read back into the character of thing-in-itself objectified
in the phenomenal world a beneficent and generous rather than malicious
and insatiably voracious Will? Perhaps he would then also interpret the spirit
of compassion manifested in his own moral thinking and in that of world
religions such as Christianity, Hinduism and Buddhism, among others, to
mention only those he discusses approvingly, as signs of thing-in-itself in a
more positive light? Is this possible in the moral superstructure of
Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism? Why should it not be equally
143

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
possible for things to go in the opposite direction, toward universal
optimism, for Schopenhauer, rather than abject pessimism?
We must remember that in Schopenhauer's metaphysics thing-in-itself is
Will. The world in reality is pure willing, which cannot intrinsically have any
particular benevolent or malevolent object, or, indeed, any object at all. The
nature of Will is only (monstrously) to will. We are asking whether Schopen-
hauer's impression of the world as representation as a reflection of the
character of thing-in-itself is not prejudiced by his own personal disappoint-
ments and negative outlook on life, for which there may be a psychological
basis rather than a sound philosophical justification. Is it inevitable, given
that thing-in-itself is Will, the most immediate, and in human beings the
highest, grade of the Will's objectification, for the Will's manifestations in
the world as representation always to be in eternal mutual conflict,
internecine struggle, strife and competition?
Schopenhauer believes that pessimism is strictly entailed by transcendental
idealism. His negative perspective on the world and the nature of human
interactions especially as a result is, if anything, philosophically inspired and
motivated by his epistemology and metaphysics, rather than the other way
around. The reason is that Will must objectify itself in all possible ways and
hence in particular as the phenomenal willing that we experience in the inner
knowledge of the body through the volitional control of the body's actions.
It is by means of an intuitive acquaintance with ourselves as will that we are
led to conclude that thing-in-itself is Will. If we agree with Schopenhauer
that willing necessarily produces suffering, then we may not be able to avoid
the conclusion that the world as representation is inevitably the scene of
suffering where conflicts must always occur between distinct objectifications
of Will.
Schopenhauer's moral pessimism is thus predetermined by his metaphys-
ics of thing-in-itself. There is no escape from the misery produced by willing
even in suicide, but only through the kind of salvation available in the life
of the ascetic saint or aesthetic genius, and in general through knowledge
of the Platonic Ideas. We can only seek relief by renouncing and transcend-
ing the will to life for the sake of knowledge. It is in the denial or loss of self
that comes about through sacrifice and mortification of the flesh or the
immersion of individuality in the Platonic Ideas through the experience of
beauty and the sublime in nature and art that we can master the will to life
and achieve peace of mind.22
144

CHAPTER FIVE
Art and aesthetics of the
beautiful and sublime
That the Idea comes to us more easily from the work of art than
directly from nature and from reality, arises solely from the fact that
the artist, who knew only the Idea and not reality, clearly repeated
in his work only the Idea and not reality, separated it out from
reality, and omitted all disturbing contingencies. The artist lets us
peer into the world through his eyes. That he has these eyes, that he
knows the essential in things which lies outside all relations, is the
gift of genius and is inborn; but that he is able to lend us this gift, to
let us see with his eyes, is acquired, and is the technical side of art.
(WWR1: 195)
Philosophy of art
In Schopenhauer's aesthetics we discover a lighter side of his philosophy.
Although his moral pessimism continues unabated as a recognition of the
inevitable conflicts among the Will's objedifications, Schopenhauer is not
as obsessively concerned with the facts of death and human misery when he
turns to topics of aesthetic pleasure and enjoyment of the fine arts.
Whether Schopenhauer's metaphysics of Will as thing-in-itself is brilliant
or delusional, the distinction between the world as Will and as representa-
tion supports a philosophy of art that is unique in the history of aesthetics.
Schopenhauer's theory is worth studying for two reasons, even if we do not
accept his metaphysics of Will and representation or his heterodox interpre-
tation of Platonic Ideas. It is valuable for the light it sheds on Schopenhauer's
philosophy as a whole, and for its own sake, because of the unifying
principles by which Schopenhauer proposes to understand the nature of art
and its relation to the will to life. Schopenhauer is well informed about many
145

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
kinds of art, of which he possesses a detailed knowledge and the apprecia-
tion of a professional critic and connoisseur. His sometimes idiosyncratic
judgements are offered with a remarkable sense of taste and from the
standpoint of the more general philosophical framework of his transcenden-
tal idealism.
Nietzsche, in his 1874 essay "Schopenhauer as Educator", in the collec-
tion published as Untimely Meditations, states as one of the most valuable
lessons of Schopenhauer's aesthetics:
It is the fundamental idea of culture, insofar as it sets for each one
of us but one task: to promote the production of the philosopher, the
artist and the saint within us and without us and thereby to work at
the perfecting of nature. For, as nature needs the philosopher, so does
it need the artist, for the achievement of a metaphysical goal, that
of its own self-enlightenment.. .1
In this passage, Nietzsche epitomizes all the essential concepts of
Schopenhauer's theory of art and artistic creativity. Schopenhauer asks:
What is art? What is the relation between knowledge and desire in art? How
are we to interpret the mission of art and the suffering of great artists? Why
does artistic creativity alienate the most gifted artists from everyday life, and
occasion the personal misunderstandings of which many artists complain in
what has come to be called the romantic conception of art? How does the
contemplation of great art manage to offer an anodyne sanctuary from the
cares of the world? Does it amount to anything more than simply mere
escapism? What role do perception and imagination play in artistic depic-
tions of idealized natural forms?
Schopenhauer bids us regard the artist of genius not merely as a
craftworker making decorative objects to amuse or entertain, but as what
we would now consider to be a kind of existential hero, as well as victim,
engaged in terrible struggles of passion and will. The picture seems
appropriate to many artistic talents, and certainly to those artists Schopen-
hauer would include as worthy of the name genius, including Michelangelo,
Beethoven, Dostoyevsky and Van Gogh, among many others. He sees great
art as the outcome of a deep conflict and frustration of the will in what are
often emotionally painful efforts of self-expression. He encourages us to
expect a deeper philosophical explanation of genius than we find in their
circumstantial psychological biographies. Schopenhauer's aesthetics
exerted an enormous influence on a large and diverse number of thinkers
and artists in philosophy and the arts, who grasped in his thought the
principles for a personal philosophy of life along with its message for the
arts.
146

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
With the distinction between the world as Will and representation as its
metaphysical foundation, Schopenhauer's aesthetics can be understood as
an elaboration of these basic themes:
• the concept of art
• the three-part activity of passively intuiting Platonic Ideas, completing
and perfecting them in the imagination and expressing them in an
artistic medium
• the distinction between lower and higher art forms corresponding to
higher and lower Platonic Ideas interpreted as higher and lower grades
of the objectivity of Will and reflected in distinct art forms
• music at the highest tier of art forms as the direct expression of Will,
in opposition to the Socratic thesis of the iterative imitation of nature
at second remove from reality in the case of all other art forms
• the distinction between the beautiful and the sublime in Schopenhauer's
rethinking of Kant's analyses
• the suppression of the will to life in aesthetic contemplation as a
precondition for intuiting the Platonic Ideas exemplified in the world
as representation, and as a path of salvation through the quieting of will
for aesthetic genius in the counterpart to saintly asceticism
• criteria of evaluation for distinguishing good or successful from bad or
unsuccessful art in the intelligible expression of form and the antipa-
thy of aesthetic genius and the charming
• the problem of ascetic aestheticism or aesthetic asceticism in Nietzsche's
critique of Schopenhauer's philosophy of art.
Art in the world as Will and representation
Art, like everything else in Schopenhauer's metaphysics, is an objectification
of Will. Artworks belong to the world as representation, and everything
in the world as representation objectifies thing-in-itself. The artist must
manage a delicate balancing act between surrendering individual will so
as to passively receive the Platonic Ideas in experience, curbing the will
as an obstacle to knowing, and then imaginatively completing the Ideas
imperfectly represented in nature, and labouring to express them as
intelligible forms in artworks by means of wilful coordinations of
deliberate actions. Schopenhauer is aware of the tension in the artist's
conflicting need for disassociation from and engagement of the phenomenal
will, each in the right amount and at the appropriate stage of the creative
process.
147

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
There is a parallel two-part division in Schopenhauer's philosophy of art
with respect to the perception of Ideas and their artistic expression in
completed form. The relation between the intuitive grasp of Platonic Ideas
and their presentation in artworks is a special case of what Schopenhauer
describes concerning all representational knowledge in which intuition is
articulated in abstract theory for the convenience of codifying, communi-
cating and applying its content. Intuitive knowledge is more important than
abstraction for Schopenhauer, because it is the foundation of theory to which
even the laws of logic must answer when disagreements arise between theory
and intuitive understanding. The same is true with respect to the artist's
passive reception of Platonic Ideas in nature and their complete expression
in artworks. We recall that some of Schopenhauer's most vivid examples of
the distinction between intuitive and abstract representation concern such
artistic enterprises as the composition of pleasing music versus the elabora-
tion of abstract theories of harmony, counterpoint and thorough-bass.
Schopenhauer emphasizes two challenges facing artists. In his later
collection of philosophical remarks in the second volume of the Parerga and
Paralipomena, he writes:
By virtue of his objectivity the genius with reflectiveness perceives
all that others do not see. This gives him as a poet the ability to
describe nature so clearly, palpably, and vividly, or as a painter, to
portray it. On the other hand, with the execution of the work, where
the purpose is to communicate and present what is known, the will
can, and indeed must, again be active, just because there exists a
purpose. 
(PP2: 418-19)
He identifies three separate stages in the creative aesthetic process. Artworks
begin with the sensory reception of Platonic Ideas instantiated in the world
of nature. Intuited Ideas are then completed and perfected in imaginative
abstraction. Finally, the Ideas are given non-discursive representational
expression in intelligible form for popular consumption in an artistic medium.
Individual willing is switched off involuntarily for the aesthetic genius only
during the first and possibly second of these stages, when Platonic Ideas are
passively received in an act of perception and then completed and perfected
by an act of imagination. Schopenhauer regards these first two stages as the
most important part of aesthetic activity. It is in the course of these prelimi-
naries to artistic production that an artist receives inspiration for the work of
genius. The Idea and its imaginative completion as an abstract concept is
primary; its expression in an artwork is only secondary and in some ways
dispensable. The purpose of aesthetic genius is fulfilled for Schopenhauer
when the first or second stage is reached. The expression of abstracted non-
148

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
representational Ideas in the concrete representational form of public art is
an afterthought that does not add much if anything to what is of real value
when genius arrives at an intuitive knowledge of a Platonic Idea.
As many artists report about their own methods and the ways in which
they conceive of their endeavours, it is nevertheless the third stage that is
often the most crucial for creative work. It is in the process of making
something concrete that the ideas (or Platonic Ideas) that are eventually to
be expressed in a finished artwork begin to take shape opportunistically
through chance by refining unanticipated suggestions inherent in the mate-
rials, while beforehand the end-project is often provisional and ill defined.
This, realistically, is when the artist in Schopenhauer's language attempts to
sort out the Ideas that have accumulated in disinterested exposure to the
world as representation. It is also when artists temporarily lose their egos
and at the same time express themselves personally in creative activity. An
artist's decisions about what to represent progresses gradually as the work
unfolds through many stepwise decisions in the activity of producing an art
object (WWR 1: 212; WWR 2: 370).
Schopenhauer can readily accommodate these facts. His purpose is to
describe the artist's non-discursive expression of intuitive knowledge. From
such a standpoint, it is understandable that the artist need not always or even
typically be able to articulate the Ideas she or he is attempting to concretize
in art. The non-discursive mode of aesthetic expression of intuitive knowl-
edge of Platonic Ideas might even lead Schopenhauer to disregard entirely
whatever an artist has to say about the psychological occurrences that
accompany the making of art. It is a commonplace, after all, to which
Schopenhauer can also ascribe, that artists are often the least reliable authori-
ties to explain discursively their own artistic practices. Schopenhauer might
add that he is trying to describe the activity of aesthetic genius of the highest
ideal order. The most accomplished artists of the greatest genius fit his two-
part (intuitive-abstract) three-stage (perception-completion/perfection-
expression) model exactly, while, admittedly, artists of lesser genius, the
majority in fact, or all artists in practice rather than theory, might need to
refine their abstraction of Ideas by actually working with art instruments and
materials in a preliminary way before the work is finished and the final
concept is fully grasped. Artists are nevertheless capable of passively receiving
and subconsciously abstracting Platonic Ideas in an aesthetic reverie or while
working at the mechanical tasks of art, experiencing the changing shape of
clay turning on a wheel, of musical passages tried out experimentally on a
keyboard, or arrangements of pigment on canvas. The clarification, comple-
tion and perfection of Ideas can evolve along with the making of something
that is at first unexpected, in the process whereby an Idea takes shape in an
artist's work, with or without the artist's deliberate intent.
149

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
"At the lower grades of its objectivity," Schopenhauer remarks, beginning
with natural science and progressing to the fine arts, "where it still acts with-
out knowledge, natural science as etiology considers the laws of the changes
of its phenomena, and as morphology considers what is permanent in them"
(WWR 1: 184). "But now," he asks:
what kind of knowledge is it that considers what continues to exist
outside and independently of all relations, but which alone is really
essential to the world, the true content of its phenomena, which is
subject to no change, as is therefore known with equal truth for all
time, in a word, the Ideas that are the immediate and adequate
objectivity of the thing-in-itself, of the will? It is art, the work of
genius. 
(WWR 1: 184)
Like science, art fixes on the Platonic Ideas by which the Will objectifies itself
in the world as representation. Unlike science, art seeks no explanations of
phenomena under the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason. "It
repeats", instead:
the eternal Ideas apprehended through pure contemplation, the
essential and abiding element in all the phenomena of the world.
According to the material in which it repeats, it is sculpture, paint-
ing, poetry, or music. Its only source is knowledge of the Ideas; its sole
aim is communication of this knowledge. 
(WWR 1: 184-5)
The absence of explanation in art facilitates its unique mode of communi-
cating intuitive knowledge. By eliminating inessentials and translating
intuitive knowledge of the Platonic Ideas perceived in nature, art passes along
a vision of the truth of things recovered from a special relationship to the
world as representation and the Platonic Ideas embodied in represented
objects as grades of the Will's objectification.
The principle of sufficient reason allows that every phenomenon has a
scientific explanation. Since this includes whatever may be invoked in
explaining a given occurrence, these factors are also capable of further
explanation, and so on, indefinitely. Art, in contrast, standing outside the
nexus of all explanation, avoids regress by presenting another phenomenon
in the form of a specially chosen and prepared object, the artwork. An art
object is meant to reflect a grasp of Platonic Ideas, and to convey for the
benefit of others a sense of the Ideas received in the artist's experience (FFR:
41—2). Schopenhauer posits a collaboration between aesthetic contempla-
tion entirely divorced from will in the experience of objective, purely passive
perception, and the active play of imagination. He refuses to identify
150

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
imagination with genius, but admits it as an essential ingredient. The role
of imagination in aesthetic genius is to eliminate what is accidental in
perceived forms in nature, and to add whatever is needed in order to
complete nature's intentions as the artist perceives them. The conflict of
natural forms cited by Schopenhauer as cause of the inevitable incomplete-
ness and imperfection in the phenomenal world recapitulates the ground of
his romantic moral pessimism in what he sees as the artist's tragic existence,
driven to represent the unrepresentable, and hence frequently misunder-
stood by whoever encounters the artist's work.
Platonic Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification
in higher and lower art forms
Schopenhauer distinguishes higher and lower art forms. These belong to a
hierarchy corresponding to the higher and lower Platonic Ideas. The Ideas
are themselves higher or lower grades of the Will's objectification, as deter-
mined by their respective degrees of individuality among the instances of
each Idea. Such an ordering of the fine arts is not only appropriate but strictly
required by Schopenhauer's theory of Ideas. The connecting link needed to
justify a hierarchical arrangement of art forms in Schopenhauer's theory,
which Schopenhauer freely supplies, is the proposition that distinct art forms
are specifically concerned with particular Ideas.
There are pure and mixed art forms. Music, painting, and poetry are pure.
Opera is an obvious example of a mixed art that combines poetry or literature
with music. All art forms can be ordered by virtue of the Platonic Ideas they
feature and their relative grade of the Will's objectification. Architecture is
the lowest art form, according to Schopenhauer, because, although it can also
involve sculpture, painting and other forms of decoration, in its purest form
it concerns the lowest, most primal grades of the Will's objectification in the
world as representation. These include especially Gravity, Rigidity, Hardness
and Mass, and in general those involving the control and distribution of natu-
ral forces in the creation of spaces intended for a variety of practical functions.
Music exhibits the highest grade of the Will's objectification, or belongs to
a separate category all by itself, in the sense that music in its pure form is
altogether independent of the world as representation. Its existence is inter-
preted by Schopenhauer as an immediate direct objectification of Will, like
the natural world itself, with no further representation or iterative imitation
separating it from Will as thing-in-itself or mediating between the two.
If we begin with architecture as the lowest art form in Schopenhauer's
hierarchy, corresponding to the lowest grade of the Will's objectification, we
151

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
may then compare it with music at the opposite extreme. Schopenhauer
offers two reasons for dividing these broad artwork categories so dramati-
cally. Architecture, unlike music, is rarely if ever undertaken purely as a fine
art, or as art for art's sake, and is therefore almost invariably related to
purpose and the satisfaction of desire. This puts it in closer relation to
phenomenal willing and the will to life, and farther away from thing-in-itself
and the most highly individualized grades of the Will's objectifications. The
highest grade Ideas are necessarily connected to human beauty in artistic
representations of human form (WWR 1: 214). The distancing of architec-
ture from music on the spectrum of art forms obliges Schopenhauer, in the
second volume of The World as Will and Representation, to renounce
Goethe's otherwise suggestive image of architecture as frozen music (WWR
2: 453-4).
With music at the top of or standing outside the ordering of arts, and
architecture at the bottom, Schopenhauer arranges the remaining fine arts
in between. They are ranked according to their relation to a specific degree
of the Will's objectification corresponding to the Platonic Ideas with which
each is associated. The scale begins with such universal physical forces as
Gravity and proceeds up to Man, at the peak of the Ideas, reflecting the
highly particularized nature of human beings. The complete hierarchy is easy
to provide on the basis of this principle, interpolating poetry, literature,
painting and sculpture on the basis of hints Schopenhauer sprinkles through-
out his remarks on art. Sculpture, for obvious reasons, is closer to architec-
ture than to music. Painting falls between sculpture and poetry and literature,
with poetry occurring between music and literature. The hierarchy from
higher to lower artforms in rough outline accordingly looks like this:
architecture —> sculpture —> painting —» literature -» poetry —> music
(grades of the Will's objectification in art forms: low —> high)
Schopenhauer locates landscape gardening between architecture and
sculpture. He divides the category of painting more finely, so that landscape
painting is placed above historical painting, and these in turn above still-lifes.
Similarly with respect to epic and lyric poetry; dance; opera, and orchestral
music; fountain or hydraulic and other sculpture; and all other art forms.
The hierarchy supports Schopenhauer's theory of art as the objectification
of Will by providing a classification from lower to higher art forms accord-
ing to his conception of their dependence on and exemplification of respec-
tive grades of the Will's objectification.
Although Schopenhauer insists that the fine arts fall into a rank ordering
from low to high, depending on their relation to similarly ordered Platonic
152

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
Ideas, he maintains that there is no bar to regarding anything whatsoever
as beautiful. He illustrates the proposition that everything is beautiful by
Dutch still-life painting, in which even the most everyday objects are elevated
to the status of fine art by the artist's attention to their forms, colours, and
individuality (WWR 1: 210). We can see how Schopenhauer's thesis that
everything is potentially beautiful follows directly from his argument that
everything in the world as representation is the manifestation of thing-in-
itself. For everything embodies some grade or other of the Will's objectifica-
tion, which is to say of some Platonic Idea or other. The stronger thesis that
everything is actually beautiful might be derived from Schopenhauer's claim
that a Platonic Idea simply by virtue of being such is automatically beauti-
ful. Schopenhauer does not explicitly say this, nor does he provide any
positive reason for thinking that it would be true, although the concept fits
nicely into his metaphysics and aesthetics. Why not suppose on the contrary,
then, that some Platonic Ideas are beautiful, some are plain or non-beautiful,
and some unbeautiful or even ugly?
Schopenhauer in any case acknowledges degrees of beauty. While every
represented object is beautiful, some things are more beautiful than others,
depending on the exact way in which they embody their respective Platonic
Ideas (WWR 1: 210). Some things express more highly ranked Platonic
Ideas, construed as higher grades of the Will's objectification. Thus, a good
representation of a flower is inherently more beautiful for Schopenhauer
than a good representation of a stone. Other objects of nature and works
of art are more clearly and distinctly concrete embodiments of whatever
Platonic Ideas they are chosen to express. These factors, in Schopenhauer's
view, also contribute in another way to an object's greater beauty.
It is in these terms and for these reasons that Schopenhauer acknowledges
human beauty, the beauty of the Idea of humanity, and the human form, as
the highest type of beauty in any art form. The exalted classification of
human beauty fits Schopenhauer's overall theory of the stratification of art
forms and particular types of representations within art forms. His hierar-
chy corresponds exactly with the grades of the Will's objectification in the
phenomenal world. The fact that human beings as members of a species
associated with a Platonic Idea exhibit the highest degree of individuality
among the things we know guarantees that artworks devoted to human
beauty embody the highest type of beauty. Schopenhauer demonstrates the
superiority of human beauty over all other subcategories by the common-
sense comparison of artworks of individual persons in portrait art with
artworks of non-human animals. The latter may be interesting and beautiful
to a limited degree, but Schopenhauer insists that the greater beauty will
always belong to anything directly associated with human interests. As one
way of characterizing the difference, he remarks that any competent painting
153

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of a given breed of horse or dog would serve as well as any other, while the
same is obviously not true of human portraits, the individuality of which at
each stage of life is always in evidence (WWR 1: 221).
Thus, Schopenhauer's nineteenth-century transcendental idealism
confirms the ancient Greek ideal of the human form as paramount among
artistic subjects. It is not merely that we as human beings are preoccupied
with ourselves and with every aspect of the human body, nor that we take a
certain erotic pleasure in realistic representations of youthful athletic human
anatomy. Schopenhauer, on the contrary, argues that artworks displaying the
sensuality of human nudity in any medium are unworthy as being too closely
related to the will to life. The reason why Schopenhauer regards human
beauty as the highest, greatest and most interesting of all types and degrees
is that it exemplifies the highest Platonic Idea, the highest grade of the Will's
objectification, given that human beings possess the greatest diversity and
individuality among the members of any known species.
Music and nature as immediate objectifications of Will
The best known conclusion of Schopenhauer's aesthetic theory, familiar to
many who know little else about his philosophy, is that music, like the
natural world and unlike any other art form, is the direct expression of Will.
Schopenhauer makes music an exception to the Socratic criticism of art as
an iterative imitation at two removes from reality, an imitation of the world
of appearance, which is itself in turn supposed to be an imitation of the
eternal Forms or Ideas.2 Painting, poetry, sculpture, architecture and the
like, are all separated from reality in just this way. Good music, the only
music Schopenhauer finds worthy of consideration as exemplary of the art
form, is entirely on a par with the world of nature as the immediate
representation of thing-in-itself, the world as Will objectified in the world
as representation.
Schopenhauer begins his discussion of music as the immediate objectifica-
tion of Will by first distinguishing in Socratic fashion between literature and
the plastic arts as expressive in other ways of Platonic Ideas. Music, he
maintains, alone among art forms, bypasses the Ideas, because it does not
try to further represent anything that is already a representational object.
A painting of a horse is a representation of the Idea of Horse, and as such
communicates through its selection and emphasis of essential features the
relevant Platonic Idea in a form that can be perceived and from which
intuitive knowledge of the Idea can be indirectly recovered. Since a particular
horse is already an objectification of the world as Will, a painting of a horse
154

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
is a representation of a representation at two removes of objectification from
the reality that is thing-in-itself.
The same is not true of music. Schopenhauer believes that music, like the
world of nature itself, is a direct objectification of Will. Music belongs to a
distinct aesthetic category of its own. Schopenhauer is explicit that this
classification is intended to pay tribute to what should be obvious to any
listener about the special character of music as a fine art. He describes all
music worthy of the name as standing outside phenomenal representation,
the principle of individuation and presumably also, therefore, although he
does not mention it, the principle of sufficient reason. Arts other than music
imitate in their production of represented objects other represented objects
that are already to be found in the world as representation. The artist
expresses intuited Platonic Ideas from which, when the art is good, an
appreciative audience can grasp the twice-removed Ideas. This is precisely
Socrates' complaint about the representational arts in Plato's Republic. The
objection does not apply in the unique case of music, which Schopenhauer
regards as the only exception to the Socratic rule (WWR 1: 257).
Music fails and falls disastrously short of its true potential when it seeks
imitatively to express emotions. It succeeds when through its pure forms of
melody and harmony, representationally unconnected to anything else in the
phenomenal world, it simply objectifies Will. This alone is the proper prov-
ince of music, that which makes it outstanding among all other art forms.
Schopenhauer concludes:
Therefore music does not express this or that particular and definite
pleasure, this or that affliction, pain, sorrow, horror, gaiety,
merriment, or peace of mind, but joy, pain, sorrow, horror, gaiety,
merriment, peace of mind themselves, to a certain extent in the
abstract, their essential nature, without any accessories, and so also
without the motives for them. Nevertheless, we understand them
perfectly in this extracted quintessence. 
(WWR 1: 261)
The proof of Schopenhauer's assessment of music's special gift is found in
enjoyment of the effect music has on the listener's imagination in trying to
give substance to the feelings it evokes.
Schopenhauer seems to think that the only way to explain what is special
about music, the undeniable impact it has on aesthetic sensibilities, is by
attributing to it non-iteratively representational status as the immediate
objectification of Will in the auditory world as representation. There its effect
is to invite the listener to construct a world in the imagination correspond-
ing to the moods and feelings it arouses. Schopenhauer is prepared to take
the sentiment literally and at face value when people say, as they sometimes
155

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
do, that music is a world in and of and unto itself. If for Schopenhauer
architecture, in Goethe's simile, is not like frozen music, music is in any case
precisely akin to the direct objectification of Will in such beautiful repre-
sented objects of nature as snowflakes and rivers and mountainsides, the
vascular structures of plants, their leaves, roots and stems, honeycombs and
seashells, among countless other examples.
Schopenhauer's distinction between the non-imitation of (good) music
and the iterative imitation of all other arts raises interesting problems.
Schopenhauer says that music has nothing to do with the phenomenal world,
"positively ignores it", "passes over the Ideas", and, most remarkably, un-
like the other arts, "could still exist even if there were no world at all" (WWR
1: 262). We should begin by noting Schopenhauer's normative loading of
the term "music" to refer specifically to non-programmatic music that does
not attempt to imitate the sounds of nature or particular types of emotion.
He speaks only of music that meets his evaluative Socratic standard for good
music by not being iteratively imitative. His theory of music involves some-
thing like the following chain of inferences: music is good music; good music
is non-imitatively expressive; non-imitative expression is the immediate
objectification of thing-in-itself as Will; therefore, music is the immediate
objectification of Will. There is something bordering dangerously on circu-
lar reasoning in any such effort to champion what is unique about music as
an art form, its metaphysics and its psychological effect on listeners.
When Schopenhauer speaks of art, not only in the case of music, he
usually means the highest and most accomplished artworks, the products of
genius. It is as though for Schopenhauer so-called artworks that do not fit
his definition or measure up to his aesthetic standards simply do not count
as art and are not to be mentioned in the same breath as recognized
masterpieces. There is a difficulty here. Although it is incumbent on aesthetic
philosophy to define the concept of art and to establish normative guide-
lines for the evaluation of artworks, the combination of these features in a
normative definition that distinguishes (good) art from non-art threatens to
trivialize the resulting theory both as conceptual analysis and as a basis for
judging artworks in distinguishing successful from unsuccessful efforts. Art
by definition, according to the theory's peculiar bias, is necessarily good,
whereas the category of bad or unworthy art has no application. Such an
approach potentially deprives the definition of significance. What might
otherwise cast doubts on the theory's evaluative pronouncements of good
art, artworks that might be deemed bad, are automatically excluded by virtue
of not constituting genuine artworks in the first place. To make art good by
definition is to make the distinction between good and bad art meaningless,
an implication that seems especially hazardous in Schopenhauer's aesthet-
ics of music.
156

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
An even greater difficulty in distinguishing music from other arts looms
for Schopenhauer's doctrine that music "passes over" the Ideas of the
phenomenal world. This seems to contradict the central proposition of
Schopenhauer's aesthetics that genius creates art by passively receiving
Platonic Ideas, projecting them through imagination into complete perfected
abstract concepts, and then representing them in a concrete medium. If the
description applies to (good) music, then, since for Schopenhauer the
Platonic Ideas are imprinted on aesthetic genius in moments of will-
suppressed perception, music like the other arts similarly has to do with the
phenomenal world's Ideas. If the description does not apply, then
Schopenhauer's theory of aesthetic genius and artistic creativity is refuted
out of his own mouth by the counter-example he unwittingly provides. The
problem is not resolved by acknowledging music as an exception, however
embarrassing it might be for Schopenhauer's philosophy of art. If music does
not involve Platonic Ideas, but is the direct expression of Will, then we have
yet to understand the artist's role, and how it is that the composer of itera-
tively non-imitative music is supposed to have direct access to Will. Why is
music not found as naturally as daffodils and rhinoceros beetles? Why is it,
like other art forms, something that exists only when created by human
beings?
Schopenhauer also rejects the Leibnizian account of music as mathemati-
cal in nature. Despite the internal arithmetic of the ratios of musical inter-
vals in the formal harmony of chords, melody, discord and resolution,
rhythms and polyrhythms, Schopenhauer insists that there is something more
to music. Music can only be understood by coming to terms with its effect
on our emotions, when it is not merely an effort representationally to imitate
certain states of mind. As a consequence, he rejects the mathematical status
of music as an explanation of its metaphysics: "we certainly have to look for
more than that exercitium arithmeticae occultum nescientis se numerare
animi [an unconscious exercise in arithmetic in which the mind does not
know it is counting] which Leibniz took it to be" (WWR 1: 255-6).
Schopenhauer invokes intuition to uphold these conclusions; in effect, he
relies on feeling. Intuitive knowledge is supposed to be superior to, while
constituting the ultimate ground of justification for, abstract knowledge.
Schopenhauer's only recourse in trying to understand the nature of some-
thing as remarkable as music is to fall back on personal reactions to the effects
that music has on his own emotions. This is the method he recommends in
all special disciplines, including logic and mathematics. He recognizes that
the approach is not likely to be accepted by sceptics, and he tries to antici-
pate and blunt the edge of their criticisms. The personal nature of the enquiry
stands out by comparison with Schopenhauer's efforts at abstract knowledge
elsewhere in his treatise. Here, in contrast, he seems to say nothing more
157

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
than that, after listening to music for many years and thinking about what
kind of thing it is, he simply finds it compelling to conclude as a revelation
of insight that music is the immediate objectification of thing-in-itself as Will
(WWR 1:256-7).
Schopenhauer admits that he has no way to prove that music is different
from other art forms. He offers instead, almost as an article of faith, the
hopeful expectation that a reader who has agreed with his previous findings
will now go along also with the proposition that music is not itself the
representation of any other representation, but is itself the direct objectifica-
tion of Will. To sustain his conclusion, as we have seen, Schopenhauer needs
to discount all programme music and other types of iteratively representa-
tional music as unworthy of the art form. What remains is merely the
coherent description of music as the direct objectification of the Will, which
he says is sufficient for him, and which he trusts will appeal to at least some
sympathetic readers as providing the truth of the matter. This is surprisingly
weak, although it is obviously not intended as an argument. Like any other
theorist, Schopenhauer is entitled to express philosophical opinions to see
whether they resonate with other thinkers on the basis of their informed
experience and appreciation of music. If he is right, then we are supposed
to recognize the appropriateness of classifying music in this way. Beyond this,
Schopenhauer admits that he has no further resources with which to try to
persuade a reluctant critic. Schopenhauer's strategy can be understood as
more like an inference to the best explanatory hypothesis in accounting for
the nature of music, within what he believes is an already rigorously justified
metaphysics, epistemology and aesthetic theory of the non-musical arts.
This set of issues is related to another puzzle in Schopenhauer's philoso-
phy of music. He notes that, unlike the other arts, music would exist ("to a
certain extent") even if there were no phenomenal world. If music is the
direct non-imitative objectification of Will, then some version of this extrava-
gant claim must be true. At one level, it is perhaps easy enough to see what
Schopenhauer is trying to say. Music is more abstract than the literary and
plastic arts; it is more like mathematics. We might regard Schopenhauer as
a kind of modern Pythagorean in characterizing music as independent of the
phenomenal world. Yet he has already explicitly rejected the Leibnizian
mathematical concept of music. The difficulties entailed by such a position
are at once apparent. Take away the world as representation, and there are
no artists, composers, performance musicians, instruments, sound vibrations
or listeners. If music exists independently of the world of experience, it can
only be because music in essence is a set of abstract relationships to be
instantiated in any number of different ways.
The trouble is, first, that such relationships could equally be non-musically
instantiated. This, indeed, is another implication of Pythagoreanism. The real
158

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
nature or essence of music as an art form in that case clearly eludes Schopen-
hauer's theory. Nor does the thesis adequately distinguish music by virtue
of its abstractness alone from modern abstract and minimalist plastic art,
although perhaps we should not blame Schopenhauer for not foreseeing
these developments. Secondly, and more importantly, it follows that
Schopenhauer as a result has not adequately explained the relation between
musical aesthetic genius, the existence of music as an art form, and musical
compositions as expressions of artistic genius. Ideas are involved only in the
other arts. They derive from phenomenal contact with the world as
representation and are abstracted by imagination, completed and perfected,
before being concretely expressed in the artist's choice of media. By hypoth-
esis, Platonic Ideas play no essential part in the existence of music, even
though music on this conception in some sense consists essentially of abstract
relations. The limitations of interpreting music purely formally or
mathematically without taking its effect on a listener's emotions as an
essential aspect of the nature of musical expression is undoubtedly part of
the reason why Schopenhauer repudiates Leibniz's soulless mathematical
analysis of music as overlooking what music does and what it means to the
appreciative subject. It is also probably part of the reason why Schopen-
hauer's aesthetics has enjoyed such widespread appeal among musicians and
music lovers.
Beauty and the sublime, good and great art
Schopenhauer revisits the "Analytic of the Beautiful" and "Analytic of the
Sublime" in Kant's Critique of Judgement.3 In doing so, he recommends a
different basis for the distinction and an alternative account of its significance
in terms of his metaphysics of the world as Will and representation. The
beautiful and the sublime are distinguished in non-Kantian ways by
Schopenhauer as implications of the essential beauty of Ideas, and the
attitude of will toward itself as representation and towards the world as Will
in the aesthetics of the sublime.
By beauty, Schopenhauer means nothing other than the natural forms of
Platonic Ideas. Ideas are beautiful by definition. Schopenhauer speaks without
qualification of "Ideas, in which beauty, in the objective sense, consists"
(WWR 1: 200). Later, in "Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy", his Appen-
dix to the first volume of The World as Will and Representation^ he describes
"a pure perception free from reflection and from will, like that of the
beautiful, the deepest comprehension of the true essence of things, in other
words, of their Platonic Ideas" (WWR 1: 451). Clarity of expression of the
159

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Ideas is both the aesthetic goal and basis for judgement of beauty. In a single
stroke Schopenhauer cuts the Gordian knot that had perplexed young
Socrates in Plato's dialogue the Parmenides, about whether or not there are
Forms or Ideas of "ugly" and disgusting things, such as hair, mud and dirt.4
Schopenhauer excludes such possibilities by fiat on the basis of his under-
standing of what is implied by the concept of a Platonic Idea and of beauty.
He holds that even if there are such Ideas they are necessarily beautiful as
natural forms, and that they appear loathsome if at all only in non-aesthetic
relation to individual willing and the preoccupations of the will to life.5
The sublime in contrast is defined by the attitudes and emotional
responses of phenomenal will toward the world as representation. Like Kant,
Schopenhauer distinguishes between two categories of the sublime: the dy-
namical and mathematical. The dynamical sublime is experienced through
imaginative contact with great and sometimes terrifying natural forces. It is
the aesthetic feeling produced by standing above a deep ravine, mountain
range or rushing waterfall. The mathematical sublime is the product of awe
in contemplation of great distances in space and time, such as that induced
by staring in wonder at the seemingly infinite immensity of stars in the night
sky, or considering vast regressions of geologic time. In Kant's analytic of
the sublime, the impression made on the senses by such phenomena suggest
in turn the infinity of God. They lead the intellect toward religious contem-
plation of its own limitations in relation to the greatness of the deity.6
Schopenhauer, as we should expect, does not follow Kant's analytic of the
sublime in these directions. He nevertheless accepts Kant's terminology and
his basic divisions of subcategories in an aesthetics of the sublime. "The
impression of the sublime can arise in quite a different way by our imagin-
ing a mere magnitude in space and time, whose immensity reduces the in-
dividual to nought", he allows. "By retaining Kant's terms and his correct
division, we can call the first kind the dynamically sublime, although we
differ from him entirely in the explanation of the inner nature of that im-
pression, and can concede no share in this either to moral reflections or to
hypostases from scholastic philosophy" (WWR 1: 205).
Included in the dynamical sublime are standard textbook examples from
Longinus to Edmund Burke and Kant. Great storms at sea, cataracts rushing
through steep gorges and the like are all potentially life-threatening natural
occurrences in which the individual will finds exhileration at the thought of
its survival in hostile circumstances, and in which its relative insignificance in
size and power are personalized.7 Whereas beauty appears without effort in
the clear reception of natural form, the Platonic Ideas embodied as distinct
grades of the Will's objectification in the world as representation, the sublime
additionally requires a specific feeling of satisfaction that results from the
struggle and victory of will.8 Schopenhauer explains the feeling of the sublime:
160

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
[W]hat distinguishes the feeling of the sublime from that of the
beautiful is that, with the beautiful, pure knowledge has gained the
upper hand without a struggle, since the beauty of the object, in
other words, that quality of it which facilitates knowledge of its Idea,
has removed from consciousness, without resistance and hence
imperceptibly, the will and knowledge of relations that slavishly
serve this will ... The feeling of the sublime is distinguished from
that of the beautiful only by the addition, namely the exaltation
beyond the known hostile relation of the contemplated object to the
will in general. Thus there result several degrees of the sublime, in
fact transitions from the beautiful to the sublime, according as this
addition is strong, clamorous, urgent, and near, or only feeble,
remote, and merely suggested. 
(WWR 1: 202)
In company with most other aesthetic theorists, Schopenhauer acknowl-
edges different degrees of the dynamical sublime. Their quality depends on
the intensity of the perceived threat posed by violent natural events to the
individual will to life, or on the effort of imagination required to come to
terms with the magnitude of forces. The very fact that Schopenhauer has
available to his aesthetic theory a predetermined account of individual
willing and the individual's will to preserve life provides a unique basis from
which he can more exactly interpret distinct qualitative divisions within the
general catgory of the sublime. Schopenhauer's narration of the most
impressive experiences of the sublime is as remarkable for its romantic Sturm
und Drang poetry as for the philosophical observations it contains (WWR
1:204-5).
The distinction between the beautiful and the sublime is drawn exclu-
sively by reference to the subjective feeling encountered in the sublime as
menacing the will to life. Schopenhauer argues that the only difference
between beauty and the sublime is the feeling of threat to life in the case of
the sublime. This conclusion, too, is inescapable, given Schopenhauer's prior
commitment to the proposition that everything is beautiful. It follows that
the sublime is a particular type of beauty; namely, it is that which is also
experienced as a danger to the will to life. Schopenhauer believes that once
again he has excelled Kant, this time in his aesthetic philosophy of the
beautiful and the sublime as much as in his metaphysics of thing-in-itself.
The advance is only made possible by Schopenhauer's emphasis on the will
to life as the Will's most direct (psychological) objectification in the world
as representation, and as that for the sake of which thing-in-itself is identi-
fied with Will. Schopenhauer's theory of the sublime has the further
interesting implication that the beautiful and the sublime are not exclusive
categories, but that the sublime is merely a special case of the beautiful. This
161

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
is a welcome result for those who do not sense any inherent division
between beauty and the sublime, for whom what is sublime can also be
beautiful, and conversely.
Schopenhauer's concept of the sublime is subjective in its reliance on the
feelings aroused especially by scenes in nature that inspire terror. The
sublime is a state of mind produced by fear for the safety of the will to life
in the perception of potential dangers. They include mountain crags and sea
storms and the feeling of relative smallness and vulnerability of the will to
life relative to the vastness of a desert wilderness or the starry heavens.
There is no reason why such objects should not also be regarded as beauti-
ful, just as Schopenhauer's theory entails. The night sky is beautiful as well
as humbling, as are the desert and mountain range, and the plunging
waterfall spilling into a terrifying gorge. It is, if Schopenhauer is right, all
a matter of how we as representing subjects feel in the presence of such
objects. Just as every object is actually beautiful for Schopenhauer, so every
object is potentially sublime, depending on whether or not we happen to
experience any sort of threat to our phenomenal will to life in its presence.
It is possible, then, that the simplest, most innocent appearing objects could
be sublime as well as beautiful, if they happen circumstantially to arouse a
sense of fear. "The course of our remarks has made it necessary to insert
here a discussion of the sublime", Schopenhauer states, "when the treatment
of the beautiful has been only half completed, merely from one side, the
subjective. For it is only a special modification of this subjective side which
distinguishes the sublime from the beautiful" (WWR 1: 208).
It is clearly the dynamical rather than mathematical sublime that most
impresses Schopenhauer. The theory of the sublime in its relation to the will
is also accordingly quite different for Schopenhauer than for Kant. For Kant,
the mathematical sublime, seen, for example, in the vastness of the starry
heavens, suggests to imagination the infinite, which in turn is supposed to
lead by subtle turns of contemplation eventually to the concept of God.9
Schopenhauer's atheism will have none of this. He rightly observes that
despite adopting Kant's distinction between the dynamical and mathemati-
cal sublime, his theory, making reference to the struggles and sufferings of
will, is in all other respects unlike Kant's. It is in encounters with the
untamed forces of nature that the will to life confronts its limitations,
sensing something like the raw energy of the world as Will, while glorying
in the superiority of its perception and knowledge over the world as
representation. If the mind also happens to entertain thoughts of God as a
result, that effect, for Schopenhauer, is purely accidental.
162

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
Aesthetic genius and will
Schopenhauer regards the ability to engage in purely disinterested percep-
tion, excluding all signs or stirrings of appetite, desire or will to life, as the
mark of aesthetic genius. Experience of the world as representation with-
out interference of will leads genius first to grasp the Platonic ideas under-
lying appearance, to their completion and perfection in imagination, and
then in a wilful act of communication to depict the ideal in art. The ability
objectively to perceive the world with no interference of will is rare, and
Schopenhauer exploits the scarcity of this talent at the very source of artis-
tic production to explain the infrequency of true aesthetic genius.
Schopenhauer divides the activity of will from the passivity of purely
objective perception. "The punctum saliens of every beautiful work," he
writes, "every great and profound thought, is an entirely objective percep-
tion. But such a perception is absolutely conditioned by a complete silenc-
ing of the will which leaves the person as pure subject of knowing. The
aptitude for the prevalence of this state is simply genius" (WWR 2: 370).
The idea that desire and individual willing or will to life, however conceived,
should in some sense be separated from aesthetic contemplation in the
experience of genius is a perennial thesis of aesthetic philosophy. Schopen-
hauer describes the pure extreme form of aesthetic genius as a kind of ideal,
to which only a few attain, but that others may approximate, and that almost
everyone is capable of experiencing in limited ways if they are able in any
degree to experience the enjoyment of beauty or the sublime.
Aesthetic appreciation involves the passive intuition of Platonic Ideas. It
is a kind of knowledge, which for Schopenhauer always stands in opposi-
tion to the phenomenal will to life. It follows that we can only experience
beauty and the sublime by suspending the will and suppressing its demands
on our time, attention, and energy for the sake of receiving knowledge of
the Ideas. The ideal case, the most extreme and perfect form of aesthetic
appreciation, is that of aesthetic genius, who in theory is capable of
sufficiently quieting the will to intuit Platonic Ideas in objects and scenes of
nature and great works of art.
Since the Ideas are imprinted on genius during episodes of will-suppressed
perceptions of the phenomenal world, something more is required to make
sense impressions into abstract Platonic Ideas. Genius also requires imagi-
nation, by which it generalizes perceived natural forms into typified abstrac-
tions. Aesthetic genius for Schopenhauer does not merely report on the
Platonic Ideas received in moments of will-suppressed aesthetic contempla-
tion, but completes and perfects the forms in imagination, and then finds
ways to represent them in works of art according to its own sense of style.
Genius, as such, requires a collaboration between the passive reception of
163

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Platonic Ideas and the active role of imagination in completing and perfect-
ing the forms nature reveals, to be represented in a work of art.
Willing obstructs the grasp of Platonic Ideas. The Ideas present themselves
to genius only when and to the extent that willing is suppressed.
The experience of natural form coloured by taint of will obscures the Ideas,
and pollutes the well-spring of aesthetic contemplation that Schopenhauer
holds is presupposed by great art. Aesthetic genius enters into moments of
pure objectivity and total loss of individuality, an absolute denial of will, in
which objects are experienced purely perceptually, without desire, belief or
relation to the self. Considered as a means to an end, aesthetic contempla-
tion and great artistry are an alternative to saintly asceticism in transcend-
ing the will to life and attaining salvation from the suffering that accompanies
every act of willing (WWR 1: 186-7). It offers another way in which the
suffering induced by the phenomenal will can be quieted, suppressed and
transcended.
Schopenhauer describes the blessed aesthetic consciousness in these lauda-
tory terms. "Finally, it is also that blessedness of will-less perception," he
writes:
which spreads so wonderful a charm over the past and the distant,
and by a self-deception presents them to us in so flattering a light.
For by conjuring up in our minds days long past spent in a distant
place, it is only the objects recalled by our imagination, not the
subject of will, that carried around its incurable sorrows with it just
as much then as it does now. 
(WWR 1:198)
It is not quite aesthetic escapism that Schopenhauer finds most valuable in the
enjoyment of art, but something that is not far afield. He emphasizes the role
of memory and aesthetic amnesia that occurs through the loss of self in the
complete absorption in a work of art or scene of nature (WWR 1: 198-9).
Finally, the therapeutic effects of artistic dissociation from self and the
individual will to life are seen in proper perspective. "We can withdraw from
all suffering", Schopenhauer promises us:
just as well through present as through distant objects, whenever we
raise ourselves to a purely objective contemplation of them, and are
thus able to produce the illusion that only those objects are present,
not we ourselves. Then, as pure subject of knowing, delivered from
the miserable self, we become entirely one with those objects, and
foreign as our want is to them, it is at such moments just as foreign
to us. Then the world as representation alone remains; the world
as will has disappeared. 
(WWR 1: 198-9)
164

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
We are supposed to be able briefly to abandon our selves in aesthetic
contemplation, losing sight for at least a while of the tormenting will to life.
We thereby enter a will-transcending blessed state of consciousness that
offers the temporary illusion of detaching represented object from the
representing subject, merging subject unselfconsciously into object. The
resulting altered state of subjective awareness is free of individual willing,
finding temporary aesthetic release from all sufferings of will. Through
aesthetic contemplation we may come as close as it is possible ever to expe-
rience the existence of represented objects as they are in and of themselves,
without awareness of the willing subject.
We recall in this connection Schopenhauer's insistence that the Platonic
Ideas as grades of the Will's objectification, passively intuited in will-less
moments of pure aesthetic contemplation, are virtually thing-in-itself. This
is a consequence of the near convergence he discerns in the metaphysics of
Plato's Ideas and Kant's thing-in-itself. In art, through the imagination's
completion of perceptually intuited Platonic Ideas, the intrusion of will to
life in the world as representation is minimized, as the Ideas take over
consciousness and displace the willing subject far into the background. When
this occurs, the subject of aesthetic contemplation is rendered negligible in
comparison with Platonic Ideas standing in close approximation to thing-
in-itself, or, with these qualifications, as object-in-itself.
With his usual depth of penetration, Schopenhauer puts his finger on one
of the principal benefits of art. It is probably fair to say that few persons
would formulate the transcendence offered by great art in quite the way
Schopenhauer does, with or without his technical philosophical vocabulary.
Something in what he says should nevertheless ring true for those who have
had transporting aesthetic encounters with artwork of genius or outstand-
ing scenes of natural beauty or the sublime. Stand before Michelangelo's
Pieta in St Peter's Basilica in the Vatican and you might find yourself
completely captivated, unable to take your eyes away from its beauty. It is
so small and yet so perfect, even when seen today from behind bullet-proof
glass at a considerable distance. Regardless of your religious inclinations, you
might discover yourself deeply moved by the form and universal appeal of
the marble, of Jesus's mother, Mary, holding his broken body in her arms
after being taken down from the cross on the day of his crucifixion.
Schopenhauer would probably approve of this choice of artwork as illustrat-
ing his theory of aesthetic genius. It exemplifies his concept of how a viewer
of great art can be lifted out of willing and the sense of self. Moreover, it
depicts as a kind of universal theme the emotional suffering of Christ's
mother, and the bitter physical suffering and death of a saintly ascetic, who,
in another way, grappling intensely with the problems of existence, was
misunderstood and reviled by those for whose salvation he is sacrificed.
165

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer is impressed with the fact that many artists in their ordinary
and professional lives do not always live up to the contemplative ideal of
suppressing desire and the will to life. It appears, on the contrary, if
Schopenhauer has correctly diagnosed the situation, that persons of aesthetic
genius are frequently agitated, even more so than ordinary citizens, precisely
because they are endlessly in search of new objects of knowledge, new ideas
and Ideas to nourish their art. "This explains the animation, amounting to
disquietude, in men of genius," he states:
since the present can seldom satisfy them, because it does not fill
their consciousness. This gives them that restless zealous nature, that
constant search for new objects worthy of contemplation, and also
that longing, hardly ever satisfied, for men of like nature and stature
to whom they may open their hearts. 
(WWR 1: 186)
The life of genius in Schopenhauer's aesthetics can be understood as yet
another manifestation of will impelling the knower and artist in a restless
quest that precludes serenity and peace. If so, it does not change the fact that
genius, no matter how driven to increase knowledge and create more and
better art, still requires the suppression of will to receive Platonic Ideas in
perception, even if before and after such moments genius is generally in
motion, eager to learn and do more.
As in other aspects of his philosophy, Schopenhauer projects an extreme
case, and then explains the situations we encounter in actual experience as
approximations to the ideal. Here the ideal is the aesthetic genius, with
respect to which all other persons are capable of aesthetic appreciation and
enjoyment by virtue, not of complete, but at most of a partial and imper-
fect, suppression of the will to life. Having established the ideal of perfect
knowledge obtained through total overcoming of the will, Schopenhauer
next considers the intermediate range of lesser knowledge and correspond-
ingly lesser aesthetic appreciation to which most persons who are not
aesthetic geniuses are limited (WWR 1: 194-5). Finally, his evaluation of a
wide range of degrees of ability to suspend and suppress the will for the sake
of gaining knowledge enables him to characterize aesthetic genius at the far
end of the scale. Schopenhauer's theory of aesthetic genius positions him
admirably to account for the limited numbers of geniuses to be found in any
discipline, especially in the arts, and to explain how it is that the greater
number of persons, who are not geniuses in his sense, are nevertheless able
at some level or other to appreciate the value of beauty and the sublime in
nature and art.
Genius itself in any case is a matter of degree. There is a rank ordering
of greater and lesser geniuses among and within the class of geniuses.
166

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
Schopenhauer suggests an aristocracy of talent when he writes: "The
objectivity of knowledge, and above all of knowledge of perception, has
innumerable degrees, depending on the energy of the intellect and its
separation from the will. The highest degree is genius ..." (WWR 2: 291).
Aesthetic genius on this conception is elevated to an asymptotic status toward
which many may aspire and approach, but which few if any actually attain.
Here an important further distinction must be emphasized. Schopenhauer
does not say that the aesthetic genius must always be able to transcend
individuality in purely objective perception, but implies at most that aesthetic
genius is capable of passive reception of Platonic Ideas in at least some situ-
ations. Others may be able to approximate the purely aesthetic state, but the
highest degree in this progression marks its actual achievement, in the pure
objectivity that only genius attains. In many passages, Schopenhauer exults
in the rarity of genius (WWR 1: 234).
Aesthetic genius as suffering and salvation
The two non-cognitive channels through which Schopenhauer contends we
can overcome individual willing are asceticism and aesthetic contemplation.
Saintly self-denial and the overwhelming self-absorbing experience of beauty
and the sublime offer the ascetic and aesthetic genius momentary encoun-
ters with something approximating Will as thing-in-itself, in the objective
knowledge of Platonic Ideas. The world of beauty and the sublime offers
relief from the sufferings of phenomenal will by suppressing its urges for the
sake of knowledge (WWR 1: 267).
Schopenhauer compares respite from suffering obtained through aesthetic
contemplation with saintly asceticism as another path of indifference to life
and death that overcomes the will to life and with it the sufferings that attend
every act of will:
Meanwhile, he [the artist] himself is the will objectifying itself and
remaining in constant suffering. That pure, true, and profound
knowledge of the inner nature of the world now becomes for him
an end in itself; at it he stops. Therefore it does not become for him
a quieter of the will ... in the case of the saint who has attained
resignation; it does not deliver him from life for ever, but only for
a few moments. For him it is not the way out of life, but only an
occasional consolation in it, until his power, enhanced by this
contemplation, finally becomes tired of the spectacle, and seizes the
serious side of things. 
(WWR 1: 267)
167

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
How can suffering and aesthetic contemplation offer a perspective on
reality, of the world as Will? Suffering is non-representational, in the sense
that it does not depict anything in the phenomenal world. When we suffer
pain or frustrations of desire, the experience of suffering by itself, unlike
perception, while phenomenal, is not obviously representational. To suffer
can therefore be construed as experiencing non-representational reality as
intimately as possible within the confines of empirical psychology.
What individual suffering reveals about reality is that it is a force neces-
sarily at odds with itself, in essential self-conflict. If this were not so, reality
could not move the world from within through its restless activity, but would
be at peace. For Schopenhauer, Will objectifies itself most nakedly as indi-
vidual suffering, because it is in these experiences that willing encounters the
harshness of an uncontrollable personally unaccommodating external reality.
The suffering of will in the world of appearance is also the basis of
Schopenhauer's much-misunderstood romantic moral pessimism. It is a
consequence of what he regards as the most profound truth of metaphysics
that there can be no harmony of individual wills in the world as represen-
tation objectifying thing-in-itself as the hungry Will.
Acute suffering reveals the world as Will. Ecstasy and other emotions of
like intensity do not have the same effect, because they necessarily involve the
will's attachment to objects of desire. Schopenhauer believes that individual
willing is an obstacle to attaining insight into thing-in-itself, when the will to
life persists in seeking objects in the phenomenal world, such as alleviation
of pain or victory over an adversary, that may temporarily satisfy its desires.
The best understanding of the world as Will for Schopenhauer is therefore
through suffering induced by deliberate efforts at suppressing the will to life.
This is the ascetic path of disciplined self-denial, leading by degrees from
deprivation of the will's longing for such bodily necessities as food, water,
companionship and sleep, to the experience of a mystical-religious loss of
individuality and dissolution of the subject-object dichotomy in a feeling of
"oneness" with the unrepresented universe. If desire intrudes, the spell is
broken, and individual will is no longer effectively suppressed, disengaging
the ascetic's non-representational access to the thing-in-itself as Will.
With important differences, much the same is true of aesthetic contem-
plation. Aesthetic experience is like suffering in that it involves a brief but
pregnant suppression of individual willing. In contemplating nature or great
art, aesthetic genius stands so riveted in its encounter with beauty or the
sublime that there occurs something like a mystical union of the subject with
the object in a sensation that seems to dissolve the subject-object distinction.
The desires of individual will are overruled by total absorption in the
moment of aesthetic appreciation, and genius passively receives the Platonic
Ideas instantiated as perceptible grades of the Will's objectifications.
168

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
In its efforts to grasp and communicate the Ideas, aesthetic genius, through
will-suppressed moments of aesthetic rapture, in other ways and at other
times suffers more acutely than ordinary persons. Like the prisoner released
from Plato's cave, the genius, having caught sight of the Ideas as the nearest
approximations to thing-in-itself, is compelled to share non-representational
knowledge with those left behind in darkness.10 To undertake such thankless
labour is to be condemned to inevitable misunderstanding by those who have
not experienced the revelation. It is also to incur additional suffering in
acquiring specialized skills and applying every energy of mind and body to
harness non-discursive representational media for the expression of non-
representational concepts. It is in epiphanic moments of aesthetic contem-
plation that the self paradoxically is most free from itself, from the mental
oscillations by which individual will as the direct phenomenological
objectification of Will is otherwise tormented. To live is to will, and hence
to suffer, and no one suffers more, for Schopenhauer, than the aesthetic
genius. The artist suffers extraordinarily because genius experiences the
greatest frustrations of creative activity in its compulsion to represent non-
representational knowledge. It is at the same time the saving grace of aesthetic
contemplation that it lifts the artist out of the suffering induced by the
concerns of phenomenal will to life when willing is suppressed for the sake
of gaining knowledge of the Platonic Ideas.
Genius, as Schopenhauer likes to say, does not let willing get the upper
hand, but strives always to put knowing above willing. If suffering occurs
through willing, and if aesthetic genius puts knowing above willing, why does
genius suffer at all, let alone more so than the average mortal? The reason
is that genius has a vocation of higher order in which will is enlisted in the
service of knowledge. Aesthetic genius is engaged in a noble effort doomed
to the frustration and disappointment of imperfect attainment in attempts
to represent a non-representational reality. This is the ultimate ground of the
peculiar suffering of genius. It is yet another distinguishing mark of genius,
related to the compensations of ascetic saintliness, to be endowed with
disinterested aesthetic contemplation as a temporary respite from the
punishing strife of individual willing. Schopenhauer concludes that those
who because of their acute aesthetic sensibilities must undergo the most
exquisite sufferings of will mercifully are also those who are best equipped
to find salvation in aesthetic transcendence.
If the purpose of art were merely to escape from the suffering caused by
strivings of individual will, then aesthetic genius could simply submerge into
phenomena, immerse itself in the world as representation, and spend as
much time as possible extracting Platonic Ideas from its perceptions.
Unreflective involvement in the phenomenal world of appearances is what
most of humanity does anyway, disregarding thing-in-itself and thinking only
169

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of the evanescent world as representation. Schopenhauer remarks on this
sort of aesthetic intellectual mediocrity sometimes with a pitying sigh, some-
times with a contemptuous sneer. He believes that genius can never be
satisfied with such a vulgar solution having once grasped the fundamental
distinction between reality and appearance. He considers exclusive concern
with phenomena both naive and demeaning, an attitude fit only for human
beings who have barely risen above the condition of beasts. He concludes
that it is a mark of greater intellect to place less value on ephemeral appear-
ance, while embracing the hard pessimistic truth that the world as Will is
objectified as inescapable turmoil. The artist is first and foremost a knower,
someone with a distinctive albeit non-representational imagination-
enhanced knowledge of Platonic Ideas acquired through sensation. The mas-
tery of technical skills whereby Ideas are expressed for the satisfaction of
genius and the enlightenment of others is secondary for Schopenhauer. It
is the knowledge and imaginative extension of Platonic Ideas that constitutes
aesthetic genius, without which the most accomplished artist is a mere
craftsperson.11
Appetite and the will to life in art
Schopenhauer says surprisingly little about the criteria by which good and
bad artworks are to be judged. Part of the explanation for his reticence
undoubtedly has to do with the fact that he has built so much normative
content into the definition of art that for him the concept already excludes
what other theorists might regard as bad, unsuccessful or unworthy art.
Objects, however sensually pleasing, that do not meet the requirement of
expressing the will-suppressed intuitive reception of Platonic Ideas, do not
count as genuine artworks.
Still-life and historical paintings provide unexpected targets for
Schopenhauer's criticism. On the whole he admires these genres, except
when they represent objects that irresistibly arouse the appetite, and thereby
engage the phenomenal will to life. He castigates its most admired exem-
plars as instances of what he calls "the charming", and, despite appreciation
of the technical accomplishment of Dutch still lifes, dismisses them in
particular as anti-aesthetic when they realistically depict edible foodstuffs.
"I find in the province of art only two species of the charming,"
Schopenhauer remarks:
and both are unworthy of it. The one species, a very low one, is found
in the still life painting of the Dutch, when they err by depicting
170

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
edible objects. By their deceptive appearance these necessarily excite
the appetite, and this is just a stimulation of the will which puts
an end to any aesthetic contemplation of the object.
(WWR 1:207-8)
The difficulty is that many Dutch still-life masters are so adept at realis-
tically portraying delicious items, especially of prepared food, that the will
is unavoidably summoned to desire, thus adulterating the purely aesthetic
objective contemplation of art. Schopenhauer distinguishes between permis-
sible still-life renderings of fruit and flowers from aesthetically forbidden
portraits of gourmet table delicacies. "Painted fruit ... is admissible," he
writes, "for it exhibits itself as a further development of the flower, and as
a beautiful product of nature through form and color, without our being
positively forced to think of its edibility" (WWR 1: 208). However, he adds,
"unfortunately we often find, depicted with deceptive naturalness, prepared
and served-up dishes, oysters, herrings, crabs, bread and butter, beer, wine,
and so on, all of which is wholly objectionable" (WWR 1: 208).
Apparently, these paintings make Schopenhauer hungry. His will does not
rest quiet and permit him to experience the purely passive perception that
characterizes aesthetic genius. He raises analogous complaints about another
aspect of the will in an aesthetic context, for the charming in historical
paintings of nudes. "In historical painting and in sculpture," Schopenhauer
maintains, "the charming consists in nude figures, the position, semi-drapery,
and whole treatment of which are calculated to excite lustful feeling in the
beholder. Purely aesthetic contemplation is at once abolished, and the
purpose of art thus defeated" (WWR 1: 208). It is the same faux aesthetics
in both cases, deriving from a misguided effort to charm the viewer, by awak-
ening the will to carnal desire. "This mistake is wholly in keeping with what
was just censured when speaking of the Dutch", he argues.
In the case of all beauty and complete nakedness of form, the
ancients are almost always free from this fault, since the artist him-
self created them with a purely objective spirit filled with ideal
beauty, not in the spirit of subjective, base sensuality. The charming,
therefore, is everywhere to be avoided in art. 
(WWR 1: 208)
It is the base direction of desire that especially troubles Schopenhauer.
What are to be avoided are not merely the ripples of will that disturb the
calm of purely aesthetic contemplation, but desires directed toward eating
and sex in particular.12 Why else does he not complain that the exquisite still-
life painting of tulips in a vase might excite the will to want to sniff their
fragrance? Why, if that were made the basis of his reply, should olfactory
171

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
pleasure be less base than gustatory? Schopenhauer's language is instructive
here, because he projects a limit to what the will can reasonably be expected
to resist. Evidently, the will, at least for those few with aesthetic genius, can
remain disengaged during episodes of purely passive objective perception
in contemplating still-life paintings of flowers and fruit, no matter how
temptingly luscious and ripe. Display, however, before Schopenhauer's
aesthetic genius, a canvas featuring a Delft plate of smoked eels or oysters,
strawberries, sausages, a wedge of cheese and white wine in a green-stemmed
goblet with a faint chill haze and translucent beads of shimmering conden-
sation trickling down the side, and suddenly the will is necessarily excited
to appetite, the previously objective observer positively forced to think of
devouring these morsels. Similarly with respect to the portrayal of nudes in
historical paintings.
Schopenhauer already believes that aesthetic genius is the gift of the
precious few.13 Perhaps he is correct to hold that no one now, in the past,
or at any other time, is capable of contemplating a mouth-watering Dutch
still life or certain less than classically ideal nudes, without being moved by
the forces of will. Experience suggests that if you see enough of these one
after the other in a short period of time, then at least toward the end they
need have no such effect. Nevertheless, if aesthetes themselves rather than
genres are to blame, then the correct consequence is not that there is some-
thing aesthetically objectionable about realistic portrayals of edibles in art
or sensual nudes. Instead, Schopenhauer might conclude that the actual
number of true aesthetic geniuses in his terminology shrinks from a very few
to perhaps none at all.
In light of his remarks about the absolute compulsion of will in the
experience of Dutch still lifes and nudes, it seems possible to draw only two
unflattering hypotheses: (i) Schopenhauer regards himself as the final meas-
ure of aesthetic genius, and so elevates his own weakness of will in the
presence of artistic renderings of foods and nudes to the status of an abso-
lute limitation for all, blaming the genre itself rather than his own inability
to objectify aesthetic beauty beyond the mundane call to appetite; (ii)
Schopenhauer simply does not like Dutch still lifes of food or historical
paintings of nudes, and, not articulating precisely his dissatisfaction with
them, takes the occasion to berate them, despite glaring exceptions and
inconsistencies, by twisting his metaphysics of representation and the will
in such a way as implausibly to exclude them. On this interpretation,
Schopenhauer does not try to derive aesthetic conclusions from more
fundamental metaphysical categories, but tailors his metaphysics to fit largely
unexamined aesthetic prejudices.
As uncharitable as such an attribution may be, from what we know of
Schopenhauer's crotchety personality, at least as it has come down to us in
172

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
philosophical folklore, it would not be difficult nor far-fetched to interpret
his pronouncements against unclassical nudes and Dutch still lifes by either
supposition. In rejecting the charming in art, Schopenhauer considers still
lifes of food and historical paintings of nudes as his only examples, and
makes ad hoc exceptions and adjustments in unexpected ways for flowers,
fruit and classical nudes. This seems to provide nothing more than an inven-
tory of personal aesthetic likes and dislikes, and as such does not present the
philosophical basis for an aesthetic theory of objective perception bereft of
any appetite or strivings of the will to life.
Why must aesthetic value and the charming collide? Is there no irresist-
ible evocation of will in erotic dance or literature? Why are these not
addressed? Presumably prepared foods, as much as fruit and flowers, partake
of Platonic Ideas, which the artist might also receive in a moment of purely
objective individual-transcending perception, and render afterward in a life-
like representational painting. How does Schopenhauer know that this is not
what the Dutch still-life masters have tried to do? The impressive realism
of Dutch still lifes is especially disturbing to Schopenhauer. This too raises
the question whether his criticisms derive from more general aesthetic prin-
ciples, or merely record his cranky aesthetic preferences. A Cezanne or
Cubist still life might not meet with Schopenhauer's censure, since he seems
most strongly opposed to the combination of photoreal Dutch skill with their
sometime choice of the edible as subject matter. The same comparison could
be made with respect to Tiepolo's, Picasso's or Modigliani's nudes.
Technique and realistic finish alone cannot be the deciding factor, for then
how could we explain that Courbet's impressionistic Still Life with Apples
and a Pomegranate may recommend the fruit and pewter tankard to our
appetite equally if not better than even the most vivid colour photographs
of apples in grocery advertisements? Schopenhauer, it is clear, does not like
paintings of enticing nudes and delectable foodstuffs; but is there any system,
rhyme or reason to his rejections?
He has somewhat similar things to say about the misguided effort to
incorporate realistic imitations of the world as representation in music. Paint-
ing and music are placed in widely separated categories, as an application
of the thesis that music like the natural world itself is the immediate
objectification of thing-in-itself. There is nevertheless a link between his
remarks about Dutch still lifes of food and voluptuous nudes in historical
painting with cannon shots and marching timpani in military programme
music, which many agree in finding objectionable as a miscalculation on the
part of the artist to charm by imitation. Unfortunately, Schopenhauer's
rationale cannot be extrapolated to explain his denunciation of the charm-
ing in still lifes of comestibles and historical paintings of nudes. The
argument holds only with respect to music as the immediate objectification
173

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of Will in the world as representation, and has no direct implications for
other fine art media. Schopenhauer might be entitled logically to invoke his
metaphysics of the world as Will and representation to criticize the decision
to mimic the swishing sounds of a howling mountainside windstorm, or the
distant drum-rumbling of thunder. Nothing comparable, however, serves to
justify his objections to the charming in other arts that, unlike music, are not
supposed to be immediate objectifications of Will.
An obvious incongruity in Schopenhauer's rejection of Dutch still lifes of
food and historical paintings of nudes is that with equal justification he might
have drawn the opposite conclusion. He might have reasoned that these art
objects on the contrary are the most aesthetically praiseworthy and highly
recommended foci of contemplation for the person of true aesthetic genius.
The direct appeal to motivation of will in these artworks challenges aesthetic
genius to the most pristinely disinterested observation under the most trying
circumstances. The ordinary aesthete can no doubt objectively appreciate a
still life with nothing edible depicted in it without arousal of will, if it does not
especially tempt desire. The true test of aesthetic genius, by Schopenhauer's
criterion, should in part be the ability to restrain the will to life and preserve
purely objective contemplation in the face of the greatest temptations. Only
aesthetic genius, specially gifted with the aesthetic virtues Schopenhauer
repeatedly praises, could be expected to remain impassive on a hot day after
several hours without nourishment in the purely objective contemplation of
a Dutch still life of salted herrings and a foaming krug of ale.
Finally, it may be doubted whether it is possible to separate intuited
knowledge from will to life. How can the most accomplished aesthetic genius
perceive the world without "interference" by the empirical will? An act of
will is required even to keep the eyelids open. To attend to and later remem-
ber sufficiently what is observed to be able to represent it afterward in art,
to depict the Platonic Ideas grasped in experience of "purely" passive
objective perception of the world, presumably requires the will's interven-
tion. The basis for negative art criticism in Schopenhauer's theory is the con-
fusion of or failure to represent Platonic Ideas clearly and distinctly, together
with the antipathy of aesthetic experience and the charming. Ideas for
Schopenhauer are necessarily beautiful, so that the artist need only exhibit
them plainly and with bold definition, as in the best classical art, for their
intrinsic beauty to appear. An artwork, moreover, is supposed to enable the
art appreciator to enter into a will-suppressed state of contemplation similar
to that in which the work of aesthetic genius is inspired. There is to be a
temporary loss of self or individuality in experiencing as in producing good
or successful art. The primary obstacle to a lofty aesthetic experience occurs
when an artwork charms a viewer with representations that stir the will
through appetite or desire.
174

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
Schopenhauer undoubtedly glimpses something important about the
relation between perception and will in aesthetic appreciation, obstructed
by the distractions of appetite and desire. The distinction might neverthe-
less be better drawn between aesthetic value, on the one hand, and the
decidedly non-aesthetic value of an object or experience. The latter category
of factors can certainly interfere with the former, and not only in the case
of the derogatorily charming, although increasingly less so for those with
more refined aesthetic sensibilities. It clouds our appreciation of beauty in
nature to contemplate its commercial value or battlefield suitability, just as
it can sour the experience of a fine art exhibit to overhear the inevitable
museum boors chatting about whether a painting would be appropriate for
their living room decor. These detract from even a qualifiedly "pure"
aesthetic experience. Yet, in Schopenhauer's view, the will must not be
permitted to enter even in deliberate efforts to exclude non-aesthetic
elements any more than in ordinary manifestations of desire. What threat-
ens to charm, moreover, is not the only lure of the phenomenal will to life.14
The will can just as easily be coaxed into sullying a purely aesthetic experi-
ence by external inducements to fear, repulsion, scientific and philosophi-
cal curiosity, or the practical demands of memory and artistic appraisal or
production techniques. An objection of the sort Schopenhauer wants to
mount against certain types of artworks might therefore be more appropri-
ately addressed to the weaknesses of particular aesthetic perceivers than to
categories of artistic subject matter and styles.
Nietzsche's critique of Schopenhauer on the
ascetic-aesthetic transcendence of the will to life
The separation of aesthetic contemplation and desire leads Nietzsche in On
the Genealogy of Morality to speculate that Schopenhauer's theory of art and
the Will-representation dichotomy may have arisen from an ascetic attitude
to resist erotic desires. Like Schopenhauer, Nietzsche enquires philosophi-
cally into the relation between religion, ascetic ideals and aesthetic values.
In the Third Treatise of the Genealogy, Nietzsche asks: "What do ascetic
ideals mean?"15 He mentions Richard Wagner as a follower of Schopenhauer
who tries to exemplify Schopenhauerian ascetic ideals in his music. He
investigates the implications of a philosophical as opposed to religious
avowal of ascetic ideals, which he thinks must ultimately depend on under-
lying aesthetic values. He looks into the philosophical meaning of asceticism,
and suggests psychological motivations for the appreciation of fine art in
Schopenhauer stemming from his denial of the will to life.16
175

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The connection between ascetic and aesthetic values in Schopenhauer is
that both are offered as ways of attaining release from the inner turmoil of
will. Ascetic sainthood and aesthetic genius in different ways enable the adept
to overcome the strivings of the phenomenal will to life. Nietzsche criticizes
Schopenhauer for forging this connection between ascetic and aesthetic anti-
values. He regards Schopenhauer as dishonouring beauty and art by convert-
ing them into a channel of disinterested escape from the struggles of will.
He further objects to the subjectivity of aesthetic value that arises through
an overemphasis on the role of thinkers who experience beauty and the
sublime, because of what he regards as the pernicious influence of Kant on
Schopenhauer's aesthetics:
Schopenhauer used the Kantian formulation of the aesthetic
problem for his own purpose - although he most certainly did not
view it with Kantian eyes. Kant intended to honor art when, among
the predicates of the beautiful, he privileged and placed in the
foreground those that constitute the honor of knowledge: imperson-
ality and universal validity. Whether this was not on the whole a mis-
take cannot be dealt with here, I wish only to underscore that Kant,
like all philosophers, instead of envisaging the aesthetic problem
starting from the experiences of the artist (the one who creates),
thought about art and the beautiful from the viewpoint of the
"spectator" and thus, without it being noticed, got the "spectator"
himself into the concept "beautiful."17
The critique Nietzsche offers conforms predictably with his general moral
preference for action over passive principles in philosophy. He believes that
art like any other endeavour should say "yes" rather than "no" to life. He
objects to the Kantian and Schopenhauerian emphasis on those who expe-
rience art rather than on those who make artworks, on the passive viewing
of art rather than on active artistic creativity. He further criticizes the ascetic-
aestheticism or aesthetic-asceticism in Schopenhauer's philosophy of art
from the standpoint of its denial of the self and those aspects of the will to
power associated with sexual desire that are frequently found in art. He calls
attention to passages in Schopenhauer where the latter advocates the asexu-
ality of genuine aesthetic experience as a remedy for the perturbations of
mind that occur through stirrings of erotic will:
There are few things about which Schopenhauer speaks so certainly
as about the effect of aesthetic contemplation: he says of it that it
counteracts precisely sexual "interestedness," much like lupulin and
camphor, that is; he never grew tired of glorifying this breaking free
176

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
from the "will" as the greatest merit and use of the aesthetic condi-
tion. Indeed, one might be tempted to ask whether his basic concep-
tion of "will and representation," the thought that there can be a
redemption from the "will" only through "representation," did not
originate from a generalization of that sexual experience. (... one
must never ignore the fact that it is the conception of a twenty-six-
year-old young man; so that it participates not only in that which
is specific to Schopenhauer but also in that which is specific to that
that season of life.)18
We are expected to know that lupulin and camphor are substances reputed
to have the property of suppressing sexual desire. Schopenhauer does not
try to conceal this aspect of his theory of art, but, according to Nietzsche,
proudly asserts that aesthetic contemplation has the function of inhibiting
the stirrings of sexual interest, a kind of anti-aphrodisiac.
Nietzsche mentions Schopenhauer's youthful age when he first developed
the principles of his philosophy. He hints that Schopenhauer in his early years
is likely to have been especially prone to sexual inclinations, and may have
sought to avoid such distractions and the sense of shame associated with
them through aesthetic escapism. Schopenhauer, we know, regards involve-
ment in the conflicts of empirical will as a torment and source of perpetual
conflict, in which the attainment of one desire is soon satiated and then
surpassed by greater desires. Nietzsche cites those parts of The World as Will
and Representation in which Schopenhauer praises aesthetic experience as
a momentary suppression of the will. Schopenhauer extols the virtues of art
in releasing us from the lower desires of will, speaking in colourful mytho-
logical images:
Let us hear, for example, one of the most explicit of the countless
passages he wrote in honor of the aesthetic condition (World as Will
and Representation I, 231), let us hear the tone, the suffering, the
happiness, the gratitude with which such words were spoken. "This
is the painless condition that Epicurus praised as the highest good and
as the condition of the gods; we are, for that moment, freed from the
base drive of the will, we celebrate the Sabbath of the prison-house
work of willing, the wheel of Ixion stands still" ... What vehemence
of words! What images of torture and of prolonged satiety! What an
almost pathological temporal juxtaposition of "that moment" and
the usual "wheel of Ixion," the "prison-house work of willing," the
"base drive of the will"! But supposing that Schopenhauer were right
a hundred times over for himself, what would this have contributed
to our insight into the essence of the beautiful?19
177

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
It may appear strange to think of art as somehow antithetical to erotic
interests. The two are often directly related in much of sculpture, painting,
poetry, literature and even music. When Schopenhauer addresses these
issues, he makes an exception for historical paintings of nudes and still-life
paintings of food and drink, which he says are anti-aesthetic precisely
because they arouse the carnal appetites. This may seem to be an arbitrary
distinction in Schopenhauer, and to that extent it supports Nietzsche's
interpretation of Schopenhauer's aesthetics as an attempt to advance a view
of beauty that is meant to repress rather than excite and gratify erotic
inclinations. Nietzsche renounces Schopenhauer's aesthetic theory because
of its ascetic dimensions as yet another indication of Schopenhauer's deny-
ing the will to life or will to power, and hence as denying the self by saying
"no" to life.
Schopenhauer's influence on aesthetics and the arts
The Schopenhauerians of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, those
through whom Schopenhauer's thought changed not only the theory but the
practice of fine art, were almost cultish in their aesthetic worship of Will,
and in their attitudes, imbibed from The World as Will and Representation,
toward death and the suffering and salvation of artists in the pangs of
aesthetic creativity. The romantic conception of aesthetic genius, the true
artist as a figure of special suffering, misunderstood by inferior minds in the
most painful struggles to complete and express Platonic Ideas, is an endur-
ing legacy of Schopenhauer's thinking about art and the difficulties of work-
ing toward artistic perfection.
Through its diffusion into the history of post-nineteenth-century art,
especially in idealism, symbolism, romanticism and certain phases of natu-
ralism and gothic and neoclassical revivals, Schopenhauer's aesthetics
provides the philosophical subtext for major artistic movements, as it does
for particular psychological and philosophical developments. It is conse-
quently no exaggeration to say that Schopenhauer's aesthetics is central to
understanding the history of modern and contemporary art and philosophy
of art. Schopenhauer discovers something immensely revealing about the
relation between perception and will in aesthetic appreciation, and about
the distractions of appetite and desire in the contemplation of beauty and
the sublime. The distinction might be drawn without the trappings of
Schopenhauer's metaphysics of the world as Will and representation in terms
of aesthetic and extra-aesthetic or even anti-aesthetic aspects of experience.
Schopenhauer recognizes that there is something special about music that
178

ART AND AESTHETICS OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME
makes it unique among the arts, even if he has not quite understood precisely
what it is that makes music different. Many theorists share his intuition that
music belongs in a special category, that it is an art more of time than space,
directly in tune with the emotions, and with a life of its own, unlike the solid
stationary plastic arts of painting, sculpture, architecture, or even (printed)
poetry and literature. To have intuited this distinction and offered a powerful
explanation of the nature of music in terms of the metaphysics of Will and
representation is an impressive achievement, worthy of serious reflection,
and suggestive of other approaches to the problems of music to be explored
independently of Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism.
If we want to appreciate a great work of art, Schopenhauer may be on
the right track to maintain that we must lose ourselves in the experience. We
may understand an art object better by distancing ourselves at least for a few
precious moments from petty business and social and personal concerns.
Such stirrings of will cloud our appreciation of beauty in art, just as it
obscures our experience of nature to consider a majestic rocky shoreline's
commercial value. The clamouring of the will to life can detract us from the
most rewarding aesthetic experience, even for those with more refined or
better disciplined aesthetic sensibilities. To have a richly satisfying aesthetic
experience, Schopenhauer seems justified in demanding that we allow
nothing but the artist's presentation of natural forms to occupy our full
attention. Equally, if we want to create or encourage great art, Schopenhauer,
with qualifications, is undoubtedly right again that we must receive ideas (if
not the Platonic Ideas), modify them to make them our own through imagi-
nation and master the practical artistic techniques whereby our thought in
its most essential forms can be communicated to others in artistic produc-
tion. Schopenhauer's model of aesthetic creativity synthesizes the distinc-
tion between thing-in-itself or the world as Will and as representation in the
veil of Maya, and the Platonic Ideas as intuitively accessible in phenomenal
experience of the world as representation. The theory advances insightful
interpretations about the distinction between beauty and the sublime,
defends criteria for good and great art, while explaining the status of the
aesthetic genius and the relation of aesthetic genius to the community at
large, along with the relief from suffering that results from the will to life
and everyday cares of the world that is afforded by the highest aesthetic
enjoyment of beauty and the sublime in nature and art.20
179

CHAPTER SIX
Transcendental freedom of Will
As the will itself is not phenomenon, not representation or object,
but thing-in-itself, it is also not subordinate to the principle of
sufficient reason, the form of all object. Thus it is not determined
as consequent by a reason or concept or ground, and so it knows
no necessity; in other words, it is free. The concept of freedom is
therefore really a negative one, since its content is merely the denial
of necessity, in other words, the denial of the relation of consequent
to its ground according to the principle of sufficient reason ...
Everything as phenomenon, as object, is absolutely necessary; in
itself \t is will, and this is perfectly free to all eternity.
(WWR 1:287)
World and individual
The individual thinking subject, like the world as a whole, has both an inner
and outer aspect. There is a parallelism in Schopenhauer's philosophy
between, on the grand scale, the world as representation and thing-in-itself
as Will, and, on the personal scale, the individual's body and phenomenal
will to life. The will to life also has a dual nature. It consists primarily of
psychological episodes occurring in real space and time, as an overlay on a
transcendent core of unmotivated, uncaused, objectless and hence subject-
less, unindividuated and inexplicable pure willing. Pure willing is identical
in each willing subject with Will as the one and only thing-in-itself, that,
unlike the body and mind, is indestructible and immortal.
The isomorphism of world and individual distinguishes in each case that
which is perceptually intuited from its hidden inner nature. Schopenhauer
considers both representations and that which is represented by the
180

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
individual representing subject as objectifications of thing-in-itself. The dual
knowledge of body is extended first by analogy, and then as the literal truth
about the relation between world at large as representation and as thing-in-
itself in Schopenhauer's arguments for identifying thing-in-itself as Will.
Schopenhauer maintains on the basis of the microcosm-macrocosm paral-
lelism between the individual body and will to life and the world as repre-
sentation and Will that individual willing subjects and the world at large each
have a distinctive character.
The fact that the world considered as a whole as well as each human being
has character is owing to the fact that human beings exemplify the highest
grade of the Will's objectification, due to their extraordinarily high degree
of intratypical individuality. The differences between one human being and
another are manifest in their unique personalities and varieties of ways of
thinking and acting. Character in turn is reflected in external appearances,
in the body and behaviour of persons generally, but more prominently in
their physignomies, in the individuality of each subject's face, as different
and distinctive as their signatures or fingerprints. It is this notion of
individual character that provides the basis for Schopenhauer's metaphys-
ics of freedom and morality. Ethics for Schopenhauer begins with the fact
that each human agent has an unalterable underlying character that is
expressed in body and behaviour over the course of a person's lifetime, and
that constitutes the source of moral responsibility.1
Dependence of morality on freedom
Although the main lines of Schopenhauer's doctrine of freedom of the will
and ethical philosophy are already contained in The World as Will and
Representation^ he develops these ideas at greater length in two long essays
written in 1838 and 1840. The essays were submitted for competitions
sponsored, respectively, by the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and
Royal Danish Society of Scientific Studies. Schopenhauer's essay, On the
Freedom of the Will, was successful in its bid for the Norwegian prize, which
was awarded in 1839. He must have felt encouraged by this long-desired sign
of public acceptance for his ideas, and thereafter submitted On the Basis of
Morality to the Danish competition. The essay on ethics, remarkably, was
rejected in 1840, even though it was the only essay received.
Annoyed, but undeterred as usual by lack of popular appreciation, and
bolstered by having won the Norwegian prize, Schopenhauer published the
two essays together in a single volume in 1841, titled The Two Fundamental
Problems of Ethics. The fact that he found it appropriate to present these two
181

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
texts within the covers of a single book justifies our also treating them
together in two successive chapters. The topics are related intimately in
Schopenhauer's thought, as in Kant's very different account of the meta-
physical foundations of freedom and morality. It is only if we are in some
sense free, as Kant and Schopenhauer maintain, in agreement also with many
other thinkers in the history of philosophy, that the question of how we ought
to behave, what we should and should not do, can be regarded as intelligible.
Without freedom in some pertinent sense, we are no different than the rest
of nature, to which we do not ordinarily ascribe moral responsibility nor
stand in ethical judgement toward.
Schopenhauer builds his theory of freedom and morality on the founda-
tions of an underlying epistemology of the principle of sufficient reason,
metaphysics of identity in the principium individuationis, and distinction be-
tween thing-in-itself or world as Will and representation. He prepares the
ground for an ethical superstructure by offering an account of the will to life
and individual character. He portrays the character of the world as the Will's
objectification, the hungry Will as thing-in-itself, sorrowfully objectified in
the world as representation, whose internal self-conflict he believes entails
an extreme moral pessimism. Schopenhauer is well-positioned against the
background of his transcendental idealism to offer a momentous series of
insights about the concept of free will and the morality of action, moral judge-
ment and behaviour toward oneself and in social interaction with others, and
the implementation of the concept of justice under the law. Schopenhauer's
moral philosophy, like the metaphysics and epistemology on which it rests,
testifies to the influence of Plato, Kant and the Asian religious traditions he
admires. At the same time, it is highly original in its efforts to understand
human nature from the unique standpoint afforded by his distinction
between the world as Will and representation. The independence of
Schopenhauer's ethics from his predecessors is indicated especially by his
criticisms of Kant's moral philosophy.2
The suffering that characterizes all aspects of human life governed by
the will to life, which is to say all aspects of human life except for those
briefly available to the ascetic saint and aesthetic genius as islands of
salvation, determines Schopenhauer's outlook on every aspect of moral
value. The inevitable suffering experienced by willing subjects, in its
metaphysical as well as psychological ramifications, colours Schopen-
hauer's conclusions concerning the concept of moral obligation, moral
attitudes, decision-making in ethics, the nature of moral wrong, and of
justice and the good. He proposes to explain all facets of morality from the
standpoint of intuited feelings of compassion. His ethics can thus be
regarded as a secular theoretization of the Buddha's pronouncement that
we are to act from compassion for all living things, transposed in
182

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
Schopenhauer's thought from a religious sentiment into a comprehensive
abstract moral principle.
The moral motivation of all action is purely egoistic. Whatever is done that
can be rationally explained is intended for the individual agent's personal
benefit, even if only subconsciously. This is appropriate and possibly unavoid-
able in all consistency for Schopenhauer, given his commitment to the deeper
nature of thing-in-itself as Will and its objectifications in the world as repre-
sentation. For it is as objectifications of thing-in-itself that all individual
psychologies are set at opposition competitively against one another in all
their activities. The world as Will dictates that its objectifications must look
out for their own interests. They must be naturally moved in whatever they
do, however they may try to resist the urge in observance of culturally
approved values, by whatever is perceived egoistically as contributing to their
individual benefit. Schopenhauer does not judge the self-interest that drives
action as necessarily morally good or bad. On the contrary, through his
metaphysics of thing-in-itself and its hidden inner character as the insatiably
hungry Will, Schopenhauer does not imagine that things could possibly be
otherwise. There is no choice but for each person to be motivated by egoistic
considerations. This is not to say, however, that all actions are motivated or
rationally explainable. Morally praiseworthy actions, as we shall see, consti-
tute an important exception.
Since there are many distinct objectifications of thing-in-itself as Will,
including many different individual thinking subjects, all of whom are
motivated egoistically by self-love to attain whatever they can for them-
selves, Schopenhauer believes that moral wrong occurs when one agent
infringes upon another's will to life. Moral wrong, as such, is a positive
thing, not as a matter of moral value, but logically or metaphysically. It is
the positive doing of something that we ought not to do. What makes it
wrong is that, in killing or stealing, for example, we limit the natural
expansion of another subject's will to life for the sake of our own. We recall
that will to life is the phenomenal psychological objectification of the
common core of pure willing, the Will that underlies each willing subject.
It follows that for Schopenhauer moral right and ethical good, from a logi-
cal or metaphysical rather than valuational standpoint, can only be some-
thing negative. Moral right is the negation of moral wrong, which is itself
the gratification of one individual's will to life at the expense of that of
another. The suffering in the phenomenal world that comes about through
the imposition of one will to life on another as the hungry Will feeds on
itself is in turn an occasion for compassion. Through egoistic concern for
our own suffering, we can, if we are morally enlightened, and we should,
as an implication of the only moral principles Schopenhauer thinks are
capable of metaphysical justification, show compassion for the sufferings of
183

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
others by acting mercifully to whatever extent we can to relieve their
distress.
The effect, especially when seen in contrast with Kant's elaborate moral
philosophy, produces a highly simplified moral code. Schopenhauer argues,
without the heavy trappings of philosophical dogma, that we are to avoid
harming others and to try within the limits of our abilities to help them. The
beauty of the principle is its straightforward and immediately understand-
able formulation. The principle can be taught to the youngest children
capable of moral guidance, and yet offers a useful standard for persons at
any stage of life concerned with questions about what it is morally right or
wrong to do. The principle is also very much in keeping with Schopenhauer's
epistemic distinction between intuitive and abstract knowledge. One of the
examples by which he illustrates the distinction when he first introduces it
is that of the person who through theoretical pedantry does not simply know
what is right or wrong, as everyone should, but finds it necessary to consult
a system of rules or exact set of laws for conduct. Instead of being able to
proceed intuitively with an immediate grasp of the requirements of moral-
ity, the pedant needs to look up the answer provided by a theory. Here
Schopenhauer is clearly casting barbs at Kant's categorical imperative, as well
as targeting all efforts to replace a sound intuitive understanding of moral
right and wrong with explicit rules for behaviour that try to forecast any
eventuality and prescribe a particular behaviour or restraint of behaviour in
the form of an explicit code.
We must all know intuitively what it is morally right and wrong to do.
The task for a philosophical moral theory is to abstract from our intuitive
knowledge the underlying theoretical principles, as Schopenhauer says in all
such cases, for convenience in communication and application. What a moral
philosophy can properly try to do is to work out a concise theoretical
expression of the intuited knowledge embodied in a particular area of human
activity, whether in ethics, music composition or logical reasoning skills.
Schopenhauer seems to think that in Western philosophy there has occurred
a corruption and over-intellectualization of the natural intuition guiding
moral behaviour. The implicit morality is represented by a recognition that
life is suffering and that we ought to try to avoid, prevent and alleviate the
sufferings of others to whatever extent possible. Asian ethical traditions in
philosophical religion have remained more faithfully in touch with these
basic truths, and at the same time have evinced a crude grasp of the distinc-
tion between reality and the world of appearance, mythologized as the veil
of Maya. Schopenhauer sees it as part of his mission, while still addressing
a scientific philosophical audience, to restore these intuitive attitudes toward
ethical conduct in the form of the modest requirements of a correct moral
philosophy.
184

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
The first requirement in approaching what Schopenhauer calls the two
basic problems of moral philosophy is to understand the nature of human
freedom as a prerequisite to responsible action. Schopenhauer denies that
there is any such thing as freedom in the way it is usually conceived, and in
this he again stands at least partially in agreement with Kant. He rejects
Kant's theory of freedom as moral autonomy in the course of refuting the
rationalistic scaffolding of Kant's ethics, and in particular Kant's doctrine
of the categorical imperative. It is for this reason that Schopenhauer, both
in "Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy", the Appendix to The World as Will
and Representation^ and in The Two Fundamenetal Problems of'Ethics, deals
first with the metaphysics and moral implications of the concept of human
free will, and only thereafter turns to problems of moral reasoning, moral
values and the elaboration of a philosophically adequate moral philosophy.
Schopenhauer's analysis of freedom
We should expect that Schopenhauer is especially well placed to investigate
the problem of free will. It is in his thought especially that willing and thing-
in-itself as Will are most prominently thematized among the vital concerns
of philosophy. He acknowledges the essential connection between freedom
and thing-in-itself in Kant's critical idealism as providing the springboard
to his own transcendental idealism. He maintains that the metaphysics of
freedom, and the concept of freedom or lack thereof of willing moral agents,
depend on how thing-in-itself is understood:
The solution of the third antinomy [freedom and a special "causal-
ity of freedom" is required to explain some of the appearances of
nature and there is no causal freedom from the laws of nature],
whose subject was the Idea of freedom, merits special consideration,
in so far as for us it is very remarkable that Kant is obliged precisely
here, in connexion with the Idea of freedom, to speak in greater
detail about the thing-in-itself, hitherto seen only in the background.
This is very easy for us to understand after we have recognized the
thing-in-itself as the will. In general, this is the point where Kant's
philosophy leads to mine, or mine springs from his as its parent
stem. 
(WWR 1:501)
He takes the opportunity again to portray Kant as having only dimly
grasped what is better understood from the standpoint of a more properly
conceived distinction between the world as Will and representation, and in
185

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
particular from the vantage of an identification of thing-in-itself as Will. The
question of human freedom for Schopenhauer is thus tightly bound up in
interesting ways with his metaphysics of Will.
The clue to Kant's perceptive but still clouded understanding of free will
is the fact that Kant, perhaps without himself fully understanding why, finds
it necessary to discuss thing-in-itself immediately upon presentation of the
Third Antinomy, affirming and denying the existence of human freedom in
different senses and for different reasons.3 What Schopenhauer proposes to
do is to make these conceptual connections clear, to draw sharper distinc-
tions on the basis of his discovery that thing-in-itself is Will, and from this
platform to explain the senses of free will that are available and unavailable
to human moral agents. The problem of free will in its relation to thing-in-
itself is regarded as so important to Schopenhauer that he mentions it in this
context from opposite perspectives as the Kantian point of departure for the
development of his own philosophy.
For two reasons, there can be no meaningful human freedom in
Schopenhauer's system. First, the actions undertaken by moral agents, like
all events in the phenomenal world, are governed by the fourfold root of
the principle of sufficient reason, and in particular by causal laws. In so far
as freedom of will is opposed to physical determinism, there can be no
possibility in Schopenhauer's philosophy for the decisions and actions of
human agents to be free in the sense of being contracausally undetermined.
Secondly, Schopenhauer regards the character of each willing subject as an
individual essence, comparable to thing-in-itself construed as Will, the
hidden inner nature of reality that transcends the world as representation.
Schopenhauer believes that just as the character of the world, the Will as
thing-in-itself in perpetual self-conflict, can never be changed or altered in
any way, so by analogy the character of each person is unalterable, incapa-
ble of change. Thus, a thief or a murderer is necessarily a thief or a murderer
for all his or her life, and cannot change from being such by any act of will
or effort at reform.4 To an extent, this conclusion of Schopenhauer's echoes
Socrates' argument in Plato's dialogue the Meno. There Socrates is asked
whether virtue can be taught or is bestowed by nature, or acquired in some
other way. Socrates reasons that virtue cannot be taught, since there are no
teachers who can competently train others to be virtuous as though they were
imparting a technical skill. He further argues that virtue is not the product
of nature, which, if it were, could be discerned among infants to distinguish
between those who are destined later to be virtuous and those who will later
become vicious. He suggests at the very end of Plato's dialogue that virtue
must therefore be a gift of the gods (BM: 187-8).5
Schopenhauer does not suppose that moral character has a divine origin.
At most, he sometimes interprets references to God or the gods as a metaphor
186

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
for the transcendence of thing-in-itself as mind-independent reality. He nev-
ertheless agrees with Socrates that virtue cannot be taught, and more particu-
larly that it cannot be altered within an individual's character by training or
resolve leading either to improvement or corruption. We cannot change what
we are, just as the character of thing-in-itself, the hungry Will in constant
struggle and strife, cannot change. The unalterability of the character of the
willing subject deprives the moral agent of a certain type of freedom: the
freedom to change. If Schopenhauer is right, then we can never become some-
thing different, change from being virtuous to vicious, or the reverse, or
reform ourselves through force of will and dedication of effort to alter the
kinds of people we are. We can never remake ourselves morally after another
image of what we would rather become, to exert control over the course of
our lives by modifying the deepest aspects of our personalities from within.
This, Schopenhauer maintains, is impossible, thereby denying the possibility
of another morally relevant type of freedom.
We can neither shape our destinies by deliberately transforming our
characters, which are fixed and unchangeable, nor defy the rigid nomic
necessity of cause and effect by which our bodies, including our brains and
all our actions, are determinately ruled by the laws of causality. What, then,
if anything, remains of the sense of human freedom? Is it real or illusory? If
free will is only illusory, what implications does it have for moral responsi-
bility, the meaning of moral judgement, and moral value? The first problem
Schopenhauer faces in the Essay on the Freedom of the Will is to explicate a
concept of freedom that is compatible with his commitment to causal
determinism and the fixed nature of human character. As he also says of the
concept of moral right, freedom is something essentially negative. He
distinguishes between three broad categories of physical, intellectual and
moral freedom in everyday and philosophical thought and discourse, argu-
ing that all three are negative concepts involving the absence of obstruction
or restraint. We are physically free when we are not physically restrained
from doing what we want to do, and similarly with respect to intellectual
and moral freedom.
Schopenhauer refers to the physical concept of freedom as the "popular"
sense. With great sensitivity to the term's occurrence in many different
contexts, he lists a large number of ordinary ways in which the expressions
"free" and "freedom" are ascribed even to non-living things when their
physical motion is not physically inhibited. He extends the concept of free-
dom in a morally extraneous sense to animals and human beings when they
act wilfully. We are free in what Schopenhauer calls the superficial sense
when we are not physically prevented from doing what we choose to do. If
we consider slavery as the opposite of freedom in the political meaning of
the word, including the physical restraints by which a slave's freedom to do
187

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
as he or she wills are sometimes prevented, by shackles, locks and keys, then
Schopenhauer is clearly right in classifying political freedom as a type of
physical freedom (FW: 4).
Proceeding from the popular sense of freedom, Schopenhauer categorizes
intellectual and moral freedom as philosophical subtypes. He defers discus-
sion of intellectual freedom to the end of the essay, to the "Appendix,
Supplementing the First Section", where he interprets intellect as the
"medium" of moral motivation. Intellectual freedom enables a willing sub-
ject to entertain reasons for acting, and to engage in practical inference by
connecting together means with ends. It is the forum where we evaluate ends
in terms of our larger purposes and values, making reference to what it is
rational and practically feasible to do. Intellectual freedom obtains when we
are not prevented from exercising normal abilities to reason about what to
do and how to do it. In keeping with the theory of freedom as a negative
concept, the absence of obstruction or restraint, Schopenhauer provides an
idea of the kinds of restraints that might otherwise inhibit the intellect's free
exercise. "The intellectual freedom is suspended", he writes:
either through the permanent or temporary derangement of the
medium of motives, the faculty of cognition, or by a faulty appre-
hension of motives which is caused by external circumstances in the
particular case. The former is the case in madness, delirium, parox-
ysm, and heavy drowsiness; the latter occurs when a decisive but
innocent mistake has been made ... when instead of medicine
poison is administered, or a servant entering at night is mistaken for
a burglar and shot, and so on. 
(FW: 89)
The preliminary discussion and distinction of these irrelevant senses of
freedom clears the ground for a topic that more properly interests Schopen-
hauer in the analysis of moral freedom. Schopenhauer understands moral
freedom in what he takes to be the sense of the term intended by the
Norwegian Society essay competition. The topic, originally formulated in
Latin, is contained in the question, "Can the freedom of the human will be
demonstrated from self-consciousness?" (FW: 3). He answers, as we should
now be able to predict from what we know about his transcendental idealism,
that free will in the moral sense of freedom cannot be demonstrated from self-
consciousness. His reasons are instructive for the further light they shed on
his metaphysics and epistemology, and in grounding his theory of ethics.
Moral free will, for Schopenhauer, is related to, but metaphysically
different from, physical freedom. The main confusion with which Schopen-
hauer charges popular thinking about the nature of freedom is its assumption
that we are free provided that we can do what we want, whatever it is we may
188

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
will to do. Schopenhauer has already defined the concept of physical freedom
in such a way as to distinguish it from moral freedom. The exact manner in
which the two are sometimes jumbled together is worth disentangling because
of the prevalence of misinterpretations.
Suppose that there is no obvious compulsion driving a person to act in a
certain way. Schopenhauer eliminates from his thought experiment any
factors that would prevent or force the agent to do or refrain from doing
something. If we try to answer the problem of free will by appealing to self-
consciousness, we can only superficially approach the question of whether
we have free will by consulting our wishes and desires. We examine our
phenomenal will and acts of willing, which Schopenhauer identifies with the
will to life, whereupon we may conclude that our will is free provided that
we can do whatever we want. Schopenhauer insists that we need to look
beyond the question of whether or not we can do what we want to the
further and deeper question of whether we have the freedom to will what
we want, or whether the will itself is subject to such predeterminations that
what might otherwise pass as acts of free will are in fact predetermined.
He pinpoints the error in conventional efforts to address the metaphysical
problem of free will by addressing the will and asking whether or not it can
do what it wants. He answers the essay question in the negative for an
obvious reason. Any such effort to solve the free will problem from
Schopenhauer's perspective merely forces the issue back to what he has
already distinguished as the very different concept of physical as opposed
to moral freedom. He continues, in the most frequently cited and enthusi-
astically admired passage in the essay:
As a result of the empirical concept of freedom we have: "I am free
if I can do what I will" and the freedom is already decided by this
"what I will." But now since we are asking about the freedom of
willing itself, this question should accordingly be expressed as
follows: "Can you also will what you will?" This appears as if the
willing depended on yet another willing lying behind it. And sup-
posing that this question were answered in the affirmative, there
would soon arise the second question: "Can you also will what you
will to will?" and thus it would be pushed back to infinity, since we
would always think of one willing as being dependent on a previ-
ous or deeper willing, and thus in vain endeavor to arrive ultimately
at a willing that we were bound to conceive and accept as being
dependent on absolutely nothing. 
(FW: 6)
The regress that Schopenhauer projects begins with efforts to understand
free will as being able to do what one wills. It gains momentum when we
189

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
ask about the freedom or unfreedom of what it is we will. If the principle
of sufficient reason is true, then anything we offer as a reason for anything
else in turn must have a sufficient reason why it is, and so on, indefinitely.
The same is true for psychological phenomena such as an act of willing as
for the movements of the planets and stars. All are equally subject to deter-
ministic laws of causality. The mere fact that we find ourselves engaged in
an endless regress of asking whether we are free to will what we will in
willing anything at all indicates that we are asking the wrong kinds of ques-
tions and looking in the wrong places for answers. The mistake, as
Schopenhauer diagnoses the problem, is in confining attention exclusively
to the "empirical" concept of freedom. Rejecting the entire issue of empiri-
cal freedom paves the way for Schopenhauer's deeper transcendental inves-
tigation of freedom, in which he brings the analysis of free will back around
to the metaphysics of thing-in-itself. In this way, he draws together two
fundamental metaphysical problems that he remarks are only implicitly
interrelated in Kant's examination of the Third Antinomy.6
The enquiry leads Schopenhauer away from the inadequacies of the
empirical concept of free will. He remains firmly within the treatment of
freedom as something negative, as the absence of necessity in acts of willing.
"The original, empirical concept of freedom, a concept drawn from doing,
thus refuses to enter into a direct connection with that of willing", he
comments.
Therefore to be able to apply to the will the concept of freedom, one
had to modify it by grasping it in a more abstract way. This was done
by conceiving through the concept of freedom only the absence of
all necessity in general. Here the concept retains the negative char-
acter which I had assigned to it at the very beginning. 
(FW: 6)
Pursuing the investigation in this framework, Schopenhauer is led to the
problem of understanding the nature of necessity. As one approach is
rejected, making the remaining alternatives stand out more clearly, he is
obliged to look more carefully into what is meant by necessity and the
conditions of its application to willing.
Schopenhauer does not interpret necessity modally as the negation of
impossibility, but epistemically, in terms of the principle of sufficient reason.
Absence of necessity in Schopenhauer's language means that every aspect of
the will does not fall under the fourfold root. There are, in other words,
truths about willing that cannot be explained. Explanation fails in such cases
not merely for practical reasons, but because the nature of will is such that
there exists no possible explanation of all its properties. "We therefore ask
what is meant by necessary", Schopenhauer continues:
190

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
The usual explanation that "necessary is that the opposite of which
is impossible, or which cannot be otherwise," is merely verbal, a
paraphrase of the concept which does not increase our insight. But
as the real definition I give the following: necessary is that which
follows from a given sufficient ground. 
(FW: 6)
The will is free only in so far as it is not subject to necessity, where neces-
sity is interpreted as lawlike explanatory governance under the principle of
sufficient reason. As individual willing subjects, we are free in that there is
something about our willing that in principle cannot be explained. We know
that for Schopenhauer many aspects of phenomenal willing can be explained
in terms of logic, mathematics, causation and motivation. There are reasons
why we will as we do and why we will to do specific things. A chain of in-
ferences accounts motivationally for all acts of willing, just as there are causal
explanations for all aspects of the phenomenal will in behavioural psychol-
ogy and neurophysiology.
On the empirical side of willing, there is no moral freedom in Schopen-
hauer's sense, because all phenomenal action and decision-making is
necessary. The phenomenal willing subject is under as much lawlike
explanatory necessity as any other aspect of the physical universe. It is
causally and in other ways explanatorily fully determined. Schopenhauer is
a materialist in his philosophy of mind. He identifies the representing mind
with the brain, itself a represented object. The fact that both phenomenal
mind and brain are objectifications of thing-in-itself enables Schopenhauer
to articulate a coherent account of the world as representation existing
idealistically in each representing subject's thoughts, and governed by the
necessity of causal and other types of explanation under the principle of
sufficient reason.
In the second edition of The World as Will and Representation^ referring
to idealism's burden to explain the creation of past time within the
occurrent thinking of a representing subject, Schopenhauer asks: "How
can he, a transient and ephemeral being hurrying past, to whom is
permitted only a fleeting glance into such a world, judge apodictically,
beforehand, and without experience, about this world, about the possibil-
ity of its existence and origin?" (WWR 2: 46). "The solution of this riddle,"
he says:
is that the man is concerned merely with his own representations,
which as such are the work of his brain; therefore their conformity
to law is merely the mode or manner in which the function of his
brain alone can be carried out, in other words, the form of his
representing. 
(WWR 2: 46-7)
191

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
If the representing subject were not also something representational, namely,
the phenomenal brain by which the representing subject perceives the world,
intuits the represented objects and empirical facts of the world, then the
world as representation would not be explainable, and would not be
subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason. The world would then be
removed from all possibility of explanation by virtue of existing idealistically
in the non-phenomenally representing subject's thoughts. "He therefore
judges only about his own brain-phenomenon" Schopenhauer concludes,
"and states what goes into its forms, time, space, and causality, and what does
not. He is then perfectly at home, and speaks apodictically" (WWR 2: 47).
Were it otherwise, the subject would be unable to attribute any certainty or
apodicticity to pronouncements about the logical, mathematical, causal or
motivational necessity of occurrences in the world as representation. The
judgements and their explanatory necessity are thinkable for Schopenhauer
only because they apply to the representing subject's own representations,
occurring within the representing subject's representational brain. The mind,
in Schopenhauer's metaphysics, in so far as it represents the world, is itself
a representation, a concrete physical objectification of thing-in-itself. This
is to say that the representing subject is nothing other than the brain. It
follows that whatever occurs in thought, by virtue of the mind's identity with
the representational brain, and including the world as representation in its
entirety, is subject to the same explanatory necessity as any represented
object.
We recall that Schopenhauer takes a dual-aspect approach to the nature
of the willing subject. The willing subject has not only a representing mind
= representational brain, but also a transcendent underlay of pure willing
or Will. As we think away the will's phenomenal trappings, the pure willing
at its core is entirely uncaused, unmotivated, objectless, subjectless and
therefore unindividualizable and unexplainable. Pure willing or Will as such
stands entirely outside the principles of individuation and sufficient reason,
satisfying the epistemic and metaphysical requirements of Kantian thing-in-
itself. The pure willing underlying individual will lacks individual personal-
ity, and for that reason is incapable of being destroyed along with the body.
The Will that transcends each willing subject, the centre of each thinker that
constitutes his or her impersonal immortality, by virtue of its independence
from the explanatory necessity of logical, mathematical, causal and motiva-
tional law, is metaphysically free in what Schopenhauer considers to be the
only morally relevant sense.
192

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
Free will and the contents of consciousness
To address fully the Norwegian Royal Society's essay topic, Schopenhauer
needs to say whether or not the moral freedom of the will can be "demon-
strated from self-consciousness". He answers the question in the negative,
holding that self-consciousness by itself is inadequate to establish the free-
dom of pure willing.
His reason has primarily to do with the exact definition of the concept
of self-consciousness. He claims that as a special source of empirical knowl-
edge it is insufficient to prove that there is transcendent freedom of the will.
The negative sense of free will that Schopenhauer describes is implied by the
unindividualizability and causal and other inexplicability of Will as thing-
in-itself. The freedom of will, transcending representation, cannot be
demonstrated from the phenomenal content of self-consciousness. Schopen-
hauer first distinguishes between self-consciousness as consciousness of the
self and consciousness of other things about which we may be conscious.
Consciousness of self or self-consciousness is only a minor part of conscious-
ness generally, the greater proportion of which is concerned with things other
than the self in the external world (FW: 9).
The expectation is defeated when Schopenhauer enquires into the knowl-
edge constituted by self-consciousness. He argues that self-consciousness
considered in and of itself as consciousness of the self and not of other things
is inherently incapable of establishing the necessary relation between the will
and things outside itself. It is incompetent, consequently, to judge whether or
not the will is free of the necessity of lawlike explanation, for its discoveries
depend entirely on the applicability of the principle of sufficient reason. Self-
consciousness as consciousness of the self takes only the phenomenal, empiri-
cal half of the nature of will into account. Hence, self-consciousness cannot
possibly render knowledge of the transcendent aspect of will that
Schopenhauer considers essential in proving its freedom (FW: 19).
What is needed, in addition to the data of self-consciousness, according
to Schopenhauer, is a form of Kantian transcendental reasoning. He
describes what is needed to establish the freedom of will as pure understand-
ing for the faculty of reason:
Now the question of the Royal Society would really be answered,
and in fact in the negative, by the discussion contained in this
section, although only in the main, since this exposition of the state
of affairs in self-consciousness will be rendered even more complete
by what follows ... Thus if we now turn with our question to that
authority to which, as the only competent one, we were previously
referred, namely to the pure understanding, to the faculty of reason
193

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
reflecting on the latter's data, and to experience which results from
both, and if their decision proved to be that a liberum arbitrium in
general did not exist, but that human conduct, like everything else
in nature, in every given case ensued as a necessarily occurring effect,
then this would give us the assurance that in immediate self-
consciousness there could not possibly be found data from which the
liberum arbitrium we are inquiring about could be established.
(FW: 21)
We might wonder whether the Norwegian Royal Society had ever imag-
ined that reason would not also be involved in proceeding from the data of
self-consciousness to an inference in support of free will. For Schopenhauer
to conclude that self-consciousness as consciousness of the self in and of itself
cannot establish the freedom of the will because reason is also required does
not at first seem to be a relevant, let alone exciting or original, reply to the
essay question.
Schopenhauer misstates the force of his solution in two ways. It is not
merely reason or pure understanding in addition to the empirical data of self-
consciousness that is required in order to determine that the will is free. It
is Kantian transcendental reasoning in particular by which the Will as thing-
in-itself can be intuited as beyond the scope of the principle of sufficient
reason, and hence of explanatory necessity. The limitation of self-conscious-
ness that prevents it from being able to demonstrate that the will is free is
not merely its empirical status. It is the fact that by itself self-consciousness,
as Schopenhauer defines the concept, provides data only of the self, and not
of the knowledge of its relation to other things. Yet it is only knowledge of
how self-consciousness relates to pure willing or Will as thing-in-itself that
can prove the freedom of the will in the negative sense of being non-
subservient to the necessity of explanatory law.
In the last section of his Essay on the Freedom of the Will, Schopenhauer
presents his "Conclusion and Higher View", indicating that:
the negative reply to the question set by the Royal Society, that was
established directly and actually, and hence a posteriori, above with
the investigation of self-consciousness, is now also established indi-
rectly and a priori. For that which does not exist at all cannot have
in self-consciousness data from which it could be demonstrated.
(FW: 81)
Here he provides another way of describing the limits of self-consciousness
in trying to prove the freedom of the will. He argues that the freedom of the
phenomenal will as opposed to Will as thing-in-itself cannot be demonstrated
194

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
from the data of self-consciousness or any other empirical source, with or
without the assistance of inference. The reason is simple, because there is no
such thing, no freedom of the phenomenal will, to be proved. The phenom-
enal will is not free. It is only the transcendental Will as thing-in-itself that is
free of all necessity of explanatory law, which for that very reason is such that
its existence and freedom cannot be established from the data of self-
consciousness.
This is Schopenhauer's official answer to the Norwegian Royal Society's
prize essay question. It may nevertheless be doubted whether he might not
have reached a different conclusion by allowing that the data of self-
consciousness, while not sufficient to determine the freedom of the will, are
nevertheless the enquiry's only possible starting-point. It is by consulting the
data of self-consciousness, and in particular the phenomenal will, that
Schopenhauer arrives through a process of abstraction at pure willing or Will
as thing-in-itself, which he concludes is free in the sense of being removed
from the force of explanatory law and from the necessity of the principles
of individuation and sufficient reason. The data of self-consciousness in that
case are admittedly not sufficient in and of themselves to prove the freedom
of the will. They are nevertheless indispensable in proving the transcend-
ent negative explanatory freedom of the Will that lies identically at the heart
of every phenomenal act of will. Self-consciousness, while incapable alone
of proving that the will is free, is essential to Schopenhauer's proof. It is only
from the fact of self-conscious willing as empirical raw material for the right
application of transcendental reasoning that the will's freedom is demon-
strated. In that sense and with these qualifications, could Schopenhauer not
have answered the prize essay question in the affirmative?
Transcendental freedom of will
The problem of whether the will is free, of whether there is such a thing as
free will, is complex. It can have two different answers, depending on exactly
how the question is supposed to be understood. We are free and we are not
free, unparadoxically, once we have properly disambiguated the question
according to Schopenhauer's distinction between the world as Will and
representation.
Schopenhauer considers direct and indirect modes of enquiry into the
question of free will. The duality of method is dictated by the basic division
that governs all aspects of his philosophy, especially his metaphysics. The
direct investigation is a matter of consulting self-consciousness at a superfi-
cial level to see whether it discloses any information that might be used to
195

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
decide the problem of free will. The indirect approach follows the method-
ology Schopenhauer proposes to prove that thing-in-itself is Will. He begins
with the phenomenal data of willing in self-consciousness and abstracts from
them the essence of pure willing in order to recognize thing-in-itself as Will.
It is only the Will in turn that is immortal and independent of all law and
necessity, and therefore free in the negative sense he requires.
The empirical will is not free, because its acts are subject to the same
lawlike explanatory necessity as every other phenomenon in the world as
representation. The transcendental Will at the core of phenomenal will is
as morally free as it is immortal, and for precisely the same reason. Every
willing subject is potentially morally responsible for the actions decided upon
and undertaken by the phenomenal will, which, considered only in itself, is
neither free nor morally responsible, nor, of course, immortal. As Schopen-
hauer states in The World as Will and Representation: "The will in itself is
absolutely free and entirely self-determining, and for it there is no law. First
of all, however, before we embark on the aforesaid discussion, we must
explain and define more precisely this freedom and its relation to necessity"
(WWR 1:285).
The will is free only because the Will is free. The Will is free because it is
subject to no lawlike necessity. The only necessity to be found pertains to the
world as representation, where individuation and the principle of sufficient
reason govern all represented objects, states of affairs and occurrences. The
Will as thing-in-itself exists outside all explanation and explanatory necessity.
The Will is free, and the phenomenal will is free to the extent that it contains
within it Will as its most basic transcendental foundation, in the same way and
for the same reason that the phenomenal will is immortal by virtue of con-
taining Will as thing-in-itself at its core. Schopenhauer adds:
That the will as such is free, follows already from the fact that,
according to our view, it is the thing-in-itself, the content of all
phenomena. The phenomenon, on the other hand, we recognize as
absolutely subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason in its four
forms. As we know that necessity is absolutely identical with
consequent from a given ground, and that the two are convertible
concepts, all that belongs to the phenomenon, in other words all that
is object for the subject that knows as an individual, is on the one
hand ground or reason, on the other consequent, and in this last
capacity is determined with absolute necessity; thus it cannot be in
any respect other than it is. 
(WWR 1: 286)
If the willing subject is immortal only in the sense that thing-in-itself
identified as Will underlying each act of will is beyond individuality and
196

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
explanation, then we are left at best with an uncomforting concept of
impersonal survival that does not carry the soul through the event of death
to the other side of eternity. Might the same not be said now about the limi-
tations of treating Will rather than the empirical will as free, especially where
the concept is supposed to be related to the moral responsibility attributed
to agents for actions performed within the world as representation?
We must ask whether Schopenhauer provides a sufficiently robust sense
of free will to uphold the possibility of moral responsibility, of moral judge-
ment and moral values. Is the freedom of Will, the freedom of thing-in-itself,
which in Schopenhauer's analysis it possesses only by standing outside
explanatory necessity, adequate by itself to sustain a sufficiently interesting
sense of moral responsibility for the requirements of theoretical ethics? The
answer, unsurprisingly, once again, is yes and no, depending on what we
mean by morality and what we expect of moral philosophy. As usual,
Schopenhauer regards his philosophical rivals as only partially grasping the
significance of the intuition by which morality is related to freedom of the
will. The transcendent freedom of that part of phenomenal willing identi-
cal to Will is, he believes, the only possibility of establishing the existence
of freedom, in a sense that, correctly understood, provides the foundation
needed for the only logically coherent moral philosophy.
The relation of the intellect to acts of will in motivating action pertains
only to the phenomenal will, which, in any case, Schopenhauer does not
regard as free. The same relation leaves the pure willing or Will as thing-in-
itself underlying every act of phenomenal will untouched and unnecessitated
by any law or explanatory principle. Schopenhauer accordingly writes, in
the concluding paragraphs of his Essay on the Freedom of the Will:
In a word, a human being always does only what he wills, and yet
he necessarily does it. This is owing to the fact that he already is what
he wills; for from what he is all that he ever does follows of neces-
sity. If we consider his actions objectively, i.e., from without, we
recognize apodictically that, like the actions of every being in nature,
they must be subject to the law of causality in all its strictness. Sub-
jectively', on the other hand, everyone feels that he always does only
what he wills. But this means merely that his actions are the pure
manifestation of his very own essence. Therefore if it could feel,
every being in nature, even the lowest, would feel the same thing.
Freedom, then, is not suspended by my treatment of the matter,
but merely moved up from the domain of individual actions, where
it obviously is not to be found, into a higher region, which, how-
ever, is not so easily accessible to our cognition; in other words,
freedom is transcendental. 
(FW: 88)
197

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Moral character: empirical, intelligible and acquired
The parallelism between the world and the individual willing subject encour-
ages Schopenhauer to posit the existence of the character of every individual
willing subject, just as he identifies the character of thing-in-itself in speak-
ing of the insatiably hungry Will. He holds that the character of an individual
willing subject is as unchanging and unalterable as the character of the world
as Will.
He distinguishes between empirical, intelligible and acquired character. All
three are of interest in understanding the moral nature of human agents.
Roughly, empirical character is the quality of a personal psychology, among
the many objectifications of thing-in-itself in the world as representation,
reflected in the individual's actions and behaviour, and unalterable in its
distinctive features. Intelligible character is the empirically hidden nature of
Will as thing-in-itself, the blind urging that transcends all individual willing
subjects, that is only known through the appropriate exercise of Kantian
transcendental reasoning. Acquired character is the changeable first-person
knowledge of an individual's good and bad qualities, of what he and others
can and cannot expect as a result of what we ordinarily speak of as moral
character, the virtues a person possesses or his or her lack thereof. The
concept of character, and especially of intelligible character, is crucial to
Schopenhauer's moral philosophy. His thesis that moral character is unal-
terable, but comes to express itself differently under different circumstances
over time, is especially noteworthy. It is the individual's character, moreo-
ver, to which Schopenhauer attaches all moral responsibility.7
Transcending the empirical character is the intelligible character, identi-
cal to Will construed as thing-in-itself. It is the intelligible character that is
free and incidentally immortal, because it alone is independent of explana-
tory law. The freedom of will is also transcendental, as a consequence, and
does not directly make itself known as such in phenomenal psychology.
Schopenhauer describes the intelligible character as the conditioning
transcendental ground of an individual's empirical character (FW: 86). The
freedom of intelligible character is the negative sense of the term Schopen-
hauer develops as the Will's not being subject to explanatory necessity of any
type, standing outside the principles of individuation and sufficient reason.
"This freedom, however," he reminds us, "is transcendental... it does not
emerge in the appearance but is present only insofar as we abstract from the
appearance and all its forms in order to arrive at that which, outside all time,
is to be thought of as the inner essence of the human being in himself" (FW:
86). As inner being or moral essence, the Will in its transcendental freedom
is the source of every aspect of the empirical character it objectifies. It is also
for this reason the ground of every attribution of morally responsible action
198

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
to the empirical character in phenomenal psychology (FW: 86). The relation
between the empirical and intelligible character in an individual willing
subject is the same as that between the world as representation and Will as
thing-in-itself (FW: 86-7). This is true not merely by analogy, but in a strict
and literal sense in Schopenhauer's metaphysics, in so far as the empirical
character is one among various phenomenal objectifications of thing-in-itself,
intelligible character is identical with Will, and Will is thing-in-itself (BM:
111-12).8
In addition to the empirical and intelligible characters of moral agents,
Schopenhauer identifies a third type, which he calls acquired character. It
is to this sense of character that most people refer when they speak of the
virtuous or unvirtuous nature of a moral agent. A character is acquired
through constant interaction with other objectifications of Will in the world
as representation, by means of the accidental circumstances through which
the empirical character is shaped and moulded in reacting and adjusting to
the contingencies of existence. "Besides the intelligible and empirical char-
acters", Schopenhauer relates in The World as Will and Representation:
we have still to mention a third which is different from these two,
namely the acquired character. We obtain this only in life, through
contact with the world, and it is this we speak of when anyone is
praised as a person who has character, or censured as one without
character. 
(WWR 1:303)
Although empirical and intelligible character are unalterable, Schopenhauer
allows, even as the name suggests, that acquired character is malleable,
subject to change over time.
The alterability of acquired character contributes to the illusion that
willing moral agents are able to change themselves, to transform the persons
they really are in another sense of character, through experience, training,
incentive, punishment, deliberation or resolve. The acquired character of a
moral agent in particular is the most superficial and ephemeral part of a
subject. Because of its propensity to change the exact manner in which its
underlying empirical and intelligible characters express themselves behav-
iourally, acquired character cannot possibly be the source of moral respon-
sibility to which decision-making and action are properly attributed.
Schopenhauer makes similar remarks in taking up the distinction between
empirical, intelligible and acquired character in the Essay on the Freedom
of the Will, where he remarks:
Only a precise knowledge of his own empirical character gives a
human being what is called an acquired character. It is possessed by
199

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
the human being who knows precisely his own qualities, both good
and bad, and thus knows for certain what he may and may not count
on and expect from himself. 
(FW: 43)
It is through this kind of knowledge that moral agents proceed confidently
on the basis of superficial self-knowledge.
We can misjudge ourselves where acquired character is concerned. As to
empirical character, ironically, it is less easily empirically determined. It is
difficult to know which features of acquired character are among the true
signs of a willing subject's empirical character objectified as intelligible
character in the world as representation, where it is subject to errors of judge-
ment. Intelligible character itself, however, if we have a correct understand-
ing of it as Will, cannot be misjudged. The inference is trivial, in a way,
because there is nothing substantive to know concerning thing-in-itself
except that it is Will. The Will's intelligible character, which is equally the
character of every individual willing subject, is the blind urging of a hungry
beast, bent on consuming itself by proxy through its objectifications in the
world as representation. There is a greater chance of misunderstanding the
acquired character of individuals in the empirical world, where we can
always suffer illusion or be deceived, misread the clues we encounter, jump
to hasty conclusions, and exercise faulty inductive reasoning. The empiri-
cal character of a willing subject or moral agent, according to Schopenhauer,
is nevertheless fixed, permanent and unchanging.
Schopenhauer relies in part on folk wisdom about persons not changing
their natures or characters, but at most making only shallow adjustments of
their acquired characters. Once a thief, always a thief, is the popular cliche.
"We can obtain confirmation of this truth from daily experience", Schopen-
hauer allows:
but the most striking is obtained when after twenty or thirty years
we meet an acquaintance again and soon spot in him precisely the
same old tricks as before. - Many a human being, of course, will
deny this truth in words; yet he himself presupposes it in his actions,
for he never again trusts anyone whom he has once found to be
dishonest, whereas he relies on the one who has previously shown
himself to be honest. 
(FW: 44)
Schopenhauer assumes that in so far as we fail to trust someone again after
we have once been betrayed, or on the contrary return for assistance to the
same person repeatedly after we have once been befriended, we evince an
implicit understanding of the thesis he believes follows from the proposi-
tion that empirical character can never be changed. If we do not expect
200

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM OF WILL
people to alter their ways, then we agree with Schopenhauer in taking this
assumption as evidence for the proposition that moral character, empirical
rather than acquired, never changes in the life of any person from birth to
death, but is manifested over time in different ways and in different circum-
stances as modifications of acquired character.
Finally, Schopenhauer attaches transcendental freedom and the concept
of empirical character to moral responsibility. It is only the concept of
empirical character, he believes, that connects the body's physical behaviour
in action to a willing subject as a morally responsible agent. The transition
from freedom to responsibility in its most general terms is found in almost
any ethical philosophy. In Schopenhauer, there is a finely nuanced linkage
by which the two concepts are related. "[T]here is still a fact of conscious-
ness," he writes, "which, to avoid disturbing the course of our investigation,
I have so far entirely disregarded. This is the perfectly clear and certain
feeling of responsibility for our actions - a feeling that rests on the unshak-
able certainty that we ourselves are the doers of our deeds" (FW: 83).
Morality functions superficially in certain judgements we make in episodes
of phenomenal psychology. Schopenhauer wants to explain how we can
justify attributions of moral responsibility as we pronounce an agent's actions
morally right or wrong.
"On the strength of that consciousness", he says:
it never occurs to anyone, not even to someone who is fully con-
vinced of the necessity (previously discussed) with which our actions
occur, to make use of this necessity as an excuse for a transgression,
and to throw the blame on the motives because their appearance
rendered the deed inevitable. 
(FW: 83^-)
The explanatory necessity of moral decision-making and action is never rea-
sonably cited as an excuse for wrongful behaviour. We can say on Schopen-
hauer's behalf that it makes no sense to try to avoid blame on grounds that
would apply to any and every moral agent. All willing subjects are in the same
boat in that all their actions are necessitated by lawlike explanatory princi-
ples, including causal and motivational laws. Schopenhauer argues that the
conditions by which an action is determined have only a subjective necessity,
stemming from the contingent fact that the individual is determined involun-
tarily to be one particular individual willing subject rather than another:
For he sees quite well that this necessity has a subjective condition,
and that here objectively it depended on the latter alone; in other
words, in existing circumstances and hence under the influence of
the motives that have determined him, an entirely different action,
201

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
in fact the very opposite of his, was quite possible and could have
happened, if only he had been another person. 
(FW: 84)
The same could be said, of course, by any other agent. "Because he is this
person and not another," Schopenhauer adds:
because he has such-and-such a character, naturally no other action
was possible for him\ in itself, however, and thus objectivelyr, it is
possible. Therefore the responsibility of which he is conscious
concerns the deed only in the first instance and ostensibly, but at
bottom it concerns his character^ it is for the latter that he feels
himself responsible. 
(FW: 84)
The agent implicitly intuits the basic facts about the nature of free will that
Schopenhauer codifies as abstract theoretical knowledge. In practice,
Schopenhauer argues, moral agents behave as though they understand and
accept his analysis. This is just the corroboration he seeks, the only sort he
thinks he needs. "And for the latter he is also made responsible by others,"
he elaborates, "since their judgment turns at once from the deed to ascer-
tain the qualities of the doer. 'He is a bad human being, a rogue,' or 'he is a
scoundrel,' or 'he is a petty, false, mean soul' - such is their verdict, and their
reproaches recur to his character" (FW: 84).
The intuitive conduct of those who stand in moral judgement of others
provides powerful evidence for Schopenhauer's theory. When someone acts
wrongly, the misdeed is attributed to the agent, which is to say the charac-
ter of the perpetrator. Although he chooses a wrongful action to illustrate
the point, the same might be said of someone who acts rightly and thereby
earns moral respect or praise. The credit for morally right or wrong actions,
in either case, Schopenhauer emphasizes, redounds to the agent's character.
The empirical rather than the acquired character is not only the seat of moral
responsibility, but it is that which alone is transcendentally free. Schopen-
hauer in this way forges the required conceptual connection between free-
dom of the will and moral responsibility. Morality presupposes the free will
and responsibility of moral agents for their actions, without which attribu-
tions of moral right and wrong lack meaningful application. Schopenhauer
locates the freedom of will transcendentally in Will as thing-in-itself, where
the pure willing of a willing subject exists outside the necessity of law. He
assigns responsibility for action to the unalterable empirical character of the
subject, from which all free-will moral decision-making proceeds.9
202

CHAPTER SEVEN
Compassion as the philosophical
foundation of morality
Boundless compassion for all living things is the firmest and surest
guarantee of pure moral conduct, and needs no causistry. Whoever
is inspired with it will assuredly injure no one, will wrong no one, will
encroach on no one's rights; on the contrary, he will be lenient and
patient with everyone, will forgive everyone, will help everyone as
much as he can, and all his actions will bear the stamp of justice,
philanthropy, and loving-kindness. 
(BM: 172)
Origin of morality
Schopenhauer's "Prize Essay", On the Basis of Morality, in fact won no prize.
It was written in response to the Royal Danish Society of Scientific Studies
competition, like the Norwegian prize essay contest on freedom of the will,
on a topic concerning the psychology of moral reasoning. The essay ques-
tion contains a lengthy preamble, the main thrust of which is to ask:
Is the source and foundation of morality to be looked for in an idea
of morality which lies immediately in consciousness (or conscience),
and in the analysis of the other principal notions of morality spring-
ing from this, or is it to be sought in another ground of knowledge?
(BM: 38)
Critique of Kant's ethics
Schopenhauer begins his essay, following a brief general introduction, with
a long section criticizing Kant's moral philosophy, covering roughly half the
203

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
length of the book. He maintains that, despite being profoundly indebted
to Kant's critical idealism, and in particular to the distinction between
appearance and thing-in-itself, he is everywhere in disagreement with Kant's
ethics and with what Kant calls the groundwork of the metaphysics of
morals.
The analysis of free will and its relation to moral responsibility are among
the respects in which Schopenhauer believes he has improved over Kant's
moral philosophy. Impressed as he is with the opening sections of Kant's
Critique of Pure Reason on the Transcendental Aesthetic, and especially with
Kant's theory of space and time as the representing subject's pure forms of
intuition, Schopenhauer does not accept at face value Kant's distinction
between the world of appearance and thing-in-itself, and he regards Kant's
argument for the existence of thing-in-itself as logically incoherent. He
rejects the architectonic system of twelve Aristotelian categories in Kant's
Analytic of Concepts, and takes issue with Kant's doctrine of the transcen-
dental unity of apperception in his theory of self-consciousness. Most
importantly, Schopenhauer believes he has surpassed the limitations of Kant's
metaphysics and epistemology of noumenal thing-in-itself, which he is
convinced he has correctly identified as Will.
These are among the most important differences between Schopenhauer
and Kant. Nevertheless, they pale in comparison with the repugnance
Schopenhauer feels for every aspect of Kant's moral theory. Schopenhauer
devotes a relatively short final section of the "Criticism of the Kantian
Philosophy", the Appendix in the first volume of The World as Will and
Representation, to Kant's ethics. As he remarks even in the book's second
edition, it is in On the Basis of Morality that he offers the most detailed
critique of Kant's ethics, in the long, 70-plus-page chapter, "Criticism of
Kant's Basis of Ethics". This extended polemic can be understood as the
more complete continuation of the Appendix evaluation of Kant's moral
philosophy. Schopenhauer makes explicit both his intellectual debt to and
disagreements with Kant in declaring that: "[T]he criticism of Kant's foun-
dation of morals will be in particular the best preparation and guide - in fact
the direct path - to my own foundation of morals, for opposites illustrate
each other, and my foundation is, in essentials, diametrically opposed to
Kant's" (BM: 47).
In criticizing Kant's moral philosophy Schopenhauer prepares the way for
the presentation of his own ideas. He identifies important themes and prob-
lems, and distances himself from Kant as an influential precursor whose
conclusions he rejects. He establishes the need for another hopefully
improved solution, reflecting the difficulties and shortcomings of the system
under review. To properly understand Schopenhauer's criticisms of Kant's
moral philosophy, and the differences between Kant's and Schopenhauer's
204

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
ethics, we should therefore first examine the basic principles of Kant's meta-
physics of morals.1
Kant's moral philosophy
In his Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals., Kant lays down purely
rationalist foundations. He disavows all empirical elements in ethics, which
he regards as theoretical impurities. When ethics is completely purged of
empirical factors, Kant stands ready to reject consequentialist moralities
based on the experience of pleasure or inclination.
Kant is so convinced of the fundamental distinction between ethics and
empirical psychological factors that he argues that we cannot be known
without qualification to act in a morally correct way when there is any
possibility of a conflicting motivation of desire. He formulates this conclu-
sion in the thesis that the only thing that is unqualifiedly good is a good will.
He proposes to identify synthetic a priori judgements that constitute the
proper subject matter of the metaphysics of morals, as they do for him in
any branch of metaphysics. He distinguishes between hypothetical impera-
tives and the categorical imperative as the one and only purely rational
principle of ethics. Hypothetical imperatives are obligations we incur only
conditionally, if we want to achieve some other end, such as promoting the
general happiness. The categorical imperative is unconditional, requiring
that we act always according to whatever moral maxims we can will at the
same time to be universal principles of conduct for all rational beings. In four
applications, Kant makes it clear that violations of the categorical impera-
tive involve rules of conduct that we cannot will to be followed universally;
when we try to do so, we encounter logical contradictions. The implemen-
tation of the categorical imperative through the logical consistency or
inconsistency encountered in efforts to universalize a maxim of action makes
Kant's ethics a formalist theory of moral value. The reductions to contra-
diction in some of Kant's illustrations of how the categorical imperative is
supposed to be practically applied are not always immediately convincing.
The categorical imperative is meant to be an unconditional principle of moral
action, in any case, one that imposes a duty on every rational being simply
by virtue of being rational.
Kant proposes to establish a special type of freedom that he believes is
needed to make sense of moral responsibility by distinguishing between
moral autonomy and heteronomy. Autonomy is freedom in the sense of self-
governance or self-rule, while heteronomy is governance by something other
than or outside the self. Kant's grounding of the metaphysics of morals, like
205

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer's, postulates a transcendental sense of freedom, but as a kind
of moral autonomy that is presupposed by the possibility of moral respon-
sibility. Moral autonomy is achieved when reason, as that which is essential
to every morally responsible agent, gives the moral law to itself, which can
only occur when a rational agent accepts the categorical imperative. Moral
heteronomy as something inconsistent with the requirements of moral
responsibility occurs when a moral law is given to reason by something other
than reason, standing outside itself. A rational agent can be heteronomously
ruled by passion, emotion, inclination or such empirical considerations as the
desire to promote happiness or pleasure. When reason accepts the moral law
of reason in the form of the categorical imperative, Kant believes, the agent
is free by virtue of being self-governing, and hence morally responsible.
The categorical imperative takes several forms under several interpreta-
tions. Kant insists that there is only one principle of unconditional moral
duty that can be viewed from different perspectives. An important interpre-
tation of the categorical imperative holds that we are always to treat rational
beings as intrinsically valuable ends in themselves, and never merely as
instrumentally valuable means to another end. We violate this implication
of the categorical imperative, for example, when we act in such a way as to
advance the moral consequentialist goal of promoting the greatest good or
greatest happiness for the greatest number. This is the moral objective
defended later in the history of ethics in John Stuart Mill's utilitarianism,
among other hedonistic moral systems advocating the values of pleasure that
Kant vehemently rejects. Kant projects a Utopian ideal state of humankind,
which he calls the Kingdom of Ends, in which every rational being treats
every other rational being in accordance with the categorical imperative as
ends in themselves rather than merely as means to another end. There would
theoretically be no violations of the moral rights of others in the Kantian
Kingdom of Ends. It instantiates what Kant hopes will result in a state of
perpetual peace, in which all conflict and violence is overcome in the moral
equivalent of a perfectly just reign in an ethical heaven on earth.
Schopenhauer's objections
Schopenhauer takes issue with all of these components of Kant's moral
philosophy. At the beginning of the Appendix to The World as Will and
Representation, he states with specific reference to Kant, that "It is much easier
to point out the faults and errors in the work of a great mind than to give a
clear and complete exposition of its value" (WWR1: 415). In his assessment
of Kant's ethics in On the Basis of Morality, Schopenhauer tries to do a little
206

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
of both. However, he places greater weight by far on the objections by which
he seeks to demolish Kant's theory, in order to make room for his own.
In his "Introduction" to On the Basis of Morality, Schopenhauer admits:
I therefore confess the particular pleasure with which I set to work
to remove the broad cushion from ethics, and frankly express my
intention of proving Kant's practical reason and categorical impera-
tive are wholly unjustified, groundless, and fictitious assumptions,
and of showing that even Kant's ethics lacks a solid foundation.
(BM: 48)
He begins by undermining Kant's fundamental idea that the purpose of
philosophical ethics is to give reasons for what ought to happen, even if it
never actually happens, disputing the a priori orientation of Kant's ethics.
One can see, in light of Schopenhauer's commitment to moral motivation
as one of the four roots of the principle of sufficient reason, that he would
expect an adequate theory of ethics to concern the real behaviour of human
agents here and now in the world as representation where all action takes
place. He argues that:
moral laws, apart from human ordinance, State institution, or
religious doctrine, cannot be assumed as existing without proof. By
this anticipation Kant is, therefore guilty oi&petitio principii, which
appears all the bolder because he adds at once... [in] the Preface that
a moral law ought to imply "absolute necessity". 
(BM: 53)
Kant errs, according to Schopenhauer, right from the start, when he begins
by stating without demonstration that the purpose of ethics is to articulate
necessary principles of morality. Schopenhauer not only faults Kant with the
circular assumption that there must be such principles, leaving open the
possibility that the proposition could be adequately defended, but claims
further and more pointedly that the entire realm of ethics is not in fact
necessary but only contingent. "[S]uch necessity is everywhere characterized
by the inevitability of the resulting effect", he argues. "Now how can we
speak of absolute necessity in the case of these alleged moral laws, as an
example of which [Kant] mentions Du sollt [sic] nicht lugen [Thou shalt not
lie]. For as we know and as he himself admits, they remain frequently, indeed
as a rule, ineffective" (BM: 53).
Although Schopenhauer offers additional criticisms against Kant's quest
for necessary a priori moral principles, the above reason does not seem
particularly persuasive. There is generally no objection to supposing that
necessary principles can imply logically or causally contingent consequences,
207

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
provided that at least some additional assumptions are contingent. The
opposite inference would of course be modally invalid, but to derive merely
possible or contingent propositions from necessary and contingent assump-
tions is no failure of reasoning. The fact that a moral rule against lying is
ineffective in practice, and in that sense is not logically or causally necessary,
is no count against a defender of Kant who might reply that the rule never-
theless remains morally necessary in the sense that whether or not it is
actually observed it is necessary if true at all within Kant's system that one
ought not to lie. Would Schopenhauer similarly dispute the causal necessity
of the proposition that a golden globe ten miles in circumference would have
a certain gravitational attraction solely on the grounds that as a matter of
fact there nowhere exists such an immense gold orb? Why not interpret
Kant's demand for a priori moral principles in the same charitable subjunc-
tive fashion? Why not say that if a person were never to lie, despite the fact
that all persons do lie, then that person would be acting rightly according
to an idealized moral principle?
Schopenhauer understands Kant's emphasis on moral duty, especially as
it is formulated in the categorical imperative, as a kind of disguised
theological morality. He may in fact have his finger on the beating pulse of
Kant's implicit reasoning in ethics, but the argument again is not clearly
conclusive (BM: 56-7). His objection to what he perceives as the hidden
theological presuppositions of Kant's moral philosophy is a recurrent theme
in his criticism. Kant's own attitude toward religion is ambivalent, while
Schopenhauer, despite expressing great interest in the philosophical ideas
concealed in religion, is undoubtedly an atheist. Here he regards any effort
to cast ethics in the form of a code as duties or imperatives, in effect, in the
way that a "Thou shalt X" or "Thou shalt not Y" assumes the existence of
another will to which the individual to whom the duty applies is subject and
subservient (BM: 57-8).2
There is no good reason why such constructions as the form of moral
obligation should not be construed as a moral agent's dictating the require-
ments of moral law to herself. This is particularly true of Kant's categorical
imperative, which does not explicitly depend essentially on the "Thou shalt"
formula. "Act always ... etc." is, after all, not far afield from "Thou shalt".
While it addresses the moral agent as though in another voice, it need not
be so construed, but might be understood instead as a reminder of an ethi-
cal principle that a person can issue to himself. It has a form something like
"Rotate your tyres every six months", from which no reference to a deity is
necessarily inferred. It can be understood instead as the voice of impersonal
reason. When Schopenhauer's own moral principle finally surfaces in the
exposition, it appears in much the same formulation, which can easily be
translated without addition or loss of meaning as either "Act always" or
208

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
"Thou shalt". Schopenhauer avoids the implication by surrounding his moral
principle with disclaimers to the effect that it offers at most a moral guide-
line rather than a strict duty or command. The point is that the mere
linguistic form in which a moral principle is presented is no certain indica-
tion of whether or not it is supposed to have a theological foundation.
Schopenhauer further disputes Kant's assumption that the essence of a
moral agent is reason, and that therefore the freedom of will and moral
responsibility, along with all morality, must somehow be connected to the
agent's reason in a correct moral philosophy. Schopenhauer believes, on the
contrary, that willing is the essence of moral agency, and that rationality is
relatively superficial, belonging only to the world as representation where
it is subject to the principle of sufficient reason. We know this first from
Schopenhauer's epistemology, in which he gives second place to abstract
knowledge in deference to intuited insight and pre-theoretical understand-
ing, and also from his secondary treatment of intellectual freedom as an
afterthought to physical and moral freedom in the Essay on the Freedom of
the Will, where the role of reasoning in matching means to ends in practi-
cal judgement is assigned only to the Appendix (BM: 64).
We could hardly hope for a more revealing statement of Schopenhauer's
disagreements with Kant. Kant, although a critical idealist in metaphysics and
epistemology, strives to be a pure rationalist in ethics. Schopenhauer no
doubt already sees this as a betrayal of critical idealism and a symptom of
deep incoherence in Kant's philosophy. The opposition between regarding
moral agents as essentially wilful by contrast with the view of people as
essentially rational makes an enormous difference in the outlook toward
human nature reflected in a thinker's moral philosophy. Kant appeals to
reason in the form of the categorical imperative and as the source of that
freedom whereby it is possible for rational agents to be morally responsi-
ble. Schopenhauer regards reason, cognitive and intellectual faculties
generally as secondary phenomena. Transcendental freedom for Schopen-
hauer is implied instead by the fact that each willing subject contains a
common core of pure willing or Will as thing-in-itself that is non-
individualizable and inexplicable, whose actions consequently are not subject
to causal or motivational law. Schopenhauer, in this sense, if we can be
permitted such a barbarism, believes that he out-transcendentalizes Kant.
In keeping with his denial of Kant's starting-point, Schopenhauer rejects
the purpose of ethics as an articulation of a priori necessary principles of moral
duty and obligation. He disputes Kant's view of ethics as what ought in prin-
ciple to be done, even if such actions are never actually performed. He de-
taches reason from moral virtue and vice, as these qualities are actually
instantiated in the world as representation. "Only after Kant," Schopenhauer
observes with a touch of sarcasm, "for then virtue was supposed to spring
209

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
from pure reason, did the virtuous and the reasonable become one and the
same; this despite the usage of all languages, which is not accidental, but the
work of universal human, and therefore coherent and consistent knowledge"
(BM: 83). Far from supposing that reason is the basis of morality, Schopen-
hauer holds that the greater the powers of reasoning, the more harm and
havoc an evil will can wreak in the world. Nor does he suppose that a good
moral will must necessarily coincide with sound reasoning, but instead
believes that it can motivate the charitable of heart to acts of unreason and
even practical stupidity.
It is not astonishing, then, that Schopenhauer should also dispute not only
the form but the content of Kant's categorical imperative as the foundation
of his moral theory. At one point he objects that:
Moreover, there is the fact that, considered merely as a formula, [the
categorical imperative] is only a paraphrase, an obscure and
disguised expression of the well-known rule, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris [Do not to another what you do not wish to be done
to you], if, that is, by repeating this without non and ne, we remove
the defect of containing only the duties of rights or law and not of
love. 
(BM: 92)
Unfortunately, Schopenhauer in this passage indicates that he misunderstands
Kant's categorical imperative in equating it as he does here with the so-called
Golden Rule. In formulating the categorical imperative, Kant does not say that
we are to act only in such a way toward other persons as we would like in turn
to be acted toward ourselves. That would be to make morality a matter of
inclination and empirical psychology, of what agents want or wish or will to
have happen to them as a consequence of the actions of others, which Kant
emphatically disavows. The focus in Kant's categorical imperative is instead
on whether we can logically consistently will that the maxims of our actions
become universal principles to be followed by all rational beings. If, without
falling into logical contradiction, we can will the maxims of our actions to be
universalized, then the categorical imperative commands that the actions be
done. If we cannot consistently will our maxims to be universally applied, then
the categorical imperative forbids our performing the respective actions. It is
not at all a question for Kant of what we will to do, but of what we logically
can will. This is, naturally, what is supposed to make Kant's ethics purely
formal, and what is supposed to make his groundwork for the metaphysics
of morals an exercise in pure a priori reason with a purely rational justifica-
tion that depends only on logical contradiction or non-contradiction.
Schopenhauer should know better. He should have based his critique of
Kant's moral philosophy on a more accurate interpretation of the categorical
210

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
imperative. He takes aim at the further implication of the principle accord-
ing to which we are to treat all rational beings as ends in themselves and
never merely as means to another end. Schopenhauer claims that the concept
of something's being an end in itself is in the first place conceptually
incoherent. "Kant... slips through his strange definitions to the proposi-
tion", he writes. "'Man, and in general every rational being, exists as an end
in himself' But I must say frankly that 'to exist as an end in oneself is an
unthinkable expression, a contradictio in adjecto" (BM: 95). The reason is
that:
To be an end or aim means to be willed. Every aim or end in view
exists only in reference to a will, and is the end of the will, that is (as
I have said) the direct motive of it. Only in this relation has the
concept end any meaning, which it loses as soon as it is torn away. But
this essential relation necessarily excludes all in itself. 
(BM: 95)
Schopenhauer ridicules the idea of an end in itself in a series of comparisons:
"'End in itself is exactly like saying 'friend in himself, enemy in himself,
uncle in himself, north or east in itself, above or below in itself,' and so on.
Basically, however, the case is the same with 'end in itself as with the
'absolute ought'" (BM: 95).
There has often been thought to exist a distinction in value enquiry
between intrinsic and extrinsic or instrumental value. It is the difference
between things that are valuable in and of themselves or for their own sake,
as opposed to those that are valuable merely as the means to another end.
Schopenhauer challenges the distinction with the charge that the concept is
logically inconsistent, a contradiction in terms. His objection is that to be
an end is by definition to stand in some relation to an act of will or to be
undertaken for some purpose. Thus, we cannot simply sheer off the purpose
for which the thing in question is supposed to be valued. The comparisons
with other inherently relational concepts such as "uncle in itself", which
Schopenhauer raises, have a certain rhetorical force, making the idea seem
absurd; but are they the right way to think about the concept of an end in
itself?
Let us suppose that Schopenhauer is correct to hold that the concept of
an end only makes sense in relation to an act of will by which the end is
defined. Does this entail that an end must always have something other than
itself as that for the sake of which it is an end? We can grant that all ends
are willed and that they cannot be understood in themselves in any sense that
would entail their detachment from every act of will. Still, does it not make
sense, and is it not what Kant, Aristotle in Nicomachean Ethics, and other
philosophers mean by invoking the distinction between intrinsic and
211

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
instrumental value? Is there not a distinction between ends that are willed
only because they are valuable as contributing to some further end, and
things that are willed because they are deemed valuable even if they do not
contribute to any further end? Is the question of whether or not things that
are thought to be ends in themselves are supposed to be understood
independently of any act of will not simply a red herring in Schopenhauer's
criticism? Does it not confuse the issue of the distinction between different
ways in which willed ends can assume value, either for their own sake, as
something we would choose even if they did not produce anything else of
value, and those we choose only because they are the means to obtaining
something else of value other than themselves?
Schopenhauer questions the conclusion whereby rational beings alone
have intrinsic value in the sense of constituting ends in themselves accord-
ing to one of Kant's interpretations of the categorical imperative. Kant is
committed to the position that non-rational beings lacking intrinsic value
do not need to be treated with anything like the same moral respect as
rational agents. This position is distinctly at odds with Schopenhauer's
doctrine of moral compassion. He agrees in this respect with the teachings
of Buddhism, Hinduism and other Asian religious traditions, concerning
moral conduct toward all sentient beings. He praises these values in oppo-
sition to what he takes to be the anthropocentric ethics of Judaism, Islam,
Christianity, and Kant's formalist deontology, in their blithe disregard for
the sufferings of non-human animals (BM: 96). His moral indignation is
aroused by the Kantian suggestion that our obligations extend only to other
rational beings. This is the kind of unenlightened ethical outlook that ani-
mal rights advocates have sometimes referred to with some justice as spe-
cies chauvinism. Why, indeed, should beings equally capable of suffering as
ourselves be treated so differently simply on the basis of whether or not they
are also capable of reasoning?
For Schopenhauer, whose moral principles depend on intuited compas-
sion for the sufferings of other objectifications of Will in the world as
representation, there can be no philosophical justification for prejudice
against the suffering of any creatures. Kant, on the other hand, is commit-
ted to preferential moral attitudes only toward rational beings, since it is only
by virtue of possessing reason that he believes a being has moral value as an
autonomous morally free agent and end in itself. Everything else in the uni-
verse, according to Kant's viewpoint, can be used with perfect moral
impunity merely as a means to any other chosen end. Schopenhauer, perhaps
wishing not unduly to offend the prize essay judges, refers only obliquely
to the Book of Genesis assertion that God gave humankind "dominion" over
all the beasts of the field, fowl of the air and fish of the sea. He thinks that
no such division in the basic principles of morality can possibly be correct.
212

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
He is appalled at the practices encouraged by moral theories that regard only
rational agents as morally valuable, allowing non-rational animals to be used
for the benefit of rational beings without moral concern for their pain and
suffering.
Finally, following the development of moral principles in Kant's exposi-
tion, Schopenhauer turns at last to the Utopian Kingdom of Ends. He had
previously indicated that he regards the concept of an end in itself as logically
incoherent. Moreover, we know that any such ideal is incompatible with
Schopenhauer's moral pessimism, based on his metaphysics of the hungry
Will as thing-in-itself, endlessly feeding on itself through its objectifications
in the world as representation. We moral agents, considered in terms of our
phenomenal psychologies or empirical and acquired characters, are part and
parcel of the phenomenal world, and as such are equally among the
objectifications of thing-in-itself as Will that, of necessity, are constantly at
war with one another. Strife rules the world as representation, according to
Schopenhauer's moral pessimism, even when we are personally victorious,
and even when we can afford to relax temporarily through periods of plenty,
repose and detente. The world as a whole can never attain the sort of
perpetual peace that Kant projects for a Kingdom of Ends, even as a philo-
sophical fiction or ideal state of affairs that it would make sense to try to
attain. The Kantian idea of perpetual peace in a Kingdom of Ends is not
merely unfounded optimistic pie in the sky, as far as Schopenhauer is
concerned, but it is philosophically inconceivable in light of the world's tran-
scendental reality. The world we live in can never be free of conflict between
moral agents because the world is the objectification of Will as thing-in-itself,
the insatiably hungry and inherently self-conflicted Will that necessarily
manifests its character in endless collisions of individual phenomenal wills.
Schopenhauer rehearses his objections to the category of an end in itself
as a prelude to refuting Kant's Kingdom of Ends. "However, Kant propounds
a second and entirely new class of actions occurring without any interest and
thus without motive," he writes in exasperation, "and these were supposed
to be actions of justice and charitableness!" (BM: 100). "To refute this
monstrous assumption," he adds:
it was necessary merely to reduce the assumption to its real meaning,
which was concealed by the play on the word interest. Meanwhile
Kant celebrates ... the triumph of his autonomy of the will in the
setting up of a moral Utopia with the name of a kingdom of ends,
which is populated with nothing but rational beings in abstracto, who
one and all constantly will without willing anything (i.e., without
interest). The one thing they will is that they all constantly will in
accordance with one maxim (i.e., autonomy). 
(BM: 100)
213

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer tries in this way to criticize Kant's concept of the Kingdom
of Ends on logical rather than ideological grounds, referring again to the
nonsense of an unwilled end.
We have already raised the issue of whether Schopenhauer's objection to
the concept of intrinsic value is misplaced. If there could be a Kingdom of
Ends, its members, each a monarch in his or her own right by virtue of
possessing absolute moral autonomy, could presumably will many things. In
particular, they could will to use each other as means to other ends, provided
that they never will to use each other merely as means to another end. The
royalty of the Kingdom of Ends could will many other things besides,
concerning the use of non-rational beings and non-living entities for other
ends. The only moral restriction they must observe is never to violate one
another's moral rights by treatment incompatible with the moral respect
implied by the categorical imperative. Again, this does not mean without
relation to will, as Schopenhauer would have it, but more specifically as not
willing to treat other rational beings merely as instruments for the satisfac-
tion of practical needs, merely as means to another end rather than always
as ends in themselves. Whatever other defects may plague Kant's categori-
cal imperative, it cannot responsibly be said that Kant advocates an unin-
telligible concept of ends in themselves or of rational beings as ends in
themselves in an ideal Kingdom of Ends.
After harsh criticism of Kant, it is interesting to see that Schopenhauer
credits him with important contributions to moral philosophy. He opens
Chapter II of On the Basis of Morality, with the sincere acknowledgment
that: "Kant has the great merit of having purged ethics of all eudaemonisrri"
(BM: 49). He appreciates the fact that in his misguided efforts to cleanse
moral reasoning of all empirical elements, Kant rejects the ancient Greek
concept of moral reasoning and right action as directed toward securing
eudaimonia, a happy life, or living in accord with the principles of moral-
ity regardless of the vicissitudes of life. Schopenhauer is at pains even in the
first edition of The World as Will and Representation to distinguish the
suffering-salvation axis of his moral philosophy from that of the Stoics and
Epicureans, who sought to achieve happiness in the absence of pain. We shall
see below how Schopenhauer attacks such moral philosophies, beginning
with Aristotle and continuing through Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman Stoic
and Epicurean moral philosophy.
Near the end of On the Basis of Morality, Schopenhauer writes:
justice requires that I not leave this subject without recalling Kant's
greatest and most brilliant merit in the service of ethics. This consists
in the doctrine of the coexistence of freedom and necessity, which
he expounds first of all in the Critique of Pure Reason ...; yet an even
214

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
clearer presentation of the discussion is given in the Critique of
Practical Reason .... 
(BM: 109)
Needless to say, Schopenhauer, while lauding this achievement of Kant's,
approaches the compatibility of moral freedom and causal necessity with
respect to the transcendental ground of moral responsibility in a very
different way than Kant. Just as Schopenhauer credits Kant's critical ideal-
ist epistemology and metaphysics with invaluable insights that he transposes
in modified form as principles of his transcendental idealism, so he now does
the same with respect to Kant's doctrine of the compatibility of moral
freedom and causal necessity. There is, moreover, an essential connection
between these two borrowings from Kant's metaphysics of morals in
Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism.
"I regard Kant's doctrine of the coexistence of freedom and necessity as
the greatest of all achievements of the human mind", Schopenhauer writes
with heartfelt enthusiasm. "With the Transcendental Aesthetic it forms the
two great diamonds in Kant's crown of fame, which will never become
extinct" (BM: 111). The eulogy allows Schopenhauer to end, as he begins
this section of the essay, on a positive note of praise for his philosophical
predecessor. He diplomatically avoids mentioning that he completely
rejects Kant's way of reconciling freedom with necessity by means of Kant's
concept of moral autonomy. Nor does he repeat his complaints about the
limitation of Kant's ethics to rational beings. We are free, according to
Kant, only in so far as we rationally choose to adopt the categorical
imperative, which Schopenhauer rejects in both form and content. He
perceives an interesting connection between Kant's notion of transcenden-
tal freedom, and the Kantian noumenal thing-in-itself. "The thing-in-itself
underlying the phenomenon is outside space and time and free from all
succession and plurality of acts", he states, "it is one and unchangeable"
(BM: 110). He then inserts his own analysis of the concept of transcenden-
tal freedom related to the Will and relevant to moral responsibility, stretch-
ing Kant's thing-in-itself to cover the distinction between intelligible and
empirical character. "Its constitution in itself is the intelligible character",
he writes:
which is equally present in all the actions of the individual and is
stamped on every one of them, like the signet on a thousand seals.
The empirical character of this phenomenon, manifesting itself in
time and in the succession of acts, is determined by the intelligible.
Hence this phenomenon must show the constancy of a natural law
in all its manifestations, which are brought about by the motives;
and thus all its acts ensue with strict necessity. 
(BM: 110)
215

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer thereby reconciles transcendental freedom and phenomenal
necessity in a significantly different way than Kant had proposed. He does
so, moreover, in what he undoubtedly sees as a more thoroughly grounded
comprehensive transcendental idealism. He interprets thing-in-itself as Will,
underlying or existing at the core of every individual willing subject of action,
and hence of every morally responsible agent. Finally, he argues that Will is
free by virtue of falling outside the principle of individuation and explana-
tory lawlike necessity under the principle of sufficient reason.
Egoism as the ultimate motivation of morality
Having worked through the main principles of Kant's ethics, and criticiz-
ing what he finds inadequate in the theory, Schopenhauer is now ready to
square off against the Danish prize essay question. Chapter 3 of the book,
approximately as long as the "Criticism of Kant's Basis of Ethics", is
developed in several parts under the title "The Foundation of Ethics".
Schopenhauer first argues that the motivation for action is primarily but
not exclusively egoistic. He distinguishes between three kinds of motives,
but believes that ultimately most actions are motivated by self-love. The idea
that people generally act self-interestedly is by no means new or original to
Schopenhauer's ethics. We may think of cynics who regard persons willing
to donate money to charity as doing so only for selfish motives because it
makes them feel better about themselves. Or of even the most apparently
altruistic behaviour as somehow indirectly self-benefiting, if only we can
untangle the ulterior reasons why people do what they do. Schopenhauer
does not go quite this far or in quite this direction, although he maintains
that: "The chief and fundamental incentive in man as in the animal is egoism,
that is, the craving for existence and well-being" (BM: 131).
Where it is important to explain the motivations for actions, considering
what is done as a phenomenal occurrence adhering to the principles of
individuation and sufficient reason, Schopenhauer argues that the incentive
to act is always egoistic. It follows that all moral motivation is ultimately a
matter of self-interest or self-love. This is to say that all worldly motivated
action is undertaken for the sake of egoistic satisfaction, even when the
agents in question do not recognize the fact and even if they would positively
deny that they were acting to promote their own personal self-interests.
Schopenhauer argues that in the absence of self-love moral agents can never
be sufficiently motivated to act, a fact that follows directly as a function of
the kinds of explanations available for actions within the world as represen-
tation. He nevertheless believes that egoism is opposed to morality, and that
216

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
all actions motivated by self-aggrandizement have no moral value. "Moral-
ity without argumentation and reasoning, that is, mere moralizing, cannot
have any effect, because it does not motivate", he says in The World as Will
and Representation, adding:
But a morality that does motivate can do so only by acting on self-
love. Now what springs from this has no moral worth. From this it
follows that no genuine virtue can be brought about through
morality and abstract knowledge in general, but that such virtue
must spring from the intuitive knowledge that recognizes in anoth-
er's individuality the same inner nature as in one's own.
(WWR 1:367-8).
When individuals act non-egoistically, their deeds can have moral value,
although in such cases what they choose to do is by definition unmotivated
and hence cannot be rationally explained. Morally worthy actions in
Schopenhauer's philosophy as a result are always, in his technical sense of
the word, mysterious.
Why do we then sometimes act altruistically, and why do we make sacri-
fices for others, as Schopenhauer recognizes people sometimes do? We do
so literally for no reason, or, more specifically, with no motivation. The only
motivation we can possibly have for our actions as objectifications of the
hungry Will in the world as representation is self-interest. When we act
altruistically through compassion for the suffering of others, we do so by
virtue of a mysterious transcendental intuition. We recognize that all people
in their intelligible characters, the pure willing or Will in each individual,
are identical beneath their representational guises. We help others even when
doing so does not directly benefit us, because we intuit that the intelligible
character of another thinking subject distinct from us in space, time and
personality, is really strictly identical to ourselves, to our own intelligible
character. There is in the end only one such intelligible character. There is
only one strictly identical Will as thing-in-itself, transcending the empirical
distinctions among individuals objectified in the world as representation. We
help others, when we do, according to Schopenhauer, through self-love,
because we at least implicitly know that all willing subjects are at bottom
identical, that all are really the one and only intelligible character, which is
thing-in-itself construed as Will.
To repeat, the explanation of all action in human beings and non-human
animals for Schopenhauer can only involve egoistic motivations. "In the
animal as in man this egoism is most intimately connected with their inner-
most core and essence", Schopenhauer writes; "in fact, it is really identical
with essence. As a rule, therefore, all man's actions spring from egoism, and
217

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
we must always first try to explain a given action with this in mind" (BM:
131). Like the Will that it objectifies, the essence of an individual animal or
human being has potentially unlimited desires, needs and wants, which its
egoistic motivations seek to gratify, necessarily, in the long run, if not mor
immediately, at the expense of others. This is the source of at least a good
part of the suffering that takes place in the phenomenal world, as we
objectifications of Will struggle against and attempt in effect to eat each other
and take valuable things away from each other.
Why are we so? Not because we fell from a state of grace through an act
of disobedience to God in the Garden of Eden. Nor because we have
succumbed to malevolent influences perpetuated in a materialistic culture
through a series of historical accidents. It is for one reason only, according
to Schopenhauer - because we are all objectifications of an insatiably hungry
Will. We cannot help ourselves, as creatures inhabiting the world as
representation, in so far as our actions are motivated and hence explainable
according to causal and motivational laws. Schopenhauer remarks that:
"Everything opposing the strivings of [a person's] egoism excites his wrath,
anger, and hatred, and he will attempt to destroy it as his enemy" (BM: 131-
2). This is motivation indeed. When individuals feel that their vital interests
are threatened, they act in every way to defend themselves, and, with
emotions at their peak, actively engage in efforts to obtain whatever the ego
demands (BM: 142-3).
From a rational rather than emotional point of view, most individuals
recognize that their needs and interests are no different from, and no less
valuable to themselves than, those of the countless other persons who also
populate the world. "Now while in his subjective view a man's own self
assumes these colossal proportions," Schopenhauer says, "in the objective
view it shrinks to almost nothing, to a thousand millionth part of the
present human race" (BM: 132-3). Knowing that there are others with
whom the ego is in competition for the goods it desires only intensifies the
struggle, and thereby the suffering (BM: 133). It is exclusively this kind of
unmotivated and literally inexplicable mysterious leaping across the egois-
tic gulf that divides one human being from another in the act of aiding
them or relieving their suffering that Schopenhauer regards as possessing
moral value. The philosophical basis of morality can accordingly be sought
only in the transcendental understanding of Will as thing-in-itself. The
origin of moral principles and rules of behaviour in the world as represen-
tation are explained by Schopenhauer along the lines of something like a
social contract, although he does not quite adopt this theory or terminol-
ogy. He argues, citing Thomas Hobbes's Leviathan and thinkers with
similar insights about the need to control the violence of unbridled egoism,
that:
218

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
where egoism is not opposed either by external force, which must
also include all fear whether of human or supernatural powers, or
by a genuine moral incentive, it pursues its purposes without reserve.
Therefore, without such checks and in view of the infinite number
of egoistic individuals, the helium omnium contra omnes [war of all
against all] would be the order of the day, to the undoing of all. And
so reflecting reason very soon invented the machinery of the State
which, springing from mutual fear of mutual violence, obviates the
disastrous consequences of universal egoism, as far as this can be
done in the negative way. 
(BM: 133)
The untrammelled egoistic pursuit of gain is restrained by external force
within the social contract for the greater benefit of all people. Individuals
must seek their fortunes and strive to fulfil their ambitions within a frame-
work of religious or political laws designed to prevent the chaos of every
person trying to satisfy their egoistic desires by whatever violent or unjust
means they might otherwise choose. In this account of the origins of law and
civil government, Schopenhauer merely echoes, as he acknowledges, what
many political theorists have speculated before him. The doctrine receives
special emphasis in the context of his transcendental idealism, where egoistic
pursuits by many individuals in potentially endless conflict are objectifica-
tions of the insatiably hungry Will. The egoism of societies banding together
for the sake of promoting the interests of their members in Schopenhauer's
philosophy inevitably conflict with one another at the tribal and national
level in trade and war, where even then there are often rules for the
management of collective self-serving egoism.
Moral value of compassion
All moral value, according to Schopenhauer, stands in stark opposition to
egoism. Although he limits motivational explanation of actions to egoistic
considerations, he characterizes this only as the primary type of action for
the sake of self-love undertaken by most people most of the time. There are
important exceptions in the realm of ethics, just as there are in aesthetics for
the rare individual possessed of aesthetic genius. The ascetic saint is such a
person in the moral sphere. Falling short of genuine saintliness, there are
many small acts of benevolence and charity, loving kindness and altruism.
These for Schopenhauer are the only preciously few morally worthy acts that
contradict all egoistic motivations in the vast majority of actions that human
beings undertake in doing the things they do, especially with or to each other.
219

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Standing out among the common throng of individuals in egoistic pursuit
of selfish interests, there are also persons of genuine morality. These are
individuals who mysteriously and unmotivatedly dedicate some part of their
energy and resources to helping others for no other reason than the fact that
those persons are suffering and need someone to help. "I believe there are
those who have, as it were, an inborn principle of giving others their due,
who therefore do not intentionally hurt anyone's feelings, who do not
unconditionally seek their own advantage, but who in this connection also
consider the rights of others" (BM: 138-9). Schopenhauer acknowledges the
statistically limited numbers of persons who behave morally toward others.
He characterizes such individuals notably as benefiting others without
thought of egoistic benefit or self-love, and hence inexplicably without
motivation. "In the case of obligations mutually undertaken," Schopenhauer
elaborates:
they see not only that the other man does his part, but also that he
receives his due, since it is their sincere desire that whoever has
dealings with them may not be the loser. These are the people of true
integrity, the few aequi (just) among the numberless host of iniqui
(unjust); but there are such. 
(BM: 139
The restriction of moral value to unegoistic actions is now made explicit
in Schopenhauer's ethics. He writes: "It is, therefore, only actions of the kind
just described to which we attribute real moral worth. We find that their
characteristic feature is the exclusion of that class of motives whereby all
human actions are otherwise prompted, namely, those of self-interest in the
widest sense of the term" (BM: 139). The slightest taint of self-interest doe
not morally invalidate an action in Schopenhauer's moral philosophy, as in
Kant's. Rather, an action is altogether lacking in moral value if it is under-
taken entirely and exclusively for egoistic motives. "If a self-interested motive
is the only one," Schopenhauer explains, "its discovery entirely destroys the
moral worth of an action; and if such a motive acts as an accessory, the moral
worth of the action is reduced by its discovery. The absence of all egoistic
motivation is, therefore, the criterion of an action of moral worth''' (BM:
139-40).
Non-egoistic action for Schopenhauer is compassionate. Compassion is
the emotional capacity for sharing vicariously in the sufferings of others
(BM: 144). There is a kind of identification with another person when we
are emotionally moved to an act of compassion. The word "compassion"
means literally to have passion with another, which is also true of the
preposition particle "ra/Y" in Schopenhauer's German termMitleid. We may
strongly feel a unity with the person for whom we experience the
220

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
psychological phenomenon of compassion, for which Schopenhauer in due
course offers a deeper, transcendental, metaphysical understanding.
Ultimately, the feeling of compassion is a recognition that another individual
is literally identical with ourselves, not in the superficial sense of ego,
personality, or empirical or acquired character, but in the sense of intelligi-
ble character, the Will as thing-in-itself, which all phenomenally willing
subjects have identically within themselves, transcending or underlying all
superficially distinct acts of will. We are all one in this sense. As willing
subjects, we are all objectifications of the same Will. We share equally in the
identical intelligible character on which our distinctive empirical and
acquired characters are founded and on which they metaphysically depend.
If it is only actions inspired by compassion rather than egoistically moti-
vated by considerations of self-interest that are morally valuable, what, then,
is an acceptable principle of ethical conduct? What is an appropriate rule
of moral behaviour for people who want to do the right thing and live their
lives in accordance with a correct set of moral rules? Schopenhauer roundly
rejects both the form and content of Kant's categorical imperative. Kant, in
any case, contrary to Schopenhauer, regards compassion as antithetical to
morality. Schopenhauer believes just the opposite, holding that it is only
compassionate action that is morally justified. Where Kant insists that we
are to act always according to that maxim which we can will at the same time
to be a universal law for all rational beings, what does Schopenhauer offer
instead? Previously, in his criticism of Kant's basis for ethics, Schopenhauer
announces his counter-principle. He formulates a simplified moral rule of
guidance in this way, contrasting it with Kant's categorical imperative
misintepreted as the Golden Rule:
But this rule, Quod tibi fieri, etc. [Do not do to another what you
do not wish to be done to you], is again only a circumlocution or,
if it is preferred, a premise of the proposition that is laid down by
me as the simplest and purest expression of the mode of conduct
unanimously demanded of all systems of morality, Neminem laede,
into omnes quantum poles, juva [Injure no one; on the contrary, help
everyone as much as you can]. This proposition is and remains the
true and genuine substance of all morality. 
(BM: 92)
What could at the same time be simpler or more profound? Schopenhauer's
principle of morality, not to injure but to try to help others, vibrates with a
deeply felt sense of what it is right and wrong to do.
The principle has two complementary components. Neminem laede, harm
or injure no one, is negative in specifying what we ought not to do.
Schopenhauer introduces the rule, although he has not yet said why it would
221

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
be wrong to injure another or why compassion for others and in particular
for their sufferings dictates that we ought to avoid injuring them. The second
component of the rule, omnes quantum poles, juva, obligates us to help
others as much as possible. This part of the principle is positive, instructing
or advising us to do whatever advances the interests of others in avoiding
pain and suffering. Compassion supports not only the justice of refraining
from injuring other sentient beings, but helping to alleviate their suffering
whenever and to whatever extent we can. "[AJnother's suffering in itself and
as such directly becomes my motive by means of compassion," Schopenhauer
reminds us:
which was previously shown to be a fact, although of mysterious
origin. This second degree is clearly distinguished from the first by
the positive character of the actions resulting from it, since compas-
sion now not only restrains me from injuring another, but even
impels me to help him. 
(BM: 163)
Schopenhauer, in sharp contrast with Kant's limitation of moral respon-
sibility to rational beings, regards compassion for all suffering beings, includ-
ing human beings and non-human animals, as morally obligatory. "The
moral incentive advanced by me as the genuine", Schopenhauer holds:
is further confirmed by the fact that the animals are also taken under
its protection. In other European systems of morality they are badly
provided for, which is most inexcusable. They are said to have no
rights, and there is the erroneous idea that our behavior to them is
without moral significance, or, as it is said in the language of that
morality, there are no duties to animals. All this is revoltingly crude,
a barbarism of the West... 
(BM: 175)
Although Schopenhauer is not a consequentialist like James Mill, John Stuart
Mill, Jeremy Bentham or the later utilitarians, he is clearly closer in spirit
to them in acknowledging these implications of his moral philosophy than
he is to Kant's purely rationalist formal deontology. Schopenhauer is
generally concerned for the suffering of any sentient being, and analyses
moral value in terms of justice and mercy or loving kindness toward others.3
Schopenhauer explains the psychology of compassion in The World as Will
and Representation:
That we are moved to tears not by our own sufferings, but by those
of others, happens in the following way; either in imagination we
put ourselves vividly in the sufferer's place, or we see in his fate the
222

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
lot of the whole of humanity, and consequently above all our own
fate. Thus in a very roundabout way, we always weep about
ourselves; we feel sympathy with ourselves. This seems also to be a
main reason for the universal, and hence natural, weeping in cases
of death. It is not the mourner's loss over which he weeps; he would
be ashamed of such egoistical tears, instead of sometimes being
ashamed of not weeping. In the first place, of course, he weeps over
the fate of the deceased; yet he weeps also when for the deceased
death was a desirable deliverance after long, grave, and incurable
sufferings. In the main, therefore, he is seized with sympathy over
the lot of the whole of mankind that is given over to finiteness. In
consequence of this, every life, however ambitious and often rich
in deeds, must become extinct and nothing. 
(WWR 1: 377)
The morality of compassion is further explained in Schopenhauer's
treatise as something that approximates a morally acceptable form of ego-
ism that might be called alter-egoism. We recognize ourselves in the
sufferings of other persons, so that in alleviating their sufferings we are in a
sense acting in our own interests (WWR 1: 379). While Schopenhauer's anti-
egoistic treatment of the subject in On the Basis of Morality is not strictly
incompatible with his earlier account of why compassion is morally valuable,
he more clearly distances himself from any taint of egoism in addressing the
prize essay question. Here he now distinguishes:
There are generally only three fundamental incentives of human
action, and all possible motives operate solely through their stim-
ulation:
a) Egoism: this desires one's own weal (is boundless).
b) Malice: this desires another's woe (goes to the limits of extreme
cruelty).
c) Compassion: this desires another's weal (goes to the length of
nobleness and magnanimity).
Every human action must be attributable to one of these incentives,
although two can also act in combination. Now as we have assumed
that actions of moral worth are given facts, they too must result from
one of these fundamental incentives. But by virtue of the eighth
premise, they cannot spring from the first, still less from the second,
for all actions that arise from the second are morally bad, while the
first incentive produces actions that, from a moral point of view, are
in part neither good nor bad. They must, therefore, come from the
third alternative; and this will receive its confirmation a posteriori
in what follows. 
(BM: 145)
223

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
To fulfil this final promise, Schopenhauer must try to explain precisely
how it is that compassion is related to morality. Why is it that compassion,
and compassion alone, is morally valuable? What is wrong with egoism,
especially if its unrestrained expression is harnessed by a social contract in
a system of laws by which violence and aggression are sublimated for the
better good of the commonwealth? If egoism is such a powerful motivation
to action, should we not rather see it as a source of moral good? Is it not
the case that most if not all of the substantive benefits accruing to a society
ultimately derive from individuals pursuing their own interests in a way that
has the indirect effect of making life better for others? Schopenhauer pro-
poses to prove the dependence of morality on compassion in the essay by
explaining the concepts of moral right and wrong.
Moral right and wrong
The next step for Schopenhauer is to give substance to moral value and moral
judgement. He proceeds by recalling his "supreme principle of ethics", that
we are not to injure others, but on the contrary to try to help them in practice
to whatever extent we can. He has not tried to justify the principle, but
indicates only that he has previously "laid down the rule".
Schopenhauer acknowledges two parts, positive and negative, into which
the rule divides, and accordingly divides up the discussion of moral right and
moral wrong into the same two moments:
I now turn to the derivation of actions of genuine moral worth from
the source already indicated [compassion]. In the previous section
I laid down the rule as the universal maxim of such actions and
consequently as the supreme principle of ethics: Neminem laede;
into omnes, quantum poles, juva. As this maxim contains two
clauses, the actions that correspond to them automatically fall into
two classes. 
(BM: 147)
We can expect that Schopenhauer will find it morally wrong to injure others
and morally right to help others as much as possible. What remains to be
seen is why he wants to make these identifications in the analyses he proposes
and in his defence of what it is he believes constitutes moral right and wrong.
Schopenhauer gives an account of the concept of moral wrong in The
World as Will and Representation, which he presupposes in On the Basis of
Morality. The idea is that an egoistic action that thwarts another individual's
pursuit of his or her interests is morally objectionable. It is morally wrong
224

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
because it takes away from someone something that belongs most person-
ally to them. Schopenhauer says that such actions by a wrongdoer in effect
deprive an individual of the body's "powers" for the sake of increasing the
wrongdoer's own body powers proportionately without compensation for
something that had belonged to the victim. It is not difficult to see what he
means by taking away another's body powers for the sake of one's own
benefit, or why he construes it as something that is morally wrong. In terms
of his transcendental idealism, Schopenhauer regards egoistic action against
another person as the wrongdoer's affirming his or her own will while
denying the will of the other. We must nevertheless ask why any of this is
supposed to be morally wrong, when Schopenhauer maintains that:
The will of the first breaks through the boundary of another's
affirmation of will, since the individual either destroys or injures this
other body itself, or compels the powers of that other body to serve
his will, instead of serving the will that appears in that other body.
Thus if from the will, appearing as the body of another, he takes away
the powers of this body, and thereby increases the power serving his
will beyond that of his own body, he in consequence affirms his own
will beyond his own body by denying the will that appears in the body
of another. This breaking through the boundary of another's affir-
mation of will has at all times been distinctly recognized, and its
concept has been denoted by the word wrong (Unrecht). For both
parties instantly recognize the fact, not indeed as we do here in
distinct abstraction, but as feeling. 
(WWR 1:334)
The closest Schopenhauer comes to explaining the judgement that it is
wrong to act egoistically against the interests of another sentient being,
denying that individual's will to life at the same time and to the same extent
that we amplify our own, is that this is simply what we call moral wrong-
doing. We can say more charitably with respect to his attempt to clarify these
concepts that his theory stands or falls holistically in so far as it seems to shed
light on the ideas and language used to describe moral and immoral conduct.
Schopenhauer might reply that this is all we can expect of any moral
philosophy, and that his analysis in particular has the virtue of fitting com-
patibly into a much larger system of metaphysics and epistemology of the
world as representation and thing-in-itself. Ultimately, it seems, Schopen-
hauer understands moral wrong as the causing of pain. He further interprets
any egoistic action, enhancing one's own will to life at the expense of that
of another, as causing pain (WWR 1: 334-5, 339).
The descriptive nature of Schopenhauer's ethics is clear in his admission
that he has derived the fundamental principle of his moral philosophy not
225

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
to injure others but to try to help them as much as possible. This is perfectly
justified contextually if his purpose throughout is to account for how people
think and talk about moral values, which in turn agrees with his criticism
of the a priori goals of Kant's theoretical ethics (WWR 1: 272). If moral
philosophy is supposed to take its starting-point from empirical evidence,
from moral reasoning, judgement and practice, as it actually occurs, then
Schopenhauer's method of trying to justify what is morally wrong about
egoistic behaviour and what is morally right about compassionate behaviour
has much to recommend it, even if counter-considerations should finally
countermand his conclusions in the court of philosophical criticism (WWR
1:362-3).
Schopenhauer considers the negative part of his fundamental moral
principle in "The Virtue of Justice", On the Basis of Morality §17, and the
positive part in "The Virtue of Loving-Kindness", §18. "[T]he maxim,
Neminem laede", he begins, "arises in noble dispositions from the knowl-
edge, gained once for all, of the suffering which every unjust action neces-
sarily brings to others and which is intensified by the feeling of enduring
wrong, that is, of someone else's superior strength" (BM: 150). Thus far,
Schopenhauer recapitulates his discussion of moral wrong in The World as
Will and Representation. He now adds the negative concept of a moral right,
which is the right not to be injured by another: "Rational reflection", he
continues, "raises noble dispositions to the firm resolution, grasped once for
all, of respecting the rights of everyone, of never allowing themselves to
encroach on them, of keeping themselves free from the self-reproach of being
the cause of another's suffering" (BM: 150).
The concept of a moral right is the right not to have others interfere with
one's individual will to life. We can almost imagine persons having a kind
of sphere of personal space surrounding them, metaphorically speaking,
which others cannot penetrate without causing suffering and pain. It is
significant that Schopenhauer believes that the concept of another individu-
al's right not to have their will to life infringed upon by others can and should
be "grasped once for all". We either understand that others have such a right,
or we do not. This is not the kind of thing we need to learn gradually over
time through a number of different encounters, but the kind that we can be
expected to intuit as something any other person is due. We might possibly
do so through a feeling similar to compassion. We extend the same right not
to have pain and suffering imposed on others by our actions that we believe
ourselves to deserve as a result of what we find objectionable about surren-
dering any part of our needs or wants in order for others to enhance their
own will to life at our expense.
What is fascinating about Schopenhauer's analysis of the concept of
moral wrong and the right to avoid injury from others is the extent to which
226

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
it reinforces his abiding moral pessimism. Schopenhauer sees pain and
suffering as something extremely negative. It is the basis of all moral wrong
and moral badness in the behaviour of moral agents. Most philosophers
would probably agree. Schopenhauer is unique among other thinkers in that
he regards the reality of the world, thing-in-itself, as the insatiably hungry
Will that through its objectifications in the world as representation is the
source of all suffering. Suffering is bad. Causing others to suffer is morally
wrong. All persons have a moral right not to have suffering imposed upon
them egoistically by others trying to improve their own situation and gratify
their will to life. It is the world itself, the reality that transcends the phenom-
enal appearances of things, that is the non-causal basis for all suffering. We
cannot simply connect the dots in Schopenhauer's moral philosophy by
concluding that the hungry Will as thing-in-itself is morally bad or morally
wrong. Thing-in-itself does not cause anything to happen, nor is the Will
motivated egoistically or in any other way to produce suffering in the world.
We cannot intelligibly blame the world for the suffering it contains, even
though it is its character to objectify itself in such a way that pain and
suffering are inevitable. We can nevertheless agree that for Schopenhauer the
moral pessimism he admits makes the world as representation the dismal
theatre of suffering. It is only the noblest moral natures who, through altru-
istic acts of compassion in their actions toward others, rise above their own
interests and desires in order to alleviate suffering, while defending others
against moral wrongs that threaten to be perpetrated by third parties (BM:
152-3).
The positive part of Schopenhauer's fundamental moral principle con-
cerns compassion toward others, and enjoins us to help others to whatever
extent we can. We are not required by the principle to sacrifice our own
interests for the sake of others, but only to help them when, where and to
whatever degree is reasonable. Schopenhauer explicitly links this part of his
principle to the Asian philosophical religions whose metaphysical tenets he
admires. The connection between intuited idealisms concerning the nature
of the world and a compassionate attitude in morality cannot be accidental.
It stems from a common tacit recognition that the nature of the world
beyond the reality-shrouding veil of Maya makes all persons in reality one
and the same. It implies that we as psychologically individual thinkers are no
different from any other suffering beings on this planet. In reality, we are all
indistinguishable objectifications of the same Will as the one and only thing-
in-itself. When I look at someone suffering in pain, Schopenhauer maintains,
in agreement with the moral stance of Christians, Buddhists and Hindus, I
am really looking at myself. Schopenhauer now turns from questions of
justice, covered by the first half of his fundamental moral principle, to
questions of compassion and loving kindness.4
227

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The positive doctrine of Schopenhauer's fundamental moral principle
supports many of the ethical duties and obligations that have traditionally
been promoted by religions and the practical wisdom of family and civic
values. "Thus in that direct participation," he reports, "resting on and
requiring no arguments, is to be found the only true origin of loving-
kindness, caritus, a,ya,Tir\ [agape], in other words, that virtue whose maxim
is Omnes, quantum poles, juva" (BM: 163). All moral duties to others can
be traced to compassion. It is only through compassion that actions respect-
ing moral rights in acts of justice or benefiting others altruistically can
possibly have moral value (BM: 167).5
Idealist metaphysics of compassion
Let us now consider Schopenhauer's reasoning concerning the metaphysics
of compassion. How can people have compassion toward others?
Schopenhauer asks: "how is it possible for a suffering which is not mine and
does not touch me to become just as directly a motive as only my own
normally does, and to move me to action?" (BM: 165). There is, admittedly,
a problem here to be solved.
Schopenhauer cannot expect altruistic moral conduct, inspired by
compassion, to be motivated in anything like the same way as egoistically
gratifying actions. The difficulty is in understanding why the sufferings of
another person should lead one to offer assistance, to help relieve their pain.
In one's own case the explanation is obvious. We act in order to diminish
our sufferings because we want to avoid pain. Why, however, should we
devote any of our own precious time and treasure to help another person
experiencing discomfort? "As I have said," Schopenhauer resumes, "only by
the fact that although it is given to me merely as something external, merely
by means of external intuitive perception or knowledge, I nevertheless feel
it with him, feel it as my own, and yet not within me, but in another person"
(BM: 165). Schopenhauer gestures toward a phenomenology of compassion.
When we experience compassion we feel another person's suffering, not, so
to speak, within our own skin, but perceptibly as though our sensations were
extended to another's body. When we feel compassionately toward another
person, this is what it can feel like. We may wince and look away, clutch at
ourselves or undergo other kinds of visceral reactions, even though the pain
is not physically within us. The desire to relieve such pain and suffering in
another can therefore approximate even if it does not exactly duplicate the
motivation to do so in the case of pain we are ourselves immediately
suffering.
228

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
Schopenhauer remarks that for such an explanation to make sense there
must be an identification between the compassionate person and the person
in pain. "[T]his presupposes that to a certain extent I have identified myself
with the other man, and in consequence the barrier between the ego and
non-ego is for the moment abolished; only then do the other man's affairs,
his need, distress, and suffering, directly become my own" (BM: 166). The
identification of self and other must be such that the compassionate person
understands at some level that the suffering of the person toward whom
compassion is directed is only superficially another person. "I no longer look
at him as if he were something given to me by empirical intuitive percep-
tion, as something strange and foreign, as a matter of indifference, as some-
thing entirely different from me", Schopenhauer says. "On the contrary, I
share the suffering in him, in spite of the fact that his skin does not enclose
my nerves. Only in this way can his woe, his distress, become a motive for
me\ otherwise it can be absolutely only my own" (BM 166). How, then, in
the end, does the compassionate person literally make the sufferings of
another person his or her own? Schopenhauer admits, as he must, given the
limits of motivational explanation, that such behaviour is a mystery: "I repeat
that this occurrence is mysterious, for it is something our faculty of reason
can give no direct account of, and its grounds cannot be discovered on the
path of experience" (BM: 166).
Schopenhauer opens the way for an idealist metaphysics of compassion.
The basis of compassion is not empirically discoverable or explainable. It
involves the transcendental identity of the unitary intelligible character of all
willing subjects. Moral agents are spatiotemporally physically individuated
one from another only phenomenally within the world as representation as
distinct objectifications of Will. In reality, they are metaphysically numerically
identical, the single unitary pure willing that is deep within every willing
subject (BM: 166). The transcendental ground of Schopenhauer's metaphys-
ics of compassion is indicated in these terms as essential for a complete moral
philosophy (BM: 200). That there is a serious need for a metaphysics of
compassion, and, more generally, for a metaphysical foundation of ethics, is
recognized by Kant as well as Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer, in particular,
disagreeing so radically with Kant with respect to the superstructure of
morality, believes that without a properly transcendental metaphysics of
morals we cannot explain compassion as the only morally valuable motiva-
tion for the two components of his most fundamental moral principle. The
solution to the problem is indicated by Schopenhauer as the metaphysical
identity or shared intelligible character of both compassionate and suffering
individuals (BM: 205-6).
Advancing from mere possibility to the conclusion that all thinking willing
subjects are actually identical, Schopenhauer argues that the compassionate
229

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
moral agent and the suffering person whose pain is to be relieved, or whose
moral right to justice is respected by the only morally valuable motivation
for any action, are in reality identical.
This doctrine teaches that all plurality is only apparent; that in all
the individuals of this world, however infinite the number in which
they exhibit themselves successively and simultaneously, there is yet
manifested only one and the same truly existing essence, present and
identical in all of them. 
(BM: 207)
Schopenhauer maintains:
Accordingly, if plurality and separateness belong only to the
phenomenon, and if it is one and the same essence that manifests
itself in all living things, then that conception that abolishes the
difference between ego and non-ego is not erroneous; but on the
contrary, the opposite conception must be. We find also that this
latter conception is described by the Hindus asMaya, i.e., illusion,
deception, phantasm, mirage. It is the former view which we found
to be the basis of the phenomenon of compassion; in fact, compas-
sion is the proper expression of that view. Accordingly, it would be
the metaphysical basis of ethics and consist in one individual's again
recognizing in another his own self, his own true inner nature.
(BM: 209)
The question remains why Schopenhauer's mystical solution to the meta-
physics of compassion is not after all egoistic. When I witness the sufferings
of another person I am in a sense really seeing myself in pain, in the sense that
I recognize however implicitly in another human body the objectification of
the same thing-in-itself as Will or intelligible character that every willing
subject, myself included, embodies at bottom, transcending every willing sub-
ject alike. If that is why I am inclined at my own expense in time and trouble
to help another individual, why is my motivation in that case not also at least
a disguised form of egoism? The answer is that for Schopenhauer the word
"ego" does not apply to the intelligible character or thing-in-itself, but only
to the superficial phenomenal psychological willing subject also known as the
empirical or acquired character, the self, soul or person, with which we
associate our individual personalities. If this is ego for Schopenhauer, then his
metaphysics of compassion as a moral motivation for helping others in need
clearly transcends egoism, just as the intelligible character of every willing
subject, the one and only Will as thing-in-itself, transcends the phenomenal
psychological or phenomenological ego.6
230

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
Ethics Prize decision
The Danish Royal Society did not award its prize to Schopenhauer, even
though his essay was the only submission. Their reasons are sociologically
rather than philosophically interesting, but are an important part of
Schopenhauer's intellectual biography. The essay is so skilfully composed
and carefully argued that it is hard to see how the Danish committee could
have rejected it on purely objective grounds.
What they officially maintain is that Schopenhauer fails to deliver what
the essay topic requires, while offering instead more in the essay's final
section than entrants were asked to write about in expounding the relation
between ethics and metaphysics. The unknown judges dispute the relevance
of what Schopenhauer has to say about the origin of ethics as originating in
compassion rather than as belonging immediately to conscience or
consciousness. It is clear, however, that Schopenhauer's essay taken as a
whole directly answers the essay question, holding that morality owes its
basic principles to conscience in the sense of compassion as the feeling we
may have for the pain and suffering of others. We have seen that Schopen-
hauer mentions both conscience and consciousness, and that his excursion
into the metaphysics of compassion is meant to prove that superficial psy-
chological considerations of consciousness and conscience alone are not
adequate for the philosophical foundations of morals.
The committee seems to have objected that Schopenhauer, in developing
his own systematic principles of ethics, skirts the essay question rather than
addressing it directly. This is an uncharitable interpretation of what Schopen-
hauer sets out to do in the essay. Without stretching things, his purpose can
just as easily be understood as providing the necessary context for claiming
that the foundations of morals in one sense belong to phenomenal conscious-
ness and conscience in the form of compassion, while in yet another sense the
foundations of morals transcend empirical psychology. The complete ground-
ing of ethics in the metaphysics of Will as thing-in-itself identifies the intelli-
gible character that willing subjects share in common, by virtue of which all
individuals in reality are identical. It further recognizes that compassion, while
mysterious, can be intuitively understood as one's own personal suffering that
only appears superficially to be distributed in different physical bodies in
different places in space and time. These aspects of Schopenhauer's essay are
not superfluous, but immediately relevant to what could and perhaps should
have seemed a legitimate effort directly to answer the prize essay question.
The report of the committee states:
For by omitting what had been asked first and foremost, [the author,
Schopenhauer] thought it was a question of laying down some
231

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
principles of ethics. Therefore that part of the essay in which he
discusses the connection between the ethical principle laid down by
him and his metaphysics has been expounded by him only in an
appendix. Here he submitted more than had been required, whereas
the theme had asked for just such an investigation in which, first and
foremost, the connection between metaphysics and ethics would be
clearly discussed. 
(BM: 216)
The essay question, however, says nothing whatsoever about metaphysics,
but mentions only consciousness and conscience. It leaves open to the author
whether or not in answering that part of the question in the negative it is
appropriate to offer an account that in principle might but need not delve
into metaphysics in order to uncover the theoretical basis of morals. The
committee complains that: "when the author attempts to show that compas-
sion is the foundation of morality, he has not satisfied us by the form of his
essay, nor has he in point of fact shown that this foundation is adequate"
(BM: 216). If the committee was never looking for moral principles in the
first place, but limited the essay question to the problem of the psychologi-
cal origins of morality, how can they object that Schopenhauer fails to
provide them? They add that: "On the contrary, he saw himself obliged even
to admit the very opposite" (BM: 216). Again, Schopenhauer by no means
hesitates to proclaim his fundamental principle of ethics adequate. He thinks
that he has correctly formulated the only possible basis of morality in the
two-part requirement of justice by which all willing subjects are morally
obligated not to injure others, and to show mercy and loving kindness in
trying to alleviate their suffering. He acknowledges that compassion is
mysterious, but this is only because according to his theory it cannot be
empirically motivated. He believes that the transcendental ground of
morality in the identity of the compassionate and suffering individual is
thoroughly upheld by his transcendental idealism and doctrine of Will as
thing-in-itself.
It is in their parting comment that the committee seems to give away its
real reason for withholding the prize from Schopenhauer's essay. "Finally,"
they say, almost offhandedly, "we cannot pass over in silence the fact that
several distinguished philosophers of recent times are mentioned in a manner
so unseemly as to cause just and grave offense" (BM: 216). Here we may
have a better clue as to the prize committee's decision. Hegel, Fichte and
Schelling are criticized by Schopenhauer at different points in the essay with
his usual vitriolic scorn. He cannot help indulging his bad humour concern-
ing these rival exponents of post-Kantian idealism with whom he is so
diametrically opposed, and whose writings in philosophy he thinks are so
utterly confused as to be fraudulent. Moreover, he is envious of the attention
232

COMPASSION AS THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATION OF MORALITY
and accolades they have received, especially from the popular press. We may
naturally wonder why the committee should have taken such offence at
Schopenhauer's castigating especially recent philosophers, as opposed to his
lengthy diatribe against Kant's ethics. What difference can it possibly make
whether Schopenhauer has attacked recent as opposed to long-deceased
philosophers, unless he has thereby ruffled the feathers of some of the
followers of these post-Kantian thinkers active at the time in Denmark or
recruited to serve on the committee? Even if Schopenhauer has gone over
the top in embroidering his criticisms with indelicate polemics, one might
reply that the committee's purpose should have been to evaluate the truth
and strength of Schopenhauer's objections, rather than reacting to the
admittedly unscientific animus with which he sometimes criticizes his op-
ponents. The committee no doubt believed that it would be inappropriate
to sanction what they perceived as Schopenhauer's uncivil pronouncements
about these well-respected ideologues by awarding him the prize, thereby
lending his acid criticisms of these figures their implicit approval.
It is possible to dismiss the committee's rejection of Schopenhauer's
submission to the contest as philosophically incompetent or academically
political. Schopenhauer's discussion of theoretical ethics and its practical
applications as based on compassion constitute a cogent, even brilliant,
original answer to the prize essay question. In lieu of another more successful
submitted contribution, it seems only reasonable, regardless of whether we
agree or disagree with Schopenhauer's moral philosophy, that his essay
should have won the prize. Undeterred by the essay's rejection, Schopen-
hauer soon published it together with his winning entry for the Norwegian
Royal Society's previous year's competition. He includes a statement of the
Danish Society's justification for their verdict for readers to judge the merits
of the decision for themselves. He also attaches a lengthy preface in which
he discusses the scandal and replies in detail to the committee's conclusion
that he had spoken in an unseemly fashion of recent philosophers in such a
way as to give "grave offense". The incident provides yet another example
of Schopenhauer's ill-considered invective delivered against his philosophical
adversaries without concern for its possible repercussions. As such, the
episode constitutes another set piece in Schopenhauer's biography to be
placed alongside his decision to hold his lectures at the same time as Hegel's.
It reflects an unflappable conviction that when he believes himself philo-
sophically in the right, nothing else matters. He thinks it is worth any risk
to test the waters as dramatically as possible for the sake of achieving a pos-
sible stunning victory over his ideological opponents. At best, through such
puerile tokens of disapproval, Schopenhauer might have hoped to win a
minor Pyrric victory over his adversaries. In the end, he was repeatedly de-
nied even that sort of trophy during his lifetime.
233

CHAPTER EIGHT
Schopenhauer's legacy in the
philosophy of Nietzsche, Heidegger
and the early Wittgenstein
Not to my contemporaries or my compatriots, but to mankind I
consign my now complete work, confident that it will not be without
value to humanity, even if this value should be recognized only
tardily, as is the inevitable fate of the good in whatever form ...
Accordingly, as the history of literature testifies throughout, every-
thing of value needs a long time to gain authority ...
(WWRlixviii)
Years of neglect and posthumous triumph
To his dismay, Schopenhauer's philosophy was largely neglected during his
lifetime. He did not obtain serious recognition for his ideas until relatively
late in his career, and then only from a few enthusiastic but relatively
uninfluential thinkers. His books were not well received and sold only a few
copies, they were seldom and then almost always indifferently or unsympa-
thetically reviewed, and they went out of print without his knowledge or
permission. The scant recognition he finally began to receive toward the end
of his life was not enough, and not timely enough, to satisfy him. Schopen-
hauer should have recognized in this situation precisely the kind of sufferings
of will that his own metaphysics entailed, and it is conceivable that he may
have appreciated the irony.1
While Schopenhauer writes that he is not interested in popular acclaim,
that he is in pursuit of truth rather than fame, the very opposite of the
lionized heroes of philosophy in his day, Hegel, Fichte and Schelling, there
is no doubt that he was disappointed by the lack of any meaningful
recognition. However unknown he remained during his life, the first signs
of interest in his work that began to emerge in his twilight years were
234

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
indications of a tsunami that began to sweep the artistic, literary and philo-
sophical worlds of Europe, where Schopenhauer's thought was about to
exert an enormous, powerful and long-lasting influence. Schopenhauer's
aesthetics in particular was important in shaping attitudes toward art that
guided Romantic and Symbolist movements in painting and poetry. His
metaphysics of music had a powerful impact on many musicians, especially
Richard Wagner, who considered himself a Schopenhauerian and sought to
compose music to immediately objectify Will.2
If we were simply to list the important thinkers, writers, musicians and
artists who owe an intellectual or inspirational debt to Schopenhauer from
the end of the nineteenth century through the twentieth century to the
present, we would need to mention at least such figures as Nietzsche,
Sigmund Freud, Martin Heidegger, Wittgenstein, Wagner, Leo Tolstoy,
Anton Chekov, Ivan Turgenev, Guy de Maupassant, Thomas Hardy, Emile
Zola, Edgar Allan Poe, Charles Baudelaire, Joseph Conrad, Eugene
Delacroix, Thomas Mann, Gustav Mahler, Marcel Proust, Rainer Maria
Rilke, Thomas Bernhard, Odilon Redon, Gustave Moreau, Maurice Denis,
Luigi Pirandello, Felix Feneon, Gustav Kahn, J. K. Huysmans, William Butler
Yeats, Max Horkheimer, Samuel Beckett, T. S. Eliot, Somerset Maugham,
Jorge Luis Borges, and directly or more or less indirectly everyone influenced
in turn by them, including the burgeoning industry of professional
Schopenhauer scholarship that flourishes today.3
We get a sense of the way in which Schopenhauer's moral pessimism
struck a chord with several generations of poets and novelists by consider-
ing the Portuguese writer Fernando Pessoa's enigmatic collection of vignettes,
the Livro do Desassossego [The Book of Disquiet]., discovered in manuscript
scribbled on scraps of paper in a trunk after his death in 1935. Pessoa's name
is not often mentioned in connection with Schopenhauer's idealism, but the
similarities between so many of his passages and Schopenhauer's reflections
on the human condition are too striking to be coincidental. This is true
despite or perhaps as further evidence of the fact that Pessoa says repeatedly
that he is not pessimistic, merely "sad". In the first long part of the book,
"A Factless Autobiography", offered under the assumed name of one of his
numerous imaginary literary personae, Bernardo Soares, an assistant
bookkeeper in a Lisbon fabric company, Pessoa writes:
The way I see it, plagues, storms and wars are products of the same
blind force, sometimes operating through unconscious microbes,
sometimes through unconscious waters and thunderbolts, and some-
times through unconscious men. For me, the difference between an
earthquake and a massacre is like the difference between murdering
with a knife and murdering with a dagger. The monster immanent in
235

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
things, for the sake of his own good or his own evil, which are appar-
ently indifferent to him, is equally served by the shifting of a rock on
a hilltop or by the stirring of envy or greed in a heart. The rock falls
and kills a man; greed or envy prompts an arm, and the arm kills a
man. Such is the world - a dunghill of instinctive forces that never-
theless shines in the sun with pale shades of light and dark gold.
To oppose the brutal indifference that constitutes the manifest
essence of things, the mystics discovered it was best to renounce. To
deny the world, to turn our backs on it as on a swamp at whose edge
we suddenly find ourselves standing. To deny, like the Buddha, its
absolute reality; to deny, like Christ, its relative reality; to deny .. .4
In music, literature and the arts, Schopenhauer's ideas found an excep-
tionally receptive audience and fertile ground for expression. The process
was painfully slow during Schopenhauer's lifetime, and non-philosophers,
who are seldom trained in the methods of rigorous argumentation, inevita-
bly found what they wanted and were predisposed selectively to find among
Schopenhauer's ideas. Often they focused exclusively on the aesthetics and
analysis of human nature in Schopenhauer with which many persons
especially of artistic temperament can readily identify. They frequently
fastened onto these implications independently of the epistemic and meta-
physical foundations of Schopenhauer's transcendental idealism, without
which his ethics and aesthetics cannot be fully understood and appreciated.
The idea of Will as thing-in-itself is often confused in many of these
Schopenhauerian traditions with the phenomenal will or will to life, rather
than as the Kantian thing-in-itself.
What, then, of the philosophers who read and came to be influenced by
Schopenhauer? There are many such thinkers who were capable of grasp-
ing the complexities of Schopenhauer's writings and were shaped in their
own philosophical contributions by his ideas. For the sake of convenience,
we shall concentrate on three of the most important: Nietzsche, Heidegger
and Wittgenstein.
Nietzsche's critique of Schopenhauer
The story of Nietzsche's introduction to Schopenhauer's philosophy typifies
the thinker's unpopularity at the time. Because Schopenhauer's books
were not taught in the universities, anyone who became interested in his
thought had to stumble upon it accidentally. This is what happened to
Nietzsche. He was serving in the Prussian cavalry and had fallen from his
236

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
horse, hurting his leg. While recuperating, he found the two volumes of the
second edition of Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation at
a used book stand, and, purely out of curiosity, bought them to read and
pass the time.5
What occurred at first was a rapid and enthusiastic conversion to
Schopenhauer's philosophy in Nietzsche's mind. He describes the awaken-
ing he experienced as one in which Schopenhauer had suddenly revealed the
true nature of the world and provided a set of concepts in terms of which for
the first time he could see behind the surface of phenomena to understand
every aspect of existence. Nietzsche was particularly impressed with
Schopenhauer's account of the nature of human life and the significance of
art. With his prior interests in classical literature and aesthetics, it was this
component of Schopenhauer's thought that had the greatest impact on
Nietzsche. For some time thereafter, Nietzsche apparently considered
himself to be a Schopenhauerian. The effect lasted at least until the 1872
publication of his first book, The Birth of Tragedy, a predominantly
Schopenhauerian account of the origins of tragedy in classical Greece. By
1887, when he came to write On the Genealogy of Morality, Nietzsche had
completely reversed his devotion to Schopenhauer. He then began to
describe Schopenhauer as his spiritual "antipode", and continued a kind of
love-hate relationship with Schopenhauer's ideas throughout the period of
his philosophical activity.6
The Birth of Tragedy relates the origin of tragedy to music, and the origin
of music in turn to a Dionysian expression of desire interpreted roughly
along the lines of a Schopenhauerian conception of Will. Nietzsche identi-
fies two trends in Western culture, mythologized as the spirit of Apollo, the
ancient Greek god of reason, calculation, moderation and planning, and also
of music, in contrast with that of Dionysus, god of wine and sexual frenzy.
Later in his philosophy, after he had abandoned his fondness for
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche reconciles and finds polytheistic accommodation
for both Apollo and Dionysus in the pantheon of art. In The Birth of Tragedy,
he sees these two forces as fundamentally opposed, and throws in his
preference for that side of human nature represented by Dionysus, repre-
senting the forces of emotion and desire, rather than the Apollonian restraint
of intellect. He associates the Apollonian strain he wants to see subordinated
in art with the rationalist philosophy of Socrates, who in Plato's dialogue
the Republic argues that justice is a state of the individual soul in which rea-
son prevails over spiritedness and the carnal appetites.
In his early writings, Nietzsche believes that the fine arts flourish only
when cold Apollonian reason is superseded by hot-blooded Dionysian
passion. "Music and tragic myth", Nietzsche explains, near the end of The
Birth of Tragedy:
237

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
are equally expressive of the Dionysiac talent of a nation and cannot
be divorced from one another. Both have their origin in a realm of
art which is beyond the Apollonian; both shed their transfiguring
light on a region in whose rapt harmony dissonance and the horror
of existence fade away in enchantment.7
"Thus," Nietzsche adds, "the Dionysiac element, as against the Apollonian,
proves itself to be the eternal and original power of art, since it calls into
being the entire world of phenomena".8 Here we clearly see in Nietzsche's
study the elements of a modified Schopenhauerian metaphysics and philoso-
phy of art. Schopenhauer had similarly distinguished between intuition and
abstract knowledge, which in some ways maps directly onto Nietzsche's
exaggerated emphases on these characteristics personified respectively by
Dionysus and Apollo. Schopenhauer anticipates Nietzsche's portrayal of the
aesthetic attitude toward the sublime as one in which the audience suspends
concern for the will to life, or, as Nietzsche prefers more flamboyantly and
with a significant shift of emphasis to say, experiences "the horror of
existence".
Nietzsche reports his indebtedness to Schopenhauer's aesthetics more
explicitly earlier in the text, when he maintains, "In accordance with
Schopenhauer's doctrine, we interpret music as the immediate language of
the will, and our imaginations are stimulated to embody that immaterial
world, which speaks to us with lively motion and yet remains invisible."9 We
find Schopenhauer's technical philosophical terminology scattered through-
out Nietzsche's Birth of Tragedy, for example, when Nietzsche writes: "Apollo
embodies the transcendental genius of the principium individuationis-,
through him alone is it possible to achieve redemption in illusion. The
mystical jubilation of Dionysos, on the other hand, breaks the spell of
individuation and opens a path to the maternal womb of being".10 He
embellishes the same point in adding:
Among the great thinkers there is only one who has fully realized
the immense discrepancy between the plastic Apollonian art and the
Dionysiac art of music. Independently of Greek religious symbols,
Schopenhauer assigned to music a totally different character and
origin from all the other arts, because it does not, like all the others,
represent appearance, but the will directly. It is the metaphysical
complement to everything that is physical in the world; the thing-
in-itself where all else is appearance (The World as Will and Idea, 7).11
In The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche even manages to put in a sympathetic
word for Buddhism, when he theorizes that:
238

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
Apollo, the founder of states, is also the genius of the principium
individuationis, and neither commonwealth nor patriotism can
subsist without an affirmation of individuality. The only path from
orgiastic rites, for a nation, leads to Buddhism, which, given its
desire for Nirvana, requires those rare moments of paroxysm that
lift man beyond the confines of space, time, and individuation.
These paroxysms, in turn, require a philosophy which teaches how
the drab intermediate phases can be triumphed over with the aid of
the imagination.12
How different things were soon to become. In a few years Nietzsche made
a dramatic turn away from every part of Schopenhauer's philosophy. The
rejection of Schopenhauer seems to have come about near the end of 1876,
as documented by a letter he wrote in that year to Richard and Cosima
Wagner. Thereafter, Nietzsche criticizes and distances himself increasingly
from Schopenhauer, beginning with his next book, Human, All Too Human
(1878-80), and proceeding through his middle-period writings, Daybreak
(1881), The Joyful Science (1882), Beyond Good and Evil (1886), and finally
to the Genealogy.
A most valuable resource for investigating Nietzsche's complex relation
to Schopenhauer, what he borrowed from Schopenhauer's thought and how
he later came to reject all he had learned, is Christopher Janaway's collec-
tion, Willing and Nothingness: Schopenhauer as Nietzsche's Educator (1998).
Of special interest is the book's opening essay by Janaway, "Schopenhauer
as Nietzsche's Educator" and the Appendices, including Janaway's transla-
tion of Nietzsche's 1868 essay, "On Schopenhauer", and list of "Nietzsche's
References to Schopenhauer", culled from all of Nietzsche's writings. In his
introduction to the volume, Janaway asks:
How much of Nietzsche's thought is shaped by the effort to rid
himself of Schopenhauerianism, and how much is the persistence of
Schopenhauerian elements in disguise? A collection of pieces
addressing such questions is timely, given that many discussions of
Nietzsche these days make only glancing reference to Schopenhauer
- which is, at best, Hamlet without the Ghost.13
Popular philosophical discussions of Nietzsche in recent years have
proceeded largely in a vacuum because they have not paid sufficient heed
to the Schopenhauerian background of Nietzsche's thought. They have
tended to downplay or simply ignore both the period when Nietzsche con-
sidered himself a follower of Schopenhauer, and later when he decided that
Schopenhauer was pointing humanity in an altogether wrong direction.14
239

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Nietzsche characterizes what has become a non-Schopenhaurian quest in
the Genealogy as one of investigating the "value of morality". Put this way,
the problem presupposes that morality itself is identifiable. We know what
morality is, and the question is only what value it has or how we are to think
of it. Nietzsche's project is remarkable for daring to ask whether what passes
for morality is in another possibly higher sense truly or genuinely moral. He
wants to know whether the morality that he finds preached and practised
by others around him, the conventional ethics that informs the lives and
attitudes, decisions and actions of the surrounding culture, has any authen-
tic moral value, and if so, what that value is and what it means. He specifi-
cally mentions Schopenhauer's philosophy in this connection, citing his
influence:
The issue for me was the value of morality - and over this I had to
struggle almost solely with my great teacher Schopenhauer, to whom
that book, the passion and the secret contradiction of that book, is
directed, as if to a contemporary (- for that book, too, was a
"polemic"). In particular the issue was the value of the unegoistic,
of the instincts of compassion, self-denial, self-sacrifice, precisely the
instincts that Schopenhauer had gilded, deified, and made
otherworldly until finally they alone were left for him as the "values
in themselves," on the basis of which he said "no" to life, also to
himself.15
Nietzsche says that he struggled with Schopenhauer's ideas. This is not,
presumably, because they were so difficult to grasp, but because for a time
he had fallen under Schopenhauer's sway, and had to make an effort to free
himself from his impact as he later found himself rebelling. He expresses a
high degree of passion in his ambivalence and finally antipathy toward
Schopenhauer's thought.
Eventually, Nietzsche came to recognize something profoundly unaccept-
able pervading Schopenhauer's philosophical outlook. Schopenhauer and
the mature Nietzsche are polar opposites in their philosophical approaches
to ethics and the meaning of life. Nietzsche is so repulsed by Schopenhauer's
philosophy, despite its initial attraction, that he finds it natural to go further
and further in a direction diametrically opposed to Schopenhauer's views.
We can summarize the difference that eventually emerges between
Nietzsche and Schopenhauer in Nietzsche's own terms as one in which
Nietzsche says "yes" where Schopenhauer says "no" to life. For reasons we
have now considered, Nietzsche rightly interprets Schopenhauer as espous-
ing a life-denying philosophy that Nietzsche came to see as intellectually and
morally unhealthy. He proposes to counter Schopenhauer's nihilism with a
240

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
more life-affirming philosophical outlook. It is clear from what little
Nietzsche relates in the passage that Schopenhauer's saying "no" to life is
based on the ethics of self-denial and self-sacrifice, which Schopenhauer,
according to Nietzsche, regarded as pure moral values, values in themselves.
Nietzsche, on the contrary, identifies any self-limiting attitudes as life-
denying.
Nietzsche increasingly denounces Schopenhauer's "morality of compas-
sion". This is a significant objection for Nietzsche to make, since the
conventional morality that is reflected even in Schopenhauer's ethical system
understands compassion as the foundation of moral judgement and conduct.
Nietzsche insists that the opposite is true, that compassion for others is life-
denying, and that it leads finally to a nihilistic embrace of nothingness. He
protests:
But against precisely these instincts there spoke from within me an
ever more fundamental suspicion, an ever deeper-delving skepti-
cism! Precisely here I saw the great danger to humanity, its most
sublime lure and temptation - and into what? into nothingness? -
precisely here I saw the beginning of the end, the standstill, the
backward-glancing tiredness, the will turning against life, the last
sickness gently and melancholically announcing itself: I understood
the ever more widely spreading morality of compassion - which
seized even the philosophers and made them sick - as the most
uncanny symptom of our now uncanny European culture, as its
detour to a new Buddhism? to a Buddhism for Europeans? to -
nihilism'}16
Nietzsche characterizes the affirmation of compassion in popular senti-
ment and in Schopenhauer's moral philosophy as a kind of European
Buddhism. One of the world's most widely respected religions, Buddhism
is known for its emphasis on moral compassion for all living things.
Nietzsche speaks of a Buddhism for Europeans, by which he derides the
morality of compassion that he believes has taken hold of European ethics.
It is reasonable to suppose that Nietzsche is thinking also and perhaps more
specifically of Christianity, another major world religion that stresses
compassion, exemplifying the modern European "Buddhist" morality he
rejects as inimical to the full development of human potential.
He also objects to the Buddhist ideal of achieving nirvana. The state of
nirvana is one of total annihilation, of quieting all desire and exiting from
the wheel of dharma or endless cycle of birth, death and rebirth. Nietzsche
reacts violently to this ego-less self-denying religious concept as the desire
for nothingness he denounces as nihilistic. He does not assume that the
241

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Europeans of his day are literally converting to Buddhism, although some
of them then just as today were no doubt attracted to its principles and
practices. He complains that through the influence of self-denying compas-
sion, moral thinkers like Schopenhauer have created an objectionable intel-
lectual climate, whose continued proliferation he hopes to reverse, and
which he describes as Buddhism rhetorically as a way of registering his strong
disapproval.
In keeping with the avowed purpose of his project as a polemic, indicated
in the book's subtitle, Nietzsche reviles compassion, maintaining a steady
barrage of complaints against it as life-denying. The defenders of a compas-
sionate morality are likely to reply that feeling compassion and acting from
compassionate motives toward less fortunate individuals are life-affirming
rather than life-denying, and that caring for others also enhances one's own
life. If Nietzsche is to raise a convincing criticism of moral compassion, he
needs to make a powerful case against the popular conception that sees
compassion as an ethical virtue. He proposes to do so, and he has no
hesitation in identifying the feeling of compassion for others as a symptom
of what he finds objectionable in conventional morality. Caring for others
and their welfare, being moved emotionally by their suffering, and trying
to help them, oddly enough, Nietzsche regards as tantamount to a self-
denying embrace of nothingness. Why should this be so?
Nietzsche understands moral compassion as a relatively new development
in European philosophy. He insinuates that it is an aberration that does not
reflect the underlying spirit of European morality. He suggests that to resist
compassion is not contrary to the real moral orientation of Western philoso-
phy, but rather a return to its true nature. It is probably for this reason also
that he labels moral compassion in non-Western terms as a grafting of Asian
religion onto European stock. He now explains:
For this preferential treatment and overestimation of compassion on
the part of modern philosophers is something new: until this point
philosophers had agreed precisely on the worthlessness of compas-
sion. I name only Plato, Spinoza, La Rochefoucauld, and Kant, four
spirits as different from each other as possible, but united on one
point: their low regard for compassion.17
The rationalist philosophers Nietzsche names on the whole do in fact
consider reason to be more important in moral theory than compassion.
They emphasize logic, the analysis of concepts and practical reasoning over
feeling, and generally consider compassion to be inessential to morality. This
is clear especially in Kant, who discounts emotion, along with inclination
and desire, as morally irrelevant and inimical to autonomy. What constitutes
242

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
moral duty for Kant is the categorical imperative, a principle of pure rea-
son, rather than the psychological factor of whether or not an agent feels
sorry for other people and wants to do something to help them. If compas-
sion as an empirical psychological factor is permitted to influence moral
decision-making, then, Kant believes, the moral agent will lack freedom in
the sense of autonomy, and hence be deprived of moral responsibility.
Schopenhauer, in contrast, as Nietzsche observes, regards compassion as the
basis for morality and the only proper motivation for ethical behaviour, for
putting into practice what a correct morality requires in theory.
Although Nietzsche is right to argue that rationalist philosophers
downplay the role of such emotions as compassion in moral obligation, it
is questionable whether it is accurate also to say that compassion is a
particularly new development in European thought. If we think of European
philosophy as heavily influenced by Christian theology, then it is a more
difficult proposition to agree with Nietzsche that compassion is something
new on the philosophical horizon in the Europe of his day. On the contrary,
it might be historically more accurate to conclude that compassion is part
of the very fibre of European morality, at least from the time of the late
Roman Empire. What is new or old is a relative matter. It is worth noting
that to the extent that Nietzsche regards a morality of compassion as a
novelty in European thought, he is presumably thinking back almost two
thousand years to a time before the rise of Christianity.
After struggling with and finally overcoming his initial infatuation over
Schopenhauer's system, Nietzsche declares that Schopenhauer's philosophy
must be rejected as detrimental to a healthy life-affirming outlook. Where
compassion governs morality, individual will to power (Wille zur Macht) is
denied and sacrificed for the sake of others, contributing ultimately to self-
denial. Schopenhauer is the central figure in Nietzsche's critique of nihilis-
tic European Buddhism. Nietzsche, for reasons we are now in a position to
understand, criticizes Schopenhauer's philosophy precisely on these grounds.
Schopenhauer would not be embarrassed in the least by this conclusion. He
is fully confident that a correct philosophical account of the human condi-
tion ought to entail that life and the will to life are worthless except as some-
thing to be resisted and overcome for the sake of knowledge. Nietzsche for
his part, on the other hand, thoroughly rejects Schopenhauer's metaphys-
ics and moral philosophy, which he abominates as spiritually unwholesome.
He is repelled by Schopenhauer's subjugation of the will in a very visceral
way, at a deep level of intuition that precedes argument and signals funda-
mental irreconcilable differences in their respective outlooks on life.
After a powerful flirtation with Schopenhauerianism, Nietzsche comes to
regard himself as anti-Schopenhauerian. He argues, not only in the Gene-
alogy, but in all of his writings after this time, that Schopenhauer's denial
243

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
of life, his exaltation of suffering and salvation, has had a deleterious effect
not only on philosophy but on the course of human development. He
believes that it is vital to resist the kinds of attitudes that inform
Schopenhauer's idealism and moral pessimism for the good of the human
species. It is only through unlimited reign of the individual will to power,
Nietzsche's non-transcendentalist version of Schopenhauer's concept of the
will to life, that Nietzsche believes our species can realize its full potential.
To deny the will to life in Nietzsche's view is like keeping a sprouted acorn
under a bushel so that it cannot receive the light it needs in order to thrive
and grow into an oak tree. Denial and renunciation of the will to life, in effect
of life itself, in Schopenhauer, is seen by Nietzsche as profoundly unhealthy
because it is contrary to nature.
Regardless of how much he has learned from Schopenhauer, Nietzsche
finally opposes him on virtually every key point of his philosophy. It is
possible to object that in repudiating Schopenhauer's ethics and his rejection
of the will to life even as the positive therapeutic effect of fine art, Nietzsche
goes too far, swinging the pendulum as far as it can go in the opposite direc-
tion. He advocates giving full vent to the will to power for the sake of allowing
human potential to flower without any restraint. The much-disputed break
in relations between Nietzsche and Wagner, who lived together for a time and
were in close intellectual sympathy and collaboration for eight years, is in
large part a result of Nietzsche's mounting disaffection for Schopenhauer and
Wagner's continuing commitment to the truth of Schopenhauer's philosophy.
It is nevertheless significant testimony to the importance of Schopenhauer's
later prestige years after his death that a thinker as passionate as Nietzsche
should have found it necessary to take his bearings from Schopenhauer and
criticize his ideas so vehemently in developing his own philosophy, as though
one pole of a very powerful magnet had repelled another as far and as
violently as possible in the opposite philosophical direction.18
Heidegger on Do-se/n, Sorge, Zuhandenheit, Ge/crssen/ie/f
Looking ahead from the late-nineteenth century to the middle of the
twentieth century, Martin Heidegger is a more recent Schopenhauerian
whose existentialist ontology bears many signs of Schopenhauer's influence.
It is possible to interpret Heidegger's philosophy as a synthesis of the method
of transcendental phenomenology developed by his teacher, Edmund
Husserl, informed in a modified and distinctively Heideggerean language
by what are still recognizably Schopenhauerian ideas concerning the
philosophical meaning of human life.
244

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
Julian Young begins his essay "Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Art, and the
Will" (1996), with the words:
The question of the relationship between Schopenhauer and
Heidegger has been, in English at least, virtually untouched. This is
somewhat odd given the evident fact that Heidegger read Schopen-
hauer and the rather striking affinities between the two. No doubt
this neglect has been encouraged by the fact that Heidegger's explicit
references to Schopenhauer are, almost without exception, contemp-
tuous.19
Young is right to cite the few and virtually unanimously derogatory references
to Schopenhauer in Heidegger as a reason for the topic of their relationship
having been so largely neglected in philosophical commentary on Heidegger.
Another reason, in the same way that Janaway complains about the lack of
appreciation of Schopenhauer's positive and negative influence on Nietzsche,
is that contemporary scholars of Heidegger, as of Nietzsche for the most part,
have not studied Schopenhauer in depth, and hence are unprepared to notice
the most important of Schopenhauer's ideas reflected and transformed in the
work of or reacted against by these more widely discussed thinkers.
In Heidegger's case, it is possible to trace back to Schopenhauer virtually
all of the most distinctive concepts of Da-sein (human existence, literally
being-there), Sorge (care or concern), Zuhandenheit (literally to-handed-ness,
an attitude of seeing everything in the world as a raw material or tool for
human use) and Gelassenheit (an attitude of leaving things alone, non-in-
terference with what is found that could otherwise be put to use for human
needs and wants). Protagoras, in the pre-Socratic world of ancient Greece,
said that "Man is the measure of all things, of those that exist and those that
do not exist". Heidegger seems to take this motto as his own for the phe-
nomenology of existence that he undertakes to articulate in his 1927
masterwork, Being and Time (Sein und Zeit). As a student of Husserl,
Heidegger argues that the only method of ontology is phenomenology. From
this starting-point, he proposes to analyse the concept of being in its most
general terms, and to answer the question of being, of what it means for
something to exist, along with the problem of why there is something rather
than nothing. When he enters phenomenologically into the concept of being,
he observes that all existence, seen unavoidably through the ontologist's
human eyes, can only be understood in human terms, from the standpoint
of human interests, which he refers to as Da-sein. He adapts and typographi-
cally modifies the German word Dasein for this purpose, whose original
meaning is simply "being there" or literally "there-being", in the sense of
manifest presence, confronting the perceiver with its undeniable reality,
245

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
giving it a particularly anthropocentric interpretation more specifically as
human being-in-the-world.20
The phenomenological method of exploring the fundamental question of
being encourages Heidegger to discover within himself that all things are
tinged with human concern. Existence needs to be understood from the per-
spective of what he characterizes as a kind of anxiety, related to every enti-
ty's potential uses for human purposes. The things we own and the things
we encounter even if we do not have any special responsibility toward them,
according to Heidegger, are always seen or understood in terms of our care
or concern (Sorge). We feel as though they need to be handled and main-
tained, and we feel distress over the prospect of their deteriorating to the
point of becoming useless for our needs. More directly, Heidegger believes
that we experience the world of objects from the standpoint of to-handed-
ness or Zuhandenheit, considering everything as something we might be able
to use, to pick up and manipulate, even if we cannot physically do so with
our bare hands, but for which we may require powerful machines to manu-
ally guide and control.
The connection to Schopenhauer is obvious if we read into Heidegger's
theory of Sorge and Zuhandenheit Schopenhauer's concept of the will to life.
In setting forth additional points of agreement and disagreement between
Schopenhauer and the early and later Heidegger on the relation of art and
the individual will, we find in the early Heidegger an ontic conception of
the differences among things as stemming from the standpoint of the
perceiver's will and purposive preoccupations. This yields a Schopenhauer-
ian anticipation of Heidegger's key notions of ready-to-handedness and
human being-in-the-world. The two philosophers, despite many differences,
emphasize a kind of idealistic outlook on the world. They assume the
perspective of an individual phenomenological investigator beginning with
perceptual data as something given in the represented world, and trying to
abstract philosophical principles from intuitive knowledge. In presenting
their findings, Schopenhauer and Heidegger arrive at a number of conclu-
sions that are so similar as to be due either to coincidence in the investiga-
tion of similar problems by similar methods, or, as is more likely, because
Heidegger, through his reading, was directly influenced by Schopenhauer's
idealism. Where Schopenhauer recommends denial of the will to life, either
through the renunciation of the ascetic saint or transcendent rapture in the
experience of beauty or the sublime of aesthetic genius, as the only salva-
tion from the suffering incurred by the will to life, so Heidegger describes
a kind of salvation from the care and concern of Zuhandenheit in
Gelassenheit, an attitude of simply leaving things alone.
Young explains Heidegger's turn from the early to the later philosophy
as a recognition of the need to alter his system to make room for something
246

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
like Schopenhauer's account of salvation through aesthetic experience.
Heidegger defines being-in-the-world by reference to time, and to social
circumstances in particular. What Heidegger, expanding on Schopenhauer's
concept, calls the assertive will in modern technological society creates a
pathological attitude toward the world that reduces nature to a mere supply
store for human wants. The later Heidegger is convinced that only art, in
somewhat the way Schopenhauer conceived it as a release from individual
willing, can save us from this deplorable state of things through a return to
metaphysical at-homeness. Young further finds that Heidegger's theory of
techne provides the basis for two criticisms of Schopenhauer's aesthetics. The
aesthetic condition is not necessarily opposed to will without qualification,
as Schopenhauer maintains, but more specifically to what Heidegger calls
the self-assertive will. The will in general, moreover, is not essentially
excluded from aesthetic activity, but can be embodied in a proper mode of
production, and even in an entire culture.21
The spirit of Schopenhauer's philosophy pervades Heidegger's Being and
Time in these and other ways, despite Heidegger's efforts to separate his
existential ontology from Schopenhauer's moral pessimism. Heidegger,
much like Schopenhauer, thinks that we can learn to overcome the aliena-
tion from authentic existence that occurs as a result of seeing the world
primarily as a warehouse of things to satisfy our wants. Heidegger is also
often compared to Schopenhauer on the basis of Schopenhauer's proto-
phenomenological understanding, in ways that are preminiscent of Merleau-
Ponty's The Phenomenology of Perception. Merleau-Ponty similarly
thematizes a sense of place and interaction with the world that occurs
through proprioception, body knowledge and the range and limits of activity
available to a human agent.22 This concept is much in agreement with if not
actually derivative from Heidegger's concept otDa-sein as human being-in-
the-world, revealed by phenomenology as a potentially endless succession
of time horizons for alternative courses of action. The idea in both Heidegger
and Merleau-Ponty is related indirectly to Schopenhauer's second way of
knowing the body intuitively through wilful direction and control of its
actions.
There is also a methodological epistemic analogy between Schopenhauer
and Heidegger. Schopenhauer suggests, in his first effort to prove that thing-
in-itself is Will, that desire and other manifestations of phenomenal will to
life is the Trojan horse by which knowledge can penetrate the fortress wall
that separates the world as it appears and as transcendental reality. The em-
pirical will for Schopenhauer allows metaphysics to peek behind the veil of
Maya to discover that thing-in-itself is pure willing or Will. There we dis-
cover it to be blind, objectless and therefore subjectless, uncaused and
unmotivated urging, undirected striving. Heidegger similarly glimpses the
247

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
nature of being phenomenologically through the eyes of temporally situated
personal experience, and in particular as Da-sein, or specifically human
being-in-the-world. It, too, is therefore a kind of Trojan horse that enables
us to unlock the mystery posed by the question of being that Heidegger hopes
to resolve. Young maintains:
Heidegger divided his philosophy into early and late in terms of a
"turning" (die Kehre) that occurred in about 1930. While there is a
great deal of debate as to the radicalness and uniqueness of this
"turning," a rough and ready division of his philosophy into early
and late is universally accepted ... I want to postulate an extremely
bold two-part hypothesis, (i) Early Heidegger, in particular the
Heidegger of Being and Time (1927) = the Schopenhauer of,
roughly, Books I and II of The World as Will and Representation. In
a different sense of "early" one could speak of "early" Schopenhauer
and say that early Heidegger = "early" Schopenhauer, (ii) Late
Heidegger = the result of adding Books III and IV of The World as
Will, in particular, the discussion of art, to Books I and II. (Late
Heidegger = "late" Schopenhauer.)23
Young does not believe that these identifications are strictly true; in fact,
he denies their validity. "This hypothesis is certainly false", he continues.
"There is, however, enough truth in it to make its exploration fruitful both
in terms of illuminating the affinities between the two philosophers and in
terms of illuminating the issues themselves with which both are con-
cerned."24 Whether and to what extent such correlations between Heidegger
and Schopenhauer can be substantiated, and to whatever degree they shed
light on the ideas each develop, Young usefully calls attention to a sufficiently
strong basis of contact between the two thinkers to make the comparison
worth exploring.
By making phenomenology the methodological foundation of ontology,
rather than the other way around, Heidegger, like Schopenhauer before him,
investigates the nature of being from the standpoint of the knower's felt
condition. For Schopenhauer, this is intuition concerning the phenomenal
will or will to life, while for Heidegger it is phenomenology of Da-sein,
construed as human being-in-the-world. The difference, and the reason why
Schopenhauer's pre-Husserlian phenomenological starting-point in meta-
physics is more excusable than Heidegger's, is that Schopenhauer, unlike
Heidegger, is clearly involved in an empirical enquiry into introspective clues
about the nature of reality, of Will as Kantian thing-in-itself, and not, like
Heidegger, attempting rigorously to establish the meaning of a concept a
priori before proceeding to its application.25 Schopenhauer undoubtedly
248

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
influences Heidegger's thinking about the question of being, the concept of
Da-sein, interpreted in terms of a Schopenhauerian understanding of human
will. Schopenhauer's moral pessimism is translated into Heidegger's concept
of care, concern and ready-to-handedness, which Heidegger regards also as
a regrettable fact about the world. It is something to be resisted, by a
contravening ethics of leaving-things-alone, just as Schopenhauer proposes
that salvation from the sufferings produced by the demands of the phenom-
enal will to life can only be attained by not giving in to such pressing urges
but by overcoming will for the sake of knowledge in ascetic renunciation or
aesthetic rapture.
To attribute a lineage to Heidegger's ideas, going back to Schopenhauer
and Husserl, in no way detracts from the originality of Heidegger's philoso-
phy, any more than it does so in the case of Schopenhauer to trace sources
of his distinctions and philosophical principles to Plato, Kant and the Vedas
and Upanishads. In his existentialist ontology, Heidegger offers a remark-
able transcription of Schopenhauer's philosophy into a twentieth-century
idiom of Husserlian phenomenology and a concern with the ethics of
technology. Heidegger's methodology and its distinctive field of applications
could not have arisen for Schopenhauer in quite the same way, given changes
in the twentieth-century intellectual context that became prevalent only
many years after he died. Nor could Schopenhauer have approached these
problems with the same sense of urgency as Heidegger following the accel-
erated development of technological culture from the end of the nineteenth
century. The differences between Schopenhauer and Heidegger should
nevertheless not obscure the definite points of contact they share.
Wittgenstein's early Schopenhaurianism
It is not only among continental thinkers like Nietzsche and Heidegger that
Schopenhauer's idealism exerted influence. He was also enormously impor-
tant especially in the early philosophical thinking of young Wittgenstein.
Wittgenstein, as one of the seminal founders of analytic philosophy at the
beginning of the twentieth century, testifies to the wide philosophical appeal
of Schopenhauer's thought and his continuing significance in many branches
and traditions of philosophy.
What, exactly, did Wittgenstein learn from Schopenhauer, and how are
Schopenhauer's ideas transformed by Wittgenstein in his two earliest surviv-
ing writings, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus and Notebooks 1914-1916?
There is hearsay evidence that Wittgenstein, like many other Austrian intel-
lectuals near the end of the nineteenth century, discovered in Schopenhauer's
249

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
moral pessimism a touchstone for his own sense of adolescent Weltschmerz.
G. H. von Wright, a student of the later Wittgenstein at Cambridge in the
1930s, writes in his book, Wittgenstein (1982): "If I remember rightly,
Wittgenstein told me that he had read Schopenhauer's Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung in his youth and that his first philosophy was a Schopenhauerian
epistemological idealism."26 A. J. Ayer, another later acquaintance of
Wittgenstein's, although not a member of his inner circle of students, simi-
larly recounts:
Wittgenstein was not entirely dismissive of the philosophers of the
past, but his reading of them was markedly eclectic. As a boy he was
strongly influenced by Schopenhauer's principal work, The World
as Will and Representation, and we shall see that this influence
persists in the Tractates, though the only philosophers to whom he
acknowledges a debt in the Tractatus are Frege and Russell. The
book contains a passing reference to Kant and has been thought by
some critics to display a Kantian approach, but there is no evidence
that Wittgenstein made any serious study of Kant's writings and his
knowledge of Kant was probably filtered through Schopenhauer.27
Ayer seems unaware of the fact that Wittgenstein had made a close study
of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. He did so with Ludwig Hansel and
Michael Drobil while a prisoner of the Italians at the end of the First World
War in the castle at Monte Cassino. It seems reasonable also to infer that
Wittgenstein's first interest in Kant may have been stirred by his prior reading
of Schopenhauer.28
Wittgenstein's aphoristic style, first perfected in the Notebooks, Proto-
Tractatus and Tractatus, and later modified in The Blue and Brown Books,
Philosophical Investigations and virtually all of the posthumous manuscripts,
seems in part at least to have been inspired by Schopenhauer, as many
commentators have assumed.29 Wittgenstein was probably stylistically influ-
enced to a limited degree by Schopenhauer, particularly if he was familiar
not only with The World as Will and Representation but also with the second
volume of Schopenhauer's Parerga and Paralipomena. This, unfortunately,
is a possibility that no Wittgenstein or Schopenhauer scholar seems to have
convincingly demonstrated. Von Wright, in his addendum to Norman
Malcolm's Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir with a Biographical Sketch by
Georg Henrik von Wright, argues that it is Georg Christoph Lichtenberg in
his Aphorisms, written in numerous notebooks and in the margins of
accounting ledgers up to the time of his death in 1799, rather than Schopen-
hauer, that Wittgenstein may have adopted as his admired literary model.
As further corroboration, Wittgenstein also seems to have adopted some of
250

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
Lichtenberg's ideas concerning the relation between mathematics and the
world of nature.30
Wittgenstein himself later denied any strong impact by Schopenhauer on
his own early thinking. M. O'C. Drury reports a conversation with Wittgen-
stein as follows:
WITTGENSTEIN: My fundamental ideas came to me very early in life.
DRURY: Schopenhauer?
WITTGENSTEIN: No; I think I see quite clearly what Schopenhauer
got out of his philosophy - but when I read Schopenhauer I seem
to see to the bottom very easily. He is not deep in the sense that
Kant and Berkeley are deep.31
It may be surprising to find Wittgenstein mentioning Berkeley as deep,
especially in comparison with Schopenhauer. Nevertheless, we know that
Wittgenstein was often as reluctant to acknowledge predecessors as he was
jealous especially of his later ideas not being plagiarized by such later
contemporaries as Gilbert Ryle, Rudolf Carnap and Friedrich Waismann.
The oral history may be ambiguous, and we can only hope to resolve the
question by considering Wittgenstein's own writings to decide whether it is
reasonable to attribute to him a Schopenhauerian strand in his early thought.
If we agree with many recent commentators that in the Tractatus and
Notebooks Witgenstein is a kind of semantic and logical transcendentalist,
then there may be a sound basis for identifying Schopenhauer's distinction
between the world as Will and representation as somehow at work in
Wittgenstein's philosophy. There are several respects in which Wittgenstein
evinces Schopenhauerian transcendentalism in the Tractatus. He notably
distinguishes between sign and symbol, when he writes "The sign is the part
of the symbol perceptible to the senses".32 The distinction is crucial to
Wittgenstein's efforts to provide a general semantics for the possibility of
determinate meaning in any logically possible language. Wittgenstein is as
aware as Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell that ordinary language is rife
with conceptual confusions, and in particular with ambiguities in which
single terms have more than one referent or no referent at all, as well as
multiple terms with difference senses but the same reference.
Unlike Frege and Russell, Wittgenstein is unwilling to take refuge in an
ideal language or Begriffsschrift. He recognizes that formal technical and
mathematical languages from a historical point of view derive from pre-
existent natural languages in which it is already possible to express deter-
minate meaning. It does not contribute to Wittgenstein's purpose of
understanding the semantics of languages generally to turn his back espe-
cially on colloquial languages. As many commentators have observed, this
251

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
is one important respect in which Russell in his introduction to the Tractatus
seriously misunderstands Wittgenstein's intentions.33 It is only by distinguish-
ing between two aspects of language, the perceptible sign part of a symbol
and its transcendent imperceptible part, that Wittgenstein is able to explain
the logic and picture theory semantics of all genuine languages despite their
superficial confusions and ambiguities. Whereas colloquial language
disguises the meanings of thoughts, its transcendent symbolism expresses
definite meaning by picturing an existent or non-existent state of affairs in
a one-one correspondence between the fully analysed elements of a sentence
in the linguistic order and the fully reduced elements of a state of affairs in
the ontic order.34 The colloquial sentence "It is raining" does not picture
precipitation in its sign aspect at the superficial level of its orthographic
appearance in conventional English. It does so, rather, according to Witt-
genstein, in its transcendent imperceptible symbolic level as a truth function
of elementary propositions corresponding to the co-presence of relevant
atomic facts or states of affairs, and in the one-one picturing of simple names
concatenated in each elementary proposition with the simple objects corre-
spondingly juxtaposed in each pictured atomic fact or state of affairs.35
The sign-aspect of language is Wittgenstein's semantic version of
Schopenhauer's concept of the world as representation. It is that part of
language that is perceptible to intuition and represented in thought. The
transcendent symbol-aspect of language is Wittgenstein's semantic version
of Schopenhauer's concept of thing-in-itself, understood as the transcend-
ent reality underlying the world of appearances or representations. Wittgen-
stein does not need to posit the existence of an ideal language if every
language already has an ideal transcendent aspect by virtue of which it
expresses meaning. Similarly, therefore, he has no need to abandon conven-
tional colloquial language for the sake of limiting semantic theory only to
an ideal language. If we compare Plato to Frege and Russell and Wittgen-
stein to Kant and Schopenhauer, then we can see how Wittgenstein's prior
reading and interest in Schopenhauer might have prepared him later in his
study of Whitehead and Russell's logic inPrincipiaMathematica (1910-13).
He need not construct an ideal language in order to understand the mean-
ing of language generally, if all languages have a Schopenhauerian transcen-
dental aspect in which ambiguities are avoided and meaning functions
pictorially in a metaphysics of logical atomism.
Where Plato posits two worlds, the changing phenomenal world of
Becoming and the real unchanging world of Being, of appearances and the
realm of eternal Forms or Ideas, Frege and Russell posit two categories of
languages. They distinguish between ordinary languages with a natural his-
tory developed through accidental contingencies of expression in linguistic
communities, and ideal languages such as that to which Frege's 
Begriffsschrift
252

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
and Whitehead and Russell's Principia Mathematica aspire. Similarly, where
Kant and Schopenhauer postulate a single unified world with two aspects,
as perceptually intuited representation and transcendent thing-in-itself, there
Wittgenstein posits a single linguistic order, for all colloquial and artificial
languages, each of which has a dual aspect. All languages in Wittgenstein's
Tractatus can be understood from the standpoint of their perceivable signs
and imperceivable transcendent symbols. It is with respect to their symbolic
aspect alone that Wittgenstein argues that meaning is grounded in the one-
one picturing of fully analysed elements in language and in the states of
affairs that the sentences in a language picture. Within the nineteenth-century
German logic and semantic tradition, Bernard Bolzano in his Wissenschafts-
lehre had previously distinguished in similar Kantian fashion between
sentences (Satze) and sentences-in-themselves (Satze an sich). The latter are
evidently supposed to be the linguistic equivalent of Kant's or Schopen-
hauer's thing-in-itself, which Bolzano designates by a choice of term that
unmistakably recalls Kant's Ding an sich.36
There is nevertheless an important difference between Bolzano's and
Wittgenstein's dual aspect treatment of the semantics of sentences and Kant's
and Schopenhauer's metaphysics of the world as phenomenon and thing-
in-itself. Whereas for Kant and Schopenhauer there is only one thing-in-
itself, to which the principium individuationis does not apply, for
Wittgenstein and Bolzano there are as many transcendent meanings, symbol
aspects of colloquial sentences for Wittgenstein, Satze an sich for Bolzano,
as there are meaningful sentences in all possible languages. Wittgenstein
argues that one-one picturing relations, pictorial and representational form
and logical form, are all transcendent. The division is the basis for his
important further distinction between what can be said and what can only
be shown. The showing of which Wittgenstein speaks is not perceptual or
intuitive in Schopenhauer's sense, but takes place only in the transcendent
order where the symbolic aspect of language stands in one-one correspond-
ence with the fully analysed atomic components of whatever states of affairs
a sentence transcendentally pictures in the "great mirror" or "logical scaf-
folding" of language.37
Wittgenstein accordingly writes: "Logic is not a theory but a reflexion of
the world. Logic is transcendental."38 The perceptible part of language and
the states of affairs in logical space that constitute a world for early
Wittgenstein are the equivalent of Schopenhauer's world as representation.
Logical form, pictorial and representational form, among other items of
interest, in turn transcend the world of facts, where alone they show them-
selves. They do not exist as objects or states of affairs in what Schopenhauer
would call the world as representation, but stand outside all facts and objects,
comprising a transcendent logical structure of the world in which pictorial
253

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
meaning relations obtain. It is possible in this light to understand Wittgen-
stein's picture theory of meaning as a Schopenhauerian semantics in which
the distinction between the world as representation and as thing-in-itself is
applied on a limited scale to language, for the sake of interpreting the
meanings expressed by sentences in similarly dual - perceptible and tran-
scendent - aspects.
Wittgenstein's reasoning in the Tractatus, furthermore, takes the form of
a Kantian transcendental argument. Just as Kant begins with something
given, a datum, and asks transcendentally what must be true in order for the
given to be possible, so similarly, although less explicitly, Wittgenstein begins
with the fact that we can use language to express determinate meaning, or
that genuine uses of language are determinately meaningful, and asks in
effect what must be true in order for such a thing to be possible.39 What he
concludes, with all the assurance of any of Kant's or Schopenhauer's a pri-
ori synthetic pronouncements, is that in order for the determinate meaning-
fulness of language to be possible it must be the case that sentences in a
language stand in one-one picturing relations with the states of affairs that
sentences picture. The picturing relation obtains only in the transcenden-
tal symbolic aspect of language, and only when fully analysed as concatena-
tions of simple names possessing the same structures of the simple objects
they name in the corresponding facts as sentence pictures. There is scarcely
any other way to understand the theory of the Tractatus than in these
Kantian-Schopenhauerian terms, as Erik Stenius, Allan Janik and other
commentators have urged.40
It is not only logical, pictorial and representational form that transcends
the empirical world of facts, according to the Tractatus. Wittgenstein places
value, ethics and aesthetics (identified as one) outside the world, by which
attempts to express value are relegated to the extrasemantic category of
literal nonsense. Value thereby joins representational form, logical form, the
metaphysical subject, and whatever cannot be said but only shown. This
includes, as Wittgenstein subsequently adds, the mystical, das Mystische,
interpreted Spinozistically as religious or spiritual experience of the world
considered as a whole as though from the Godlike perspective of eternity,
sub specie aeterni*1 Moral and aesthetic value transcends the world. The
elimination of value from the world implies that ethics, including attempts
at ethical judgement in theory and practice, is nonsense, since, according to
the logic and semantics of the Tractatus, only logically contingent statements
of fact convey meaning.42
6.41 
The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the
world everything is as it is and happens as it does happen. In
it there is no value - and if there were, it would be of no value.
254

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
If there is a value which is of value, it must lie outside all
happening and being-so. For all happening and being-so is
accidental.
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in the world, for
otherwise this would again be accidental.
It must lie outside the world.
6.42 
Hence also there can be no ethical propositions.
Propositions cannot expess anything higher.
6.421 It is clear that ethics cannot be expressed.
Ethics is transcendental.
(Ethics and aesthetics are one.)43
Wittgenstein locates undifferentiated value outside the world. He explains
the semantic implications of transcendence for the ineffability of ethics and
the pseudopropositional status of efforts to express ethical value. Finally, he
concludes with an intriguing identification of ethics and aesthetics as one.44
The transcendence of value and identification of ethics and aesthetics are
explicit also in the Notebooks, when Wittgenstein writes: "The work of art
is the object seen sub specie aeternitatis, and the good life is the world seen
sub specie aeternitatis. This is the connexion between art and ethics".45
The discussion of transcendence in the Tractatus does not draw directly
on the transcendence of the metaphysical subject as transmitting transcend-
ence to value by constituting the transcendental ground of subjective
valuation, as in one of Wittgenstein's Notebooks arguments on the topic. In
the Notebooks entry for 2 August 1916, Wittgenstein writes, in distinctively
Schopenhauerian terms:
And this consciousness is life itself.
Can there be any ethics if there is no living being but myself?
If ethics is supposed to be something fundamental, there can.
If I am right, then it is not sufficient for the ethical judgment that
a world is given.
Then the world in itself is neither good nor evil.
For it must be all one, as far as concerns the existence of ethics,
whether there is living matter in the world or not. And it is clear that
a world in which there is only dead matter is in itself neither good
nor evil, so even the world of living things can in itself be neither
good nor evil.
Good and evil only enter through the subject. And the subject is
not part of the world, but a boundary of the world.
It would be possible to say (a la Schopenhauer): It is not the world
of Idea that is either good or evil; but the willing subject.46
255

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The Tractatus develops Wittgenstein's concept of the subject's transcendence
even more fully than the Notebooks, but leaves the connection between the
subject's transcendence and the transcendence of value unstated.47
What does Wittgenstein mean in Tractatus 6.421 by identifying ethics and
aesthetics as one? Ethics and aesthetics are not identical merely because both
are transcendent, unsayable and non-discursive.48 The same is true of
pictorial form, logical and mathematical form, and sheer nonsense like
"There is only one 1" (4.1272) or "Socrates is identical" (5.473, 5.4733).
Wittgenstein does not lump all of these together as one in the realm of
Unsinn [nonsense] in the way that he specifically identifies ethics and
aesthetics. We can be reasonably certain that Wittgenstein does not mean
anything so quotidian as that morality reduces in practice to the duty to
create, preserve and appreciate beauty, or that the life of the artist is some-
how supposed to be a fulfilment of every type of moral obligation.
The Notebooks entries for July and August 1917, in which these parts of
the Tractatus are first drafted, preserve Wittgenstein's reflections on
Schopenhauer's idealist metaphysics, ethics and aesthetics. The difficult
parenthetical pronouncement of Tractatus 6.421 might be understood by
considering Schopenhauer's doctrine that aesthetic genius involves the moral
duty to place knowing above willing and to perfect natural forms in art.
Schopenhauer's hints at an identification of ethics and aesthetics in turn go
back to Plato's Pythagorean concept of justice as a harmony of the parts of
the soul, and Socrates' portrayal of the moral wrongdoer as "unmusical".49
We do not discover Schopenhauer anywhere explicitly stating, as Witt-
genstein does, that ethics and aesthetics are one. He does, however, relate
ethics to aesthetics indirectly by describing the will-less attitude of aesthetic
absorption in nature or in a work of great beauty or the sublime as a mode
of salvation, with evident moral overtones. Wittgenstein has not bought into
all of Schopenhauer's metaphysical apparatus by which this conclusion is
upheld, but he does seem for similar reasons to regard ethics and aesthetics
as indistinguishable.
Ethics and aesthetics are one for Wittgenstein in the Tractatus because the
requirements of art are moral obligations. They make demands upon an
artist's actions that are not merely like but indistinguishable from the moral
attitude of a responsible craftsperson. He regards all actions as works of art,
which we can perform skilfully and stylishly, which is to say morally, or
unskilfully and unstylishly, which is to say irresponsibly. There is an art to
everything, because every action as a human doing is an artifact rather than
something that merely occurs naturally in non-human or extrahuman reality.
We are good or bad artists in every action we undertake. Wittgenstein,
accordingly, can discern no meaningful difference between ethics and
aesthetics because they are merely different ways of emphasizing what
256

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
persons choose to do or not to do. The actions in which ethics and aesthet-
ics are one include but are not limited to the making of art and artifacts as
narrowly conceived, in painting, sculpting, writing or reciting poetry,
drafting a novel, designing a work of architecture, composing a sonata or
whistling a tune. There is an indistinguishable ethics-aesthetics for all other
less obviously artistic actions as well; in diapering a baby, having a conver-
sation with a friend, negotiating a treaty, serving in the military or deciding
whether or not violently to avenge a perceived wrong. The ethical terms we
use in judging the merits of such behaviour are equally aesthetic, and the
aesthetic vocabulary by which we assess the merits of artistic endeavours are
equally pronouncements of the artist's morality. To be a good or bad
conductor of an orchestra is no different in principle, although the appli-
cable criteria are highly specialized, than to be a good or bad soldier,
husband, mother or prime minister.
To conclude that value transcends the world makes an important contri-
bution to our understanding both of value and the world. The implication of
identifying ethics and aesthetics is that there is no theoretical task for ethics,
and therefore no philosophical discipline in the category of what is commonly
called metaethics. This is in keeping with Wittgenstein's levelling of the pre-
sumed hierarchy of traditional philosophical domains, eliminating meta-
philosophy, metamathematics and metaphysics. There is only a single flatland
dimension of moral and aesthetic attitudes toward states of the world, includ-
ing facts about what people do. Beyond this, according to Wittgenstein, there
is no prospect for meaningful speculation about moral or aesthetic value.
Wittgenstein brands all attempts to express value propositionally as logically
meaningless. This negative semantic categorization does not preclude the
moralist or aesthete from appreciating and cultivating value in enlightened
theoretical silence, as prescribed by Tractatus 7. This is in sharp contrast with
those who accept the possibility of a theoretical or philosophical ethics or
metaethics. Ethics and aesthetics considered as one are literal nonsense
according to the picture theory of meaning. Value in moral and aesthetic
judgement for Wittgenstein is nevertheless immensely important, arguably
even among the most important kinds of nonsense.
In the Tractatus Wittgenstein is committed to what he calls the general
form of proposition. The principle holds that all language is constructible
as a truth function of the elementary propositions. It establishes the full range
of meaningful expression, distinguishing meaning from nonsense. In defence
of the general form of proposition, Wittgenstein is induced to reject the
existence of the psychological subject and prepositional attitudes. His
application of Ockham's razor to eliminate whatever is not strictly logically
needed from theory rescues his commitment to the general form of propo-
sition from a host of counter-examples. If we say or write "I believe that /?",
257

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
then it appears we have produced a genuine sentence of a language that is
not simply a truth function of p. For the truth of "I believe that p" does not
depend on the truth or falsehood of p. Wittgenstein argues that the mean-
ingful content of propositional attitude sentences, such as "I believe that /?",
"I doubt that p", "I fear (hope, etc.) that p", all reduce simply to the content
of the sentence p. His reasons are complex, and whether or not his argument
is correct would require extended discussion. If the reduction is successful,
then Wittgenstein has no further obstacle to limiting all proposition-build-
ing to purely truth-functional operations on the elementary propositions,
as the general form of proposition prescribes.
With the elimination of propositional attitude contexts from a correct
logical notation, as the transcendental aspect of every genuine language,
Wittgenstein eliminates propositional attitudes or psychological states them-
selves, and therewith all psychological subjects. He speaks of phenomenal
mental states in Schopenhauerian fashion as belonging to "contemporary
superficial psychology". Like Hume in A Treatise of Human Nature, but in
an importantly different way, in a single stroke Wittgenstein rids philoso-
phy of the psychological subject, and thereby defends the general form of
proposition. The logical and metaphysical economy he achieves in this way
creates an opportunity for him to articulate some remarkably penetrating,
often Schopenhauerian observations about the pretensions of a priori knowl-
edge (5.634), the problem of solipsism (5.62, 5.64-5.641), and the concept
of death (6.431-6.4312).50 Thus, he writes:
5.631 The thinking, presenting subject; there is no such thing.
If I wrote a book "The world as I found it", I should also have
therein to report on my body and say which members obey
my will and which do not, etc. This then would be a method
of isolating the subject or rather of showing that in an impor-
tant sense there is no subject: that is to say, of it alone in this
book mention could not be made.
5.632 The subject does not belong to the world but is a limit of the
world.
5.633 Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be noted?
And, one page later:
5.641 There is therefore really a sense in which in philosophy we
can talk of a non-psychological I.
The I occurs in philosophy through the fact that the "world
is my world".
The philosophical I is not the man, not the human body or
258

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
the human soul of which psychology treats, but the meta-
physical subject, the limit - not a part of the world.51
What in Wittgenstein is called the superficial psychological subject is
merely a coordination of picturing occurrences. In effect, it is the con-
currence of scaffold-like alignments of the internal logical structures and
analytically logically isomorphic facts, plus an act of will that one fact
represent another. The subject is a technically meaningless formal coordina-
tion of elements that shows itself in but adds no further sayable facts to the
world.
The philosophy of mind that underwrites the theory of meaning in the
Tractatus is complex. In Schopenhauerian fashion, Wittgenstein passes along
the extrasubjectivity of thought and thinking to the extrasubjectivity of a
transcendent will to represent as the ultimate reality of language. Wittgen-
stein does not speak of the will to represent as such, but the picture theory
of meaning requires a way of establishing directional lines of projection from
picturing facts to analytically isomorphic pictured facts' constituents. It fits
the requirements of his semantic philosophy to attribute this picturing role
to a transcendental will to represent as the function of what he introduces
as the metaphysical subject or philosophical "I", to which no other office is
ascribed. A Wittgensteinian-Schopenhauerian will to represent cannot
picture facts, because it transcends the world of facts. The metaphysical
subject or philosophical I can nevertheless will that facts be represented. It
can manifest its will directly in language use as lines of projection extend-
ing from pictures to pictured facts. In so doing, it provides the transcendental
ground underlying the epiphenomenal phenomenological will of superficial
psychological subjects who express facts in language, whenever we make to
ourselves pictures of facts.
Wittgenstein maintains that semantic picturing requires thinking the sense
of a proposition. If there is thinking, there is something that thinks - a think-
ing subject. There is no psychological subject, if Wittgenstein's use of
Ockham's razor in defending the general form of proposition is correct. He
accordingly fills the gap at precisely this juncture by introducing his concept
of the metaphysical subject or philosophical I. The metaphysical subject
seems to serve no other purpose than to ground what we have called the will
to represent that is required by any picturing relation. The will to represent
has no direct access to facts to use in picturing other facts. Schopenhauer's
concept of the transcendent Will nevertheless provides the blind Schopen-
hauerian will (or "Will") to express ideas by which thought at some deeper
transcendental rather than superficial psychological level is enabled to
picture facts. The unidirectional projection of meaning from pictures to
whatever they are meant to picture is conditioned by the will to represent.
259

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
The transcendence of the metaphysical subject or philosophical I is then no
obstacle to its supplying the necessary will that drives representation tran-
scendently, as in Schopenhauer, from behind the scenes.52
By willing representation, the metaphysical subject makes it possible
extrasubjectively for finite consciousnesses like ourselves to make to
ourselves pictures of facts. Picturing facts are pictorially unidirectionally
related to the facts they picture in a transcendental act of willing, which is
not the willing of any phenomenal or superficial psychological subject. The
metaphysical subject or philosophical I thinks the sense of every proposition
by transcendently willing to represent. Thinking, after all, does not cease to
exist, when, as in Hume, it is no longer regarded as the thinking of a
psychological subject. Wittgenstein finds it necessary to ground willing to
represent in a subject, and, when logic discounts the existence of a psycho-
logical subject, he turns to the metaphysical subject as the only alternative,
in a Schopenhauerian kind of "Will" that transcends the phenomenal world
of facts.53
The passage quoted from Wittgenstein's Notebooks 1914-1916 is the only
place in that early source where he mentions Schopenhauer by name. If our
reading of the Tractatus is correct, then Wittgenstein's philosophy is run
through with Schopenhauer's influence. It is an almost palpable presence in
the semantic theory, from the distinction between sign and symbol, to the
theory of aesthetics and ethics as one, the transcendence of logic, mathematics
and all semantic form, and the concept of the metaphysical subject or
philosophical I. Limited as all of Wittgenstein's Schopenhauerianism seems
to be in the early philosophy to logic, semantics and their implications for
philosophy generally, the parallel concept in Wittgenstein is not quite
Schopenhauer's Will, but what we have characterized in modified terms as
the will to represent. Alternatively, the will to represent, even though the term
does not appear in Wittgenstein, can be understood as nothing other than
Schopenhauer's Will objectifying itself in this among so many other ways in
language whereby meaning is projected pictorially onto states of affairs.
In his later philosophy, Wittgenstein is by no means as Schopenhauerian
as he appears in the Tractatus. In Philosophical Investigations, he declares
that meaning can be understood in terms of language games with a certain
point and purpose, and that all we need to do is offer a perspicuous
representation of the way in which the rules for language games are praxeo-
logically grounded in a complex network of linguistic and extralinguistic
activities that constitute a form of life. Wittgenstein writes:
435. If it is asked: "How do sentences manage to represent?" - the
answer might be: "Don't you know? You certainly see it, when
you use them. For nothing is concealed."
260

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
How do sentences do it? - Don't you know? For nothing is
hidden.
But given this answer: "But you know how sentences do it, for
nothing is concealed" one would like to retort, "Yes, but it all
goes by so quick, and I should like to see it as it were laid open
to view."54
With the firm conviction that in semantics nothing is hidden, the later
Wittgenstein turns away from Schopenhauer's transcendentalism in the
theory of meaning. Whether and to what extent if any Wittgenstein remains
indebted in more subtle ways by his early immersion in Schopenhauer's ide-
alism is as interesting and important a question in coming to terms with
Wittgenstein's valuable contributions to philosophy as it is in understand-
ing Nietzsche's early devotion to and later rejection of Schopenhauerianism.
The movement constitutes a philosophical reversal that in some ways, in a
very different sphere of application and with very different results, antici-
pates Wittgenstein's similar experience almost a century later. Wittgenstein's
later philosophy, like Nietzsche's, after losing affection for Schopenhauer's
transcendental idealism, would not have been what it became if it had not
first been seasoned in a system of thought that emphasized a transcenden-
tal reality, of thing-in-itself as Will, including all that this might be regarded
as implying for ethics and aesthetics, and, in Wittgenstein's example more
immediately, for logic, semantics and the limits of philosophy.55
Schopenhauer's philosophical achievement
In taking the measure of Schopenhauer's accomplishments, it is difficult not
to exaggerate the brilliance of his philosophy. He succeeds in so many areas
where his predecessors and contemporaries did not attain the same high
standard of rigorous argumentation, synthesis of science, religion, metaphys-
ics, ethics, history, art and aesthetic theory.
To such an extent did Schopenhauer excel in providing more adequate
grounds for similar conclusions reached by Kant, that his writings On the
Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason and Essay on the Freedom
of the Will in particular have been esteemed by generations of analytic
philosophers who otherwise have no interest in or sympathy with Schopen-
hauer's transcendental idealism. If we think of analytic philosophy as a
method of careful reasoning and clarification of concepts in the service of
scientific knowledge broadly conceived, then there can be no objection to
including Schopenhauer as a practitioner of proto-analytic philosophy.
261

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
We should try to imagine Schopenhauer as a young man, convinced that
he has discovered that Kant's thing-in-itself is Will, and beginning to grasp
the full implications of his metaphysics. He reads science, religion, history
and works of mysticism, and everywhere, even in the newspapers, he finds
confirmation of his basic thesis. He writes constantly when he is not
travelling or attending the theatre. He keeps extensive notebooks, chap-
books and journals, in which he records new discoveries in science, along
with curiosities that find their proper place in his grand philosophical
scheme. He publishes these or collects them for future use; he leaves a certain
part of them behind at his death, active in his work until the very end. In
this way, he prepares the second edition of The World as Will and Represen-
tation. He publishes further corroborations of his metaphysics in science in
On the Will in Nature. He gathers further verification, especially of his ethical
and aesthetic ideas, in the extensive Parerga andParalipomena. He composes
essays on related topics concerning the freedom of will and the basis of
morality, that fit together like the parts of a well-oiled machine.
Schopenhauer's philosophy compartmentalizes all disciplines according
to its fundamental distinction between the world as representation and Will
as thing-in-itself. Within these categories Schopenhauer allows a purer
approach to the kind of methods and conclusions they sustain. As a result,
he is more empirical than most empiricists, at least where the world as
representation is concerned, for he is not only or primarily an empiricist.
He is also more transcendental than most transcendentalists, because he is
not only or primarily a transcendentalist. Nor, for that matter, is he merely
a German idealist philosopher, a European or Western thinker, although he
is all of these to an exceptional degree and in an exceptionally pure form.
Integrating Plato, Kant and the great Asian religious philosophies,
Schopenhauer is at home intellectually as much on the banks of the Main-
Flu6 as the Ganges.
The compartments into which he divides the world and all knowledge or
understanding are watertight. The same cannot be said, as Schopenhauer
critically observes, of Kant's original use of the prior distinction between
noumena and phenomena. This gives Schopenhauer's system a special
strength. It does so only, however, at the price of making it difficult for him
to explain the exact relationship between thing-in-itself and the phenom-
enal world. He is in many ways no better off than Kant, explaining thing-
in-itself merely as the transcendental ground of appearance, or than Plato,
positing two worlds rather than a single world possessing two aspects, hold-
ing that the world of Becoming imitates or participates in the world of Being,
consisting of abstract Ideas. The basic categories of Schopenhauer's meta-
physics are in other ways more flexible and adaptable than those of his major
primary sources. The fact that he recognizes a wide range of grades of the
262

NIETZSCHE, HEIDEGGER AND THE EARLY WITTGENSTEIN
Will's objectification in the world as representation permits him to reorgan-
ize the phenomenal data of other philosophical theories, notably in ethics
and aesthetics, but also for the empirical side of metaphysics generally, in
philosophy of science. He also readily makes allowance for a sense of the
world's historical progress, regress and developmental apotheosis in a more
fine-grained way than other systems such as Kant's or Hegel's.
There is much to admire in Schopenhauer's philosophy. He offers
penetrating insight into some of philosophy's deepest and most long-
standing problems. If we agree with his methods and the distinctions he
draws, together with their implications, then he can help us to understand
such puzzling occurrences as matter and causation, the methods of science,
logic and mathematics, life and death, the value of art, the vast panorama
of conflict, disappointment, the nature and fragility of existence, the inevi-
tability of suffering and natural evil in the lived world, and the possibility
of salvation and the paradoxical saintly life that renounces life. If we want
to understand why the world is perpetually divided into opposing camps,
into communists and capitalists, Jews and Gentiles, Muslims and Infidels,
Catholics and Protestants, carnivores and vegetarians, feminists and chau-
vinists, liberals and conservatives and so on, why not look to Schopenhauer?
He, almost alone in the history of philosophy, provides a powerful and
immensely intriguing, if still controversial, answer to these kinds of questions
within a single unified system of metaphysical and epistemological distinc-
tions that purport to cover, in their peculiar way, every truth of existence.
He offers a vision of the world with an empirical and metaphysical aspect
that finds a place for every fact and the transcendental justification of every
fact concerning the physical, biological and human social world. He pro-
poses a metaphysics of compassion as the basis for all morality. He defends
the possibility of a qualified sense of immortality in which the impersonal
essence of each person survives death without supposing that there exists an
immaterial spirit or soul. He relates and integrates all of these stunning con-
clusions, finally, in terms of the concept of pure willing in each of us as thing-
in-itself. It is the transcendent Will that is deep within each willing subject
that makes us what we truly are in our empirical and acquired characters at
the heart of moral responsibility.
Schopenhauer's writings are rich and beautiful works of genius. His
distinctions are crisp and clear; his arguments have hard sharp edges, like
those we value in the work of the best analytic philosophers. If we do not
always agree with his conclusions, that hardly distinguishes his work from
that of other great thinkers. We almost always know exactly what Schopen-
hauer is saying and why he finds it necessary or expedient to defend the
positions he takes. We can generally see where we think he may have taken
a false step, and the criticisms it would be useful to raise. The philosophical
263

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
stature of Schopenhauer's achievement depends equally not only on his
impact on professional philosophers but on the fine arts and literature in
Europe and throughout the world.
What is most astonishing, perhaps, is that during his lifelong programme
of philosophical activity, from the beginning Schopenhauer never once
deviated from the course he set. Contrary to the philosophers he most deeply
influenced, Nietzsche, Heidegger and Wittgenstein, Schopenhauer's work
does not fall into an early and later period in which he changed his mind
or made a drastic turn away from previous commitments to philosophical
principles. He remains true to the "single thought" that he says in the Pref-
ace to the First Edition of The World as Will and Representation (WWR 1:
xii) informs all his reflections, and which all his later writings in different
ways and from different perspectives develop at length, like the spokes
radiating from the hub of a wheel. The very fact that Schopenhauer exerted
such a marked effect on the course of both so-called continental and ana-
lytic traditions indicates the extent of his universality and depth of insight.
The many points of interest in his system that have inspired the imagination
of some of the most important thinkers in Western philosophy, to which he
also introduces or defends the philosophical merits of Asian religions,
testifies to his greatness, independently of whether or not in the end he
arrives at final truths.
264

Notes
Introduction: Schopenhauer's life and times
1. The most authoritative biographies include A. Hiibscher, Schopenhauer: Biographic eines
Weltbildnis (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1967); W von Gwinner, Schopenhauers Leben (Leipzig: F. A.
Brockhaus, 1878); H. Zimmern, Schopenhauer: His Life and His Philosophy (London: Allen
& Unwin, 1876), rev. edn 1932; R. Safranski, Schopenhauer and the WildYears of Philosophy,
E. Osers (trans.) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990). A new resource, Schopen-
hauer: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), is currently in preparation by
D. E. Cartwright.
2. In the Manuscript Remains, Schopenhauer writes: "I regard my inheritance as a consecrated
treasure which is entrusted to me simply for the purpose of being able to solve the problem
set me by nature and to be for myself and humankind what nature intended me to be. I regard
it as a charter without which it would be useless to humankind and would perhaps have the
most wretched existence a man of my nature ever had" (HN 4: 503).
3. "Schopenhauer's way of expressing himself reminds me here and there a little of Goethe, but
otherwise he recalls no German model at all. For he understands how to express the profound
with simplicity, the moving without rhetoric, the strictly scientific without pedantry: and from
what German could he have learned this?" (F. Nietzsche, "Schopenhauer as Educator", in
Untimely Meditations, R. J. Hollingdale (trans.), 125-94 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1983), 134). See also J. Snow, "Schopenhauer's Style", International Philosophical
Quarterly 33 (1993), 401-12 and P. Bridgwater, Arthur Schopenhauer's English Schooling (New
York: Routledge, 1988), 322-48.
4. See P. Abelsen, "Schopenhauer and Buddhism", Philosophy East and West 43 (1993), 255-78;
B. Nanajivako, Schopenhauer and Buddhism (Kandy, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society,
1970); H. Dumoulin, "Buddhism and Nineteenth Century German Philosophy", Journal of
the History of Ideas 4 (1981), 457-70; R. K. Das Gupta, "Schopenhauer and Indian Thought",
East and West 13 (1962), 32-40; C. Muses, East-West Fire: Schopenhauer's Optinism and the
Lanhavatara Sutra (Indian Hills, CO: Falcon's Wing Press, 1970); and D. Dauer, Schopenhauer
as Transmitter of Buddhist Ideas (Berne: Herbert Lang, 1969).
5. F. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, M. Clark and A. J. Swenson (trans.) (Indianapolis,
IN: Hackett, 1998), 2.
6. The episode is amusingly recounted by W Wallace, Life of Arthur Schopenhauer (London: W.
Scott, 1890), 149-50. For analysis of Schopenhauer's objections to Hegel's philosophy, see A.
Schmidt, Idee undWertwille: Schopenhauer als Kritiker Hegels (Munich: Carl Hauser, 1988).
Schopenhauer's later considered opinions on the limitations of academic philosophy are
discussed in PP 1: 137-97.
7. An example of Schopenhauer's misanthropy in the manner of one who does not suffer fools
gladly is found in his tirade against the mindless distractions of the greater part of mankind:
265

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
"But purely intellectual pleasures are not accessible to the vast majority of men. They are almost
wholly incapable of the pleasure to be found in pure knowledge; they are entirely given over
to willing... this need for exciting the will shows itself particularly in the invention and main-
tenance of card-playing, which is in the truest sense an expression of the wretched side of
humanity" (WWR 1: 314). See K. Pfeiffer, Arthur Schopenhauer: Personlichkeit und Werk
(Leipzig: A. Kroner, 1925) and Wallace, Life of Arthur Schopenhauer, 151-5. Also: "At one
o'clock [Schopenhauer] dines in the Englischer Hof. Of the company at the table d'hote he does
not think highly. It was noticed that for some time he had each day put down on the table a
gold coin, which he afterwards replaced in his pocket, but it was not easy to guess the import
of the action. It turned out that it was in consequence of a wager he made to himself to pay
the sum over to the poor-box the first day the officers dining there talked of anything besides
horses, dogs, and women. Schopenhauer's idea was probably not original: a book of sketches
of travel (Bilderaus Helvetien, &cc.) by the poet [Friedrich von] Mattisson, published in 1816,
tells the same story of an Englishman at Innsbruck in 1799" (Wallace, Life of Arthur
Schopenhauer, 171). A version of the account appears in Saltus, The Philosophy of Disenchant-
ment (New York: AMS Press, 1995), 163.
8. Hiibscher, Schopenhauer-Bildnisses: Eine Ikonographie (Frankfurt: Waldemar Kramer, 1968)
and Wallace, Life of Arthur Schopenhauer, 205-6.
Chapter 1: Schopenhauer's idealism
1. Schopenhauer introduces his idealist concept of the representing subject early in WWR: "That
which knows all things and is known by none is the subject. It is accordingly the supporter of
the world, the universal condition of all that appears, of all objects, and it is always presup-
posed; for whatever exists, exists only for the subject. Everyone finds himself as this subject,
yet only in so far as he knows, not in so far as he is object of knowledge" (WWR 1: 5).
2. I limit discussion here to Kant's B-edition refutation of idealism in CPR, B275-6. Kant offers
anticipations of the argument in A368-80, in the Fourth Paralogism: Of Ideality (in Regard
to Outer Relation), in what he calls the Critique of the Fourth Paralogism of Transcendental
Psychology. See also the Preface to the Second Edition, Bxxxix-xli, note a. Kant maintains
(Bxxxvii-xlii) that the only real addition to the second edition of CPR is the section "The
Refutation of Idealism"; yet the new material is supposed to constitute only a "method of
proof", with no substantive doctrinal innovations.
3. For a more complete exposition and criticism of Kant's argument see D. Jacquette, "Of Time
and the River in Kant's Refutation of Idealism", History of Philosophy Quarterly 18 (2001),
297-310.
4. CPR, A19-B73; on thing-in-itself, see B67-6 and passim.
5. The standard references are Galileo, "// Saggiatore [The Assayer]", in Le Opere de Galileo
Galilei, 20 vols, A. Favaro (ed.) (Florence: S.A.G. Barbera Editore, 1929-39); R. Descartes,
The Philosophical Works of Descartes, 2 vols, E. S. Haldane & G. R. T. Ross (trans.) (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), 1, §§188-203; R. Boyle, The Origin of Forms and
Qualities [1666], volume 3 in The Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle, 6 vols (London: J.
and F. Rivington, 1772); and J. Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding [1700], P.
H. Nidditch (ed.) (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), Bk 2, Ch. 8.
6. G. Berkeley, Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, The Works of George Berkeley
Bishop ofCloyne, vol. 2, A. A. Luce & T. E. Jessop (eds) (London: Thomas Nelson, 1949), 184-
254. See J. Bennett, "Berkeley and God", Philosophy 40 (1965), 207-21; I. C. Tipton, Berkeley:
The Philosophy of Immaterialism (London: Methuen, 1974), 320-50; and D. Jacquette,
"Berkeley's Continuity Argument for the Existence of God", The Journal of Religion 65 (1985),
1-14. On Berkeley's distinction between ectypal and archetypal existence of sensible things
as congeries of ideas as the basis for his objective idealism, see D. Jacquette, "Reconciling
Berkeley's Microscopes in God's Infinite Mind", Religious Studies 29 (1993), 453-63.
7. See R. A. Tsanoff, Schopenhauer's Critique of Kant's Theory of Experience (New York:
Longmans, Green &c Co, 1911) and C. Janaway, Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 37-83. Also P. Guyer, "Schopenhauer, Kant, and the Methods
266

NOTES
of Philosophy", in C. Janaway (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1999), 93-137.
8. Kant discusses the concept of an object-in-itself as an abstraction: "The understanding, when
it entitles an object in a [certain] relation mere phenomenon, at the same time forms, apart from
that relation a representation of an object in itself, and so comes to represent itself as also being
able to form concepts of such objects. And since the understanding yields no concepts addi-
tional to the categories, it also supposes that the object in itself must at least be thought through
these pure concepts, and so is misled into treating the entirely indeterminate concept of an
intelligible entity, namely, of a something in general outside our sensibility, as being a determi-
nate concept of an entity that allows of being known in a certain [purely intelligible] manner
by means of the understanding" (CPR: B306-7).
9. "Deep sleep, while it lasts, is in no way different from death, into which it constantly passes,
for example in the case of freezing to death, differing only as to the future, namely with regard
to the awakening. Death is a sleep in which individuality is forgotten; everything else awak-
ens again, or rather has remained awake" (WWR 1: 278).
10. See P. Welsen, Schopenhauers Theorie des Subjekts: ihere transzendentalphilosophischen,
anthropologischen und naturmetaphysischen Grundlagen (Wiirzburg: Konigshausen &t
Neumann, 1995), 156-238 and B. Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1997), 105-18.
11. On Schopenhauer's critique of Fichte, see Janaway, Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philoso-
phy, esp. 203-7.
12. See R. E. Aquila, "On the 'Subjects' of Knowing and Willing and the T in Schopenhauer",
History of Philosophy Quarterly 10 (1993), 241-60.
13. "The entire centre of the world is in every living being, and therefore its own existence is to it
all in all. On this rests also egoism. To imagine that death annihilates it is absolutely absurd as
all existence proceeds from it alone" (PP 2: 95 (Chapter IV, "Observations on the Antithesis
of the Thing-in-Itself and the Phenomenon", §66)).
14. A useful exposition of Schopenhauer on these topics is offered by B. Bykhovsky, Schopenhauer
and the Ground of Existence, P. Moran (trans.) (Amsterdam: R. R. Griiner, 1984). See also S.
S. Colvin, Schopenhauer's Doctrine of the Thing-in-Itself and his Attempt to Relate it to the
World of Phenomena (Providence, RI: Franklin Press, 1897); and see F. C. White, "The Fourfold
Root", in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 63-92.
15. Schopenhauer's place in the German idealist tradition is discussed by S. G. Neeley,
Schopenhauer: A Consistent Reading (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1994). An early
appreciative account of his influence and relation to the idealists he criticizes is presented by
W Caldwell, Schopenhauer's System in its Philosophical Significance (Edinburgh: Blackwood,
1896). See also D. Snow and J. Snow, "Was Schopenhauer an Idealist?", Journal of the History
of Philosophy 29 (1991), 633-55 and M. Kelly, Kant's Philosophy as Rectified by Schopenhauer
(London: Swan Sonnenschein, 1909).
Chapter 2: Empirical knowledge of the world as representation
1. EC. White, On Schopenhauer's Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason (New York:
E. J. Brill, 1992), 1-11, 152-3 and R. Taylor, "Introduction", in The Fourfold Root of the
Principle of Sufficient Reason, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), ix-xviii (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 1974),
ix-xi.
2. Schopenhauer adopts Christian Wolff's Latin formulation: nihil est sine ratione cur potius sit
quam non sit (for which he offers no exact source).
3. CPR A592/B620-A603/B631 (Transcendental Dialectic, Book 2, Chapter 3, The Ideal of Pure
Reason, Section 4, "The Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of the Existence of God").
4. P. Gardiner, Schopenhauer (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1967), 69-77.
5. Aristotle, Metaphysics, in The Complete Works of Aristotle, 2 vols, the revised Oxford trans-
lation, J. Barnes (ed.) (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 1013a24-1014a25.
6. See A. Phillips Griffiths, "Wittgenstein on the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient
Reason", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supplementary volume 50 (1976), 1-20.
267

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
7. In his Letters from a Stoic [Epistulae Morales adLucilium], R. Campbell (trans.) (Harmonds-
worth: Penguin, 1969), Seneca similarly speaks of the "plays on words, syllogisms, sophistries
and all the other toys of sterile intellectual cleverness" (Letters From a Stoic, 204). See also ibid.,
97-9.
8. See WWR 1: 60 on pedantry as a form of folly.
9. WWR 1: 76, n.28 similarly criticizes Spinoza's more geometrico in the Ethics as an abstract
theoretical construction of intuited conclusions.
10. See note 2 above. The translation is from Schopenhauer's preferred formulation of the principle
in Wolff.
11. D. W Hamlyn, Schopenhauer (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980), 11 and "Schopenhauer
on the Principle of Sufficient Reason", in Reason and Reality, Royal Institute of Philosophy
Lectures 5, 1970-1971, G. N. A. Vesey (ed.), 145-62 (London: Macmillan, 1972); and
Griffiths, "Wittgenstein and the Fourfold Root".
12. Hamlyn, Schopenhauer, 12.
13. Schopenhauer refers to Metaphysics III [F], 6 [1011a3-17], and Posterior Analytics, I, 3 [72b5-
73a20].
14. "[W]ith the exception of the Kantian which is directed not to the validity but to the a priori
nature of the law of causality" (FFR: 32); and "I have attempted to show that the principle of
sufficient reason or ground is a common expression for four entirely different relations each
of which rests on a particular law that is given a priori (for the principle of sufficient reason is
synthetical a priori)" (FFR: 231).
15. Aristotle's distinction between demonstration and the irreducible axioms of demonstration
suggests an independent foundation for Schopenhauer's contention that there can and need
be no proof of the sufficient reason principle. Schopenhauer writes: "[EJvery proof is a reduc-
tion of something doubtful to something acknowledged and established, and if we continue
to demand a proof of this something, whatever it may be, we shall ultimately arrive at certain
propositions which express the forms and laws and thus the conditions of all thinking and
knowing. Consequently, all thinking and knowing consist of the application of these; so that
certainty is nothing but an agreement with those conditions, forms, and laws, and therefore
their own certainty cannot again become evident from other propositions" (FFR: 32).
Schopenhauer must show not only in a general way (as Aristotle does) that all proofs and
explanations have unprovable conceptual foundations, but that the principle of sufficient rea-
son in particular is foundational. This is why he advances the circularity argument, attempt-
ing to establish the sufficient reason principle as the unprovable basis of every proof, causal
explanation, or scientific justification.
16. CPR: Axv-xvii, Bix-xi, A58/B82-A61/B86.
17. Hamlyn, Schopenhauer, 11.
18. This conclusion contradicts Hamlyn's claim that the sceptic who doubts the truth of the suffi-
cient reason principle is refuted by Schopenhauer's circle not merely by denial, but by engag-
ing or attempting to engage in argument. "In the case of the principle of sufficient reason ...
the sceptic would have to do more than speak; he would have to argue. An unargued scepti-
cism about the principle of sufficient reason might be gratuitous, but it would not be incoher-
ent in the way that a denial of the principle of contradiction might be held to be" (Hamlyn,
Schopenhauer, 11). If the defence of scepticism presented here is sound, then the sceptic is free
not only to deny the principle of sufficient reason, but also to argue against it by demanding
proof and refusing to accept the principle in the absence of satisfactory proof, without falling
into logical inconsistency.
19. F. Bacon, Novum Organon, translated in 1863 as The New Organon and Related Writings, J.
Spedding, R. L. Ellis & D. Denon Heath (trans.), F. H. Anderson, (ed.) (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1960), Aphorisms (Book One) I, 39; XIX, 43; XXII, 43-4. See L. K. Luxembourg,
Francis Bacon and Denis Diderot: Philosophers of Science (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1967),
72-108. J. Martin, Francis Bacon: The State and the Reform of Natural Philosophy (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992), 141-71.
20. Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature [1739-40], 2nd edn, with text revised and notes by P. H.
Nidditch and analytical index by L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978),
Bkl, Pt3, Sec. 2, 73-8.
268

NOTES
Chapter 3: Willing and the world as Will
1. Magee does not seem to understand that Schopenhauer deliberately avoids speaking of thing-
in-itself as noumenon or noumenal. See Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, esp. 96,210-
11.
2. "See human beings as though they were in an underground cavelike dwelling with its entrance,
a long one, open to the light across the whole width of the cave. They are in it from childhood
with their legs and necks in bonds so that they are fixed, seeing only in front of them, unable
because of the bond to turn their heads all the way around. Their light is from a fire burning
far above and behind them. Between the fire and the prisoners there is a road above, along
which we see a wall, built like the partitions puppet-handlers set in front of the human beings
and over which they show the puppets... [D]o you suppose such men would have seen anything
of themselves and one another other than the shadows cast by the fire on the side of the cave
facing them?" (Plato, Republic 514a3-515a8).
3. WWR 1: Appendix: Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy, 421-2 and C. Janaway, "Will and
Nature", in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 138-70.
4. "[Kant] did not deduce the thing-in-itself in the right way, as I shall soon show, but by means
of an inconsistency; and he had to pay the penalty for this in the frequent and irresistible attacks
on this principal part of his teaching. He did not recognize the thing-in-itself directly in the
will, but made a great and original step towards this knowledge, since he demonstrated the
undeniable moral significance of human conduct to be quite different from, and not depend-
ent on, the laws of the phenomenon, to be not even capable of explanation according to them,
but to be something directly touching the thing-in-itself" (WWR 1: 422); and "I now return
to Kant's great mistake, already touched on above, namely that he did not properly separate
knowledge of perception from abstract knowledge; from this there arose a terrible confusion
which we have now to consider more closely. If he had sharply separated representations of
perception from concepts thought merely in abstracto, he would have kept these two apart,
and would have known with which of the two he had to deal in each case" (ibid.: 437).
5. Schopenhauer explains motivational laws in FFR. He argues that motivation is "causality seen
from within" (FFR: 214). The subject of willing is known from within, and can never become
a represented object, according to FFR: 207, 210-14.
6. "Finally, the knowledge I have of my will, although an immediate knowledge, cannot be sepa-
rated from that of my body. I know my will not as a whole, not as a unity, not completely
according to its nature, but only in its individual acts, and hence in time, which is the form of
the body's appearing, as it is of every body. Therefore, the body is the condition of knowledge
of my will. Accordingly, I cannot really imagine this will without my body" (WWR 1: 101-2).
See also "Meanwhile it is to be carefully noted, and I have always kept it in mind, that even
the inward observation we have of our own will still does not by any means furnish an exhaus-
tive and adequate knowledge of the thing-in-itself... In the first place, such knowledge is tied
to the form of the representation; it is perception or observation, and as such falls apart into
subject and object... Hence even in inner knowledge there still occurs a difference between
the being-in-itself of its object and the observation or perception of this object in the knowing
subject" (WWR 2: 196-7). The point is that thing-in-itself is not directly encountered in
introspection of any act of phenomenal willing. Inner sense of phenomenal willing provides
only the starting-point for enquiry, from which it is necessary to arrive at a grasp of thing-in-
itself as pure willing or Will only by a process of abstraction or thinking away the cause,
motivation, object and subject of phenomenal willing to arrive at something that on reflection
is understood as not governed by the principles of individuation and sufficient reason.
7. See, for general reference, J. E. Atwell, Schopenhauer on the Character of the World: The Meta-
physics of the Will (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1995); Janaway, Self and World
in Schopenhauer's Philosophy, Bykhovsky, Schopenhauer and the Ground of Existence; Colvin,
Schopenhauer's Doctrine of the Thing-in-itself; A. Hiibscher, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer
in its Intellectual Context: Thinker Against the Tide (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1989).
8. "Thus everyone in this twofold regard is the whole world itself, the microcosm; he finds its
two sides whole and complete within himself. And what he thus recognizes as his own inner
being also exhausts the inner being of the whole world, of the macrocosm. Thus the whole
269

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
world, like man himself, is through and through will and through and through representation,
and beyond this there is nothing" (WWR 1: 162).
9. Plato, Republic, 595a-602b.
10. Janaway challenges the historical accuracy of Schopenhauer's theory of Platonic Ideas, in Self
and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy, 9, 27, 277.
11. See J. D. Chansky, "Schopenhauer and Platonic Ideas: A Groundwork for an Aesthetic
Metaphysics", in E. von der Luft (ed.) Schopenhauer: New Essays in Honor of his 200th Birth-
day, 67-81 (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1988); and T. G. Taylor, "Platonic Ideas,
Aesthetic Experience, and the Resolution of Schopenhauer's Great Contradiction", Interna-
tional Studies in Philosophy 19 (1987), 43-53.
Chapter 4: Suffering, salvation, death and
renunciation of the will to life
1. Alfred Lord Tennyson, "In Memoriam, A.H.H." (1850). In his 1844 essay, Darwin wrote: "[The
Swiss botanist Alphonse] De Candolle, in an eloquent passage, has declared that all nature is
at war, one organism with another, or with external nature. Seeing the contented face of nature,
this may at first be well doubted; but reflection will inevitably prove it is too true. The war,
however, is not constant, but only recurrent in a slight degree at short periods and more se-
verely at occasional more distant periods; and hence its effects are more easily overlooked"
(The Works of Charles Darwin: vol. 10, The Foundations of the Origin of Species: Two Essays
Written in 1842 and 1844, P. H. Barrett & R. B. Freeman (eds) (London: William Pickering,
1986), "Natural means of Selection", 68).
2. See G. Goedert, "Schopenhauer: Ethik als Weltiiberwindung", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 77
(1996), 113-31; V J. McGill, Schopenhauer: Pessimist and Pagan (New York: Haskell House,
1977); I. Murdoch, Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1992), 57-
80; and F. Paulsen, Schopenhauer, Hamlet, Mephistopheles: drei AufsdtzezurNaturgeschichte
desPessimismus (Berlin: Cotta Verlag, 1901), 45-81, 97-176.
3. "[L]ife may certainly be regarded as a dream and death as an awakening. But then the person-
ality, the individual, belongs to the dreaming and not to the waking consciousness; and so death
presents itself to the former as annihilation" (PP 2: 272 ("On the Doctrine of the Indestruct-
ibility of Our True Nature by Death")).
4. "And now ... as man is nature herself and indeed as the highest degree of her consciousness;
moreover, as nature is only the will-to-live together with the phenomenon of this, it is appro-
priate for man, as long as he is the will (or nature), to console himself about his own death and
the death of his friends by looking back at the immortal life of nature, which he himself is, -
the will-to-live objectified" (HN 1: 370).
5. Quoted in WWR 2: 588. Greek mythology offers a legend that strikingly affirms Schopen-
hauer's philosophy of death. Herodotus in his Histories and Plutarch in Lives, among others,
recount the story of Cleobis and Biton, two young sons of a priestess of Argos. When the oxen
that were supposed to draw their mother's cart more than five miles to the temple of Hera at
Delphi were late in arriving, the boys piously took the animals' place and pulled the cart all
the way themselves. The priestess in gratitude to her sons prayed to the goddess to grant them
the greatest possible blessing, whereupon, the boys, who apparently were not consulted in the
matter, died peacefully in their sleep that night within the temple. Their memory is enshrined
in two kouros statues carved in the seventh-sixth centuries BCE, and currently housed in the
Delphi museum. The idea of a painless uneventful death even at so tender an age as the great-
est gift the gods can bestow is much in the spirit of Schopenhauer's moral pessimism.
6. "Death is the great reprimand that the will-to-live, and more particularly the egoism essential
thereto, receive through the course of nature; and it can be conceived as a punishment for our
existence" (WWR 2: 507). In the asterisk footnote, Schopenhauer adds: "Death says: You are
the product of an act that ought not to have taken place; therefore, to wipe it out, you must
die". Also, "For with the empirical consciousness we necessarily have not only sinfulness, but
also all the evils that follow from this kingdom of error, chance, wickedness and folly, and finally
death. Death is, so to speak, a debt contracted through life, as are also the other evils that are
270

NOTES
determined with less certainty (haec est conditio Vivendi}. The Bible and Christianity through
the fall of man rightly introduce into the world death and the troubles and miseries of life" (HN
1: 74). See J. E. Atwell, Schopenhauer: The Human Character (Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press, 1990), 202-4.
7. W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature. The Gifford
Lectures on Natural Religion 1901-1902 (London: Longmans, Greene & Co., 1935), 145-
7. James refers to Theodule Armand Ribot's original sense oianhedonia as an indifference to
life resulting from liver disorders in Ribot's Psychologie des sentiments (1897), 54.
8. One might compare the idea of a will to death complementing Schopenhauer's concept of the
will to life with the present complementary suggestion concerning a will to death with Freud's
(Schopenhauerian) distinction between (in reverse order) the pleasure principle and the death
wish (eros and thanatos), as reflected in the difference of outlook from the time of Interpreta-
tion of Dreams (1899) to Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920). See S. Gardner, "Schopenhauer,
Will, and the Unconscious, in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 375-421.
Freud consistently maintained that he had not read Schopenhauer or Nietzsche until many years
after making his foundational clinical discoveries and formulating the basic principles of
psychoanalysis.
9. Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus, in Diogenes Laertius, Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philoso-
phers, 10.27.
10. A. Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays, J. O'Brien (trans.) (New York: Vintage,
1955), 3.
11. "It might be thought that in view of this grim picture of human life, Schopenhauer would rec-
ommend suicide; but, though he refused to recognise any valid moral reason for condemning
suicide, he considered that it is no real solution to life's tragedy" (F. Copleston, Schopenhauer:
Philosopher of Pessimism (London: Burns, Oates, & Washburne, 1946), 91).
12. "On the whole, we shall find that, as soon as a point is reached where the terrors of life out-
weigh those of death, man puts an end to his life. The resistance of the latter is nevertheless
considerable; they stand, so to speak, as guardians at the gate of exit. Perhaps there is no one
alive who would not already have made an end of his life if such an end were something purely
negative, a sudden cessation of existence. But it is something positive, namely the destruction
of the body, and this frightens people back just because the body is the phenomenon of the will-
to-live" (WWR 1, 324-5; PP 2, 310 ("On Suicide")).
13. I. Kant, Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, L. White Beck (trans.) (New York:
Macmillan, 1959), 39-40.
14. "If criminal law condemns suicide, that is not an ecclesiastically valid reason and is, moreo-
ver, definitely ridiculous; for what punishment can frighten the man who seeks death? If we
punish the attempt to commit suicide, then we are simply punishing the want of skill whereby
it failed" (PP 2: 307).
15. "I have expounded in my chief work, volume one, §69, the only valid moral reason against
suicide. It lies in the fact that suicide is opposed to the real salvation from this world of woe
and misery one that is merely apparent. But it is still a very long way from this aberration to a
crime, such as the Christian clergy would like to stamp it" (PP 2: 309). See G. Simmel,
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, H. Loiskandl, D. Weinstein &c M. Weinstein (trans.) (Amherst,
MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1986), 131-2.
16. "The question whether Schopenhauer's higher view of death could be consoling is a difficult
one. He tries to inculcate the thought that one's own death has no great significance in the order
of things. But if one accepted his reasons for taking this attitude, ought one not to think that
one's life has just as little significance? And is that a consoling thought? Schopenhauer appears
to think so" (C. Janaway, Schopenhauer (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984), 89). See D. E.
Cartwright, "Schopenhauer on Suffering, Death, Guilt, and the Consolation of Metaphysics",
in von der Luft, Schopenhauer: New Essays, 51-66.
17. Schopenhauer further criticizes suicide as a puerile metaphysical gamble: "Suicide can also be
regarded as an experiment, a question we put to nature and try to make her answer, namely
what change the existence and knowledge of man undergo through death. But it is an awkward
experiment, for it abolishes the identity of the consciousness that would have to listen to the
answer" (PP 2: 311).
271

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
18. "Between this voluntary death springing from the extreme of asceticism and that resulting from
despair there may be many different intermediate stages and combinations, which are indeed
hard to explain; but human nature has depths, obscurities, and intricacies, whose elucidation
and unfolding are of the very greatest difficulty (WWR1: 402). I develop these themes at greater
length in D. Jacquette, "Schopenhauer on Death", in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to
Schopenhauer, 293-317 and "Schopenhauer on the Ethics of Suicide", Continental Philoso-
phy Review 33 (2000), 43-58.
19. "Whoever has perceived the true nature of the world, sees life in death, but also death in life;
the two are only different but inseparable aspects of the objectification of the will" (HN 1: 369).
And "But just as death is essential to life, yet it is the distressing side of life, that in which the
inner emptiness and unreality of the will-to-live most frequently expresses itself, the identity
of life and suffering. Considered in this way, there is in exchange for death only one consola-
tion, namely that, just as the phenomenon of the will-to-live must come to an end, this will
itself can freely come to an end. If the will itself has ended, in other words has turned, then
death is no longer a suffering, because a will-to-live no longer exists" (HN 1: 370-71).
20. "In rejecting suicide while affirming the motivation to negate the will, Schopenhauer must evade
the fact that suicide removes the individual organism, which is the only tool for producing
suffering, without any trace or potential for further suffering ... The renunciation of life and
ascetic resignation from all desire that Schopenhauer proposed as the perfection and sanctifi-
cation of the soul are too comprehensive and fundamental to be motivated merely by suffer-
ing, even if the metaphysical unity of the world translates all suffering into the personal soul.
We rarely find that this is the motivation for renouncing the will by the holy penitents and
ascetes of all religions, who Schopenhauer deems to be the embodiments of his ideal" (Simmel,
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, 133). See R. A. Gonzales, An Approach to the Sacred in the
Thought of Schopenhauer (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1992); and B. V. Kishan,
Schopenhauer's Theory of Salvation (Visakhapatnam: Andrea University Press, 1978).
21. Copleston, Schopenhauer: Philosopher of Pessimism, 91. See Simmel: "The annihilation of will
does, indeed, remove the possibility of suffering, but this procedure is unnecessary if the
annihilation of the phenomenon completely cuts off the reality of will ... The weakness of
Schopenhauer's argumentation in this case is obvious, especially as it pertains to life's suffer-
ing, because in the instance of suicide alone, the treatment of the symptoms is as radically potent
as is the internal annihilation of the will to live ... Though it might seem paradoxical, suicide
might seem to be justified in less radical cases, whereas it would not be a proper remedy for a
profound and total distaste with life. In the case of radical ennui Schopenhauer is correct and
shows profound perception, though weak argumentation, in claiming that an external
annihilation of life would be a totally useless and contradictory expression of an inner separa-
tion of life from itself" (Simmel, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, 132-3). See also Saltus, The
Philosophy of Disenchantment, 36-76.
22. The life-denying moral stance that Schopenhauer represents is also attributed to several other
philosophers in Leo Tolstoy's remarkable Confession, D. Patterson (trans.) (New York: Norton,
1983). Tolstoy summarizes the same "nihilistic" outlook in the following passages:
Thus we have the direct answers that human wisdom has to give when it answers the
question of life.
"The life of the body is an evil and a lie. And so the destruction of the life of the body is
a blessing, and we should long for it," says Socrates.
"Life is what it should not be, an evil; and a passage into nothingness is the only bless-
ing that life has to offer," says Schopenhauer.
"Everything in the world - both folly and wisdom, wealth and poverty, joy and sorrow
- all is vanity and emptiness. A man dies and nothing remains. And this is absurd,"
says [King] Solomon [in the Old Testament].
"It is not possible to live, knowing that suffering, decrepitness, old age, and death are
inevitable; we must free ourselves from life and from all possibility of life," says the
Buddha.
And the very thing that has been uttered by these powerful minds has been said, thought,
and felt by millions of people like them. I too have thought and felt the same way.
(Tolstoy, Confession, 48)
272

NOTES
Chapter 5: Art and aesthetics of the beautiful and sublime
1. Nietzsche, "Schopenhauer as Educator", 160.
2. Plato, Republic, 514a-b4.
3. I. Kant, "Analytic of the Beautiful", in The Critique of Judgement, J. C. Meredith (trans.)
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952), 41-89 and "Analytic of the Sublime", in The Critique of
judgement, 90-203.
4. Plato, Parmenides, 130e.
5. "For the beauty with which ... objects present themselves rests precisely on the pure objectiv-
ity, i.e., disinterestedness, of their perception" (WWR 2: 374). Kant had earlier written: "Now,
where the question is whether something is beautiful, we do not want to know, whether we,
or any one else, are, or even could be, concerned in the real existence of the thing, but rather
what estimate we form of it on mere contemplation (intuition and reflection) ... Every one
must allow that a judgement on the beautiful which is tinged with the slightest interest, is very
partial and not a pure judgement of taste" ("Critique of Aesthetic Judgement", in The Critique
of Judgement, 42-3).
6. Kant, "Critique of Aesthetic Judgement", 94-117.
7. Rousseau offers an evocative image of the sublime in describing the waterfalls at Chailles, near
the Pas de 1'Echelle, in The Confessions,]. M. Cohen (trans.) (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1953),
Book Four (1732), 167-8.
8. In A Treatise of Human Nature, Hume explains the sublime in terms of the triumph of the
imagination over the challenges of great distances in space and time or the terrifying. Hume
writes: "Tis a quality very observable in human nature, that any opposition, which does not
entirely discourage and intimidate us, has rather a contrary effect, and inspires us with a more
than ordinary grandeur and magnanimity. In collecting our force to overcome the opposition,
we invigorate the soul, and give it an elevation with which otherwise it wou'd never have been
acquainted. Compliance, by rendering our strength useless, makes us insensible of it; but
opposition awakens and employs it" (A Treatise of Human Nature, 433-4).
9. Kant, "Critique of Aesthetic Judgement", 109-14.
10. Plato, Republic, 514a-b4; H. Hein, "Schopenhauer and Platonic Ideas", Journal of the History
of Philosophy, 4 (1996), 133^4; Chansky, "Schopenhauer and Platonic Ideas", 67-81; Taylor,
"Platonic Ideas, Aesthetic Experience", 43-53; J. Engelmann, "Schonheit und Zweckma&gkeit
in der Architektur", Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 65 (1984), 157-69.
11. I. Knox, "Schopenhauer's Aesthetic Theory", in Schopenhauer: His Philosophical Achievement,
M. Fox (ed.), 132-46 (Brighton: Harvester Press, 1980), 132-46.
12. See WWR 1: 126-7 for Schopenhauer's references to Augustine's denunciation of the carnal
in City of God, XI, 28.
13. "[T]he most excellent works of any art, the noblest productions of genius, must eternally remain
sealed books to the dull majority of men, and are inaccessible to them. They are separated from
them by a wide gulf, just as the society of princes is inaccessible to the common people ... [The
Idea] is never known by the individual as such, but only by him who has raised himself above
all willing and all individuality to the pure subject of knowing. Thus it is attainable only by the
man of genius, and by him who, mostly with the assistance of works of genius, has raised his
power of pure knowledge, and is now in the frame of mind of the genius" (WWR 1: 234). See
also PP 2: 71-87 and Hamlyn, Schopenhauer, 62.
14. "By virtue of his objectivity, the genius with reflectiveness perceives all that others do not see.
This gives him as a poet the ability to describe nature so clearly, palpably, and vividly, or as a
painter, to portray it. On the other hand, with the execution of the work, where the purpose
is to communicate and present what is known, the will can, and indeed must, again be active,
just because there exists a purpose" (PP 2: 418-19).
15. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, 63.
16. Ibid., 71.
17. Ibid., 72.
18. Ibid., 73. The anti-erotic elements of Schopenhauer's aesthetics are discussed by Murdoch,
Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals, 61-2, 67-70.
19. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, 73.
273

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
20. See P. Alperson, "Schopenhauer and Musical Revelation", The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 40 (1982), 155-66; M. Budd, Music and the Emotions: The Philosophical Theories
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), 76-7,115,176,181; T. J. Diffey, "Schopenhauer's
Account of Aesthetic Experience", The British Journal of Aesthetics 30 (1990), 132-42; C.
Foster, "Schopenhauer's Subtext on Natural Beauty", The British Journal of Aesthetics 32
(1992), 21-32 and "Ideas and Imagination: Schopenhauer on the Proper Foundation of Art",
in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 213-51; L. Goehr, The Imaginary
Museum of Musical Works: An Essay in the Philosophy of Music (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1992), 148-75; D. Jacquette, "Schopenhauer on the Antipathy of Aesthetic Genius and the
Charming", History of European Ideas 18 (1994), 373-85 and "Schopenhauer's Metaphysics
of Appearance and Will in the Philosophy of Art", in D. Jacquette (ed.), Schopenhauer,
Philosophy, and the Arts, 1-36 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996); C. Janaway,
"Knowledge and Tranquility: Schopenhauer on the Value of Art", in Jacquette, Schopenhauer,
Philosophy, and the Arts, 39-61; A. Kanovitch, The Will to Beauty: Being a Continuation of
the Philosophies of Arthur Schopenhauer and Friedrich Nietzsche (New York: Henry Bee
Company, 1923), 17-18, 116-17; I. Knox, The Aesthetic Theories of Kant, Hegel, and
Schopenhauer (New York: Humanities Press, 1958), 123-66; U. Pothast, Die eigentlich
metaphysische Tatigkeit: uber Schopenhauers Asthetik und ihre Anwendung durch Samuel
Beckett (Frankfurt: Surkamp, 1982), 33-44, 95-107; J. Taminiaux, "Art and Truth in
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche", Man and World 20 (1987), 85-102; and J. Young, "The Stand-
point of Eternity: Schopenhauer on Art", Kant-Studien 78 (1987), 424—41.
Chapter 6: Transcendental freedom of will
1. Atwell, Schopenhauer: The Human Character, 32-43 and Schopenhauer on the Character of
the World, 132-4, 163; and S. G. Neeley, "A Re-Examination of Schopenhauer's Analysis of
Bodily Agency: The Ego as Microcosm", Idealistic Studies 22 (1992), 52-67.
2. BM 49-119. See D. E. Cartwright, "Kant, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche on the Morality of
Pity", Journal of the History of Ideas 45 (1984), 83-98; P. F. H. Lauxtermann, Schopenhauer's
Broken World-View: Colours and Ethics Between Kant and Goethe (The Hague: Kluwer, 2000),
135-96; M. Kelly, Kant's Ethics and Schopenhauer's Criticism (London: Swan Sonnenschein,
1910); and M. Nicholls, "The Kantian Inheritance and Schopenhauer's Doctrine of Will", Kant-
Studien 85 (1994), 257-79.
3. CPR A445/B473-A452-B480. The antinomy states: "Thesis Causality in accordance with laws
of nature is not the only causality from which the appearances of the world can one and all be
derived. To explain these appearances it is necessary to assume that there is also another
causality, that of freedom. Antithesis There is no freedom; everything in the world takes place
solely in accordance with laws of nature".
4. "Is it possible that ethics, in discovering the moral incentive, is also capable of setting it in
motion? Can ethics transform the man who is hardhearted into one who is compassionate, and
thereby just and humane? Certainly not; the difference of characters is innate and ineradica-
ble. The wicked man is born with his wickedness as much as the serpent is with its poisonous
fangs and glands; and he is as little able to change his character as the serpent its fangs" (BM:
187).
5. Schopenhauer refers to Plato's Meno as corroboration for his thesis that empirical and acquired
character is unalterable.
6. "For we cannot accept as possible a final contradiction between the immediate utterances of
self-consciousness and the results from the fundamental principles of the pure understanding
together with their application to experience; ours cannot be so mendacious a self-conscious-
ness. It must be observed here that even the alleged antinomy advanced by Kant on this topic
is not supposed to result, even for him, from the thesis and antithesis from different sources
of cognition, one possibly from the utterances of self-consciousness, and the other from the
faculty of reason and experience. On the contrary, thesis and antithesis both rationalize from
allegedly objective grounds" (FW: 21).
7. "That relation, explained by Kant, between the empirical and intelligible character rests entirely
274

NOTES
on what constitutes the fundamental trait of his entire philosophy, namely the distinction
between appearance and thing in itself; and as with him the complete empirical reality of the
world of experience coexists with its transcendental ideality', so does the strict empirical necessity
of acting coexist with its transcendental freedom" (FW: 86). See Janaway, Self and World in
Schopenhauer's Philosophy, 84-97,208-47.
See D. E. Cartwright, "Schopenhauer's Axiological Analysis of Character", Revue Internationale
de Philosophic 42 (1988), 18-36.
"Freedom appertains not to the empirical character but only to the intelligible. The operari of
a given person (what he does) is necessarily determined from without by motives, and from
within by his character; hence everything that he does necessarily takes place. In his esse (what
he is), however, the freedom lies. He could have been a different man, and guilt or merit lies
in what he is" (BM: 112).
Chapter 7: Compassion as the philosophical
foundation of morality
1. Schopenhauer considers Kant's Grundlegung as the primary source for Kant's metaphysics of
morals. "I take as my guide in the present criticism the first-mentioned Foundations of the
Metaphysics of Morals, and request the reader to note that that all page numbers mentioned
by me without further addition refer to that work. I shall consider the other two works [Critique
of Practical Reason and Metaphysical Principles of the Doctrine of Virtue} only as accessory and
secondary" (BM: 51).
2. See J. Young, "Schopenhauer's Critique of Kantian Ethics", Kant-Studien 75 (1984), 191-212.
3. "The circumstance of John the Baptist coming before us quite like an Indian sannyasi, yet clad
in the skin of an animal, could be viewed as an odd symbol of the defect in Christian morality
..., in spite of its otherwise close agreement with the Indian. We know, of course, that to every
Hindu such a thing would be an abomination. Even the Royal Society of Calcutta received their
copy of the Vedas only on their promising not to have it bound in leather, in the European style;
it is therefore to be seen bound in silk in their library" (BM: 178-9). Devout Muslims simi-
larly will not use silk prayer rugs for their devotions on the grounds that silk worms must be
killed in the processing of silk when their cocoons are boiled in water.
4. It is worthwhile in this context to consider the frequently raised question of whether
Schopenhauer is a misanthrope. He pushes a seamstress down the stairs, writes venomous things
about Hegel and other philosophical contemporaries, and expresses contempt for the human
race. Does he therefore simply despise the species? The answer is complex. Alongside the evi-
dence for his hatred of mankind, we must consider also the fact that he places human beings
at the apex of the pyramid of Platonic Ideas as the highest grade of the Will's objectification
in the world as representation, that he regards the human form as the greatest subject of art
and recommends compassion for all suffering humanity. Schopenhauer seems to exalt human
possibilities while decrying the failure of the vast majority of the species as failing to live up to
their potential. The enormous individuality of human beings that places them at the highest
grade of the Will's objectivity implies every possible degree of ability and accomplishment,
including genius, sainthood and the common run of humanity. The sense in which the sufferings
of human beings deserve our loving kindness is no different for Schopenhauer than that which
we equally morally owe non-human animals. Suffering must always be met with compassion,
no matter what species of willing subject suffers, because all willing subjects as pure willing or
Will are transcendentally identical.
5. See Abelsen, "Schopenhauer and Buddhism", 255-78; A. Barua, The Philosophy of Arthur
Schopenhauer (New Delhi: Intellectual Publishing House, 1992); Dauer, Schopenhauer as Trans-
mitter of Buddhist Ideas; Muses, East-West Fire:, Nanajivako, Schopenhauer and Buddhism-, and
G. Son, Schopenhauers Ethik des Mitleids und die Indische Philosophie: Parallelitdt undDifferenz
(Freiburg im Breisgau: Verlag K. Alber, 2001), 62-95, 122-51, 173-336.
6. J. E. Atwell, "Schopenhauer's Account of Moral Responsibility", Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
61 (1980), 396^04 and Schopenhauer: The Human Character, 67-142; D. E. Cartwright,
"Compassion", inZeit derErnte: Festschrift fur Arthur Hubscher zum 85. Geburtstag, 60—69
275
8.
9.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
(Stuttgart and Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1982), "Kant, Schopenhauer, and
Nietzsche", 83-98, "Schopenhauer as Moral Philosopher: Toward the Actuality of his Ethics",
Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 70 (1989), 54-65, "Schopenhauer's Compassion and Nietzsche's Pity",
Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 69 (1988), 557-67, "Schopenhauer's Narrower Sense of Morality",
in Janaway, Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 252-92; Goedert, "Schopenhauer: Ethik
als Weltiiberwindung"; Lauxtermann, Schopenhauer's Broken World-View, 135-96; and
M. Maidan, "Schopenhauer on Altruism and Morality", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 69 (1988),
265-72.
Chapter 8: Schopenhauer's legacy in the philosophy of Nietzsche,
Heidegger and the early Wittgenstein
1. Safranski, Schopenhauer and the Wild Years, 327-49.
2. B. Magee, Wagner and Philosophy (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2000), 126-73; R. Gray, "The
German Intellectual Background". In The Wagner Companion, P. Burbridge & R. Sutton (eds),
34-59 (London: Faber, 1979); B. Nelson, "Wagner, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche: On the Value
of Human Action", The Opera Quarterly 6 (1989), 24-32.
3. See S. Atzert, Schopenhauer und Thomas Bernhard: zur literarischen Verwendung von
Philosophie (Freiburg: Rombach, 1999), 104-25. See also the papers collected in the volume
edited by J. T. Baer, Arthur Schopenhauer und die russische Literatur des spdten 19. und fruhen
ZO.Jahrhunderts, SlavistischeBeitrage, vol. 140 (Munich: Verlag Otto Sagner, 1980); A. Baillot,
Influence de la philosophie de Schopenhauer en France, 1860-1900 (Paris: Vrin, 1927); C. S.
Durer, "Moby Dick's Ishmael, Burke, and Schopenhauer", The Midwest Quarterly 30 (1989),
161-78; Knox, The Aesthetic Theories of Kant; L. Krukowski, Aesthetic Legacies (Philadelphia,
PA: Temple University Press, 1992), 41-64, 109-17; P. Lefew-Blake, Schopenhauer, Woman's
Literature, and the Legacy of Pessimism in the Novels of George Eliot, Olive Schreiner, Virginia
Woolf, and Doris Lessing (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 2001), esp. 13-34, 69-88; Magee,
Wagner and Philosophy, 205-27; T. J. Diffey, "Metaphysics and Aesthetics: A Case Study of
Schopenhauer and Thomas Hardy", in Jacquette, Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 229—
48; S. McLaughlin, Schopenhauer in Russland: zur literarischen Rezeption bei Turgenev
(Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 1984), esp. 15^4; Nelson, "Wagner, Schopenhauer, and
Nietzsche", 24-32; N. Pangopoulus, The Fiction of Joseph Conrad: The Influence of
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche (New York: Peter Lang, 1998); K. Pfeiffer, Tjum hochsten Dasein:
Goethes Faust im Lichte der Schopenhauerschen Philosophie (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1949);
A. Philonenko, Schopenhauer: Une Philosophie de Tragedie (Paris: Vrin, 1980); B. Sorg, Zur
literarischen Schopenhauer-Rezeption im 19. Jahrhundert (Heidelberg: Winter Verlag, 1975);
C. Wulf, The Imperative of Narration: Beckett, Bernhardt, Schopenhauer, Lacan (Brighton:
Sussex Academic Press, 1998), 21-5, 63-78,130-37; S. Doss-Davezac, "Schopenhauer Accord-
ing to the Symbolists: The Philosophical Roots of Late Nineteenth-Century French Aesthetic
Theory, in Jacquette, Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 249-76.
4. F. Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, R. Zenith (ed. and trans.) (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2001),
120.
5. C. Janaway, "Schopenhauer as Nietzsche's Educator", in C. Janaway (ed.), Willing and
Nothingness: Schopenhauer as Nietzsche's Educator, 13-36 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998),
16-19.
6. F. Nietzsche, Nietzsche contra Wagner, Werke: Kritische Studienausgabe, 4 (Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, 1967), 425.
7. F. Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy and The Genealogy of Morals, F. Golffing (trans.) (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, 1956), 145.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid., 109.
10. Ibid., 97.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid., 124-5.
13. C. Janaway, "Introduction", in Janaway, Willing and Nothingness, 1-17, esp. 1.
276

NOTES
14. See the papers collected in W. Schirmacher (ed.), Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, und die Kunst
(Vienna: Passagen Verlag, 1991); Simmel, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche-, C. S. Taylor,
"Nietzsche's Schopenhauerianism", Nietzsche-Studien 17 (1988), 45-73; D. Touey,
"Schopenhauer and Nietzsche on the Nature and Limits of Philosophy", Journal of Value
Inquiry 32 (1998), 243-52; M. Clark, "On Knowledge, Truth, and Value: Nietzsche's Debt
to Schopenhauer and the Development of his Empiricism", in Janaway, Willing and Nothing-
ness, 37-78; K. M. Higgins, "Schopenhauer and Niezsche: Temperament and Temporality",
in Janaway, Willing and Nothingness, 151-77; I. Soil, "Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and the
Redemption of Life Through Art", in Janaway, Willing and Nothingness, 79-115.
15. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, 4.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid.
18. Cartwright, "Kant, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche", 83-98 and "Nietzsche's Use and Abuse of
Schopenhauer's Moral Philosophy for Life", in Janaway, Willing and Nothingness, 116-50; D.
Berman, "Schopenhauer and Nietzsche: Honest Atheism, Dishonest Pessimism", in Janaway,
Willing and Nothingness, 178-95; D. E. Cooper, "Self and Morality in Schopenhauer and
Nietzsche", in Janaway, Willing and Nothingness, 196-216.
19. J. Young, "Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Art, and the Will", in Jacquette, Schopenhauer, Philoso-
phy, and the Arts, 162-80, esp. 162.
20. M. Heidegger, Being and Time: A Translation ofSein und Zeit, J. Stambaugh (trans.) (Albany,
NY: SUNY Press, 1996), esp. 132-7, 141-86 on disclosedness (Erschlossenheit), and 121-7,
171-230 and passim on care (Sorge). See also 113-30, 161-4, 237-8, 263-4, 270-72, 280-
83, on the concept oiMitda-Sein.
21. Young, "Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Art", esp. 164-6, 169-71.
22. See M. Merleau-Ponty, The Phenomenology of Perception, C. Smith (trans.) (New York:
Humanities Press, 1962), esp. 67-199, on the concept of the lived-body.
23. Young, "Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Art", 163.
24. Ibid.
25. Heidegger, Being and Time, 6.
26. G. H. von Wright, Wittgenstein (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1982), 18.
27. A. J. Ayer, Wittgenstein (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 13.
28. See R. Monk, Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1990), 158.
29. The case for Schopenhauer's stylistic influence is made by A. S. Janik and S. Toulmin,
Wittgenstein's Vienna (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1973), 74, 164.
30. "It may appear strange that Schopenhauer, one of the masters of philosophic prose, did not
influence Wittgenstein's style. An author, however, who reminds one, often astonishingly, of
Wittgenstein is [Georg Christoph] Lichtenberg. Wittgenstein esteemed him highly. To what
extent, if any, he can be said to have learned from him I do not know. It is deserving of mention
that some of Lichtenberg's thoughts on philosophic questions show a striking resemblance to
Wittgenstein's" (G. H. von Wright, "Biographical Sketch", in Malcolm (1958: 21-2)). Compare
von Wright (1942: 201-17); Janik and Toulmin, after describing Schopenhauer's "epigram-
matic punch" and "elegant literary style" (Wittgenstein's Vienna, 164) as influencing the early
Wittgenstein and such writers as Karl Kraus, whom Wittgenstein admired; citing von Wright,
they also acknowledge the importance of Lichtenberg (ibid., 176).
31. Drury in R. Rhees (ed.) Recollections ofWittgenstein, rev. edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1984), 158.
32. Tractatus 3.32. All references are to the Ogden edition of the Tractatus: L. Wittgenstein,
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, C. K. Ogden (ed.) (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
33. "Mr. Wittgenstein is concerned with the conditions for a logically perfect language - not that
any language is logically perfect, or that we believe ourselves capable, here and now, of
constructing a logically perfect language, but that the whole function of language is to have
meaning, and it only fulfils this function in proportion as it approaches to the ideal language
which we postulate" (Bertrand Russell, "Introduction", in Tractatus, 8). Compare "All propo-
sitions of our colloquial language are actually, just as they are, logically completely in order"
(Tractatus 5.5563).
34. Wittgenstein writes: "Colloquial language is a part of the human organism and is not less
277

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
complicated than it. From it it is humanly impossible to gather immediately the logic of
language. Language disguises the thought; so that from the external form of the clothes one
cannot infer the form of the thought they clothe, because the external form of the clothes is
constructed with quite another object than to let the form of the body be recognized" (Tractatus
4.002).
35. I develop an account of Wittgenstein's early picture theory of meaning as involving a kind of
Kantian—Schopenhauerian transcendence of symbol over linguistic sign in D. Jacquette,
Wittgenstein's Thought in Transition (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 1998), 35-
58. See also R. Haller, "Was Wittgenstein a Neo-Kantian?", in Questions on Wittgenstein, R.
Haller (ed.), 44-56 (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1988); and D. Jacquette,
"Haller on Wittgenstein and Kant", in Austrian Philosophy Past and Present: Essays in Honor
of Rudolf Haller, K. Lehrer & J. C. Marek (eds), 29^4, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997).
36. B. Bolzano, Theory of Science: Attempt at a Detailed and in the Main Novel Exposition of Logic
with Constant Attention to Earlier Authors, R. George (ed. and trans.) (Berkeley, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1972), esp. 20-31, 171-80.
37. Wittgenstein, Tractatus 3.42, 4.023, 4.121, 5.511, 5.514, 6.124.
38. Ibid., 6.13.
39. See, inter alia, E. Stenius, Wittgenstein's "Tractatus": A Critical Exposition of its Main Lines
of Thought (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1960), 214-26.
40. A. S. Janik, "Schopenhauer and the Early Wittgenstein", Philosophical Studies (Ireland) 15
(1966), 76-95; M. S. Engel, "Schopenhauer's Impact on Wittgenstein", The Journal of the His-
tory of Philosophy 7 (1969), 285-302; A. Phillips Griffiths, "Wittgenstein, Schopenhauer, and
Ethics", in Under standing Wittgenstein, Royal Institute of Philosophy Lectures, vol. 7,96-116
(London: Macmillan, 1974); D. A. Weiner, Genius and Talent: Schopenhauer's Influence on
Wittgenstein's Early Philosophy (Rutherford, NJ: Farleigh Dickinson University Press, 1992),
esp. 15-21,46-79; N. Carver, This Complicated Form of Life: Essays on Wittgenstein (LaSalle,
IL: Open Court, 1994), 91-101; H.-J. Clock, "Schopenhauer and Wittgenstein: Representation
as Language and Will", in Janaway, The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 422-58.
41. Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 2.151,2.172,2.18,4.12^.1211,4.461, 6.22,5.541-5.5422,5.631-
5.641, 6.432-6.45, 6.522. On the saying-showing distinction, see especially 4.12-4.1212.
42. Ibid., 3.3, 4.01, 4.021-4.023, 4.06, 4.2.
43. Ibid.
44. Ethics is identified with aesthetics in the final statement of Notebooks 1914-1916, 2nd edn,
G. H. von Wright & G. E. M. Anscombe (eds), G. E. M. Anscombe (trans.) (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1979), 24.7.16, p. 77e. See also, in connection with Wittgenstein's extension of the
relation between ethics and happiness, his remark that: "the beautiful is what makes happy"
(21.10.16, p. 86e).
45. Wittgenstein, Notebooks 1914-1916, 7.10.16.
46. Wittgenstein, Notebooks 1914-1916, 79e; C. Barrett, Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious
Belief (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991), 30, also 60-63. And: "Ethics does not treat of the world.
Ethics must be a condition of the world, like logic" (Wittgenstein, Notebooks 1914-1916,77e).
47. There is substantial distance between Tractatus 5.5421, in the last passage of which the
transcendence of the metaphysical subject is explicitly discussed, and Tractatus 6.41, where Witt-
genstein's remarks on the transcendence of value appear. Wittgenstein makes no attempt to
connect the two or to prove the transcendence of value by the transcendence of the metaphysical
subject.
48. Most commentators on the Tractatus do not hazard interpretations of Wittgenstein's reason-
ing in 6.421. M. Black, for example, in A Companion to Wittgenstein's Tractatus (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1964), offers no interpretation or concordance, nor does he even
include mention of the final parenthetical identification of ethics and aesthetics in the passage.
49. Plato, Republic, 410a7-412a6.
50. "For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some
particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleas-
ure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe any thing
but the perception" (Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, 162).
278

NOTES
51. Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 5.5421. In an earlier draft of the Tractatus, Wittgenstein's elimination
of propositional attitude contexts (and criticism of Russell's relational theory of judgement)
in 5.54-5.5423, originally came immediately after the statement of the general form of propo-
sition. See L. Wittgenstein, Prototractatus: An Early Version ofTractatus Logico-Philosophicus,
B. McGuinness, T. Nybert & G. H. von Wright (eds), D. Pears & B. McGuinness (trans.) (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1971), 6.001-6.0051, 196-201. The concept of the self as the
vanishing point is taken from the (Schopenhauerian) analogy of the eye as excluded from the
visual field in Tractatus 5.6331. In 5.64, Wittgenstein explains: "Here we see that solipsism
strictly carried out coincides with pure realism. The I in solipsism shrinks to an extensionless
point [schrumpft zum ausdehnungslosen Punkt] and there remains the reality co-ordinated with
it". Wittgenstein's concept of transcendence precludes the application of identity principles by
which things in the world of facts are individuated. This makes it nonsense to consider the
possibility of there being more than one transcendent subject. The world may be "my" world,
as Wittgenstein states in Tractatus 5.641, but it is not mine as opposed to yours. The world does
not belong to any particular personal empirical subject of superficial psychology, but to the
impersonal undifferentiated extraworldly transcendent subject, the metaphysical, not the
phenomenological "I", at the limit of the world.
52. See D. Jacquette, "Wittgenstein on Thoughts as Pictures of Facts and the Transcendence of the
Metaphysical Subject", in Wittgenstein and the Future of Philosophy: A Reassessment After 50
Years/Wittgenstein und die Zukunft der Philosophic. Eine Neubewertung nach 50 Jahren, R.
Haller & K. Puhl (eds), 160-70 (Vienna: Obv&Hpt, 2002). Wittgenstein's famous metaphor
of the ladder is also prefigured in Schopenhauer. Wittgenstein writes: "My propositions are
elucidatory in this way: he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless [unsinnig],
when he has climbed out through them, on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw away
the ladder, after he has climbed up on it. He must surmount these propositions; then he sees
the world rightly" (Tractatus 6.54). Compare Schopenhauer: "However, for the man who stud-
ies to gain insight, books and studies are merely rungs of the ladder on which he climbs to the
summit of knowledge. As soon as a rung has raised him one step, he leaves it behind" (WWR
2: 80).
53. Wittgenstein's statement that the existence of ethics is logically independent of whether or not
the world is inhabited by living things seems to presuppose some more fundamental chain of
reasoning in his thought. The identification of a Kantian thesis as a source for the independ-
ence of the existence of ethics from life has the advantage of linking Wittgenstein's work to
the critical idealist tradition through well-documented connections with Schopenhauer. R. B.
Goodman, "Schopenhauer and Wittgenstein on Ethics", journal of the History of Philosophy
17 (1979), 437-47.
54. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations.
55. See also E. M. Lange, Wittgenstein und Schopenhauer: logisch-philosophische Abhandlung und
Kritik des Solipsismus (Cuxhaven: Junghaus-Verlag, 1989), 3-52; B. R. Tilghman, Wittgenstein,
Ethics and Aesthetics: The View from Eternity (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1991), 51-5, 74-8;
J. S. Clegg, On Genius: Affirmation and Denial from Schopenhauer to Wittgenstein (Ameri-
can University Studies, Series V, Philosophy, vol. 158) (New York: Peter Lang, 1994), 7-38;
J. Young, "Wittgenstein, Kant, Schopenhauer and Critical Philosophy", Theoria 50 (1984), 73-
105.
279

This page intentionally left blank 

Bibliography and
recommended reading
Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860) collected works
Schopenhauers samtliche Schriften, 7 vols, Arthur Hiibscher (ed.) (Wiesbaden: Eberhard Brockhaus
Verlag, 1946-1958).
1: 
Schriften zur Erkenntnislehre
2: 
Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung I
3: 
Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung II
4: 
Schriften zur Naturphilosophie und zur Ethik; Uber den Willen in der Natur; Die beiden
Grundprobleme der Ethik
5: 
Parerga und Paralipomena I,
6: 
Parerga und Paralipomena II
7: 
Uber die vierfache Wiirzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde-,Gestrichene Stellen; Zitate und
fremdsprachige Stellen:, Namen- und Sachregister
Schopenhauer's writings in translation
1966. The World as Will and Representation,, 2 vols, E. F. J. Payne (trans.). New York: Dover
Publications. [Originally published 1819,1844, 1859,1919.]
1974. The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, E. F. J. Payne (trans.). LaSalle, IL:
Open Court. [Originally published 1813, 1847.]
1974. Parerga and Paralipomena, 2 vols, E. F. J. Payne (trans.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. [Origi-
nally published 1851.]
1988. Arthur Schopenhauer: Manuscript Remains in Four Volumes, E. F. J. Payne (trans.). Oxford:
Berg.
1992. On the Will in Nature: A Discussion of the Corroborations from the Empirical Sciences that
the Author's Philosophy has Received Since its First Appearance, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), D. E.
Cartwright (ed.). Oxford: Berg. [Originally published 1836.]
1994. On Vision and Colors: An Essay, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), D. E. Cartwright (ed.). Oxford: Berg.
[Originally published 1816.]
1995. On the Basis of Morality, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), with an introduction by D. E. Cartwright.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett. [Originally published 1840.]
1999. Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), G. Zoller (ed.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. [Originally published 1839.]
281

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Secondary philosophical literature
Abelsen, P. 1993 "Schopenhauer and Buddhism", Philosophy East and West 43, 255-78.
Acton, H. B. 1970. Kant's Moral Philosophy. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Allison, H. E. 1996. Idealism and Freedom: Essays on Kant's Theoretical and Practical Philosophy.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Alperson, P. 1982. "Schopenhauer and Musical Revelation", The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 40, 155-66.
Aquila, R. E. 1993. "On the 'Subjects' of Knowing and Willing and the T in Schopenhauer", History
of Philosophy Quarterly 10, 241-60.
Aristotle 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle, 2 vols, the revised Oxford translation, J. Barnes
(ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Atwell, J. E. 1980. "Schopenhauer's Account of Moral Responsibility", Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly 61, 396^04.
Atwell, J. E. 1986. Ends and Principles in Kant's Moral Thought. Dordrecht & Boston: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Atwell, J. E. 1990. Schopenhauer: The Human Character. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Atwell, J. E. 1995. Schopenhauer on the Character of the World: The Metaphysics of the Will.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Atwell, J. E. 1996. "Art as Liberation: A Central Theme of Schopenhauer's Philosophy". See
Jacquette (ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 81-106.
Atzert, S. 1999. Schopenhauer und Thomas Bernhard: zur literarischen Verwendung von Philosophic.
Freiburg: Rombach.
Aune, B. 1979. Kant's Theory of Morals. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ausmus, H. J. 1996. A Schopenhauerian Challenge of Nietzsche's Thought: Towards a Restoration
of Metaphysics. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Ayer, A. J. 1985. Wittgenstein. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bacon, F. 1960. Novum Organon, translated in 1863 as The New Organon and Related Writings,
J. Spedding, R. L. Ellis & D. Denon Heath (trans.), F. H. Anderson, (ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-
Merrill.
Baer, J. T. (ed.) 1980. Arthur Schopenhauer und die russische Literatur des spdten 19. und friihen
20. Jahrhunderts, Slavistische Beitrdge, vol. 140. Munich: Verlag Otto Sagner.
Baillot, A. 1927. Influence de la philosophic de Schopenhauer en France, 1860-1900. Paris: Vrin.
Barrett, C. 1991. Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Barua, A. 1992. The Philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer. New Delhi: Intellectual Publishing House.
Beer, M. 1914. Schopenhauer. London: T.C. & E.G. Jac.
Bennett, J. 1965. "Berkeley and God", Philosophy 40, 207-21. Reprinted in Locke and Berkeley:
A Collection of Critical Essays, C. B. Martin & D. M. Armstrong (eds), 350-99 (Notre Dame,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1968).
Berkeley, G. 1949. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, The Works of George Berkeley
Bishop ofCloyne, vol. 2, A. A. Luce & T. E. Jessop (eds). London: Thomas Nelson.
Berman, D. 1998. "Schopenhauer and Nietzsche: Honest Atheism, Dishonest Pessimism". See
Janaway (ed.) (1998), Willing and Nothingness, 178-95.
Birnbacher, D. (ed.) 1996. Schopenhauer in der Philosophic der Gegenwart. Wiirzburg:
Konigshausen & Neumann.
Black, M. 1964. A Companion to Wittgenstein's Tractatus. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bolzano, B. 1972. Theory of Science: Attempt at a Detailed and in the Main Novel Exposition of
Logic with Constant Attention to Earlier Authors, R. George (ed. and trans.). Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Boyle, R. 1772. The Origin of Forms and Qualities [1666]. Volume 3 in The Works of the Honour-
able Robert Boyle, 6 vols. London: J. and F. Rivington.
Braun, P. 2000. Vernunft und Endlichkeit: eine kritische Auseinandersetzung mit dem Problem der
Endlichkeit des Daseins in der Philosophie Arthur Schopenhauers unter besondererBerucksichtigung
alternativer Reflexionsdtze. Essen: Verlag die Blaude Eule.
Bridgwater, P. 1988. Arthur Schopenhauer's English Schooling. New York: Routledge.
Brinkmann, K. 1958. Die rechts- und staatslehre Schopenhauers. Bonn: H. Bouvier.
282

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READING
Budd, M. 1985. Music and the Emotions: The Philosophical Theories. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Bykhovsky, B. 1984. Schopenhauer and the Ground of Existence, P. Moran (trans.). Amsterdam:
R.R. Griiner.
Caldwell, W 1896. Schopenhauer's System in its Philosophical Significance. Edinburgh: Blackwood.
Camus, A. 1955. The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays, J. O'Brien (trans.). New York:
Vintage.
Cartwright, D. E. 1982. "Compassion". InZeit derErnte: Festschrift fur ArthurHubscherzum 85.
Geburtstag, 60-69. Stuttgart and Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog.
Cartwright, D. E. 1984. "Kant, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche on the Morality of Pity"', Journal of
the History of Ideas 45, 83-98.
Cartwright, D. E. 1998. "Nietzsche's Use and Abuse of Schopenhauer's Moral Philosophy for Life".
See Janaway (ed.) (1998), Wiling and Nothingness, 116-50.
Cartwright, D. E. 1989. "Schopenhauer as Moral Philosopher: Toward the Actuality of his Ethics",
Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 70, 54-65.
Cartwright, D. E. 1988. "Schopenhauer on Suffering, Death, Guilt, and the Consolation of
Metaphysics". See von der Luft (ed.) (1988), Schopenhauer: New Essays, 51-66.
Cartwright, D. E. 1988. "Schopenhauer's Axiological Analysis of Character", Revue Internationale
de Philosophic 42, 18-36.
Cartwright, D. E. 1988. "Schopenhauer's Compassion and Nietzsche's Pity", Schopenhauer-
Jahrbuch 69, 557-67.
Cartwright, D. E. 1999. "Schopenhauer's Narrower Sense of Morality". See Janaway (ed.) (1999),
The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 252-92.
Cartwright, D. E. forthcoming. Schopenhauer: A Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Chansky, J. D. 1988. "Schopenhauer and Platonic Ideas: A Groundwork for an Aesthetic Metaphys-
ics". See von der Luft (ed.) (1988), Schopenhauer: New Essays, 67-81.
Clark, M. 1998. "On Knowledge, Truth, and Value: Nietzsche's Debt to Schopenhauer and the
Development of his Empiricism". See Janaway (ed.) (1998), Willing and Nothingness, 37-78.
Clegg, J. S. 1994. On Genius: Affirmation and Denial from Schopenhauer to Wittgenstein (Ameri-
can University Studies, Series V, Philosophy, vol. 158). New York: Peter Lang.
Colvin, S. S. 1897. Schopenhauer's Doctrine of the Thing-in-Itself and his Attempt to Relate it to
the World of Phenomena. Providence, RI: Franklin Press.
Cooper, D. E. 1998. "Self and Morality in Schopenhauer and Nietzsche". See Janaway (ed.) (1998),
Willing and Nothingness, 196-216.
Copleston, F. 1946. Schopenhauer: Philosopher of Pessimism. London: Burns, Oates, &c Washburne.
Darwin, C. 1986. The Works of Charles Darwin: vol. 10, The Foundations of the Origin of Species:
Two Essays Written in 1842 and 1844, P. H. Barrett & R. B. Freeman (eds). London: William
Pickering.
Dauer, D. 1969. Schopenhauer as Transmitter of Buddhist Ideas. Berne: Herbert Lang.
Descartes, R. 1975. The Philosophical Works of Descartes, 2 vols, E. S. Haldane & G. R. T. Ross
(trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Desmond, W, 1988. "Schopenhauer, Art, and the Dark Origin". See von der Luft (ed.) (1988),
Schopenhauer: New Essays, 101-22.
Diffey, T. J. 1990. "Schopenhauer's Account of Aesthetic Experience", The British journal of Aes-
thetics 30, 132-42.
Diffey, T. J. 1996. "Metaphysics and Aesthetics: A Case Study of Schopenhauer and Thomas Hardy".
See Jacquette (ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 229^8.
Doring, W. O. 1947. Schopenhauer. Hamburg: Hansischer Gildenverlag.
Doss-Davezac, S. 1996. "Schopenhauer According to the Symbolists: The Philosophical Roots of
Late Nineteenth-Century French Aesthetic Theory. See Jacquette (ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer,
Philosophy, and the Arts, 249-76.
Dumoulin, H. 1981. "Buddhism and Nineteenth-Century German Philosophy", Journal of the
History of Ideas 42, 457-70.
Durer, C. S. 1989. "Moby Dick's Ishmael, Burke, and Schopenhauer", The Midwest Quarterly 30,
161-78.
283

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Engel, M. S. 1969. "Schopenhauer's Impact on Wittgenstein", The Journal of the History of
Philosophy 7, 285-302.
Engelmann, J. 1984. "Schonheit und Zweckmafiigkeit in der Architektur", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch
65,157-69.
Ferrara, L. 1996. "Schopenhauer on Music as the Embodiment of Will". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 183-99.
Fleischer, M. 2001. Schopenhauer. Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder.
Foster, C. 1992. "Schopenhauer's Subtext on Natural Beauty", The British Journal of Aesthetics 32,
21-32.
Foster, C. 1996. "Schopenhauer and Aesthetic Recognition". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 133—49.
Foster, C. 1999. "Ideas and Imagination: Schopenhauer on the Proper Foundation of Art". See
Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 213-51.
Fox, M. 1980. Schopenhauer: His Philosophical Achievement. Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble.
Fromentin, E. 1981. The Masters of Past Time: Dutch and Flemish Painting from Van Eyck to
Rembrandt. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Galileo 1929-39. "// Saggiatore [The Assayer]". In Le Opere de Galileo Galilei, 20 vols, A. Favaro
(ed.). Florence: S.A.G. Barbera Editore.
Gardiner, P. 1967. Schopenhauer. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gardner, S. 1999. "Schopenhauer, Will, and the Unconscious". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The
Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 375^21.
Carver, N. 1994. This Complicated Form of Life: Essays on Wittgenstein. LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
Clock, H.-J. 1999. "Schopenhauer and Wittgenstein: Representation as Language and Will". See
Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 422-58.
Goedert, G. 1996. "Schopenhauer: Ethik als Weltiiberwindung", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 77,113-
31.
Goehr, L. 1992. The Imaginary Museum of Musical Works: An Essay in the Philosophy of Music.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Goehr, L. 1996. "Schopenhauer and the Musicians: An Inquiry into the Sounds of Silence and the
Limits of Philosophizing About Music". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and
the Arts, 200-28.
Gonzales, R. A. 1992. An Approach to the Sacred in the Thought of Schopenhauer. Lewiston, NY:
Edwin Mellen Press.
Goodman, R. B. 1979. "Schopenhauer and Wittgenstein on Ethics", Journal of the History of
Philosophy 17, 437-47.
Gray, R. 1979. "The German Intellectual Background". In The Wagner Companion, P. Burbridge
& R. Sutton (eds), 34-59. London: Faber.
Griffiths, A. P. 1974. "Wittgenstein, Schopenhauer, and Ethics". In Understanding Wittgenstein,
Royal Institute of Philosophy Lectures, vol. 7, 96-116. London: Macmillan.
Griffiths, A. P. 1976. "Wittgenstein on the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason",
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supplementary volume 50,1-20.
Das Gupta, R. K. 1962. "Schopenhauer and Indian Thought", East and West 13, 32-40.
Guyer, P. 1996. "Pleasure and Knowledge in Schopenhauer's Aesthetics". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 109-32.
Guyer, P. 1999. "Schopenhauer, Kant, and the Methods of Philosophy". See Janaway (ed.) (1999),
The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 93-137.
Haller, R. 1988. "Was Wittgenstein a Neo-Kantian?". In Questions on Wittgenstein, R. Haller (ed.),
44-56. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Hamlyn, D. W 1972. "Schopenhauer on the Principle of Sufficient Reason". In Reason and Reality,
Royal Institute of Philosophy Lectures 5, 1970-1971, G. N. A. Vesey (ed.), 145-62. London:
Macmillan.
Hamlyn, D. W. 1980. Schopenhauer. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hamlyn, D. W. 1999. "Schopenhauer and Knowledge". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge
Companion to Schopenhauer, 44-62.
Heidegger, M. 1996. Being and Time: A Translation ofSein undZeit, J. Stambaugh (trans.). Albany,
NY: SUNY Press. [Originally published in 1953 by Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tubingen.]
284

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READING
Hein,H. 1996. "Schopenhauer and Platonic Ideas" Journal of the History of Philosophy, 4,133-44.
Higgins, K. M. 1998. "Schopenhauer and Nietzsche: Temperament and Temporality". See Janaway
(ed.) (1998), Willing and Nothingness, 151-77.
Hiibscher, A. 1960. Arthur Schopenhauer: Mensch und Philosoph in seinen Briefe. Wiesbaden:
F. A. Brockhaus.
Hiibscher, A. 1967. Schopenhauer: Biographie eines Weltbildnis. Stuttgart: Reclam.
Hiibscher, A. 1968. Schopenhauer-Bildnisses: Eine Ikonographie. Frankfurt am Main: Waldemar
Kramer.
Hiibscher, A. 1981. Schopenhauer-Bibliographie. Stuttgart: Fromann-Holzboog.
Hiibscher, A. 1989. The Philosophy of Schopenhauer in its Intellectual Context: Thinker Against
the Tide. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Hume, D. 1978. A Treatise of Human Nature [1739-40], 2nd edn, with text revised and notes by
P. H. Nidditch and analytical index by L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jacquette, D. 1985. "Berkeley's Continuity Argument for the Existence of God", The Journal of
Religion 65, 1-14.
Jacquette, D. 1992. "Schopenhauer's Circle and the Principle of Sufficient Reason", Metaphilosophy
23, 279-87.
Jacquette, D. 1993. "Reconciling Berkeley's Microscopes in God's Infinite Mind", Religious Studies
29,453-63.
Jacquette, D. 1994. "Schopenhauer on the Antipathy of Aesthetic Genius and the Charming",
History of European Ideas 18, 373-85.
Jacquette, D. (ed.) 1996. Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Jacquette, D. 1996. "Schopenhauer's Metaphysics of Appearance and Will in the Philosophy of Art".
See Jacquette (ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 1-36.
Jacquette, D. 1997. "Haller on Wittgenstein and Kant". In Austrian Philosophy Past and Present:
Essays in Honor of Rudolf Haller, K. Lehrer & J. C. Marek (eds), 29-44. Boston Studies in the
Philosophy of Science. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Jacquette, D. 1998. Wittgenstein's Thought in Transition. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University
Press.
Jacquette, D. 1999. "Schopenhauer on Death". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge
Companion to Schopenhauer, 293-317.
Jacquette, D. 2000. "Schopenhauer on the Ethics of Suicide", Continental Philosophy Review 33,
43-58.
Jacquette, D. 2001. "Of Time and the River in Kant's Refutation of Idealism", History of Philoso-
phy Quarterly 18, 297-310.
Jacquette, D. 2002. "Wittgenstein on Thoughts as Pictures of Facts and the Transcendence of the
Metaphysical Subject", Wittgenstein and the Future of Philosophy: A Reassessment After 50 Years/
Wittgenstein und die Zukunft der Philosophie. Eine Neubewertung nach SOJahren, R. Haller 8c
K. Puhl (eds), 160-70. Vienna: Obv&Hpt.
James, W. 1935. The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature. The Gifford
Lectures on Natural Religion 1901-1902. London: Longmans, Greene & Co.
Janaway, C. 1989. Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Janaway, C. 1994. Schopenhauer. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Janaway, C. 1996. "Knowledge and Tranquility: Schopenhauer on the Value of Art". See Jacquette
(ed.) (1996), Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 39-61.
Janaway, C. 1998. "Schopenhauer as Nietzsche's Educator". See Janaway (ed.) (1998), Willing and
Nothingness, 13-36.
Janaway, C. 1998. Willing and Nothingness: Schopenhauer as Nietzsche's Educator. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Janaway, C. (ed.) 1999. The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Janaway, C. 1999. "Introduction". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion to
Schopenhauer, 1-17.
Janaway, C. 1999. "Will and Nature". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion to
Schopenhauer, 138-70.
285

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Janaway, C. 1999. "Schopenhauer's Pessimism". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Com-
panion to Schopenhauer, 318^43.
Janik, A. S. 1966. "Schopenhauer and the Early Wittgenstein", Philosophical Studies (Ireland) 15,
76-95.
Janik, A. S. & S. Toulmin 1973. Wittgenstein's Vienna. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kanovitch, A. 1923. The Will to Beauty: Being a Continuation of the Philosophies of Arthur
Schopenhauer and Friedrich Nietzsche. New York: Henry Bee Company.
Kant, I. 1952. The Critique of judgement,]. C. Meredith (trans.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kant, I. 1959. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, L. White Beck (trans.). New York:
Macmillan.
Kant, 1.1965. Critique of Pure Reason [1781,1787], N. Kemp Smith (trans.). New York: St. Martin's
Press.
Keller, H. 1968. "Schopenhauer's Talestrina'", The Listener, 23 May, 79(2043), 676.
Kelly, M. 1909. Kant's Philosophy as Rectified by Schopenhauer. London: Swan Sonnenschein.
Kelly, M. 1910. Kant's Ethics and Schopenhauer's Criticism. London: Swan Sonnenschein.
Kishan, B. V 1978. Schopenhauer's Theory of Salvation. Visakhapatnam: Andrea University Press.
Knox, I. 1958. The Aesthetic Theories of Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer. New York: Humanities
Press.
Knox, I. 1980. "Schopenhauer's Aesthetic Theory". In Schopenhauer: His Philosophical Achieve-
ment, M. Fox (ed.), 132-46. Brighton: Harvester Press.
Krukowski, L. 1992. Aesthetic Legacies. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Krukowski, L. 1996. "Schopenhauer and the Aesthetics of Creativity". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 62-80.
Lange, E. M. 1989. Wittgenstein und Schopenhauer: logisch-philosophischeAbhandlungundKritik
des Solipsismus. Cuxhaven: Junghaus-Verlag.
Lauxtermann, P. F. H. 2000. Schopenhauer's Broken World-View: Colours and Ethics Between Kant
and Goethe. The Hague: Kluwer.
Lefew-Blake, P 2001. Schopenhauer, Woman's Literature, and the Legacy of Pessimism in the Novels
of George Eliot, Olive Schreiner, Virginia Woolf, and Doris Lessing. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen
Press.
Locke, J. 1975. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding [1700], P H. Nidditch (ed.). Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Luxembourg, L. K. 1967. Francis Bacon and Denis Diderot: Philosophers of Science. Copenhagen:
Munksgaard.
Magee, B. 1997. The Philosophy of Schopenhauer. Oxford: Clarendon Press. [Revised and enlarged
edition; originally published 1983.]
Magee, B. 1990. Misunderstanding Schopenhauer. London: University of London Institute of
Germanic Studies.
Magee, B. 2000. Wagner and Philosophy. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Maidan, M. 1988. "Schopenhauer on Altruism and Morality", Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 69, 265-
72.
Malcolm, N. 1958. Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir, with a Biographical Sketch by Georg Henrik
von Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maker, R. 1988. Dereine Gedanke: Hinfuhrung zur Philosophic Arthur Schopenhauers. Darmstadt:
WissenschaftlicheBuchgesellschaft.
Maker, 1985. "Schopenhauers Transzendentalismus", Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 66, 29-51.
Mann, T. 1947. "Schopenhauer", Essays of Three Decades, H. T. Lowe-Porter (trans.). New York:
Knopf.
Martin, J. 1992. Francis Bacon: The State and the Reform of Natural Philosophy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McGill, V J. 1977. Schopenhauer: Pessimist and Pagan. New York: Haskell House.
McLaughlin, S. 1984. Schopenhauer in Russland: zur literarischen Rezeption bei Turgenev.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1962. The Phenomenology of Perception, C. Smith (trans.). New York: Humani-
ties Press.
Monk, R. 1990. Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
286

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READING
Murdoch, I. 1992. Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Muses, C. 1955. East-West Fire: Schopenhauer's Optimism and the Lanhavatara Sutra. Indian Hills,
CO: Falcon's Wing Press.
Nanajivako, B. 1970. Schopenhauer and Buddhism. Kandy, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society.
Neeley, S. G. 1992. "A Re-Examination of Schopenhauer's Analysis of Bodily Agency: The Ego as
Microcosm", Idealistic Studies 22, 52-67.
Neeley, S. G. 1994. Schopenhauer: A Consistent Reading. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Neeley, S. G. 1996. "The Knowledge and Nature of Schopenhauer's Will", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch
77,85-112.
Nelson, B. 1989. "Wagner, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche: On the Value of Human Action", The
Opera Quarterly 6, 24-32.
Neymeyr, B. \996.AesthetischeAutonomie als Abnormalitdt: Kritische Analysen zu Schopenhauers
Asthetikk im Horizont seiner Willensmetaphysik. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Nicholls, M. 1994. "The Kantian Inheritance and Schopenhauer's Doctrine of Will", Kant-Studien
85,257-79.
Nicholls, M. 1995. "Schopenhauer, Feeling and the Noumenon", Schopenhauer-]ahrbuch 76,53-
71.
Nicholls, M. 1999. "The Influence of Eastern Thought on Schopenhauer's Doctrine of the Thing-
in-Itself". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 171-212.
Nietzsche, F. 1967. Kritische Studienausgabe: Werke, 15 vols, G. Colli &t M. Montinari (eds). Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter.
Nietzsche, F. 1956. The Birth of Tragedy and The Genealogy of Morals, F. Golffing (trans.). Garden
City, NY: Doubleday.
Nietzsche, F. 1974. The Complete Works ofFriedrich Nietzsche, O. Levy (ed.). New York: Gordon
Press.
Nietzsche, F. 1983. "Schopenhauer as Educator". In Untimely Meditations, R. J. Hollingdale (trans.),
125-94. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nietzsche, F. 1998. On the Genealogy of Morality, M. Clark & A. J. Swenson (trans.). Indianapolis,
IN: Hackett.
Nussbaum, M. C. "The Transfigurations of Intoxication: Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, and Dionysus",
Arion, 3rd series, 1, 75-111.
Nussbaum, M. C. 1999. "Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, and Dionysus". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The
Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 344-74.
Odell, S. J. 2001. On Schopenhauer. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
O'Neill, O. 1989. Constructions of Reason: Explorations of Kant's Practical Philosophy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pangopoulus, N. 1998. The Fiction of Joseph Conrad: The Influence of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche.
New York: Peter Lang.
Paton, H. J. 1967. The Categorical Imperative: A Study in Kant's Moral Philosophy. New York:
Harper 6c Row.
Paulsen, F. 1901. Schopenhauer, Hamlet, Mephistopheles: drei Aufsatze zur Naturgeschichte des
Pessimismus. Berlin: Cotta Verlag.
Pessoa, F. 2001. The Book of Disquiet, R. Zenith (ed. and trans.). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Pfeiffer, K. 1925. Arthur Schopenhauer: Personlichkeit und Werk. Leipzig: A. Kroner.
Pfeiffer, K. 1949. Zum hochsten Dasein: Goethes Faust im Lichte der Schopenhauerschen
Philosophie. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Philonenko, A. 1980. Schopenhauer: Une Philosophie de Tragedie. Paris: Vrin.
Plato 1991. The Republic of Plato, 2nd edn, translated with notes, an interpretive essay and a new
introduction by A. Bloom. New York: Basic Books.
Plato 1997. Complete Works, J. M. Cooper (ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Podro, M. 1972. The Manifold in Perception: Theories of Art from Kant to Hildebrand. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Poggeler, O. 1960. "Schopenhauer und das Wesen der Kunst", Zeitschrift fur Philosophische
Forschung 14, 353-89.
Pothast, U. 1982. Die eigentlich metaphysische Tatigkeit: iiber Schopenhauers Asthetik und ihre
Anwendung durch Samuel Beckett. Frankfurt: Surkamp.
287

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Preiffer, K. 1949. 'Lum hochsten Dasein: Goethes Faust im Lichte der Schopenhauerschen
Philosophie. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Rhees, R. (ed.) 1984. Recollections of Wittgenstein, rev. edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ross, W D. 1954. Kant's Ethical Theory: A Commentary on the Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der
Sitten. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rotenstreich, N. 1996. "Schopenhauer on Beauty and Ontology". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 150-61.
Rousseau, J.-J. 1953. The Confessions,]. M. Cohen (trans.). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Safranski, R. 1990. Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy, E. Osers (trans.). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Saltus, E. 1995. The Philosophy of Disenchantment. New York: AMS Press.
Schirmacher, W. (ed.) 1988. Schopenhauers Aktualitat: ein Philosoph wird neu gelesen. Vienna:
Passagen Verlag.
Schirmacher, W (ed.) 1991, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, unddie Kunst. Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
Schmidt, A. 1988. Idee und Weltwille: Schopenhauer als Kritiker Hegels. Munich: Carl Hauser.
Schwarzer, M. 1996. "Schopenhauer's Philosophy of Architecture". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 277-98.
Seneca 1969. Letters from a Stoic, R. Campbell (trans.). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Simmel, G. 1986. Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, H. Loiskandl, D. Weinstein & M. Weinstein (trans.).
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Snow, D. &c J. Snow 1991. "Was Schopenhauer an Idealist ?", Journal of the History of Philosophy
29, 633-55.
Snow, J. 1993. "Schopenhauer's Style", International Philosophical Quarterly 33, 401-12.
Soil, I. 1998. "Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and the Redemption of Life Through Art". See Janaway
(ed.) (1998), Willing and Nothingness, 79-115.
Son, G. 2001. Schopenhauers Ethik des Mitleids und die Indische Philosophie: Parallelitat und
Differenz. Freiburg im Breisgau: Verlag K. Alber.
Sorg, B. 1975. Zur literarischen Schopenhauer-Rezeption im 19.Jahrhundert. Heidelberg: Winter
Verlag.
Stenius, E. 1960. Wittgenstein's "Tractatus": A Critical Exposition of its Main Lines of Thought.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Stratton-Lake, P. 2000. Kant, Duty, and Moral Worth. London: Routledge.
Sullivan, R. J. 1989. Immanuel Kant's Moral Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taminiaux, J. 1987. "Art and Truth in Schopenhauer and Nietzsche", Man and World 20, 85-102.
Tanner, M. 1999. Schopenhauer. New York: Routledge.
Taylor, C. S. "Nietzsche's Schopenhauerianism", Nietzsche-Studien 17, 45-73.
Taylor, R. 1964. "Schopenhauer". In A Critical History of Western Philosophy, D. J. O'Connor (ed.),
365-83. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Taylor, R. 1974. "Introduction". In The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, E. F. J.
Payne (trans.), ix-xviii. LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
Taylor, T. G. 1987. "Platonic Ideas, Aesthetic Experience, and the Resolution of Schopenhauer's
Great Contradiction", International Studies in Philosophy 19, 43-53.
Tilghman, B. R. 1991. Wittgenstein, Ethics and Aesthetics: The View from Eternity. Basingstoke:
Macmillan.
Tipton, I. C. 1974. Berkeley: The Philosophy oflmmaterialism. London: Methuen.
Tolstoy, L. 1983. Confession, D. Patterson (trans.). New York: Norton.
Touey, D. 1998. "Schopenhauer and Nietzsche on the Nature and Limits of Philosophy", Journal
of Value Inquiry 32, 243-52.
Tsanoff, R. A. 1911. Schopenhauer's Critique of Kant's Theory of Experience. New York: Longmans,
Green & Co.
von der Luft, E. (ed.) 1988. Schopenhauer: New Essays in Honor of his 200th Birthday. Lewiston,
NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
von Gwinner, W. 1878. Schopenhauers Leben, 2nd edn. Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus.
von Wright, G. H. 1942. "Georg Lichtenberg als Philosoph", Theoria 8, 201-17.
von Wright, G. H. 1982. Wittgenstein. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press,
von Wright, G. H. 1958. "Biographical Sketch", in Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir, with a
288

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READING
Biographical Sketch by GeorgHenrik von Wright, N. Malcolm, 1-22. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wagner, G. F. 1960. Schopenhauer-Register. Stuttgart: Frommann.
Wallace, W. 1890. Life of Arthur Schopenhauer. London: W Scott.
Weimer, W. 1982. Schopenhauer. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Weiner, D. A. 1992. Genius and Talent: Schopenhauer's Influence on Wittgenstein's Early Philoso-
phy. Rutherford, NJ: Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Welsen, P. 1995. Schopenhauers Theorie des Subjekts: ihre transzendentalphilosophischen,
anthropologischen und naturmetaphysischen Grundlagen. Wiirzburg: Konigshausen &c Neumann.
Whittaker, T. 1920. Schopenhauer. London: Constable.
White, F. C. 1992. On Schopenhauer's Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason. New
York: E. J. Brill.
White, F. C. 1999. "The Fourfold Root". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Companion
to Schopenhauer, 63-92.
Wicks, R. 1993. "Schopenhauer's Naturalization of Kant's A Priori Forms of Empirical Knowledge",
History of Philosophy Quarterly 10, 181-96.
Williams, T. C. 1968. The Concept of the Categorical Imperative: A Study of the Place of the
Categorical Imperative in Kant's Ethical Theory. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wittgenstein, L. 1922. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, C. K. Ogden (ed.). London: Routledge &c
Kegan Paul.
Wittgenstein, L. 1966. Philosophical Investigations, 3rd edn, G. E. M. Anscombe (trans.). New York:
Macmillan.
Wittgenstein, L. 1971. Prototractatus: An Early Version of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, B.
McGuinness, T. Nybert & G. H. von Wright (eds), D. Pears 8t B. McGuinness (trans.). Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. 1979. Notebooks 1914-1916, 2nd edn, G. H. von Wright 8t G. E. M. Anscombe
(eds), G. E. M. Anscombe (trans.). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wood, A. W 1999. Kant's Ethical Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wulf, C. 1998. The Imperative of Narration: Beckett, Bernhardt, Schopenhauer, Lacan. Birghton:
Sussex Academic Press.
Young,]. 1984. "Schopenhauer's Critique of Kantian Ethics", Kant-Studien 75, 191-212.
Young, J. 1984. "Wittgenstein, Kant, Schopenhauer and Critical Philosophy", Theoria 50, 73-105.
Young, J. 1987. "The Standpoint of Eternity: Schopenhauer on Art", Kant-Studien 78, 424^1.
Young, J. 1987. Willing and Unwilling: A Study in the Philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer.
Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.
Young, J. 1996. "Schopenhauer, Heidegger, Art, and the Will". See Jacquette (ed.) (1996),
Schopenhauer, Philosophy, and the Arts, 162-80.
Zimmern, H. 1876. Schopenhauer: His Life and His Philosophy. London: Allen &c Unwin. [Revised
edition 1932.]
Zint, H. 1954. Schopenhauer als Erlebnis. Munich: E. Reinhardt.
Zoller, G. 1995. "Schopenhauer and the Problem of Metaphysics: Critical Reflections on Rudolf
Maker's Interpretation", Man and World 28, 1-10.
Zoller, G. 1999. "Schopenhauer on the Self". See Janaway (ed.) (1999), The Cambridge Compan-
ion to Schopenhauer, 18^3.
289

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
a posteriori judgement, knowledge 55, 194,
223
a priori judgement, knowledge 23, 54-6, 59-
60, 70, 194, 205, 207-10, 226, 248, 254,
258, 268 (see aprioricity)
Abelsen,P. 265,275
abstract theory 48, 51, 53-4, 120, 148;
abstraction 26, 31, 48-9, 51, 63-4, 89-91,
96, 148-9, 163, 195, 225, 267, 269
absurd, absurdity 58, 60-61, 94, 134, 211,
267, 272
accidental property, circumstance 90, 114,
120, 142, 151, 162, 199, 210, 227, 252, 255
acquired character 198-202, 221, 230, 274
act of will 34, 73, 85-6, 88, 91, 107, 117, 124,
142, 167, 174, 186, 195-6, 211-12, 259;
acts of will 76-7, 81, 90, 93, 98, 197, 221
action 8, 33, 45, 47, 49, 66, 73, 76-81, 91-3,
98, 108, 111, 113, 131, 133, 136, 139, 144,
147, 176, 182-3, 185-7, 191, 196-203,
205, 207, 209-10, 213-28, 230, 240, 247,
256-7, 266, 276; activity 51, 53, 66, 77-8,
98, 111, 117, 142, 147-9, 163, 168-9, 183-
4, 237, 247, 260, 264
A-deduction (of thing-in-itself) (Kant) 23
aesthetic genius 117-18, 144, 147-9, 151,
157, 159, 163-72, 174, 176, 178-9, 182,
219, 246, 256, 274 (see genius)
aesthetic 18, 20-21, 38, 44, 52-3, 101, 117-
18, 132, 144-5, 147-51, 154-61, 163-79,
182, 204, 215, 219, 238, 246-7, 249, 254,
256-7, 261-2, 270, 273^, 276; aesthete
174, 257; aesthetic activity 148, 247;
aesthetic amnesia 164; aesthetic antivalues
176; aesthetic appreciation 101, 163, 166,
168, 175, 178; aesthetic asceticism 147,
176; aesthetic contemplation 118, 147,
150, 163-5, 167-9, 171, 175-7; aesthetic
escapism 164, 177; aesthetic experience
168, 174-7, 179, 247, 270, 273^; aesthetic
sensibilities 155, 169,1 75, 179; aesthetics
2, 52, 79, 118, 145-7, 149, 151, 153, 155-
7, 159-61, 163, 165-7, 169, 171, 173, 175-
9, 219, 235-8, 247, 254-7, 260-61, 263,
273^, 276, 278-9; aesthetic theory 154,
158, 161, 173, 178, 261, 273, 276; aesthetic
transcendence 169, 175; aesthetic value
173, 175-6, 254, 257
affirmation of will 135, 137, 142, 225
afterlife 114, 119, 124, 127 (see immortality)
agency 38,81,92,201-2,209-10,274
aggression 110,118,224
agony 4, 141
alienation 135, 247
allegory of the cave (Plato) 75
Alperson,R 274
alter-egoism 223
altruism 216-17,219,227-8,276
analogy 75-81, 84, 94, 101, 105, 127, 181,
186, 199, 247, 279; analogy of the eye 279;
analogical argument 52, 78, 80-82, 88,
119,137
Analytic of the Beautiful (Kant) 159, 273
Analytic of the Sublime (Kant) 159-60, 273
analytic philosophy 249, 261, 264
Anderson, F. H. 268
anguish 4, 126
anhedonia 130, 271
animal 12, 28, 36-8, 48, 93-5, 99, 108-10,
127-8, 138, 153, 187, 212-13, 216-18,
222, 270, 275; animal kingdom 28, 48, 99,
109-10; animal psychology 127; animal
rights 212
annihilation 15, 123-5, 127, 134-5, 241, 270,
272
Anscombe, G. E. M. 278
anti-aesthetics 170, 178
anxiety 108,118,246
apodicticity 192
Apollo (Greek god) 237-8
appearance 15-17, 20-25, 31, 40, 42, 69-70,
72, 75, 77, 80, 82, 91-2, 97, 100, 102, 120-
291

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
21, 127-8, 143, 154, 163, 168, 170-71,
184, 198, 201, 204, 238, 252, 262, 274-5;
appearances 19-22, 24, 50, 69, 74, 95, 99,
102, 133, 169, 181, 185, 227, 252, 274;
appearance-transcending reality 102, 104
appetite 67, 122, 163, 170-75, 178
appreciation 4, 9, 52, 69, 101, 146, 158, 163,
166, 168, 170, 175, 178-9, 181, 245
aprioricity 59-61 (see a priori)
Aquila,R.E. 267
archetype 98
architecture 151-2, 154, 156, 179, 257; as
frozen music (Goethe) 152, 156
Aristotle 3, 43-7, 58-61, 211, 214, 267-8;
Aristotelian 54, 59, 204, 267; Aristotelian
dialectical demonstrations 59; Aristotelian
dialectical proof of the sufficient reason
principle 59; Aristotle's four causes 44-5;
Aristotelian categories 204
arithmetic 44, 46, 53, 55, 157
art 3,9,52,65, 117-18, 144-59, 161, 163-
79, 235, 237-8, 244-8, 255-7, 261, 263,
273-5, 277; art appreciator 174; art form
147, 151-9; arts 52, 145-6, 150-52, 154-
9, 166, 174, 178-9, 236-8; artwork, 52,
113, 147-50, 152-4, 156, 165, 170, 174-6;
artist 6,52, 117, 145-51, 153, 155, 157-9,
166-7, 169-71, 173^, 176, 178-9, 236-8,
256-7, 264, 274, 276-7; artistic 45, 52,
101, 146-9, 152, 154, 157, 159, 163^,
172, 175-6, 178-9, 235-6, 257 (see great
art)
ascetic attitude, discipline, ideals, practices
118-21, 141-2, 147, 164, 168, 175-6, 182,
219, 229, 246, 249, 272; ascetic saint 117-
19, 138, 141-2, 144, 168-9, 176, 182, 219,
246 (see saint, saints)
Asian religion, religious philosophy 1, 113,
120, 182, 184, 212, 227, 242, 262, 264
astronomy 41,95
atheism 23,208,277
Atwell, J. E. 269, 271, 274-5
Atzert,S. 276
authentic existence 247; authentic moral
value 240
autonomy (Kant) 185, 205-6, 213-15, 242-3
(see heteronomy, moral autonomy)
awareness 4, 48, 77-8, 80, 127-30, 135, 165;
awareness of death 127-8
Ayer,A.J. 250,277
Bacon, Francis 64,268
Baer,J.T. 276
Baillot,A. 276
Barnes, J. 267
Barrett, C. 270,278
Barrett, EH. 270
Barua,A. 275
Baudelaire, Charles 235
B-deduction (of thing-in-itself) (Kant) 22-3
beauty 144, 152-4, 159-63, 165-8, 171-2,
174-6, 178-9, 184, 246, 256, 273-4;
beautiful 117, 145, 147, 149, 151, 153,
155-7, 159-63, 165, 167, 169, 171, 173-7,
179, 263, 273, 278
Beck,L.W 271
Beckett, S. 235,274,276
Beethoven, Ludwig van 146
Begriffsschrift 
(Frege) 251-2
behaviour 63, 92-3, 127, 131, 181-2, 184,
198-9, 201, 207, 216, 218, 221-2, 226-7,
229, 243, 257
being-in-the- world (Heidegger) 246-8
being-there (Heidegger) 245 (see Da-Sein)
benefit 116, 139, 150, 183, 213, 217, 219-20,
225
Bennett,]. 266
Bentham, Jeremy 222
Berkeley, George 17-18, 23, 66, 83, 251, 266,
269, 278; Berkeleyan idealism 18, 20-21,
23,25,83
Berman, D. 277
Bernhard, Thomas 235, 276
Bible 271-2
Big Bang theory 3 7
biology 41,68,79,95
birth 3, 5, 15, 20, 30, 32^, 37, 112-13, 125,
129-30, 201, 237-8, 241, 276
Black, M. 278
blindness 1, 16, 73, 88, 90, 94, 97, 106-8,
111, 118, 198, 200, 235, 247, 259
body 27-8, 76-81, 90-94, 96-7, 123-5, 131,
135, 140, 144, 154, 165, 169, 180-81, 192,
201, 225, 228, 230, 247, 258, 269, 271-2,
278; bodies 27-8, 53, 68, 76-9, 88, 98,
124, 131, 187, 231; body language 80,
131; body movement 28,77-8,81,97;
body part 94; body powers 225; body's
actions 76, 79, 144
Bolzano, Bernard 253, 278
boredom 109,115,117-18
Borges, Jorge Luis 235
botany 63
boundary 29, 37, 67, 74, 225, 255; bound-
less 203,223
Boyle, Robert 23,266
Brahma (Hindu god) 113
brain 27-8, 30, 135, 187, 191-2
Bridgwater, P. 265
Brockhaus, F. A. 265
Budd,M. 274
Buddha 4-5, 8, 182,236, 272; Buddhism 5,
109, 119, 127, 143, 212, 227, 238-9, 241-
3, 265, 275
Burbridge,P. 276
Burke, Edmund 160
Bykhovsky,B. 267,269
Byron, Lord 126
292

INDEX
calculation 237; calculus 53
Caldwell,W. 267
Campbell, R. 268
camphor and lupulin 176-7
Camus, Albert 134,271
care, caring 98, 118, 242, 245-6, 249, 277
(see Sorge)
carnal appetites 178, 237
Carnap, Rudolf, 251
Cartesian substance dualism 27 (see Descartes)
Cartwright, D. E. 265, 271, 274-5, 277
castle 71, 89, 250 (see fortress)
categorical imperative (Kant) 136-7, 184-5,
205-10, 212, 214-15, 221, 243
category, categories 1, 15, 19, 21, 23-6, 29-
30, 33, 41-8, 50, 55, 58-62, 64-6, 85, 100,
105, 151-2, 155-6, 160-61, 172-3, 175,
179, 187, 204, 213, 252, 254, 257, 262,
267; categories of artistic 175; categories of
explanation 44-6, 55; categories of
knowledge 85, 105; categories of mind 1,
15,29
cause 8, 22^, 45, 50, 61, 67, 73, 81, 91, 95,
97, 114, 116, 132, 151, 187, 225-7, 232,
269; causation 21, 23-4, 29-30, 39, 43, 45,
47, 65-7, 88, 90, 95, 98, 124, 191, 263;
causality 23-4, 34-5, 37-9, 46-9, 60, 65-
7, 72-3, 91, 103, 109, 113-14, 123, 129,
185, 187, 190-92, 197, 207-8, 268-9, 274;
causal connections 24, 49-50, 64, 68;
causal determinism 187; causal efficacy
16, 81, 94; causal explanation 63, 69, 191,
268; causal inefficacy of thing-in-itself, 24;
causal interrelations 29, 35, 63^, 66-8;
causal laws 38, 44, 93, 186; causal
mechanisms of physical phenomena 67;
causal necessity 208, 215; causal regulari-
ties 35, 49, 69; causal relations 63
causistry 203
certainty 50, 129, 192, 201, 268, 271
Cezanne, Paul 173
Chansky,J.D. 270,273
character 17, 52, 55, 67, 70, 76, 79-80, 82,
92-4, 108, 110, 113, 115-16, 127, 132-3,
135, 139, 142^, 155, 181-3, 186-7, 190,
198-202, 213, 215, 217, 221-2, 227, 229-
31, 238, 269, 271, 274-5; character of the
world 79, 93^, 182, 186, 198, 269, 274;
character of thing-in-itself, 67, 92-3, 110,
143^, 187, 198; character of Will 82, 92
charity 210, 213, 216, 219
charm 117, 164, 171, 173, 175; charming
147,170-71,173-5,274
Chekov, Anton 235
chemistry 41, 95; chemical elements 108;
chemical attraction 93
Christ, Jesus 236; Christian apologists 120;
Christianity 119-20, 122-3, 143, 212, 227,
241,243,271
Chronos (Greek god of time) 37
Clark, M. 265,277
CleggJ.S. 279
Cleobis and Biton (Greek legend) 270
Cleopatra 139
cognition 56, 81, 188, 197, 274; cognitive
beings 28; cognitive death 33
Cohen, J. M. 273
colloquial language 25 1-2, 277 (see language)
colour 6, 19, 48, 153, 171, 173, 182, 274
Colvin,S.S. 267,269
compassion 4-5, 8, 121, 128, 143, 182-3,
203, 212, 217, 219-24, 226-33, 240^3,
263, 275-6; compassionate morality 242
composers 52, 157-8; composition of pleasing
music 148
compulsion 169, 172, 189
conduct 52-3, 114, 184, 194, 202-3, 205,
212,221,225,228,241,269
conflict 49, 51, 110, 113, 115, 128-9, 143-6,
151,177,206,213,219,263
congeries of ideas (Berkeley) 83, 266
Conrad, Joseph 235, 276
conscience 133,203,231-2
consciousness 1 1-15, 17-21, 24, 28-9, 32-4,
36-8, 78, 83^, 122-3, 125, 127-8, 131-2,
134-5, 139-42, 161, 164-6, 193^, 201,
203,231-2,255,270-71
consequentialism 205-6, 222
contemplation 75, 106, 118, 120-21, 129,
139, 146-7, 150, 160, 162-9, 171, 174-8,
273 ; contemplation of beauty 178;
contemplation of great art 146; contempla-
tion of great distances 160; contemplation
of suicide 129
contemporary superficial psychology (Wittgen-
stein) 258
contradiction 22-3, 26, 35, 37, 58-9, 132,
134, 136-8, 140, 205, 210-11, 240, 268,
270, 274
control 34, 77-81, 94, 97, 144, 151, 187,
218, 246-7; control of body movements 97
Cooper, D. E. 277
Copleston, Frederick, 134, 271-2
Courbet, Gustave 173
cravings 96,121,141,216
creation 37,99,113,151,191
critical idealism (Kant) 17-18, 20-21, 24-5,
28-9, 61, 71-2, 84, 185, 204, 209, 215, 279
criticism of Kantian philosophy
(Schopenhauer) 20, 22, 159, 185, 204, 269
crystal growth 95-6,108
culture 2, 4, 95, 146, 218, 237, 240^1, 247,
249
curiosity 75,95,175,237
danger 114, 127, 161-2, 241
Danish essay prize competition 9, 18 1, 23 1,
216
293

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Darwin, C. 270
Da-sein (Heidegger) 244-5, 247-9 (see being-
there, there-being)
Dasein 245 (see Da-Sein, being-there, there-
being)
data 30, 63^, 193-6, 246, 254, 263; data of
self-consciousness 193-5
Dauer,D. 265,275
De Candolle, Alphonse 270
death 4-5, 9, 11, 14-15, 20, 28, 30, 32^, 38,
108-9, 111-19, 121-43, 145, 165, 167,
178, 197, 201, 223, 235, 241, 244, 250,
258, 262-3, 267, 270-72
decision 6, 76, 138, 140^2, 149, 174, 186,
194, 23 1-3, 240; decision-making 143,
182,191,199,201-2,243
definition 17, 22-3, 89-90, 104, 116, 156,
159, 170, 174, 191, 193, 211, 217;
definition of art 1 70 ; definition of
significance 156
degree 6, 52, 68, 85, 87, 98-9, 101, 109, 130,
141, 151-4, 161, 163, 166-8, 181, 222,
227, 240, 248, 250, 262, 270, 275; degree
of individuality 98, 153; degree of
intratypical individuality 181; degrees of
ability 166; degrees of beauty 153;
degrees of the Will's objectif ication 101 (see
grade of the will's objectification)
deity 160, 208 (see divinity; God, gods)
Delacroix, Eugene 235
denial 5, 118-21, 125, 134, 137, 140-42,
144, 164, 175-6, 180, 209, 243^, 246,
268, 279; denial of the will 5, 119-21, 134,
142, 164, 175, 246; denial of the world 121
Denis, Maurice 235
Descartes, Rene 3, 18, 27, 43, 64, 124, 266
(see Cartesian substance dualism)
destruction 113, 124, 127, 129, 131, 139,
142, 271-2
devil 4-5
Diderot, Denis 268
Diffey,T.J. 274,276
Ding an sich 15, 17, 25, 88, 253 (see thing-in-
itself)
Diogenes Laertius 271
Dionysus (Greek god of wine) 237-8
disease 114,142
dissatisfaction 20, 77, 109, 116-17, 122, 172
divinity 23; divine origin 186 (see deity; God,
gods)
Doss-Davezac, S. 276
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 146
dreams, dreaming 75, 129, 133, 139, 270-71
Drobil, Michael 250
Drury,M.O'C. 251,277
dual knowledge of body (inner and external)
76,181
dual metaphysics of appearance and reality
41-2,76,92,123,180,253,
Dumoulin, H. 265
Durer,C.S. 276
duty 8, 136-8, 141, 205-6, 208-10, 222, 228,
243, 256, 277 (see obligation)
ego, 149, 218, 221, 229-30, 274; egoism 183,
216-20, 223-6, 230, 267, 270
Eisenholz 3 1
electricity 93; electromagnetism 95-6, 108
elementary proposition (Wittgenstein) 252,
257-8
elimination of propositional attitude contexts
(Wittgenstein) 258,279
Eliot, George 276
Eliot, T.S. 235
Ellis, R.L. 268
emotion 156, 206, 237, 242; emotional
capacity 220; emotional responses of
phenomenal will 160; emotions 155,157,
159,168,179,218,243,274
empirical character 198-202, 215, 275
empirical knowledge 38, 40, 43, 45, 47, 49,
51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67-9, 74-5,
97, 192^, 205, 214, 217, 226, 229, 248,
267, 270; empirical methods 93; empirical
observation 50, 64-5; empirical science 1,
43, 65, 67, 69-70, 75, 82, 92-3, 98
empirical phenomena 19, 68, 75, 95;
empirical psychological factor 205, 243;
empirical psychology 74, 168, 210, 231;
empirical psychology 168; empirical will
44, 111, 125-6, 129, 174, 177, 196-7, 247;
empirical world 29, 32, 37, 39^2, 76, 89,
93, 102, 200, 254
empiricism 21,55,262,277
energy 3, 9, 16, 66, 95, 162-3, 167, 169, 220
Engel,M.S. 278
Engelmann, J. 273
enjoyment 145, 155, 163^, 166, 179
enlightenment 170
ennui, 110,272
entity 19-20, 28-9, 31, 76, 80, 99, 106-7,
112, 115, 135, 246, 267; entities 14, 18,
35, 37-9, 47, 56, 68, 73, 83-4, 93, 98, 100,
102-3,214
Epicurus 132, 177, 271; Epicureanism 119-
20,123,214
epistemology 1-2, 6, 11, 16, 32, 40, 43, 47-8,
51, 55, 57-8, 63, 66-7, 78, 92, 103-4, 128-
9, 141, 144, 158, 182, 184, 188, 190, 192,
204, 209, 215, 225, 236, 247, 263
Eros (Greek god of love) 271 ; erotic inclina-
tions 178; erotic pleasure 154; erotic will
176
escapism 146, 164, 177
essence 49, 65, 94, 96-7, 140, 158-9, 177,
186, 196-8, 209, 217-18, 230, 236, 263;
essential 16, 41, 48, 50, 64, 73, 79, 82, 92,
101, 109-10, 113-14, 125, 128, 133-4,
294

INDEX
141, 145-6, 150-51, 154-5, 159, 168, 179,
185, 193, 195, 206, 211, 215, 229, 270, 272
eternity 180, 197, 254, 274, 279
ethics 2, 5, 52, 79, 138-9, 181-2, 184-5, 188,
197, 203-12, 214-16, 219-21, 224-6, 228-
33, 236, 240-44, 249, 254-7, 260-61, 263,
268, 272, 274-6, 278-9 (see morals,
morality)
etiology 63,67-9,93,150
Euclid 13
eudaemonism 214
European Buddhism (Nietzsche's term for
Schopenhauerianism) 5, 241-3
evidence 49-50, 54-5, 61-2, 82, 119, 154,
201-2, 226, 235, 249-50, 275
evil 5, 136-7, 210, 236, 239, 255, 263, 270,
272
evolution 3 8
existence of a physical reality outside the mind
18, 29, 69; of a statue 45; of actual things
1 8 ; of an ideal language 252; of an
individual consciousness 20; of appear-
ances 22; of biological entities 37; of
causal connections 24; of ethics 255, 279;
of explanatory connections 74; of
freedom 197; of god 23, 43, 266-7; of
human freedom 1 8 6 ; of inorganic nature
37; of Kantian thing-in-itself, 17-20, 22-7,
29,42,81, 125, 204; of music 159; of
obj ects 1 8 , 3 5 ; of appearances 20
existentialism 135, 244, 247, 249
experience 5, 11, 14-17, 19-20, 29, 32-3, 39,
43, 48-9, 53-4, 59, 65, 68, 70, 73, 75-7, 79,
81, 90-92, 97-8, 102, 110-12, 120-21,
128-31, 137, 144, 147, 150, 158, 162-8,
171-2, 174-9, 191, 194, 199-200, 205,
220, 228-9, 246-8, 254, 261, 266, 270-71,
273-5
experiment 26,39,86,143,189,271
explanation 2, 16, 23, 39-41, 43-7, 55, 62-5,
67-71, 75, 80, 85-7, 93, 95, 112, 124, 129,
142, 146, 150, 157, 160, 170, 179, 190-93,
196, 216-17, 219, 228-9, 268-9; of natural
phenomena 70, 95, 150; explanatory
limitations of empirical science 69, 75;
explanatory necessity 191-2, 194, 196-8,
201
expression of Will 79, 147, 154, 157 (see
objectification of Will)
external knowledge of body or world 76, 78,
80
eye 9, 12, 31, 36-9, 72, 113, 115, 120, 124,
145, 165, 174, 176, 245, 248, 279
fate 110,115,222-3,234
Favaro, A. 266
fear 114, 122-3, 126, 130, 162, 175, 219,
258; of death 114,126,130
feeding 110, 112-13, 130, 183 (see food)
feeling 7, 54, 76, 79, 143, 162, 197, 216, 218,
220, 223, 228, 246; feeling 5, 48, 80-81,
85, 136, 155, 157, 160-62, 168, 171, 182,
201, 220-21, 225-6, 231, 242; of compas-
sion 5, 221, 242; of oneness 168; of
relative smallness 162
Feneon, Felix, 235
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 6-7, 16, 29-31, 40,
232, 234, 267
final cause 45-6
first-person 12-15, 29, 34, 76, 78, 80, 89-90,
98,122,131,198
flowers 171-3
food 110, 168, 171-4, 178 (see feeding)
fool 48,265
forces of nature 94,162
formal property 45-6, 49-51, 53-4, 157, 210,
222, 251, 259; formal discipline 50, 53-54
fortress (impenetrable walls) 73-4, 83-4, 89,
247 (see castle)
Foster, Cheryl 274
foundation of morality 203, 205, 207, 209,
211, 213, 215, 217, 219, 221, 223, 225,
227,229,231-3,241,275
four categories of explanation 43^, 46, 55,
58
four noble truths of Buddhism 109 (see
Buddha, Buddhism)
fourfold root of the principle of sufficient
reason (Schopenhauer) 2, 6, 9, 16, 34-5,
40^7, 55, 57-8, 63, 67, 69-70, 75, 85-8,
95, 122, 150, 186, 190, 261, 267-8
fourth paralogism (Kant) 266
Fox,M. 273
freedom 2, 9, 13, 138, 180-83, 185-91, 193-
9, 201-3, 205-6, 209, 214-16, 243, 261-2,
274-5 ; of intelligible character 1 9 8 ; of the
human will 1 8 8 ; of the phenomenal will
194-5; of the Will 9, 181, 187, 193-5, 197,
199, 202-3, 209, 261; of thing-in-itself, 197;
of will 180-81, 183, 185-7, 189, 191, 193,
195, 197-9, 201-2, 209, 262, 274; free
will 182, 185-90, 193-7, 202, 204
Freeman, R. B. 270
Frege, Gottlob 250-52
Freud, Sigmund 235,271
frustration 109-10, 117, 121-2, 146, 168-
169
fulfillment 117,123,126,256
fundamental question of being (Heidegger)
246
future 6, 13-15, 34, 37-9, 99, 115-16, 138,
262, 267, 279; of philosophy 279
Galileo, G. 23,64,266
Garden of Eden 218
Gardiner,?. 267
Gardner, S. 271
Carver, N. 278
295

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
Gelassenheit (Heidegger) 244-6
general form of proposition (Wittgenstein)
257-259, 279
genius 1, 117-18, 128, 144-51, 156-7, 159,
163-72, 174, 176, 178-9, 182, 219, 238-9,
246, 256, 263, 273-5, 277-9 (see aesthetic
genius)
geometry 44, 46, 53, 55; more geometrico,
268 (see Euclid)
George, R. 278
Clock, H.-J. 278
god, gods 5, 23, 37, 43, 45, 81, 83, 113, 125,
160, 162, 186, 212, 218, 237, 266-7; of
wine 237; divine justice 5; infinite
knowledge 83, 266; goddess 270; godlike
perspective of eternity 254 (see deity,
divinity)
Goedert,G. 270,276
Goehr,L. 274
Goethe, Wolfgang Johann von 6, 9, 152, 156,
265, 274
Goldbach's conjecture 61
golden rule 210,221
Golffing,R 276
Gonzales, R. A. 272
good 3-4, 13-14, 44, 47, 51, 86, 89, 114,
116, 142-3, 147, 153-7, 159, 170, 174,
177, 179, 182-3, 198, 200, 205-6, 208,
210, 218, 223-4, 234, 236, 239, 244, 255-
7; good health 1 14, 142; good humour
1 14; good life 1 14, 255; good luck, 47,
143; good moral will 210; good music
154, 156-7; good of the human species
244; good thing 142-3
Goodman, R. B. 279
grace 4, 169, 218; grace of aesthetic contem-
plation 169
grade of the Will's objectification 88, 94, 98-
102, 104-6, 108-11, 144, 147, 150-54,
160, 165, 168, 181, 262, 275 (see degree of
the Will's objectification)
gravity 93-8, 108, 113, 151-2, 208
Gray,R. 276
great art 52, 117, 146, 159, 163-5, 168, 179
(see art)
Greek mythology 37, 238, 270
Griffiths, A. R 267-8, 278
Gruner,R. R. 267
guilt 271,275
Gupta, R. K. Das 265
Guyer,P. 266
Haldane,E.S. 266
Haller,R. 278-9
Hamlet (Shakespeare) 132^, 239, 270
Hamlyn, D. W 58-9, 62, 268, 273
Hansel, Ludwig 250
happiness 4, 114, 116, 119, 122, 130, 177,
205-6, 214, 278
Hardy, Thomas 235,276
harmony 52, 103-4, 148, 155, 157, 168, 238,
256
hatred 118,218,275,278
Hauser, Carl 265
Heath, D. Denon 268
heaven 37,98-9,125,206
hedonism 206
Hegel, G. W R 6-9, 16, 232-4, 263, 265, 274-
5
Heidegger, Martin 234-7, 239, 241, 243-9,
251, 253, 255, 257, 259, 261, 263^, 276-7
Hein,H. 273
Hera (Greek goddess) 270
Herodotus 270
heteronomy (Kant) 205-6 (see autonomy,
moral autonomy)
hierarchy 48, 99, 151-3, 257; hierarchical
arrangement of art forms 151
Higgins,K.M. 277
highest degree of Will's objectification 85, 141,
153, 167, 270; highest grade of the Will's
objectification 99, 144, 151, 154, 181, 275
Hinduism 119, 123, 143, 212, 227, 230
history 1-2, 6, 16, 35-9, 63, 72, 101, 145,
178, 182, 206, 234, 251-2, 261-3, 265-7,
270, 273^, 278-9; of aesthetics 145; of
ethics 206; of literature 234; of philoso-
phy 16, 182, 263, 266-7, 273, 278-9; of
post-nineteenth-century art 178
Hobbes, Thomas 218
Hollingdale, R. J. 265
hope 7, 15, 19, 67-8, 71, 84, 97-8, 116-17,
132, 134, 139, 206, 209, 242, 248, 251, 258;
of salvation 117; hopeful expectation 127,
158
Horkheimer, Max, 235
horror 155,238
Hubscher,A. 265-6,269,275
human beings 13, 37, 49, 92, 94, 99, 117, 127-
8, 144, 152^, 157, 170, 181, 187, 197-200,
202, 217-19, 222, 246-8, 269, 275; human
action 223, 276; human beauty 152^;
human body 76, 94, 135, 154, 230, 258;
human character 187, 271, 274-5; human
condition 115, 130, 235, 243; human
conduct 194, 269; human existence 109,
115, 117-18, 245; human form 152^,275;
human life 115-16, 118-19, 182,237,244,
271; human nature 67, 115, 127, 182, 209,
236-7, 258, 268, 271-3, 278; humanity 4,
48, 153, 169, 223, 234, 239, 241, 266, 275;
humankind 5,99,206,212,265
Hume, David 3, 67-8, 258, 260, 268, 273, 278
hungry will 108, 110, 112-13, 115, 118, 122,
126, 130, 168, 182-3, 187, 198, 213, 217-
19, 227
Husserl, Edmund 244-5, 249
Huysmans, J. K. 235
296

INDEX
idea 26, 32-3, 36-8, 44, 63, 67, 70, 73, 98-
102, 104-6, 109-10, 129-30, 132, 139,
143, 145_6, 148-9, 151, 153^, 160-61,
163, 185, 188, 203, 211, 213, 216, 222,
224, 236, 238, 247, 255, 266, 270-71, 273,
275; of death 38, 129-30; of Dog 100,
105-6; of Horse 100, 154; ideas 1,3,7,9,
12, 22-3, 45, 65, 83, 98-106, 117, 120,
124, 144-5, 147-57, 159-60, 163-70, 173-
4, 178-9, 181, 204, 208, 225, 234, 236-7,
240, 244-5, 248-9, 251-2, 259, 262, 265-
6, 270, 273-5
ideal 13, 43, 65-6, 83, 143, 149, 154, 163,
166, 171-2, 206, 213-14, 241, 251-2, 267,
272, 277; ideal language 25 1-2, 277
idealism 7, 11-25, 27-41, 55, 57, 61, 66, 72,
82^, 96, 100-101, 103, 112, 114, 121,
129, 133, 143-4, 146, 154, 178-9, 182,
185, 188, 191, 204, 209, 215-16, 219, 225,
232, 235-6, 244, 246, 249-50, 261, 266;
idealist 1-2, 24, 30, 32^, 36, 39, 42, 55,
65-6, 71-2, 89, 126, 209, 215, 228-9, 256,
262, 266-7, 279; idealist metaphysics 1-2,
24, 32, 42, 55, 126, 228-9, 256
identification 73, 80, 83, 92, 124, 186, 220,
224, 229, 248, 255-6, 278-9; of ethics
255-6, 278; of thing-in-itself, 80, 83, 92,
186
Identity 36, 57, 77, 83-4, 103, 182, 192, 229,
232, 271-2, 279; identity principle 279 (see
principium individuationis)
illusion 35, 51, 68, 84, 112, 121, 139, 164-5,
199-200,230,238
imagination 21, 146-8, 150-51, 155, 157,
159, 161-5, 179, 222, 239, 264, 273^
imitation 147, 151, 154, 156, 173 (see
iterative imitation)
immediate objectification 102, 111, 116, 118,
122, 154-6, 158, 173-4
immortality 2, 122-5, 180, 192, 196, 198,
263, 270
inclination 8, 205-6, 210, 242
Indian religious philosophy 2, 120, 265, 275
individual essence 186
individual will 74, 76-8, 81-2, 84-5, 88, 90,
92, 94, 116, 123-9, 132, 134-5, 138^2,
147, 160-61, 164, 168-9, 192, 226, 243-4,
246
individuality 90-91, 98-9, 102, 106, 124,
129, 144, 151, 153^, 164, 167-8, 174,
181, 183, 196, 217, 239, 267, 273, 275;
individuation 15, 27-8, 39, 42, 56, 67, 70,
90, 92, 101, 107, 155, 192, 195-6, 198,
216, 238-9, 269 (see principium
individuationis)
inevitability 13, 74-5, 122, 126, 128-30, 144,
207, 219, 236, 263, 270; of death 122,
128-30
inner character 80, 92, 94, 110, 116, 183
inner knowledge 76-7, 80-81, 90, 96-8, 144,
269
inner nature 17, 31, 70-71, 76-8, 80-81, 83-
4s 90, 93-4, 97-8, 106-7, 128, 134, 160,
167, 180, 186, 217, 230; of the world 31,
76, 78, 97, 107, 167; of thing-in-itself, 77,
81,84,90, 106; of things 71,83-4
inorganic world 36,110,113
intellect 22, 103, 160, 167, 170, 188, 197,
237; intellectual freedom 188
intelligible character 198-200, 215, 217, 221,
229-31,274
intention 4, 49-50, 73, 80, 92, 94, 97, 141,
151,207,252
interpresuppositionality of subject and object
26-31, 34, 40^2, 66, 105-7, 112-13, 125
intrinsic value 174, 212, 214
intuition 18-19, 21, 24, 26, 29, 35, 38, 44,
48-50, 53-6, 65, 79, 83, 85-6, 98, 128,
147-8, 155, 157, 163, 165, 174, 179-80,
182, 184, 194, 197, 204, 209, 212, 217,
227, 238, 243, 248, 252-3, 268, 273;
intuitive acquaintance 144; intuitive
attitudes toward ethical conduct 184;
intuitive conduct 202; intuitive inner
feeling 85; intuitive insight 79,84,90;
intuitive knowledge 48, 50-52, 148-50,
154,157,184,217,246
Islam 123, 212 (see Muslims)
iterative imitation 147, 151, 154, 156 (see
imitation)
Jacquette, D. 266, 272, 274, 276-9
James, William 130,271
Janaway, C. 239, 245, 266-7, 269-72, 274-8
Janik,A.S. 254,277-8
Jessop, T. E. 266
Jews, Judaism 123, 212, 263
joy 117,155,272
judgement 46, 54, 57-8, 60-62, 64-5, 78, 81,
92, 114, 136-7, 146, 159-60, 182-3, 187,
191-2, 193, 197, 200-202, 205, 209, 224-
6, 233, 241, 254-5, 257, 273, 279
justice 5, 15, 43, 73, 182, 203, 212-14, 222,
226-8, 230, 232, 237, 256
justification 45-6, 50, 53^, 58-9, 64, 99,
106, 109, 130, 144, 157, 174, 183, 210,
212,233,263,268
Kahn, Gustav, 235
Kanovitch,A. 274
Kant, Immanuel 1-3, 5-6, 14-29, 37, 42-4,
50, 53, 55, 59-61, 65, 67, 70-72, 81-4, 88,
93, 97, 99, 101-4, 132, 136-9, 147, 159-
62, 165, 176, 182, 184-6, 190, 203-16,
220-22, 226, 229, 233, 242-3, 249-54,
261-3, 266-7, 269, 271, 273-9; analysis of
the Transcendental Aesthetic 44; Analytic
of Concepts 204; B-edition refutation of
297

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
idealism 266; ethics 185,203-7,210,
215-16, 233, 274; metaphysics 14, 16, 18,
26, 72, 102, 204-5, 215, 275; of morals
205, 215, 275; moral philosophy 182,
203-6, 208, 210; noumenon, noumenal
reality 16, 72, 97, 215; refutation of
Berkeleyan idealism 17-18, 20, 25, 29,
266; Kantianism 15, 19-20, 22, 26, 29-30,
32, 38, 42, 47, 59-60, 66, 69, 72, 80, 85, 87,
92-93, lOl^t, 123, 125, 159, 176, 185-6,
192-4, 198, 204, 206, 212-13, 215, 236,
248, 250, 253-4, 268-9, 274-5, 278-9
Kehre, die (Heidegger) 248
Kelly, M. 267,274
kindness 4, 219, 222, 227, 232, 275
Kingdom of Ends (Kant) 206, 213-14 (see
Utopia, Utopian Kingdom of Ends)
Kishan,B.V 272
knowledge 2, 5, 9, 12-13, 17, 22, 25, 30, 33,
36, 40^3, 45, 47-57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67-72,
74-81, 83, 85, 88, 90, 92-3, 95-8, 101,
103-6, 111-12, 117, 120-21, 128-32, 139,
141-2, 144, 146, 148-50, 154, 157, 161-3,
166-7, 169-70, 174, 176, 181, 184, 193^,
198-200, 202-3, 209-10, 217, 226, 228,
234, 238, 243, 246-7, 249-50, 258, 261-2,
266-7, 269, 271, 273-4, 277, 279; of
death 128-9; of the body 76-7,81,90,
92, 96, 144; of the Platonic Ideas 117, 144,
150, 169; of the world 17, 40, 43, 45, 47,
49, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69,
80-81, 83, 85, 129, 267; of thing-in-itself,
71,79,81
Knox,I. 273-4,276
Kraus,Karl 277
Krukowski, L. 276
La Rochefoucauld, Francois 242
Lacan, Jacques 276
Lange,E.M. 279
language 14, 22, 72, 80, 102, 127, 131, 149,
172, 190, 210, 222, 225, 238, 244, 251^,
257-60, 277-8 (see ideal language)
Lauxtermann, E F. H. 274, 276
law 34-5, 37-9, 59-61, 65, 67-8, 75, 87, 110,
136-7, 182, 191-2, 194-8, 202, 206-10,
215, 219, 221, 268, 271; laws 35, 37-8,
42-5, 47, 55, 63, 65, 68-9, 79, 86, 92-5, 97,
101, 111-12, 148, 150, 184-7, 190, 201,
207, 218-19, 224, 268-9, 274; of causality
34_5? 37_9? 60, 65, 197, 268; of contradic-
tion 59; of nature 68, 136-7; of non-
contradiction 61; lawlike regularities 35,
42, 93, 98
Lefew-Blake, P. 276
Lehrer,K. 278
Leibniz, G.W 43,157-9
Lessing, Doris 276
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph 250, 277
life 1-5, 8-9, 34, 44, 85, 108-30, 132^7,
152, 154, 160-70, 172-84, 186, 189, 199,
201, 214, 223-7, 234, 236-8, 240-44, 246-
9, 251, 255-6, 260, 263, 265-6, 270-72,
277-9; living things 109, 182, 203, 230,
241
limit 6, 29, 49, 74, 83, 122-3, 172, 183, 258-
9, 266, 279; of metaphysics 83; of the
world 122, 258, 279; of Kant's ethics 215;
of self-consciousness 194; limitations 17,
64, 69-70, 75-6, 83, 129, 131, 159-60,
162, 197, 204, 265; of academic philoso-
phy 265; of Kant's metaphysics 204; of
representational knowledge 1 3 1 ; of the
world 69, 75, 129; limits 2,43,47,64,
67-9, 74-5, 77, 83-4, 97, 114-15, 123, 126,
184, 194, 219, 223, 229, 247, 261, 277
lingam 113
literature 3^, 115, 151-2, 154, 173, 178-9,
234,236-7,264,276-7
Locke, John 23,266
logic 17, 43-6, 48, 50-54, 59, 65, 79, 148,
157, 191, 242, 252-4, 260-61, 263, 278;
logicism 44-6
Loiskandl,H. 271
Longinus, Cassius 160
love 9, 118, 136, 142, 210, 237, 278; loving
kindness 203, 219, 222, 226-7, 232, 275
Luce, A. A. 266
Luxembourg, L. K. 268
macrocosm 77, 98, 181, 269
madness 138, 188
Magee,B. 267,269,276
magnanimity 223, 273
Mahler, Gustav, 235
Maidan,M. 276
Malcolm, N. 250,277
manifestation of thing-in-itself, 68, 70, 93, 105,
110, 118, 141, 153, 166, 197; manifesta-
tions 76, 97, 125, 144, 175, 215, 247
Mann, Thomas 235
Marek,J.C. 278
Martin, J. 268
material, materialism 18, 23, 27, 29-30, 38-9,
45-7, 66, 70, 108, 121, 150, 195, 245, 266
(see matter)
mathematics 43-6, 48, 50-51, 53-5, 157-8,
191, 251, 256, 260, 263; mathematical
physics 66, 68-9, 94; mathematical proof,
54; mathematical properties 101; math-
ematical relations 54; mathematical status
of music 157
matter 17, 19, 30-32, 35-6, 42, 45-7, 63, 65-
7, 74, 78, 81, 86, 100, 104, 109-10, 113-
14, 143, 158, 162, 166, 172-3, 175, 183,
195, 197, 205, 208, 210, 216, 229, 243,
255, 262-3, 270, 275 (see material,
materialism)
298

INDEX
Mattisson, Friedrich von 266
Maugham, Somerset 235
Maupassant, Guy de 235
McGill,VJ. 270
McGuinness, B. 279
McLaughlin, S. 276
meaning 8, 12, 36, 70, 94, 99, 126-7, 140,
143, 175, 187, 208, 211, 213, 240, 244-5,
248, 251-4, 257, 259-61, 277-8; of a
concept 248; of existence 140; of
language 252; of life 240; of moral
judgement 187; meaningfulness 123,186,
202, 234, 253-4, 256-8
mechanics 53, 68, 95 (see physics)
medicine 6,64,188
melody 155,157
memory 4, 27, 51, 124-5, 164, 175, 270
Meno (Plato's dialogue) 1 8 6, 274
Menoeceus 132, 271
Mephistopheles 270
mercy 222, 232
Meredith, J. C. 273
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 247, 277
metaphor 4,88,186,279
metaphysics of compassion 228-3 1, 263 ; of
death 32, 129; of freedom 181, 185; of
identity 1 8 2 ; of logical atomism 25 2 ; of
matter 47; of mind 27; of morals 136,
204-5, 210, 215, 229, 271, 275; of music
235; of natural laws 79; of the Will 213,
269; of the world 40^2, 69, 143, 159,
174, 178, 253; of thing-in-itself, 20, 41, 69,
74, 93, 95, 144, 161, 183, 190; of Will 132,
139, 145, 179, 186, 231; metaphysical at-
homeness (Heidegger) 247
method, methodology 22, 24, 30, 59, 62-5,
85, 93, 106, 157, 195, 226, 244-6, 258,
261, 266; methods 45, 65, 71, 74, 93, 149,
236, 246, 262-3, 266
Michelangelo, 146, 165
microcosm 77, 80, 92, 98, 181, 269, 274
Mill, James 222
Mill, John Stuart 206,222
mind 1, 7, 11-12, 15-17, 19, 21, 23^, 27-
30, 34, 52, 65, 72-3, 75, 88, 104, 124,
128-9, 133, 141, 144, 155, 157, 162, 169,
176, 180, 191-2, 206, 215, 218, 237, 259,
264, 266, 269, 273; minds 13, 15, 20, 23,
56, 131, 164, 178, 272; mind-dependence
15, 19, 23-4, 29; mind-independence (of
thing-in-itself) 15-16, 20, 24-5, 57, 65,
74, 187
misanthropy 265, 275
misery 4-5, 109, 113, 117-18, 133, 142,
144-5, 271
Mitda-Sein (Heidegger) 277
Mitleid 220 (see compassion)
mode, modality 21, 35, 45, 54, 56, 78, 8 1, 90,
95, 124, 149-50, 191, 221, 247, 256
model 84, 149, 179, 250, 265
Modigliani, Amedeo, 173
Monk,R. 277
moral maxim (Kant) 136-7, 205, 210, 213,
221, 224, 226, 228
morals, morality 2, 4-5, 9, 13, 44, 46, 52-5,
79, 109, 114, 119-20, 122, 126, 128, 133-
40, 142-5, 151, 160, 168, 175-6, 181-9,
191, 193, 197-233, 235, 237, 240^4, 247,
249, 254, 256-7, 262-3, 265, 269-77;
moral autonomy 185,205-6,214-15;
moral character 135, 139, 142, 186, 198,
201; moral compassion 128, 212, 241-2;
moral conduct 52, 203, 212, 228; moral
duty 206, 208-9, 256; moral freedom 13,
187-9, 191, 193, 209, 215; moral judge-
ment 136, 182, 187, 197, 202, 224, 241;
moral law 44, 206-8; moral motivation
183, 188, 207, 216, 230; moral obligation
142, 182, 208, 243, 256; moral optimism
114; moral pessimism 2, 109, 143-5, 151,
168, 182, 213, 227, 235, 244, 247, 249,
270; moral philosophy 5, 120, 133, 182,
184-5, 197-8, 203-6, 208-10, 214, 220,
222, 225-7, 229, 233, 241, 243, 277; moral
principle 120, 137, 183, 207-9, 218, 226-
9,232; moral reason 137,271; moral
responsibility 181-2, 187, 197-9, 201-2,
204-6, 209, 215, 222, 243, 263, 275; moral
right 183^, 187, 202, 206, 214, 224, 226-
8, 230; moral rule 208, 221; moral theory
184, 204, 210, 213, 242; moral value 182-
3, 185, 187, 197, 205, 212, 217-20, 222,
224, 226, 228, 240-41; moral worth 217,
220, 223-4; morality of compassion 5, 223,
241-3,274
Moran,P. 267
Moreau, Gustave 235
morphology 63,93,150
motion 27, 45, 68, 73, 77-9, 81, 94, 97, 108,
166,187,238,274
motive, motivation 43^, 73, 86-8, 90-91,
94, 96-8, 120, 136, 139, 155, 174, 183,
188, 191, 201, 205, 207, 211, 213, 215-20,
222, 224, 228-30, 242-3, 269, 272, 275;
motivational explanation, factors, laws 2,
44, 46, 55, 86-7, 95, 192, 201, 209, 218-
19, 229, 269
Murdoch,!. 270,273
musagetes of philosophy 128
Muses, C. 265, 275
music 52-3, 65, 147-52, 154-9, 173-5, 178-
9,184,235-8,274
Muslims 263 (see Islam)
mystery 85,222,229,248
mystical 1, 118, 122, 168, 236, 238;
Mystische, das (Wittgenstein) 254
myth 37, 115; of Sisyphus 134, 271 (see
Greek mythology)
299

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
naivety, naive realism 12, 14, 21, 35, 40, 42, 44,
57, 64, 170
Nanajivako, B. 265,275
Napoleon Bonaparte 6
natural 1, 5, 30, 40^4, 46, 48-9, 63-5, 67-70,
75_6, 78-9, 82, 92-5, 97-8, 108, 112-14,
116, 133, 137, 141, 146, 150-51, 154, 159-
61, 163-5, 173, 179, 183^, 215, 223, 240,
251-2, 256, 263, 268, 270-71, 274; natural
beauty 165,274; natural evil 5, 263; natural
forms 146, 151, 159-60, 163, 179, 256;
natural history 63, 252; natural law 68-9,
79, 95, 97, 112, 215; natural phenomena
41, 70, 95, 97-8, 108; natural science 30,
40-43, 63^, 67-70, 76, 82, 92-4, 150;
natural world 43, 64-5, 68, 151, 154, 173;
nature of art 145 ; of being 248 ; of death
125; of freedom 188; of gravity 97; of
human beings 152; of human freedom 185;
of human interactions 1 44 ; of intuitive
representations 49; nature of life 126; of
matter 65; of music 158, 179; of reality 12,
65, 67, 95, 186, 248; of the world 31, 33, 41,
67, 76, 78, 93, 96-7, 107, 119, 167, 227, 237,
272; of thing-in-itself, 2, 16, 67, 71, 73, 77,
81-2, 84, 87, 90, 93, 106, 115, 183; of Will
144, 190, 193, 198
necessity 3, 39, 53, 57, 60, 68, 93, 108-9, 129,
138, 180, 187, 190-98, 201-2, 207-8, 213-
16,275
Neeley,S.G. 267,274
negation 60, 128-9; of experience 129; of
impossibility 190; negative concept 187-8,
226
Nelson, B. 266,276
Nelson, Thomas 266
neminem laede, imo omnes quantum potes, juva
221, 224, 226 (see morals, morality)
Neo-Kantian philosophy 16, 278
Newton, I. 64,97
Nicholls,M. 274
Nidditch, P. H. 266,268
Nietzsche, F. 5, 146-7, 175-8, 234-5, 247,
249, 251, 253, 255, 257, 259, 261, 263-5,
271-7; Nietzsche's critique of Schopenhauer
147, 175, 236
night 132, 139, 160, 162, 188, 270; night sky
160, 162
nihilism 121,136,240^1
Nirvana 239,241
nonsense 214, 254, 256-7, 279
Norwegian essay prize competition 9,181,188,
203
nothingness 239, 241-2, 272, 276-7
noumenon (Kant) 16, 19, 71-2, 93, 97, 262,
269; noumenal thing-in-itself (Kant) 97, 204,
215
nourishment 110,114,141,174
Nybert,T. 279
obit anus, abit onus 8
object 2, 13, 17, 20, 25-31, 34-5, 37, 40-42,
56, 66, 72-3, 80, 85, 87-91, 97, 101-3,
105-7, 112-14, 118, 125, 127, 141, 144,
149-50, 153-4, 161-2, 165, 168, 171, 175,
179-80, 191-2, 196, 232, 244, 255, 266-7,
269, 278 ; of knowledge 266; of perceptual
knowledge 101; of representation 26; of
representational knowledge 42; of the
categories 25; of the representation 25 (see
objects)
objectification 17, 55-6, 72, 85, 88, 92-6, 98-
102, 104-6, 108-16, 118, 120, 122-6,
128,130, 135, 139, 144-5, 147, 150-56,
158, 160-61, 165, 168-9, 173-4, 181-3,
191-2, 198-200, 212-13, 217-19, 221,
227, 229-30, 272, 275; of the hungry Will
110, 112, 115-17, 122, 126,219;ofthing-
in-itself, 55, 111-12, 116, 118, 123, 130,
156, 158, 173, 181, 183, 191-2, 198-9,
213, 230; of Will 95, 98-100, 108-13,
116, 122, 126, 128, 139, 144, 147, 151-2,
154-6, 158, 169, 174, 199, 212-13, 218,
229, 272 (see expression of Will, manifesta-
tion of thing-in-itself)
object-in-itself, 25-6, 165, 267
objectivity 23, 34, 37, 83, 102, 104-5, 111,
132, 147-8, 150, 164, 167, 273, 275;
objective contemplation 164, 171, 174;
objective perception 163,167,172^
objectlessness 1, 16, 73, 85, 87-8, 90, 94, 97-
8,128,180,192,247
objects 11-12, 18-21, 25-39, 42, 44, 47-8,
54-6, 63-7, 69, 74-6, 78, 81, 83, 87, 90,
95-9, 102-6, 112-13, 117, 131, 143, 146,
150, 153, 155-6, 162-6, 168, 170-71, 174,
176, 192, 196, 210, 241, 246, 252^, 266-
7, 273; objects of nature 117, 153, 156; of
representation 29-30 (see object)
obligation 8, 141-2, 182, 205, 208-9, 212,
220, 228, 243, 256 (see duty)
oblivion 28,128
O'Brien,]. 271
observation 48, 50, 54, 64-5, 103, 127, 161,
174,258,267,269
Ockham's razor 257,259
Ogden,C.K. 277
ontology 244-5, 247-9; ontological proof for
the existence of God 43, 267
opera 151-2,276
opposition 5, 50, 108-9, 117, 121, 130, 147,
163,183,209,212,219,273
organism 30, 109, 270, 272, 277
Osers,E. 265
pain 4, 91, 113, 116, 118-19, 132-3, 135,
137, 142, 155, 168, 177, 213-14, 222, 225-
31,278
painting 9, 148, 150-54, 170-71, 173, 175,
300

INDEX
178-9, 235, 257, 273 (see art)
Pangopoulus, N. 276
pantheological monism 43 (see Spinoza)
paradox, 62, 103, 125
Parmenides 160,273
paroxysm 188,239
passion 90-92, 118, 146, 206, 220, 237, 240;
passive reception of Platonic Ideas 68, 101,
148, 150, 163, 167, 171-2, 174
Patterson, D. 272
Paulsen,F. 270
Payne, E.F.J. 267
peace 109, 144, 155, 166, 168, 206, 213
Pears, D. 279
pedantry 48, 184, 265, 268
perception 13, 18-19, 21, 25-6, 29, 42, 48-
51, 53^, 56, 64-6, 69, 72, 75-6, 78-9, 84-
5, 90, 95, 146, 148-50, 157, 159, 162-4,
166-9, 171-5, 178, 228-9, 247, 252, 269,
272-3, 277-8; perceptual 21, 24, 27, 33,
375 77, 4i_2, 48-51, 53, 55-7, 65, 68, 77,
80-81, 88, 96, 101, 113, 117, 164-5, 180,
246, 253; perceptual knowledge 42, 80-
81, 88, 96, 101, 117; perceiver 12-13, 15,
17, 22, 57, 66, 175, 245-6
perfection 48, 149, 163, 178, 272
person 2, 45, 48, 52, 76, 83, 86, 92-3, 114,
117, 121, 123^, 129, 132, 137-8, 142,
163, 174, 181, 183-4, 186, 189, 198-202,
208, 218-20, 225-6, 228-30, 263, 275;
persons 33, 49-50, 54, 114, 116-17, 123,
130-31, 141, 153, 165-6, 169, 181, 184,
199-200, 208, 210, 216, 218, 220, 223,
226-7, 236; personality 2, 8, 27, 54, 90,
92, 118, 123-4, 126, 143, 172, 181, 187,
192,217,221,230,270
pessimism 2, 109, 114, 120, 125, 130, 133^,
142-5, 151, 168, 182, 213, 227, 235, 244,
247, 249-50, 270-72, 276-7
Pessoa,F. 235,276
Pfeiffer,K. 266,276
Phaedo (Plato) 128,135
phenomenon, phenomena 2, 15-17, 19-22,
24, 28, 32, 40^4, 46, 55-6, 63, 67-72, 75,
77-8, 80, 82-3, 85-7, 93-9, 101-2, 106,
108-9, 112, 121, 125, 131-4, 139^1, 150,
160, 169-70, 180, 190, 196, 204, 209, 215,
221, 227, 230, 237-8, 253, 262, 267, 269-
72; phenomenal psychology 198-9, 201;
phenomenal will 98, 113, 122, 124, 130,
132, 138, 140, 142, 147, 160, 162^, 167,
169-70, 175-6, 180, 189, 191, 194-7, 236,
247-9; phenomenal world 16, 28, 33, 47,
69, 75-6, 83, 89, 96-7, 102-3, 111, 113,
120-21, 125-6, 135, 143, 151, 153, 155-8,
163, 168-9, 183, 186, 213, 218, 252, 260,
262
phenomenology 73^, 81, 85, 228, 244-5,
247-9, 277
Philonenko, A. 276
philosophy of mathematics 44, 53, 55
philosophy of mind 28, 191, 259
philosophy of music 1 5 8 , 274
philosophy of science 64-5, 263, 278
photosynthesis, phototropism 93 (see plants)
physical entity 19-20, 38, 28, 76, 80; physical
phenomena 20, 67, 93^, 97; physical
reality 17-18, 20, 29, 35, 66; physical
universe 34, 92, 108, 191; physical world
11-12, 14-15, 17, 19, 35, 38-9, 75
physics 40^1, 45, 55, 66, 68-9, 79, 94, 97
(see mathematical physics; mechanics)
physignomy 7, 181
physiology 53, 68, 86, 93, 95
Picasso, P. 173
Pickering, William 270
picture, picturing 30, 41, 55, 94, 118, 126,
135, 146, 252-4, 257, 259-60, 271, 278;
pictorial form 256-60, 279; pictures 83,
102,252-4,259-60,279
Pirandello, Luigi, 235
planet, planets 14, 31, 36, 68, 97, 108, 114,
190, 227
plants 108, 114, 156 (see photosynthesis,
phototropism)
plastic arts 52, 154, 158, 179 (see art,
painting, sculpture)
Plato, 1-3, 6, 43, 75, 99-104, 121, 124, 128,
132, 135, 155, 160, 165, 169, 182, 186,
237, 242, 249, 252, 256, 262, 269-70, 273-
4, 278; Platonic Idea 98-106, 117, 144-5,
147-55, 157, 159-60, 163-70, 173-4, 178-
9, 270, 273, 275
Plautus, Titus Maccius 111
pleasure 4, 116, 118-21, 137, 142, 145, 154-
5, 205-7, 266, 271, 278
Plutarch 270
Poe, Edgar Allan 235
poet, poetry 8, 110, 148, 150-52, 154, 161,
178-9, 235, 257, 266, 273
politics 79,187,219
Post- Kantianism 16, 232-3
Pothast,U. 274
poverty 4,29,116,120,272
power 5, 7, 66, 87, 137, 160, 167, 176, 178,
225,238,243-4,273
practice, practices 49, 51-3, 73, 95, 119-20,
123, 149, 178, 202, 208, 213, 224, 226,
242-3, 254, 256
predator 108, 110, 114 (see prey)
pre-Socratic philosophy 245
prey 108, 110, 114, 129, 138 (see predator)
principium individuationis 15, 17, 29, 40, 55-
7, 67, 85, 88, 112, 122, 182, 238-9, 253;
principle of individuation 27, 42, 70, 90,
92, 107, 192, 195, 198, 216, 269 (see
individuality)
principle of sufficient reason 2, 16, 30, 34-5,
301

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
37-47, 55-63, 65, 67, 69, 75, 77, 85-7, 90-
91, 93, 95, 98, 101, 105-6, 112, 122, 150,
155, 180, 182, 186, 190-94, 196, 207, 209,
261,267-8
programme music 158, 173
Proof, 12-13, 17-18, 20, 22-4, 26-7, 54, 57-
62, 81-2, 155, 195, 207, 266-8; proofs 43,
54, 59-60, 62, 64, 268
Property, properties 19-21, 28, 39, 46-7, 49,
56, 63^, 66, 73, 81, 92, 96, 101, 105, 177,
190 (see quality, qualities)
prepositional attitudes 257-8
proprioception 247
Protagoras 245
Protestant 263
Proust, Marcel 235
psychoanalysis 271
psychology, psychological 27-8, 41, 74, 86-7,
89, 91, 95, 106-7, 109, 111, 124-5, 127,
131, 149, 156, 168, 175, 180, 182-3, 191,
198-9, 201, 203, 210, 213, 222, 231, 243,
258-9,266,279
Puhl,K. 279
pure forms of intuition (space and time) (Kant)
18-19, 21, 24-5, 29, 35, 38, 44, 53, 55-6,
65, 83, 204
pure knowledge 117, 161, 266, 273
pure objectivity 105, 164, 167, 273
purpose 4, 7, 44, 59, 63, 68, 79-80, 82, 102,
108, 121-3, 125-6, 129, 135, 139^0, 142,
148-9, 152, 169, 171, 176, 207, 209, 211,
226, 231, 233, 242, 245, 251, 259-60, 265,
273
pyramid of beings 100, 275
Pythagoreanism 158
quality, qualities 4, 21, 23, 49-50, 76, 90, 161,
198, 200, 202, 209, 266, 273 (see property,
properties)
question of being (Heidegger) 245-6, 248-9
radical idealism 15, 17, 20, 25, 34, 57, 248
(see idealism)
Rameau, Jean-Philippe 52
rational being 74, 136, 205-6, 210-15, 221-2
real 13, 18, 32, 35, 39, 64, 66-7, 70, 83-5,
92, 99, 104-5, 112, 114, 117, 120-23, 128,
131, 134, 149, 158, 180, 187, 191, 207,
213, 220, 232, 242, 252, 266, 271, 273;
reality 11-12, 15-18, 20, 23-5, 29-31, 34-
5, 37, 39, 42, 47, 65-9, 72-5, 77-8, 83-4,
94-5, 101^, 109-10, 114-17, 121, 123^,
129, 143-5, 147, 154-5, 168-70, 184, 186-
7, 213, 227, 229-31, 236, 245, 247-8, 252,
256, 259, 261, 268, 272, 275, 279; of the
world 35, 116, 168, 227, 275; realism 12,
14, 21, 29, 32, 35, 42, 149, 154, 170-73,
279
reason 193, 229, 274; reasoning 12,20-21,
39, 49-54, 59-60, 75, 90, 95-6, 106, 127-8,
134, 136-7, 156, 184-5, 193-5, 198, 200,
203, 208-10, 212, 214, 217, 226, 228, 242,
254,261,278-9
redemption 177,238,277
Redon,Odilon 235
refutation of idealism (Kant) 17-1 8, 23, 29,
266
regularity, regularities, regular successions of
events 35,42,49,67-9,93,95,97-8
relief, 110, 114, 117-18, 144, 167, 179
religion, religions 1-2, 23, 79, 1 13-14, 1 19-
21, 124, 127-8, 130, 141, 143, 165, 168,
175, 182^, 207-8, 212, 227-8, 241-2,
261-2, 264, 271-2, 278
renunciation of the will 108, 117, 120, 140,
142, 244, 246, 249, 270, 272
representation 16, 49, 89, 94, 122; of thing-
in-itself, 94, 123, 154
representational form 105, 149, 253^
representational knowledge 42, 68, 71, 79,
129,131,148
represented object, world 2, 17, 26, 32-3, 35,
72, 105-6, 114, 129, 153, 165, 191-2, 246,
269
responsibility 6, 181-2, 185, 187, 197-9,
201-2, 204-6, 209, 215, 222, 243, 246,
263, 275 (see moral responsibility)
Rhees,R. 277
Ribot, Theodule Armand 271
rights 203, 206, 210, 212, 214, 220, 222, 226,
228 (see moral rights)
Rilke, Rainer Maria 235
river 2, 18, 266
Rivington, F. 266
Roman Empire 243
romanticism 9, 146, 151, 161, 168, 178, 235
Ross,G.R.T. 266
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 273
Royal Danish Society of Scientific Studies 9,
181,203,231-3,253
Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences 9,181,
193-5
Ruhl, Ludwig Sigismund 9
rule 3, 53, 73, 137, 155, 207-8, 210, 217,
221-2, 224; rules 49, 51-4, 65, 184, 205,
213, 218-19, 221, 260; of a logical system
49; of behaviour 218; of conduct 205; of
logic 51,53,65;of logical inference 5 1 ; of
mathematics 54
Russell, Bertrand 250-53, 277, 279
Ryle, Gilbert 251
sacrifice 144,227
safety 127,162
Safranski,R. 265,276
saint, saints 43, 117-19, 140^2, 144, 146,
167,176,182,219,246,275
Saltus,E. 272
302

INDEX
salvation 2, 5, 79, 108-9, 111, 113-15, 117,
119-23, 125, 127, 129, 131, 133-5, 137,
139, 141, 143^, 147, 164-5, 167, 169,
178, 182, 214, 244, 246-7, 249, 256, 263,
270-72
sanctification 143, 272
satiety 110,115-18,121-2,177
satisfaction 109, 116, 122, 136-7, 152, 160,
170,214,216
sceptic, scepticism 57, 59-62, 66, 91, 157,
268
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von 7, 16,
232, 234
Schirmacher, W 277
Schleiermacher, Friedrich D. E. 6
Schmerzenman 119
Schmidt, A. 265
Schopenhauer, Adele (Schopenhauer's sister) 3
Schopenhauer, Henrich Floris (Schopenhauer's
father) 3
Schopenhauer's circle 57-61
Schreiner, Olive 276
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst 6
science 1, 30, 40^1, 43-4, 46, 63-70, 74-6,
92-4, 150, 239, 261-3, 268, 278; sciences
9, 11, 42, 51, 53-4, 68, 79, 82, 93, 95, 98,
181; scientific explanation 40, 45, 63-5,
67, 75, 150 (see natural science)
Scott, W. 265
sculpture 47, 150-52, 154, 171, 178-9, 257
(see art; plastic arts)
Selby-Bigge, L. A. 268
self, 118, 123-4, 127-8, 138-9, 144, 164-5,
169, 174, 176, 178, 193^, 205, 217-18,
229-30, 266-7, 269-70, 275, 277, 279; self-
consciousness 128, 188-9, 193-6, 204,
274; self-denial 120, 132, 167-8, 240^1;
self-destruction 132; self-flagellation 120;
self-interest 183, 216-17, 220-21; self-
knowledge 200; self-love 136,183,216-
17,219-20
semantics 60, 251-3, 255, 257, 259-61 (see
theory of meaning)
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus 268
sensation 11, 19, 21, 25, 42, 51, 54, 76-7,
101, 168, 170, 228; senses 76, 141, 160,
186, 188, 251; sense perception 19, 48, 51,
53; sensibility 4, 25, 52, 267; sensible
things 23, 83, 266; sentiment 3, 126, 155,
183,241,271
sex, 95, 118, 176-7,237
Shakespeare, William 132
Shiva (Hindu god) 113
sickness 4,118,241
Siddhartha 4 (see Buddha)
sideroxylon 3 1
sieve of the Danaids (Greek myth) 115
sign 8, 25, 86, 181, 251-2, 260, 278; signs
17, 49, 93, 143, 163, 200, 234, 244, 253
silk, prayer rugs, worms 275
Simmel,G. 271-2,277
Smith, C. 277
Snow,D. 265,267
Snow,J. 265,267
Scares, Bernardo, 235
society, social 9, 44, 95, 181-2, 188, 193-5,
203, 224, 231, 233, 247, 265, 267, 273,
275; social contract 218-19, 224
Socrates 3, 75, 121, 124, 128, 135, 155, 160,
186-7, 237, 256, 272; Socratic 124, 147,
154-6
solipsism, solipsist 13, 32, 258, 279
Soil, I. 277
Son,G. 275
sophism, sophistry 3, 268
Sorge (Heidegger) 244-6, 277 (see care,
caring)
soul 5,28,114,123
space 13, 18-21, 24-7, 29, 32, 35, 37-9, 44-
6, 53-6, 65-7, 72, 83, 90, 98, 100, 103, 105,
108-9, 113-14, 122-5, 129, 151, 160, 179-
80, 192, 204, 215, 217, 226, 231, 239, 253,
273 ; spatiotemporality 1 9-20, 24, 27-8 ,
34, 36, 38-9, 56, 65, 69, 73, 83, 100, 105,
124, 229
species 49, 110, 113, 122, 153-4, 170, 212,
244, 270, 275; species chauvinism 212
Spedding,J. 268
Spinoza, Baruch de 43,242,254,268
spirit 16, 114, 131, 143, 171, 222, 237, 242,
247, 263, 270
Stambaugh, J. 277
starvation 140-42
states of affairs 12, 50, 196, 252^, 260
Stenius,E. 254,278
still life 130, 152-3, 170-74, 178
Stoicism, Stoic philosophy 1 19-20, 123, 132,
137-8,214,268
strife 108, 110, 114, 144, 169, 187, 213
struggle 109-14, 117, 126, 129, 144, 146,
160-62, 176, 178, 187, 218, 240, 243
stupidity 50,210
sub specie aeternitatis 255 (see Spinoza)
subjectivity 24, 29-30; subjective idealism
27,29-31,40
subjugation of will 111, 243
sublime 117-19,167
substance 27, 38, 45, 47, 49, 65-7, 97, 101,
110,112,155,177,221,224
suffering 4-5, 91, 108-9, 111, 113-23, 125-
35, 137-44, 146, 164-5, 167-9, 177-9,
182-4, 212-14, 217-18, 220, 222, 226-32,
242, 244, 246, 263, 270-72, 275; of animal
world 109, 128, 212; of great artists 146;
of individual will 129, 141 ; sufferings of
will 117-20, 123, 129, 138, 162, 165, 169,
234
sufficient reason 2, 6, 16, 27, 30, 34-5, 37-
303

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCHOPENHAUER
47, 55-63, 65, 67, 69-70, 75, 77, 85-8, 90-
93, 95, 98, 101, 105-7, 112, 122, 150, 155,
180, 182, 186, 190-96, 198, 207, 209, 216,
261, 267-9
suicide 3, 125, 129, 132-42, 144, 271-2
sun 12,31,108,121,132,139,236
suppression of the will 142, 147, 166, 177
Sutton,R. 276
Swenson, A. J. 265
syllogism, syllogistic reasoning 54, 64-5, 97,
268
symbol 96, 119, 251-3, 260, 275, 278;
symbolism 178,252; symbolist move-
ments 235, 276
sympathy 41,223,244,261
symptom 130,209,241-2
system 2, 11, 29, 31, 41-3, 49, 52-3, 58, 136,
173, 184, 186, 204, 208, 224-5, 241, 243,
246, 261-4, 267; of laws 224; of metaphys-
ics 29, 225; of nature 136; of rules 52,
1 8 4 ; of theoretical principles 5 3
talent 9, 146, 163, 167, 238, 278
Taminiaux, J. 274
Tantalus (Greek myth) 115
tautology 28,51
Taylor, CS. 277
Taylor, R. 267
Taylor, T. G. 270,273
techne, technological culture (Heidegger) 247,
249
Tennyson, Alfred Lord 110, 270
terror 162,271
Thanatos (Greek god of death) 271
theatre 4,227,262
theology 208-9
theory of meaning 254, 257, 259, 261, 278
(see semantics)
there-being (Heidegger) 245 (see Da-Sein,
Dasein, being-there)
thief, 186,200
thing 12, 15, 18, 25, 57, 81, 105-6, 109-13,
123, 131, 136, 142-3, 158, 183, 185, 195,
197, 205, 211, 213, 221, 226, 254, 258,
272-3, 275, 278; thing outside of conscious-
ness (Kant) 18
thing-in-itself, 1-2, 15-25, 27-32, 38-43, 47-
8, 55-7, 66-7, 69-74, 76-116, 118, 122-5,
127-30, 132, 134, 139, 142-4, 147, 150-
52, 154-6, 158, 161, 165, 167-9, 173, 179-
83, 185-7, 190-92, 194-200, 204, 209,
213, 215-18, 221, 225, 227, 230-32, 236,
247-8, 252-4, 261-3, 266-7, 269; thing-in-
itself (Kant) 15, 21, 30, 42, 69, 87, 92,
101-4, 125, 132, 165, 192, 215, 236, 248,
262; things-in-themselves 17, 26, 101, 103
(see Ding an sich)
thoughts 12, 14-15, 17, 21, 28, 32, 34-5, 37,
57, 66, 69, 92, 125, 162, 191-2, 252, 277,
279; thought experiment 26, 39, 86, 143,
189
Tiepolo, Giovanni Battista 173
Tilghman, B. R. 279
Tipton, C. 266
to-handed-ness (Heidegger) 245, 249 (see
Zuhandenheit)
Tolstoy, Leo, 235, 272
Touey,D. 277
Toulmin,S. 277
tragedy 5, 115, 237-8, 271, 276
transcendence 67, 86, 134, 165, 169, 175,
187, 255-6, 260, 278-9; of the metaphysical
subject 255, 260, 278-9; of the will 134,
175; of the world 67, 86; of thing-in-itself,
187; of value 255-6,278
transcendental aesthetic (Kant) 18, 20-21, 38,
44,204,215
transcendental analytic (Kant) 17, 21
transcendental argument 59-60, 254;
transcendental reasoning 21, 90, 195, 198
transcendental freedom 180-81, 183, 185,
187, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197-9, 201, 209,
215-16,274-5
transcendental ground 19-22, 32, 85, 88, 97-
8, 198, 215, 229, 232, 255, 259, 262
transcendental idealism 27-32, 36-41, 65, 84,
96, 100-101, 103, 121, 129, 133, 143-4,
146, 154, 179, 182, 185, 188, 215-16, 219,
225,232,236,261
transcendental metaphysics 22, 40-41, 65,
69-71, 73-4, 76, 85, 93, 95, 98, 102, 229;
transcendental reality 23-4, 47, 213, 247,
261
Trojan horse, war 74,77,88,247-8
Trosiener, Johanna (Schopenhauer's mother) 3,
6
truth 1, 3, 12-14, 53-5, 58-62, 79, 84, 89,
118-19, 150, 158, 168, 170, 181, 200, 233-
4, 244, 248, 252, 257-8, 263, 268, 274, 277
Tsanoff, R.A. 266
Turgenev, Ivan 235
type 29, 45, 48, 85, 153, 161, 187-8, 198-9,
205,219,256
ugliness 153, 160
unconsciousness 157, 235, 271
understanding 5, 14, 19, 21, 23-5, 27, 31, 35,
37, 41-2, 45, 48-51, 53-4, 65-7, 70-72,
74-81, 85, 88, 91, 93, 96-8, 115, 120, 123,
126-8, 142, 148, 160, 168, 178, 184, 186,
190, 193-4, 198, 200, 209, 218, 221, 228,
247, 249, 251, 257, 261-2, 266-7, 274, 278
unity 12, 55, 101, 204, 220, 269, 272
universe 5, 28, 34, 92, 108, 113, 168, 191,
212
Upanishads 249
Utopia, Utopian Kingdom of Ends 206, 213
(see Kingdom of Ends)
304

INDEX
value 7, 52-3, 95, 110, 120-21, 127, 130,
139, 149, 155, 166, 170, 173, 175-6, 179,
182-3, 187, 204-6, 211-12, 214, 217-20,
222, 224, 228, 234, 240, 254-7, 263, 274,
276-8; of art 263, 274; of beauty 166; of
logic 53 ; of morality 240; of the world
121; values 175-6, 183, 185, 188, 197,
206,212,226,228,240-41
Van Gogh, Vincent 146
vanity 10,272
Vedas 249, 275; Vedic myth 68 (see Veil of
Maya)
vegetation 93, 108, 110-11, 263 (see plants;
photosynthesis, phototropism)
Veil of Maya 68, 71, 73, 77, 96, 120, 179,
184, 227, 230, 247 (see Vedas; Vedic myth)
Verstand 48,50
Vesey,G.N.A. 268
Vishnu (Hindu god) 113
vision 6,48-9,75, 150, 263; visibility 102;
visual field 279
volition 76,97,144
Von der Luft, E. 270-71
VonGwinner,W 265
Von Wright, G. H. 250, 277-9
Vorstellung 6,15,250
Wagner, Richard 175, 235, 239, 244, 276
Wagner, Cosima 239
Wahrnehmung 48
Waismann, Friedrich 25 1
Wallace, W. 265-6
war 95, 213, 219, 250, 270; wars 110,114,
235
Weiner,D.A. 278
Weinstein,D. 271
Weinstein,M. 271
Welsen,P. 267
Western philosophy 101, 184, 242, 262, 264
wheel of dharma 24 1
wheel of Ixion 115, 177
White, EC. 267
Whitehead, A. N. 252
will to life 5,44, 85, 108-9, 111-14, 116-30,
132-5, 137^5, 147, 152, 154, 160-70,
173-6, 178-83, 189, 225-7, 236, 238, 243-
4, 246-9, 270-71; will-to-live (Payne's
translation of Schopenhauer's term, ' der
Wile zum Leben') 110-11, 139, 270, 272
will to power (Nietzsche) 5, 176, 178, 243-4;
WillezurMacht 243
willing 5, 7, 9, 16, 27, 34, 61, 71, 73-81, 83-
99, 101, 103, 105-7, 109-12, 115-18, 122-
6, 129-32, 134-6, 138-42, 144, 148, 152,
160-61, 163-5, 167-9, 177, 180-83, 185-
202, 209, 213-14, 216-17, 221, 229-32,
239, 247, 255-6, 260, 263, 266-7, 269,
273,275-7
wine 9, 87, 130, 171-2, 237
wisdom 1, 7, 114, 119, 121, 141, 200, 228,
272
wish 109, 116-17, 133-5, 138, 176, 189,
210,221,271
Wittgenstein, L. 3, 234-79
Wolf, Friedrich August 6,111
Wolff, Christian 43, 267-8
Woolf, Virginia 276
World of Becoming (Plato) 124, 252, 262
World of Being (Plato) 124, 252, 262
Wulf,C. 276
Yeats, William Butler 235
Young,]. 274-5,277,279
Zenith, R. 276
Zimmern, H. 265
Zola,Emile 235
zoology 8, 63
Zuhandenheit (Heidegger) 244-6 (see to-
handed-ness)
305

