
 
 
 
The Meme Machine 
 
 
 
Susan Blackmore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1999 
Oxford University Press. 

 
 
Contents 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 
Preface 
 
1. Strange creatures 
2. Universal Darwinism 
3. The evolution of culture 
4. Taking the meme's eye view 
5. Three problems with memes 
6. The big brain 
7. The origins of language 
8. Meme-gene coevolution 
9. The limits of sociobiology 
10. 'An orgasm saved my life' 
11. Sex in the modern world 
12. A memetic theory of altruism 
13. The altruism trick 
14. Memes of the New Age 
15. Religions as memeplexes 
16. Into the Internet 
17. The ultimate memeplex 
18. Out of the meme race 
 
References 

Foreword 
by Richard Dawkins 
 
 
 
As an undergraduate I was chatting to a friend in the Balliol College lunch 
queue.  He regarded me with increasingly quizzical amusement, then asked: 
‘Have you just been with Peter Brunet?’  I had indeed, though I couldn’t guess 
how he knew.  Peter Brunet was our much loved tutor, and I had come hotfoot 
from a tutorial hour with him.  ‘I thought so’, my friend laughed.  ‘You are 
talking just like him; your voice sounds exactly like his.’  I had, if only briefly, 
‘inherited’ intonations and manners of speech from an admired, and now greatly 
missed, teacher.  Years later, when I became a tutor myself, I taught a young 
woman who affected an unusual habit.  When asked a question which required 
deep thought, she would screw her eyes tight shut, jerk her head down to her 
chest and then freeze for up to half a minute before looking up, opening her 
eyes, and answering the question with fluency and intelligence.  I was amused 
by this, and did an imitation of it to divert my colleagues after dinner.  Among 
them was a distinguished Oxford philosopher.  As soon as he saw my imitation, 
he immediately said: ‘That’s Wittgenstein!  Is her surname ____ by any 
chance?’  Taken aback, I said that it was.  ‘I thought so’, said my colleague.  
‘Both her parents are professional philosophers and devoted followers of 
Wittgenstein.’  The gesture had passed from the great philosopher, via one or 
both of her parents to my pupil.  I suppose that, although my further imitation 
was done in jest, I must count myself a fourth-generation transmitter of the 
gesture.  And who knows where Wittgenstein got it? 
The fact that we unconsciously imitate others, especially our parents, those in 
quasi-parental roles, or those we admire, is familiar enough.  But is it really 
credible that imitation could become the basis of a major theory of the evolution 
of the human mind and the explosive inflation of the human brain, even of what 
it means to be a conscious self?  Could imitation have been the key to what set 
our ancestors apart from all other animals?  I would never have thought so, but 
Susan Blackmore in this book makes a tantalisingly strong case. 
Imitation is how a child learns its particular language rather than some other

THE MEME MACHINE 
viii 
language.  It is why people speak more like their own parents than like other 
people’s parents.  It is why regional accents, and on a longer timescale separate 
languages, exist.  It is why religions persist along family lines rather than being 
chosen afresh in every generation.  There is at least a superficial analogy to the 
longitudinal transmission of genes down generations, and to the horizontal 
transmission of genes in viruses.  Without prejudging the issue of whether the 
analogy is a fruitful one, if we want even to talk about it we had better have a 
name for the entity that might play the role of gene in the transmission of words, 
ideas, faiths, mannerisms and fashions.  Since 1976, when the word was coined, 
increasing numbers of people have adopted the name ‘meme’ for the postulated 
gene analogue. 
The compilers of the Oxford English Dictionary operate a sensible criterion 
for deciding whether a new word shall be canonised by inclusion.  The aspirant 
word must be commonly used without needing to be defined and without its 
coinage being attributed whenever it is used.  To ask the metamemetic question, 
how widespread is ‘meme’?  A far from ideal, but nevertheless easy and 
convenient method of sampling the meme pool, is provided by the World Wide 
Web and the ease with which it may be searched.  I did a quick search of the 
Web on the day of writing this, which happened to be 29 August 1998.  ‘Meme’ 
is mentioned about half a million times, but that is a ridiculously high figure, 
obviously confounded by various acronyms and the French même.  The 
adjectival form ‘memetic’, however, is genuinely exclusive, and it clocked up 
5042 mentions.  To put this number into perspective, I compared a few other 
recently coined words or fashionable expressions.  Spin doctor (or spin-doctor) 
gets 1412 mentions, dumbing down: 3905, docudrama (or docu-drama) 2848, 
sociobiology 6679, catastrophe theory 1472, edge of chaos 2673, wannabee 
2650, zippergate 1752, studmuffin 776, post-structural (or poststructural) 577, 
extended phenotype 515, exaptation 307.  Of the 5042 mentions of memetic, 
more than 90 per cent make no mention of the origin of the word, which 
suggests that it does indeed meet the OED’s criterion.  And, as Susan Blackmore 
tells us, the Oxford English Dictionary now does contain the following 
definition: 
 
meme An element of a culture that may be considered to be passed on by 
non-genetic means, esp. imitation. 
 
Further searching of the Internet reveals a newsgroup talking shop, 
‘alt.memetics’, which has received about 12000 postings during the past year.  
There are on-line articles on, among many other things, ‘The New Meme’, 
‘Meme, Counter-meme’, ‘Memetics: a Systems Metabiology’, ‘Memes, and

FOREWORD 
ix 
Grinning Idiot Press’, ‘Memes, Metamemes and Politics’, ‘Cryonics, religions 
and memes’, ‘Selfish Memes and the evolution of cooperation’, and ‘Running 
down the Meme’.  There are separate Web pages on ‘Memetics’, ‘Memes’, ‘The 
C Memetic Nexus’, ‘Meme theorists is on the Web’, ‘Meme of the week’, 
‘Meme Central’, ‘Arkaut’s Meme Workshop’, ‘Some pointers and a short 
introduction to memetics’, ‘Memetics Index’ and ‘Meme Gardening Page’.  
There is even a new religion (tongue-in-cheek, I think), called the ‘Church of 
Virus’, complete with its own list of Sins and Virtues, and its own patron saint 
(Saint Charles Darwin, canonised as ‘perhaps the most influential memetic 
engineer of the modern era’) and I was alarmed to discover a passing reference 
to ‘St Dawkin’. 
Susan Blackmore’s book is preceded by two others entirely devoted to the 
subject of memes and both good in their different ways: Richard Brodie’s Virus 
of the Mind: The New Science of the Meme, and Aaron Lynch’s Thought 
Contagion: How belief Spreads through Society.  Most significant of all, the 
distinguished philosopher Daniel Dennett has adopted the idea of the meme, 
building it in as a cornerstone of his theory of mind, as developed in his two 
great books Consciousness Explained, and Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. 
Memes travel longitudinally down generations, but they travel horizontally 
too, like viruses in an epidemic.  Indeed, it is largely horizontal epidemiology 
that we are studying when we measure the spread of words like ‘memetic’, 
‘docudrama’ or ‘studmuffin’ over the Internet.  Crazes among schoolchildren 
provide particularly tidy examples.  When I was abut nine, my father taught me 
to fold a square of paper to make an origami Chinese junk.  It was a remarkable 
feat of artificial embryology, passing through a distinctive series of intermediate 
stages: catamaran with two hulls, cupboard with doors, picture in a frame, and 
finally the junk itself, fully seaworthy or at least bathworthy, complete with deep 
hold, and two flat decks each surmounted by a large, square-rigged sail.  The 
point of the story is that I went back to school and infected my friends with the 
skill, and it then spread around the school with the speed of the measles and 
pretty much the same epidemiological time-course.  I do not know whether the 
epidemic subsequently jumped to other schools (a boarding school is a 
somewhat isolated backwater of the meme pool).  But I do know that my father 
himself originally picked up the Chinese Junk meme during an almost identical 
epidemic at the same school 25 years earlier.  The earlier virus was launched by 
the school matron.  Long after the old matron’s departure, I had reintroduced her 
meme to a new cohort of small boys. 

THE MEME MACHINE 
x 
Before leaving the Chinese Junk, let me use it to make one more point.  A 
favourite objection to the meme/gene analogy is that memes, if they exist at all, 
are transmitted with too low fidelity to perform a gene-like role in any 
realistically Darwinian selection process.  The difference between high-fidelity 
genes and low-fidelity memes is assumed to follow from the fact that genes, but 
not memes, are digital.  I am sure that the details of Wittgenstein’s mannerism 
were far from faithfully reproduced when I imitated my pupil’s imitation of her 
parents’ imitation of Wittgenstein.  The form and timing of the tic undoubtedly 
mutated over the generations, as in the childhood game of Chinese Whispers 
(Americans call it Telephone). 
Suppose we assemble a line of children.  A picture of, say, a Chinese junk is 
shown to the first child, who is asked to draw it.  The drawing, but not the 
original picture, is then shown to the second child, who is asked to make her 
own drawing of it.  The second child’s drawing is shown to the third child, who 
draws it again, and so the series proceeds until the twentieth child, whose 
drawing is revealed to everyone and compared faith the first.  Without even 
doing the experiment, we know what the result will be.  The twentieth drawing 
will be so unlike the first as to be unrecognisable.  Presumably, if we lay the 
drawings out in order, we shall note some resemblance between each one and its 
immediate predecessor and successor, but the mutation rate will be so high as to 
destroy all semblance after a few generations.  A trend will be visible as we walk 
from one end of the series of drawings to the other, and the direction of the trend 
will be degeneration.  Evolutionary geneticists have long understood that natural 
selection cannot work unless the mutation rate is low.  Indeed, the initial 
problem of overcoming the fidelity barrier has been described as the Catch-22 of 
the Origin of Life.  Darwinism depends on high-fidelity gene replication.  How 
then can the meme, with its apparently dismal lack of fidelity, serve as quasi-
gene in any quasi-Darwinian process? 
It is not always as dismal as you think and, as Susan Blackmore insists, high 
fidelity is not necessarily synonymous with digital.  Suppose we set up our 
Chinese Whispers Chinese Junk game again, but this time with a crucial 
difference.  Instead of asking the first child to copy a drawing of a junk, we 
teach her, by demonstration, to make an origami model of a junk.  When she has 
mastered the skill and made her own junk, the first child is asked to turn round 
to the second child and teach him how to make one.  So the skill passes down 
the line to the twentieth child.  What will be the result of this experiment?  What 
will the twentieth child produce, and what shall we observe if we lay the twenty, 
efforts out in order along the ground?  I have not done it, but I will make the

FOREWORD 
xi 
following confident prediction, assuming that we run the experiment many times 
on different groups of twenty children.  In several of the experiments, a child 
somewhere along the line will forget some crucial step in the skill taught him by 
the previous child, and the line of phenotypes will suffer an abrupt 
macromutation which will presumably then be copied to the end of the line, or 
until another discrete mistake is made.  The end result of such mutated lines will 
not bear any resemblance to a Chinese junk at all.  But in a good number of 
experiments the skill will correctly pass all along the line, and the twentieth junk 
will be no worse and no better, on average, than the first junk.  If we then lay the 
twenty junks out in order, some will be more perfect than others, but 
imperfections will not be copied on down the line.  If the fifth child is ham-
fisted and makes a clumsily asymmetrical or floppy junk, his quantitative errors 
will be corrected if the sixth child happens to be more dextrous.  The twenty 
junks will not exhibit a progressive deterioration in the way that the twenty 
drawings of our first experiment undoubtedly would. 
Why?  What is the crucial difference between the two kinds of experiment?  
It is this: inheritance in the drawing experiment is Lamarckian (Blackmore calls 
it ‘copying-the-product’).  In the origami experiment it is Weismannian 
(Blackmore’s ‘copying-the-instructions’).  In the drawing experiment, the 
phenotype in every generation is also the genotype – it is what is passed on to 
the next generation.  In the origami experiment, what passes to the next 
generation is not the paper phenotype but a set of instructions for making it.  
Imperfections in the execution of the instructions result in imperfect junks 
(phenotypes) but they are not passed on to future generations: they are non-
memetic.  Here are the first five instructions in the Weismannian meme line of 
instructions for making a Chinese junk: 
 
1.  Take a square sheet of paper and fold all four corners exactly into the middle. 
 
2.  Take the reduced square so formed, and fold one side into the middle. 
 
3.  Fold the opposite side into the middle, symmetrically. 
 
4.  In the same way, take the rectangle so formed, and fold its two ends into the 
middle. 
 
5.  Take the small square so formed, and fold it backwards, exactly along the 
straight line where your last two folds met. 
 
. . . and so on, through 20 or 30 instructions of this kind.  These instructions, 
though I would not wish to call them digital, are potentially of very high fidelity,

THE MEME MACHINE 
xii 
just as if they were digital.  This is because they all make reference to idealised 
tasks like ‘fold the four corners exactly into the middle’.  If the paper is not 
exactly square, or if a child folds ineptly so that, say, the just corner overshoots 
the middle and the fourth corner undershoots it, the junk that results will be 
inelegant.  But the next child in the line will not copy the error, for she will 
assume that her instructor intended to fold all four corners into the exact centre 
of a perfect square.  The instructions are self-normalising.  The code is error-
correcting.  Plato would enjoy it: what passes down the line is an ideal essence 
of junk, of which each actual junk is an imperfect approximation. 
The instructions are more effectively passed on if verbally reinforced, but 
they can be transmitted by demonstration alone.  A Japanese child could teach 
an English one, though neither has a word of the other’s language.  In the same 
way, a Japanese master carpenter could convey his skills to an equally monoglot 
English apprentice.  The apprentice would not copy obvious mistakes.  If the 
master hit his thumb with a hammer, the apprentice would correctly guess, even 
without understanding the Japanese expletive ‘** **** **!’, that he meant to hit 
the nail.  He would not make a Lamarckian copy of the precise details of every 
hammer blow, but copy instead the inferred Weismannian instruction: drive the 
nail in with as many blows of your hammer as it takes your arm to achieve the 
same idealised end result as the master has achieved with his – a nail head flush 
with the wood. 
I believe that these considerations greatly reduce, and probably remove 
altogether, the objection that memes are copied with insufficient high fidelity to 
be compared with genes.  For me, the quasi-genetic inheritance of language, and 
of religious and traditional customs, teaches the same lesson.  Another objection, 
discussed, like the first, in Susan Blackmore’s illuminating chapter on ‘Three 
problems with memes’ is that we do not know what memes are made of or 
where they reside.  Memes have not yet found their Watson and Crick; they even 
lack their Mendel.  Where genes are to be found in precise locations on 
chromosomes, memes presumably exist in brains, and we have even less chance 
of seeing one than of seeing a gene (though, in an article referred to by 
Blackmore, the neurobiologist Juan Delius had pictured his conjecture of what a 
meme might look like).  As with genes, we track memes through populations by 
their phenotypes.  The ‘phenotype’ of the Chinese junk meme is made of paper.  
With the exception of ‘extended phenotypes’, such as beaver dams and caddis 
larva houses, the phenotypes of genes are normally parts of living bodies.  
Meme phenotypes seldom are. 
But it can happen.  To return to my school again, a Martian geneticist,

FOREWORD xiii 
visiting the school during the morning cold bath ritual, would have 
unhesitatingly diagnosed an ‘obvious’ genetic polyrnorphism.  About 50 per 
cent of the boys were circumcised and 50 per cent were not.  The boys, 
incidentally, were highly conscious of the polymorphism and classified 
ourselves into Roundheads versus Cavaliers (I have recently read of another 
school in which the boys even organised themselves into two football teams 
along the same lines).  It is, of course, not a genetic but a memetic 
polymorphism.  But the Martian’s mistake is completely understandable; the 
morphological discontinuity is of exactly the kind that one normally expects to 
find produced by genes. 
In England at that time, infant circumcision was a medical whim, and the 
Roundhead/cavalier polymorphism at my school probably owed less to 
longitudinal transmission than to differing fashions in the various hospitals 
where we happened to have been born – horizontal memetic transmission, yet 
again.  But through most of history circumcision has been longitudinally 
transmitted as a badge of religion (of parents’ religion I hasten to point out, for 
the unfortunate child is normally too young to know his own religious mind).  
Where circumcision is religiously or traditionally based (the barbaric custom of 
female circumcision always is), the transmission will follow a longitudinal 
pattern of heredity, very similar to the pattern for true genetic transmission, and 
often persisting for many generations.  Our Martian geneticist would have to 
work quite hard to discover that no genes are involved in the genesis of the 
roundhead phenotype. 
The Martian geneticist’s eyes would also pop out on stalks (assuming they 
were not on stalks to begin with) at the contemplation of certain styles of 
clothing and hairdressing, and their inheritance patterns.  The black skull-capped 
phenotype shows a marked tendency towards longitudinal transmission from 
father to son (or it may be from maternal grandfather to grandson), and there is 
clear linkage to the rarer pigtail-plaited sideburn phenotype.  Behavioural 
phenotypes such as genuflecting in front of crosses, and facing east to kneel five 
times per day, are inherited longitudinally too, and are in strongly negative 
linkage disequilibrium with each other and with the previously mentioned 
phenotypes, as is the red-dot-on-forehead phenotype, and the saffron 
robes/shaven head linkage group. 
Genes are accurately copied and transmitted from body to body, but some are 
transmitted at greater frequency than others – by definition they are more 
successful.  This is natural selection, and it is the explanation for most of what is 
interesting and remarkable about life.  But is there a similar meme-based natural 
selection?  Perhaps we can use the Internet again to investigate natural selection

THE MEME MACHINE 
xiv 
among memes?  As it happens, around the time the word ‘meme’ was coined 
(actually a little later), a rival synonym, ‘culturgen’, was proposed.  Today, 
culturgen is mentioned twenty times on the World Wide Web, compared with 
memetic’s 5042.  Moreover, of those twenty, seventeen also mention the source 
of the word, falling foul of the Oxford English Dictionary’s criterion.  Perhaps it 
is not too fanciful to imagine a Darwinian struggle between the two memes (or 
culturgens), and it is not totally silly to ask why one of them was so much more 
successful.  Perhaps it is because meme is a monosyllable similar to gene, which 
therefore lends itself to quasi-genetic sub-coinings: meme pool (352), memotype 
(58), memeticist (163), memeoid (or memoid) (28), retromeme (14), population 
memetics (41), meme complex (494), memetic engineering (302) and 
metameme 
(71) 
are 
all 
listed 
in 
the 
‘Memetic 
Lexicon’ 
at 
http://www.luxifer.com/virus/memlex.html#MEME (the numbers in parentheses 
count the mentions of each word on the Web on my sampling day).  Culturgen-
based equivalents would be more obvious but less snappy.  Or the success of 
meme against culturgen may have been initially just a non-Darwinian matter of 
chance – memetic drift (85) – followed by a self-reinforcing positive feedback 
effect (‘unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but 
from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath’, Matthew 
25: 29). 
I have mentioned two favourite objections to the meme idea: memes have 
insufficient copying fidelity, and nobody really knows what a meme physically 
is.  A third is the vexed question of how large a unit deserves the name ‘meme’.  
Is the whole Roman Catholic Church one meme, or should we use the word for 
one constituent unit such as the idea of incense or transubstantiation?  Or for 
something in between?  Susan Blackmore gives due attention to such questions, 
but she rightly concentrates on a more constructive approach, developing the 
positive explanatory power of the ‘memeplex’ – an abbreviation which she 
prefers over the full ‘coadapted meme complex’, and I shall be surprised if in 
time her book does not bring about a Darwinian reversal of their numerical 
fortunes (today, 20 and 494, respectively). 
Memes, like genes, are selected against the background of other memes in 
the meme pool.  The result is that gangs of mutually compatible memes – 
coadapted meme complexes or memeplexes – are found cohabiting in individual 
brains.  This is not because selection has chosen them as a group, but because 
each separate member of the group tends to be favoured when its environment 
happens to be dominated by the others.  An exactly similar point can be made

FOREWORD 
xv 
about genetic selection.  Every gene in a gene pool constitutes part of the 
environmental background against which the other genes are naturally selected, 
so it’s no wonder natural selection favours genes that ‘cooperate’ in building 
those highly integrated and unified machines called organisms.  Biologists are 
sharply divided into those for whom this logic is as clear as daylight, and those 
(even some very distinguished ones) who just do not understand it – who naïvely 
trot out the obvious cooperativeness of genes and unitariness of organisms as 
though they somehow counted against the ‘selfish gene’ view of evolution.  
Susan Blackmore not only understands it, she explains the matter with unusual 
clarity and goes on to apply the lesson with equal clarity and force to memes.  
By analogy with coadapted gene complexes, memes, selected against the 
background of each other, ‘cooperate’ in mutually supportive memeplexes – 
supportive within the memeplex but hostile to rival memeplexes.  Religions may 
be the most convincing examples of memeplexes but they are by no means the 
only ones.  Susan Blackmore’s treatment is, as ever, provocative and revealing. 
I believe a sufficient case has been made that the analogy between memes 
and genes is persuasive and that the obvious objections to it can be satisfactorily 
answered.  But can the analogy do useful work?  Can it lead us to powerful new 
theories that actually explain anything important?  This is where Susan 
Blackmore really comes into her own.  She warms us up with some fascinating 
‘vignettes which get us used to the memetic style of reasoning.  Why do we talk 
so much?  Why can’t we stop thinking?  Why do silly tunes buzz round our 
heads and torment us into insomnia?  In every case she begins her response in 
the same way: ‘Imagine a world full of brains, and far more memes than can 
possibly find homes.  Which memes are more likely to find a safe home and get 
passed on again?’  The answer comes back readily enough, and our 
understanding of ourselves is enriched.  She pushes on, with patience and skill 
applying the same method to deeper and more exacting problems: What is 
language for?  What attracts us to our mates?  ‘Why are we so good to each 
other?  Did memes drive the rapid, massive, and peculiar evolutionary expansion 
of the human brain?  Along the way, she shows how the theory of memes can 
throw light on particular areas where she has special expertise from her 
academic career as a psychologist and sceptical investigator of the paranormal: 
superstition and near-death experience. 
In the end, showing greater courage and intellectual chutzpah than I have 
ever aspired to, she deploys her memetic forces in a brave – do not think 
foolhardy until you have read it – assault on the deepest questions of all: What is 
a self?  What am 1?  Where am I?  (famous questions posed by Daniel Dennett

THE MEME MACHINE 
xvi 
long before he became the philosophical mentor of all meme theorists).  What of 
consciousness, creativity and foresight? 
I am occasionally accused of having backtracked on memes; of having lost 
heart, pulled in my horns, had second thoughts.  The truth is that my first 
thoughts were more modest than some memeticists, including perhaps Dr 
Blackmore, might have wished.  For me, the original mission of the meme was 
negative.  The word was introduced at the end of a book which otherwise must 
have seemed entirely devoted to extolling the selfish gene as the be-all and end-
all of evolution, the fundamental unit of selection, the entity in the hierarchy of 
life which all adaptations could be said to benefit.  There was a risk that my 
readers would misunderstand the message as being necessarily about genes in 
the sense of DNA molecules.  On the contrary, DNA was incidental.  The real 
unit of natural selection was any kind of replicator, any unit of which copies are 
made, with occasional errors, and with some influence or power over their own 
probability of replication.  The genetic natural selection identified by neo-
Darwinism as the driving force of evolution on this planet was only a special 
case of a more general process that I came to dub ‘universal Darwinism’.  
Perhaps we would have to go to other planets in order to discover any other 
examples.  But perhaps we did not have to go that far.  Could it be that a new 
kind of Darwinian replicator was even now staring us in the face?  This was 
where the meme came in. 
I would have been content, then, if the meme had done its work of simply 
persuading my readers that the gene was only a special case: that its role in the 
play of Universal Darwinism could be filled by any entity in the universe 
answering to the definition of Replicator.  The original didactic purpose of the 
meme was the negative one of cutting the selfish gene down to size.  I became a 
little alarmed at the number of my readers who took the meme more positively 
as a theory of human culture in its own right – either to criticise it (unfairly, 
given my original modest intention) or to carry it far beyond the limits of what I 
then thought justified.  This was why I may have seemed to backtrack. 
But I was always open to the possibility that the meme might one day be 
developed into a proper hypothesis of the human mind, and I did not know how 
ambitious such a thesis might turn out to be.  Any theory deserves to be given its 
best shot, and that is what Susan Blackmore has given the theory of the meme.  I 
do not know whether she will be judged too ambitious in this enterprise, and I 
would even fear for her if I did not know her redoubtable qualities as a fighter.  
Redoubtable she is, and hard-nosed too, but at the same time her style is light 
and personable.  Her thesis undermines our most cherished illusions (as she

FOREWORD xvii 
would see them) of individual identity and personhood, yet she comes across as 
the kind of individual person you would wish to know.  As one reader I am 
grateful for the courage, dedication and skill she has put into her difficult task of 
memetic engineering, and I am delighted to recommend her book. 

Preface 
 
 
 
 
This book owes its existence to an illness.  In September 1995 I caught a nasty 
virus, and struggled to keep working until I was finally forced to give up and 
take to my bed.  I stayed there for many months, unable to walk more than a few 
steps, unable to talk for more than a few minutes, unable to use my computer – 
in fact unable to do anything but read and think. 
During this time I began on my pile of ‘urgent books I must read this week’ 
which has long been oppressing me.  One of them was Dan Dennett’s latest 
book Darwin’s Dangerous Idea.  At about the same time one of my PhD 
students, Nick Rose, wrote me an essay on ‘Memes and Consciousness’.  
Somehow the meme meme got to me.  I had read Dawkins’s The Selfish Gene 
many years before but, I suppose, had dismissed the idea of memes as nothing 
more than a bit of fun.  Suddenly I realised that here was a powerful idea, 
capable of transforming our understanding the human mind – and I hadn’t even 
noticed it.  I then read everything I could find on memes.  Since I had to refuse 
all invitations to give lectures, take part in television programmes, go to 
conferences, or write papers, I could devote myself properly to the study of 
memes. 
Most of the ideas in this book came to me while I was lying in bed during 
those months, especially between January and March 1996.  As I gradually got 
better I began to make extensive notes.  Some two years after I first became ill I 
was well enough to work again, and decided to keep on saying no to all those 
invitations, and to write this book instead. 
I would like to thank the illness for making it possible, and my children 
Emily and Jolyon for not, apparently, minding that their mother was uselessly 
lying in bed all the time.  I would like to thank my partner Adam Hart-Davis for 
not only looking after me when I was ill, but for encouraging my enthusiasm for 
memes in every way possible and for putting ‘the book’ first. 
Dan Dennett was one of the first to hear my ideas and I thank him for his 
‘avuncular advice’.  Several people helped greatly by reading earlier drafts of all 
or part of the book.  They are Richard Dawkins, Dan Dennett, Derek Gatherer,

THE MEME MACHINE 
xx 
Adam Hart-Davis, Euan MacPhail, Nick Rose, and my editor Michael Rodgers 
who has given me much sound advice and encouragement.  Helena Cronin 
helped enormously by inviting me to lecture on memes and putting me in touch 
with many helpful critics.  Finally I would like to thank the Perrott-Warwick 
Fund for their financial support for the research on sleep paralysis and the 
paranormal discussions in Chapter 14.  Without all this help, these particular 
memes would never have come together. 
 
Bristol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     SJB 
October 1998 

Strange Creatures 
 
 
 
 
We humans are strange creatures.  There is no doubt that our bodies evolved by 
natural selection just as other animals’ did.  Yet we differ from all other 
creatures in many ways.  For a start we speak.  We believe ourselves to be the 
most intelligent species on the planet.  We are extraordinarily widespread and 
extremely versatile in our ways of making a living.  We wage wars, believe in 
religions, bury our dead and get embarrassed about sex.  We watch television, 
drive cars and eat ice cream.  We have had such a devastating impact upon the 
ecosystems of our planet that we appear to be in danger of destroying everything 
on which our lives depend.  One of the problems of being a human is that it is 
rather hard to look at humans with an unprejudiced eye. 
On the one hand, we are obviously animals comparable with any others.  We 
have lungs, hearts and brains made of living cells; we eat and breathe and 
reproduce.  Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection can successfully 
explain how we, along with the rest of life on this planet, came to be here, and 
why we all share so many characteristics.  On the other hand, we behave quite 
differently from other animals.  Now that biology has so successfully explained 
much of our similarity with other creatures we need to ask the opposite question.  
What makes us so different?  Could it be our superior intelligence, our 
consciousness, our language, or what? 
A common answer is that we are simply more intelligent than any other 
species.  Yet the notion of intelligence is extremely slippery, with interminable 
arguments about how to define it, how to measure it, and to what extent it is 
inherited.  Research in artificial intelligence (AI) has provided some nice 
surprises for those who thought they knew what makes human intelligence so 
special. 
In the early days of AI, researchers thought that if they could teach a 
computer to play chess they would have reproduced one of the highest forms of 
human intelligence.  In those days the idea that a computer could ever play well, 
let alone beat a Grand Master, was unthinkable.  Yet now most home computers 
come with passable chess programmes already installed, and in 1997 the 
program Deep Blue beat World Champion Garry Kasparov, ending unquestioned
CHAPTER 1 

2    THE MEME MACHINE 
human supremacy at the game.  Computers may not play chess in the same way 
as humans, but their success shows how wrong we can be about intelligence.  
Clearly, what we thought were human beings’ most special capabilities may not 
be. 
Quite the opposite goes for some apparently quite unintelligent things like 
cleaning the house, digging the garden or making a cup of tea.  Time and again 
AI researchers have tried to build robots to carry out such tasks and been 
defeated.  The first problem is that the tasks all require vision.  There is a 
popular (though possibly apocryphal) story about Marvin Minsky at MIT (the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology) that he once gave his graduate students 
the problem of vision as a summer project.  Decades later the problem of 
computer vision is still just that – a problem.  We humans can see so effortlessly 
that we cannot begin to imagine how complex the process has to be.  And in any 
case, this kind of intelligence cannot distinguish us from other animals because 
they can see too. 
If intelligence does not provide simple answers perhaps consciousness might.  
Many people believe that human consciousness is unique and is responsible for 
making us human.  Yet scientists cannot even define the term ‘consciousness’.  
Everyone knows what their own consciousness is like but they cannot share that 
knowledge with anyone else.  This troublesome fact – the subjectivity of 
consciousness – may explain why for most of this century the whole topic of 
consciousness was more or less banned from scientific discussion.  Now at last it 
has become fashionable again, but scientists and philosophers cannot even agree 
on what an explanation of consciousness would look like.  Some say that the 
‘Hard Problem’ of subjectivity is quite different from any other scientific 
problem and needs a totally new kind of solution, while others are sure that 
when we fully understand brain function and behaviour the problem of 
consciousness will have disappeared. 
Some people believe in the existence of a human soul or spirit that transcends 
the physical brain and explains human uniqueness.  With the decline in religious 
belief fewer and fewer people intellectually accept that view, yet most of us 
continue to think of ourselves as a little conscious ‘me’ inside our brain; a ‘me’ 
who sees the world, makes the decisions, directs the actions and has 
responsibility for them. 
As we shall see later, this view has to be wrong.  Whatever the brain is doing 
it does not seem to need help from an extra, magical self.  Various parts of the 
brain carry on their tasks independently of each other and countless different 
things are always going on at once.  We may feel as though there is a central 
place inside our heads in to which the sensations come and from which we 
consciously make the decisions.  Yet this place simply does not exist.  Clearly, 
something is very wrong with our ordinary view of our conscious selves.  From

STRANGE CREATURES    3 
this confused viewpoint we cannot say with certainty that other animals are not 
conscious, nor that consciousness is what makes us unique.  So what does? 
 
What makes us different? 
 
The thesis of this book is that what makes us different is our ability to imitate. 
Imitation comes naturally to us humans.  Have you ever sat and blinked, or 
waved, or ‘goo gooed’, or even just smiled, at a baby?  What happens?  Very 
often they blink too, or wave, or smile back at you.  We do it so easily, even as 
an infant.  We copy each other all the time.  Like seeing, it comes so effortlessly 
that we hardly think about it.  We certainly do not think of it as being something 
very clever.  Yet, as we shall see, it is fantastically clever. 
Certainly, other animals do not take naturally to it.  Blink, or wave, or smile 
at your dog or cat and what happens?  She might purr, wag her tail, twitch, or 
walk away, but you can be pretty sure she will not imitate you.  You can teach a 
cat, or rat, to beg neatly for its food by progressively rewarding it, but you 
cannot teach it by demonstrating the trick yourself – nor can another cat or rat.  
Years of detailed research on animal imitation has led to the conclusion that it is 
extremely rare (I shall return to this in Chapter 4).  Though we may think of 
mother cats as teaching their kittens to hunt, or groom, or use the cat door, they 
do not do it by demonstration or imitation.  Parent birds ‘teach’ their babies to 
fly more by pushing them out of the nest and giving them the chance to try it 
than by demonstrating the required skills for them to copy. 
There is a special appeal to stories of animals copying human behaviour, and 
pet owners are fond of such tales.  I read on the Internet about a cat who learned 
to flush the toilet and soon taught a second cat the same trick.  Now the two of 
them sit together on the cistern flushing away.  A more reliable anecdote was 
told by Diana Reiss, a psychologist at Rutgers University.  She works with 
bottlenose dolphins, who are known to be able to copy vocal sounds and 
artificial whistles, as well as simple actions (Bauer and Johnson 1994; Reiss and 
McGowan 1993).  She trained the dolphins by giving them fish as a reward and 
also by a ‘time out’ procedure for punishment.  If they did the wrong thing she 
would walk away from the water’s edge and wait for one minute before 
returning to the pool.  One day she threw a fish to one of the dolphins but had

4    THE MEME MACHINE 
accidentally left on some spiky bits of fin.  Immediately the dolphin turned, 
swam away, and waited for a minute at the other side of the pool. 
That story touched me because I could not help thinking of the dolphins as 
understanding the action, as having intelligence and consciousness and 
intentionality like ours.  But we cannot even define these things, let alone be 
sure that the dolphin was using them in this apparent act of reciprocation.  What 
we can see is that it imitated Dr Reiss in an appropriate way.  We are so 
oblivious to the cleverness of imitation that we do not even notice how rare it is 
in other animals and how often we do it ourselves. 
Perhaps more telling is that we do not have separate words for radically 
different kinds of learning.  We use the same word ‘learning’ for simple 
association or ‘classical conditioning’ (which almost all animals can do), for 
learning by trial and error or ‘operant conditioning’ (which many animal can 
do), and for learning by imitation (which almost none can do).  I want to argue 
that the supreme ease with which we are capable of imitation, has blinded us to 
this simple fact – that imitation is what makes us special. 
 
Imitation and the meme 
 
When you imitate someone else, something is passed on.  This ‘something’ can 
then be passed on again, and again, and so take on a life of its own.  We might 
call this thing an idea, an instruction, a behaviour, a piece of information . . . but 
if we are going to study it we shall need to give it a name. 
Fortunately, there is a name.  It is the ‘meme’. 
The term ‘meme’ first appeared in 1976, in Richard Dawkins’s best-selling 
book The Selfish Gene.  In that book Dawkins, an Oxford zoologist, popularised 
the increasingly influential view that evolution is best understood in terms of the 
competition between genes.  Earlier in the twentieth century, biologists had 
blithely talked about evolution occurring for the ‘good of the species’ without 
worrying about the exact mechanisms involved, but in the 1960s serious 
problems with this view began to be recognised (Williams 1966).  For example, 
if a group of organisms all act for the good of the group then one individual who 
does not can easily exploit the rest.  He will then leave more descendants who in 
turn do not act for the group, and the group benefit will be lost.  On the more 
modern ‘gene’s eye view’, evolution may appear to proceed in the interests of 
the individual, or for the good of the species, but in fact it is all driven by the

STRANGE CREATURES    5 
competition between genes.  This new viewpoint provided a much more 
powerful understanding of evolution and has come to be known as ‘selfish-gene 
theory’. 
We must be absolutely clear about what ‘selfish’ means in this context.  It 
does not mean genes for selfishness.  Such genes would incline their carriers to 
act selfishly and that is something quite different.  The term ‘selfish’ here means 
that the genes act only for themselves; their only interest is their own replication; 
all they want is to be passed on to the next generation.  Of course, genes do not 
‘want’ or have aims or intentions in the same way as people do; they are only 
chemical instructions that can be copied.  So when I say they ‘want’, or are 
selfish I am using a shorthand, but this shorthand is necessary to avoid lengthy 
explanations.  It will not lead us astray if we remember that genes either are or 
are not successful at getting passed on into the next generation.  So the 
shorthand ‘genes want x’ can always be spelled out as ‘genes that do x are more 
likely to be passed on’.  This is the only power they have – replicator power.  
And it is in this sense that they are selfish. 
Dawkins also introduced the important distinction between ‘replicators’ and 
their ‘vehicles’.  A replicator is anything of which copies are made, including 
‘active replicators’ whose nature affects the chances of their being copied again.  
A vehicle is the entity that interacts with the environment, which is why Hull 
(1988a) prefers the term ‘interactors’ for a similar idea.  Vehicles or interactors 
carry the replicators around inside them and protect them.  The original 
replicator was presumably a simple self-copying molecule in the primeval soup, 
but our most familiar replicator now is DNA.  Its vehicles are organisms and 
groups of organisms that interact with each other as they live out their lives in 
the seas or the air, the forests or fields.  Genes are the selfish replicators that 
drive the evolution of the biological world here on earth but Dawkins believes 
there is a more fundamental principle at work.  He suggested that wherever it 
arises, anywhere in the universe, ‘all life evolves by the differential survival of 
replicating entities’ (1976, p. 192).  This is the foundation for the idea of 
Universal Darwinism; the application of Darwinian thinking way beyond the 
confines of biological evolution. 
At the very end of the book he asked an obvious, if provocative, question.  
Are there any other replicators on our planet?  The answer, he claimed, is ‘Yes’.  
Staring us in the face, although still drifting clumsily about in its primeval soup 
of culture, is another replicator – a unit of imitation. 

6    THE MEME MACHINE 
We need a name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of 
cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation.  ‘Mimeme’ comes from a suitable 
Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit like ‘gene’, I hope my 
classicist friends will forgive me if l abbreviate mimeme to meme. 
 
As examples, he suggested ‘tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, 
ways of making pots or of building arches’.  He mentioned scientific ideas that 
catch on and propagate themselves around the world by jumping from brain to 
brain.  He wrote about religions as groups of memes with a high sundial value, 
infecting whole societies with belief in a God or an afterlife.  He talked about 
fashions in dress or diet, and about ceremonies, customs and technologies – all 
of which are spread by one person copying another.  Memes are stored in human 
brains (or books or inventions) and passed on by imitation. 
In a few pages, Dawkins laid the foundations for understanding the evolution 
of memes.  He discussed their propagation by jumping from brain to brain, 
likened them to parasites infecting a host, treated them as physically realised 
living structures, and showed how mutually assisting memes will gang together 
in groups just as genes do.  Most importantly, he treated the meme as a 
replicator in its own right.  He complained that many of his colleagues seemed 
unable to accept the idea that memes would spread for their own benefit, 
independently of any benefit to the genes.  ‘In the last analysis they wish always 
to go back to “biological advantage”’ to answer questions about human 
behaviour.  Yes, he agreed, we got our brains for biological (genetic) reasons but 
now we have them a new replicator has been unleashed.  ‘Once this new 
evolution begins, it will in no necessary sense be subservient to the old’ 
(Dawkins 1976, pp. 193–4).  In other words, memetic evolution can now take 
off without regard to its effects on the genes. 
If Dawkins is right then human life is permeated through and through with 
memes and their consequences.  Everything you have learned by imitation from 
someone else is a meme.  But we must be clear what is meant by the word 
‘imitation’, because our whole understanding of memetics depends on it.  
Dawkins said that memes jump from ‘brain to brain via a process which, in the 
broad sense, can be called imitation’ (1976, p. 192).  I will also use the term 
‘imitation’ in the broad sense.  So if, for example, a friend tells you a story and 
you remember the gist and pass it on to someone else then that counts as 
imitation.  You have not precisely imitated your friend’s every action and word, 
but something (the gist of the story) has been copied from her to you and then on

STRANGE CREATURES    7 
to someone else.  This is the ‘broad sense’ in which we must understand the 
term ‘imitation’.  If in doubt, remember that something must have been copied. 
Everything that is passed from person to person in this way is a meme.  This 
includes all the words in your vocabulary, the stories you know, the skills and 
habits you have picked up from others and the games you like to play.  It 
includes the songs you sing and the rules you obey.  So, for example, whenever 
you drive on the left (or the right!), eat curry with lager or pizza and coke, 
whistle the theme tune from Neighbours or even shake hands, you are dealing in 
memes.  Each of these memes has evolved in its own unique way with its own 
history, but each of them is using your behaviour to get itself copied. 
Take the song ‘Happy Birthday to You’.  Millions of people – probably 
thousands of millions of people the world over – know this tune.  Indeed, I only 
have to write down those four words to have a pretty good idea that you may 
soon start humming it to yourself.  Those words affect you, probably quite 
without any conscious intention on your part, by stirring up a memory you 
already possess.  And where did that come from?  Like millions of other people 
you have acquired it by imitation.  Something, some kind of information, some 
kind of instruction, has become lodged in all those brains so that now we all do 
the same thing at birthday parties.  That something is what we call the meme. 
Memes spread themselves around indiscriminately without regard to whether 
they are useful, neutral, or positively harmful to us.  A brilliant new scientific 
idea, or a technological invention, may spread because of its usefulness.  A song 
like Jingle Bells may spread because it sounds OK, though it is not seriously 
useful and can definitely get on your nerves.  But some memes are positively 
harmful – like chain letters and pyramid selling, new methods of fraud and false 
doctrines, ineffective slimming diets and dangerous medical ‘cures’.  Of course, 
the memes do not care; they are selfish like genes and will simply spread if they 
can. 
Remember that the same shorthand applies to memes as to genes.  ‘We can 
say that memes are ‘selfish’, that they ‘do not care’, that they ‘want’ to 
propagate themselves, and so on, when all we mean is that successful memes are 
the ones that get copied and spread, while unsuccessful ones do not.  This is the 
sense in which memes ‘want’ to get copied, ‘want’ you to pass them on and ‘do 
not care’ what that means to you or your genes. 
This is the power behind the idea of memes.  To start to think memetically 
we have to make a giant flip in our minds just as biologists had to do when 
taking on the idea of the selfish gene.  Instead of thinking of our ideas as our

8    THE MEME MACHINE 
own creations, and as working for us, we have to think of them as autonomous 
selfish memes, working only to get themselves copied.  We humans, because of 
our powers of imitation, have become just the physical ‘hosts’ needed for the 
memes to get around.  This is how the world looks from a ‘meme’s eye view’. 
 
Meme fear 
 
This is a scary idea indeed.  And perhaps that is why the word ‘meme’ is so 
often written with inverted commas around it, as though to apologise for using 
it.  I have even seen eminent lecturers raise both hands and tweak them above 
their ears when forced to say ‘meme’ out loud.  Gradually, the word has become 
more generally known, and has even been added to the Oxford English 
Dictionary.  There are discussion groups and a Journal of Memetics on the 
Internet, and the idea almost seems to have acquired a cult following in 
cyberspace.  But in academia it has not yet been so successful.  A perusal of 
some of the best recent books on human origins, the evolution of language and 
evolutionary psychology shows that the word does not appear at all in most of 
them (‘meme’ is not in the indexes of Barkow et al. 1992; Diamond 1997; 
Dunbar 1996; Mithen 1996; Pinker 1994; Mark Ridley 1996; Tudge 1995; Wills 
1993; Wright 1994).  The idea of memes seems extremely relevant to these 
disciplines, and I want to argue that it is time for us to take on board the notion 
of a second replicator at work in human life and evolution. 
One of the problems with the idea of memes is that it strikes at our deepest 
assumptions about who we are and why we are here.  This is always happening 
in science.  Before Copernicus and Galileo, people believed they lived at the 
centre of the universe in a world created especially for them by God.  Gradually, 
we had to accept not only that the sun does not revolve around the earth, but that 
we live on some minor little planet in an ordinary galaxy in a vast universe of 
other galaxies. 
A hundred and forty years ago Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural 
selection provided the first plausible mechanism for evolution without a 
designer.  People’s view of their own origin changed from the biblical story of 
special creation in the image of God, to an animal descended from an apelike 
ancestor – a vast leap indeed, and one that led to much ridicule and fanatical 
opposition to Darwin.  Still – we have all coped with that leap and come to 
accept that we are animals created by evolution. However, if memetics is valid, 
we will have to make another vast leap in accepting a similar evolutionary

STRANGE CREATURES    9 
mechanism for the origin of our minds and our selves. 
 
What will determine whether the theory of memes is worth having or not?  
Although philosophers of science argue over what makes a scientific theory 
valid, there are at least two commonly agreed criteria, and I will use these in 
judging memetics.  First, a theory must be able to explain things better than its 
rival theories; more economically or more comprehensively.  And second, it 
must lead to testable predictions that turn out to be correct.  Ideally, those 
predictions should be unexpected ones – things that no one would have looked 
for if they were not starting from a theory of memetics. 
My aim in this book is to show that many aspects of human nature are 
explained far better by a theory of memetics than by any rival theory yet 
available.  The theory starts only with one simple mechanism – the competition 
between memes to get into human brains and be passed on again.  From this, it 
gives rise to explanations for such diverse phenomena as the evolution of the 
enormous human brain, the origins of language, our tendency to talk and think 
too much, human altruism, and the evolution of the Internet.  Looked at through 
the new lens of the memes, human beings look quite different. 
Is the new way better?  It seems obviously so to me, but I expect that many 
people will disagree.  This is where the predictions come in.  I shall try to be as 
clear as I can in deriving predictions and showing how they follow from 
memetic theory.  I may speculate and even, at times, leap wildly beyond the 
evidence, but as long as the speculations can be tested then they can be helpful.  
In the end, the success or failure of these predictions will decide whether memes 
are just a meaningless metaphor or the grand new unifying theory we need to 
understand human nature. 

Universal Darwinism 
 
 
 
 
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection is, to my mind, the most 
beautiful in all of science.  It is beautiful because it is so simple and yet its 
results are so complex.  It is counter-intuitive and hard to grasp but once you 
have seen it the world is transformed before your eyes.  There is no longer any 
need for a grand designer to explain all the complexity of the living world.  
There is just a stark and mindless procedure by which we have all come about – 
beautiful but scary. 
I want to spend most of this chapter explaining the theory.  The problem is 
that this beautifully simple idea is often misunderstood.  Perhaps its very 
simplicity makes people think there must be something more to it, or that they 
have missed the point when they have actually grasped it.  Evolution by natural 
selection is very, very simple and not at all obvious. 
Darwin explained the basic principle in his great work On the Origin of 
Species by Means of Natural Selection, just published in 1859.  Before that time 
many people had been impressed by the relationships between organisms, and 
by progressions in the fossil record, and had speculated about evolution.  Among 
them were Charles’s grandfather Erasmus Darwin, and Jean-Baptiste de 
Lamarck.  However, no one had described a plausible mechanism by which 
evolution might work, and this was Darwin’s great contribution. 
He reasoned that if living creatures vary (as they certainly do) and if, due to 
their geometric increase in numbers, there is at certain times a struggle for life 
(which cannot be disputed), then it would be most extraordinary if there were 
not some variation that was useful to a creature’s welfare.  The individuals with 
these characteristics will then have the best chance of being ‘preserved in the 
struggle for life’ and will produce offspring with the same characteristics.  This 
was the principle he called ‘natural selection’. 
Darwin’s argument requires three main features: variation, selection and 
retention (or heredity).  That is, just there must be variation so that not all 
creatures are identical.  Second, there must be an environment in which not all 
the creatures can survive and some varieties do better than others.  Third, there 
must be some process by which offspring inherit characteristics from their
CHAPTER 2 

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    11 
parents.  If all these three are in place then any characteristics that are positively 
useful for survival in that environment must tend to increase.  Put into Richard 
Dawkins’s language, if there is a replicator that makes imperfect copies of itself 
only some of which survive, then evolution simply must occur.  This 
inevitability of evolution is part of what makes Darwin’s insight so clever.  All 
you need is the right starting conditions and evolution just has to happen. 
 
The evolutionary algorithm 
 
The American philosopher Daniel Dennett (1995) has described the whole 
evolutionary process as an algorithm, that is, a mindless procedure which, when 
followed, must produce an outcome.  Nowadays we are used to the idea of 
algorithms, although Darwin, Wallace and other early evolutionists would not 
have been.  Many of the things we do are based on algorithms, whether it is 
adding up sums, dialling a telephone number or even making a cup of tea.  Our 
interactions with machines are particularly algorithmic and the prevalence of 
machines makes it easier for us to think this way – take a cup, put it under the 
spout, choose the drink, put in the right amount of money, press the button, take 
the cup out – if you do the right steps in the right order then the result is a cup of 
cappuccino, do it wrong and you have a mess on the floor.  The computer 
programs that hold our medical records or run the graphics in our computer 
games are all algorithms, as are the ways we interface with word processors and 
financial packages. 
Algorithms are ‘substrate-neutral’, meaning they can run on a variety of 
different materials.  A human with a pencil and paper, a hand-cranked adding 
machine, and a digital computer can all follow the same algorithm for some 
mathematical procedure and come to the same answer.  The substrate does not 
matter – only the logic of the procedure does.  In the case of Darwin’s own 
argument the substrate was living creatures and a biological environment, but as 
Dennett points out his logic would apply equally to any system in which there 
was heredity, variation, and selection.  This, again, is the idea of Universal 
Darwinism. 
Algorithms are also completely mindless.  If a system is set up so that it 
follows a given procedure then it does not also need a little mind, or extra-
something, inside to make it work.  It just must mindlessly happen.  This is why 
Dennett describes Darwin’s theory as ‘a scheme for creating Design out of 
Chaos without the aid of Mind’ (1995, p. 50).  The design simply must come 
about when millions of creatures, over millions of years, produce more offspring

12    THE MEME MACHINE 
than can survive.  The ones that live do so because they are better adapted to the 
environment in which they find themselves.  They then pass on their 
characteristics to their offspring and so it goes on.  The environment itself is 
constantly changing because of all these developments, and so the process is 
never static. 
Algorithms must always produce the same result if they start from the same 
point.  This seems to suggest that, if evolution follows an algorithm, its results 
must be predetermined and predictable.  This is not the case, and chaos theory 
explains why not.  There are many simple processes, like dripping taps or 
moving gases, or the path drawn out by a swinging pendulum, which are 
chaotic.  They follow simple and mindless algorithms but their end results are 
complex, chaotic and unpredictable.  Beautiful shapes and patterns can emerge, 
but although the kind of pattern may be repeatable, the detail cannot be predicted 
without running the procedure right through.  And since chaotic systems can be 
highly sensitive to initial starting conditions, a tiny difference at the beginning 
may lead to an entirely different outcome.  Evolution is like this. 
The complexity theorist Stuart Kauffman also likens the evolution of life to 
an incompressible computer algorithm.  We cannot predict exactly how it will 
all unfold and can only ‘stand back and watch the pageant’.  We can, however, 
‘find deep and beautiful laws governing that unpredictable flow’ (Kauffman 
1995, p. 23). 
We can now see that even if evolution is only following a simple algorithm, 
it is a chaotic system and its outcome can be incredibly complex.  Moreover, the 
results cannot be predicted without running it – and it is only being run once.  
We can do experiments to test predictions of the theory, but we cannot rerun the 
evolution of life on earth to see whether it might go a different way next time.  
There is no next time.  Until we find life on other planets there is only this once. 
Many interesting arguments remain: such as just how much pattern and order 
inevitably springs up in the universe even without selection; the role of historical 
accidents in shaping the path of life, and whether evolution will always tend to 
produce certain kinds of thing, such as wormlike creatures with a mouth at the 
front, symmetrical animals with pairs of legs, or eyes or sex.  Their resolution 
will help our understanding of evolution enormously but none of this really 
matters for grasping the basic principle of the evolutionary algorithm.  When 
this algorithm gets going the inevitable result is that design is created out of 
nowhere – but we cannot predict exactly what sort of design it will be.  
Evolution emphatically did not have to end up with us.  It had to end up with

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    13 
something more than it started with – and that something just happens to be this 
world with us in it. 
Is there progress in evolution?  Gould (1996a) famously argues there is not, 
but I think he has a concept of progress that I do not share.  He is right to rule 
out progress towards anything.  This is the whole point of Darwin’s inspiration – 
and what makes his theory so beautiful – there is no master plan, no end point, 
and no designer.  But of course there is progress in the sense that we now live in 
a complex world full of creatures of all kinds and a few billion years ago there 
was only a primeval soup.  Although there is no generally accepted measure for 
this complexity, there is no doubt that the variety of organisms, the number of 
genes in individual organisms, and their structural and behavioral complexity 
have all increased (Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995).  Evolution uses its 
own products to climb upon. 
Dawkins (1996a) describes this as ‘climbing Mount Improbable’ – as time 
goes on natural selection inches up the gentle slopes to reach the heights of ever 
more improbable creations, and when there are strong selection pressures, 
progress may be maintained for many generations.  Dennett describes the 
progress as ‘lifting in Design Space’, the crane or wedge of natural selection 
very slowly, and by tiny steps, finds and accumulates good design tricks by 
building on the efforts of all the earlier climbing.  In this sense, then, there is 
progress. 
This progress is not necessarily steady or always increasing.  There are long 
periods of stasis between periods of rapid change.  Also, some animals, like 
crocodiles, stay the same for long periods, while others change rapidly.  And 
sometimes millions of years of accumulated design are suddenly wiped out, as 
when the dinosaurs became extinct.  Some people believe that we humans are in 
the process of obliterating as much biodiversity as was lost in that previous 
extinction.  If we do, then the evolutionary algorithm will start its creative work 
again on whatever is left. 
All this creativity depends on replicator power.  The selfish replicators get 
copied, and they do this willy-nilly so long as they have the machinery and 
building blocks they need for that copying.  They have no foresight, they do not 
look ahead or have plans or schemes in mind.  They just get copied.  In the 
process some do better than others – some obliterate others – and in this way 
evolutionary design comes about. 
These, then, are some of the general principles that apply to any theory of 
evolution.  If memes are really replicators and can sustain an evolutionary 
process then all these principles must apply and we should be able to build a 
theory of memetics on this basis.  So are they?  We can now ask two important

14    THE MEME MACHINE 
questions – what are the criteria for being a replicator?  Does the meme fulfil 
those criteria? 
 
Memes as replicators 
 
For something to count as a replicator it must sustain the evolutionary algorithm 
based on variation, selection and retention (or heredity).  Memes certainly come 
with variation – stories are rarely told exactly the same way twice, no two 
buildings are absolutely identical, and every conversation is unique – and when 
memes are passed on, the copying is not always perfect.  As the psychologist, 
Sir Frederic Bartlett (1932) showed in the l930s, a story gets a bit embellished or 
details are forgotten every time it is passed on.  There is memetic selection – 
some memes grab the attention, are faithfully remembered and passed on to 
other people, while others fail to get copied at all.  Then, when memes are 
passed on there is retention of some of the ideas or behaviours in that meme – 
something of the original meme must be retained for us to call it imitation or 
copying or learning by example.  The meme therefore fits perfectly into 
Dawkins’s idea of a replicator and into Dennett’s evolutionary algorithm. 
Let us consider the example of a simple story.  Have you heard the one about 
the poodle in the microwave?  An American lady, so the story goes, used to 
wash her poodle and dry it in the oven.  When she acquired a brand new 
microwave oven, she did the same thing, bringing the poor dog to a painful and 
untimely death.  Then she sued the manufacturers for not providing a warning 
‘Do not dry your poodle in this oven’ – and won! 
This story has spread so widely that millions of people in Britain have heard 
it – but they might have heard another version, like the ‘cat in the microwave’ 
version, or the ‘Chihuahua in the microwave’.  Perhaps Americans have an 
equivalent version in which the woman is from New York or Kansas City.  This 
is an example of an ‘urban myth’, a story that takes on a life of its own 
regardless of its truth, value or importance.  This story is probably untrue but 
truth is not a necessary criterion for a successful meme.  If a meme can spread, it 
will. 
Stories like this are clearly inherited – millions of people cannot have 
suddenly made up the same story by chance, and the way the changes creep in 
can be used to demonstrate where a story originated and how it spread.  There is 
clearly variation – not everyone has heard the same version even though the 
basic story is recognisable.  Finally, there is selection – millions of people tell

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    15 
millions of stories every day but most are completely forgotten and only very 
few achieve urban-myth status. 
Where do new memes come from?  They come about through variation and 
combination of old ones – either inside one person’s mind, or when memes are 
passed from person to person.  So, for example, the poodle story is concocted 
out of language that people already know and ideas they already have, put 
together in new ways.  They then remember it and pass it on, and variations 
occur in the process.  And the same is true of inventions, songs, works of art, 
and scientific theories.  The human mind is a rich source of variation.  In our 
thinking we mix up ideas and turn them over to produce new combinations.  In 
our dreams we mix them up even more, with bizarre – and occasionally creative 
– consequences.  Human creativity is a process of variation and recombination. 
In thinking about thinking we should remember that not all thoughts are 
memes.  In principle, our immediate perceptions and emotions are not memes 
because they are ours alone, and we may never pass them on.  We may imagine 
a beautiful scene from memory, or fantasise about sex or food, without using 
ideas that have been copied from someone else.  We may even, in principle, 
think up a completely new way of doing something without using any memes 
from anyone else.  However, in practice, because we use memes so much, most 
of our thinking is coloured by them in one way or another.  Memes have become 
the tools with which we think. 
Human thinking (indeed all thinking) may itself depend on other Darwinian 
processes.  There have been many attempts to treat learning as a Darwinian 
process (e.g. Ashby 1960; Young 1965) or the brain as a ‘Darwin machine’ 
(Calvin 1987, 1996; Edelman 1989).  And the idea that creativity and individual 
learning are selection processes is far from new (Campbell 1960; Skinner 1953).  
However, all these ideas concern processes entirely within one brain, while the 
meme is a replicator that jumps from one brain to another.  Darwinian principles 
may apply to many aspects of brain function and development, and 
understanding them will be very important, but this book is just about memetics. 
There are many reasons why some memes succeed and others fail.  These 
reasons fall roughly into two categories.  First, there is the nature of human 
beings as imitators and selectors.  From the memetic point of view the human 
being (with its clever thinking brain) acts both as the replicating machinery, and 
as the selective environment for the memes.  Psychology can help us understand 
why and how this operates.  There are the properties of our sensory systems that 
make some memes obvious and others not, the mechanisms of attention that

16    THE MEME MACHINE 
allow some memes to grab the available processing capacity, the nature of 
human memory that determines which memes will be successfully remembered, 
and the limitations of our capacity to imitate.  We can, and will, apply this to 
understanding the fate of memes but it is more properly the domain of 
psychology and physiology than memetics. 
The other kinds of reasons concern the nature of the memes themselves, the 
tricks they exploit, the ways they group together and the general processes of 
memetic evolution that favour some memes over others.  These have not 
previously been studied by psychology and are an important aspect of memetics. 
Putting together all these reasons we may be able to see why some memes 
succeed and others fail; why certain stories take off while others are told once 
and never again.  Other examples include recipes, clothes fashions and interior 
designs; trends in architecture, rules of political correctness, or the habit of 
recycling glass bottles.  All of these are copied from one person to another and 
spread by imitation.  They vary slightly in the copying and some of them are 
more frequently copied than others.  That is how we get useless popular crazes, 
and good ideas that never seem to get off the ground.  I think there can be no 
doubt that memes count as replicators.  This means that memetic evolution is 
inevitable.  It is time we began to understand it. 
 
Memes and genes are not the same 
 
A word of caution is needed here.  I have explained that the meme is a replicator 
and in this sense it is equivalent to the gene.  However, we must not fall into the 
trap of thinking that memes can only work if they are like genes in other ways.  
This is simply not so.  The science of genetics has blossomed in recent decades 
to the point where we can identify particular genes, map the entire human 
genome, and even undertake genetic engineering.  Some of the insights gained 
from all this understanding may help us to understand memes, but alternatively 
some of it may just mislead us. 
Also, genes are not the only other replicators to consider.  For example, our 
immune systems are now known to work by selection.  The British psychologist 
Henry Plotkin (1993) refers to both brains and immune systems as ‘Darwin 
machines’, and in his study of Universal Darwinism uses general evolutionary 
theory to apply to many other systems including the evolution of science.  In 
each case, one can apply the ideas of replicators and vehicles (or of replicators, 
interactors and lineages, to use Hull’s formulation) to understand the way the 
system evolves. 

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    17 
We should think of it like this – evolutionary theory describes how design is 
created by the competition between replicators.  Genes are one example of a 
replicator and memes another.  The general theory of evolution must apply to 
both of them, but the specific details of how each replicator works may be quite 
different. 
This relationship was clearly seen by the American psychologist Donald 
Campbell (1960, 1965) long before the idea of memes was invented.  He argued 
that organic evolution, creative thought and cultural evolution resemble each 
other and they do so because all are evolving systems where there is blind 
variation among the replicated units and selective retention of some variants at 
the expense of others.  Most importantly, he explained that the analogy with 
cultural accumulations is not from organic evolution per se but rather from a 
general model of evolutionary change for which organic evolution is but one 
instance.  Durham (1991) calls this principle ‘Campbell’s Rule’. 
We need to remember Campbell’s Rule when we compare memes and genes.  
Genes are instructions for making proteins, stored in the cells of the body and 
passed on in reproduction.  Their competition drives the evolution of the 
biological world.  Memes are instructions for carrying out behaviour, stored in 
brains (or other objects) and passed on by imitation.  Their competition drives 
the evolution of the mind.  Both genes and memes are replicators and must obey 
the general principles of evolutionary theory and in that sense are the same.  
Beyond that they may be, and indeed are, very different – they are related only 
by analogy. 
Some critics have tried to dismiss the whole idea of memetics on the grounds 
that memes are not like genes, or that the whole idea of memes is only an ‘empty 
analogy’.  We can now see why these criticisms are misguided.  For example, 
Mary Midgley (1994) calls memes ‘mythical entities’ that cannot have interests 
of their own, ‘an empty and misleading metaphor’, a ‘useless and essentially 
superstitious notion’.  But Midgley has misunderstood the way in which 
replicators can be said to have power or ‘interests of their own’ and therefore she 
simply misses the strength and generality of evolutionary theory.  Memes are no 
more ‘mythical entities’ than genes are – genes are instructions encoded in 
molecules of DNA – memes are instructions embedded in human brains, or in 
artefacts such as books, pictures, bridges or steam trains. 
In a radio debate, Stephen Jay Gould (1996b) called the idea of memes a 
‘meaningless metaphor’ (though I am not sure one can actually have a 
meaningless metaphor!).  He goes even further and rejects the very notion that 
ideas and culture can evolve, pleading ‘I do wish that the term “cultural

18    THE MEME MACHINE 
evolution” would drop from use’ (Gould 1996a, pp. 219–20), but I do not think 
that it will, because culture does evolve. 
Gould seems to think that because memes and genes are related by analogy 
or metaphor we would somehow be doing a disservice to biological evolution by 
making the comparison.  Again, he has missed the point that both are replicators 
but they need not work in the same way. 
My own view is that the idea of memes is an example of the best use of 
analogy in science.  That is, a powerful mechanism in one domain is seen to 
operate in a slightly different way in an entirely new domain.  What begins as an 
analogy ends up as a powerful new explanatory principle.  In this case, the most 
powerful idea in all of science – the explanation of biological diversity by the 
Simple process of natural selection – becomes the explanation of mental and 
cultural diversity, by the simple process of memetic selection.  The overarching 
theory of evolution provides a framework for both. 
With Campbell’s Rule in mind we can now go on to the task of trying to 
understand the evolution of memes.  We may use the gene as an analogy but 
must not expect too close a comparison.  Instead, we must rely on the 
fundamental principles of evolutionary theory to guide us in understanding just 
how memes work. 
 
Copy me! 
 
What is special about the sentence ‘Say me!’ – or ‘Copy me!’ – or ‘Repeat 
me!’? 
They are simple (perhaps the simplest possible) examples of self-replicating 
sentences.  Their whole point is to get themselves copied.  These sentences are 
certainly memes – but probably not very effective ones.  I doubt you will now 
go around shouting ‘Say me!’ to all your friends, but there are tricks that can be 
added to the simpler sentence to improve its covering potential.  Hofstadter 
(1985) wrote about such ‘viral sentences’ in his monthly column in the magazine 
Scientific American called ‘Metamagical Themas’, and readers wrote in with 
many more examples. 
Take: ‘If you copy me, I’ll grant you three wishes!’ or ‘Say me or I’ll put a 
curse on you!’  Neither of these is likely to be able to keep its word and few 
people over the age of five are likely to fall for such simple-minded threats and 
promises.  Unless – Hofstadter adds – you simply tack on the phrase ‘in the 
afterlife’. 
In fact, it is often at about the age of five that many of us meet such sentences 
for the first time.  I well remember being excited when I received in the post a

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    19 
letter that contained a list of six names and instructed me to send a postcard to 
the first name on the list.  I was to put my own name and address at the bottom 
and send the new list to six more people.  It promised me I would receive lots of 
postcards.  I do not remember whether my mum prevented me from joining in or 
not.  She might have been wise to – realising, though she would not have put it 
that way, that my meme-immunological system was not yet well developed.  I 
certainly do not remember a deluge of postcards. 
As these things go, that was a fairly innocuous chain letter, consisting of just 
a promise (the postcards) and an instruction to pass it on.  At worst I would have 
wasted seven stamps and a postcard.  I might even have received a few cards 
myself.  Many are much more sinister, such as pyramid selling schemes, that can 
lose people fortunes.  You would think such trivial schemes would die out, but 
they do not seem to.  Only recently, I received an e-mail that said ‘Do you like 
to play those scratcher lottery tickets?’ (I do not) ‘Would you like to learn how 
to turn 6 tickets into thousands?’ (not particularly) ‘You’ll receive lottery tickets 
from all over the country every month!  Have fun just collecting them or scratch 
them for the $$$jackpot$$$.  There is a free service on the Web that can set you 
up to do just that!’  Do people really join up?  I suppose they must. 
These are all examples of groups of memes that are replicated together.  
Dawkins calls such groups ‘coadapted meme complexes’, a phrase recently 
abbreviated to ‘memeplexes’ (Speel 1995).  Memetic jargon is changing so fast 
and much of it is so poorly thought out and so misused that I shall try to avoid 
using it.  However, ‘memeplex’ is a handy word for an important concept and so 
it is one of the few new words I shall adopt. 
Genes, of course, go around in groups too.  They clump together into 
chromosomes, and chromosomes are packed together inside cells.  Perhaps more 
importantly, the whole gene pool of a species can be seen as a group of mutually 
cooperating genes.  The reason is simple: a free-floating piece of DNA could not 
effectively get itself replicated.  After billions of years of biological evolution, 
most of the DNA on the planet is very well packaged indeed, as genes inside 
organisms that are their survival machines.  Of course, there are occasional 
‘jumping genes’ and ‘outlaw genes’ and little bits of selfish DNA hitchhiking on 
the rest, and there are viruses that are minimal groups that exploit the replicating 
machinery of other larger groups – but groups, by and large, are necessary for 
genes to get around at all. 
We could simply draw the analogy and say that memes should behave the 
same way but it is better to go back to the basics of evolutionary theory.

20    THE MEME MACHINE 
Imagine two memes, one ‘send a scratchcard to x’ and another ‘win lots of 
money’.  The former instruction is unlikely to be obeyed just on its own.  The 
latter is tempting but includes no instruction on how to.  Together, and with 
some other suitable co-memes, the two can apparently get people to obey – and 
copy the whole package on again.  The essence of any memeplex is that the 
memes inside it can replicate better as part of the group than they can on their 
own.  We shall meet many more examples of memeplexes in due course. 
The simple self-replicating meme groups we have considered so far have 
been given a great boost by the advent of computers and the Internet.  Computer 
viruses are an obvious and familiar example.  They can leap from user to user 
and the number of users (at least at the moment) keeps increasing.  They can 
cross vast distances at the speed of light and then lie dormant in safe and solid 
memory banks.  However, they cannot be just a bare instruction to ‘Copy me’.  
This might succeed in clogging up the entire memory of the first computer it got 
into but would have no way of getting any further.  So viruses have co-memes 
for promoting their survival.  They lurk in the programs that people mail to their 
friends on disks.  Some evade immediate detection by infecting only a small 
proportion of the machines they reach, and some are triggered probabilistically.  
Some bury themselves in memory only to pop up at a specified time – we may 
expect many at midnight on 31 December 1999 – quite apart from the looming 
problem of computers that cannot cope with the year ‘00’. 
Some have quite funny effects, such as making all the letters on a computer 
screen fall to the bottom of the page – with a devastating effect on the user, but 
some have clogged up entire networks and destroyed books and doctoral theses.  
My students have recently encountered a virus on the word processor Word 6.0 
that lives in a formatting section called ‘Thesis’ – tempting you to get infected 
just when your year’s work is almost finished.  No wonder networks are now 
protected by frequent automated virus checks and we have a proliferation of 
anti-virus software – medication for the infosphere. 
Internet viruses are a relatively new arrival.  I once received ‘Penpal 
Greetings’, apparently a very kind warning from someone I have never met.  
‘Do not download any message entitled “Penpal Greetings”’ it said – and went 
on to warn me that if I read this terrible message I would have let in a ‘Trojan 
Horse’ virus that would destroy everything on my hard drive and then send itself 
on to every e-mail address in my mail box.  To protect all my friends, and the 
worldwide computer network, I had to act fast and send the warning on to them. 

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    21 
Have you spotted it?  The virus described does not make sense – and does not 
exist.  The real virus is the warning.  This is a very clever little memeplex that 
uses both threats and appeals to altruism to get you – the silly, caring victim – to 
pass it on.  It is not the first – ‘Good Times’ and ‘Deeyenda Maddick’ used a 
similar trick.  ‘Join the Crew’ is slightly more damaging, warning ‘do not open 
or look at any mail that says RETURNED OR UNABLE TO DELIVER.  This virus will 
attach itself to your computer components and render them useless.  
Immediately delete . . . there is NO remedy.’  Anyone who does not spot the trick 
will presumably delete all those messages they had sent to people whose 
addresses have changed or whose e-mail systems were temporarily unavailable.  
A little bit of self-replicating code, using a combination of humans and 
computers as its replicating machinery, can have annoying consequences. 
What will happen next?  As people become familiar with these viruses they 
may learn to ignore the warnings.  Thus the original type of virus will start to 
fail but it might let in something worse, as people start ignoring warnings they 
ought to heed.  But then again, if ordinary old-fashioned chain letters still work, 
perhaps things will not change so very rapidly. 
All this talk of viruses makes me wonder just why we call some pieces of 
computer code a virus and others a computer program.  Intrinsically, they are 
both just lines of code, bits of information or instructions.  The word is, of 
course, taken directly by analogy from biological viruses and probably based on 
the same intuitions about the way these bits of code spread.  The answer is not 
so much to do with the harm they do – indeed some really do very little – but to 
do with their function.  They have none apart from their own replication. 
Bacteria are more complex than viruses and can be positively helpful as well 
as harmful.  Lots live in symbiosis with us and with other animals and plants.  
Many do important jobs inside our bodies.  Some have been co-opted to make 
special foods for us and so on.  Viruses do little else than replicate themselves – 
and then only by stealing other organisms’ replicating machinery.  So the 
comparison with today’s rather simple computer viruses is apt. 
Might we build the equivalent of computer bacteria?  Perhaps this would be a 
better term for some existing programs that are deliberately used to infect 
computer systems and run around doing jobs like updating databases or seeking 
out errors.  Dawkins (1993) imagines useful self-replicating programs that might 
carry out market research by infecting many computers and then, as occasional 
copies got back to their starting place, providing useful statistics on user habits.  
Simple robotic programs, or bots, are already designed to roam around

22    THE MEME MACHINE 
congested communications networks leaving trails that provide information 
about the best and worst areas of congestion, or to mimic human users in games 
and virtual environments.  Might such simple creatures gang up together to 
create powerful groups just as genes have done? 
These ideas seem to stretch the analogy with biological viruses a bit far (and 
we must be very careful of-such analogies), but they do remind us that 
replicators vary in their usefulness.  We tend to call something a virus when it is 
clearly acting mainly for its own replication by stealing the replicating resources 
of some other system – and especially when it does harm to that system.  We 
usually give it a different name when it is useful to us. 
Just the same can be seen in the world of the mind.  Dawkins (1993) coined 
the term ‘viruses of the mind’ to apply to such memeplexes as religions and 
cults – which spread themselves through vast populations of people by using all 
kinds of clever copying tricks, and can have disastrous consequences for those 
infected.  Children’s games and crazes spread like infections (Marsden 1998a), 
and Dawkins suggested that children are vulnerable to ‘mental infections’ that 
more sophisticated adults can easily reject.  He tried to distinguish useful 
memeplexes, such as science, from viral ones – an issue to which we will return. 
This theme has been taken up in popular books on memetics, such as Richard 
Brodie’s Virus of the Mind (1996) and Aaron Lynch’s Thought Contagion 
(1996), both of which provide many examples of how memes spread through 
society and both of which emphasise the more dangerous and pernicious kinds 
of memes.  We can now see that the idea of a virus is applicable in all three 
worlds – of biology, of computer programs and of human minds.  The reason is 
that all three systems involve replicators and we call particularly useless and 
self-serving replicating ‘viruses’. 
But if the theory of memetics is right, viruses are not the only memes, and 
memetics should not become a science of mind viruses.  Indeed, the vast 
majority of memes (like the vast majority- of genes) cannot be considered as 
viral at all – they are the very stuff of our minds.  Our memes is who we are. 
According to Dennett, our minds and selves are created by the interplay of 
the memes.  Not only are memes replicating like genes (and fit his evolutionary 
algorithm perfectly) but human consciousness itself is a product of memes.  He 
has shown how the competition between memes to get into our brains has made 
us the kinds of creatures we are.  As he puts it ‘The haven all memes depend on 
reaching is the human mind, but a human mind is itself an artefact created when 
memes restructure a human brain in order to make it a better habitat for memes’ 
(Dennett 1991, p. 207). 

UNIVERSAL DARWINISM    23 
On this view we cannot possibly hope to understand the nature and origins of the 
human mind without an effective theory of memetics.  But before beginning to 
build that theory I want to consider some previous attempts at describing the 
evolution of ideas.  To understand the special contribution of memetics we need 
to understand how it differs from other theories of cultural evolution. 

The evolution of culture 
 
 
 
 
From the early days of Darwinism analogies have been drawn between 
biological evolution and the evolution of culture.  Darwin’s contemporary 
Herbert Spencer studied the evolution of civilisations, which he viewed as 
progressing towards an ideal something like that of Victorian English society.  
Lewis Morgan’s evolutionary theory of society included the three stages of 
savagery, barbarism and civilisation.  The historian Arnold Toynbee used 
evolutionary ideas in identifying over thirty distinct civilisations some of which 
were derived from others and some of which went extinct, and even Karl Marx 
used evolutionary analogies in his analysis of society.  Fifty years after Darwin, 
the American psychologist James Baldwin said that natural selection was not 
merely a law of biology but applied to all the sciences of life and mind, an early 
version of Universal Darwinism (Baldwin 1909), and he coined the term ‘social 
heredity’ to describe the way individuals learn from society by imitation and 
instruction (Baldwin 1896). 
In some ways it is obvious that ideas and cultures evolve – that is, changes 
are gradual and build on what went before.  Ideas spread from one place to 
another and from one person to another (Sperber 1990).  Inventions do not 
spring out of nowhere but depend on previous inventions, and so on.  However, 
truly Darwinian explanations require more than just the idea of accumulating 
changes over time.  As we shall see, some theories of cultural evolution are little 
more than this idea; others try to specify a mechanism but still come back to 
biological evolution as the only driving force, while just a few involve the 
concept of a second replicator as memetics does.  This is what makes memetics 
so distinctive and so powerful.  The whole point of a memetic theory of cultural 
evolution is to treat memes as replicators in their own right.  This means that 
memetic selection drives the evolution of ideas in the interests of replicating 
memes, not the genes.  This is the big difference that separates memetics from 
most previous theories of cultural evolution. 
Language provides a good example of cultural evolution.  Darwin pointed 
out the parallel between species and different languages: ‘We find in distinct 
languages striking homologies due to community of descent, and analogies due 
to a similar process of formation . . . A language, like a species, when extinct,
CHAPTER 3 

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    25 
never . . . reappears’ (Darwin 1859, p. 422).  He also spoke of words competing 
for survival.  Darwin probably knew about the work of the British Judge Sir 
William Jones who, in 1786, found remarkable similarities between Sanskrit, 
Greek and Latin, and concluded that all three languages must have sprung from 
a common source.  But Darwin could not have seen many languages become 
extinct in his own lifetime nor have known just how many are now threatened.  
On a recent estimate, about 80 per cent of North American Indian languages are 
spoken largely by adults only, and are therefore likely to become extinct when 
those adults die.  Similarly, about 90 per cent of Australian languages and 
perhaps 50 per cent of languages worldwide are doomed (Pinker 1994). 
Nowadays, comparative linguists analyse the minute details of similarities 
and differences.  They can often trace words back through many types of change 
such as the dropping of syllables and shifts in pronunciation.  Thus, the 
evolutionary history of various languages can be accurately traced.  Family trees 
of languages have been constructed that are comparable with the genetic family 
trees based on differences in DNA.  Also, the migratory history of whole 
peoples can be deduced from the languages that remain today.  In Africa, for 
example, the 1500 or more surviving languages fall into just give main language 
groups, largely spoken by distinct racial group, and their distribution can reveal 
which groups defeated others in the past.  From a few remaining words it can be 
deduced that the pygmies once had their own languages but were forced into 
adopting those of neighbouring black farmers, and that Semitic languages, the 
languages of the Bible and of Islam, came not from the Near East but from 
Africa.  The American physiologist and evolutionary biologist Jared Diamond 
(1997) uses language analysis as just one part of his masterful history of 
humanity over the past 13000 years.  He explains how languages evolve along 
with the people who speak them, but he does not consider the elements of 
language as replicators in a new evolutionary process. 
In his book The Language Instinct, Steven Pinker (1994) explicitly applies 
evolutionary thinking to the development of languages, looking at heredity, 
variation and the effects of isolation in allowing sets of variations to accumulate.  
However, he does not use the idea of a selfish replicator to understand language 
revolution and not does he explain why language evolved in the first place.  
Perhaps the answer seems too obvious – that it was biologically adaptive.  But, 
as we shall see, this is not necessarily the right answer, and memetics can 
provide new twists to the argument. 

26    THE MEME MACHINE 
Inventions as memes 
 
Another example is the spread of inventions.  Probably the most important of all 
‘inventions’ in human history was that of farming.  Although there are still many 
arguments over the details, archaeologists generally agree that before about 
10000 years ago all humans lived by hunting and gathering.  Dating from around 
that time, finds in the Middle East include grains that are larger, and sheep and 
cattle that are smaller than their wild relatives and presumably domesticated.  
Farming then spread in a great wave, reaching places like Ireland and 
Scandinavia by about 4500 years ago.  Just how many times food production 
arose independently is not known for sure although probably at least five times 
and possible many more (Diamond 1997). 
Diamond has explored the whole vexed question of why some peoples in 
some parts of the world ended up with all the goods – from food production to 
guns, germs and steel – while some have ended up still hunting and foraging, 
and others were completely wiped out.  His answer has little to do with 
geography and climate.  Food production and skills that went along with it, 
could spread easily across Europe with its East-West axis, but could not spread 
easily in the Americas with their North-South axis, dramatic climate variations, 
deserts and mountain ranges.  Australia had no suitable domesticable animals, 
after the first humans who arrived obliterated the tame creatures they found 
there, and other islands, like New Guinea, are so mountainous and variable that 
techniques suitable in one place are unsuitable a few miles away.  With this kind 
of analysis Diamond has explained how farming spread, bringing more complex 
societies in its wake. 
But why did farming spread at all?  The answer might seem to be obvious – 
for example, that farming makes life easier or happier, or that it provides a 
genetic advantage to the people who practise it. 
In fact, it seems that farming did not make life easier, nor did it improve 
nutrition, or reduce disease.  The British science writer Colin Tudge (1995) 
describes farming as ‘the end of Eden’.  Rather than being easier, the life of 
early farmers was utter misery.  Early Egyptian skeletons tell a story of a terrible 
life.  Their toes and backs are deformed by the way people had to grind corn to 
make bread; they dhow signs of rickets and of terrible abscesses in their jaws.  
Probably few lived beyond the age of thirty.  Stories in the Old Testament 
describe the arduous work of farmers and, after all, Adam was thrown out of 
Eden and told ‘In the sweat of thy face shalt though eat bread’.  By contrast,

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    27 
modern hunter-gatherers have been estimated to spend only about fifteen hours a 
week hunting and have plenty of time for leisure.  This is despite the fact that 
they have been pushed into marginal environments far poorer than those in 
which our ancient ancestors probably lived.  Why would people the world over 
have given up an easier life in favour of a life of toil and drudgery? 
Tudge assumes ‘that agriculture arose because it was favoured by natural 
selection’ (1995, p. 274) and therefore looks for a genetic advantage.  He 
suggests that because farming produces more food from a given area of land, 
farmers will produce more children who will encroach on neighbouring hunter-
gatherer’s lands and so destroy their way of life.  For this reason, once farming 
arrives no one has the luxury of saying ‘I want to keep the old way of life’.  
However, we know from the skeletons of early farmers that they were 
malnourished and sickly.  So was there really a genetic advantage? 
Memetics allows us to ask a different question.  That is, why were farming 
practices successful as memes?  In other words, how did these particular memes 
get themselves copied?  The answers might include their benefits to human 
happiness or to human genes, but are not confined to those possibilities.  Memes 
can spread for other reasons too, including less benign ones.  They might spread 
because they appear to provide advantages even when they do not, because they 
are especially easily imitated by human brains, because they change the selective 
environment to the detriment of competing memes, and so on.  With a meme’s 
eye view we ask not how inventions benefit human happiness or human genes, 
but how they benefit themselves. 
Turning to more modern technology, from the invention of the wheel to the 
design of cars, there is plenty of evidence that innovations evolve in the sense 
that they arise from what went before.  In The Evolution of Technology, George 
Basalla (1988) develops an evolutionary account of the way in which hammers, 
steam engines, trucks and transistors have come about.  Playing down the 
importance of heroic inventors he emphasises the gradual process of change 
through imitation and variation.  For example, many features of wooden 
buildings were reproduced in stone by the Greeks, the first iron bridge built in 
the late 1770s was modelled on woodworking practices, and even the humble 
plastic bucket often still shows signs of its origins in metal.  Transistors were 
only gradually miniaturised and radio signals very gradually transmitted further 
and further. 
Basalla questions the idea of technology making progress towards any grand 
goal such as ‘the advancement of humanity’ or ‘the overall betterment of the

28    THE MEME MACHINE 
human race’ (Basalla 1988).  In true Darwinian fashion he sees technology as 
developing only from the present situation with very limited specific goals and 
suggests we discard the entire illusion of technological progress.  But I would 
add here another word of caution concerning the word ‘progress’.  The word can 
be used in at least two different ways.  One implies progress towards some goal 
or objective; the other implies only increasing design, increasing complexity, or 
any kind of continuous development without a particular goal or end point built 
in.  Basalla, like Gould, throws out both kinds of progress.  I would throw out 
only the first.  Today’s technology is far more sophisticated and complex than 
that of 10000 years ago, and that is progress of the second kind.  But, there is no 
progress towards some predetermined or ultimate goal.  We did not have to go 
from stone axes to fax machines – we did have to go from stone axes to 
something more specialised, more designed and more improbable.  In Dennett’s 
terminology, there has been ever more exploration of the Design Space of 
possible artefacts.  In Dawkins’s terminology, technology has been slowly 
climbing its own Mount Improbable.  This is technological progress, if not 
progress towards anything in particular. 
So why do we have fax machines?  Why Coca Cola cans and wheelybins?  
Why Windows 98 and felt-tip pens?  I want answers to these specific questions.  
‘Because we want them’ is not a sufficient answer.  ‘Because we need them’ is 
clearly untrue.  If we want to understand how the fantastic complexity of our 
technological world came about it is not enough just to say that technology 
evolves, without providing a mechanism.  In later chapters I shall explain how a 
memetic approach can help. 
Scientific ideas also evolve and there have been many theories that attempt to 
explain them.  The influential philosopher Karl Popper, in one of his best known 
contributions to the philosophy of science, suggested that scientific knowledge is 
gained by the falsification of hypotheses, not by accumulating proof or evidence 
for theories.  Science can then be seen as a competitive struggle between rival 
hypotheses in which only some survive. 
Popper also applied Darwinian thinking in this three ‘cosmic evolutionary 
stages’: World 1 is the world of physical objects such as trees, tables and human 
bodies; World 2 is the world of subjective experiences including feelings, 
emotions and consciousness; and World 3 is the world of ideas; of language and 
stories, works of art and technology, mathematics and science.  World 3 is 
largely autonomous, even though created by us (Popper 1972), and its contents 
have effects on the other worlds by a kind of downward causation.  So, for 
example, scientific theories may appear as World 1 objects (the scientist, the

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    29 
journal papers, the experimental apparatus, and the so on).  But they are more 
than just physical objects.  The ideas themselves influence those objects.  The 
problems, hypotheses, theories and intellectual struggles work through World 2 
and into World 1.  Scientific ideas really do change the world: ‘once theories 
exist, they being to have a life of their own’ (Popper and Eccles 1977, p. 40). 
How can an idea change the physical world?  Popper was struggling here 
with a difficult and important problem, related to the value of reductionism in 
science and the viability of materialism as a world view.  I do not think he 
solved it.  His three worlds contain very different kinds of material and he has to 
propose a tricky kind of interactionism to link them.  Interestingly, he touches on 
the role of imitation but without realising how it might help.  For example, in 
explaining how artistic ideas can have real effects, he says ‘a sculptor may, by 
producing a new work, encourage other sculptors to copy it, or to produce 
similar sculptures’ (Popper and Eccles 1977, p. 39).  In his terms, the ideas in 
the sculptor’s mind (World 3) affect the experiences of others (World 2) and 
thus lead to new sculptures (World 1). 
In memetic terms, all that happens – whether in science or art – is selective 
imitation.  The emotions, the intellectual struggles, the subjective experiences – 
these are all parts of the complex system that leads to some behaviours being 
imitated and others not.  And it is because imitation lets loose a second 
replicator that ideas begin to ‘have a life of their own’.  In this way, memetics 
provides a mechanism for the evolution of scientific ideas that Popper’s three 
worlds cannot. 
Although Popper did not use the idea of a replicator, his views directly gave 
rise to the new field of evolutionary epistemology, which does.  Evolutionary 
epistemology began in 1974 with a critique of Popper by Campbell, and applies 
Darwinian thinking to the evolution of knowledge (Hull 1988a, b; Plotkin 1982).  
The American philosopher David Hull studies the way scientific ideas develop 
over time in lineages rather as species do.  He treats scientific ideas as the 
replicators and scientists as the interactors (he prefers the term ‘interactor’ to 
Dawkins’s ‘vehicle’ because of its more active connotations).  Plotkin considers 
science as not only ‘the product of a “Darwin machine”’ but ‘a special form of 
culture that is transformed in time by evolutionary processes’ (Plotkin 1993, pp. 
69, 223).  According to evolutionary epistemology, biological adaptations are 
one form of knowledge, and science is another; both as produced by the 
processes of blind variation and selective retention (Campbell 1975).  This 
approach is firmly based in Universal Darwinism and does not bring everything 
back to genetic advantage. 

30    THE MEME MACHINE 
Whose advantage? 
 
We can now see that many theories of cultural change use evolutionary ideas but 
they are not the same as memetics.  There are two fundamental differences.  
First, most do not distinguish general evolutionary theory from the specifics of 
biological evolution.  This means they are unclear about the relationship 
between biology and culture and easily fall foul of the obvious differences 
between genetics and cultural evolution.  Second, they do not introduce the idea 
of a second replicator such as the meme.  This means they do not see cultural 
evolution as proceeding in the interests of a selfish replicator. 
This last issue is most important and I want to pursue it.  The whole point of 
memetics is to treat the meme as a replicator in its own right, operating entirely 
for the benefit of its own selfish replication.  If there is no second replicator, and 
you are a committed Darwinian, then somehow or other everything must come 
back to the genes – to biological advantage.  If there are two replicators (or 
more) then there will inevitably be conflicts of interest – circumstances in which 
the interests of the genes pull in one direction and those of the memes in the 
opposite direction.  These examples are very important for memetics because 
they would not be predicted by a purely genetic theory.  If they occur, they 
prove that we need a theory of memes – or at least a theory involving some kind 
of second replicator.  This is what distinguishes memetic theory from other 
theories of cultural evolution. 
Dennett (1995) makes the same point when he asks ‘Cui bono?’, who 
benefits?  He says ‘The first rule of memes, as it is for genes, is that replication 
is not necessarily for the good of anything; replicators flourish that are good at . . 
. replicating! . . . The important point is that there is no necessary connection 
between a meme’s replicative power, its “fitness” from its point of view, and its 
contributions to our fitness (by whatever standard we judge that)’ (Dennett 
1991, p. 203, italics in the original). 
Dawkins explains: 
 
As soon as the primeval soup provided conditions in which molecules could 
make copies of themselves, the replicators themselves took over.  For more than 
three thousand million years, DNA has been the only replicator worth talking 
about in the world.  Fur it does not necessarily hold these monopoly rights for all 
time.  Whenever conditions arise in which a new kind of replicator can make 
copies of itself, the new replicators will tend to take over, and start a new kind of

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    31 
evolution of their own.  Once this new evolution begins, it will in no necessary 
sense be subservient to the old (Dawkins 1976, pp. 193–4, italics in the original). 
 
Of course, memes could only come into existence when the genes had 
provided brains that were capable of imitation – and the nature of those brains 
must have influenced which memes took hold and which did not.  However, 
once memes had come into existence they would be expected to take on a life of 
their own. 
Dawkins argued that biologists had so deeply assimilated the idea of genetic 
evolution that they tended to forget that it is only one of many possible kinds of 
evolution.  He complained of his colleagues that ‘In the last analysis they wish 
always to go back to “biological advantage”’ (Dawkins 1976, p. 193).  In other 
words, they might accept the idea of memes, or some kind of unit of cultural 
evolution, but then still believe that memes must always act somehow for the 
benefit of the genes.  But this is missing the whole point of the second replicator.  
If memes are replicators, as I am convinced they are, then they will not act for 
the benefit of the species, for the benefit of the individual, for the benefit of the 
genes, of indeed for the benefit of anything but themselves.  That is what it 
means to be a replicator. 
I am labouring this point because I am now going to review some theories of 
cultural evolution that have introduced the idea of a second replicator – or at 
least some kind of new cultural unit.  (Durham 1991 provides a more thorough 
review.)  At first sight these may all appear equivalent to the idea of the meme, 
but they are not.  There are many similarities and differences but the most 
important point to look for is whether the new unit is really being treated as a 
replicator in its own right.  If it is not then the theory is not equivalent to 
memetics. 
In 1975, just before Dawkins proposed the idea of memes, the American 
anthropologist F.T. Cloak wrote about cultural instructions.  He pointed out that 
whenever we see any behaviour being performed we assume that there is some 
internal structure in the animal’s nervous system that causes that behaviour.  All 
animals have such instructions but humans, unlike other animals, can acquire 
new instructions by observing and imitating others.  Cloak suggested that culture 
is acquired in tiny, unrelated snippets that he called ‘corpuscles of culture’ or 
‘cultural instructions’. 
Furthermore, he distinguished very carefully between the instructions in 
people’s heads and the behaviour, technology or social organization that those 
instructions produce.  The former he called ‘i-culture’ and the latter the ‘m-
culture’. 

32    THE MEME MACHINE 
He was absolutely clear about the status of cultural instructions, even though 
he did not use the replicator concept.  He said that ultimate function of both i-
culture and m-culture is the maintenance and propagation of the i-culture.  
Therefore, he concluded we should not be surprised to find some m-culture 
features that perform functions that are irrelevant, or even destructive, to the 
organisms who make of do them.  He compared cultural instructions to parasites 
that control some of their host’s behaviour – a bit like a flu virus that makes you 
sneeze to get itself propagated.  He concluded ‘In short, “our” cultural 
instructions don’t work for us organisms; we work for them.  At best, we are in 
symbiosis with them, as we are with our genes.  At worst, we are their slaves’ 
(Cloak 1975, p. 172).  Quite clearly, Cloak had seen the implications of having a 
second selfish replicator – even though others subsequently argued that cultural 
instructions are not replicators at all (Alexander 1979). 
In The Selfish Gene, Dawkins mentions Cloak, saying that he wants to go 
further in directions being explored by Cloak and others.  However, Dawkins 
lumps together both the behaviours and the instructions that produce them, and 
calls then all memes, while Cloak separates the two – a distinction that is 
somewhat analogous to the distinction between the genotype and the phenotype 
in biology.  Later, Dawkins (1982) makes the same distinction as Cloak and 
defines a meme as ‘a unit of information residing in the brain’.  I shall return to 
consider the importance of this difference later on.  For now we need only note 
that Cloak’s cultural instruction is, like the meme, a true second replicator. 
 
Sociobiology and culture on a leash 
 
While Dawkins was writing The Selfish Gene, the new science of sociobiology 
was being established – studying the genetic and evolutionary basis of 
behaviour.  There was, at the time, a great outcry against applying sociobiology 
to human behaviour.  Some of this came from sociologists, anthropologists and 
others who argued that human behaviour was almost entirely free from the 
constraints of the genes and could not be understood by what they saw as (horror 
of horrors) ‘genetic determinism’.  The genes, they claimed, only give us a 
‘capacity for culture’.  Some came from ordinary people who rejected the idea 
that their cherished beliefs, decisions and actions were constrained by their 
genetic make-up – what about ‘free will’? 
This reaction reminds me of the antagonism to Newton, to Copernicus, and to

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    33 
Darwin himself.  Sociobiology seemed to push human beings further off their 
self-created pedestal – to undermine their sense of free will and autonomy.  As 
we shall see, memetics takes a further big step in this direction and so will 
probably reap the same antagonism.  Still – as Cloak put it ‘. . . if we are the 
slaves of some of “our” cultural traits, isn’t it time we knew it?’ (Cloak 1975, p. 
178). 
Much of the antagonism to sociobiology has died down, perhaps because of 
the increasing evidence for the evolutionary basis of human behaviour, and 
perhaps because of a better understanding of the way genes and environment 
interact.  The old image of genes as providing a blueprint or wiring diagram for 
building a body is clearly wrong.  A better analogy is with a recipe, though it is 
still not a close one.  Genes are instructions for building proteins, and the results 
of their protein synthesis are influenced at every stage by the available raw 
materials and the nature of the environment.  Nothing is purely genetically 
determined and nothing purely environmentally determined.  We human beings, 
like all other creatures, are a complex product of both – and this is true of the 
way we behave as well as the shape of our legs. 
In spite of the antagonism, sociobiology made great progress but, as its 
founding father Edward O. Wilson complained, it had little to say about the 
individual human mind r the diversity of cultures.  In 1981, Wilson teamed up 
with the physicist Charles Lumsden to develop a theory of gene-culture 
coevolution and introduced the concept of the ‘culturgen’ as ‘the basic unit of 
inheritance in cultural evolution’ (Lumsden and Wilson 1981, p. x).  They hoped 
their new theory would lead right through from genes to mind to culture and 
developed mathematical treatments of how different culturgens would affect 
genetic fitness.  However, they always came back to the genes as the final 
arbiters.  If maladaptive culturgens are sometimes selected this is because their 
harm is not immediately apparent and so there is some lag before the system 
adapts.  Ultimately, the genes will win out.  As they put it – ‘the genes hold 
culture on a leash’. 
The ‘leash principle’ is a more memorable way of expressing what Dawkins 
meant about his colleagues wanting ‘always to go back to “biological 
advantage”’.  It also provides us with a helpful image.  If Lumsden and Wilson 
are right then the genes are always the owner and the culturgens are the dog.  
The leash can sometimes longer – even extremely long – but it is still a dog at 
the other end.  According to memetics, the genes may turn into a dog and the 
memes become the owner – or perhaps we should enjoy the spectacle of two 
dogs, one on either end – each running like mad to serve their own selfish 
replication. 

34    THE MEME MACHINE 
The Stanford geneticists, Luigi Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus Feldman (1981), 
developed a detailed model of cultural transmission based on the ‘cultural trait’ 
as the unit.  Cultural traits are learned by imprinting, conditioning, observation, 
imitation or direct teaching (note that this is a broader range than for memes 
which, by definition, have to be passed on by imitation and cannot be acquired 
by imprinting or conditioning).  They clearly distinguish cultural selection from 
Darwinian or natural selection and they use the concept of ‘cultural fitness’ – 
that is, the fitness for survival of a cultural trait itself – a concept that is useful in 
memetics.  They also introduced the distinction between vertical transmission – 
such as from parent to child – and horizontal transmission – such as from child 
to child or adult to unrelated adult.  We shall see later how important this is for 
understanding life in an age of predominantly horizontal transmission. 
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman listed different mechanisms of cultural 
transmission and provided mathematical models of particular cases, including 
maladaptive ones.  A seriously maladaptive example is the practice of 
cannibalism in the funeral rites of a New Guinea highland tribe called the Foré.  
As part of complex rituals honouring their dead the Foré ate parts of the human 
bodies.  In fact, they preferred eating pork to human flesh and so the men tended 
to get more of this prized food, leaving the women and children to more 
cannibalism (Durham 1991).  This practice led directly to an epidemic of the 
degenerative disease known as kuru, which killed about 2500 Foré people, 
mostly women and children.  Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman demonstrated 
mathematically that a maladaptive trait like this could eliminate up to 50 per 
cent of its carriers and still spread through a population. 
However, despite contributing so much to our understanding of cultural 
transmission and the spread of maladaptive practices, Cavalli-Sforza and 
Feldman still see ‘cultural activity as an extension of Darwinian fitness’ (1981, 
p. 362), and this is what distinguishes their theory from memetics.  As Dennett 
(1997) puts it, they do not ask the all-important Cui bono? question.  Or, if they 
do, they simply assume that the answer must be genes, and do not consider the 
possibility that ‘it is the cultural items themselves that benefit from the 
adaptations they exhibit’ (Dennett 1997, p. 7).  For Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 
cultural adaptation means the use of skills, beliefs, and so on, to the ultimate 
benefit of genes – and the term ‘maladaptive’ means maladaptive to the genes.  
Even if only in the long run, they say, ‘The mechanism of natural selection 
retains ultimate control’ (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981, p. 364).  In other 
words they too believe in the leash. 

THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE    35 
The only anthropologists who seem to have let go of the leash are Robert 
Boyd and Peter Richerson from the University of California at Los Angeles.  
Like sociobiologists, they accept that culture arises from ‘natural origins’ but 
claim that models that take cultural evolution into account – like their ‘Dual 
Inheritance Model’ – can do better than sociobiology.  They refer to Campbell’s 
rule and are convinced, as I am, that cultural variants must be subject to their 
own form of natural selection.  They analyse in great detail the structural 
differences between cultural transmission and conclude ‘. . . the behavior that 
enables an individual to maximize his chance to enculturate cultural offspring 
may not be the behavior that will maximize the transmission of genes to the next 
generation’ (Boyd and Richerson 1985, p. 11).  In their version of coevolution 
the genes can keep culture on a leash, culture can keep the genes on a leash, or 
the two may evolve in competition or mutuality (Richerson and Boyd 1989).  
They seem to be truly treating their cultural unit as a separate replicator.  Boyd 
and Richerson are anthropologists, concerned far more than I shall be with 
cultural variation.  However, many of their ideas will prove useful in 
understanding the selection of memes. 
The anthropologist William Durham uses the term ‘meme’ for his unit of 
cultural evolution, and at first sight may appear to take a memetic view, but a 
closer look shows that for him the meme is not truly a selfish replicator.  He 
claims that organic and cultural selection work on the same criterion – that is, 
inclusive fitness – and are complementary.  He argues that Boyd and Richerson 
take ‘the abstract genetic analogy a bit too far’ and are ‘strongly anti-
Darwinian’, and he does not agree with them that human evolution is 
fundamentally different from that of other organisms (Durham 1991, p. 183). 
This comes to the heart of the issue.  For me, as for Dawkins and Dennett, 
memetic evolution means that people are different.  Their ability to imitate 
creates a second replicator that acts in its own interests and can produce 
behaviour that is memetically adaptive but biologically maladaptive.  This is not 
just a temporary aberration to be ultimately reined in by the powerful genes, but 
is permanent, because memes are powerful in just the same way that genes are; 
they have replicator power.  Cloak, and Boyd and Richerson, seem to agree but 
the others do not accept the independent replicator power of their units of 
cultural transmission.  In that important sense they are much closer to traditional 
sociobiology – their motto might be ‘the genes will always win’.  The leash may 
sometimes get very long but the dog can never get away. 
That brings us full circle to the modern successor to sociobiology, which

36    THE MEME MACHINE 
largely takes the same standpoint.  Evolutionary psychology is based on the idea 
that the human mind evolved to solve problems of a hunter-gatherer way of life 
in the Pleistocene age (Barkow et al. 1992; Pinker 1997).  In other words, all our 
behaviours, beliefs, tendencies and customs are adaptations.  For example, 
sexual jealousy and love for our children, the way we acquire grammar or adjust 
our food intake to deal with nutritional deficits, our avoidance of snakes and our 
ability to maintain friendships are all seen as adaptations to a lifestyle of hunting 
and gathering.  Evolutionary psychologists therefore argue that all behaviour 
ultimately comes back to biological advantage. 
Evolutionary psychology can take us a long way, but is it far enough?  I say 
not.  From the perspective of memetics, evolutionary psychology provides a 
crucial underpinning.  In order to understand why certain memes are positively 
selected and others rejected we need to understand the way natural selection has 
moulded our brains for the benefit of the genes.  We like sweet cakes and 
caffeine-filled drinks, we look twice at a magazine with a naked woman on the 
front and not at the one with trains on it.  We buy bright bunches of flowers and 
avoid the smell of rotting cabbages, and all this is essential to understanding 
memetic selection.  But it is not the whole story.  To fully understand human 
behaviour we must consider both genetic and memetic selection.  Most 
evolutionary psychologists reject outright the idea that a second replicator is 
needed.  My task in this book must be to show why it is. 
 
I have explored various approaches to cultural evolution to see whether any use 
the same ideas as memetics but under another name.  The answer, with the 
limited exceptions I have discussed, is no.  It seems that there is no ready-made 
science of memetics waiting to be taken over.  If we need a science of memetics, 
as I convinced we do, then we shall have to build one up from scratch. 
The main tools available are the basic principles of evolutionary theory, the 
founding ideas of Dawkins, Dennett and other early memeticists, and the 
relevant ideas from a cultural anthropology discussed above.  Of course, we can 
also draw on more than a century of research in psychology and several decades 
of cognitive science and neuroscience. 
Using these tools, I shall try to lay the foundations for a science of memetics.  
I can then use this to provide new answers to old questions from the apparently 
trivial, such as ‘Why is my head so full of thoughts?’ to the weighty questions of 
why human beings have such big brains.  The first step in this endeavour is to 
start looking at the world from a meme’s eye view. 

Taking the meme’s eye 
view 
 
 
 
We can now start to look at the world in a new way.  I shall call this the meme’s 
eye view, though, of course, memes do not really have eyes or points of view.  
They cannot see anything and they cannot predict anything.  However, the point 
of this perspective is the same as the ‘gene’s eye view’ in biology.  Memes are 
replicators and tend to increase in number whenever they have the chance.  So 
the meme’s eye view is the view that looks at the world in terms of opportunities 
for replication – what will help a meme to make more copies of itself and what 
will prevent it? 
I like to ask a simple question – indeed I shall use this question again in 
several different contexts.  Imagine a world full of hosts for memes (e.g. brains) 
and far more memes than can possibly find homes.  Now ask, which memes are 
more likely to find a safe home and get passed on again? 
This is a reasonable way to characterise the real world we live in.  Each of us 
creates or comes across countless memes every day.  Most of our thoughts are 
potentially memes but if they do not get spoken they die out straight away.  We 
produce memes every time we speak, but most of these are quickly snuffed out 
in their travels.  Other memes are carried on radio and television, in rewritten 
words, in other people’s actions, or the products of technology, films and 
pictures. 
Think for a moment about all the thoughts you have had in the past ten 
minutes – let alone all day.  Even while reading you have probably thought 
about other people, remembered things you meant to do, made plans for later in 
the day, or (I hope) pursued ideas sparked off by the book.  Most of these 
thoughts will never be thought again.  You will not pass them on and they will 
perish. 
Think of the number of things you are likely to say to someone else today – 
or the number of words you will hear other people speak.  You might listen to 
the radio, watch television, have dinner with other people, help your children 
with the homework, answer the phone to people far away.  Most of what is said 
in these conversations will never be passed on again.  Most of it will not 
reappear as ‘Then he said to her . . .’ or ‘And did you know . . .’.  Most will die 
at birth. 
CHAPTER 4 

38    THE MEME MACHINE 
Written words may not fare much better.  The words on this page have at 
least got as far as being read by you, but may well get no further.  Even if you do 
pass them on, you may scramble them for easier recall or because I have not 
made myself clear, so the copying fidelity will not always be high.  Millions of 
newspapers are printed each day but by a week later most of the copies have 
gone and most people have forgotten what was in them.  Books may do a little 
better – though in the United States alone something like one hundred thousand 
new books are published every year.  Not all of them can be influential or 
memorable.  And while some scientific papers are widely read and quoted, it is 
rumoured that the majority are not read by anyone at all! 
We could not (even in principle) calculate the proportion of potential memes 
that actually do get passed on but the idea is clear enough.  There is enormous 
selection pressure, and therefore very few survivors from among the very many 
starters.  Only a few memes are successfully copied from brain to brain, from 
brain to print, from print to print or from voice to compact disk.  The ones we 
regularly meet are the successful ones – the ones that made it in the competition 
for replication.  My question is simply – which memes are those? 
I am going to take the meme’s eye view as a way of tackling several 
controversial questions.  I shall start with a simple one.  The question itself may 
not be profound but it does turn out to be rather intriguing – and it will give us 
practise in thinking from the meme’s point of view. 
 
Why can’t we stop thinking? 
 
Can you stop thinking? 
Perhaps you have practised meditation or some other method of calming the 
mind.  If so you will know that the task is not trivial.  If you have not, I suggest 
you try now to empty your mind for a minute or so (or if you cannot face it now, 
try it sometime when you have nothing ‘better’ to do, waiting for the kettle to 
boil, or the computer to boot up, for example).  ‘When any thought comes along, 
as it certainly will, just acknowledge it and let it go.  Do not get tangled up in the 
thoughts or follow them up.  See whether you can find any space between them.  
The simplest forms of meditation are no more than this kind of practice.  It is 
fiendishly difficult. 
‘Why?  You will doubtless notice that thoughts just seem to pop up out of 
nowhere and grab your attention.  You may also notice what kinds of thought 
they are.  Typically, they are imagined conversations or arguments, reruns of

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    39 
events with new endings, self-justifications, complicated plans for the future, or 
difficult decisions that have to be made.  They are rarely simple images, 
perceptions or feelings (which can come and go without causing trouble); rather, 
they use words, arguments, and ideas you have acquired from other people.  In 
other words, these incessant thoughts are memes.  ‘You’ cannot command them 
to cease.  You cannot even command them to go slower nor tell yourself not to 
get sucked into them.  They seem to have a life and power of their own.  Why? 
From the biological point of view this constant thinking does not appear to be 
justified.  I say this cautiously, in the recognition that many things that at first 
did not appear to be in the interests of the genes subsequently have turned out to 
be.  Nevertheless it may be helpful to think this through. 
Thinking requires energy.  One of the many benefits of techniques like PET 
scanning (positron emission tomography) is that we can observe graphically 
what goes on in a brain when someone is thinking.  Scans, although still 
severely limited in resolution, can show the relative amounts of blood flowing in 
different areas of the brain.  For example, when someone is doing a visual task 
there is more activity in the visual cortex, when listening to music more in the 
auditory cortex, and so on.  As had long been suspected, imagining something 
uses similar parts of the brain as actually seeing or hearing the same thing.  So 
imagining conversations activates speech areas, and so on.  Experiments 
comparing simple usual tasks with more difficult ones show higher levels of 
activity with the more difficult task. 
The amounts of energy used are small compared with, say, running up a hill, 
but they are not entirely negligible.  Blood flow means that oxygen and stored 
energy are being burned up, and these have to be worked for.  If an organism 
could get by without thinking all the time it would use less energy and hence 
ought to have a survival advantage. 
Presumably, then, all this thinking has some function.  But what?  Perhaps 
we are practising useful skills, or solving problems, or thinking through social 
exchanges so as to make better deals, or planning future activities.  I have to say 
this does not seem to be plausible for the sorts of daft and pointless thoughts I 
tend to think about.  However, applying evolutionary thinking to today’s 
situation may not be appropriate.  We did not evolve along with books, 
telephones and cities. 
Evolutionary psychologists would suggest that instead we consider our 
hunter-gatherer past.  Speculating in too much detail is dangerous since we have 
rather little information about the far past, but many authors have provided good 
descriptions based on the available evidence (Dunbar 1996; Leakey 1994;

40    THE MEME MACHINE 
Mithen 1996; Tudge 1995).  They tend to agree that people lived in groups of 
roughly 100–250 people, with strong family ties and complex social rules.  
Women tended to gather the plant foods and men to hunt.  Life expectancy was 
short compared with today.  Density of population was limited by the large area 
of land needed for this lifestyle and there were predators and disease to worry 
about.  However, providing the food would not take all day and there would 
have been many hours left over. 
In such a situation would it make sense to keep on thinking all the time?  
Should those endless thoughts have justified their energy costs in terms of 
survival advantage?  Or would it have been better to save the energy and be able 
just to sit and not think – as cats appear to do when resting in the sun?  I am only 
speculating but I would suggest that it may have benefited the genes more if we 
could stop thinking sometimes and conserve valuable resources.  Why, then, can 
we not? 
The answer from memetics is to start thinking in terms of replicators trying to 
get copied. 
First, let us think about brains without memes.  If the brain really is a Darwin 
machine then the thoughts, perceptions, ideas, memories, and so on, that go on 
inside it must all be competing for the brain’s limited processing resources.  
Natural selection will have ensured that the brain’s attention mechanisms 
generally devote most resources to the processing that helps the genes that made 
it.  Within those constraints, all the thoughts and ideas will compete for attention 
and the chance to get copied.  However, they are limited to one brain and subject 
to the pressures of natural selection. 
Now imagine a brain capable of imitation – a brain with memes.  A brain 
with memes not only has much more information to store, but the memes 
themselves are tools for thinking with (Dennett 1991).  Far more kinds of 
thinking are possible when you have learned words, stories, the structure of 
arguments, or new ways of thinking about love, logic or science.  There are now 
far more thoughts competing for the same limited processing capacity of the 
brain.  Not only that, but memes can also get copied from one brain to another. 
If a meme can get itself successfully copied it will.  One way to do so is to 
command the resources of someone’s brain and make them keep on rehearsing 
it, so giving that meme a competitive edge over memes that do not get rehearsed.  
Memes like this are not only more likely to be remembered but also to be ‘on 
your mind’ when you next speak to someone else.  If we take stories as an 
example, a story that has great emotional impact, or for any other reason has the

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    41 
effect that you just cannot stop thinking about it, will go round and round in 
your head.  This will consolidate the memory for that story and will also mean 
that, since you are thinking about it a lot, you are more likely to pass it on to 
someone else, who may be similarly affected. 
We may now ask the question I posed at the start.  Imagine a world full of 
brains, and far more memes than can possibly find homes.  Which memes are 
more likely to find a safe home and get passed on again? 
Compare a meme that not only grabs the attention but tends to make its host 
keep on mentally rehearsing it, with one that buries itself quietly in memory and 
is never rehearsed, or a thought that is too boring ever to think again. 
Which will do better?  Other things being equal, the first type will.  So these 
are the thoughts that get passed on again while the others simply fade away.  The 
consequence is that the world of memes – the meme pool – fills up with the 
kinds of thoughts that people tend to think about.  We all come across them and 
so we all think an awful lot.  The reason ‘I’ cannot compel myself to stop 
thinking is that millions of memes are competing for the space in ‘my’ brain. 
Note that this is just a general principle designed to show why we think so 
much.  We should also be able to find out which kinds of memes these 
successful ones are.  For example, they may be ones that trigger certain 
emotional responses, or which relate to the core needs for sex and food – and 
evolutionary psychology can help us here.  They may be ones that provide 
especially good tools for creating more memes, or which fit neatly into already 
installed memeplexes like political ideologies or belief in astrology.  But 
exploring these reasons is a more specific task and I shall return to it later.  For 
the moment I want only to show how general principles of memetics can help us 
understand the nature of our minds. 
I think of this as the ‘weed theory’ of memes.  An empty mind is a bit like 
my vegetable garden when I have dug and cleared and hoed it.  The earth is 
brown, rough, rich and ready for anything that wants to grow.  A week or two 
later there are little bits of green poking up in places; another week or two later 
there are serious plants dotted about; and soon the whole plot is covered in 
green, tangled with creepers, thrusting with tall leaves, and not a spot of brown 
earth can be seen.  The reason is obvious.  If something can grow it will.  There 
are far more seeds in the soil and in the air than can possibly grow into mature 
plants, and as soon as any one of them finds itself with space, water and light, 
off it goes.  That is just what seeds do.  Memes do just the same with brains.  
‘Whenever there is any spare thinking capacity memes will come along and use

42    THE MEME MACHINE 
it up.  Even when we are already thinking about something absolutely gripping 
any other idea that is even more gripping may displace the first from its position, 
improve its chance of getting passed on, and so increase the likelihood of 
someone else being infected with it.  On this view the practice of meditation is a 
kind of mental weeding. 
There are other analogies in the world of biology (although we must 
remember they are only analogies).  Take a forest, for example.  In a forest every 
tree has to compete for light, so genes for growing tall trunks will do well and 
tend to spread in the gene pool, as all the trees carrying genes for shorter trunks 
die out in the gloom below.  In the end the forest will consist of trees that all 
have the tallest trunks they can manage to create. 
Who benefits?  Not the trees.  They have all invested enormous amounts of 
energy into growing the trunks and are still competing with each other.  There is 
no way that they could come to a gentleman’s agreement not to bother with 
trunks, for if some of them did, a cheat could always succeed by breaking the 
pact.  So forests are a common creation all over the planet.  The beneficiary is 
the successful gene, not the trees. 
Returning to our poor overactive brains, we can ask again – who benefits?  
The constant thinking does not apparently benefit our genes, and nor does it 
make us happy.  The point is that once memes have appeared the pressure to 
keep thinking all the time is ineffable.  With all this competition going on the 
main casualty is a peaceful mind. 
Of course, neither the genes nor the memes care about that – they are just 
mindlessly replicating.  They have no foresight and they could not plan 
according to the consequences of their actions – even if they did care.  We 
should not expect them to have created a happy and relaxing life for us and 
indeed they have not. 
I have used this simple example to show the way in which I want to use 
memetics to understand the human mind.  Later I will use the same approach to 
ask a closely related question – why do people talk so much?  You may already 
think the answer is obvious, but before we explore the many ramifications of 
this one I want to add an important word of caution. 
Not everything is a meme! 
 
Not everything is a meme 
 
Once you grasp the basic idea of memes it is all too easy to get carried away 
with enthusiasm and to think of everything as a meme – to equate memes with 
ideas, or thoughts, or beliefs, or the contents of consciousness, or anything you

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    43 
can think of.  This tendency is deeply confusing and gets in the way of 
understanding what memes can and cannot do.  We need to start with a clear and 
precise definition of the meme and decide just what does and does not count. 
The most important point to remember is that, as in Dawkins’s original 
formulation, memes are passed on by imitation.  I have described them as 
‘instructions for carrying out behaviour, stored in brains (or other objects) and 
passed on by imitation’.  The new Oxford English Dictionary gives meme 
(mi:m), n. Biol. (shortened from mimeme . . . that which is imitated, after GENE 
n.)  An element of a culture that may be considered to be passed on by non-
genetic means, esp. imitation’.  Imitation is a kind of replication, or copying, and 
that is what makes the meme a replicator and gives it its replicator power.  You 
could even say that ‘a meme is whatever it is that is passed on by imitation’ – if 
it didn’t sound so awkward. 
We may (and will) argue about just what counts as imitation but for now I 
shall use the word ‘in the broad sense’, as Dawkins did.  When I say ‘imitation’ 
I mean to include passing on information by using language, reading, and 
instruction, as well as other complex skills and behaviours.  Imitation includes 
any kind of copying of ideas and behaviours from one person to another.  So 
when you hear a story and pass on the gist to someone else, you have copied a 
meme.  The important point is that the emphasis on imitation allows us to rule 
out all kinds of things which cannot be passed on and therefore cannot be 
counted as memes. 
Look away from this page for a moment and rest your eyes on the window, 
the wall, a piece of furniture or a plant.  Anything will do, but just look quietly 
at it for – say – five seconds before you come back to reading.  I presume you 
experienced something.  There were sights, sounds, and impressions that made 
up your experience in those few seconds.  Did they involve memes?  Perhaps 
you said to yourself ‘That plant needs watering’ or ‘I wish there weren’t so 
much traffic outside’.  If so, you were using words; you obtained those words 
memetically and you could pass them on again – but as for the perceptual 
experience itself – that does not necessarily involve memes. 
Of course, you could argue that now we have language everything we 
experience is coloured by our memes.  So let us consider the experiences of 
some other animal that does not have language.  One of my cats will do as an 
example.  She is not the brainiest of creatures but she does have a rich and 
interesting life and many capabilities despite having acquired next to nothing by 
imitation. 
First of all she can see and hear.  She can run after butterflies and scamper up

44    THE MEME MACHINE 
a tree – which requires complex perceptual and motor skills.  She can taste and 
smell, and choose Whiskas over Katkins.  She has a powerful sense of hierarchy 
and territory and will hiss at or run away from some cats, and play with others.  
She can obviously recognise individual cats and also some humans, responding 
to their voices, footsteps or touch, and can communicate with them using 
movement, physical contact and her own quite powerful voice.  Her mental map 
is complex and detailed.  I have no idea how far it stretches but it covers at least 
four human gardens, two roads and many human-made and cat-made paths.  She 
can relate the position of a person at a window to the room they are in, and find 
the most direct route to the kitchen when the knife hits the bowl.  And when she 
arrives, at the word ‘Hup’ she neatly stands on her hind legs and tucks in her 
front paws. 
Her life includes many of the experiences that I can recognise in my life too – 
perception, memory, learning, exploration, food preferences, communication 
and social relationships.  These are all examples of experiences and behaviours 
that have not been acquired by imitation and so are not memes.  Note that my cat 
has done a lot of learning in her lifetime, and some of it from me, but it cannot 
be ‘passed on by imitation’. 
If we are to be sure what is meant by a meme then we must carefully 
distinguish learning by imitation from other kinds of learning.  Psychology 
traditionally deals with two major types of individual learning (i.e. learning by 
an individual animal or person) – classical conditioning and operant 
conditioning.  In classical conditioning, originally studied by Pavlov with his 
salivating dogs, two stimuli become associated by repeated pairing.  My cat has 
probably learned to associate certain sounds nth food-time, the sight of certain 
cats with fear, the sound of rain with ‘not a nice day to go out’, and so on.  Just 
as I have learned to freeze at the sound of a dentist’s drill (and I still do, even 
though I have been given anaesthetics for the past 25 years!), and to relax with 
pleasure at the sound of the ice going in the gin and tonic.  You could say that in 
classical conditioning some aspect of the environment has been copied into a 
brain, but it stops with that brain and cannot be passed on by imitation. 
Operant conditioning is when a behaviour made by an animal is either 
rewarded or punished and therefore either increases or decreases in frequency.  
Skinner famously studied this kind of trial and error learning with his rats or 
pigeons in cages, pressing levers to obtain food.  My cat probably learned to use 
the cat door by operant conditioning, as well as better ways of catching voles.  
She also learned to beg that way.  At just she made feeble attempts to get her 
nose up to where I was holding the dish.  Then, in a process called shaping, I

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    45 
progressively rewarded her for ever neater and neater begging, finally hiding the 
dish behind my back and saying ‘Hup’.  And in case you think this is unfair 
treatment of a small weak animal by a large and powerful one I should point out 
that she has successfully trained me to leave my desk to come and stroke her 
when required. 
Skinner also pointed out the similarity between operant conditioning and 
natural selection – some behaviours are positively selected and others weeded 
out.  In this way learning can be seen as an evolutionary system in which the 
instructions for carrying out behaviour are the replicators.  Several selection 
theories of learning and of brain development have been proposed but as long as 
the behaviours cannot be passed on to someone else by imitation then they do 
not become memes and the selection is not memetic selection. 
Much of human learning is Skinnerian and not memetic, whether consciously 
or not, parents shape their children’s behaviour by the way they reinforce them.  
The best reward for children is attention, and rewards work better than 
punishment.  So if parents pay lots of attention to their children when they are 
behaving well, and act uninterested when they scream or have tantrums, then 
behaving well is simply in the best interests of the kids and they will do it.  
Parents who do everything for their children end up with dependent children, 
while those who expect their children to find their own games kit, and leave 
them to reap teacher’s wrath if they are late for school, end up with children who 
take responsibility for themselves.  You may think you taught your daughter to 
ride a bike but in all probability you just bought the bike, provided 
encouragement, and trial and error did the rest.  There is not necessarily 
anything memetic in all of this (apart from the idea of riding a bike at all).  Much 
of what we learn, we learn only for ourselves and cannot pass on. 
In practice, we can probably never tease out those things we have personally 
learned by imitation from those we have learned in other ways – but in principle 
the two are different.  We know lots of things that are not memes.  Some 
authors, however, imply that virtually everything we know is a meme (e.g. 
Brodie 1996; Gabora 1997; Lynch 1996).  Brodie includes operant conditioning, 
and indeed all conditioning, as memetic.  Gabora goes even further and counts 
as a meme ‘anything that can be the subject of an instant of experience’.  This is 
extremely confusing.  It takes away any power of the idea of the meme as a 
replicator and adds nothing to the already difficult problem of how to deal with 
consciousness.  If we are going to make progress we need to stick to our clear 
and simple definition. 

46    THE MEME MACHINE 
What about emotions?  Emotions are an inextricable part of human life and 
even play a key role in rational thought and decision making.  The neurologist 
Antonio Damasio (1994) has worked with many patients who have brain 
damage, often in the frontal lobe, that causes them to lose their normal 
emotional responses and become emotionally flat.  Far from turning into super-
rational decision-makers, able to plan their lives without all the irritating 
distraction of unwanted emotions, they become almost paralysed with 
indecision.  Whether to choose pickle and pumpkin crisps, or cheese and onion, 
can become a nerve-racking dilemma to be resolved only by long and careful 
thought, and a normal life becomes impossible.  Most of us would just think 
‘well, I feel like cheese and onion today’ not realising that the emotions have 
done the complex work of juggling the possible consequences, weighing up the 
results of past experiences, throwing these in with species-specific preferences 
and coming up with some rough and ready bodily reaction that allows that tiny 
verbal part of our brain to say ‘I think I will have the cheese and onion please – 
if you don’t want it’.  Star Trek’s Mr Data is simply implausible.  If he truly had 
no feelings he would not be able to decide whether to get up in the morning, 
when to speak to Captain Picard, or whether to drink tea or coffee. 
Emotions and thought are intimately linked in other ways too.  There are 
rather few hormones, such as adrenaline and noradrenaline, that control 
emotional states, but we can experience a vast array of different emotions 
according to how we interpret and label our physiological responses.  In this way 
you could say that memes come to be involved in our emotions, but are 
emotions memes?  The answer is – only if they can be transmitted to someone 
else by imitation. 
It is almost a truism to say ‘you can’t possibly know how I’m feeling’.  
Emotions are private and notoriously difficult to communicate.  We write 
poems, give roses, and paint pictures to try in some small way, to communicate 
them.  We might, of course, pick up an emotion from someone else, and this 
certainly looks like imitation, as when tears of sadness spring up in response to 
seeing another’s grief.  This contagious spread of behaviour looks like imitation 
because one person does something and then another person does the same 
thing.  But strictly speaking it is not.  To understand why we need to define 
imitation. 

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    47 
Imitation, contagion, and social learning 
 
The psychologist, Edward Lee Thorndike (1898), was possibly the first to 
provide a clear definition of imitation as ‘learning to do an act from seeing it 
done’.  Thorndike’s definition (although confined to visual information) captures 
the essential idea that in imitation a new behaviour is learned by copying it from 
someone else.  A hundred years later we can see the importance of this point in 
distinguishing between contagion, ‘social learning’ and ‘true imitation’. 
The term ‘contagion’ is used in many different ways.  We may think of ideas 
as contagious, and compare the spread of memes with the spread of infectious or 
contagious diseases (Lynch 1996).  Also the term ‘social contagion’ is used to 
describe the spread of behaviours, such as crazes or even suicide, through 
society (Levy and Nail 1993; Marsden 1998).  However, this is not the kind of 
contagion I want to contrast with imitation.  Rather, I mean what has variously 
been called instinctive imitation, behavioural contagion, social facilitation, co-
action, or (simply) contagion (Whiten and Ham 1992).  Unfortunately, social 
psychologists often confuse imitation and contagion, or treat them as the same 
thing (Grosser et al. 1951; Levy and Nail 1993).  However, comparative 
psychologists (those comparing animal and human behaviour) have recently 
made clear a useful distinction. 
Yawning, coughing and laughter are all extremely contagious in humans.  
Indeed, it can be difficult not to laugh if everyone around you is already 
laughing.  This kind of contagion is thought to rely on specific stimulus feature 
detectors which detect laughing or yawning in someone else and then trigger the 
same innate behaviour as the response.  In other animals, alarm calls and other 
vocalisations can be contagious, but contagious laughter appears to be limited to 
humans (Provine 1996).  Other examples include the spread of moods and 
emotions through crowds, and the way people will stop to look at something if 
they see other people staring. 
This kind of contagion is not true imitation.  We can see why by considering 
Thorndike’s simple definition.  Yawning, coughing, laughing, and looking are 
innate behaviours.  When we start laughing because everyone else is laughing 
we have not learned ‘how to do an act’.  We already know how to laugh, and the 
kind of laugh we make is not modelled on the laugh we hear.  So this kind of 
contagion is not imitation and should not be counted as memetic. 
Then there is social learning (as opposed to individual learning), which is

48    THE MEME MACHINE 
learning that is influenced by observing, or interacting with, another animal or 
person.  Imitation is one form of social learning but there are others that are not 
truly imitative.  Animal researchers have recently made considerable progress in 
distinguishing between these kinds of learning, and finding out which animals 
are capable of true imitation (Hayes and Galef 1996).  The results have been 
surprising. 
In 1921, in the south of England, tits (small garden birds) were seen prising 
open the wax-board tops of milk bottles left on the doorstep.  Subsequently, the 
habit became widespread across England and some parts of Scotland and Wales, 
with other species of bird joining in, and foil tops being pecked as well.  That 
the tits learned from each other was suggested by the way the trick spread 
gradually from village to village, and across different areas, although it was 
obviously independently reinvented many times (Fisher and Hinde 1949).  With 
the advent of supermarkets and cardboard cartons, the bottle left by the milkman 
is becoming rare, but even today you will occasionally find your silver top 
pierced. 
The spread of milk bottle pecking was a simple cultural phenomenon but 
purists would argue that it was based not on imitation, but on a simpler kind of 
social learning (Sherry and Galef 1984).  Imagine that one bird learned, by trial 
and error, that there was cream to be had by pecking at the bottles.  Then another 
bird chanced by and saw the pecking and the obviously pecked top.  Pecking is a 
natural action for tits and now that the attention of the second bird had been 
drawn to the bottle it was more likely to land on it and peck too.  Reinforcement 
in the form of nice tasty cream would lead this bird to repeat the action and 
possibly be seen by other birds, and so on.  The fact that the birds used lots of 
different methods for opening the bottles also suggests they did not learn by 
direct imitation. 
This kind of social learning is sometimes called ‘stimulus enhancement’ – the 
stimulus, in this case the bottle top, has become more readily noticed.  Similarly, 
‘local enhancement’ is when attention is directed towards a specific place.  
Animals also learn from each other which objects or places to fear or ignore.  
For example, young rhesus monkeys learn to avoid snakes after seeing their 
parents react fearfully to a snake, and octopuses will attack something they have 
seen others attacking.  Birds and rabbits learn not to fear trains by following 
others who are not afraid, and therefore become used to the frightening noise.  
Oystercatchers open mussel shells by either stabbing or hammering techniques 
according to their tradition, and birds learn to choose migration routes and 
nesting sites from other birds (Bonner 1980, gives many interesting examples).  
But none of these processes is true imitation because no new behaviours are

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    49 
passed on from one animal to another (for reviews of social learning and 
imitation see Heyes and Galef 1996; Whiten and Ham 1992; Zentall and Galef 
1988). 
Other famous examples that look like true cultural learning based on 
imitation include the troop of Japanese monkeys that learned to wash sweet-
potatoes, and chimpanzees that learned how to fish for termites by poking sticks 
into the mounds.  However, further study of the spread of these skills, and of the 
animals’ learning abilities, suggests that both these traditions depend on 
individual learning and the kinds of social learning described above, not on true 
imitation (Galef 1992).  So if you want to be really precise about it you have to 
say that bottle top pecking, termite fishing and sweet-potato washing are not true 
memes – though they do come close. 
What about your neighbourhood blackbird who sings like your alarm clock 
or imitates a car alarm?  True imitation does occur in birds, although their 
powers of imitation are limited to sounds, and to rather specific kinds of sound 
at that (with the possible exception of parrots who may be able to imitate simple 
gestures).  For this reason birdsong has long been treated as a special case 
(Bonner 1980; Delius 1989; Thorndike 1898; Whiten and Ham 1992).  Many 
songbirds have long traditions.  The young learn what to sing by imitating their 
parents or neighbours.  In chaffinches, for example, the nestling may hear its 
father sing long before it is capable of singing itself.  A few months later it 
begins to make a wide variety of sounds, gradually narrowing down to the song 
it heard as a chick.  Experiments show that there is a critical period for learning 
and that the bird has to hear its own song and match it to the remembered song it 
is imitating.  Hand-raised birds can learn songs from tape recorders and adopted 
birds sing songs more like their adopted, not biological, parents.  Some species 
learn many songs from neighbours and a few, like parrots and mynahs, can 
imitate human speech.  So we can count birdsong as a meme.  Indeed, the 
cultural evolution of chaffinch song has actually been studied in terms of the 
mutation, flow and drift of song memes (Lynch et al. 1989), and studies of 
singing honeyeaters have shown that their song meme pool is more diverse on 
mainland Australia than on a nearby island (Baker 1996).  Birdsong is therefore 
unlike the examples of social learning we were considering before. 
The difference can be explained like this.  Imitation is learning something 
about the form of behaviour through observing others, while social learning is 
learning about the environment through observing others (Hayes 1993).  The tits 
already knew how to peck; they only learned what to peck.  The monkeys

50    THE MEME MACHINE 
already knew how to be frightened, they only learned whit to fear. 
After nearly a century of research there is very little evidence of true 
imitation in non-human animals.  Birdsong is obviously an exception, and we 
may be simply ignorant of the underwater world of dolphin imitation.  
Chimpanzees and gorillas that have been brought up in human families 
occasionally imitate in ways that their wild counterparts do not (Tomasello et al. 
1993).  However, when apes and human children are given the same problems, 
only the children readily use imitation to solve them (Call and Tomasello 1995).  
It seems we are wrong to use the verb ‘to ape’ to mean imitate, for apes rarely 
ape. 
By contrast, humans are ‘the consummate imitative generalist’ (Meltzoff 
1988, p. 59).  Human infants are able to imitate a wide range of vocal sounds, 
body postures, actions on objects, and even completely arbitrary actions like 
bending down to touch your head on a plastic panel.  By 14 months of age they 
can even delay imitation for a week or more (Meltzoff 1988), and they seem to 
know when they are being imitated by adults (Meltzoff 1996).  Unlike any other 
animals, we readily imitate almost everything and anything, and seem to take 
pleasure in doing so. 
If we define memes as transmitted by imitation then we must conclude that 
only humans are capable of extensive memetic transmission.  Some other 
theorists have included all forms of social learning in their definitions of cultural 
evolution (e.g. Boyd and Richerson 1985; Delius 1989).  Their mathematical 
models may usefully apply to all; however, I suggest that it will be better for 
memetics to stick to the original definition of memes.  The reason is that the 
other forms of social learning do not support a replication system with true 
heredity, because the behaviour is not really copied. 
We can think of it this way.  In social learning, one animal may invent a new 
behaviour during individual learning and then somehow lead a second animal 
into such a situation that it is likely to learn the same new behaviour – or 
perhaps the first can behave in such a way as to change the contingencies of 
learning for the second animal so that it learns the same (or a similar) new 
behaviour.  The result looks like copying but it is not, because the behaviour 
must be created anew by the second learner.  The social situation, and the 
behaviour of the other animal plays a role, but the details of the first behaviour 
are not transmitted and therefore cannot be built upon and refined by further 
selective copping.  In this sense, then, there is no true heredity.  This means 
there is no new replicator, no true evolution, and therefore the process should 
not be considered as memetic. 
By contrast, the skill of generalised imitation means that humans can invent

TAKING THE MEME’S EYE VIEW    51 
new behaviours of almost unlimited kinds and copy them on to each other.  If 
we define memes as transmitted by imitation then whatever is passed on by this 
copying process is a meme.  Memes fulfil the role of replicator because they 
exhibit all three of the necessary conditions, that is, heredity (the form and 
details of the behaviour are copied), variation (they are copied with errors, 
embellishments or other variations), and selection (only some behaviours are 
successfully copied).  This is a true evolutionary process. 
 
We have now established that imitation is rare and special, but just what is 
entailed in an act of imitation?  There is considerable research on imitation in 
infants and children (Meltzoff and Moore 1977; Whiten et al. 1996; Yando et al. 
1978), and some on sport, on social conformity, and on questions like whether 
violent television causes copycat violence (Bandura and Walters 1963) and 
whether suicide, vehicle accidents, and even murder can spread by imitation 
(Marsden 1998b; Phillips 1980).  However, there is little on the mechanisms 
underlying imitation, and so I will have to speculate a little. 
We might liken the process to ‘reverse engineering’, a common way of 
stealing ideas in modern industry.  If an unscrupulous manufacturer wants to 
make a cheap version of the latest high-tech compact disk player then specially 
trained engineers tear the real thing apart bit by bit, trying to work out what all 
the parts do and how they can be made.  With luck they can then build their own 
version to perform the same way – without paying royalties.  But it is not easy. 
Now imagine you are going to copy a simple action.  Suppose I put my hands 
to my mouth in a trumpet-like shape, point them upwards and hum ‘de-tum-de-
tum’.  I would bet that, unless you were physically unable, you would have little 
trouble in copying me – and that people watching would agree on whether you 
managed a good performance or not.  What is so difficult about that? 
Everything.  First, you (or rather some unconscious brain mechanisms) have 
to decide which aspects of the action are to be copied – does the angle of your 
leg matter?  or the position of your feet?  Is it more important that your hands 
look something like a trumpet or that their exact position is as close as possible 
to my version of a trumpet?  Must your humming be in the same key, or only 
follow the same melody?  I am sure you can make up your own questions.  
Having decided on the important aspects to be copied, a very difficult set of 
transformations has to be effected.  You watched me, let’s say, from the side.  
Nothing you saw of my actions will correspond to the way the actions will look

52    THE MEME MACHINE 
from your perspective when you carry them out yourself.  You will see only 
your hands from the near end of the ‘trumpet’.  Somehow, your brain has to 
create a transformation of the action I did that will enable it to instruct your 
muscles to do whatever they have to do to get your action to look like mine to 
someone else.  Now it begins to sound complicated. 
It sounds complicated because it is.  Imitation necessarily involves: (a) 
decisions about what to imitate, or what counts as ‘the same or ‘similar’, (b) 
complex transformations from one point of view to another, and (c) the 
production of matching bodily actions. 
Once you realise how difficult this natural-seeming kind of act is, it is 
tempting to think we cannot possibly do it – although obviously we do do it.  Or 
that a science of memetics cannot be based on something so peculiar.  I am 
reassured by simply reminding myself that human life really is like this.  We do 
copy each other all the time and we underestimate what is involved because 
imitation comes so easily to us.  When we copy each other, something, however 
intangible, is passed on.  That something is the meme.  And taking a meme’s eye 
viewer is the foundation of memetics. 

Three problems with 
memes 
 
 
 
Is Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony a meme, or only the first four notes? 
This raises a real question for memetics and one that is worth exploring – but 
I do not think it is a problem.  There are several such objections to memetics that 
are frequently raised and worth trying to resolve.  I am going to consider three 
and will argue that all are either soluble or irrelevant. 
 
We cannot specify the unit of a meme 
 
Whether by coincidence or by memetic transmission, Beethoven is the favourite 
example for illustrating this problem.  Brodie (1996) uses Beethoven’s Fifth 
Symphony, Dawkins (1976) uses the Ninth, and Dennett (1995) uses both the 
Fifth and the Seventh.  Dennett adds that the first four notes of Beethoven’s Fifth 
are a tremendously successful meme, replicating all by themselves in contexts in 
which Beethoven’s works are quite unknown.  So are they the meme, or the 
whole symphony? 
If we cannot answer this question we cannot identify the unit of the meme, 
and some people clearly think this is a problem for memetics.  For example, 
many years ago Jacob Bronowski wondered why we do not have a better 
understanding of social change and blamed our not being able to pin down the 
relevant units (Hull 1982).  I have heard people dismiss the whole idea of 
memetics on the grounds that ‘you can’t even say what the unit of a meme is’.  
Well that is true, I cannot.  And I do not think it is necessary.  A replicator does 
not have to come neatly parcelled up in ready-labelled units.  Since genes are 
our most familiar example we should look at the same issue for them. 
Defining a gene is not easy and in fact the term is used quite differently by 
breeders, geneticists and molecular biologists because they are interested in 
different things.  At the molecular level, genes consist of sequences of 
nucleotides along a molecule of DNA.  Names are given to different lengths of 
DNA, such as a codon, which is a sequence of three nucleotides, or a cistron,
CHAPTER 5 

54    THE MEME MACHINE 
which is a sufficiently long sequence of nucleotides to provide the instructions 
for building one protein – with a start symbol and a stop symbol.  Neither of 
these is necessarily passed on intact in sexual reproduction and neither 
corresponds with what we think of as the gene ‘for’ something.  DNA provides 
instructions for protein synthesis and it is a long way from there to having blue 
or brown eyes, finding men more sexy than women, or having a flair for music.  
Yet it is these effects of genes that natural selection gets to work on.  So what is 
the unit of the gene? 
Perhaps there is no final answer.  One useful suggestion is that a gene is 
hereditary information that lasts long enough to be subject to the relevant 
selection pressures.  A sequence of DNA that is too short is meaningless – it 
lasts almost indefinitely, being passed on identically from generation to 
generation but taking part in countless different kinds of protein synthesis and 
countless different phenotypic effects.  A sequence that is too long does not 
survive through enough generations to be selected for or against.  So some 
intermediate length has to be chosen, and even this varies with the strength of 
the selection pressure (see Dawkins 1976; Williams 1966). 
This intrinsic uncertainty about just what to count as a gene has not impeded 
progress in genetics and biology.  It has not made people say, ‘We cannot decide 
what the unit of the gene is so let’s abandon genetics, biology and evolution’.  
These sciences all work by using whatever unit they find most helpful for what 
they are doing at the time. 
The same logic applies in memetics.  Dennett (1995) defines the units of 
memes as ‘the smallest elements that replicate themselves with reliability and 
fecundity.” (p. 344).  A blob of pink paint is too small a unit for memetic 
selection pressures to apply – to be enjoyed or disliked, photographed or thrown 
away.  A whole gallery of paintings is too large.  The single painting is the 
natural unit for most of us and that is why we remember Van Gogh’s Sunflowers 
or buy postcards of Edvard Munch’s The Scream.  Styles of painting, such as 
impressionism or cubism, can also be copied and therefore count as memes, but 
can hardly be divided up into units.  A single word is too short to copyright and 
an entire library too long, but we can and do copyright anything from a clever 
advertising jingle to a 100 000-word book.  Any of these can count as memes – 
there is no right answer to the question – ‘What really is the unit of the meme’. 
I might have argued that four notes is too short to be a meme but everyone’s 
favourite example shows I am wrong.  If a musical genius picks on just the right 
four notes, starts a wonderful symphony with them and has the luck to have his

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    55 
work survive into an age of mass communication – then his four notes can be 
heard and remembered by literally billions of people.  I am sorry if you are one 
of them and now are not able to get these four notes out of your mind. 
This problem – why can’t I get that tune out of my mind – provides a good 
example of memetics at work, and I shall use it to show that the size of the unit 
makes no difference. 
Why do tunes sometimes just go round and round in my head and will not go 
away?  Why do we have the sort of brains that do that?  What possible use is it 
for me to spend all day singing ‘Coke Refreshes you Best’, or the theme tune 
from Neighbours?  The answer from memetics is that it is no use at all to me – 
but it is of use to the memes. 
Memes are replicators and if they can get themselves copied they will.  The 
imitating machinery of the brain is an excellent environment for copying tunes.  
So if a tune is memorable enough to get lodged in your brain and then passed on 
again then it will – and if it is really memorable, or singable, or playable, it will 
get into a lot of brains.  If it turns out to be just what some TV producer needs to 
start her latest soap opera then it will get into even more brains, and every time 
you start humming it there is a chance that someone else will hear you and you 
still set them off.  Meanwhile, plenty of other tunes are never heard again.  The 
consequence of all this is that the successful ones increase in the meme pool at 
the expense of the others.  We all get infected with them and they are stored in 
our memories, ever ready to be activated and passed on to anyone who has not 
got them yet.  All this singing is not for our benefit, nor for our genes’ benefit.  
Being haunted by horrible tunes is just an inevitable consequence of having 
brains that can imitate tunes. 
Note that this argument works regardless of all the specific reasons why one 
piece of music may be singable or likeable and another not.  Those reasons 
might include, for example, innate preferences for certain sounds, the pleasure to 
be found in predictability and unpredictability of sounds, or overall complexity.  
Gatherer (1997) has explored the development of jazz in terms of the 
adaptiveness of its component parts, looking at complexity, memorability and 
the effect of the available technology at different times.  Simple melodies are 
easy to remember but may not be interesting enough for people to pass on.  
Complex improvised music can evolve but may only survive in a community of 
trained musicians and listeners, while even more complex music may be simply 
too difficult to remember and so fail to be replicated, even if it can be enjoyed.  
Memetics in the future may discover what makes for successful replication in 
music.  It may find out how different kinds of music fill different niches, such as

56    THE MEME MACHINE 
specialised replication among minority groups, or short-lived mass popularity.  
But note that none of this matters for the simple argument I am making here.  
That is, that any catchy tune that gets you to rehearse it in your head will get 
passed on, and so we will all come across such tunes and be in danger of 
‘catching’ them. 
Memetics thus provides a simple and obvious explanation for those irritating 
tunes that go round and round in our heads – as it did for why we cannot stop 
thinking in general.  The tunes are like weeds and just tend to grow.  Does it 
matter what we count as the unit of a meme in either of these cases?  I say no.  
The competition to grab any spare brain power will go on regardless of the way 
we might decide to divide the competing instructions.  The meme is ‘whatever it 
is that is passed on by imitation’.  If your irritating humming at work passes on 
all four verses of Blake’s Jerusalem to the rest of the office then the whole 
inspirational song is the meme.  If you infected them only with ‘da, da, da, 
dum’, then those good old four notes are the meme. 
 
We do not know the mechanism for copying and storing memes 
 
No we do not.  The fact that we now know so much about how DNA works can 
easily lead us to imagine that we need that level of understanding for memetics – 
right away.  I do not think this is so.  Don’t forget how far evolutionary theory 
got before DNA was even heard of.  Darwin’s Origins of Species was published 
in 1859.  It was not until the 1930s that genetics and natural selection were 
brought together (Fisher 1930); not until the 1940s that other areas of science 
were brought into what is sometimes known as the modern synthesis, leading to 
neo-Darwinian theory; and not until the 1950s that the structure of DNA was 
finally discovered (Watson 1968).  In the first century of Darwinism an 
enormous amount was achieved in the understanding of evolution without 
anyone having any idea about chemical replication, the control of protein 
synthesis or what on earth DNA was doing. 
The memetics we build at the very end of the twentieth century will doubtless 
appear inept in another century’s time, but that is no reason not to begin.  We 
may get a long way with the general principles of memetic selection without 
understanding the brain mechanisms it relies on.  We can also make some 
educated guesses about those mechanisms based on what little we do know. 

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    57 
First, we may assume that, at least at some phase in their replication, memes 
have to be physically stored in brains.  As far as storage is concerned 
neuroscience is making great strides in working out the biological basis of 
memory.  Artificial neural networks have demonstrated that many of the features 
of human memory can be simulated in computers.  Work on synaptic 
transmission, long-term potentiation and neurotransmitters is finding out 
whether real brains do anything similar.  If they do, we may guess that human 
memory probably works something like this (for example, see Churchland and 
Sejnowski 1992). 
Neural networks in the brain consist of large agglomerations of individual 
cells with a layer of cells taking input (e.g. from the eyes, or from another 
network), another layer providing output (e.g. to the muscles, the voice, or 
another network), and many layers in between.  Each neuron has connections to 
many others and the strength of these connections varies according to their 
history.  At any given state of the network a certain kind of input will produce a 
certain kind of output but this relationship is not fixed.  The network can be 
trained, for example by consistently pairing certain sorts of input, and this 
experience changes its responses to new inputs.  In other words, it can 
remember. 
This kind of memory is nothing like the memory of a digital computer, with 
its fixed locations, nor like a tape recorder with its more or less faithful 
duplication of everything fed into it.  In a brain, every input builds on what went 
before.  In a lifetime of complex experiences we do not store each one away in a 
black box to be retrieved later when we need it – rather, every experience comes 
into a complex brain and has a greater or lesser effect on what it finds there.  
Some things have virtually no effect and are completely unmemorable (we could 
not function otherwise).  Some have enough of an effect to stay briefly in short-
term memory but are then lost, while some lead to dramatic changes so that 
precise events can easily be reconstructed, whole poems recited or that special 
face never forgotten. 
Effective memes will be those that cause high fidelity, long-lasting memory.  
Memes may be successful at spreading largely because they are memorable 
rather than because they are important or useful.  Wrong theories in science may 
spread simply because they are comprehensible and fit easily with existing 
theories, and bad books may sell more copies because you can remember the 
title when you get to the bookshop – though, of course, we do have strategies for 
overcoming these biases.  An important task of memetics will be to integrate the 
psychology of memory with an understanding of memetic selection. 
Some people argue that memes are not digital (Maynard Smith 1996) and

58    THE MEME MACHINE 
that only digital systems can support evolution.  Certainly genes are digital and 
certainly digital storage is far preferable to analogue.  We all know that digital 
video- and audio-recordings look and sound better than their analogue 
predecessors; a digital system allows information to be stored and transmitted 
with far less loss of information even over noisy channels.  However, there is no 
law that says that evolution has to be digitally based – the issue is really one of 
the quality of replication. 
What, then, makes for a good quality replicator?  Dawkins (1976) sums it up 
in three words – fidelity, fecundity and longevity.  This means that a replicator 
has to be copied accurately, many copies must be made, and the copies must last 
a long time – although there may be trade-offs between the three.  Genes do well 
on all three counts, and being digital gives them high fidelity copying.  So what 
about brains? 
Our memory is obviously good enough for us to learn several languages, 
recognise thousands of photographs from one showing, and recall the major 
events of our lives over periods of decades.  Is this good enough to support 
memetic evolution?  I think this is an empirical question that could be put to the 
test.  In the future, memeticists might be able to develop mathematical models to 
determine just how high the fidelity of memory must be to support memetic 
evolution, and compare that with the known performance of human memes.  My 
guess is that our memories will be found to be quite good enough, whether they 
ultimately turn out to be digital or not. 
Second, memes depend on being transmitted from one person to another and, 
by definition, this is done by imitation.  We have already seen how poorly 
understood imitation is but we may at least make a simple prediction.  Actions 
that are easy to imitate will make for successful memes and ones that are 
difficult to imitate will not. 
Apart from that, the effective transmission of memes depends critically on 
human preferences, attention, emotions and desires – in other words, the stuff of 
evolutionary psychology.  For genetic reasons we are driven by the desire for 
sex, for sex of different kinds, for food, for better food, for avoiding danger and 
for excitement and power.  Evolutionary psychology already provides us with 
lots of information that explains why some memes are picked up again and again 
while others make no impact.  We need to use that information and build on it. 
To conclude – it is true that we do not understand in detail how memes are 
stored and transmitted.  But we have plenty of clues and we certainly know 
enough to get started. 

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    59 
Memetic evolution is ‘Lamarckian’ 
 
Biological evolution is not Lamarckian and cultural evolution is – or so I have 
heard.  This apparent difference has been frequently noted, and many treat it as a 
problem (Boyd and Richerson 1985; Dennett 1991; Gould 1979, 1991; Hull 
1982; Wispé and Thompson 1976).  In a recent discussion of artificial life, the 
British biologist John Maynard Smith asked what features are necessary for any 
evolving system – natural or artificial – and suggested ‘digital coding and non-
Lamarckian inheritance’ (Maynard Smith 1996, p. 177).  So is memetic 
evolution really Lamarckian?  And what would be the significance for memetics 
if it were? 
First, the term ‘Lamarckian’ has come to refer to just one aspect of the 
evolutionary theory of Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck.  Lamarck believed in all sorts 
of things that have now been rejected, including the inevitability of progress in 
evolution and the importance of organisms striving towards their own 
improvement.  However, what is now referred to as ‘Lamarckism’ is the 
principle of the inheritance of acquired characteristics.  That is, if you learn 
something or undergo some change during your lifetime, you can pass it on to 
your offspring. 
Lamarckism (in this sense) is not true of biological evolution, at least in 
sexually reproducing species.  The way inheritance works (which was not 
understood in Darwin’s or Lamarck’s time) makes it impossible.  This is 
sometimes known as ‘Weismann’s barrier’ after August Weismann who, at the 
end of the nineteenth century, pointed out what he called the ‘continuity of the 
germ-plasm’.  In more modern terms we can see it like this – using the example 
of sexual reproduction and human beings. 
The genes are coded in DNA and stored in pairs of chromosomes in every 
cell of your body.  At any location on a chromosome different people may have 
different alleles (versions) of the same gene and the total make-up of genes in 
each individual is known as their genotype.  Correspondingly, the various 
characteristics of the final person is known as the phenotype.  The genes are not 
a blue print or a map of the future phenotype; they are instructions for building 
proteins.  These instructions control the development of the embryo as it grows, 
and of the adult as it develops in its own unique environment.  The result is a 
phenotype which is highly dependent on the genotype it started from but is in no 
sense a copy of that genotype or completely determined by it. 
Now imagine that you acquire some new characteristics by, say learning a 
language, practising playing the piano, or building up your thigh muscles – that 
is, your phenotype changes.  There is no way that this change in your body can

60    THE MEME MACHINE 
affect the genes that you pass on – although it can affect whether you pass some 
on or not.  The genes your children will inherit are derived directly from the 
genes you inherited and it is this continuous line that is known as the ‘germ 
line’.  Conceivably, if genes worked as some kind of stored blueprint or map 
then changes in the phenotype could be fed back to change the map but this is 
not the case.  Conceivably, the process of meiosis, in which cells divide to make 
ova and sperms, could be affected by changes in the phenotype, but this does not 
happen and in any case, the ova a woman carries in her ovaries are already there 
at her birth.  We must imagine the germ line going on continuously, with the 
genes being shuffled and recombined in each generation.  These genes instruct 
the phenotype which then set off on their own and are either successful or not, 
but the phenotypes do not instruct the genes. 
Even though Lamarckian inheritance cannot happen in such a system, there 
have been many experiments looking for it.  Weismann himself cut off the tails 
of mice for many generations with no obvious effect on the length of their 
offspring’s tails.  However, this is not strictly a test of the theory because 
Lamarck argued that organisms had to strive towards improvements, as when 
giraffes stretch their necks, or birds practise flying, and Weismann’s mice 
presumably did not strive to have their tails cut off.  In Russia, the official 
science of Lysenko was based on Lamarckism but produced no progress in 
biology and was disastrous for Soviet agriculture because their plant breeding 
programmes failed. 
Lamarck’s idea is still popular and appears in many guises, including 
memories of past lives being attributed to ‘genetic memory’, and psychic powers 
being explained by ‘spiritual evolution’.  Perhaps it is popular because it implies 
that there is some point in all our hard work or some benefit to our children if we 
struggle to improve ourselves.  But from the purely genetic point of view there is 
no such benefit.  Popular it may be, but it is simply not true. 
At least, Lamarckism is not true for sexual species.  For other kinds of 
organism the idea is simply inapplicable.  The most common creatures on this 
planet are unicellular organisms, such as bacteria, which reproduce by cell 
division.  For these ubiquitous creatures there is no clear distinction between 
genotype and phenotype, genetic information is exchanged in various ways, and 
there is no clear germ line.  So the whole idea of Lamarckian inheritance is 
irrelevant. 
What then of cultural evolution?  The answer depends critically on how you 
draw the analogy between genes and memes and, as I have stressed before, we 
must be very careful whenever we use this analogy. 

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    61 
One way to draw the analogy is to stick to the notion of the human genotype, 
phenotype and generation.  In this case, acquired characteristics are certainly 
passed on, as when religions are transmitted from parents to children generation 
after generation.  But memes do not stick to biological generations and can jump 
about all over the place.  If I invent a brilliant new recipe for pumpkin soup, I 
can pass it on to you and you can pass it on to your granny and she can pass it on 
to her best friend.  Also, this is not inheritance in the biological sense and the 
genes are not affected.  So it is not Lamarckian. 
A more interesting way to use the analogy is to forget about phenotypes and 
biological generations and look at memes and memetic generations.  In the case 
of the soup there were three generations between me and your granny’s best 
friend.  In each generation, the recipe went from brain to behaviour in the 
kitchen and on to the next brain (that is if you watched me make the soup).  Was 
there inheritance of acquired characteristics?  Let us say that the meme in my 
brain is the equivalent of the genotype and my behaviour in the kitchen is the 
equivalent of the phenotype.  Then, yes, inheritance is Lamarckian because if I 
put in too much salt on this occasion, or you forget one of my special herbs, or 
fail to copy the way I shred the garlic, then you will pass on this new version 
when your granny watches you, and so the new phenotype will have acquired 
the characteristics accordingly. 
But what if you did not watch me make the soup?  What if I sent you the 
recipe in the post and you passed it on to your granny and she made a photocopy 
for her friend?  Now the situation is quite different.  ‘We may draw the analogy 
with biology this way.  The written recipe is like the genotype, it contains the 
instructions for making the soup.  The soup is like the phenotype.  The delicious 
taste of the soup is the reason why the recipe is copied – your granny only asked 
for a copy of the recipe because she liked the soup.  In this case, if she fails to 
follow the recipe correctly her alterations may affect the chance of someone else 
wanting the recipe, but the alterations will not be passed on because they are 
only in the soup itself (phenotype) not in the written recipe (genotype).  In this 
case the process is perfectly analogous to the biological situation and is not 
Lamarckian. 
I shall call these different modes of transmission ‘copy-the-product’ and 
‘copy-the-instructions’.  Music provides a slightly different example.  Let us 
suppose that my daughter plays a beautiful piece of music for her friends and 
one of them wants to learn to play it too.  Emily could either play it many times 
until her friend can copy it accurately (copy-the-product), or simply hand her the 
written music in a book (copy-the-instructions).  In the first case, any changes

62    THE MEME MACHINE 
Emily makes will be passed on, and if there follows a series of pianists copying 
each other, the composition may gradually change, incorporating the errors or 
embellishments of each player.  In the second case, the individual playing styles 
of each pianist will not have any effect because copies of the (unembellished) 
written music are passed on.  In the first case the process appears Lamarckian 
but in the second case it does not. 
In the biological world, sexual species work by copying-the-instructions.  
The genes are the instructions that are copied, the phenotype is the result and is 
not copied.  In the world of memes, in which both processes are used, you could 
argue for calling ‘copy-the-instructions’ Darwinian, and ‘copy-the-product’ 
Lamarckian, but I suggest this would only lead to more confusion.  I deliberately 
described the soup and the music in ways that allowed the two modes of 
replication to be easily separated, but in the real world they may be inextricably 
mixed.  From me to your granny’s friend the instructions on making the soup 
might go from brain to piece of paper, to behaviour, to another brain, to a 
computer disk and another piece of paper and to another brain – with lots of 
different flavoured soups being made along the way.  Which is the genotype and 
which the phenotype in each case?  Are we to count memes as only the 
instructions in the brains or the ones on paper too?  Are the behaviours memes 
or meme-phenotypes?  If the behaviour is the phenotype, what then is the soup?  
There are lots of possibilities in memetic evolution because memes are not 
confined by the rigid structure of DNA.  The ways they spread are legion.  But 
we can only decide whether memetic evolution is really Lamarckian if we can 
answer these questions.  We seem to be at an impasse. 
Fortunately, we need not worry.  All this trouble is caused by expecting there 
to be a close analogy between memes and genes when there need not be.  We 
must remember Campbell’s Rule and the basic principle of memetics – that 
genes and memes are both replicators but otherwise they are different.  We need 
not, and must not, expect all the concepts from biological evolution to transfer 
neatly across to memetic evolution.  If we do we will hit trouble as we have 
done here. 
My conclusion apropos Lamarck is that the question ‘Is cultural evolution 
Lamarckian’ is best not asked.  The question only makes sense if you draw 
certain kinds of strict analogy between genes and memes but such analogies are 
not justified.  ‘We are best to confine the term ‘Lamarckian’ to discussion of 
biological evolution in sexually reproducing species.  When we come to other 
kinds of evolution the distinction between mechanisms that ‘copy-the-
instructions’ and those that ‘copy-the-product’ will prove more helpful. 

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    63 
Terminology 
 
So what do we call that soup?  The value of asking the question about Lamarck 
is that it does make us face up to some really tricky questions about terminology.  
Some previous authors have, understandably, evaded these questions, while 
others have launched in and made distinctions that might turn out not to be 
justified.  In fact, the terminology of memetics is in a mess and needs sorting 
out, I am going to consider the use of three terms: meme, meme-phenotype 
(sometimes called phemotype), and meme vehicle. 
First, what are we to count as a meme?  In the case of the soup, is it the 
stored instructions in my brain, the soup itself, my behaviour in the kitchen, the 
words on the piece of paper, or all or none of these things?  We might have 
doubts about the soup because, however delicious it is, you could not easily 
work out how it was made from tasting it – though perhaps an expert chef might 
be able to do it, just as a musician might be able to reconstruct a piece of music 
from hearing it.  So do we need a different scheme for copyable meme products 
from uncopyable ones?  I am deliberately making life difficult for myself 
because no consensus has yet emerged and if memetics is going to make 
progress we will have to agree on fundamentals like this.  Let us see whether 
definitions exist that can help us sort it all out. 
Dawkins (1976) initially did not commit himself at all and used the term 
‘meme’ to apply to the behaviour, the physical structure in a brain, and memetic 
information stored in other ways.  His original examples, remember, were tunes, 
ideas, catchphrases, clothes fashions, and ways of making pots or arches.  Later 
he decided that ‘A meme should be regarded as a unit of information residing in 
a brain (Cloak’s i-culture)’ (Dawkins 1982, p. 109).  This implies that the 
information in the clothes or the arches does not count as a meme.  But later still 
he says that memes ‘can propagate themselves from brain to brain, from brain to 
book, from book to brain, from brain to computer, from computer to computer’ 
(Dawkins 1986, p. 158).  Presumably, they still count as memes in all these 
forms of storage – not just when they are in a brain. 
Dennett (1991, 1995) treats memes as the ideas that are passed on; whether 
they are in a brain or a book or some other physical structure, they are 
information undergoing the evolutionary algorithm.  He points out that the 
structure of a meme may not be the same in any two brains – indeed it almost 
certainly will not be – but when a person carries out any behaviour there must be 
some kind of instruction stored in their brain, and when someone else copies and

64    THE MEME MACHINE 
remembers an action they must also create some kind of neural change.  Durham 
(1991) also treats memes as information, again regardless of how it is stored. 
In contrast, Delius (1989) describes memes as ‘constellations of activated and 
non-activated synapses within neural memory networks’ (p. 45), or ‘arrays of 
modified synapses’ (p. 54).  Lynch (1991) defines them as memory abstractions 
and, in his memetic lexicon, Grant (1990) defines memes as information patterns 
infecting human minds.  Presumably, on these latter definitions, memes cannot 
be carried by books or buildings, and the books and buildings must be given 
some other role.  This has been done, by using further distinctions. 
The usual way to make the distinction is, of course, by analogy with genes.  
A common one is to use the concept of the phenotype.  Cloak (1975) was the 
first to do this and was very clear about it.  He defined the i-culture as the 
instructions in people’s heads, and the m-culture as the features of people’s 
behaviour, their technology and social organisation.  He explicitly likened his i-
culture to the genotype and m-culture to the phenotype.  As we have seen, 
Dawkins initially did not make such a distinction, but in The Extended 
Phenotype he says ‘unfortunately, unlike Cloak, I was insufficiently clear about 
the distinction between the meme itself, as replicator, on the one hand, and its 
“phenotypic effect” or “meme products” on the other’ (Dawkins 1982, p. 109).  
He then went on to describe the meme as the structure physically realised in the 
brain. 
Dennett (1995) also talks about memes and their phenotypic effects, but in a 
different way.  The meme is internal (though not confined to brains) while the 
design it shows the world, ‘the way it affects things in its environment’ (p. 349), 
is its phenotype.  In an almost complete reversal, Benzon (1996) likens pots, 
knives, and written words (Cloak’s m-culture) to the gene, and ideas, desires and 
emotion (i-culture) to the phenotype.  Gabora (1997) likens the genotype to the 
mental representation of a meme, and the phenotype to its implementation.  
Delius (1989), having defined memes as being in the brain, refers to behaviour 
as memes’ phenotypic expression, while remaining ambiguous about the role of 
the clothes fashions he discusses.  Grant (1990) defines the ‘memotype’ as the 
actual information content of a meme, and distinguishes this from its ‘sociotype’ 
or social expression.  He explicitly bases his memotype/sociotype distinction on 
the phenotype/genotype distinction. 
Although these ideas have something in common they are not all the same 
and it is not at all clear, at least to me, which is better.  On the whole, I think 
none of them really works because they have not appreciated the difference 
between the copying-the-product and copying-the-instructions.  The notion of a

THREE PROBLEMS WITH MEMES    65 
phenotype applies easily to one but not to the other and there may be other 
modes of transmission as well.  I will not, therefore, use the concept of the 
meme-phenotype because I cannot give it a clear and unambiguous meaning. 
Another analogy is made with the concept of the vehicle.  Dawkins (1982) 
originally introduced the distinction between replicators and vehicles in the 
context of genetic selection, in order to make clear that the genes are the selfish 
replicators, while it is much larger units – typically (though not necessarily) 
whole organisms – that either live or die.  He described organisms as vehicles 
for the genes, built to carry them around and protect them.  Dawkins defines a 
vehicle as ‘any unit, discrete enough to seem worth naming, which houses a 
collection of replicators and which works as a unit for the preservation and 
propagation of those replicators’ (p. 114). 
Using this concept, Dennett treats memes as ideas and the physical objects 
that carry them around as meme vehicles.  So, for example, ‘A wagon with 
spoked wheels carries not only grain or freight from place to place; it carries the 
brilliant idea of a wagon with spoked wheels from mind to mind’ (Dennett 1995, 
p. 348 and 1991, p. 204).  Pictures, books, tools and buildings are all meme 
vehicles for Dennett, and he explicitly makes the comparison with gene vehicles.  
Brodie (1996) follows Dennett and uses the term ‘vehicle’ for physical 
manifestations of a meme, as do others.  However, there are problems with this 
analogy (Speel 1995).  A wagon may indeed carry around the idea of spoked 
wheels but does it house a collection of replicators?  Does it work as a unit for 
the preservation and propagation of its memes?  A book may seem very much 
like a vehicle in this sense, but my pumpkin soup does not.  I am not at all sure 
where to draw the lines here. 
We must avoid the temptation of assuming there must always be a vehicle, 
and therefore forcing the memes to fit.  Dawkins says he coined the ‘vehicle’ not 
to praise it but to bury it.  There is no necessity for vehicles to form, and in 
many kinds of evolution they may not.  We should not ask, ‘What is the vehicle 
in this situation,’ but, ‘Is there a vehicle in this situation and, if so, why?’ 
(Dawkins, 1994, p. 617).  We might therefore ask whether memes do in fact 
group together to make ‘a unit for the preservation and propagation of those 
replicators’ and if so what would these true meme vehicles look like?  Large 
self-preserving memeplexes such as religions, scientific theories, or political 
ideologies might fit the analogy better than wagons and recipes but obviously 
the term ‘vehicle’ is being used in quite a different sense here.  Finally, the term 
‘vehicle’ can be used in the very ordinary sense that people carry both genes and

66    THE MEME MACHINE 
memes around with them and thus act as their ‘vehicle’. 
I have thought long and hard about these distinctions.  I have tried to see 
which works well and which does not and so adopt one or other version.  I have 
tried to make new ones of my own and despaired of it.  In the end, I come back 
to what I have called the most basic principle of memetics – that genes and 
memes are both replicators but otherwise they are different.  The analogy 
between genes and memes has led many people astray and will probably 
continue to do so for a long time to come.  There is an analogy there but only 
because both are replicators.  Beyond that the analogy is weak.  There need be 
no exact memetic equivalent of the phenotype or the vehicle, any more than 
there are equivalents for strictly genetic concepts like alleles, loci, mitosis and 
meiosis.  In biological evolution genes build their phenotype but copy 
themselves straight down through the germ line, but in memetic evolution it can 
be more like a zigzag with memes hopping from brain to paper to computer and 
back to brain. 
The conclusion I have come to from all of this, is to keep things as simple as 
possible.  I shall use the term ‘meme’ indiscriminately to refer to memetic 
information in any of its many forms; including ideas, the brain structures that 
instantiate those ideas, the behaviours these brain structures produce, and their 
versions in books, recipes, maps and written music.  As long as that information 
can be copied by a process we may broadly call ‘imitation’, then it counts as a 
meme.  I shall use the term ‘vehicle’ only in the ordinary sense of carrying 
something around, and I shall not use terms like ‘sociotype’ or ‘meme-
phenotype’ at all.  If it turns out later that we need more terms and distinctions 
then I am sure someone will provide them.  It will be easier for someone else to 
add on necessary distinctions at a later date than to demolish any unhelpful ones 
that I make now. 
This has been a long struggle through some (and certainly not all) of the 
problems of memetics but I think it will stand us in good stead.  Using the 
simple scheme we have arrived at, and bearing in mind the lurking dangers, we 
can get on with exploring just what a science of memetics can do – like 
explaining why we humans have such big brains. 

The big brain 
 
 
 
The human brain is enormous.  Why?  Nobody knows for sure.  Certainly there 
have been many theories of the origins of the huge human brain, but still none is 
universally accepted and a mystery remains.  Most theorists assume that the big 
brain must have evolved by natural selection, such as the American 
neuroscientist and anthropologist Terrence Deacon (1997) who ways ‘It cannot 
be doubted that such a robust and persistent trend in brain structure evolution 
reflects forces of natural selection’ (p. 344) – but if so we must be able to 
identify the selection pressures involved.  So what are they?  The answer is not 
obvious, and the explanatory task to be performed is great.  It is basically this. 
 
Origins of the human brain 
 
Human brains today are capable of extraordinary feats quite beyond the abilities 
of any other species on the planet.  Not only do we have language but we have 
invented fridge-freezers, the internal combustion engine and rocket technology; 
we can (well, some of us can) play chess, tennis and Mega-Death 6; we listen to 
music, dance and sing; and we have created democracy, social security systems 
and the stock market.  What possible evolutionary advantage could these things 
have?  Or more precisely what selective advantage could there have been for a 
brain capable of such things?  We seem to have a brain ‘surplus to requirements, 
surplus to adaptive needs’ (Cronin 1991, p. 355). 
In Darwin’s time this question so vexed Alfred Russel Wallace that, despite 
having independently discovered the principle of natural selection, he concluded 
that it could not account for man’s higher abilities (Wallace 1891).  Primitive 
hunter-gatherers could not possibly have needed brains such as these, he 
reasoned, so there must have been some kind of supernatural intervention.  
Wallace supported the spiritualists who were claiming to be able to 
communicate with the surviving spirits of the dead, while Darwin fought against 
them.  Wallace believed that the intellectual and spiritual nature of man was so 
far above that of the animals that we were different in kind from them.  
Although our bodies were developed by continuous modification of ancestral
CHAPTER 6 

68    THE MEME MACHINE 
animals, some different agency was required to explain our consciousness, 
morality and spiritual nature, ‘the higher feelings of pure morality’, courageous 
self-sacrifice, art, mathematics and philosophy. 
Appealing to God or spirits to solve mysteries is no help and few, if any, 
scientists now favour Wallace’s ‘solution’.  Nevertheless, this old argument 
highlights a real problem; our abilities are quite out of line with those of other 
living creatures and they do not seem obviously designed for survival. 
The gulf is obvious in purely physical measurements (Jerison 1973).  The 
modern human brain has a volume of about 1350 cubic centimetres (i.e. roughly 
three times as large as the brains of existing apes of comparable body size).  A 
common way of comparing brain sizes is to use the ‘encephalisation quotient’ 
which compares a given animal’s brain-to-body ratio with the average for a 
group of animals.  For any group of related animals a plot of brain size against 
body size yields a roughly straight line (on a log-log scale).  If we humans are 
placed on such a line with our closest living relatives we just do not fit.  Our 
encephalisation quotient compared with other primates is 3.  Our brains are far 
too large for our bodies. 
Of course, the encephalisation quotient is only a crude measure and hides the 
different ways in which the body size to brain size ratio can come about.  For 
example, a chihuahua has a very high encephalisation quotient compared with 
that of a Great Dane, but this is because chihuahuas have been specially bred for 
small bodies – not for large brains or superior intelligence!  So could we have 
been selected for small bodies rather than large brains?  Deacon (1997), who 
pointed out the ‘Chihuahua Fallacy’ explains that the higher encephalisation 
quotient of primates compared with other animals is a result of their having 
smaller, slower growing bodies.  Primates’ brains grow at the same rate as other 
species’ but their bodies grow more slowly.  However, when you compare 
humans with other primates the situation is different.  Human fetuses start 
growing the same way as other primates’ but then our brains continue to grow 
for longer.  So our brains do seem to have been selected for extra growth.  Our 
high encephalisation has come about first from the slowed body growth of 
primates and second from the extra brain growth of humans. 
When in evolution did this brain growth begin?  About five million years ago 
the evolutionary branch leading to modern humans split off from that leading to 
the present day African apes (Leakey, 1994; Wills 1993).  After this, our early 
hominid ancestors include various species of australopithecines and

THE BIG BRAIN    69 
then of Homo – including Homo habilis, Homo erectus, and most recently Homo 
sapiens. 
The australopithecines include the famous skeleton Lucy, an example of 
Australopithecus afarensis found in Ethiopia by Maurice Taieb and Donald 
Johansen and named after the Beatles’ song Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.  
Remains of A. afarensis range from four million to less than two and a half 
million years old.  Lucy herself is thought to have lived a little over three million 
years ago, was about three feet tall and rather ape-like in build with a brain of 
about 400–500 cc – not much larger than a modern chimpanzee’s.  From fossil 
footprints and computer simulations of walking based on fossil bones, it is now 
clear that A. afarensis must have walked upright, though probably could not run.  
So we follow that bipedalism came long before hominid brains began to grow 
significantly in size. 
The increase in brain size probably began about two and a half million years 
ago, at about the same time (archaeologically speaking) as the beginnings of 
stone tools and the transition from Australopithecus to Homo.  At this time, 
global cooling was transforming much of Africa’s lush forest into woodland and 
then into grassy savannah.  Adaptation to this new environment is thought to 
account for some of the changes leading to Homo.  The first species of Homo 
was Homo habilis, named the ‘handyman’ because of the primitive stone tools 
they made.  Australopithecines may have used sticks or stones that they found as 
tools, as other apes do today, but H. habilis was the first to chip stones into 
specific shapes to use as knives, choppers or scrapers.  Their brains were 
significantly larger than australopithecine brains at about 600–750 cc. 
About l.8 million years ago Homo erectus begin to appear in the fossil record 
in Kenya.  Homo erectus was taller and had yet bigger brains, about 800–900 cc.  
They were the first hominids to travel out of Africa, the first to harness and use 
ire, and they survived in some parts of the world until as recently as 100 000 
years ago.  More recently still, the fossil record becomes much richer but there 
are many arguments about the origins of fully modern humans.  So-called 
archaic Homo sapiens are widely distributed and have brains around 1100 cc, 
with somewhat protruding faces and heavy brow ridges, but there are two main 
slopes.  One type, which seems to have led to modern H. sapiens, appeared in 
Africa about 120 000 years ago.  The other lived at the same time and finally 
died out only about 35 000 years ago – they were the Neanderthals, Homo 
sapiens neanderthalensis.  They had large brow ridges and protruding faces.  
Their brains were possibly even larger than ours and there is increasing evidence 
of their use of fire, their culture, and the possibility that they too had language.

70    THE MEME MACHINE 
There is still much argument about which hominid line produced modern 
humans, and what happened to the Neanderthals.  However, sequencing of 
mitochondrial DNA suggests that they were not our ancestors (Krings et al. 
1997).  So did we kill them off, as we have killed off so many other species, or 
did they become extinct for some other reason? 
A rather odd fact is that for most of the past 5 million years there have 
always been several species of hominid living at the same time, as there are 
several species of other primates now.  Today there is only one kind of human 
with rather minor differences around the world.  ‘What happened to all the rest? 
These are fascinating issues but we must return to our main argument.  Most 
relevant is that brain size increased dramatically during the relatively short 
period of 2.5 million years that separated the last australopithecines from fully 
modern humans.  By about 100 000 years ago all living hominids would 
probably class as H. sapiens and had brains about as large as ours. 
This massive increase must have been very expensive in energy terms.  First, 
the brain is expensive to run.  It is often said that the brain consumes 20 per cent 
of the body’s energy but consists of only 2 per cent of the body weight.  This 
figure is slightly misleading because it refers to a body at rest.  When large 
muscles are lugging you and your suitcase as fast as you can go across the 
platform as the train whistle blows, the brain’s energy use is small by 
comparison.  Nevertheless, your muscles often rest, but the brain does not, even 
in sleep.  It uses roughly the energy consumed by a light bulb, all the time. 
The brain consists primarily of neurons that conduct impulses along their 
axons.  These impulses consist of a wave of depolarisation which sweeps along 
the axon as charged ions flood across the axon’s membrane.  Much of the energy 
the brain uses is consumed in maintaining the chemical differences across these 
membranes so that the neurons are continuously ready to fire.  Also, many 
neurons keep firing at a low frequency all the time so that incoming signals can 
pass on information by either increasing or decreasing the resting frequency.  
The body’s energy budget must have to find a large surplus to keep all this 
going.  A smaller brain would certainly save a lot of energy, and evolution does 
not waste energy for no reason.  As Steven Pinker (1994, p. 363) said ‘Why 
would evolution ever have selected for sheer bigness of brain, that bulbous, 
metabolically greedy organ?  . . .  Any selection on brain size itself would surely 
have favored the pinhead’. 
Second, the brain is expensive to build.  The neurons are surrounded by a

THE BIG BRAIN    71 
fatty sheath of myelin which insulates them and increases the speed at which 
impulses travel.  Myelination occurs during fetal development and early 
childhood and must be quite a drain on the infant’s resources.  Homo erectus 
may have begun eating more meat than the australopithecines (and making tools 
to cut it up), primarily to provide for the greater demand of the increasingly 
greedy brain. 
The brain is also a dangerous organ to produce.  The fact that large brains 
came about in a species that was already bipedal may be a coincidence, but it 
means that we are especially ill-suited to giving birth to our big-brained babies.  
Various adaptations have made it possible, including the fact that human babies 
are born extremely premature as compared with most other species.  They are 
helpless and unable to fend for themselves, and are born with soft skulls that 
only harden up later.  A baby’s brain is about 385 cc at birth and more than 
triples in size in the first few years.  Even with these adaptations, birth is a 
hazardous process for modern humans.  Many babies and mothers die because 
the skull is simply too big for an easy birth.  All these facts suggest that a 
powerful and consistent selection pressure for larger brains was at work, but we 
do not know what it was. 
I have so far talked about the increase in brain size as though it were just a 
simple enlargement, when in fact it is more complicated than that.  Higher 
vertebrates in general have more cerebral cortex than other animals while the 
older parts of the brain that control breathing, feeding, sleep-waking cycles and 
emotional responses are more similar.  However, the most interesting 
comparisons are between actual human brains and what might be expected of a 
typical ape of our size.  Although we are highly visual animals our visual cortex 
(at the very back of the brain) is relatively small while the prefrontal cortex, at 
the very front, is most enlarged.  This difference may well be because our eyes 
are a normal size and the amount of cortex needed to process the complex visual 
information coming in, is relatively constant for any ape.  The prefrontal cortex, 
by contrast, does not directly take sensory information but is fed by neurons 
coming from other parts of the brain. 
The frontal cortex is itself a kind of mystery.  There is no clear answer to the 
question ‘What does the frontal cortex do?’  This is particularly frustrating 
because if we knew precisely what this part of the brain did, then we might be 
closer to understanding the selection pressures for the larger brain – but we do 
not know.  People can function surprisingly well with gross damage to this part 
of the brain, as is known from the famous 1848 case of Phineas Gage, the 
railroad foreman whose frontal cortex was pierced right through with an iron bar 
in an explosion.  Although his personality was completely changed, and his life

72    THE MEME MACHINE 
and ability to hold down a job were ruined, he could still walk and talk and, at 
least to some extent, appeared normal.  The same is true of the victims of frontal 
lobotomy, a crude operation that destroyed parts of the frontal cortex and was 
once used to control serious psychiatric cases.  They there never ‘themselves’ 
again but the changes were subtle considering the vast amounts of brain damage 
caused in this horrible ‘treatment’.  There are numerous theories of the function 
of the frontal lobes but none is universally accepted.  We cannot find out why 
our large brains evolved by appealing to the function of the part that was 
enlarged the most. 
Apart from the massive increase in the frontal lobes, the brain has been 
reorganised in other ways.  For example, there are two main cortical areas that 
are critical for language, Broca’s area which is responsible for speech 
production, and Wernicke’s area which is responsible for language 
understanding.  Interestingly, these two areas seem to have evolved from the 
motor cortex and auditory cortex, respectively.  Most sounds made by other 
animals, from grunts to calls and birdsongs are produced in the midbrain, by 
areas closely connected to those controlling emotional responses and general 
arousal levels.  Some human sounds, such as crying and laughing, are also 
produced by midbrain areas, but speech is controlled from the cortex.  In most 
people both of the main language areas are in the left hemisphere, so that the two 
halves of our brains are not the same.  Most of us are right-handed, meaning that 
our left hemisphere is dominant.  Although some apes show handedness most do 
not and there is nothing like our systematic brain asymmetry in other primates.  
Clearly, our brains have changed in many ways other than just size. 
I have described very briefly what needs to be explained – that over a period 
of about 2.5 million years hominid brains steadily increased in size, an increase 
that carries obvious costs and must have been driven by a powerful selection 
pressure.  But we do not know what that pressure was. 
 
Theories of the big brain 
 
Theories abound.  Most early theories suggested that toolmaking and 
technological advances drove the need for a larger brain.  For theories of this 
kind the selection pressure came from the physical environment and from other 
animals.  Human brains were needed to outwit their prey.  Tools provided 
obvious advantages and bigger brains could make better tools.  Among problems 
for this kind of theory are that the increase in brain size seems to be out of all

THE BIG BRAIN    73 
proportion to the scale of the endeavour.  Big brains are so expensive that if you 
could catch your prey with a slightly smaller one you would have an advantage.  
Many pack animals hunt extremely effectively with brains that are small by 
human standards.  Indeed, as we have seen, it rather looks as though Homo 
erectus began eating more meat to feed the growing brain rather than vice versa.  
Something else must have been driving brain size. 
Early hominids obtained much of their food by foraging.  So perhaps a big 
brain was needed for extracting difficult foods or for the spatial ability and 
cognitive maps needed to find food in patchy and unpredictable environments.  
However, animals with very small brains manage to store and find food in vast 
numbers of separate locations, and many animals, such as squirrels and sewer 
rats, make cognitive maps of large areas.  Species with such good spatial skills 
do show differences in brain structure but not in overall size.  Also, predictions 
concerning brain size and foraging range have not generally supported this kind 
of theory (Barton and Dunbar 1997; Harvey and Krebs 1990). 
Other theories emphasise the social environment.  The Cambridge 
psychologist Nicholas Humphrey (1986) suggested that early hominids took an 
important step beyond their ancestors by beginning to look into their own minds 
as a way of predicting what others would do.  For example, if you want to know 
whether that huge male gorilla is likely to attack you if you try to mate with this 
attractive female, you should try to imagine what you would do in the same 
situation.  This introspection is the origin of what Humphrey calls ‘Homo 
psychologicus’, of humans capable of understanding that others have minds, and 
ultimately of self-awareness. 
Consciousness itself is something we value highly and tend to think of as 
uniquely human and special, but whether it provides any selective advantage is a 
fiercely debated issue (e.g. Blakemore and Greenfield 1987; Chalmers 1996; 
Dennett 1991).  Some argue that consciousness could not have evolved unless it 
had a function, while others maintain that consciousness is not the sort of thing 
that could have a function.  For example, if consciousness is an epiphenomenon 
of attention or language or intelligence, then the selective advantage would be 
for those capabilities, not for consciousness itself.  More radically, some believe 
that consciousness is an illusion, or that the whole idea of consciousness will 
ultimately be dropped, just as the idea of the ‘life force’ was dropped when we 
began to understand the mechanisms of life.  Clearly, consciousness cannot help 
us explain the big brain; you cannot solve one mystery by invoking another. 

74    THE MEME MACHINE 
An influential version of social theory is the ‘Machiavellian Intelligence’ 
hypothesis (Byrne and Whiten 1988; Whiten and Byrne 1997).  Social 
interactions and relationships are not only complex but also constantly changing 
and therefore require fast parallel processing (Barton and Dunbar 1997).  The 
similarity with Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), the devious adviser of 
sixteenth-century Italian princes, is that much of social life is a question of 
outwitting others, plotting and scheming, entering into alliances and breaking 
them again.  All this requires a lot of brain power to remember who is who, and 
who has done what to whom, as well as to think up ever more crafty wiles, and 
to double bluff the crafty wiles of your rivals – leading to a spiralling arms race. 
‘Arms races’ are common in biology, as when predators evolve to run ever 
faster to catch their faster prey, or parasites evolve to outwit the immune systems 
of their hosts.  The notion that some kind of spiralling or self-catalytic process is 
involved certainly suits what Christopher Wills (1993) calls ‘the runaway brain’, 
and this idea is common among theories that relate language evolution to brain 
size.  These take the social function of the brain a step further but I will leave 
them until the next chapter.  In general, social theories of the evolution of 
intelligence have been very successful over the past ten years.  They have shifted 
the balance from male-dominated technological explanations to those that 
appreciate the complexity of social life.  Research on the topic is growing but 
many questions remain.  Why, for example, was there pressure for such a great 
improvement in social skills?  Competition within the species is implied but why 
should just this species and no others take this expensive route?  I also wonder 
how much our peculiar abilities to do mathematics, program computers, paint 
pictures or build cathedrals actually come down to social skills.  Many people 
think the social theories are the best we have, but the question of brain size is far 
from resolved.  No one knows for sure how and why we got our enormous 
brains. 
 
Did memes drive brain size? 
 
I am going to propose an entirely new theory based on memetics.  In summary it 
is this.  The turning point in our evolutionary history was when we began to 
imitate each other.  From this point on a second replicator, the meme, came into 
play.  Memes changed the environment in which genes were selected, and the 
direction of change was determined by the outcome of memetic selection.  So 
the selection pressures which produced the massive increase in brain size were

THE BIG BRAIN    75 
initiated and driven by memes. 
I shall explore this new theory in two ways, first by rather speculatively 
looking at our origins again, and then by examining in more detail the processes 
of memetic driving. 
The turning point was when early hominids began to imitate each other.  The 
origins of imitation itself are lost in our far past, but the selective (genetic) 
advantage of imitation is no mystery.  Imitation may be very difficult to do but 
is certainly a ‘good trick’ if you can acquire it.  If your neighbour has learned 
something really useful – like which foods to eat and which to avoid, or how to 
get inside a prickly pine cone – it may pay (in biological terms) to copy him.  
You can then avoid all the slow and potentially dangerous process of trying out 
new foods for yourself.  This is only worthwhile if the environment does not 
change too fast, a factor that can be modelled mathematically.  Richerson and 
Boyd (1992) have shown the conditions under which natural selection might 
favour more reliance on social learning (including imitation) rather than 
individual learning.  Economists have devised models of how optimisers (who 
incur the cost of making a decisions) can coexist with imitators (who avoid the 
cost but make inferior decisions) and studied how fads and fashions result when 
large numbers of people all imitate each other (Bikhchandani et al. 1992; 
Conlisk 1980).  Indeed, fads and fashions have been associated with imitation 
ever since Charles Mackay (1841) blamed such ‘extraordinary popular 
delusions’ as the South Sea Bubble and the Dutch seventeenth-century mania for 
tulips on ‘popular imitativeness’. 
But why did generalised imitation apparently evolve only once?  We know, 
from studies of other animals, already discussed, that social learning is fairly 
common in the animal kingdom but true imitation is very rare.  Why should it 
have arisen in early hominids rather than any other kind of animal? 
I suggested that imitation requires three skills: making decisions about what 
to imitate, complex transformations from one point of view to another, and the 
production of matching bodily actions.  These basic skills, or at least the 
beginnings of them, are available in many primates and were probably available 
to our ancestors of 5 million years ago.  Primates have good motor control and 
hand co-ordination, and good general intelligence which would enable them to 
classify actions and decide what to imitate.  Some of them can imagine events 
and manipulate them mentally, as is shown by their use of insight to solve such 
problems as reaching food with sticks or by piling up boxes, and, most notably, 
they have Machiavellian Intelligence and the beginnings of a theory of mind.

76    THE MEME MACHINE 
The connection between advanced social skills (or Machiavellian Intelligence) 
and imitation is this.  To indulge in deception, pretence and social manipulation 
you need to be able to put yourself in another’s shoes; to take the other’s point 
of view; to imagine what it would be like to be that other.  This is precisely what 
you need to be able to imitate someone else.  In both cases you must be able to 
transform what you see someone else doing into what you would have to do to 
achieve the same end, and vice versa.  Finally, our ancestors used reciprocal 
altruism, that is, helping others who will later help you in return.  As we shall 
see (Chapter 12), a common strategy in reciprocation is to copy what the other 
person does; cooperating if they cooperate and refusing if they do not.  With all 
these prior skills imitation is not such a huge leap for evolution to make. 
I suggest that the social skills others have singled out as directly responsible 
for our large brain were in fact responsible for the prior step of acquiring 
imitation.  As soon as our ancestors crossed the threshold into true imitation a 
second replicator was unwittingly unleashed.  Only then did the memetic 
pressure for increasing brain size begin. 
When was this turning point?  The first signs of obvious imitation are the 
stone tools made by Homo habilis 2.5 million years ago.  We modern people are 
not natural stone flakers, and experiments trying to find out how it was 
originally done have shown that making stone tools is a fine art and not easily 
learned by trial and error.  Almost certainly the skill of making stone tools 
spread through early peoples by imitation.  This certainty is much increased in 
the later archaeological record which shows styles of tools, pots, jewellery and 
other cultural artefacts spreading through different cultures at different times. 
Imitation could have begun earlier.  Perhaps people imitated ways of making 
baskets, wooden scrapers or knives, baby slings, or other useful artefacts that 
would not have survived the way stone tools do.  So let us imagine a very early 
culture of H. habilis, using simple stone tools to cut up and skin game or shape 
wood, and inventing and copying a few other simple artefacts. 
As the new skills begin to spread it becomes more and more important to be 
able to acquire them.  And how do you acquire them? – by imitation of course.  
Thus, being a good imitator becomes increasingly important.  Not only that, but 
it becomes important to imitate the right people and the right things.  In such 
decisions we would expect simple heuristics, or rules of thumb, to be used.  
‘Imitate the most successful people’ might be one; but now there are memes this 
does not just mean imitating those with the most food or the strongest muscles, it 
means imitating the people who have the most impressive tools, the brightest 
clothes, or the newest skills.  What this amounts to is ‘imitate the best imitator’.

THE BIG BRAIN    77 
As a consequence, whatever is deemed best spreads fastest. 
Another important decision is whom to mate with, and again the answer 
should be the best imitators, because they will provide you with children who 
are more likely to be good imitators.  With this pressure for better imitation 
creates more people who are good at spreading memes – whether the memes are 
ways of making tools, rituals, clothes or whatever.  As imitation improves, more 
new skills are invented and spread, and these in turn create more pressure to be 
able to copy them.  And so it goes on.  In a few million years, not only have the 
memes changed out of all recognition but the genes have been forced into 
creating brains capable of spreading them – big brains. 
That is the story in a nutshell, but I now want to unpack it and take it one step 
at a time, looking more closely at the mechanisms involved. 
The first step we might call ‘selection for imitation’.  Let us assume, echoing 
Darwin’s original argument, that there is some genetic variation in people’s 
ability to imitate.  Some people quickly pick up the new technology of stone 
flaking, while others do not.  Who will do better?  The better imitators of course.  
If stone tools help with food processing, then better toolmakers will eat better 
and their children will eat better.  So far, the same argument could be applied 
equally well to having strong hands for making the tools.  But the difference is 
this – imitation is a general skill.  The good imitators would also be good at 
copying ways of making wooden scrapers or baskets, or plaiting their hair, or 
carrying piles of leaves or fruits, or making warm clothes, or any skill that helps 
survival and can be stolen from someone else.  Genes for being a good imitator 
will begin to spread in the gene pool.  Now the environment in which the genes 
are selected begins to change.  If you are absolutely hopeless at imitation, you, 
and therefore your offspring, will be at a disadvantage in a way you never would 
have been a few thousand years earlier.  The new selection pressure begins with 
this step. 
The next step we might call ‘selection for imitating the imitators’.  Whom 
does it pay to imitate?  The good imitators of course.  Imagine a woman who is 
especially skilled at copying the latest ways of picking inaccessible fruits or 
carrying them back to the family, or a man especially good at copying the best 
toolmaker.  If you are an inferior imitator it will pay you to copy the best 
imitators.  They will have acquired the most useful skills and you now need 
those skills.  During the last millennium you did not.  When no one had clothes 
there was no competitive edge to having them, but now they have been invented 
you will be less protected from cold and injury and less likely to survive than 
people who do have them.  Now that carrying-baskets have been invented you

78    THE MEME MACHINE 
will get less of the best fruit if you cannot make one.  Genes for imitating the 
best imitators sill increase in the gene pool. 
Note that this is an escalating process.  A male robin can only get a bigger 
territory in predetermined ways, for example, by singing well – and there is a 
limit to how brilliant any robin song can be.  But a male Homo erectus might get 
power and influence, and come to be copied, by wearing more impressive 
clothes, lighting bigger and better fires to cook the meat – or to scare the people 
who have not yet mastered fire – having the sharpest tools, and so on.  There is 
no theoretical limit to this process or to the direction it may take.  Selection 
pressures on the genes will be influenced by whichever memes happen to 
proliferate.  Memes evolve as memes build on memes; new tools emerge; new 
clothes are made; new ways of doing things are invented.  As these memes 
spread the most successful people are those who can acquire the currently most 
important memes.  Genes for being able to copy the best memes, and genes for 
copying the people who have the best memes, will be more successful than other 
genes. 
But which are the best memes?  ‘Best’ means, initially at least, ‘best for the 
genes’.  People who copy survival-related memes will fare better than people 
who copy irrelevant memes.  But it cannot always be obvious which these 
memes are.  The genes set us up with preferences that reflect their interests.  So 
we like cool drinks and sweet foods, and enjoy sex, for example.  These things 
feel ‘best’ to us because they were best for the genes of our ancestors.  But 
memes can change faster than human genes, so the genes will not be able to 
track them effectively.  The best the system can do is probably to evolve 
heuristics such as ‘copy the most obvious memes’ or ‘copy the most popular 
memes’ or ‘copy memes to do with food, sex and winning battles’.  We will 
look at the effect of such heuristics in modern society later.  In ancient hominid 
society such heuristics would initially have helped individuals survive and 
spread their genes, but then increasingly would allow the memes to outwit the 
genes.  Any meme that looked popular, sexy, or very obvious would spread in 
the meme pool and thus change the selection pressures on the genes. 
The third step could be called ‘selection for mating with the imitators’.  In 
our imaginary society it would pay to mate with the same people you want to 
copy.  If you mate with the best imitators, then your offspring are more likely to 
be good imitators and so to acquire all the things that have become important in 
this newly emerging culture.  It is this conjunction that drives the process on – 
first it pays to copy the best imitators because they will have the most useful 
skills, next it pays to mate with them so that your children can also get these

THE BIG BRAIN    79 
skills.  But the heuristics for choosing what to imitate are only rough-and-ready 
guidelines and the memes are beginning to proliferate beyond purely survival-
related skills.  For example, as memes for singing appeared, the best imitators 
would begin to sing best, singing would be perceived as important, and so 
copying singing would come to have survival value.  In this way, the specific 
nature of the memes of the time would determine which genes were more 
successful.  The memes began to force the hand of the genes. 
There is a fourth and final step that might increase the process again – though 
it is not necessary to the explanation.  We can call this ‘sexual selection for 
imitation’.  Sexual selection, first described by Darwin and much argued about 
ever since, is a well-recognised, if controversial, process in biology (see Cronin 
1991 for a review and Fisher 1930).  Particularly interesting cases involve 
runaway sexual selection, in which elaborate but otherwise useless structures, 
such as the peacock’s fantastic tail, are selected for by generations of peahens 
choosing males with fancier tails.  Once the process has begun it can incur 
enormous costs for the male but it works for the following reason.  A female 
who chooses a male with a good tail will have sons with good tails who will 
attract mates with choices like hers.  She will therefore have more grandchildren.  
The reason it is the females who do the selecting is the imbalance between the 
sexes in parental investment.  Male birds can potentially have vast numbers of 
offspring but females are constrained to producing only a few eggs a year or, in 
the case of humans, a few children in a lifetime.  So females cannot greatly 
increase the number of children they have.  They can, however, increase the 
number of their descendants in future generations by choosing mates who will 
give them ‘sexy sons’ who will have many offspring.  With lots of females all 
going for the same males, this process rapidly escalates until the costs become 
too great. 
The big brain certainly looks like a runaway phenomenon and I am not the 
first to suggest a role for sexual selection in brain size.  But previous theorists 
have not explained why sexual selection should pick on brain size (e.g. Deacon 
1997; Miller 1993).  My answer comes directly from the power of the memes. 
The way memes can exploit the process of sexual selection is unique.  
Whatever is deemed ‘in’ can change as fast as the memes change – and that is 
much faster than genes can produce longer tails or an innate ability to build a 
fancy nest.  If you follow the heuristic ‘mate with the man with the most memes’ 
you will soon find yourself mating with the one with the best hairdo or the best 
song (as well as the ability to imitate).  If other females start going for good 
songs then it becomes advantageous to have male children who can pick up a

80    THE MEME MACHINE 
tune quickly.  Or if females (for whatever reason) start going for ritualised 
hunting dances then it becomes advantageous to have male children who can 
copy dances.  The selection pressures on the genes now change in the wake of 
changes in the memes.  The process of sexual selection is exactly the same as it 
is in examples of biological evolution, but with the added twist that the things 
being selected for can spread at the speed of memetic evolution.  Meme-driven 
sexual selection will favour mating with males who are not only good at 
imitating in general, but who are good at imitating whatever happen to be the 
favoured memes at the time.  In this way the memes are, as it were, dragging the 
genes along.  The leash has been reversed and, to mix metaphors, the dog is in 
the driving seat. 
Please note, however, that sexual selection is not necessary for a memetic 
explanation of brain size, and its role must be an empirical question for the 
future.  The first three processes alone will produce the selection pressures 
required to drive a runaway increase in brain size – if one further small 
assumption is made.  That is, that being good at imitation requires a big brain.  
Interestingly, there has been so little attention paid to imitation that there is very 
little information to back this up.  However, this theory suggests that the main 
tasks of our larger brains are first, the general ability to imitate, and second, the 
particular ability to imitate the kinds of memes that have proliferated in our 
species’ past. 
Can this theory be tested?  Like so many biological theories it is not easy to 
devise specific experimental tests.  Nevertheless, some predictions can be made.  
For example, within any related group of species I would predict that imitation 
ability will correlate positively with brain size.  That is, the best imitators will 
have the largest brains.  Given the scarcity of imitation among other animals 
there will not be much data to choose from, and there will be problems with 
choosing an appropriate measure of encephalisation, but this study ought to be 
possible for various groups of birds and cetaceans. 
Using humans, experiments could compare two people performing the same 
actions but with one person initiating the action while the other imitates it.  
Various measures could be used to determine just how much extra demand is 
created by imitating.  For example, cognitive studies should show that imitation 
requires a lot of processing and that we have specialised mechanisms for doing 
it.  Brain-scan studies should show that imitation requires a large amount of 
energy, and that the extra activity is found predominantly in the evolutionarily 
newer parts of the brain – those parts that differentiate us from other species.  I 
would not be surprised if specific neurons were found that carry out some of the

THE BIG BRAIN    81 
basic tasks of imitation, such as relating observed facial expressions or actions to 
one’s own, but we will need to know a lot more about how imitation is done 
before we can guess what to look for. 
If these predictions turn out to be right they will confirm the suggestion that 
imitation is an enormously demanding task, and that it takes a large brain to be 
able to do it.  I would further predict that many aspects of language and thought 
will turn out to be best understood as by-products of our brains’ ability to select 
which aspects of the world to imitate.  However, until more research on 
imitation is carried out, I can only speculate and say this – if being good at 
imitation requires a big brain then the processes described above can explain it.  
These are: selection for imitation, selection for imitating the best imitators, 
selection for mating with the best imitators, and (possibly) memetic sexual 
selection.  Once early hominids achieved imitation the second replicator was 
born and these processes began to drive the increase in brain size.  The 
enormous human brain has been created by the memes, 

The origins of language 
 
 
 
Why do we talk so much? 
This might not be a question you have agonised over, but once I started to 
think about it I found it more and more interesting.  How much time and energy 
does an average person spend on talking every day?  I doubt it has been 
measured but the answer must be several hours.  A typical human form of 
entertainment is to sit over a meal or a few drinks and talk to a lot of other 
people – what about?  Well, about football, or sex, or who has got off with 
whom, or what he said to her or she said to him, or the latest trouble at work, or 
the iniquities of the latest government proposals on health care, and so on and on 
and on.  According to some estimates about two-thirds of all conversation is 
taken up with social matters (Dunbar 1996).  It is rare for any group of people to 
sit in companionable silence. 
Then there is work.  Some jobs are silent but most are not.  In shops and 
offices, on the buses and trains, in factories and restaurants, people talk.  And if 
they do not talk they often have the radio on with voices and music coming at 
them from somewhere else.  And then there are other forms of communication 
that use language – the letters, magazines and newspapers arrive on the doormat, 
the phone rings, the fax starts up, the email messages flood in.  The use of time 
and energy is phenomenal. What is it all for? 
There are at least three issues here.  One is why we talk at all – in other 
words, why human beings acquired language in the first place.  The second is 
how we acquired language – how the human brain became structured the way it 
did.  The third is why, having acquired language, we use it so much.  I am going 
to tackle the last question first, partly because it is easier, and partly because the 
answer will help us with the much more controversial questions of how and why 
language evolved. 
 
Why do we talk so much? 
 
Talking all the time must cost energy – and a lot of it.  Thinking uses some 
energy, but talking uses a lot more.  Not only are several brain areas necessarily
CHAPTER 7 

THE ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE    83 
active during speech, or when listening to and understanding speech, but the 
production of sound is itself expensive.  If you have ever been very ill you will 
know how exhausting it is to speak.  You may lie in a hospital bed perfectly able 
to think but when the nurse arrives you can barely manage a feeble ‘thank you’, 
while a few days later you still happily engage in friendly banter about the 
qualify of the food, or what you still do when you get out – complete with 
smiles, laughs and completely superfluous chit-chat. 
Perhaps you are a hi-fi freak.  If so you will know how much energy is 
needed to drive big speakers, and how expensive the sound system gets when it 
needs to play loud, high-quality sound.  Or if you prefer low tech you may have 
a clockwork radio, in which case you will know all too well, by the feeling in 
your arm, how much energy is needed to produce that sound, and how much 
winding you can save by turning down the volume. 
This phenomenal use of energy presents something of a puzzle.  Living 
creatures have to work hard for all the energy they consume, and efficient 
energy use is a critical factor in survival.  If you can use less energy than your 
neighbour, you are more likely to pull through the hard times, to find scarce 
food, to win the competition for the best mate, and so to pass on your genes.  
Why, then, has evolution produced creatures that talk whenever they get the 
chance? 
Several possible answers spring to mind.  First, there may, after all, be a 
sound biological explanation.  Perhaps talking serves an important function that 
I have overlooked, such as cementing social bonds or exchanging useful 
information.  I will consider theories of this kind later on. 
Second, a sociobiologist might argue that, with the evolution of language, 
culture has somehow got temporarily out of hand, and the cultural trait of speech 
has been stretching the leash.  However, if talking is really wasteful of precious 
energy then the genes of the people who talk most will do less well and in time 
the genes will pull the leash in again. 
Third, an evolutionary psychologist might argue that all this talking once had 
advantages for our ancestors and so we are stuck with it now, even though it 
doesn’t benefit our genes any more.  On this view we ought to be able to find the 
function of so much talking in the lives of early hunter-gatherers. 
All these suggestions have in common that they appeal to genetic advantage 
for an explanation.  Memetics provides a totally different approach.  Rather than 
asking what advantage talking provides to the genes, we can ask what advantage 
it provides to the memes.  Now the answer is obvious.  Talking spreads memes.

84    THE MEME MACHINE 
In other words, the reason we talk so much is not to benefit our genes, but to 
spread our memes. 
There are several ways of looking at how memes exert pressure on us to keep 
talking, and 1 will consider three of them in more detail. 
First, since talking is an efficient way of propagating memes, memes that can 
get themselves spoken will (in general) be copied more often than those that 
cannot.  So these kinds of memes will spread in the meme pool and we will all 
end up talking a lot. 
This argument is similar to the explanation I proposed for why we think so 
much – another example of the ‘weed theory’ of memes (p. 41).  Silence is like a 
beautifully weeded flowerbed, just waiting for your favourite plants, and it does 
not stay that way for long.  A silent person is an idle copying machine waiting to 
be exploited.  Your brain is full of ideas, memories, thoughts to be shared, and 
actions to be carried out; the social world is full of new memes being created, 
spread about, and competing to be taken up by you and passed on again.  But 
you cannot possibly speak them all.  Competition to take charge of your voice is 
strong – just as competition to grow in the garden is strong.  Keeping silence is 
as hard work as weeding. 
So which memes will win in this competition to take over your voice?  It may 
help to ask again our familiar question – imagine a world full of brains, and far 
more memes that can possibly find homes.  Which memes are more likely to find 
a safe home and get passed on again? 
Certain memes are particularly easy to say, or almost force their hosts to pass 
them on.  These include bits of juicy scandal, terrifying news, comforting ideas 
of various sorts, or useful instructions.  Some of these have their ‘spread me’ 
effect for good biological and psychological reasons.  Perhaps they tap into 
needs for sex, social cohesion, excitement, or avoiding danger.  Perhaps people 
pass them on in order to conform, to be better liked, to enjoy the other person’s 
surprise or laughter.  Perhaps the information will be genuinely useful to the 
other person.  We can certainly study all these reasons (and indeed psychologists 
do just that) but for the memetic argument I am proposing here it does not matter 
what they are.  The point is you are less likely to want to pass on some boring 
thing you heard about the health of your neighbour’s rose bushes than a rumour 
about what your neighbour was doing behind them.  Such ‘say me’ memes will 
therefore spread better than other memes and many people will get infected with 
them. 
The news of Princess Diana’s death in 1997 spread around the world at the 
speed of light within minutes of its first announcement.  People all over the 
world told anyone who did not yet know.  I did myself.  I turned on the radio,

THE ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE    85 
heard the continuous coverage instead of the weather forecast and called out to 
the rest of my family.  Then I felt a bit silly for shouting so loud about 
something I would normally profess to take no interest in.  But the death of 
Diana was just that sort of news.  It spread like an extremely infectious virus and 
within weeks the princess’s reputation had become saintly and her following 
cult-like (Marsden 1997).  Within a few months, millions of pounds had been 
given to her memorial fund and millions more made out of selling her image.  
Few memes can claim anything like this power, but the principle is quite 
general.  Certain kinds of news spread more effectively than others.  These are 
the things people get to hear about and want to pass on again.  As a result, 
people talk more. 
This does not mean that silence is impossible.  It is just rare, and needs 
special rules to enforce it against the natural memetic tendency for endless talk.  
We see these rules all over the place, in libraries and schools, in lecture theatres 
and cinemas, and even in special train carriages – and we see people, despite 
their best intentions, finding themselves breaking the rules.  True vows of 
silence are hard to make, and on religious retreats beginners find the rules of 
silence difficult to keep, even for a few days.  Taking on a silence meme goes 
against the grain. 
This suggests a second approach: to look at rules or social practices 
concerning speech.  Again let’s compare two types of meme.  Suppose there are 
instructions encouraging people to talk a lot.  These might come in many forms, 
such as embarrassment at being silent in company, or rules about making polite 
conversation or entertaining people with chat.  Now suppose there are other 
memes for keeping silent, such as the suggestion that idle chat is pointless, a rule 
of quiet etiquette, or a spiritual belief in the value of silence.  Which will do 
better?  I suggest the first type will.  People who hold these memes will talk 
more; therefore, the things they say will be heard more often and have more 
chances of being picked up by other people. 
If this conclusion does not immediately appear obvious think of it this way – 
imagine that one hundred people have been taught behaviour of the first type – 
such as ‘You should make polite conversation whenever you can’ – and another 
hundred people have been taught the rule ‘It’s polite only to talk when you have 
to’.  The first group will, because they hold this meme, talk whenever they have 
the chance.  The second lot will keep quiet.  If talkers meet talkers they will all 
talk.  If silents meet silents they will not.  The interesting mixture is when talkers 
meet silent types.  It is possible that nobody will ever change their minds or 
throw out old memes in favour of new ones, but if ever this does happen the

86    THE MEME MACHINE 
imbalance is obvious.  A talker will talk, and either directly, or by implication, 
suggest that polite conversation is necessary, or that talking is fun, or useful.  A 
silent type might be converted.  But the reverse is extremely unlikely to happen.  
The silent type may occasionally say things like ‘I think it’s better to keep quiet’ 
or ‘Why don’t you shut up’ but will not, by definition, say much – and for that 
reason alone is unlikely to make converts.  Although single memes of this 
explicitness are probably rare, there are notable examples, such as the British 
Telecom slogan ‘It’s good to talk’ and the proverbial ‘Silence is golden’.  
Memetics should help us understand not only why talking in general must 
spread, but also how some selective environments can encourage the rarer 
silence rule to succeed. 
A final way of looking at the memetic pressure to talk is to consider groups 
of memes or memeplexes, and the kinds of person who will nurture and spread 
them.  Memes that thrive in the environment of a chatty person (and contribute 
to that person being chatty) will differ from those that thrive in the environment 
of a silent type.  The chatty person will, by definition, talk more and so give her 
memes more chances of spreading.  When another chatty person hears these 
ideas she will easily pick them up and pass them on again.  The silent person 
will not talk much and so all the memes compatible with being a quiet type will 
have fewer chances to spread.  Of course, chatty people can be extremely 
irritating, and silent types deeply fascinating, but this does not alter the basic 
imbalance, the inequitable result of which is that memes for talking, or memes 
that exist happily with memes for talking, will spread in the meme pool at the 
expense of memes for keeping silent.  These are several memetic arguments 
which all conspire to have the same effect.  If they are correct, it means that the 
meme pool gradually fills up with memes that encourage talking.  We all come 
across them and that is why we talk so much.  We are driven to talk by our 
memes. 
Memetics thus provides a very simple answer to the question – why do we 
talk so much.  This talking is not for our benefit or to make us happy – though 
sometimes it may do that – nor is it for the benefit of our genes.  It is just an 
inevitable consequence of having a brain that is capable of imitating speech. 
This brings us straight back to our other two major issues – how and why we 
came to have speech in the first place. 

THE ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE    87 
The evolution of language 
 
The question of language origins has been so contentious, that as long ago as 
1866 the Société de Linguistique de Paris banned any more speculation about 
the issue.  The glaring gulf between animal communication and human speech 
cried out for explanation but, with little evidence from palaeontology, the 
speculations of the time could run wild – our words originated from copying 
animals or natural sounds, or from making grunts of exertion or disgust.  These 
theories, mockingly dubbed the ‘bow-wow’, ‘ding-dong’, ‘heave-ho’, and 
‘pooh-pooh’ theories, did nothing to explain the origins of grammar and syntax.  
More than a century later the issue is far from settled and the arguments are still 
fierce.  Our theorising is, however, constrained by a much better understanding 
of language itself, and by evidence on how the brain and language evolved 
together. 
First, let us look briefly at the nature of modern human language. 
Our language capacity is largely innate and not a by-product of intelligence 
or a general ability to learn – though this was once a hotly debated issue.  The 
fact is that people do not learn language by being systematically corrected for 
their mistakes, nor by listening attentively and slavishly copying what they hear.  
Instead, they just seem to pick it up, using minimal input to build up richly 
structured grammatical speech.  Note that by grammar I mean the natural 
structures of languages that distinguish who did what to whom or when it 
happened or in what order – not the sort of rule-book grammar that used to be 
taught at school. 
Almost everyone can use language as grammatically as everyone else, 
regardless of educational attainment or general intelligence.  All human societies 
ever discovered have language, and all of them have complex grammar.  
Although languages may vary considerably in the size of their vocabularies, they 
do not differ much in the complexity of their grammar.  Hunter-gatherers and 
remote tribal groups have languages just as complex as modern industrial 
English or Japanese.  Children all over the world can speak grammatically by the 
time they are three or four years old, and they can invent languages that are more 
systematic than the utterances that they hear.  They can even use subtle 
grammatical principles for which there is no evidence in the speech they hear.  If 
spoken language is denied them, as for the deaf, they will find other ways of 
making language.  Sign languages are not just simplified or distorted versions of 
spoken language, but whole new languages that emerge wherever groups of deaf 
people come together.  They are languages in their own right with gestures and

88    THE MEME MACHINE 
facial expressions that take on the grammatical functions of word endings, word 
orders or inflexion. 
This ‘language instinct’ as Steven Pinker (1994) calls it, singles us out 
completely from every other species on the planet.  As far as we know, no other 
species has any kind of grammatically structured language – nor are they 
capable of learning it.  When psychologists first tried to teach language to 
chimpanzees they failed because chimps simply do not have the vocal apparatus 
to make the necessary sounds.  However, they got on better when they trained 
their chimps with methods that exploit their natural manual dexterity.  One 
chimpanzee, Sarah, has been trained to use a board containing various plastic 
shapes that represent familiar objects and actions, while Lana and Kanzi press 
buttons on a special keyboard.  Most popular, however, has been the use of 
signing, building on the fact that chimps have agile hands and make many 
gestures in the wild.  Among the many animals taught this way have been a 
chimpanzee called Washoe and a gorilla called Koko, both of whom were 
brought up with humans using American Sign Language. 
At first it seemed as though Washoe, Koko and others really could sign.  
They were credited with ‘sentences’ three words long, like a child of two years 
or so.  They even made up new words by putting signs together.  But the 
excitement and wild claims soon gave way under careful criticism from 
psychologists, linguists, and native deaf signers who said that chimp signing was 
nothing like the rich and expressive human sign language.  Wishful thinking 
probably accounts for much of the exaggeration.  The consensus now seems to 
be that chimps and gorillas can learn single signs or symbols, and use short 
sequences of them appropriately – mostly to request things.  Yet they do not use 
grammar of any kind and remain oblivious to all the subtleties of sentences that 
young children seem to take to without effort.  Whereas young children just 
seem to absorb the words they hear and turn them into language, chimps have to 
be coerced, and rewarded to learn just a few paltry signs.  Whatever they may be 
thinking on the inside (and we should not underestimate that), they just do not 
‘get’ the idea of true language.  There is no comparison.  It is as though the 
chimps have to learn the words by the long slow route of ordinary learning – 
trial and error, and reward and punishment – whereas we just seem to absorb it.  
The human language capacity is unique. 
So how did we get this unique ability’?  Did it appear all at once in some 
gigantic lucky leap of sudden evolution (Bickerton 1990)?  Or did it appear 
gradually along with our slowly growing brains?  And when did language first

THE ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE    89 
appear?  Did Lucy indulge in early social chit-chat?  Did Homo habilis give 
names to their tools and inventions?  Did Homo erectus tell stories round their 
fires? 
No one knows for sure.  Words do not leave fossils, and extinct languages 
cannot be brought back.  There are, however, a few clues.  Some archaeologists 
believe that we can deduce much about hominid language abilities from their 
artefacts and burial practices.  Only 100 000 years ago there occurred the Upper 
Palaeolithic Revolution, a time of sudden (in archaeological terms) 
diversification of hominid activity.  For two million years or more the only 
hominid artefacts had been simple stone tools, the stone flakes probably used as 
choppers and scrapers by H. habilis, and hand-axes made by H. erectus.  It was 
not until the Upper Palaeolithic that H. sapiens began to leave behind evidence 
of deliberate burial of the dead, simple painting and body adornment, trading 
over long distances, increasing sizes of settlements and an extension of 
toolmaking from stones to bone, clay, antlers and other materials.  The view that 
this dramatic change coincides with the sudden origins of fully developed 
language is, according to Richard Leakey, common among archaeologists.  
However, it is based only on speculation.  Often our own thinking is so bound 
by the language we learned as children it is almost impossible for us to speculate 
accurately about what can and cannot be done in the way of art, toolmaking or 
trading, with what level of language ability.  We need better evidence than this. 
More solid clues come from anatomy.  The major increase in brain size, of 
roughly 50 per cent, occurred during the transition from the australopithecines to 
Homo.  By half a million years ago H. erectus had brains nearly as big as ours.  
Since we do not know the nature of the relationship between brain size and 
language this cannot tell us when language appeared, but perhaps we can find 
out something about the organisation of early brains.  Obviously brains do not 
fossilise, but their shape can be deduced from the inside of a fossilised skull.  
One H. habilis skull apparently shows evidence of Broca’s area and of the 
asymmetry characteristic of our language-lateralised brains which led some 
people to conclude that H. habilis could speak.  However, recent brain scan 
studies of living humans show that Broca’s area is also active during skilled 
hand movements and so cannot be definitive evidence for language.  Its 
development might be connected more to the stone tools made by that species.  
Nicholas Toth of Indiana University has made a detailed study of early stone 
tools and he and colleagues spent months learning to make them – not an easily 
acquired skill as it turned out (Toth and Schick 1993).  In the process they 
discovered that most of the early stone tools were made by right-handed people.

90    THE MEME MACHINE 
Brain lateralisation apparently began with the earliest appearance of Homo but is 
not proof of language. 
The brain is not the only part of the body that has been modified for speech.  
Exquisite control of breathing is needed and this meant changes in the muscles 
of the diaphragm and chest.  We have to be able to breathe automatically, as do 
all land mammals, but then to override the mechanism when speaking, which 
requires cortical control over the muscles.  The larynx is also much lower in 
humans than in related primates, which makes possible a greater variety of 
sounds, and the base of the skull is a different shape. 
When did these changes take place?  Neither larynx nor muscles fossilise, but 
other clues can be used.  One is the base of the skull, the shape of which affects 
the range of sounds that can be made.  It appears flat in australopithecines, 
slightly flexed in H. erectus, and only becomes fully flexed as it is in modern 
humans, in archaic H. sapiens, suggesting that only modern humans could make 
the full range of sounds that we use now.  Another clue comes from the 
thickness of the spinal cord.  Modern humans have much larger thoracic spinal 
cords than apes or early hominids, presumably because speech requires precise 
cortical control over breathing.  The palaeontologist Alan Walker made a 
detailed study of a 1.5-million-year-old H. erectus skeleton – the ‘Nariokotome 
Boy’ found near Lake Turkana in Kenya.  This skeleton was well preserved in 
just the right parts of the spine and showed no thoracic enlargement.  In this 
respect, the Nariokotome Boy was more ape-like than human.  As Walker got to 
know the boy through his ancient remains he became more and more convinced 
that erectus was speechless, and the boy less like a human trapped in an ape’s 
body and more like an ape in a human body.  ‘He may have been our ancestor, 
but there was no human consciousness within that human body.  He was not one 
of us,’ concluded Walker (Walker and Shipman 1996, p. 235). 
All these clues do not give a final answer.  Even if we thoroughly understood 
the anatomical changes involved in producing speech we would not necessarily 
understand the psychological changes.  As psychologist Merlin Donald (1991) 
points out, there is much more to modern symbolic cultures than language alone, 
and more than language separates us from our ancestors and from other living 
primates.  Language evolution needs to be understood in relation to the rest of 
our cognitive evolution. 
Perhaps the best we can conclude for now is that language did not appear 
suddenly, as some linguists have suggested.  The evolutionary changes which

THE ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE    91 
 make modern language possible appear to be strung out over a long period of 
hominid history.  Almost certainly Lucy was incapable of speech, and H. erectus 
could not have had much of a conversation around the fire.  Finely controlled 
speech and fully modern language is unlikely to have appeared until at least the 
time of archaic H. sapiens, little more than 100 000 years ago.  That said, the 
bigger questions remain unanswered.  We cannot tell whether the larger brain 
gradually made language possible, or the beginnings of language gradually 
forced the increase in brain size.  We only know that the two evolved together. 
 
It might help if we knew what language was for. 
 
The answer is not obvious – though it is often portrayed that way.  
Introductory psychology textbooks tend to make ‘obvious’ statements like ‘The 
ability, to engage in verbal behaviour confers decided advantages on our 
species’ (Carlson 1993, p. 271), and leave it at that.  The biologists Maynard 
Smith and Szathmáry (1995, p. 290) start their explanation of language 
evolution with ‘the presumption that natural selection is the only plausible 
explanation for adaptive design.  What other explanation could there be?’  
Linguists often assume that language ‘has an obvious selectional value’ or that 
‘Language must surely confer enormous selectional advantage’ (Otero 1990), or 
talk about language adaptation, the significant selective advantage of 
communication, or selection pressures for the use of symbols (Deacon 1997). 
They are surely right to think in terms of selective advantage.  When we ask 
a ‘why’ question in biology, the kind of answer we are seeking is usually a 
functional one.  Bats have sonar so that they can catch insects in the gloom.  
Spiders spin elegant webs to make near invisible, lightweight traps.  Fur is for 
insulation and eyes are for seeing (though the answer never quite stops there!).  
According to modern Darwinian thinking, all these things gradually evolved 
because individuals who carried the genes that produced them were more 
successful at survival and reproduction.  If the human language capacity is a 
biological system like the vertebrate eye or bat sonar then we must be able to say 
what function it served, and why individuals carrying the genes that increased 
language competence were more likely to survive and reproduce than their less 
language-competent neighbours.  As we have seen, language cannot have come 
cheap.  Not only are several areas of the brain specialised for understanding and 
producing speech, but the whole of our vocal apparatus had to be evolved.  This 
meant complex changes in the neck, mouth and throat that compromised other 
functions; making drinking and breathing at the same time impossible and

92    THE MEME MACHINE 
increasing the risk of choking.  Why were these costly and potentially dangerous 
modifications ever made?  What made them worth it? 
This question forces us into a difficult situation.  As several authors have 
pointed out (Deacon 1997; Dunbar 1996; Pinker 1994) it appears that either we 
must understand what selective advantage language gave early hominids, or we 
must abandon hopes of a Darwinian explanation.  This is not a happy choice – if 
indeed it is a choice. 

Meme–gene coevolution 
 
 
 
The mystery of language origins has apparently presented us with an unpleasant 
choice – abandon hopes of a Darwinian explanation or find a function for 
language.  But this is only a forced choice if the function has to be for the genes.  
If there is a second replicator this is no longer the only option.  I shall argue that 
once imitation evolved and memes appeared, the memes changed the 
environment in which genes were selected and so forced them to provide better 
and better meme-spreading apparatus.  In other words, the human language 
capacity has been meme-driven, and the function of language is to spread 
memes. 
 
What is language for? 
 
If we want to understand the evolution of language, a Darwinian explanation is 
the obvious starting point.  However, it has been argued that language shows no 
genetic variation, could not exist in intermediate forms, and would require more 
evolutionary time, and more space in the genome, than could possibly have been 
available – quite aside from the fact that its selective advantage is not obvious 
(Pinker and Bloom 1990).  All of these arguments have been forcefully opposed.  
Nevertheless, they keep reappearing in various guises. 
Oddly enough, the two major opponents of a traditional Darwinian approach 
to language origins are one of the world’s most famous evolutionary theorists, 
Stephen Jay Gould, and the world’s best-known linguist, Noam Chomsky. 
In the 1950s, the prevailing behaviourist paradigm treated language as just 
another aspect of human beings’ general ability to learn.  It denied any innate 
restrictions on what could be learned or any universal properties of language 
structure.  Chomsky went right against this view.  He pointed out that the logical 
structure of languages is far more complex than anyone had thought before, even 
though it is easily picked up by children without explicit training, and that vastly 
different languages actually share a common ‘deep structure’.  He proposed the 
now familiar idea of an innate Universal Grammar.  However, he has 
subsequently argued that natural selection cannot explain the origin of this
CHAPTER 8 

94    THE MEME MACHINE 
Universal Grammar, nor the evolution of language (see Pinker and Bloom 
1990).  According to Chomsky, we do have innate language structures, but they 
have not got there by natural selection.  They must have got there purely by 
accident, as a by-product of something else, such as the general increase in 
intelligence or brain side, or by some other process that we do not yet 
understand.  On this slew there were no selection pressures for language itself. 
Gould has long argued against the power of selection and adaptation in 
evolution in general (Gould and Lewontin 1979).  He argues, instead, that many 
biological features evolved as by-products of something else or as consequences 
of natural physical processes and constraints on structure and form.  In the case 
of language, he says, it must have come about as a by-product of other 
evolutionary changes – such as the overall increase in brain size (though, as we 
have seen, that is also unexplained), or because of some as yet unidentified 
physical constraints. 
I do not think that such an approach can work.  There is no doubt that simple 
physical processes can produce intricate designs, such as snowflakes, 
interference patterns, or ripples on the sand of a beach.  There is no doubt that 
physical constraints are important; the properties of air constrain the shapes of 
wings and tails, and gravity puts limits on height and size.  By-products 
inevitably occur as designs change, and some of these by-products turn out to be 
useful and are then exploited by evolution.  But these processes alone cannot 
account for evolutionary progress (though remember that Gould does not believe 
in progress either) nor for complex functional design.  The only process that can 
produce new designs that build on and develop the old is the evolutionary 
algorithm (p. 11).  With heredity, variation, and selection you can explain the 
gradual appearance of incredibly improbable things like eyes, ears, fins and tails.  
Language is an incredibly improbable thing, showing obvious signs of intricate 
design.  It is no explanation at all to say that it came about as a by-product of 
something else or entirely because of physical constraints. 
The non-selectionist arguments of Chomsky’s, Gould and others have been 
roundly criticised by Pinker and Bloom and many other contributors to a lively 
debate in the peer review journal Brain and Behavioral Sciences (1990).  Pinker 
and Bloom argue that language shows signs of complex design for some 
function, and that the only explanation for the origin of organs with complex 
design is the process of natural selection.  They conclude, therefore, that 
‘specialization for grammar evolved by a conventional neo-Darwinian process’ 
(Pinker and Bloom 1990, p. 707). 

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    95 
But what is the function?  A ‘conventional neo-Darwinian’ explanation 
assumes a selective advantage of having language.  My question about why we 
acquired language now becomes ‘what was the selective advantage of having 
language?’  Without an answer to that question the existence of human language 
remains a mystery. 
Pinker and Bloom’s answer is that language is designed ‘for the 
communication of propositional structures over a serial channel’ (1990, p. 712).  
But what, then, was the selective advantage of ‘communication of propositional 
structures over a serial channel’?  Language would have allowed our ancestors 
to acquire information and pass it on far faster than biological evolution could 
achieve, giving them a decisive advantage in competition with other species, 
they say.  But to complete this argument we need to know what biologically 
relevant information was to be passed on and why the use of propositional 
structures would have helped.  This they do not explain. 
There have been many answers before Pinker and Bloom’s but none is 
universally accepted.  Some of the earliest theories revolved around hunting.  
Primitive man was seen as a great hurter who needed to communicate plans for 
herding prey or trapping them in particular places.  In other words, we needed to 
speak in order to hunt better.  A more modern version comes from 
palaeontologists Walker and Shipman (1996, p, 231) who suggest the function 
of language was to communicate ‘places to hunt; new sorts of traps; locations of 
water, good caves . . .  techniques for making tools . . .  or ways to make and 
keep fire’.  Other theories emphasised foraging – perhaps early humans needed 
to communicate about the locations, nutritional value or safety of available 
foodstuffs.  What is not quite clear from any of these theories is why humans, 
and humans alone, should have developed such a complex and neurologically 
expensive solution to the problems of hunting or foraging.  For example, wolves 
and lions achieve clever pack-hunting strategies without grammatical language, 
and bees communicate the whereabouts and value of food sources with a 
specialised dance.  Vervet monkeys have different warning cries for at least five 
different predators, including leopard, eagles and snakes (Cheney and Seyfarth 
1990) but use no grammar or propositional structures.  Presumably, our innate 
Universal Grammar provides advantages over these simpler systems, but there 
remains the question why the advantage is so great that we can communicate 
who did what to whom, why you couldn’t make it to the party, and the 
advantages of the Big Bang theory over a Steady State cosmology. 
Perhaps the answer (as in theories relating brain size to Machiavellian

96    THE MEME MACHINE 
Intelligence, p. 74) lies in the complexity of our social lives.  Our hominid 
ancestors were presumably social animals like their early primate predecessors 
and, like modern monkeys, we may assume that they could recognise and 
compare different social relationships and respond appropriately without having 
verbal labels such as ‘friend’ or ‘sister’ (Cheney and Seyfarth 1990).  Social 
primates need to understand matters such as alliances, familial relationships, 
dominance hierarchies and the trustworthiness of individual members of the 
group.  They also need to communicate.  If you are maintaining a complex 
dominance hierarchy then you need to be able to show (or hide, or pretend to 
show) fear and aggression, submission and pleasure, desire to be groomed and a 
willingness to have sex.  But emotions are notoriously difficult to talk about.  
Modern primates get on very well at these complex tasks by means of facial 
expressions, calls, gestures and other behaviours, and our language does not 
seem to have been designed to do that job especially well. 
The function of language is gossip, says British psychologist Robin Dunbar 
(1996) – and gossip is a substitute for grooming.  He asks the same question I 
have asked – only rather more poetically ‘Why on earth is so much time devoted 
by so many to the discussion of so little?’  In many studies he and his colleagues 
at Liverpool University have shown that most of our talking is gossip.  We 
discuss each other, who is having what relationship with whom and why; we 
approve and disapprove, take sides, and generally chat about the social world we 
live in.  Why? 
The real function of both grooming and gossip, says Dunbar, is to keep social 
groups together, and this gets harder and harder as the groups get larger.  Many 
other primates live in social groups and much of their time is taken up with 
maintaining them.  It matters very much who is in an alliance with whom.  You 
chase away your enemies and groom your friends.  You share food with your 
allies and hope they will help you if you are in trouble.  You come to your 
friends’ aid – or not, and risk their letting you down next time.  Social 
interactions of this kind demand big brains because so much has to be 
remembered.  You need to remember who did what to whom, when, and how 
strong or shaky every alliance is at the moment.  You will not want to try to steal 
food from even a low-ranking male if he is in alliance with a stronger one.  And 
you will not risk sex with a receptive female if another stronger male has 
priority.  Also, as group size increases, freeholders and cheats can more easily 
escape detection. 
How are these complex relationships maintained?  For many primates the 
answer is grooming, but there is a natural limit.  As groups get larger the

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    97 
requirement for grooming becomes impossibly high until there are simply not 
enough hours in the day.  Baboons and chimpanzees live in groups of about fifty 
to fifty-five and spend up to a fifth of their time grooming, but humans live in 
even bigger groups.  We may be able to recognise up to a couple of thousand 
people, but the more important group size, argues Dunbar, whether in social life, 
the armed forces or industry, is about one hundred and fifty.  Extrapolating from 
monkeys and apes suggests that we would have to spend an impossible 40 per 
cent of our time grooming each other to maintain such large groups. 
That, says Dunbar, is why we need language.  It acts as ‘a cheap and ultra-
efficient form of grooming’ (1996, p. 79).  We can talk to more than one person 
at once, pass on information about cheaters and scoundrels, or tell stories about 
who makes a reliable friend.  So, Dunbar rejects ideas about language being 
primarily a male-dominated function used for hunting or fighting strategies and 
suggests instead that it is all about cementing and maintaining our human 
relationships. 
But the obvious question now is why there was selection pressure for larger 
groups.  Dunbar’s answer is that our ancestors faced increasing predation as they 
moved out of the African forests and into the grasslands; safety in numbers 
would have been a valuable strategy for survival and they had already reached 
group sizes too large for any more grooming.  But many other species have 
managed other ways of living in the grasslands, some in large herds and others 
in smaller groups.  So could this pressure for larger groups really explain all the 
drastic and expensive changes required?  Dunbar’s theory hinges on this point. 
Other theories emphasise the evolution of using symbols (e.g. Deacon 1997; 
Donald 1991).  The Harvard neuroscientist Terrence Deacon proclaims humans 
‘the symbolic species’.  He argues that symbolic reference provided the only 
conceivable selection pressure for the evolution of hominid brains – and by 
symbolic reference he means the use of arbitrary symbols to stand for something 
else.  Among the advantages of symbolic communication are mother-infant 
communication, passing on foraging tricks, manipulating competitors, collective 
warfare and defence, passing on toolmaking skills, and sharing past experiences 
– ‘there are too many compelling options to choose from’ he says (p. 377) – but, 
he argues, these could only have come into play once the ‘symbolic threshold’ 
was already crossed.  Once true symbolic communication was possible simpler 
languages (now extinct) would have created a selection pressure for bigger and 
better brains able to understand them and extend them, leading ultimately to our 
modern kind of language.  But we had to cross ‘the symbolic threshold’ in the 
first place. 

98    THE MEME MACHINE 
So how and why did this happen?  For marriage, he says.  According to 
Deacon, early hominids could only take advantage of a hunting-provisioning 
subsistence strategy if they could regulate their reproductive relationships by 
symbolic means.  ‘Symbolic culture was a response to a reproductive problem 
that only symbols could solve: the imperative of representing a social contract’ 
(Deacon 1997, p. 401).  On this theory, then, symbolic communication began 
because it was needed to regulate marriage, and then was gradually improved 
because of the myriad advantages it provided for other forms of communication. 
If I have understood him correctly, Deacon sometimes comes close to a 
memetic theory.  For example, he notes that language is its own prime mover 
and language evolution a kind of bootstrapping.  He even likens one’s own 
language to a personal symbiotic organism.  But he does not consider the 
possibility of a second replicator.  For him ‘the transmission of genes is the 
bottom line’ (p. 380).  Thus, he is stuck with finding the selective advantage for 
tile genes of using symbols. 
The 
Canadian 
psychologist, 
Merlin 
Donald, 
also 
puts 
symbolic 
representation at the heart of his theory (1991, 1993).  He suggests that human 
brains, culture, and cognition all coevolved, passing through three major 
transitions: memetic skill, lexical invention (i.e. the creation of words, spoken 
language and story telling), and finally the externalisation of memory (symbolic 
art and the technology of writing allowed humans to overcome the limitations of 
biological memory).  His first transition – the development of memetic skills – 
sounds as though it might be similar to memetics, but it is not (it is perhaps 
closer to ‘mime’ than to ‘meme’).  Donald clearly distinguishes mimesis from 
imitation, stressing that mimesis includes representing an event to oneself and is 
not tied to external communication.  He explains: ‘mimesis rests on the ability to 
produce conscious, self-initiated, representational acts that are intentional but 
not linguistic’ (1991, p. 168). 
Donald’s evolutionary theory, unlike many others, stresses the unique 
cognitive development of human beings, the importance of their culture, and the 
consequences of their inventiveness, but he does not invoke the concept of a 
second replicator.  For him, the function of language is part of the wider function 
of symbolic representation, whose advantage is ultimately to the genes. 
I have considered several popular theories of the function of language.  All 
their authors realise there are serious problems, and have tried to explain why 
language would have given early hominids a selective advantage.  I am not 
convinced that any of them really solves the mystery of human language origins.  
They need to explain why there is just one species capable of communicating

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    99 
with complex grammatical language, why this one species has a brain so very 
much bigger than its nearest relatives, and why this one species goes around 
talking not only about sex, food, and fights, but also about mathematics, the 
advantages of Macintosh over Windows, and evolutionary biology.  There are 
obviously some advantages to being able to communicate complicated things.  
When the environment changes, a species that can speak, and pass on new ways 
of copying, can adapt faster than one that can adapt only by genetic change.  
Could this be reason enough for all the expensive changes that evolution has 
brought about in order to give us speech?  I do not know, I can only conclude, 
after this necessarily brief review of the existing theories, that there is no real 
consensus over the issue. 
The situation can be summarised like this, Darwinian accounts of the 
evolution of human language have assumed that language provided a selective 
advantage to the genes, but despite many suggestions there is no unanimous 
agreement on what this selective advantage was.  However, this argument 
assumes that Darwinian explanations must rest entirely on genetic advantage.  If 
we add a second replicator the argument changes completely. 
 
Language spreads memes 
 
Memetics provides a new approach to the evolution of language in which we 
apply Darwinian thinking to two replicators, not one.  On this theory, memetic 
selection, as well as genetic selection, does the work of creating language.  In 
summary, the theory is this.  The human language faculty primarily provided a 
selective advantage to memes, not genes.  The memes then changed the 
environment in which the genes were selected, and so forced them to build better 
and better meme-spreading apparatus.  In other words, the function of language 
is to spread memes. 
This is a strong claim and I shall therefore take the argument slowly, building 
on our understanding of coevolution. 
I have already explained how meme-gene coevolution could have produced 
the big brain.  To summarise – once imitation has evolved, a second replicator 
comes into being which spreads much faster than the first.  Because the skills 
that are initially copied are biologically useful, it pays individuals both to copy 
and to mate with the best imitators.  This conjunction means that successful 
memes begin to dictate which genes are most successful: the genes responsible 
for improving the spread of those memes.  The genes could not have predicted 
the effect of creating a second replicator and cannot, as it were, take it back.

100    THE MEME MACHINE 
They are now driven by the memes.  This is the origin of the dramatic increase 
in brain size.  This theory predicts not only an increasingly large brain but a 
brain that is specifically designed to be good at spreading the most successful 
kinds of memes.  I shall argue that this is exactly what we have, and that this 
explains the evolution of language. 
If successful memes drive the evolution of the brain, then we need to ask 
which memes these are.  To some extent the success of memes is a matter of 
serendipity and accidents of history.  In our long past it might have been the case 
that long hair or ringlets, painted faces or scarred legs, singing, worshipping the 
sun or drawing pictures of insects, came to be the favoured memes.  These 
would then have exerted pressure on the genes to provide brains that were 
especially good at copying these particular things.  If the forces of accident were 
the major pressures in memetic evolution we would have little hope of ever 
making sense of our past.  However, I am going to assume that overwhelming 
these forces of serendipity are the fundamental principles of evolutionary theory.  
That is, there are some basic qualities that make for a successful replicator – in 
this case a meme. 
Dawkins (1976) identifies three criteria for a successful replicator: fidelity, 
fecundity, and longevity.  In other words, a good replicator must be copied 
accurately, many copies must be made, and the copies must last a long time – 
although there may be trade-offs between the three.  We must always be careful 
of comparisons with genes, but we can usefully consider how they match up to 
these requirements. 
Genes are high on all three.  Their method of replication is extremely 
accurate.  That is, genes have high fidelity in the sense that very few errors are 
made when long sequences of genetic information are copied.  When errors are 
made there are elaborate chemical systems for repairing them.  Of course, there 
are some remaining errors, and these contribute to the variation that is essential 
for evolution, but the errors are very few.  Also, the process is digital, which 
makes for much higher fidelity, as we have already seen. 
Genes, at least some of them, are extremely fecund, producing masses and 
masses of copies, though the fecundity varies with the kind of environment a 
species inhabits.  Biologists distinguish two kinds of selection at the extremes of 
a continuum: r-selection and K-selection.  r-selection applies in unstable and 
unpredictable environments where it pays to be able to reproduce rapidly and 
opportunistically when resources allow.  High fecundity, small size and long-
distance dispersal are favoured, as in frogs, flies and rabbits.  K-selection 
operates in stable, predictable environments where there is heavy competition

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    101 
for limited resources.  Such conditions favour large size, long life and small 
numbers of well-cared-for offspring.  K-selected species include elephants and 
humans.  These are the extremes, but even in the most K-selected species many 
copies of the genes are made. 
Finally, genes are long lived.  Individual molecules of DNA are well 
protected inside cells, and those that are passed down through the germ line can 
sometimes survive as long as the lifetime of the organism.  Depending on the 
size of unit you count as the gene, its lifetime varies, but in some sense genes are 
immortal, since they are passed on from generation to generation to generation.  
Genes are extremely high-quality replicators. 
Were they always that way?  Presumably not, although we do not know 
much about the early history of DNA.  However, it is reasonable to assume that 
the first replicators were simpler chemicals than present-day DNA, and were not 
packaged efficiently in chromosomes inside cell nuclei and with a complex 
cellular machinery devoted to their maintenance and duplication.  They may, for 
example, have been simple autocatalytic systems that give rise to two identical 
molecules, followed by polynucleotide-like molecules, and then RNA (Maynard 
Smith and Szathmáry 1995).  But why should these chemicals have evolved to 
produce the high-quality replicating system that we have today? 
Imagine the competition between various forms of early replicator in their 
primeval soup.  If a low-fidelity replicator and a high-fidelity replicator existed 
at the same time, the high-fidelity one would win out.  As Dennett (1995) puts it, 
successful evolution is all about the discovery of ‘good tricks’.  A replicator that 
makes too many mistakes in copying soon loses any good tricks that it stumbles 
across.  A high-fidelity replicator would not stumble upon them any quicker 
(and arguably could be slower) but at least it would keep any it found – and thus 
outperform the competition.  Similarly a highly fecund replicator would, simply 
by virtue of making more copies, swamp its rivals.  Finally, a long-lasting 
replicator would still be around when its competitors had fizzled out.  It is 
obvious really.  In this early environment there would have been selection 
pressure for better and better replicators, and this could ultimately have resulted 
in the exquisite cellular machinery for coming DNA. 
The same principle can be applied to memes.  Imagine early hominids who 
have discovered the biologically ‘good trick’ of imitation.  Initially, this good 
trick allowed some individuals to profit by stealing the discoveries of others, and 
these individuals therefore passed on the genes that made them imitators until 
imitation became widespread.  Then a new replicator was born and, using the

102    THE MEME MACHINE 
copying machine of the brain, began to make copies – copies of actions, copies 
of behaviours, copies of gestures and facial expressions, and copies of sounds.  
This world of early memes is the memetic equivalent of the primeval soup.  
Which of these potentially copyable actions will be more successful as a 
replicator?  The answer is those with high fidelity, high fecundity, and longevity. 
Now we can see the relevance of language.  Language certainly improves 
meme fecundity.  How many copies of an action can you spread at once?  As 
many copies as there are people watching.  But not many people can watch one 
person perform at once, and also the people nearby may just not be looking, or 
may get bored and look at something else.  On the other hand, if you make a 
sound, many people can potentially hear it at once and they do not need to be 
looking – they can even hear it in the dark.  This advantage is obvious in the 
difference between sign languages and speech.  They may both be effective for 
private conversations but you cannot shout to the masses ‘Hey, you must listen 
to this’ in sign language.  The masses have to be looking first.  Also, sound can 
travel over fairly long distances and round corners.  A lot more copies can be 
made by shouting out your news than by demonstrating it with hand signs, facial 
expressions, bodily movements or any of the other available signals. 
This means that vocalisation is a good candidate for increasing fecundity, and 
thereby winning the battle to become the better replicator.  How, then, could the 
fidelity of the copies of the sounds be increased?  One obvious strategy is to 
make the sounds digital.  As we have seen, digital copying is far more accurate 
than analogue, and genes have certainly adopted the ‘get digital’ strategy.  I 
suggest that language has done the same.  By making discrete words instead of a 
continuum of sound, copying becomes more accurate. 
We might imagine many versions of early verbal language going on 
simultaneously as people began imitating each other.  Any which divided speech 
up into discrete, easily copyable sounds would have higher fidelity and hence 
outperform the others in the race to get copied.  The problem with copying 
always lies in deciding which aspects of the stimulus are the important ones to 
copy.  Language is a system that makes these decisions clear by, for example, 
breaking up the sounds, and adopting norms of pronunciation, while ignoring 
overall pitch.  Note that other forms of communication, such as the warning 
cries of monkeys, can become gradually more and more distinct by genetic 
selection, but the process described here works much faster because it spreads 
from person to person within one generation.  Because higher fidelity copies 
spread more effectively, they tend to predominate, and the language improves. 

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    103 
What about longevity?  No individual behaviour has much longevity in itself, 
but longevity inside the brain is important.  Some actions are hard to remember 
and therefore hard to copy, especially after a delay.  We would expect the 
successful memes to depend on behaviours that are easily remembered so that 
they can be reproduced even after long delays.  Language has very efficiently 
improved memorability, remembering dance steps can be troublesome, but 
remembering ‘slow, slow, quick-quick slow’ is easy.  We find it impossible to 
reproduce a long series of meaningless noises, but easy to repeat back a sentence 
of a few dozen words.  Without too much trouble we can repeat whole stories 
and conversations.  Indeed, many cultures have depended entirely on rote 
learning of long stories and myths to pass on their history.  By structuring the 
meanings of sounds, language makes them far more memorable. 
We can look to technology for another kind of longevity – as when the 
invention of pots creates long-lasting models for new pots and more potmaking 
behaviour, or when the building of bridges spreads the idea of a bridge to 
everyone who crosses one.  The longevity of language took a dramatic turn with 
the invention of writing – committing words to clay, papyrus or floppy disk – 
but I shall consider these further steps in longevity later. 
I have described the appearance of words as a process of digitising.  The real 
problem for understanding language origins is not so much the words, which at 
least in principle can be learned by simple associative learning, but the grammar.  
However, grammar also improves replication.  How many things can you say 
with a given set of words?  Not very many, unless you have some way of 
specifying different meanings if you combine the words in different ways.  
Adding prefixes and suffixes, inflecting them in different ways, and specifying 
word order would all increase the number of possible separate utterances that 
could be produced and copied.  In this sense, grammar might be seen as a new 
way of increasing fecundity as well as fidelity.  The more precisely the copies 
are made, the more effective they will be.  Then, as more and more possible 
things can be said, more memes can be created to continue driving the process. 
Remember that all that is going on here is selection, with no need for 
conscious foresight or deliberate design on the part of either the memes 
themselves or the people who are copying them.  We need only imagine groups 
of people who all tend to copy each other, and they copy some sounds more than 
others.  Whether a particular sound is copied because it is easy to remember, 
easy to produce, conveys a pleasant emotion, or provides useful information, 
does not matter as much as the general principle, that when lots of sounds are in

104    THE MEME MACHINE 
competition to get copied, the successful ones will be those of high fidelity, high 
fecundity, and longevity.  This is the selection pressure that produced 
grammatical language. 
The development of language was thus an evolutionary process like any 
other, creating complex design apparently out of nowhere.  The early products of 
human sound copying changed the environment of memetic selection so that 
more complex sounds could find a niche.  Just as multicellular organisms could 
arise only when single cells were already common, just as animals could appear 
only when plants were already producing oxygen, just as large predators could 
evolve only when there was plenty of small game about, so complex 
grammatically structured utterances could appear only when simpler ones were 
already common.  A language with lots of words and well-defined structures 
would seem to be the natural result of memetic selection. 
The next step is to understand how language itself was able to restructure the 
human brain and vocal system for its own propagation.  This is meme-gene 
coevolution again and works as follows.  I have assumed that people will both 
preferentially copy and preferentially mate with the people with the best memes 
– in this case the best language.  These people then pass on genetically whatever 
it was about their brains that made them good at copying these particularly 
successful sounds.  In this way, brains gradually become better and better able to 
make just these sounds.  Grammatical language is not the direct result of any 
biological necessity, but of the way the memes changed the environment of 
genetic selection by increasing their own fidelity, fecundity, and longevity. 
Note that this whole process is self-sustaining.  Once language evolution 
begins, both the language itself and the brain on which it runs will continue to 
evolve under the combined pressure of memetic and genetic selection.  This is 
not the only theory to treat language as ‘its own prime mover’, or as a self-
sustaining process, but others have trouble with explaining how it ever began or 
why it takes the form it does.  Deacon, for example, had to find a reason for 
crossing the ‘symbolic threshold’ in the first place.  There is no such problem 
with the memetic theory of language origins.  The critical step was the beginning 
of imitation – and there is no mystery about why natural selection would have 
favoured imitation.  It is an obvious, if difficult to find, ‘good trick’, and one that 
is especially likely to arise in a species that already has good memory and 
problem-solving skills, reciprocal altruism, Machiavellian Intelligence and a 
complex social life.  Once found, it sets in motion the evolution of a new 
replicator and its coevolution with the old. 

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    105 
I have done a lot of speculating and imagining here.  Am I just making 
another equivalent of the ‘bow-wow’ or ‘heave-ho’ theories?  Should I be 
reminded of the ban made by the Société de Linguistique de Paris? 
I hope not.  The difference here is that I am not suggesting that words arose 
because people heaving on heavy rocks made ‘heave-ho’ noises and began to 
speak – though I suppose the odd word might have come about that way.  I am 
suggesting that verbal language is almost an inevitable consequence of memetic 
selection.  First, sounds are a good candidate for high-fecundity transmission of 
behaviour.  Second, words are an obvious way to digitise the process and so 
increase its fidelity.  Third, grammar is a next step for increasing fidelity and 
fecundity yet again, and all of these will aid memorability and hence longevity.  
Once the second replicator arose, language was more or less inevitable. 
The theory depends on a few basic assumptions, and these could be tested.  
One is that people preferentially copy the most articulate people.  Social-
psychological experiments show that people are more easily persuaded by ‘good 
talkers’ and ‘fast talkers’, but this needs more systematic research using tests of 
imitation. 
Meme-gene coevolution assumes that people preferentially mated with the 
best meme-spreaders, in this case the most articulate people.  We should 
remember that past selection for ‘good talkers’ may have used up most of the 
original variation, leaving most of us fairly articulate today.  However, the 
preference may still be there, so that being highly articulate makes you sexually 
attractive.  The history of love poems and love songs suggests as much, as does 
the sexual behaviour of politicians, writers and television stars (Miller 1993). 
If the theory is right then human grammar should show signs of having been 
designed for transmitting memes with high fecundity, fidelity, and longevity, 
rather than to convey information about some particular topic such as hunting, 
foraging or the symbolic representation of social contracts.  This is the memetic 
equivalent of adaptationist thinking in biology and I might be criticised for 
assuming that memetic evolution must always have found the best solution and 
for a kind of circular reasoning.  Nevertheless, adaptationist thinking has been 
extremely effective in biology and may prove so in memetics. 
Language continually evolves, and new words or expressions compete to be 
adopted, or co-opted from other languages.  Again, we should expect the 
winners to be those of high fidelity, fecundity, and longevity.  Wright (1998) has 
used memetics to study the translation of chemical terms such as acid, alcohol, 
or various elements, into Chinese, showing that alternative terms underwent 
intense competition for survival, with the winners depending both on properties

106    THE MEME MACHINE 
of the terms themselves and on the meme products already in existence at the 
time. 
Whole languages also compete with one another for survival.  Where 
languages have coexisted in the past we would expect the survivor to be the 
better replicator, and that languages with especially low-quality replication 
would most easily be destroyed.  Now that so many languages are threatened 
with extinction this memetic approach might help us to understand what is 
happening.  There is also a battle waging between the major world languages for 
dominance (or just survival) in industry, finance, transport, and information 
technology.  Historical accidents have made some better placed than others, but 
we might usefully look at the evolution, competition, and extinction of 
languages with three things in mind – the fidelity, fecundity, and longevity, of 
the memes they convey. 
Finally, we should be able to predict how artificial languages could arise.  
There have been many attempts to get robots, or virtual robots, to use language.  
These usually begin by teaching the artificial systems a lot about natural 
languages, or by getting them to make associations between sounds and objects.  
The theory I have proposed suggests an entirely different approach that assumes 
no knowledge of any prior language, and no concept of symbolic reference. 
Let’s imagine a group of simple robots, ambling about in some kind of 
relatively interesting and changing environment.  We can call them copybots.  
Each copybot has a sensory system, a system for making variable sounds 
(perhaps dependent on its own position or some aspect of its sensory input), and 
a memory for the sounds it hears.  Most importantly, it can imitate (though 
imperfectly) the sounds it hears.  Now, imagine that all the copybots start 
roaming around squeaking and bleeping, and copying each other’s squeaks and 
bleeps. 
The environment will soon become full of noise and the copybots will be 
unable to copy every sound they hear.  Depending on how their perception and 
imitation systems work, they will inevitably ignore some sounds and imitate 
others.  Everything is then in place for the evolutionary algorithm to run – there 
is heredity, variation, and selection – the sounds (or the stored instructions for 
making the sounds) are the replicator.  What will happen now?  ‘Will there just 
be an awful cacophony, or will something interesting emerge?  If the theory is 
correct then some sounds will have higher fidelity, longevity, and fecundity 
(depending on characteristics of the copybots) and these should be copied more 
and more accurately, and patterns begin to appear.  Some sounds would be made 
more often, depending on events in the environment and the positions of the 
copybots themselves.  I think this could be called language.  If so, it would not

MEME–GENE COEVOLUTION    107 
be the same as any language currently used by any natural or artificial systems. 
If this worked, interesting questions would arise.  Are the copybots really 
communicating?  Are they talking about something?  If so, symbolic reference 
would have arisen out of simply providing the robots with the capacity to 
imitate.  In other words, the capacity to imitate is fundamental, not the capacity 
for symbolic reference.  That is exactly what I would expect.  The final question 
is, could we ever understand them? 
To summarise, there is a memetic solution to the mystery of human language 
origins.  Once imitation evolved, something like two and a half or three million 
years ago, a second replicator, the meme, was born.  As people began to copy 
each other the highest-quality memes did the best – that is those with high 
fidelity, fecundity and longevity.  A spoken grammatical language resulted from 
the success of copyable sounds that were high in all three.  The early speakers of 
this language not only copied the best speakers in their society but also mated 
with them, creating natural selection pressures on the genes to produce brains 
that were ever better and better at spreading the new memes.  In this way, the 
memes and genes coevolved to produce just one species with the extraordinary 
properties of a large brain and language.  The only essential step to starting this 
process was the beginning of imitation.  The general principles of evolution are 
enough to account for the rest. 
The answers to two difficult questions are now obvious, and the same.  What 
is the big brain for?  What is the function of language? – To spread memes. 

The limits of sociobiology 
 
 
 
I have proposed two new theories – memetic theories – to account for human 
brain size and the origins of language.  They both depend on the replicator 
power of the meme, and introduce some new principles into the way memes and 
genes interact – the processes I have called ‘meme-gene coevolution’ and 
‘memetic driving’.  I want now to set this memetic approach in context; to see 
how it compares with other theories and explain why theories based purely on 
biological advantage must fail.  By exploring the different ways in which memes 
and genes can interact we will come up against the limits of sociobiology. 
First, theories of ‘coevolution’ are not new.  As I explained in Chapter 3 
there have been many, including those of Boyd and Richerson (1985), Deacon 
(1997), Donald (1991), Durham (1991) and Lumsden and Wilson (198l).  What 
makes the present theory of meme-gene coevolution different is that both halves 
– the memes and the genes – are replicators in their own right, with equivalent 
status.  Certainly, the two replicators are different.  They differ in how they 
work, how they are copied, and the timescales over which they operate.  There is 
also an important asymmetry between them in that memes can operate only by 
using the brains created by genes, whereas genes can (and do) operate perfectly 
well without memes.  Nevertheless, both memes and genes have replicator 
power.  They are essentially only out for themselves and if they can get copied 
they will – the rest follows from there. 
Dawkins complained that his colleagues always wanted to go back to 
biological advantage.  This theory does not go back only to biological 
advantage, but to memetic advantage as well.  With two replicators working 
together things can get complicated, but not impossibly so, and with a bit of 
simplification we can tease out the three major types of interaction: gene-gene 
interactions, gene-meme interactions, and meme-meme interactions. 
CHAPTER 9 

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    109 
Gene–gene interactions 
 
Gene-gene interactions are the stuff of biology.  When white bears manage to 
stalk more seals on the arctic ice than brown bears do, genes for producing white 
fur spread at the expense of genes for producing brown fur.  In this way, rival 
versions of genes (alleles) compete with each other.  Genes also cooperate, 
however – otherwise we would not have organisms at all.  In our own bodies, 
thousands of genes cooperate to produce muscles and nerves, liver and brain, 
and to result in a machine that effectively carries all the genes around inside it.  
Gene-gene cooperation means that genes for digesting meat cooperate with 
genes for hunting behaviour, while genes for digesting grass cooperate with 
genes for grazing and chewing the cud.  Of course, they do not cooperate out of 
kindness but because it benefits their own replication to do so. 
But these are not the only kinds of gene-gene interaction.  Genes in one 
creature can affect genes in another.  Mouse genes for fast running drive cat 
genes for pouncing quicker.  Butterfly genes for camouflage drive better 
eyesight in birds.  In this way, ‘arms races’ develop in which each creature tries 
to outwit the other.  Many of the most beautiful creations of the natural world 
are the result of genetic arms races.  Organisms exploit each other, as when ivy 
uses a tree to get height without building its own trunk, or parasites live inside 
the bodies of people and get their food for free.  But others cooperate with each 
other in symbiotic relationships, such as ants and aphids that provide each other 
with protection and nourishment, or the many bacteria that live inside our own 
intestines and without which we could not digest certain kinds of food.  It is 
even thought that the tiny mitochondria that provide the energy inside every 
living cell originated from symbiotic bacteria.  They have their own genes, and 
these mitochondrial genes are passed on from mother to child in addition to all 
the more familiar human genes in the cell nucleus. 
Another way of looking at the world is to see whole ecosystems as 
constructed by the interactions between selfish genes.  Genes can have multiple 
effects (a single gene for a single effect is a rarity) and may be packaged inside 
different organisms.  Dawkins (1982) provides many examples of what he calls 
the ‘extended phenotype’, by which he means all the effects of a gene on the 
world, not just on the organism in which it sits.  Beavers build dams and those 
dams are as much an effect of genes as are spiders’ webs or snail shells or 
human bones.  But the genes concerned need not even be part of the organism 
that builds the structure.  For example, there is a parasitic fluke that lives inside 
snails and causes them to grow thicker shells.  Dawkins suggests that the

110    THE MEME MACHINE 
thickness of a snail’s shell is a trade-off between growing a thick shell to protect 
it from birds, and saving the resources to make more baby snails.  The fluke 
genes will not benefit from more baby snails, but they will benefit from a safe 
snail to live in – so fluke genes for making snails grow thicker shells are good 
replicators.  This illustrates the important point that although the interests of a 
gene and the interests of the organism it sits in usually coincide, they do not 
always do so. 
These few examples show how genes (without foresight or intention, and just 
because they may either be successfully copied or not) can compete with each 
other, exploit each other, or cooperate with each other for mutual benefit.  ‘We 
can see not only the complexity of gene-gene interactions, but why it is helpful 
to look at the world from a gene’s eye view.  None of this makes as much sense 
if you concentrate only on the individual organisms, even though they are the 
vehicles that ultimately live or die.  The whole complex system is better viewed 
as driven by the interplay between selfish replicators – in this case genes. 
I am going to apply exactly the same principles to meme-meme interactions 
later – and these will prove to be just as intricately complex.  Meme-meme 
interactions are the stuff of today’s society; of religion, politics, and sex; of big 
business, the global economy, and the Internet.  But that comes later.  First, we 
need to clarify the interactions between genes and memes – that is, meme-gene 
coevolution. 
 
Meme–gene interactions 
 
When memes interact with genes we might expect to find both competition and 
cooperation, and every gradation in between.  As we have seen, several theorists 
have likened memes to symbionts, mutualists, commensals or parasites.  The 
first was Cloak who said that at best we are in symbiosis with our cultural 
instructions.  ‘At worst, we are their slaves’ (Cloak 1975, p. 172).  Delius (1989) 
suggests it started out the other way around.  The memes were originally the 
slaves of the genes but, as he says, slaves have a well-known bent towards 
independence and now our memes may be anything from helpful mutualists to 
destructive parasites (see also Ball 1984).  And Dawkins famously treats 
religions as viruses of the mind.  All this raises the question of whether the 
memes are the friends of the genes or their enemies. 
The answer is, of course, both.  But for the sake of sorting out meme-gene 
interactions I want to divide the interactions into two categories: those in which

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    111 
the genes drive the memes and those in which the memes drive the genes.  This 
is an oversimplification in many ways.  You can imagine cases in which the two 
help each other equally and no driving really takes place, but more commonly, I 
suggest, there is at least some imbalance and one replicator or the other 
predominates. 
The reason for this crude distinction is this.  When the genes are doing the 
driving (and the dog is safely on its leash) we have all the familiar results of 
sociobiology and evolutionary psychology.  The interests of the genes 
predominate and people behave in ways which, somehow or other, give them (or 
would have given their ancestors) a biological advantage.  Men are sexually 
attracted to women who appear to be fertile; women are attracted to strong, high-
status men; we like sweet foods and dislike snakes; and so on (see e.g. Pinker 
1997).  These effects are very powerful in our lives, and we should not 
underestimate them, but they are the stuff of biology, ethology, sociobiology and 
evolutionary psychology – not memetics. 
When the memes are doing the driving (and the dog is in charge) power 
shifts towards the interests of the memes and the results are rather different.  
These are results that cannot be predicted on the basis of biological advantage 
alone, and they are therefore critical for memetics.  They are what distinguishes 
memetic theories from all others and are likely, therefore, to be a major testing 
ground of the value and power of memetics as a science. 
I have given two examples of memetic driving so far: the big brain and the 
origins of language.  I shall return to those and add more later, but first let us 
briefly consider the claim of sociobiology and evolutionary psychology to be 
able to account for human behaviour and human culture. 
 
Overthrowing the Standard Social Science Model 
 
The argument is exemplified by John Tooby and Leda Cosmides, from the 
University of California, who plead for a new approach to the psychological 
foundations of culture (Tooby and Cosmides 1992).  They describe the old 
approach as the Standard Social Science Model, a model that treats the human 
mind as an infinitely flexible blank slate that is capable of learning any kind of 
culture at all and is almost entirely independent of biology and genes.  Quite 
rightly (in my opinion) they, and others, have undermined the central 
assumption of the SSSM. 
First, the human mind is simply not a blank slate.  In particular, work in

112    THE MEME MACHINE 
artificial intelligence has proved that it could not be so, because an all-purpose 
general perception machine just cannot get around in the world.  To live and 
feed and reproduce at all it is essential to be able to see objects, track them, 
grasp them, identify individuals, discriminate between the sexes, and so on.  
None of this can be done at all without mechanisms for dividing up the world in 
relevant ways.  The world itself can potentially be divided up in an infinite 
number of ways.  Our brains must have, and do have, ways of limiting this 
potential.  They have object-recognition modules, colour-perception systems, 
grammar modules, and so on (Pinker 1997).  The way we experience the world 
is not ‘the way it really is’ but the way that has proved useful to natural selection 
for us to perceive it. 
Similarly, learning is not some all-purpose general ability that starts from 
scratch.  Even where imitation is concerned this has proved to be true.  In the 
1940s and 1950s, when learning theory was being applied to almost every aspect 
of behaviour, psychologists assumed that imitation itself must be learned by 
being rewarded.  They strongly denied any claims of an ‘imitation instinct’ and 
poked fun at older theories of human instinctive behaviour (Miller and Dollard 
1941).  This was, in the circumstances, understandable.  These early theories had 
included instincts such as a girl’s instinct to pat and tidy her hair or, when 
thrown a ball while sitting, to part her legs and catch it in her skirt.  
Nevertheless, they were wrong about imitation.  Recent research shows that 
babies begin to imitate facial expressions and gestures from an early age whether 
they are rewarded or not.  Babies are able to mimic facial expressions they see 
and sounds they hear when they are too young to have learned by practice or by 
looking in mirrors (Meltzoff 1990).  Successfully imitating something seems to 
be rewarding in itself.  We can see now, as the behaviourists could not, why so 
much of our behaviour has to be instinctive.  The world is too complicated to 
cope with if we have to learn everything from scratch.  Indeed, learning itself 
cannot get off the ground without inbuilt competencies.  We humans have more 
instincts than other species, not fewer.  As Steven Pinker puts it ‘complexity in 
the mind is not caused by learning; learning is caused by complexity in the 
mind’ (1994, p. 125). 
The old SSSM is clearly being overthrown by the evidence, as some 
delightful examples can show.  One concerns the naming of colours.  
Anthropologists, working in the old SSSM mode, had long taken colour naming 
to be a perfect example of cultural relativism.  Lots of languages had been 
studied and wide variation found in the words used to describe colours.  In the 
early 1950s, for example, Verne Ray gave colour samples to sixty native

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    113 
American Indian groups and asked them to name them.  He concluded that there 
is no such thing as a ‘natural’ division of the spectrum but that each culture has 
taken the spectral continuum and has divided it on a completely arbitrary basis.  
In other words, all the colours we call green might be divided into two or more 
other categories in a second language, combined with some other colour in a 
third, overlap with different ones in a fourth and so on.  This is a strange 
thought.  For us, the experience of seeing red is quite different from that of 
yellow.  We know, when we look at the spectrum, that yellow forms only a thin 
band between the red and green parts, and this yellow really stands out as being 
different.  It is hard to imagine that another culture would divide this obvious 
looking spectrum in a totally different way.  Yet, this is what the relativity 
hypothesis implied – that our experience of colour is determined by the language 
we have learned – either that, or there must be a lot of people in the world who 
experience sharp divisions between the colours they see but have learned to use 
names based on quite different divisions. 
This view was accepted more or less without question until, many years later, 
two other anthropologists set out to extend and reconfirm the endings.  Brent 
Berlin and Paul Kay (1969) used a wider range of languages and a more 
systematic set of colour samples – and they failed.  What they found instead was 
an extraordinarily systematic use of colour names in language after language, 
and moreover, one that makes sense in terms of the physiology of colour vision.  
In the visual system, information about brightness is coded separately from 
colour information.  Colour information from three kinds of receptor in the eye 
is fed into an opponent system that codes colours on one red-green dimension 
and another yellow-blue dimension.  Berlin and Kay found that all languages 
contain terms for black and white.  If a language only has three terms then the 
third is for red.  If it has four terms then the next one is either green or yellow 
and if it has five then it has both green and yellow.  If a language has six colour 
terms then it includes blue and if seven it includes brown.  Languages with more 
terms then add purple, pink, orange, grey, and so on.  Colour naming is not 
arbitrary and relative, it reflects very well the way our eyes and unusual systems 
have evolved to make use of relevant information in the world around us. 
Colour naming has been a favourite for stories of this kind.  Have you ever 
heard that the Eskimos have fifty words for snow?  You might even have read 
that it is more than a hundred, or two hundred or four hundred.  None of these is 
true.  Indeed, the (Great Eskimo ‘Vocabulary Hoax’ is a kind of urban mirth, an 
extremely successful meme that has been printed, reprinted, broadcast and

114    THE MEME MACHINE 
spread in numerous other ways, despite being false.  Apparently, in 1911 the 
famous anthropologist Franz Boas noted that Eskimos used four unrelated words 
for snow.  Somehow this idea appealed and was inflated again and again until it 
became hundreds.  Modern estimates suggest that Eskimos use at most a dozen 
snow words but then this is not many more than there are in English, and is not a 
bit surprising since Eskimos spend their lives in the snow.  Even in English, we 
have hail, sleet, slush and wintry showers, and people who work in snow, or ski, 
use extra words as required, such as corn, spring, or sugar snow, powder or (as 
my dad used to call the wet heavy stuff) puddin’. 
The legacy of Boas and extreme cultural relativism stretches far beyond the 
small matter of the number of words for frozen rain.  According to the relativists 
just about every aspect of human behaviour was learned, was variable, and could 
be entirely different in different cultures – even sexual behaviour. 
Many people seem to hate the idea that human sexuality can be explained in 
terms of genetic advantage, and early sociobiologists were pilloried for 
suggesting it.  The popular view had long been that familiar sex differences, 
such as female choosiness and male promiscuity, were purely cultural creations, 
and in another culture things might be totally different.  Superficially, this is 
certainly true in that some cultures prize huge feather headdresses and others 
pinstripe suits; some cultures admire naked pendulous breasts and others uplift 
bras.  But what about the more basic differences?  The view that all sexual 
behaviour is culturally determined was central to the work of Franz Boas, and in 
the 1920s a young student of his, Margaret Mead, set out for Samoa to study a 
society that he and she believed would be totally different from their own.  In 
her famous book Coming of Age in Samoa, Samoa, Mead (1928) described an 
apparently idyllic and peaceful life in which there were no sexual inhibitions, 
and adolescent girls were free to have sex with whomever they liked.  Culture, it 
seemed, was to blame for our own inhibitions and unfair disparities between the 
sexes.  Biology was irrelevant. 
This brief apparently fitted with what people wished to believe about their 
own sexual nature, and was accepted as valid evidence that in other cultures 
almost anything goes.  It was a set of successful memes that endured for nearly 
sixty years even though it was based on only a brief study by a young student.  
The principle was barely questioned and almost nobody bothered to check.  That 
is until the early 1980s when an Australian anthropologist, Derek Freeman, 
painstakingly took the story to pieces. 

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    115 
Freeman (1996) spent six years in Samoa and, unlike Mead who was there 
only four months, he lived with Samoans and had time to learn their language.  
‘What he found could hardly have been more at variance with Mead’s 
descriptions of Samoan life.  He found aggressive behaviour and frequent 
warfare, severe forms of punishment for misdemeanours, high rates of 
delinquency among adolescents and, most important for Mead’s thesis, that the 
Samoans placed great value on virginity.  They even had a virginity test and 
ceremonial defloration of girls at their wedding. 
How could Mead have got it so wrong?  Freeman was able to track down 
some of her original informants and found out.  One woman, by then aged 86, 
explained that Mead didn’t realise they were ‘just joking’ when they said they 
went out at nights with boys.  Another confirmed that they had dreamed up the 
stories for fun – and just imagine the fun of inventing wild and crazy stories 
about your sex life for an ignorant young visitor who is anxiously writing it all 
down.  As is so often the case, it took a lot more time and hard work to unmake 
the myth than to make it in the first place.  It also took a lot of courage.  
Freeman’s discoveries were scorned by people who had almost made Mead into 
a guru, and he was vilified for daring to suggest she was completely wrong. 
Looking back with the benefit of modern evolutionary psychology we can 
see how and why the original theories were completely wrong.  Cosmides and 
Tooby are right to reject them.  However, their version of evolutionary 
psychology seems to me to go too far in the opposite direction.  They leave no 
room for any true evolution of culture.  As far as they are concerned ‘Human 
minds, human behaviour, human artefacts, and human culture are all biological 
phenomena’ (Tooby and Cosmides 1992, p. 21).  In other words, the world of 
ideas, technology and toys, philosophy and science are all to be explained as the 
products of biology – of evolution by the natural selection of genes. 
I do not wish to underestimate the importance of sociobiology and 
evolutionary psychology.  In the next chapter I will consider some of their 
greatest successes in explaining human sexuality.  But they are looking at only 
part of the picture.  Certainly much of our behaviour has been selected because it 
effectively propagates the genes on which it depends.  But behaviour is also 
driven by memetic selection and has been selected because it effectively 
propagates the memes on which it depends. 
I like to look at it this way.  There are two replicators driving the evolution 
and design of our bodies, brains and behaviour.  For some aspects of our lives 
the genes do most of the driving, and the role of the memes can be safely 
ignored.  In these cases the gene-based approach of sociobiology and 
evolutionary psychology is a good approximation (though still only an

116    THE MEME MACHINE 
approximation), but in other cases the full picture can be understood only by 
considering both replicators.  I will turn now to some of those other cases. 
 
Memetic drive and Dennett’s tower 
 
The two examples I have already given are fundamental to understanding human 
behaviour.  They are the big brain and the evolution of language.  I have argued 
that both depend on memetic driving, and I want now to explain this process 
further and put it in context.  The most important step is to show how and why 
memetic driving is not just another form of evolution in the service of the genes.  
Unless this is true, memetics can still be reduced to sociobiology. 
Memetic driving works like this.  Once imitation arose three new processes 
could begin.  First, memetic selection (that is the survival of some memes at the 
expense of others).  Second, genetic selection for the ability to imitate the new 
memes (the best imitators of the best imitators have higher reproductive 
success).  Third, genetic selection for mating with the best imitators. 
The first step means that new ideas and behaviour begin to spread 
memetically, from making tools and pots, to dancing, singing and speech.  The 
second step means that the people who are best able to pick up the new memes 
have more offspring who are also able to pick up the new memes.  So everyone 
tends more and more to imitate the successful memes.  The third step means that 
mate choice is also driven by the memes that are prevalent at the time.  The 
consequence of these processes operating together is that the direction taken by 
memetic evolution affects the direction taken by the genes.  This is memetic 
driving. 
Memetic driving may look at first sight as though it is the same as what is 
known as the Baldwin effect but it is not and I must explain why. 
The Baldwin effect was first described by the psychologist James Baldwin 
who referred to it as ‘a new factor in evolution’ (Baldwin 1896).  It explains how 
intelligent behaviour, imitation, and learning can all affect selection pressure on 
the genes.  As we have seen, there is no Lamarckian ‘inheritance of acquired 
characteristics’ in the sense of passing the results of learning on to the next 
generation through the genes.  Behaviour, however, does have effects on natural 
selection. 
Imagine, for example, a salamander-like creature that eats flies.  Individuals 
that can reach highest get the most flies.  Now imagine that one of them begins 
to jump.  It gets more flies and soon any of its mates that cannot jump at all

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    117 
begin to starve.  Therefore, genes for good jumping or strong back legs spread in 
the gene pool and soon all the creatures are more like frogs.  Jumping improves 
and the selection pressure now favours even higher leaps.  Behaviour has, in a 
perfectly Darwinian fashion, affected selection. 
Now imagine that the flies vary in appearance and goodness to eat.  Let us 
suppose that striped flies are inedible while spotty flies are excellent food.  
Froglings that prefer spotty flies will be at an advantage and so the mechanisms 
required for preferring spotty flies, such as sensitive spot detectors in the visual 
system, will spread.  However, it might be the case that the pattern on the flies 
changes faster than frogling evolution can track.  In this case it will pay the little 
frogling: to be able to learn which flies to eat.  Any frogling that cannot learn 
will be at a disadvantage and so genes for a general ability to learn will spread.  
This is the Baldwin effect. 
As Baldwin himself puts it – the highest phenomena of intelligence, 
including consciousness, the lessons of pleasure and pain, maternal instruction 
and imitation, culminate in the skilful performances of human volition and 
invention.  ‘All these instances are associated in the higher organisms, and all of 
them unite to keep the creature alive . . .  By this means those congenital or 
phylogenetic variations are kept in existence, which lend themselves to 
intelligent, imitative, adaptive, and mechanical modification during the lifetime 
of the creatures which have them.  Other congenital variations are not thus kept 
in existence.’ (Baldwin 1896, p, 445, italics in the original.)  In more modern 
terms, genes for learning and imitation will be favoured by natural selection. 
Baldwin thus saw that natural selection, without need of the inheritance of 
acquired characteristics, could account for the evolution of the capacity to learn.  
The Baldwin effect creates new kinds of creatures that are capable of adapting to 
change far more quickly than their predecessors.  But this is not the only step in 
this direction.  Dennett explains, using his metaphor of the ‘Tower of Generate 
and Test’, an imaginary tower in which each floor has creatures that are able to 
find better and smarter moves, and find them more quickly and efficiently 
(Dennett 1995). 
On the ground floor of Dennett’s tower live the ‘Darwinian creatures’.  These 
creatures evolve by natural selection and all their behaviour is built in by the 
genes.  Mistakes are very costly (unsuccessful creatures have to die) and slow 
(new creatures have to be built each time). 
On the next floor live the ‘Skinnerian creatures’, named after B. F. Skinner 
(1953) who explicitly saw operant conditioning (learning by trial and error) as a 
kind of Darwinian selection.  Skinnerian creatures can learn.  So their behaviour

118    THE MEME MACHINE 
is killed off rather than their whole body.  If something they do is rewarded they 
can do it again, and if not they won’t.  This is much faster because one creature 
can try many many different behaviours in a lifetime. 
On the third floor are the ‘Popperian creatures’.  They can evolve behaviours 
even faster because they can imagine the outcomes in their heads and solve 
problems by thinking about them.  They are named after Sir Karl Popper who 
once explained that this ability to imagine outcomes ‘permits our hypotheses to 
die in our stead’ (Dennett 1995, p. 375).  Many mammals and birds have 
reached this third floor. 
Finally, on the fourth floor, are the ‘Gregorian creatures’, named after the 
British psychologist Richard Gregory (1981) who first pointed out that cultural 
artefacts not only require intelligence to produce them in the first place but also 
enhance their owner’s intelligence.  A person with a pair of scissors can do more 
than one without; a person with a pen can exhibit more intelligence than one 
without.  In other words, memes are intelligence enhancers.  Among such 
memes are what Dennett calls ‘mind tools’ and the most important mind tools 
are words.  Equipped with an environment full of tools that other people have 
made, and with a rich and expressive language, Gregorian creatures can find 
good moves and evolve new behaviours very much faster than without.  As far 
as we know, we humans are alone on this top floor of the Tower of Generate and 
Test. 
The importance of the Baldwin effect should now be clear.  The Baldwin 
effect is like the escalator that lifts creatures from one floor to the next.  If the 
necessary good trick is stumbled upon by evolution, and if the costs are not too 
high, then the creatures who have it are more likely to survive.  At each step, 
they change the environment in which they live so that it becomes ever more 
important to be good at learning, or whatever.  And at each step the creatures 
who are better at learning are, genetically, at an advantage.  Although the 
Baldwin effect is normally discussed just in the context of learning (stepping up 
to the Second floor), it can equally be applied to the evolution of imagination 
(getting to the third floor) and of imitation (getting to the fourth floor).  Indeed, 
Baldwin himself explicitly includes imitation in his list of capacities that would 
help a creature to survive. 
But all this is in the service of the genes because the behaviours that are 
learned, and the solutions that are found by imagining problems, are the ones 
that help with survival and reproduction.  The Baldwin effect is essentially a 
form of Darwinian evolution acting in the interests of the survival and 
replication of genes.  Several theories of coevolution use the Baldwin effect 
(Such as Deacon’s, for example), but the theory of gene-meme coevolution I am

THE LIMITS OF SOCIOBIOLOGY    119 
proposing here adds the further process of memetic driving. 
The point is that everything changes when you arrive at the top floor.  And it 
changes dramatically.  This is because imitation creates a second replicator.  
None of the previous steps has created a second replicator – at least, not one that 
operates beyond the confines of the individual.  For example, Skinnerian 
learning and Popperian problem-solving can be seen as selective processes, but 
they are all going on inside one animal’s head.  The patterns of behaviour and 
the hypotheses about outcomes that are selected might be seen as replicators, but 
they are not let loose on the world unless they are copied by imitation and so 
become memes. 
Getting to the fourth floor means letting loose a replicator that spreads from 
creature to creature, setting its own agenda as it goes.  Of course the genes had 
no foresight.  They could not know that selection for imitation would let loose a 
second replicator, but that is what it has done, and so we enter the phase of gene-
meme coevolution.  In this kind of coevolution things happen that serve to 
spread memes whether or not they spread genes – the dog is off its leash and the 
slaves have rebelled against their former masters.  This is what makes the theory 
different from previous ones and provides alternative predictions.  I suggest that 
the human brain is an example of memes forcing genes to build ever better and 
better meme-spreading devices.  The brain was forced to grow bigger far faster 
and at much greater cost than would be predicted on the grounds of biological 
advantage alone, and this is why it stands out so obviously in any comparisons 
of encephalisation.  Theories based only on biological advantage cannot explain 
why the genes were forced to pay such a high price in terms of energy 
consumption and the dangers of birth (see Chapter 6).  Theories based on 
memetic advantage can. 
You might still argue that in terms of sheer brain size the results are not so 
very different from the argument based on the Baldwin effect.  However, the big 
difference between the theories should come in terms of the specific direction in 
which the brain evolves, not just its size.  If the memes have replicator power 
then they should drive the genes to produce a brain that is specifically suitable 
for replicating them, rather than one that is designed for some specifically 
genetic purpose.  We should be able to derive predictions based on the 
requirements of the new replicator to see whether the actual human brain fits the 
bill.  This is precisely what I tried to do in the argument for the evolution of 
language.  The brain we have is a brain designed for spreading memes with high 
fidelity, fecundity, and longevity. 
As it turns out, the big brains have been enormously successful for genes too,

120    THE MEME MACHINE 
and humans have colonised almost the whole planet.  But need this have been 
the case?  Might not the memes have actually forced the genes into extinction by 
pushing for ever bigger and bigger brains and extracting too high a price?  We 
cannot know – though it is an odd fact that we are the only surviving hominids.  
Could the others have gone extinct this way?  The ill-fated Neanderthals did, 
after all, have somewhat larger brains than modern humans.  This is wild 
speculation indeed, but the more serious point is that on this theory we need not 
take it for granted that big brains, intelligence and all that goes with them are 
necessarily a good thing for the genes.  We could follow Richerson and Boyd 
(1992, p. 70) in asking, ‘What is so wrong with culture that it should be really 
conspicuous in only one species?’ 
Maybe the genes have only just managed to carry the burden and fight back 
in time to produce a species that manages a symbiotic relationship between its 
two replicators.  Maybe we should not assume that when an intelligent, meme-
using species evolves it necessarily has a long life ahead. 

‘An orgasm saved my life’ 
 
 
 
Sex sex sex sex sex sex – sex – sex. 
Did you perk up?  Did you pay more attention to the start of this chapter than 
any other?  Probably not.  I expect you have developed plenty of defences 
against sex memes.  Nevertheless, if you want to sell magazines, television 
programmes, or books, one obvious strategy is to put the word ‘sex’ in a 
prominent position.  A count at my local railway station revealed that of 63 
magazines on the shelves 13 had the word ‘sex’ on the cover – and that is 
ignoring all the ones with erotic photographs, or headlines like ‘Naked couples 
reveal al1’, ‘How would you like to bed this hungry hunk?’, and ‘An orgasm 
saved my life’. 
According to the American author Richard Brodie (1996), memes that deal 
with sex, food, and power all press powerful meme ‘buttons’ because of the 
importance of these topics in our evolutionary past.  And memes that press 
buttons are successful memes. 
Another way of putting it is that genetic evolution has created brains that are 
especially concerned with sex, food, and power, and the memes we choose 
reflect those genetic concerns.  Apart from the use of the word ‘meme’, the logic 
thus far is exactly that of sociobiologists or evolutionary psychologists who 
assume that the ideas we have, the stories we pass on, the cultural artefacts and 
skills that we develop, are all ultimately serving the genes.  According to 
sociobiology, culture should reflect genetic concerns, since culture is ultimately 
for the genes. 
Yet, in our own society there are many obvious anomalies.  Birth rates have 
fallen dramatically now that many couples think that having two children is 
quite enough.  Some people have decided that they want no children at all, and 
prefer to devote their lives to their careers or other occupations.  Others adopt 
children who are not biologically related to them and yet bring them up with 
great care and devotion as though they were their own.  Advertisements, films, 
television, and books encourage us to enjoy sex with multiple partners 
throughout our adult lives, without any intention of getting pregnant, and 
teenagers carry condoms around in their pockets.  Contraception has not only 
brought about effective family planning, but also sex for pleasure and sex for 
spreading memes.  Sexually, we do not behave in ways that maximise our 
genetic legacy.  We no longer have sex in order to get the greatest possible
CHAPTER 10 

122    THE MEME MACHINE 
number of our genes into the next generation.  We do not buy those magazines 
in order to have babies.  We have largely divorced the act, and joy, and 
marketing of sex, from its reproductive function. 
There are two major ways of accounting for this divorce.  The first is 
sociobiology’s answer: modern sexual behaviour is still gene-driven and our use 
of birth control is (from the genes’ point of view) a mistake, made possible 
because the genes could not anticipate how we would use our intelligence.  The 
second is memetics’ answer: modern sexual behaviour is meme-driven.  
Although our basic instincts and desires are still genetically determined, and 
these desires in turn influence which memes are successful, the memes 
themselves are now dictating the way we behave. 
I am going to explore both these views and consider their strengths and 
weaknesses.  At the risk of gross oversimplification I am going to lump together 
as ‘sociobiology’ much of the work on sexual behaviour stemming from 
biology, sociobiology and evolutionary psychology.  In spite of some 
differences, they all agree that the fundamental driving force for sexual 
behaviour is natural selection acting on genes.  They do not consider a second 
replicator, and in this respect differ clearly from memetics. 
 
Sex and sociobiology 
 
The essence of the sociobiological view is that the genes have set up a system 
that has worked historically but is not entirely appropriate for today’s situation.  
The reason is simple enough.  Because genes have no foresight, they can never 
track environmental changes precisely.  Natural selection can ensure that 
organisms are more or less well adapted to the conditions prevailing at the time, 
and as times change selection pressures change, so that the better adapted 
organisms survive.  This ensures that tracking is quite effective when conditions 
change slowly – and extinction is always a possibility when tracking fails.  But 
nothing in the evolutionary process can produce precognition.  We are in effect, 
like all other creatures, products of past selection in past environments. 
On this sociobiological argument it is not surprising that our behaviour does 
not always maximise our genetic fitness.  Past evolution has given us a brain that 
is set up to deal with sex, food, and power, and these ideas are prevalent in our 
society because these factors all contributed to the survival of our genes in the 
past.  We enjoy sex because animals that enjoyed sex in the past passed on their

‘AN ORGASM SAVED MY LIFE’    123 
genes.  But evolution has also given us intelligence, which has enabled us to 
work out the function of sex and manipulate things so as to get the pleasure of 
sex without the costs of child care.  The genes could not have foreseen this and 
so we have no adaptation against contraception – although, if you agree with E. 
O. Wilson, you might expect the genes eventually to pull in the leash again and 
somehow prevent us from reducing our birth rates too far.  On this argument our 
present behaviour is simply a mistake. 
Life is full of mistakes.  Male frogs quite frequently try to mate with other 
males and in some species even have to make a ‘release call’ to escape the 
unwanted – and extremely lengthy – clutch.  Homosexuality in many animals, 
and even in humans, is sometimes interpreted in a similar way, just as a mistake.  
Birds with elaborate courtship displays can be induced to strut and flutter and 
sing for stuffed birds or even for just a few appropriately coloured feathers.  
Male sticklebacks will fight with very simple dummies and even their own 
reflections.  Presumably the mistakes have not been serious enough to warrant 
the cost of creating more accurate perceptual systems.  Courtship rituals have 
proved a good way to get a mate even if you occasionally end up dancing and 
singing for a pile of feathers. 
Eating inedible things is another common mistake that is not worth the cost 
of eliminating completely.  Most species survive with very crude systems for 
distinguishing food from non-food.  Chicks will peck at anything of roughly the 
right size on the ground in front of them, and frogs’ tongues will dart out at any 
small object that moves in the right way.  They generally get by perfectly well 
unless some devious experimenter comes along to trick them.  We modern 
humans have far better visual systems and rarely make such crude mistakes, but 
we make equally dangerous ones.  Selection during our hunter-gatherer past 
fitted us well for liking sweet and fatty foods.  Fish and chips with dollops of 
sweet tomato ketchup, followed by apple pie with cream and ice-cream would 
have been extremely good fuel for a Homo habilis or an archaic Homo sapiens.  
So we like those tastes, and we enjoy eating chocolates, and doughnuts, and 
creamy mashed potatoes with sausages and mustard.  This is not healthy for an 
overfed modern Homo sapiens.  Such mistakes are common in living things. 
On this view, birth control and sex for fun, and many other aspects of modern 
sexual life, are mistakes which the genes have not eliminated – either because 
the costs would have been too high or simply because the genes, not having 
foresight, could not eliminate them.  However, even if these are mistakes, 
sociobiologists would argue that most of our sexual behaviour is not.  It is the

124    THE MEME MACHINE 
kind of behaviour that served, in the past, to get our genes into the next 
generation, and will go on doing so in the future. 
We should not underestimate how successful sociobiology has been in 
addressing this central topic, nor how hard a fight it initially had for acceptance.  
For many decades the popular view was that human beings were somehow 
above nature and not subject to the constraints of genes and biology.  In sexual 
behaviour, it was thought, we alone could transcend ‘mere’ biology and make 
rational conscious choices about whom we made love to and how.  Even though 
nothing is closer to the propagation of genes than sexual behaviour, the theories 
of the 1950s and 1960s completely ignored biological facts.  They made culture 
the overriding force but, unlike memetics, had no Darwinian account of how 
culture could exert such a force.  With the advent of sociobiology in the 1970s 
we could begin to make sense of some of our peculiar sexual proclivities (see 
e.g. Matt Ridley 1993; Symons 1979). 
 
Love, beauty, and parental investment 
 
Consider mate choice.  We may like to think that we chose our lover for reasons 
that have nothing to do with genes and biology; maybe we just fell in love, 
maybe we chose rationally because he fitted our notion of a perfect husband, or 
maybe we chose for aesthetic reasons because – well, because he’s gorgeous.  
The truth appears to be that romance and falling in love are themselves based on 
our deep-seated tendencies to pick sexual partners in ways that would, in our far 
past, have enhanced the chances of passing our genes into the next generation. 
For a start, just how attractive is your partner?  I could make a guess that he 
or she will be just about as attractive as you are.  Why?  The logic of what is 
called ‘assortative mating’ is very simple, whether you are male or female you 
need to get the best mate you possibly can, Inasmuch as beauty is relevant to 
what is ‘best’ you will go for the most beautiful partner you can get.  But then so 
will everyone else.  The result should be, on the average, that people pair up 
with partners that more or less match them in attractiveness, and this is just what 
has been found in experiments. 
But what is beauty?  What makes a man or a woman attractive?  The simple 
answer seems to be that men tend women attractive when they have all the signs 
of being young and fertile, while women are more interested in the status of a 
potential lover than in his physical appearance.  This turns out to have a good 
biological basis – if a rather complex one. 
The basic difference between being male and being female is that females

‘AN ORGASM SAVED MY LIFE’    125 
produce the eggs and males the sperm – indeed this is the usual definition of the 
sexes in widely diverse species.  Eggs are large and contain food for the growing 
embryo, so they are expensive to make, while sperm are tiny and relatively 
cheap.  Eggs are therefore made in smaller quantities and need to be guarded, 
while sperm can more readily be squandered.  In addition, many females also 
provide a great deal of parental care beyond the provision of an egg, and it is 
parental care that really makes the difference when it comes to choosing a mate. 
The logic of parental investment was initially worked out by the biologist 
Robert Trivers (1972), following Fisher (1930) who called it ‘parental 
expenditure’.  Trivers showed how the sexual behaviour of many different 
species could be explained by considering how much resources each sex puts 
into bringing up the offspring.  This new understanding was then applied to 
human behaviour by early sociobiologists.  Humans are an interesting case, 
complicated by the fact that our babies require intensive care for many years and 
are still unable to fend entirely for themselves for years after weaning.  Male 
parental investment is high compared with other mammals, with males 
providing food and protection for the family.  However, male investment is still 
much lower than female investment in both traditional and industrialised 
societies.  In existing hunter-gatherer societies women have been shown to 
provide far more of the nutritionally valuable food for their children than men do 
and to spend many more hours per day working.  Even in our supposedly 
emancipated Western societies some estimates suggest that women work on 
average twice as many hours per day as men – that is, including paid jobs, 
housework, and child care, This disparity, in parental investment can explain a 
lot about human sex. 
A human female can produce a maximum of roughly one baby a year in her 
fertile years, amounting to perhaps twenty or twenty-five in a lifetime.  The 
highest ever recorded is supposedly sixty-nine babies, mostly triplets, born to a 
nineteenth-century Moscow woman.  However, human babies require enormous 
amounts of care, and in traditional hunter-gatherer societies women probably 
produced one about every three or four years, spacing the children, as hunter-
gatherers do today, by sexual abstinence, long lactation and sometimes 
infanticide.  The simple fact is that a woman cannot increase the number of 
children she can successfully raise by mating more frequently or with more men. 
By contrast a man can, potentially, produce a huge number of offspring.  The 
more women he can impregnate the more babies he will have, and he can more 
or less rely on the mother to give them some care.  Even if some do not survive 
he will only have invested a few sperm and a brief (and probably pleasurable)

126    THE MEME MACHINE 
effort in producing them.  From this simple unfairness follows a world of sexual 
difference. 
For men, the most obvious strategy for passing on the most genes is simply to 
mate as often as you can with whomever you can.  A common and effective 
method is to have one long-term partner whom you protect as well as you can 
from other men and whose children you care for, while trying to impregnate as 
many other women as you can, ideally without getting caught. 
Women will pass on the most genes if they can raise a few high-quality 
children with sufficient resources and care to bring them up.  This might mean: 
(a) mating with a high quality male (i.e. one with good genes), and (b) finding a 
male who will provide a lot of parental care.  These may not always be the same 
man. 
One consequence of this disparity is that females need to be far more choosy 
about whom they mate with.  They do not want to get lumbered with being 
pregnant by a lazy, ugly, feeble or unhealthy man who will provide poor genes 
and no care and support for them or their infants.  This could explain why 
women provincially hold back from sex, and more often have to be persuaded or 
bought presents.  Men do not need to be so choosy.  If they can impregnate 
almost any female it will be worth the small effort because they will not be left 
holding the baby.  This can explain why men are normally much more keen to 
find sex than women are, and a woman who wants sex can usually find it 
without too much trouble – and indeed can get paid for it. 
Many people seem to hate the idea that their own sexuality comes down to 
such a crude calculation, but the evidence is piling up against the early 
anthropologists’ idea that sexual behaviour is completely different in each 
culture.  More thorough research now shows that men and women conform to 
what one would expect based on the principle of higher female parental 
investment.  Men are keener to have sex and are especially turned on by the idea 
(or the actuality) of sex with many different partners, while women are more 
choosy and prefer one reliable partner.  Prostitution throughout the centuries has 
been almost exclusively a service rendered by females and paid for by males. 
But what about female beauty?  Although a man may not lose much by 
mating with almost any woman, his genes will fare best if he can impregnate a 
young, healthy and fertile woman.  Evolutionary psychologist David Buss found 
that in every one of thirty-seven cultures, males preferred younger mates and 
females preferred older ones (Buss 1994).  This desire for youth and fertility 
may explain one of sociobiology’s oft-derided findings that men prefer women 
with a low waist-to-hip ratio (Singh 1993).  Cultures vary in the preferred

‘AN ORGASM SAVED MY LIFE’    127 
 fatness or thinness of women – with our present obsession for thinness being 
rather exceptional – but there is apparently a consistent preference for women 
with narrow waists and broad hips.  The reasons for this are still disputed but 
broad hips appear to suggest a wide birth canal for safely delivering a big-
headed baby (of course they may only suggest it and the fat be a deception).  A 
small waist suggests that the woman is not already pregnant, and the last thing a 
male should want is sex with a pregnant female who may trap him into caring 
for another man’s baby. 
Large, clear eyes, smooth skin, fair hair, and symmetrical features are good 
indicators of youth and health – fairness because in fair-skinned peoples hair 
colour darkens with age, and symmetry because the effects of disease are often 
to create asymmetrical blemishes.  A long genetic history has created men who 
respond with sexual arousal to the signs of a young and fertile woman (Matt 
Ridley 1993). 
Meanwhile, the woman need be less concerned with beauty and physical 
appearance.  Her need is for a high-status male who will prove to be a good 
protector and provider.  This fits with the frequent (if depressing) observation 
that rich and powerful men pair up with young beautiful women.  It also fits 
with the results of surveys showing that men consistently rate physical 
appearance as important in a partner while women are more impressed by signs 
of wealth and status.  Indeed, looks are critical in women but not men.  In all the 
cultures studied by Buss, the men placed more value on a woman’s looks and 
women placed more value on a man’s financial prospects. 
But is this the whole story?  What exactly is it about men that women find 
attractive?  According to evolutionary psychology, the genes determining female 
mate choice should be those that would have been selected for in a hunting and 
gathering life.  In that way of life there are few possessions because people are 
always on the move, but providing regular supplies of meat and useful tools 
would presumably help in providing for children.  Status might be earned by 
prowess at hunting, or fighting or protecting the group from enemies, or perhaps 
by impressive clothing or decoration.  Can the genes for choosing these qualities 
in a man really lead us nowadays to choose men with big bank balances, fast 
cars, high-profile jobs, and beautiful houses?  Possibly, although as we shall see, 
memetics takes a different view. 
Another important biological fact is that a woman can be certain that her 
baby is her own, and may have a good idea of who the father is.  Men cannot (or 
could not until the advent of genetic fingerprinting).  This difference is 
especially acute in humans because women, rarely among primates, have

128    THE MEME MACHINE 
concealed ovulation – neither they nor their partners know at what times of the 
month they are fertile.  A man cannot guard a woman all the time; so she may be 
able to trick him into caring for another man’s child.  Indeed, this may account 
for the evolution of concealed ovulation (R. R. Baker 1996). 
There are many ways for a man to increase the probability that he is the 
father of the child he is feeding or protecting.  Marriage is one, and it is 
reinforced by men insisting on premarital chastity and marital monogamy.  
Some of human beings’ nastiest practices (at least from the female point of 
view) may also serve: to increase paternal certainty, such as the mutilation of 
female genitals, chastity belts, punishment of women (but not men) for adultery, 
and various methods of locking women away from the world.  I suppose I fell 
foul of the same unfairness in a minor way in the early l970s.  During my first 
term at Oxford I was unfortunate enough to get caught with a man in my room at 
eight in the morning.  The man concerned was fined two shillings and sixpence 
(about twelve pence in today’s money, and not much even then) and told to be 
more careful by his ‘moral tutor’.  My parents were summoned to college and I 
was sent away from the University for the rest of the term. 
If parental certainty is so important, jealousy should serve different functions 
in men and women.  The evolutionary psychologists Martin Daly and Margo 
Wilson argued that if what men fear most is being cuckolded they should be 
especially jealous of their partner’s Sexual infidelity, whereas if what women 
fear most is desertion they should be most jealous of their partners spending 
time and money on a rival.  Many studies show that this is exactly so (Wright 
1994).  David Buss even wired people up with electrodes and asked them to 
imagine their partners having sex with someone else or forming a deep 
emotional attachment to someone else.  For men it was the sex that caused all 
the physiological signs of distress; for women it was the emotional infidelity 
(Buss 1994). 
Finally, there is a last wicked twist to the argument.  Women certainly want 
to get as much male investment as possible, but they may not be able to find 
both good genes and a good provider in the same man.  Indeed, a man with good 
genes – tall, strong, and intelligent, for example – may find it so easy to get sex 
that he need not bother with putting effort into child care.  This is apparently true 
in zebra finches and swallows where the more attractive males have been shown 
to work less hard in bringing up the young, leaving the females to work harder.  
On the ‘best of both worlds’ theory a woman’s best bet may be to capture a nice, 
though unattractive man, who will rear her children, and then go and get better

‘AN ORGASM SAVED MY LIFE’    129 
genes from elsewhere.  As Matt Ridley (1993, p. 216) puts it ‘marry a nice guy 
but have an affair with your boss’. 
We can probably all think of examples, but can such behaviour be 
biologically effective in modern humans?  Evidence that it can comes from 
controversial research by British biologists Robin Baker and Mark Bellis (1994; 
Baker 1996).  In a surrey of nearly four thousand British women they found that 
women who were having extramarital affairs tended to have sex with their lovers 
more often when they were ovulating – and this was not true for sex with their 
husbands.  In addition, they had more sperm-retaining orgasms (i.e. orgasms 
between one minute before and forty-five minutes after the man’s) with their 
lovers than with their husbands.  In other words, if they were not using 
contraception they might still be more likely to get pregnant by the lover even 
though they had sex with him less often. 
These are just some of the ways in which modern sociobiology and 
evolutionary psychology are coming to understand human sexual behaviour and 
mate choice.  Some of the details may prove to be wrong and new theories will 
come along, but there is no doubt how effective this approach has been.  
However, there are many things about human sexual life that just do not seem 
explicable this way and will not, I suggest, succumb to a sociobiological 
account. 
 
Memes and mates 
 
There are two main ways in which memetic theory differs from a purely 
sociobiological account of sex.  First, memes have been around for at least 2.5 
million years; coevolving with genes and influencing sexual behaviour and mate 
choice.  Second, memes are now well off the leash and during the last century 
sexual memes have influenced our lives in ways that have little or nothing to do 
with genes. 
Let us begin with mate choice.  The main difference between the two theories 
is this.  According to sociobiology our choice of mates, and whom we find 
attractive, should ultimately come back to the question of genetic advantage.  
Our modern life may complicate things, but essentially we should choose to 
mate with people who would, in the environment of our evolutionary past, have 
helped to increase our genetic legacy. 
According to (my version of) memetics, mate choice is influenced not only 
by genetic advantage but also by memetic advantage.  One of my key 
assumptions has been that, once memes arose in our far past, natural selection 
would have begun to favour people who chose to mate with the best imitators or

130    THE MEME MACHINE 
the best users and spreaders of memes.  This was part of my argument for the 
memetic driving of genes for bigger brains and language, but it also leads 
naturally to some conclusions about mate choice.  As memetic competition took 
off in our far past, so the direction the memes took would have affected mate 
choice.  People would have tended to mate with the best meme-spreaders, but 
what constituted the best meme-spreaders depended on what the memes were 
doing at the time.  It is in this sense that the memes began to call the shots. 
Let us consider some examples.  In an early hunter-gatherer society a man 
who was especially good at imitation would have been able to copy the latest 
hunting skills or stone tool technology and hence would have gained a biological 
advantage.  And a woman who mated with him would be more likely to have 
children who shared that imitation ability and that advantage.  So how would she 
choose the right man?  I suggest she would have to look for signs, not just of 
having the good tools because they might change, but of being a good imitator in 
general.  This is the critical point – in a world with memes, signs of being a good 
imitator change as fast as the memes change.  Genes for choosing men who 
could make and use the old stone tools might once have had an advantage but as 
more memes arose and spread they would not.  Instead, genes for choosing men 
with the general ability to imitate, or even to innovate, would fare better.  In a 
hunter-gatherer society such signs might include making the best tools, singing 
the best songs, wearing the most stylish clothes or body paint, or appearing to 
have magical or healing powers.  The direction which memetic evolution took 
would have influenced the genes. 
If this argument is right we would expect the legacy of memetic driving to be 
visible in our mate choice today – that is, we will still mate with the best 
imitators (and to some extent the best imitators of the kinds of memes that have 
been around in our past).  In a modern city, clothes fashions might still be one 
sign, but others would include musical preferences, religious and political views, 
and educational qualifications.  More important, though, would be the general 
ability to spread memes – to be the fashion setter as well as the best follower.  
This suggests that desirable mates should be those whose lives allow them to 
spread the most memes, such as writers, artists, journalists, broadcasters, film 
stars, and musicians. 
There is no doubt that some of these occupations give you a good chance of 
being mobbed by admirers and of having sex with almost whomever you like.  
Jimi Hendrix apparently fathered numerous children in four countries before he 
died at the age of twenty-seven.  H. G. Wells, although notoriously ugly and 
with a squeaks voice, reputedly specialised in seducing several women in one

‘AN ORGASM SAVED MY LIFE’    131 
night.  Charlie Chaplin was short and far from good looking but a great sexual 
success story – as, apparently, were Balzac, Rubens, Picasso, and Leonardo da 
Vinci.  The biologist Geoffrey Miller argues that artistic ability and creativity 
have been sexually selected as a display to attract women (Miller 1998; Mestel 
1995), but he does not explain why sexual selection should have picked on these 
features.  Memetics provides a reason – that creativity and artistic output are 
ways of copying, using and spreading memes, and hence are signs of being a 
good imitator.  I would predict that if these things could be teased out, women 
would, other things being equal, prefer a good meme-spreader to just a rich man. 
Note that I have couched this argument in terms of female mate choice.  
There is some sense to this because, as previously discussed, females need to be 
more choosy over mates than males do, and, in general, sexual selection is 
driven by female choice – as in the examples of peacocks’ tails and other fancy 
plumage.  However, this imbalance is not necessary for the argument I am 
pursuing here, and we may find that men too have tended to mate with women 
who are good imitators.  Also, in today’s technologically advanced societies, 
women can spread memes as well as men can.  So we may expect many more 
changes in sexual behaviour and mate choice as women increasingly take 
control over the spread of memes. 
My suggestion that we should mate with the best imitators is central to the 
theory of meme-gene coevolution and memetic driving; so it is an obvious one 
for testing.  The predictions are quite straightforward: that people should choose 
mates according to how good they are at copying, using, and spreading memes.  
Experiments might be designed to hold genetic factors constant, and manipulate 
memetic factors, while measuring perceived attractiveness.  More subtly, we 
might explore the interactions.  I would expect that an ugly and impoverished 
man might still be perceived as attractive if he were a great meme-spreader – but 
just how much ugliness could one get away with?  Even in today’s meme-rich 
society, women very rarely choose men who are shorter than they are.  
Obviously, there is a limit to how far memes can overthrow genetic 
considerations, and this provides a fascinating area for research. 
Memes are now spreading farther and faster than ever before and this has 
powerful effects on everything in our lives, including sex.  The second way in 
which memetic theory differs from sociobiology is in the way it accounts for sex 
in the modern world.  It is time to return to those sexy, magazines and the 
quandaries of celibacy, adoption, and birth control. 

Sex in the modern world 
 
 
 
It is time to come into the twentieth century.  I have spent much of this book 
explaining how memes came about in human evolution and how they might 
have pressed the genes into producing a creature with an exceptionally big brain 
and the capacity for language.  For most of this long evolutionary time our 
hominid ancestors had few memes to play with.  They lived in relatively simple 
societies and there was little communication between distant groups.  Things are 
not like that now.  Not only are there far more memes in circulation, but the way 
they are passed on has changed. 
Many memes are passed from parent to child.  Parents teach their children 
many of the rules of their own society; how to hold chopsticks or a knife and 
fork, what to wear on which occasion, how to say please, thank you, no thank 
you, and countless other useful things.  Children get their first language from 
their parents and usually their religion too.  Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981) 
call this vertical transmission, as opposed to horizontal transmission (between 
peers,), or oblique transmission (e.g. from uncle to niece or older to younger 
cousin).  The mode of transmission is important because it affects the 
relationship between memes and genes. 
When memes are transmitted vertically they are transmitted alongside the 
genes.  In general, this means that what benefits one also benefits the other.  So, 
for example, if a mother teaches her child how to find food, how to avoid 
danger, how to dress up to look attractive, and so on, then she is not only helping 
her child survive but also helping the propagation of her own genes and her own 
memes.  Indeed, if all transmission is vertical there can be little conflict between 
memes and genes (and no need for memetics).  The sociobiologist’s leash is very 
tight indeed and all the memes that are created should be expected to be, at least 
in principle, helping the genes.  In fact, they may deviate from this ideal in all 
sorts of ways, and fail to track the genes perfectly, but the principle is clear.  
When you pass on your ideas to your child it is in your own genetic interest to 
pass on ideas that benefit that child’s reproductive success.  And from the 
meme’s point of view, its survival also depends on your reproductive success, 
CHAPTER 11 

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    133 
This suggests that coevolution and memetic driving cannot occur with only 
vertical transmission of memes.  So we should note at this point that all the 
examples I have given of memetic driving involve at least some element of 
horizontal transmission.  I suggested, for example, that people imitate the best 
imitators.  This entails horizontal or oblique transmission, as does the creation of 
language, since you cannot easily have a language community in which people 
speak only to their parents and children. 
Where memes are transmitted horizontally they can travel quite 
independently of the genes.  An idea may be passed from one person to another, 
and then another, within one generation.  Also memes may spread when they are 
useful, neutral or even positively harmful; such as an untrue explanation, an 
addictive habit, or a piece of malicious gossip.  Only when horizontal 
transmission becomes common can the memes really be said to be independent 
of the genes. 
Modern industrialised life is a world of horizontal transmission.  We still 
learn our mother-tongue from our mothers, and many of our habits and ideals 
too.  People are still overwhelmingly more likely to follow the religion of their 
parents than any other religion, and even to vote the same way as their parents 
did.  However, our parents have less and less sway as we get older and we now 
go on learning more or less throughout our lives.  Our main sources of 
information are sources that did not exist in our long evolutionary past: schools, 
radio, television, newspapers, books and magazines, and lots and lots of friends 
and acquaintances widely spread around the city, the country, and even the 
world. 
The more ways there are for memes to spread, and the faster they can go, the 
less they are constrained by the needs of the genes.  What determines the success 
of a meme in a traditional hunter-gatherer society, or even a simple farming 
society, is quite different from what determines its success in a modern 
industrialised society.  In the former, life changes slowly, transmission is largely 
‘vertical, and a meme is most likely to succeed if it benefits (or at least appears 
to benefit) the health, longevity, and reproductive success of its carrier.  In the 
latter, a meme is most likely to succeed if it can get quickly and efficiently from 
host to host, and never mind how well each host does in terms of either its own 
survival or its reproductive success – as long as there are more hosts around to 
infect.  We now live in this latter kind of society and the memes have utterly 
changed – and continue to change – the way we live. 
We can now return to the subject of sex and sex memes.  For the sake of 
simplicity I am going to divide societies into just two types, realising that there 
are lots of gradations in between and few are purely one or the other.  These are 
Societies in which memes are largely transmitted vertically and thus track the

134    THE MEME MACHINE 
genes, and those in which they are transmitted horizontally and do not. 
First, let us consider vertical transmission.  There are many memes that ride 
on the back of biologically determined behaviours.  They include all the memes 
that exploit biologically-determined tendencies for mate choice and other 
aspects of sexual behaviour.  From the examples given in the previous chapter 
we can easily guess at a lot of them: pictures of beautiful women with slim 
waists, long fair hair, bright eyes and symmetrical faces; films and videos of 
other people having sex, or of stories about other things with plenty of sex 
thrown in.  Because people want to see these images, money can be made from 
them.  Stories about jealous husbands and abandoned women will sell, as will 
love stories about pretty young nurses and clever, successful doctors (if you 
think these are a thing of the past go and look in the romance section of your 
local bookshop!). 
Memes concerned with marriage are another obvious example.  From fluffy 
white dresses and bunches of flowers, to defloration ceremonies and horrible 
punishments for adultery, we can understand many of the memes that surround 
marriage as being grounded in biological advantage.  The American memeticist 
Aaron Lynch (1996) has provided many examples of marriage traditions that 
track biological advantage, including gender roles and patrilineal inheritance.  
The mechanism here is simple.  People who practise a certain kind of marriage 
system will produce more children than those practising another, and so will 
pass on that system to their own, more numerous, children – so spreading that 
practice more effectively. 
Moreover, the system that works best may vary with the environment.  
Socio-ecologists have provided many examples of unusual marriage 
arrangements, and of the varieties of bride prices and dowries, that actually seem 
to track the environment and enhance genetic fitness for the people who practise 
them.  Polygyny (one man having several wives) is a common system, as is 
monogamy.  But in extreme environments other systems can prevail.  For 
example, the marginal, cold, and infertile valleys of the high Himalayas are one 
of the very few places in the world where fraternal polyandry occurs, that is, one 
woman marries two or more brothers who inherit the family land.  Many men 
and women remain celibate; women usually helping on the estate, and unmarried 
men becoming monks.  The British socio-ecologist John Crook (1989) has 
studied these people in detail and argued that their system does, in fact, 
maximise their genetic fitness.  Grandmothers with polyandrous daughters were 
found to have more surviving offspring than those with monogamous daughters 
(Crook 1995). 

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    135 
Whether you look at this from a sociobiological perspective, or a memetic 
one, the outcome is similar.  The successful practices (or successful memes) are 
those that provide the greatest genetic advantage in the given environment. 
The same is true for some widespread sexual taboos.  Masturbation has been 
seen as dirty, disgusting, revolting, and as sapping your ‘vital energy’.  
Generations of boys have been brought up to believe that ‘playing with 
themselves’ will make them go blind, or give them warts, or make hair grow on 
the palms of their hands.  Given that young men have a strong desire for sex, 
dissuading them from masturbation is likely to increase the amount of vaginal 
sex they will have, thereby increasing the number of their offspring to whom 
they can pass on the taboo (Lynch 1996).  Lynch suggests a similar explanation 
for the success of the circumcision meme, because circumcision makes 
masturbation more difficult, but not vaginal sex. 
Interestingly, there are few, if any, taboos against female masturbation.  
Recent research shows that, though women masturbate less often than men, 
many masturbate once a week or more throughout most of their adult life (R. R. 
Baker 1996).  The lack of a taboo makes sense because generally women cannot 
increase the number of their offspring by having more sex, so from this point of 
view it does not matter whether they masturbate or not. 
The taboo against homosexuality follows the same logic.  Most homosexuals 
are at least partly bisexual and can, with strongly wielded taboos, be persuaded 
to marry and have children, to whom they still pass on the taboo.  Similarly, 
taboos against any kind of sexual practice that does not involve insemination can 
spread, including those against using birth control.  Taboos against adultery 
work rather differently.  Brodie (1996) suggests that it is in every man’s genetic 
interest to persuade other men not to commit adultery while doing so 
themselves.  Thus both the anti-adultery memes and hypocrisy spread together. 
Finally, there are many religions that make use of sex to spread themselves.  
A religion that promotes large families will, assuming vertical memetic 
transmission, produce more babies to grow up in that religion than one that 
promotes small families.  Religious memes therefore become an important 
manipulator of genetic success.  Catholicism’s taboo against birth control has 
been extremely effective in filling the world with millions of Catholics who 
bring up their children to believe that condoms and the pill are evil, and that God 
wants them to have as many children as possible. 
Note that I said ‘assuming vertical memetic transmission’.  All the above

136    THE MEME MACHINE 
arguments depend on parents passing on their memes to their children, because 
only in this case does the number of children you have determine the success of 
your memes.  Vertical transmission was probably a major route of memetic 
replication throughout most of our evolutionary history.  Early humans probably 
lived in groups of about one to two hundred at most.  They may have 
communicated with many of the group, but they would have been unlikely to 
communicate much more widely than that.  As far as we can tell, cultural 
traditions changed very slowly for thousands of years and so the memes that 
parents passed on to their children would have continued to be the prevalent 
ones throughout the children’s lifetime.  In this situation, the successful memes 
would, to a large extent, be the ones that were also of biological advantage. 
In examples like these the sociobiological and memetic explanations barely 
differ.  They do not make different predictions.  There is no particular advantage 
to the memetic viewpoint, and we might as well stick with sociobiology. 
However, transmission is no longer largely vertical.  So what happens to sex 
when memes are generally spread horizontally?  The simple answer is that 
biological advantage becomes less and less relevant.  Let us take the first type of 
sex meme that I mentioned: the pictures of sexier women and the heart-rending 
love stories.  These are not affected because they depend on biologically inbuilt 
tendencies that will not quickly go away.  Even though we now spread most of 
our memes horizontally, we still have much the same brains as people did five 
hundred years ago or even five thousand years ago.  We just do like tall, dark, 
strong hunks, and slim, bright-eyed females.  We just are turned on by watching 
sex or thinking about our ideal lover while masturbating. 
The same is not true of social institutions like marriage practices.  Nowadays, 
what determines the memetic success of a marriage practice is not how many 
children it produces.  Horizontal transmission is now so fast that it outstrips 
vertical transmission and people can choose what kind of marriage system to 
adopt from any they happen to have come across, including none at all.  The 
number of children produced by their parents’ marriage system is now 
irrelevant.  Monogamous marriage has survived a long time and is still prevalent 
even in technologically advanced societies.  But it is clearly under pressure, with 
divorce rates reaching nearly 50 per cent in many countries, and some young 
people rejecting the ‘ideal’ of marriage altogether. 
I mentioned the rare practice of fraternal polyandry which increases genetic 
success in some parts of the Himalayas.  With increasing access to city lifestyles 
and more horizontally transmitted memes we might expect such a system to

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    137 
break dozen, and indeed this is exactly what is happening.  As remote 
Himalayan villages come into contact with the rest of the world, young men are 
increasingly choosing not to share a wife with their brother but to opt for city 
life instead (Crook 1989). 
The taboos also are no longer as effective as they once were.  We may 
imagine a ‘masturbation taboo’ meme competing with a ‘masturbation is fun’ 
meme.  The question of how many children the carriers of such memes produce 
is now completely irrelevant.  People will pick up their memes from films, radio, 
books and television long before they have even produced any children, let alone 
persuaded their children to copy their own habits.  So we should expect the 
power of all these sexual taboos to be reduced as horizontal transmission 
increases – as indeed appears to be the case. 
The taboo against homosexuality is especially interesting.  There is no 
generally accepted biological explanation of homosexuality and superficially it 
does not appear to be adaptive.  Nevertheless, evidence is accumulating that 
there is an inherited predisposition for homosexuality.  Assuming this is the 
case, the taboos of the past would, paradoxically, have favoured the survival of 
these genes by forcing the people who carried them, against their wishes, to 
marry and have children. 
This suggests an interesting prediction for the future.  As horizontal 
transmission increases the taboo should lose its power and so can be expected to 
disappear, as indeed it is doing in many societies.  Homosexuals are then free to 
have sex with other homosexuals, to have long-term relationships with their own 
sex, and not to have children at all.  The short-term effect is much more overt 
homosexual behaviour and acceptance of that behaviour by everyone, but the 
long-term effect may be fewer genes for homosexuality. 
This analysis suggests that ancient sexual taboos should disappear, not as a 
function of wealth or industrialisation per se but with increasing horizontal 
transmission.  Thus, we would expect cultures with the least horizontal 
transmission to have the strongest taboos and vice versa.  There are many 
indirect measures of horizontal transmission such as literacy rates, or the 
availability of telephones, radios and computers.  More direct measures would 
be estimates of the average social group size, or the number of contacts that 
people make with others outside their immediate family.  I would expect 
negative correlations between all these measures and the prevalence of sexual 
taboos.  In this case, memetics provides predictions that do not make obvious 
sense within any other framework. 

138    THE MEME MACHINE 
Celibacy 
 
We can now return to those aspects of modern life that I suggested provided a 
special challenge to sociobiology; celibacy, birth control, and adoption. 
Why would anyone voluntarily remain celibate and forego all the pleasures 
of sex?  Unless they are constructed entirely differently from the rest of us, they 
will presumably have to fight hard against the natural desire to have loving 
physical relationships and to relieve the occasional, or even persistent and 
desperate need for sex.  Celibate people cannot, by definition, pass on their 
genes.  So why do they do it? 
Genetic explanations are not impossible.  Celibate men or women might, 
under some circumstances, better promote the survival of their genes by caring 
for siblings or nieces and nephews.  This is known to happen in some territorial 
birds.  For example, when territories are scarce young unmated males help at the 
nests of their siblings.  They may get a territory of their own in future seasons, 
but for now helping out their nieces and nephews may genetically be the best 
bet.  Certainly, among humans the loving maiden aunt and generous bachelor 
uncle are well known, and nepotism is common enough to warrant having its 
own name.  Also, we have already considered one marriage system in which 
many people remain celibate but their genes still do better because of the 
impoverished environment. 
So genes and environment might account for some kinds of celibacy but what 
about the celibate priest in a wealthy society?  He cannot have inherited the 
celibate lifestyle genetically.  He is unlikely to spend his time tending his 
brothers’ children and grandchildren, and his absence from the family is unlikely 
to benefit them by leaving more food for them to eat.  If he is truly celibate (and, 
of course, many are not) his genes will die with him.  Religious celibacy is a 
dead end for genes. 
Richard Dawkins gave the just memetic explanation of celibacy in The 
Selfish Gene (1976).  Suppose, he said, that the success of a meme depends on 
how much time and effort people put into propagating it.  From the meme’s 
point of view any time spent doing anything else is simply time wasted.  
Marriage, having children and bringing them up, even sexual activity itself, is a 
great waste of time for memes.  Suppose, he went on, that marriage weakened 
the power of a priest to influence his flock because his wife and children 
occupied a large proportion of his time and attention.  Then it follows that the 
meme for celibacy could have greater survival value than the meme for 
marriage.  A religion like Roman Catholicism, which insists on celibacy in its

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    139 
priesthood, would find itself with actively meme-spreading priests, plenty of 
converts and an ongoing supply of new recruits to celibacy.  The agony of 
abstinence may even goad these priests into ever more fervent attempts to serve 
their religion as a way of diverting their own attention from wicked thoughts of 
sex. 
This is a particularly interesting kind of meme-gene conflict reminiscent of 
the gene-gene conflicts between a host and a parasite.  I already gave one 
example in the conflict over the thickness of snail shells.  Some parasites 
actually castrate their hosts (usually chemically rather than physically) as a way 
of diverting the hosts energies into replicating them rather than host genes.  
Religious celibacy is a way for memes to divert their hosts’ energies into 
replicating religious memes instead of host genes (Ball 1984). 
If this explanation is going to be really useful it should be able to predict the 
conditions under which celibacy will and will not evolve, and I shall return to 
this when considering religions in more detail.  For now the point is clear 
enough, memetics suggests that some behaviours will spread just because they 
are good for the memes.  You could look at it this way – each person only has a 
finite amount of time, effort and money.  Their memes and genes therefore have 
to compete for control of these resources.  In the truly celibate priest the memes 
have won hands down.  But they have not done badly in even a lapsed celibate 
priest.  As we know from many recent scandals, quite a few priests do have 
affairs and become fathers.  But, of course, they have to keep this secret.  They 
do not usually give up their religious life and so they cannot afford to spend any 
time and effort, or much money, on those offspring.  They must rely on the 
mother providing all the care.  If she does, the sinful man’s memes and his genes 
will both have done well. 
 
Birth control 
 
Birth control succumbs to exactly the same argument – and with dramatic 
consequences for the future of both memes and genes. 
Let us suppose that women who have many children are far too busy to have 
much social life, and spend most of their time with their partners and family.  
The few other people they do see are likely to be other mothers with young 
children who already share at least some of their child-rearing memes.  The 
more children they have the more years they will spend this way, They will, 
therefore, have little time for spreading their own memes, including the ones

140    THE MEME MACHINE 
concerned with family values and the pleasures of having lots of children. 
On the other hand, women who have only one or two children, or none at all, 
are far more likely to have jobs outside the home, to have an exciting social life, 
to use e-mail, to write books and papers and articles, to become politicians or 
broadcasters, or do any number of other things that will spread their memes, 
including the memes for birth control and the pleasures of a small family.  These 
are the women whose pictures appear in the media, whose success inspires 
others, and who provide role models for other women to copy. 
There is a battle going on here – a battle between memes and genes to take 
control over the machinery of replication – in this case a woman’s body and 
mind.  Any one person has only so much time and energy in their lifetime.  They 
can divide it as they choose but they cannot have lots of children and devote 
maximal time and effort to spreading memes.  This particular battle is played out 
largely in the lives of women and is becoming ever more important as women 
take a more prominent role in modern meme-driven society.  My argument is 
simply this – the women who devote more time to memes and less to genes are 
the more visible ones, and therefore the ones most likely to be copied.  In the 
process, they are effectively encouraging more women to desert gene-spreading 
in favour of meme-spreading. 
This simple bias ensures that memes for birth control will spread even though 
they are disastrous for the genes of the people carrying them.  These memes 
include not only ideas about small families and the benefits of birth control, but 
the pills, condoms, and caps that actually do the work; all the ideas in our 
society concerning sex for fun; the films, books, and television programmes that 
promote them; and the programmes of sex education that help our children to 
cope with sex in a permissive society without getting pregnant or catching 
AIDS.  If this theory is right, birth rates are unlikely to rise again because this 
simple bias will keep them down. 
Is this theory right?  It makes a number of assumptions that could be 
challenged.  One crucial assumption is that women with fewer children copy 
more memes.  This seems to be true in a world in which middle class women 
with more money and more access to information have fewer children, but it 
could easily be tested by measuring, for example, the number of social contacts 
they have, the time they spend talking to others, the amount they read, their 
output of written or broadcast material, how many of them use e-mail, or own 
fax machines.  The theory can work only if memetic output correlates negatively 
with the number of children a woman has. 

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    141 
A second assumption is that women are more likely to imitate the women 
they see in the media who have (or appear to have) few children, than those of 
their friends who have many.  Research in social psychology, marketing, and 
advertising shows that people are more often persuaded by others who are 
perceived as powerful or famous.  Family size is probably no exception, so if 
successful women have few children then others will copy their example.  If 
both these assumptions are true then it followers that, in a climate of horizontal 
transmission, birth control will spread and families refill get smaller. 
Predictions can also be made.  For example, the size of families should 
depend on the ease with which memes can spread horizontally in a given 
society.  Other theories might predict that the main forces for lowering birth rate 
(Chinese-type coercion aside) would be economic necessity, availability of 
birth-control technology, the value of children as agricultural workers, or the 
decline of religions.  Meme theory suggests that factors such as how many 
people a mother typically communicates with, or how much access she has to 
printed and broadcast material, should be more important.  And note that it is 
mothers who count.  Memetic theory easily explains why the education of 
women is so important in changing family size. 
Education aside, this all leads to the paradoxical thought that the more sex 
magazines, e-mail sex sites, and sex shops are available, the lower birth rates are 
likely to be.  The sale of sex in modern societies is not about spreading genes.  
Sex has been taken over by the memes. 
Let us consider an example.  Imagine a couple who both have rewarding and 
demanding careers.  Let us suppose that she is editor of a magazine and he is a 
management consultant.  They have a large house but it is a work-place as well 
as a home.  They have computers, fax machines, phones, and desks piled with 
work, and they work long hours.  She goes to the magazine’s office, but often 
works at home, editing contributions, dealing with problems and writing her 
own articles.  When they are not working they go out with friends to get a 
welcome break from it all. 
The time comes to decide about children.  The woman is in her thirties; she 
has always faintly wanted children, but how will she manage?  She sees her 
friends juggling family and careers, she sees the time that babies take up, and the 
sleep they deprive you of, the problems with nannies, the money they cost.  She 
thinks about her work: they are about to take over another magazine.  Will she 
get the job of editing both?  If she takes time off, will she lose it?  He thinks 
about his clients.  Will children be in the way?  Will he need a separate office?  
Will his competitors overtake him if he cannot keep working evenings and 
weekends?  What if he has to take children to school or do his share of nappy-

142    THE MEME MACHINE 
changing and feeding?  They decide, on balance, not to have children. 
What has happened here?  You could say that these two people have 
rationally made the choice to devote their energies to work rather than having 
children.  And in one sense you would be right.  But another way of looking at it 
is from the meme’s eye view.  From this perspective the memes have done 
rather well.  They have, as it were, persuaded the couple to devote their energies 
to memes rather than genes.  They did not do this by conscious design or 
foresight, but simply because they are replicators.  From this perspective, the 
couple’s thoughts, emotions, desire for success, and willingness to work hard, 
are all aspects of the replicating machinery that is, or is not, devoted to spreading 
the memes – as are the printing presses that reproduce the magazines and the 
factories that build the computers.  The buyers of the magazines and the users of 
the management advice are all part of the environment in which all these memes 
thrive, and these memes use us for their own propagation. 
There are many people like this.  As our environment becomes more and 
more rich in memes and meme-copying devices, we may expect more and more 
people to become infected with memes that drive them to spend their lives 
propagating those memes.  That is what memes do. 
The overworked scientist is frantic to read all those latest research reports.  
The exhausted doctor cannot keep up with the latest change in health care advice 
and works longer and longer hours.  The advertising executive has a mountain of 
new ideas to deal with.  The check-out worker at the supermarket has to learn 
the latest technology or lose the job.  With the advent of the Internet more and 
more people are getting connected and there is scope for them to spend 
inordinate amounts of time playing with the new memes.  The computer nerd is 
more in the thrall of the memes he plays with than of the genes he is carrying. 
The natural end point of all this might appear to be a childless society, but the 
genes have given us a powerful desire to have and care for children.  I would 
guess that birth rates in modern meme-driven societies will stabilise at some 
level that balances the genetically created desire for children against the 
memetically created desire to spread memes more than genes. 
 
Adoption 
 
Finally, there is the question of adoption.  Sociobiologists can reasonably argue 
that childless couples are driven by their genetically created desires to want to

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    143 
have and nurture children, and that these desires outweigh the obvious point that 
an adopted child will not pass on their genes.  In other words, from the gene’s 
point of view adoption is just a mistake.  However, it is an extremely expensive 
mistake.  It means devoting vast amounts of time and money for no genetic 
reward at all.  It is just the kind of mistake that is made by the bird who is 
tricked into bringing up a baby cuckoo, or a man who is ‘cuckolded’ – and we 
have already seen how far biological evolution has gone in devising strategies to 
avoid this happening – and what pressures men have put on women to ensure 
their own paternity.  Genetically, infertile people would do better to help their 
siblings and their siblings’ children.  Some do just that, but the long queues of 
people now waiting to adopt suggest there is something going on here that 
challenges the sociobiological view. 
Looked at from the meme’s point of view, the benefits of adoption are 
obvious.  As far as memes are concerned, the time and effort expended on an 
adopted child are exactly as valuable as that expended on one’s own offspring.  
There are many kinds of meme which parents pass down vertically to their 
children.  The ones that are successful in getting spread this way (and are 
common in the meme pool) are those that people want to pass on.  These include 
not only religious and political views, social mores, and ethical standards (in any 
case some children reject these entirely), but all the possessions that go with 
living in a meme-rich society.  Memes are ultimately responsible for us having 
our homes and possessions, our position in society, and our stocks, shares and 
money.  None of these things would exist without a meme-based society and 
these are the things we work hard for and want to leave to someone we care 
about when we die. 
If we ask someone why they want to adopt a child we should not expect them 
to say ‘to pass on my memes’, any more than if we ask someone why they enjoy 
sex we would expect them to say ‘to pass on my genes’.  Nevertheless, from the 
meme’s eye view a person’s desire to pass on their experience and possessions is 
an opportunity to be exploited.  Thus, we should expect that in species without 
memes, individuals will do all they can to avoid bringing up non-relatives, but in 
a species with both memes and genes, some individuals will find themselves 
wanting a child whether or not it is biologically their own.  Adoption, birth 
control and celibacy may be mistakes for the genes, but they are not so for the 
memes. 
 
The memes can take over sexual behaviour in many other ways too.  Sex means 
intimacy, and intimacy means sharing memes.  Many a spy has lured a

144    THE MEME MACHINE 
politician into bed as a plot, for obtaining information.  Many a young actress 
has succumbed to sex on the casting-couch in the hope that she will get on to the 
wide screen and so be seen and possibly emulated by millions.  Power is a 
powerful aphrodisiac and today’s power is all about spreading memes.  
Politicians are renowned for using sex as a weapon, as a device to gain 
influence, and as a way of cementing alliances – and these alliances are all about 
spreading political memes.  Sex is a wonderful world for the proliferation, 
control, and manipulation of memes. 
I have contrasted the sociobiological view of sex (it is all for the genes) with 
a memetic view (it is for memes as well as genes).  These two approaches make 
rather different predictions for the long-term future of any memetic species.  If 
sociobiologists are right (at least those who agree with their founding father, E. 
O. Wilson) then the genes must ultimately pull in the leash again.  If the genes 
were fundamentally in charge they would find a way to correct the mistake and 
redress the balance.  As time goes on, unless the mistake proved fatal, human 
beings would change genetically so that they were no longer lured away by 
magazines, high- powered jobs, or the Internet, and were prepared to concentrate 
on the proper business of creating more human beings. 
There is no room for such a leash on the memetic view.  If memes are 
replicators in their own right then they will spread and spread entirely selfishly.  
They will also spread faster and faster, and the number of memes will go on 
increasing.  If the genes ever could track the memes there must come a point at 
which they can no longer do so, and the speed of memetic evolution leaves the 
genes far behind. 
In today’s world a very few people still live as hunter-gatherers; many live as 
farmers or industrial workers in rapidly changing countries; and some live as 
advanced spreaders of memes in societies with computers, mobile phones, and 
television.  Birth rates are highest in the developing countries and lowest in the 
technologically advanced ones, so at the moment, memetic pressures favour the 
genes of people living in undeveloped countries.  Since their genes differ very 
slightly from the genes of people in developed countries, this will have some 
effect on the overall gene pool.  However, for this to have a big effect, the 
selection pressure would have to remain stable for many generations and, given 
the rate of cultural change, this now seems unlikely.  So what might we expect 
to happen now? 
For most of the past two or three million years memes have evolved slowly.  
Their main effect on the genes occurred because people tended to mate with 
good imitators, but beyond that they did not affect sexual behaviour very much.  
Our sexual behaviour was largely driven by the genes for their own replication,

SEX IN THE MODERN WORLD    145 
and our sexuality still shows the legacy of this long process.  However, in the 
modern world, the memes have taken over much of our sexual behaviour and put 
it to work for their propagation instead.  The technology of birth control has 
been an extraordinarily successful set of memes, facilitating the sex industry and 
diverting people’s energies away from lifelong child rearing.  However, just like 
genes, the memes have no foresight.  They cannot be expected to foresee that 
almost anything might happen.  They might even, in the process of diverting our 
energies from the genes, just wipe us out. 
Actually, this possibility is remote for the following reason.  If birth rates 
over the whole planet fall then the total population will fall.  This will be good 
news for the rest of the biosphere, but bad news for the memes.  At some point, 
the density of population will be too low to sustain the infrastructure needed for 
a thriving memetic world, and so memetic driving will slow down, and with it 
the use of birth control.  The genes can then take over and build up the 
population again until a new memetic infestation takes place.  As is seen with 
the spread of many parasites and diseases, it is rare for them to wipe out their 
hosts completely, and I would not expect memes to do so either. 
In fact, the situation is far more complex and unpredictable than that.  Given 
the gross inequities between societies at the moment it is more likely that birth 
rates will continue falling in the technologically advanced societies, while the 
less advanced ones grow in population.  Memetic influence may then shift 
towards the previously undeveloped countries and birth rates start falling there.  
So we might expect a swing back and forth as memes and genes battle it out to 
get human beings to spend their lives replicating one or the other.  This is what it 
means to be creatures of two competing replicators. 
Finally, the memes are busy devising ways of interfering even more directly 
with the genes.  We are already creating genetically engineered vegetables for 
food and, memetic pressure groups notwithstanding, will probably create 
genetically engineered animals that are quick growing, delicious to eat, and do 
not object to their impoverished or miserable lives. 
DNA testing means that paternity can be assured so that women will find it 
harder to trick their partners into raising other men’s children and men will have 
to pay the cost of having children by casual relationships.  Our sexual desires 
will still follow the dictates of genetic evolution while memetic evolution 
changes the rules.  Genetic engineering is already becoming commonplace, and 
some of the major inherited diseases may soon be defeated by simply removing 
the genes that cause them.  Cloning of sheep and other large animals is also

146    THE MEME MACHINE 
possible and, combined with the creation of headless and brainless clones, raises 
the prospect of maintaining genetically identical spare parts for rich people to 
ensure that they assay: have a heart or liver ready if they need one.  Other 
predictions for the future of ‘reprogenetics’ include babies born with the genes 
from two mothers, the insertion of genes for AIDS resistance into embryos, or 
the creation of whole suites of synthetic genes to provide designer embryos for 
people rich enough to afford them (Silver 1998). 
Note that I said ‘the memes are busy devising’.  This translates into the more 
accurate statement that memes for DNA testing, sequencing the human genome, 
and genetic engineering are successfully replicating in today’s world.  Why?  
Because many memetic factors come together to make them successful.  Enough 
people are sufficiently well educated; there are laboratories full of the necessary 
equipment; there are clever people around who manage to combine the existing 
memes and come up with new inventions; there is sufficient wealth to educate 
and fund those people to do it – and, of course, there is the human desire to have 
healthy, happy and successful children, and human greed that will always want 
more and better food, and promises of a better and easier life. 
So are we just unalterably selfish creatures, driven by the competing forces of 
two replicators to live lives of mindless greed?  Not at all.  Rather surprisingly 
one of the consequences of memetic evolution is that humans can be more 
altruistic than their genes alone would dictate. 

A memetic theory of 
altruism 
 
 
 
Altruism in the service of the genes 
 
Once one of the greatest mysteries for sociobiology – and now probably one of 
its greatest successes – is the problem of altruism. 
Altruism is defined as behaviour that benefits another creature at the expense 
of the one carrying it out.  In other words, altruism means doing something that 
costs time, effort, or resources, for the sake of someone else.  This might mean 
providing food for another animal, giving a warning signal to protect others 
while putting yourself at risk, or fighting an enemy to save another animal from 
harm.  Examples abound in nature, from the social insects whose lives revolve 
around the good of their communion to rabbits that thump warnings of 
approaching footsteps, and vampire bats that share meals of blood.  Humans are 
uniquely cooperative and spend a great deal of their time doing things that 
benefit others as well as themselves: what psychologists sometimes refer to as 
‘prosocial behaviour’.  They have moral sensibilities and a strong sense of right 
and wrong.  They are altruists. 
Altruism is a problem for many social psychologists and economists who 
assume that humans rationally pursue their own interests.  It is also a problem 
for Darwinism, although it was not always seen that way.  The problem varies 
according to the level at which you think selection takes place – or, putting it 
another way – what you think evolution is for.  If you believe, as many early 
Darwinians did, that evolution ultimately proceeds for the good of the 
individual, then why should any individual behave in such a way as to incur 
serious costs to itself while benefiting someone else?  All individuals ought to be 
out for themselves alone, and nature ought truly to be ‘red in tooth and claw’.  
Yet clearly it is not.  Many animals live social and cooperative lives, parents 
lavish devotion on their offspring, and many mammals spend hours of every day 
grooming their friends and neighbours.  Why do they do it? 
An answer that does not work is what the British philosopher Helena Cronin
CHAPTER 12 

148    THE MEME MACHINE 
(1991) calls ‘greater-goodism’ – the view that evolution proceeds for the good of 
the group or the species.  Greater-goodism permeated biological thinking in the 
early part of the twentieth century and is still a popular way of misunderstanding 
evolution.  On this view selection works ‘for the survival of the species’ or ‘for 
the good of humankind’.  The reason this cannot work is simple.  Think about 
the chance of infiltrators.  Let us suppose there were a species of wild dog in 
which each dog gladly caught rabbits for every other dog, and the pack lived in 
amiable harmony.  As long as this harmony prevailed all the dogs would benefit.  
But now imagine that a new dog appears that just eats all the meat he is given 
and never bothers to do any catching.  He will, of course, get the best food, have 
more time to pursue the best bitches, and will generally live better.  He will then, 
no doubt, pass on his selfishness genes to his many well-fed puppies.  So much 
for the good of the pack – selfishness for the individual must pay. 
The problems of thinking in terms of the good of the species were gradually 
recognised and since the early 1960s ‘group selection’ has been almost entirely 
abolished from neo-Darwinism (I shall consider some exceptions later).  The 
answer that has so successfully transformed the problem of altruism is selfish 
gene theory.  If you put the replicator at the heart of evolution and see selection 
as acting to the advantage of some genes rather than others, then many forms of 
altruism make perfect sense. 
Take parental care, for example.  Your own children inherit half of your 
genes.  Your children are the only direct way your genes can be carried on into 
future generations and so parental care is obviously needed, but this same 
principle can be applied to many other kinds of altruism.  Darwin hinted that 
‘selection may be applied to the family’ (1859, p. 258) but did not pursue the 
idea any further.  The British biologist J. B. S. Haldane first noted, in 1955, that 
a gene for selflessly jumping into a dangerous river to save a drowning child 
could flourish easily if that child were your own, and might still flourish, though 
less easily, if you saved your cousin, your niece or another more distant relative. 
In 1963 a young PhD student in London, tackling on his own the 
unfashionable topic of altruism, had just had his first paper turned down.  He 
became so lonely struggling with the unfamiliar mathematics involved that he 
sometimes used to work all evening in the main hall at Waterloo railway station 
just to have people around him (Hamilton 1996).  But William Hamilton’s next 
paper, ‘The genetical evolution of social behaviour’ (1964), became a classic.  
He put numbers to Haldane’s suggestion and developed what has come to be 
known as the theory of kin selection.  He imagined a gene G that tends to cause

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    149 
some kind of altruistic behaviour, and explained that ‘Despite the principle of 
“survival of the fittest” the ultimate criterion which determines whether G will 
spread is not whether the behaviour is to the benefit of the behaver but whether 
it is to the benefit of the gene G.’ (Hamilton 1963, p. 355).  This means that 
altruistic behaviour can spread in a population if animals are altruistic towards 
their own kin.  The nearness of the relationship determines just how much it is 
worth paying for the possibility of aiding the spread of the gene.  Instead of 
basing everything on the idea of individual fitness, the important quantity 
becomes ‘inclusive fitness’, which takes into account all the indirect ways in 
which a gene can benefit (Hamilton 1964).  The mathematics can get extremely 
complicated in real-life situations, but the principle is simple. 
Genes are invisible.  A monkey that is going to share some food cannot be 
sure whether the other monkey is really her sister or not, and certainly cannot 
look inside and find out just which genes the two of them have in common.  
However, this does not matter for the principle to work.  Monkeys that, in 
general, share resources with kin more than with non-kin will get more of their 
genes into the next generation.  How they achieve this may vary, and probably 
involves various simple heuristics such as ‘share with another monkey you were 
brought up with’ or ‘share with other monkeys that look, smell, or feel like your 
mother’ or ‘share most with monkeys you spend most time with’.  Depending on 
the lifestyle of the animals concerned, different heuristics will work better than 
others.  They work not by making the monkeys calculate sums, but by giving 
them feelings that make them act appropriately.  The same applies to us.  In 
other words, people ‘execute evolutionary logic not via conscious calculation, 
but by following their feelings, which were designed as logic executers’ (Wright 
1994, p. 190). 
We humans love our children (most of the time) and however much we are 
annoyed by our brother or despise our aunt, we still find it natural and 
unsurprising that we give them birthday presents, send them cards, or care more 
about them than some person we met in the street.  But the theory of kin 
selection explains far more of the detail of family dynamics than just that, 
including battles over weaning, siblings competing for their parents’ resources, 
and other forms of family strife as well as love. 
Another success for biology has been reciprocal altruism.  Darwin (1871) 
speculated that if a man aided his fellow-men he might expect to get aid in 
return.  A hundred years later Robert Trivers (1971) turned this speculation into 
the theory of reciprocal altruism, explaining how selection might favour animals 
who reciprocated friendship, for example, by sharing surplus resources in good

150    THE MEME MACHINE 
times in the hope of help in bad times.  Research has revealed that many animals 
do just this, but there is a catch.  If you are going to pay back favours, and avoid 
being cheated, you must be able to recognise other individuals.  Most animals 
cannot do this, but many primates can – as can elephants, dolphins, and even 
such unlikely species as vampire bats.  Vampire bats have a special problem in 
that they are very small and can easily die if they go without a meal of blood for 
more than two nights in a row.  Fortunately, blood meals can be much bigger 
than one bat really needs.  So the answer is to share your blood – and keep a 
track on who owes what to whom. 
Gratitude, friendship, sympathy, trust, indignation, and feelings of guilt and 
revenge have all been attributed to reciprocal altruism, as has moralistic 
aggression, or our tendency to get upset over unfairness.  If we have evolved to 
share resources with other humans, but to make sure our genes benefit, then our 
feelings are the way evolution has equipped us to do it.  On this theory not only 
moral sentiments, but ideas of justice and legal systems can be traced to the 
evolution of reciprocal altruism (Matt Ridley 1996; Wagstaff 1998; Wright 
1994). 
Game theory has made it possible to explore how and why various strategies 
might evolve.  Trivers used a game called the Prisoner’s Dilemma in which two 
people are kept apart and told they are accused of a crime with a penalty of, say, 
ten years in prison.  If both stay silent they can be convicted only on a lesser 
charge and both get a shorter sentence, say three years, but if one gives evidence 
against the other the defector gets off free.  What should they do?  Obviously the 
best outcome all round is for both to stay silent – but there is a strong temptation 
to defect – and what if the other one is tempted? – you might as well be tempted 
too.  There are many other versions using points, money, or other resources.  
The important point is that a perfectly rational and selfish person will always 
gain by defecting.  So how does cooperative behaviour ever come about? 
The answer is that in a one-off game it never should, but life is not a one-off 
game.  We meet people again, and form judgements about their trustworthiness.  
The answer to the Prisoner’s Dilemma lies in repetition.  In iterated Prisoner’s 
Dilemmas people assess the other’s likely behaviour and then both can gain by 
cooperating.  Players who have not met before often copy each other, 
cooperating with cooperators and not with defectors.  Persistent detectors are 
shunned, and so lose their chance of exploiting others. 
Games like this are also used by economists, mathematicians and computer 
modellers.  In 1979, the American political scientist Robert Axelrod set up a

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    151 
tournament and asked computer programmers to submit strategies for playing 
the game.  The fourteen entries each played 200 times against all the others, 
themselves, and a random program.  To many people’s surprise, the winning 
program ‘Tit-for-tat’ was both simple and ‘nice’.  Tit-for-tat began by 
cooperating and then simply copied what the other player did.  If the other 
player cooperated then both continued to cooperate and both did well; if the 
other player defected, Tit-for-tat retaliated and so did not lose out too badly 
against defectors.  In a second tournament over sixty programs tried to beat Tit- 
for-tat but failed. 
Subsequent research has used more complex situations, with many players, 
and has been used to simulate evolutionary processes.  It turns out that unless 
Tit-for-tat begins against overwhelming numbers of defecting strategies, it will 
spread in a population and come to dominate it.  It is what is known as an 
‘evolutionarily stable strategy’.  However, the real world is more complex, and 
Tit-for-tat does not do so well when mistakes are made, or when there are more 
players and more uncertainty.  Nevertheless, this approach shows how group 
advantage can emerge out of purely individual strategies without the need to 
appeal to evolution for the ‘greater-good’. 
Is this how cooperative behaviour actually evolved?  If so it would need 
some kind of nice behaviour to get it started, and Trivers has suggested that kin 
selection might have provided the starting point.  Animals already supplied with 
feelings of affection and caring towards kin could easily begin generalising and 
so give nice Tit-for-tat the start it needed. 
Note that the Prisoner’s Dilemma is a non-zero-sum game.  In a ‘zero-sum’ 
game what I gain you lose, and vice versa.  This is not so for many real-life 
situations.  Half a blood meal means life or death to a hungry young vampire bat 
but no more than an easy way to buy future favours for a well-fed more 
experienced hunter.  This exposes the rather unpleasant concept of bargain 
hunting – giving deliberately to others who are in great need because their debt 
to you will be all the greater.  This approach has also been used to show how 
moralising might evolve, since it pays to punish defectors and even to punish 
people who fail to punish defectors.  In this kind of game, trustworthiness 
becomes a valuable currency.  It pays you to be seen to be cooperative because 
you may reap the reward at some later date. 
I have given only a few examples of how sociobiology has dealt with the 
problem of altruism (more extended treatments can be found in Cronin 1991; 
Matt Ridley 1996; and Wright 1994) but I hope these are enough to see just how 
successful it has been.  In a sense this approach takes the altruism out of

152    THE MEME MACHINE 
altruism.  Acts of kindness and cooperation can be explained because they 
ultimately help the survival of the selfish genes on which they depend.  Is that 
the problem solved, then?  Does all of human altruism ultimately come down to 
kin selection and reciprocal altruism? 
 
The oddities of human altruism 
 
In today’s world we frequently deal with people who are unrelated to us and 
whom we know we will never meet again.  This suggests that society ought to 
be becoming less kind and cooperative, but this does not seem to be happening.  
Psychologists have long studied helping and cooperative behaviour.  
Experiments in the 1970s concentrated on bystander apathy – the depressing 
finding that people often do nothing to help a person injured in the street.  They 
found that helping is greatly increased if the bystander is the only one who can 
help, and is decreased if other people can be seen not helping – so this is another 
situation in which people imitate each other.  More recent studies, however, 
show that people will offer help in a wide range of situations.  Experiments 
teasing out the effects suggest that people help because they feel empathy for the 
sufferer, and not because they are related to them, nor because they can expect 
any reward for helping (Batson 1995). 
Try to think of the most altruistic of human acts you can.  Dawkins gave the 
example of giving blood.  In Britain every healthy adult is encouraged (or at 
least invited) to give blood twice a year, and donors are not paid – you get a cup 
of tea and a biscuit, and a little badge after ten donations.  He suggested this was 
a case of ‘pure, disinterested altruism’ (Dawkins 1976, p. 230.).  Others have 
suggested giving a large tip in a restaurant you will never visit again, or going to 
Ethiopia to help standing orphans.  We might add picking up valuables found in 
the street and handing them in to the police, clearing away someone else’s 
abandoned rubbish, recycling your waste, or setting up a standing order to a 
charity whose members you will never meet.  Then there are dogs’ and cats’ 
homes, and many people who care for birds with broken wings or maltreated 
donkeys.  All these may appear to be examples of ‘true’ altruism but, 
sociobiologists would argue, they are really the by-products of kin selection and 
reciprocal altruism.  We are most generous to our relatives (or those we think 
might be relatives) and we are nice to others so as to build up a reputation for 
being good and trustworthy.  Is this explanation adequate? 

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    153 
Let us take a few examples in more detail.  Imagine an Australian who sends 
money to the starving in Africa, or an American who sends money to 
Bangladesh.  Many people do this and some make no fuss about it.  They send 
off a cheque and never even tell anyone they have done so.  This cannot be kin 
selection because the final recipients are probably about as unrelated to the 
average donor as they could possibly be.  You might even argue that on a planet 
with limited resources, this kind of generosity is strongly against the genetic 
interests of the donor – over and above the cost of the gift, So is it reciprocal 
altruism?  Clearly not in any straightforward sense because the donor never 
expects to see the recipients or to be thanked by them in any way.  However, 
evolutionary psychologists argue that such generosity is a way of building up the 
donor’s reputation as a generous person (Matt Ridley 1996).  In that case, 
though, we should expect people to brag about their donations, which often they 
do not.  Even this can be explained as part of reciprocal altruism on the theory 
that the feeling of guilt is evolution’s way of making sure the system works, and 
so these hidden acts of generosity are just mistakes – the price we pay for having 
our uniquely human emotions. 
The examples I have given so far are mostly isolated acts of generosity, but 
altruism is much more deeply embedded in our lives than that.  Vast numbers of 
people choose to do jobs that are badly paid, poorly rewarded, have very long 
hours, and are highly stressful, because they want to be of service.  Such jobs 
include social work, psychotherapy, working in old people’s homes, looking 
after delinquent children, and environmental protection.  Why would anyone 
want to spend several years training to become a nurse and then spend their life 
working irregular hours, long shifts, dealing with difficult people, clearing up 
horrible messes, spending hours giving out pills and making beds in an 
environment of sickness and disease, all for an uncomfortably low salary?  The 
answer cannot be for material gain or genetic advantage.  Nurses may say it is 
because they want to help people, because it makes them feel fulfilled, because 
they believe that life is only worth living if you help others, because they are 
grateful to be healthy and want to help those who are not, because they 
recognise that money alone is not the way to happiness, and so on. 
According to sociobiological theory these reasons must all be by-products of 
reciprocal altruism, but to me that stretches the theory to breaking point.  The 
problem is that natural selection is ruthless and the cost of this kind of 
generosity could be very high indeed.  People who managed to avoid paying it in 
the past would have been at an advantage and would have passed on their genes

154    THE MEME MACHINE 
for avoiding it.  Evolutionary psychologists might argue that our emotional 
system was designed for the hunter-gatherer lifestyle and must be expected to go 
wrong (and perhaps to produce excess generosity) in a rich technological world.  
Perhaps the knowledge that ‘I will never ever see this person again’ is no match 
for underlying emotions programmed by the genes in times past, but then we are 
back to explaining away our behaviour as just a mistake. 
So is there an alternative? 
Until now there have been only two major choices in accounting for altruism.  
The first is to say that all apparent altruism actually (even if remotely) comes 
back to advantage to the genes.  On this view there is no ‘true’ altruism at all – 
or rather, what looks like true altruism is just the mistakes that natural selection 
has not managed to eradicate.  That is the sociobiological explanation.  The 
second has been to try to rescue ‘true’ altruism and propose some kind of extra 
something in human beings – a true morality, an independent moral conscience, 
a spiritual essence or a religious nature that somehow overcomes selfishness and 
the dictates of our genes; a view that finds little favour with most scientists who 
want to understand how human behaviour works without invoking magic.  
Neither choice appears satisfactory to me. 
Memetics provides a third possibility.  With a second replicator acting on 
human minds and brains the possibilities are expanded.  We should expect to 
find behaviour that is in the interests of the memes, as well as behaviour serving 
the genes.  Magic is no longer required to see why humans should differ from all 
other animals, nor why they should show far more cooperative and altruistic 
behaviour. 
We can ask our meme-selection question again.  Imagine a world full of 
brains, and far more memes than can possibly find homes.  Which memes are 
more likely to find a safe home and get passed on again?  I suggest that among 
the successful memes are altruistic, cooperative, and generous ways of behaving. 
 
Altruism in the service of the memes 
 
Imagine two people.  Kevin is an altruist.  He is kind, generous, and thoughtful.  
He gives good parties and buys people drinks in the bar.  He often has friends 
round for meals and he sends out lots of birthday cards.  If his friends are in need 
he takes the trouble to ring, to help them out, or to visit them in hospital.  Gavin 
is mean and selfish.  He resents buying other people drinks, and thinks birthday 
cards are a waste of money.  He never invites people round for a meal, and if his

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    155 
(few) friends are in trouble he always has something more important to worry 
about.  Now the question is – who will spread more memes? 
Other things being equal, Kevin will.  He has more friends and spends more 
time talking to them; they like him and they listen to him.  The memes he 
spreads might include the stories he tells, the music he likes, the clothes he 
wears, and the fashions he follows.  They might be the scientific ideas he likes to 
discuss, the economic theories he espouses, and his political views.  Most 
important, they will also include all those memes that make him the way he is – 
memes for giving good parties, for sending out lots of cards, for helping people 
in need and for buying them drinks.  Psychological experiments confirm that 
people are more likely to be influenced and persuaded by people they like 
(Cialdini 19949 Eagly and Chaiken 1984).  So his friends will imitate his 
popular behaviour and thus his altruism will spread.  And the more friends he 
has, the more people can potentially pick up his ways of making himself 
popular.  We could call Kevin a meme-fountain (Dennett 1998). 
Meanwhile, Gavin has few friends.  He makes few opportunities for talking 
to the ones he does have, and he rarely finds himself chatting over a drink or 
passing the time of day with a neighbour.  His memes have few chances to 
replicate because the few people who could potentially imitate him rarely do so.  
Whatever he thinks about the state of the nation or the best way of making apple 
pie, his ideas are unlikely to spread far because people do not listen to him, and 
if they do they do not adopt his ideas because they do not like him.  We might 
call Gavin a meme-sink. 
This difference forms the basis of a memetic theory of altruism.  The 
essential memetic point is this – if people are altruistic they become popular, 
because they are popular they are copied, and because they are copied their 
memes spread more widely than the memes of not-so-altruistic people, including 
the altruistic memes themselves.  This provides a mechanism for spreading 
altruistic behaviour. 
Note that I am not the first to treat altruistic acts as memes.  As we shall see, 
Allison (1992) proposes quite a different mechanism, and Du Preez (1996) 
considers selfish and altruistic discourses to be evolving memes, though without 
explaining exactly why altruism should spread in spite of its cost.  There are 
many ways of being altruistic and I have lumped them all together here, but they 
include generosity, kindness, caring behaviour, and so on – anything that makes 
it more likely that others will want to spend time with those people, and emulate 
them, and so will pick up their memes.  Note that for this kind of memetic 
altruism to work two things must be true.  First, that people are capable of 
imitation, and second, that they more often imitate altruists.  If both these are

156    THE MEME MACHINE 
true we should expect people just to find themselves being helpful and altruistic, 
without necessarily knowing why. 
I am going to speculate about the origins of such behaviour in our 
evolutionary past.  (In the next chapter I will deal with altruism in today’s world 
where it is easier to test the consequences and to find out whether a memetic 
theory is really needed.)  We begin with reciprocal altruism.  People are nice to 
each other to get kindness in return, and their emotions are designed 
appropriately – that is, people want to be generous to those who might repay 
them, and they want to be liked.  Now, add the capacity to imitate, and the 
strategy ‘copy-the-altruist’, and two consequences follow.  First, kind and 
generous behaviours will spread by imitation.  Second, behaviours that look like 
kind and generous ones, or are prevalent in kind and generous people, will also 
spread by imitation. 
I speculated previously about how human imitation ever came about, and it is 
interesting to realise that Tit-for-tat entails a kind of imitation – it is essentially a 
strategy of ‘imitate the other guy’.  So perhaps the selection pressures favouring 
cooperative behaviour also played a part in the evolution of imitation itself.  In 
any case, once imitation had arisen, people could begin copying each other, and 
ways of doing things could spread through whole populations.  Among these 
ways of doing things would be acts of generosity, such as sharing food, giving 
presents, and looking after the sick – all of which could arise from sound genetic 
principles such as those we have already considered, kinship patterns, mating 
systems, and reciprocal altruism. 
Once imitation has arisen, this process only works if people are more likely 
to copy altruists.  This makes sense, because if you live in a communion that 
uses reciprocal altruism you are likely to gain most by being with people who 
are known to be generous.  So the generous people will have more contact with 
others and therefore more opportunities for spreading their memes.  However, 
there is another reason why it might pay to copy altruists.  A fundamental 
principle of reciprocal altruism is that people are most generous to people who 
are generous to them.  But there is a way to cheat the system.  If you want the 
rewards (other people’s generosity) without paying the costs (actually being 
generous) you could try to look like a generous person.  In other words, it would 
pay you to copy the people who really are generous.  So the strategy ‘copy-the-
altruist’ should spread.  This strategy is, at first, of benefit to the genes but 
because it involves the second replicator the genes cannot keep it under control.  
‘Copy-the-altruist’ starts as a strategy for biological gain, and ends up as a 
strategy for spreading memes – including (but not restricted to) memes for

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    157 
altruism itself.  There will always be pressures against altruistic acts because of 
the costs involved, but once imitation is possible there is also memetic pressure 
for altruism. 
Imagine two early hunters who go out with bows and arrows, leather quivers, 
and skin clothing, and both come back with meat.  One, let us call him Kev, 
shares his meat widely with surrounding people.  He does this because kin 
selection and reciprocal altruism have given him genes for at least some 
altruistic behaviour.  Meanwhile Gav keeps his meat to himself and his own 
family, because his genes have made him somewhat less generous.  Which 
behaviours are more likely to get copied?  Kev’s of course.  He sees more 
people, these people like him, and they tend to copy him.  So his style of quiver, 
his kind of clothing and his ways of behaving are more likely to be passed on 
than Gav’s – including the altruistic behaviour itself.  In this way Kev is the 
early equivalent of the meme-fountain, and he spreads memes because of his 
altruistic behaviour. 
Note that there are two different things going on here.  First, the altruistic 
behaviour serves to spread copies of itself.  Second, it spreads copies of other 
memes from the altruistic person.  This second possibility could produce odd 
results.  As with biological evolution, accidents of history can have profound 
effects.  So, if it just happened that in one particular group of our ancestors the 
generous people happened to have made specially natty blue-feathered arrows, 
then blue-feathered arrows would spread more widely than brown-feathered 
ones, and so on.  Whatever the kind of memes we are talking about, they may be 
driven to increase by the altruism of their bearers. 
There are also more complicated ways in which altruism could be spread 
memetically.  The sociologist Paul Allison (1992) has suggested a number of 
‘beneficent rules’ whose contents may ensure their own survival.  They all take 
the general form of ‘Be good to those who have a higher than average 
probability of being carriers of this norm’.  This principle depends not on the 
strategy ‘copy-the-altruist’ but on ‘copy-the-successful’.  As Allison explains, 
suppose A follows one of these rules and helps B.  B may now be more 
successful because of the help he has received.  He is therefore more likely to be 
imitated and therefore to pass on the rule which made A help him in the first 
place.  In this way the rule spreads itself. 
This process only works if B actually takes on the beneficent rule and does 
not just take the kindness and run.  That is why the general rule is to be good to 
others who are likely to carry the rule.  So who are they?  Among many versions 
of the rules are ‘Be good to those who imitate you’, ‘Be good to children’, ‘Be 
good to your cultural ancestors’ or, more generally, ‘Be good to your close

158    THE MEME MACHINE 
cultural relatives’.  For example, you might follow the rule ‘Be good to your 
cultural descendants’.  If people have already taken on other memes of yours and 
in general are known to copy you, then they are more likely to take on your 
beneficent rules as well.  Since kindness to them is likely to increase their 
cultural fitness they may also pass it on to someone else and so the rule will 
thrive.  This process would apply to biological parents and their children, in 
which case it would be hard to distinguish from kin selection.  It becomes more 
interesting when applied to non-kin, and Allison considers the example of 
professors and their graduate students.  Professors who are generous to their 
students (in time, effort, and so on) increase the cultural fitness of their students 
and hence the chances that all their memes, including the beneficent rule itself, 
will be passed on to yet more students.  This makes sense, because a caring 
professor who works hard for her students’ welfare will certainly attract more 
students – and better students – who in turn are likely to do the same. 
Note that it is the rule that benefits here, not the professor.  Perhaps rationally 
the professor should not be so generous, but because these norms thrive and she 
has picked them up, she will be.  Allison does not use the term ‘meme’ but his 
beneficent norms clearly are memes, for he specifies that they are passed on by 
imitation and teaching.  His analysis shows how taking the meme’s eye view (or 
‘norm’s eye view’) can explain behaviours that cannot easily be explained in 
terms of rational choice theory or genetic advantage. 
Note that Allison’s scheme best accounts for acts of altruism directed 
towards cultural relatives and, as he points out, it cannot account for altruism 
directed at large groups of people, or at people in general.  In contrast, memetic 
altruism based on ‘copy-the-altruist’ can explain just this kind of generalised 
altruism. 
 
Memes versus genes 
 
Any act of meme-driven altruism potentially lowers the actor’s genetic fitness.  
In other words, the arena of human altruism can be seen as a competition 
between memes and genes.  Kev’s behaviour will make him friends but it may 
reduce his chances of survival, or the chance of his children’s surreal, by 
reducing their share of the meat.  His genes only ‘care’ about his generosity if it 
serves in the long run to pass them on, and they have equipped him with feelings 
and behaviours that generally serves their interests.  But his memes do not ‘care’ 
about his genes at all.  If they can get copied they will.  And they will, because

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    159 
people copy people they like.  Thus we can imagine a human society, in which 
meme-driven altruistic behaviour could spread – even if it put a heavy burden on 
individuals.  In other words, once people start to copy the altruists, the genes 
will not necessarily be able to stop them. 
Could memetic altruism get completely out of hand – and stretch the leash to 
breaking point?  Sometimes people do give more than they can really afford.  
They vie with each other to be the most generous, or give the most ostentatious 
of gifts.  As Matt Ridley (1996) points out, gifts can become bargains, bribes, 
and weapons.  Most extraordinary is the practice of ‘potlatch’.  The term comes 
from the Chinook language and potlatch is best known from American Indian 
groups, but it also occurs in New Guinea and other places.  A potlatch is a 
special event in which opposing groups try to impress their rivals by giving 
away, or destroying, extravagant gifts.  They may give each other canoes and 
animal skins, beads and copper plates, blankets and food.  They may even burn 
their most valuable possessions, kill their slaves, and pour precious oil onto a 
huge fire. 
Note that this wasteful tradition is not like ordinary reciprocal altruism.  In 
most forms of reciprocal altruism, both parties benefit from cooperating, but in a 
potlatch everyone loses (at least in purely material terms).  Note also that 
potlatch depends upon imitation.  Such a tradition could only spread by one 
person copying it from another until it becomes the norm for a whole society.  It 
is imitation that makes such peculiar behaviour possible, and once the genes 
have given us imitation they cannot take it back.  We could see the potlatch 
behaviour as like a parasite that may, or may not, kill its host, while most of our 
altruistic behaviour is symbiotic or even beneficial. 
Once again we can see that it is our capacity to imitate that makes humans so 
different from other species.  In other species gifts are confined to sharing with 
kin, to precise reciprocal deals, or to special situations such as the male spider 
who gives his mate a well wrapped fly to keep her busy while he copulates.  
Among human cultures, giving gifts is common; visitors bring gifts, special 
occasions are celebrated with gifts, marriages and birthdays are marked nth gifts.  
In Britain, about seven to eight per cent of the economy is devoted to producing 
articles that will be given away as gifts, and in Japan the figure may be higher 
still.  Fortunately, potlatches are rare, and for most of us the giving and receiving 
of gifts is an enjoyable part of being human. 
One last step gives us meme-gene coevolution again.  I have already argued 
that the best imitators, or the possessors of the best memes, will have a survival 
advantage, as will the people who mate with them.  So the strategy ‘mate-with-

160    THE MEME MACHINE 
he-best-imitator’ spreads.  In practice, this means mating with those people who 
have the most fashionable (and not just the most useful) memes, and we can now 
see that altruism is one of the factors that determined which memes come to be 
fashionable. 
So Kev, the meme-fountain, will not only make more friends and spread 
more memes, but since these memes are fashionable he will also attract a better 
mate and pass on the genes that made him altruistic in the first place.  This 
means that insofar as the originally altruistic behaviour depended on genetic 
differences, these will be passed on to more offspring, and so altruistic 
behaviour will spread genetically, as well as memetically.  Note that this process 
entails the memetic-driving of genes for altruism rather than just memes driving 
memes for altruism as described above.  By this process genes for human 
altruism could have been meme-driven – making us genetically more altruistic 
than we should otherwise be. 
Note also that this possibility arises because two strategies coincide – ‘imitate 
the altruist’ and (because altruism memes are imitated and become fashionable) 
‘mate-with-the-altruist’.  The same does not apply for Allison’s beneficent 
norms because they depend on the strategy ‘mate-with-the-successful’, which is 
directly in the interests of the genes, and is in any case widespread.  In other 
words, for Allison’s rules the outcome will be similar whether just genes were 
involved, or memes as well. 
I suggested that ‘imitate-the-altruist’ had two consequences: spreading 
altruism memes and spreading other memes associated with altruists.  The same 
applies to the memetic driving of genes.  So, not only might genes for altruism 
be favoured but, by the quirks of history, other genes might be affected.  For 
example, let us suppose that there was some genetic components to Kev’s choice 
of blue feathers (differences in colour vision, for example).  Blue-feathered 
arrows became popular because they first appeared on Kev, and Kev was a 
generous person.  Now people not only copy the feathers, but they preferentially 
mate with people who have the fashionable blue-feathered arrows.  Thus, the 
genes for preferring blue feathers may now have an advantage, and, if the 
fashion were maintained for enough generations, gene frequencies might start to 
change.  Note that there need be nothing intrinsically better about having blue-
feathered arrows.  The whole process began only because it was an altruistic 
person who started the fashion. 
I have no idea whether memetic-driving of this kind has ever taken place or 
not.  There is some observational evidence that human infants show a tendency 
to share (as well as to be selfish of course) at a young age, while infants of other 
primate species do not, suggesting an innate basis.  Certainly, humans have a far 
more cooperative society than any other species, apart from the social insects

A MEMETIC THEORY OF ALTRUISM    161 
such as ants and bees that operate by kin selection.  This theory of memetic 
altruism could provide the explanation.  It might also help explain why the 
relationship between memes and genes is apparently so successful, even though 
the two replicators are so often at odds.  Perhaps memes are more like a 
symbiont and less like a parasite precisely because they encourage people to 
cooperate with each other. 
If there were many other species with memes, comparisons would be easy; 
but there are not.  Many birds imitate each others’ songs and so perhaps we 
should expect these birds to show more altruism to each other than closely 
related non-imitators.  Dolphins are among the very few other species capable of 
imitation, and they are renounced for stories of heroic rescues.  Dolphins have 
been reported to push a drowning human up to the surface of the sea, and even 
to push someone onto land – a every strange thing for another species to do.  But 
this is only anecdote; much research would be needed to find out whether the 
idea is valid or not.  Other research to find out whether memetic driving of 
altruism has ever occurred would be difficult, as is all research on behaviour in 
our distant past. 
The prospects for research are much brighter when it comes to modern 
humans and their behaviour, and I want therefore to leave speculation about Kev 
and Gav and return to their modern counterparts.  We shall see that being kind, 
generous, and friendly plays an important role in spreading memes in today’s 
complicated society. 

The altruism trick 
 
 
 
In today’s world I am going to assume that we can ignore meme-gene 
coevolution.  This must be an oversimplification, because as long as there are 
two replicators they will interact with each other.  However, the pace of memetic 
evolution is now so fast, relative to that of human genetic evolution, that we can 
safely ignore the latter for most purposes.  The genes cannot keep up.  ‘What we 
cannot ignore is the legacy left by the long process of coevolution.  The brains 
we have are the big and clever brains created by meme-gene coevolution.  The 
way we think and feel is a product of that evolutionary process, and now 
determines which memes do well and which do not.  We like sex, so sex memes 
get a head start: different ones for men and for women.  ‘We like food and we 
like power and excitement.  We find maths hard, and so mathematical memes 
need a lot of encouragement.  The structure of our language affects which 
memes are more easily passed on.  The theories and myths we have created 
affect the way we deal with new memes.  And so on. 
Note that sociobiology has made a different simplifying assumption and has 
ignored the role of the memes.  For many purposes this has been an adequate 
approach, and we can use many of the findings of sociobiology to provide 
insight into the brains we have and the ideas and behaviours that come easily, 
but it cannot provide the whole picture.  Our concern now will be what happens 
when vast numbers of memes compete to get into, and stay in, limited numbers 
of increasingly educated and overworked brains. 
Here must resume the meme’s eye view; remembering that all that counts in 
the life of a meme is whether or not it survives and replicates.  I shall find 
myself saying that memes ‘want’, ‘need’, or ‘try to do’ something.  But we must 
remember that this is only shorthand for saying that the ‘something’ will 
improve the chances of the meme’s being copied.  Memes do not have conscious 
intentions; nor do they actually strive to do anything at all.  They are simply (by 
definition) capable of being copied, and all their apparent striving and 
intentionality comes from this.  When anything can be copied it can end up 
having few or many copies made.  Memes may be successfully copied because 
they are good, true, useful or beautiful – but they may be successful for other
CHAPTER 13 

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    163 
reasons too.  It is those reasons I now wish explore. 
A meme that gets into a meme-fountain will do better than one that only gets 
into meme-sinks.  We can guess who the meme-fountains are.  Indeed, many 
experiments in social psychology show who is most often emulated.  Powerful 
people (and people who dress in the trappings of power), people perceived as 
experts, and people in authority, are all examples of ‘imitate-the-successful’.  All 
these people are more likely to get others to do what they say or to accept their 
ideas; as salesmen, advertisers and politicians have long known.  In discussing 
the ‘power button’ Brodie (1996) suggests that TV shows use large cars, guns, 
and flashy clothes to gain more air time and so promote their kind of memes.  
Fame spreads memes, as when television and film stars are watched by millions 
of viewers, so changing the fashions in clothes, speech, smoking or drinking, 
cars, food and lifestyle.  But not everyone is powerful, and there are other kinds 
of meme-fountain.  For example, we are more likely to be persuaded by 
someone we perceive as similar to ourselves, and a clever sales trick is to mirror 
the actions of the potential buyer or to pretend to having similar beliefs or 
hobbies (Cialdini 1994). 
I have already suggested that one way to spread memes is to behave 
altruistically, and I now want to consider some of the consequences of this less 
obvious way of becoming a meme-fountain.  First, altruistic behaviour spreads 
copies of itself – so making us more altruistic.  Second, altruism helps to spread 
other memes – so providing a trick that memes can use to get themselves copied. 
 
Altruism spreads 
 
Let us consider just the copying of altruistic behaviour itself.  Imagine two 
different memes (or sets of memes).  One is a set of memes for helping your 
friend when she is in trouble – whether it is giving her a lift when her car breaks 
down or listening to her troubles when her boyfriend leaves her.  The other is a 
set of memes for ignoring what your friend needs.  These are behaviours that can 
be copied from one person to another and so they must be memes.  Note that I 
use the phrase ‘a meme for something’.  This is potentially dangerous because it 
might be taken to imply that there is a particular instruction explicitly stored 
somewhere in a brain which tells the person to help their friend – and this can 
easily be made to look ridiculous.  This interpretation is not necessary, however.  
All that is necessary is to assume that people imitate aspects of each other’s

164    THE MEME MACHINE 
behaviour and that when they do so something is passed on from one to the 
other.  We do not need to agonise about what that something is.  The simple fact 
is that if imitation happens (as it surely does) then something has been passed on 
and that something is what we call the meme.  So when I say a ‘meme for 
helping your friend’ I only mean that some aspect of helping behaviour has been 
passed on by one person copying another. 
Now we can ask the important question: which of these two memes will do 
better?  The first meme will – it will make your friend like you more and want to 
spend more time with you.  She will then tend to imitate you more than her 
other, less helpful, friend and so your helpfulness memes will spread to her.  She 
will therefore become more helpful to her other friends, and so the meme will 
gradually spread.  The same simple logic applies to any meme which helps its 
carrier to become more popular.  The people who pick up these memes are not 
aware of what they are doing, they just find themselves wanting to be more like 
the nice people, not the nasty ones.  They find they want to help and be kind and 
feel bad if they do not.  Just as many of our human emotions serve the genes, so 
these ones serve the memes – and they are no less noble for that. 
Does this mean that everyone will become nicer and nicer and nicer without 
limit?  Of course not.  The main reason why not is that being kind and generous 
and altruistic is expensive in terms of time and money.  There are always 
pressures acting against altruism, and there are always other strategies for 
memes to use.  However, in general it means that people will be more altruistic 
than they would be if they were incapable of imitation. 
This is an example of meme-driven altruism in a modern context (and note 
that this is different from the memetic driving of genes for altruism which I 
considered at the end of the previous chapter).  In this kind of meme-driven 
altruism, actions that are costly and done for someone else come about through 
memetic competition.  Because these actions are driven by memes and not genes 
they need not necessarily be in the person’s genetic interest.  These cases, in 
which the genes do not benefit and the memes do, provide test cases for a 
memetic explanation.  People who devote their entire lives to charitable work or 
to the caring professions while having no children of their own are examples.  
Their sacrifice cannot easily be explained in terms of genetic advantage, but can 
be simply explained in terms of memetics. 
In principle, meme-driven altruism ought to be able to produce the most pure 
and selfless generosity.  Indeed, it may occasionally do so.  However, altruism 
not only works to spread itself but also acts to spread other memes as well.  This 
provides a mechanism open to exploitation by other memes.  This, I suggest, is 
exactly what happens.  I shall describe several ways in which memes can exploit

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    165 
the process of meme-driven altruism.  These are all versions of what I shall call 
the ‘altruism trick’. 
The altruism trick depends on the simple idea that a meme that gets into an 
altruistic or likeable person (like Kevin) is more likely to be copied than one that 
gets into a meany (like Gavin).  So what kinds of meme (other than memes for 
altruism) can get into the altruist? 
First, some memes look like altruism even if they are not, and so they can fit 
easily in an already altruistic person, and second, memes can group together into 
memeplexes that use various tricks to get into altruists. 
 
Looking like altruism 
 
The first is an obvious trick, to look like altruism.  A meme that makes a person 
appear to be kinder and more generous will increase the chances of that person 
being imitated and so of that meme being spread, without incurring great costs.  
There are many examples of this kind of behaviour.  We smile at people a lot, 
and we smile back at people who smile at us first.  We say kind and polite things 
to them – ‘How are you?’ ‘I do hope your parents are well’ ‘Have a nice time at 
the party’ ‘How may I help you?’ ‘Have a good day’ ‘Happy New Year’.  With 
all these common memes we give the impression of caring about the other 
person, even if we do not.  That is why they are successful memes.  Our ordinary 
everyday conversation is full of such memes. 
Closely related to this is the sort of meme that sneaks easily into an altruist.  
Memes do not exist in isolation.  All memes, at least at some phases of their 
lives, are stored in human brains, and humans are complicated creatures who 
strive to maintain some kind of consistency to their ideas.  This ‘consistency 
principle’ is crucial in understanding a lot of human thought and action.  If a 
given person tends to be altruistic, whether because of a genetic tendency to act 
that way, or because he has picked up lots of altruistic memes during his lifetime 
(or most likely because of both), then other altruism memes are more likely to 
gain a foothold there. 
Let us suppose a new meme comes along in the lives of Kevin and Gavin; 
suppose they both hear a plea to save their used stamps and send them to some 
charity.  This new meme is far more likely to be accepted and acted on by Kevin 
than Gavin.  It fits well with his other behaviour.  He thinks of himself as a 
caring person and so on.  If he refused to take part he would suffer ‘cognitive 
dissonance’, the unpleasant consequence of holding two incompatible views – in 
this case, his idea of himself as a caring person and his refusal to help with the

166    THE MEME MACHINE 
stamps.  Many psychological studies have shown that people will work to reduce 
the dissonance between incompatible ideas, and also that consistency itself is 
generally admired and emulated (Cialdini 1994; Festinger 1957).  The idea is 
less likely to take hold of Gavin.  He should suffer no cognitive dissonance by 
refusing to help in this or any other way. 
The need for consistency and the avoidance of dissonance provide the 
context in which memes club together in different people.  Once someone is 
committed to a particular set of memes, other memes are more or less likely to 
find a safe home in that person’s repertoire of arguments, beliefs, and 
behaviours.  We find this kind of generalisation of memes in all sorts of 
contexts.  You might think it is just common sense that nice people do nice 
things and nasty people do nasty things but memetics puts this common-sense 
fact in a slightly different light.  Memes can succeed or fail because of the 
genetic propensities of the people they come across, but also because of the 
memes that are already present in those people. 
The situation is all the more complex because of changing fashions.  The 
memes which are acceptable will shift as the whole meme pool changes.  At one 
time, certain types of charitable giving will seem appropriate, but a few years 
later, completely different kinds will take over.  But this complexity should not 
cloud the basic principle.  Once meme-driven altruism has got going it will 
generalise.  Memes for all sorts of kind and generous acts can take hold more 
easily in people who are already infected with altruistic memes and who have 
invested in a particular view of themselves.  These people are copied more than 
other people and so these memes spread more widely. 
This process can be used to understand all sorts of otherwise rather baffling 
actions.  Let us take kindness to animals.  Many people go out of their way to 
help animals in distress.  There are homes for dogs and cats, and refuges for sick 
donkeys and injured wildlife.  There are game parks and great international 
attempts to save species from extinction.  There are ‘Save the Animals’ charity 
shops, and greetings cards that support wildlife organisations. 
I say this is baffling because there is no easy explanation of all this inter-
species kindness in terms of rational self-interest, genetic advantage, or 
evolutionary psychology.  Rescuing an injured tiger would not benefit a hunter-
gatherer.  Animals were not domesticated until about ten thousand years ago in 
the ‘Fertile Crescent’ to the east of the Mediterranean, as recently as one 
thousand years ago in America, and not at all in some parts of the world 
(Diamond 1997).  Therefore during most of our evolutionary past, he animals 
around us have mostly been either potential prey for eating or predators trying to

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    167 
eat us.  Saving them from death makes no genetic sense; nor does working to 
relieve their suffering.  I have never come across a sociobiological explanation 
of kindness to animals, although I can think of several possibilities.  Animals 
cannot, on the whole, pay back the favours; so direct reciprocal altruism is no 
explanation.  However, a possible argument is that reciprocal altruism has given 
us the emotions that drive this behaviour.  We feel empathy with suffering 
animals and want to relieve it; we feel guilt if we do not, and so on.  Another 
possibility is that we raise our status in the reciprocal altruism stakes by 
appearing so kind.  I am not convinced that this makes sense, because of the 
high potential costs of such behaviour.  Surely, natural selection would have 
weeded out any tendencies to be too kind to animals, especially wild and 
dangerous ones.  These theories are also hard to test. 
Why do we do it then?  I suggest that kindness to animals can easily take 
hold because it fits well in people who are already infected with altruism memes.  
They see themselves as kind people and have an investment in continuing to be 
so.  The way they behave makes them more likely to be imitated, and so 
kindness to animals spreads. 
Exactly the same argument applies to the increasingly widespread practice of 
refusing to eat meat.  Humans were clearly designed to eat a certain amount of 
meat.  Meat is high in protein and fat, and was probably necessary to feed the 
increasingly large brain of our far ancestors.  Yet now many people, myself 
included, do not eat meat.  Some argue that they feel better on a vegetarian diet 
and a few do not like meat, but most say they are affected by the suffering of the 
animals bred and killed for food.  I suggest that vegetarianism succeeds as a 
meme because we all want to be like the nice people who care about animals, 
and we copy them.  Not everyone will get infected by this meme; some like meat 
too much and others have sets of memes that are not very compatible with this 
one.  Nevertheless, it does quite well.  Vegetarianism is a memetically spread 
altruistic fashion. 
If this is right we should expect to be able to trace the historical origins of 
such memes as they gradually appear and take hold of whole populations.  We 
would not expect to find such actions in societies with little communication and 
few ways for memes to spread.  We would expect them to be most common in 
societies in which people have plenty of resources to spare and plenty of 
opportunities for picking up new memes.  We should not necessarily expect 
people to brag about being kind to animals, but simply to find themselves 
wanting to be so. 
Note that it is not necessary that the superficially kind actions should actually

168    THE MEME MACHINE 
help the animals in question.  An injured animal that is rescued is helped in the 
short term, and a potential battery hen that is never hatched is almost certainly 
better off for never having existed.  But the long-term prospects are dubious, 
especially when it comes to schemes for saving whole habitats or species.  The 
memetic approach makes it easy to understand why particular behaviours spread 
even when they do not achieve what they are supposed to achieve.  It is not just 
that people make mistakes in their reasoning, which we know all too well, but 
that they are especially likely to make certain sorts of mistakes – in this case 
copying behaviours that look altruistic. 
A final example of this kind is recycling waste.  Recycling is certainly a 
meme – that is, a behaviour that people pick up by copying other people, 
whether they read about it, see it on television or discover that all their 
neighbours are doing it.  Many people put a great deal of effort into separating 
different kinds of waste, storing them in their house or garage, taking them to 
recycling points, and buying recyclable goods.  The recycling meme has been an 
enormously successful one, spreading far and wide in the developed world and 
driving a massive amount of human activity.  Some experts argue that the energy 
thus used is far more than would be needed if the materials were simply dumped 
and new ones made.  I have no idea whether this is true, but from the memetic 
point of view it does not matter.  ‘We would expect these kinds of behaviour to 
spread because they are easily picked up by people who already do all kinds of 
generous, caring and ‘green’ activities, who are therefore seen as altruistic and 
are therefore copied.  The whole ‘green movement’, and the effort put into it, is 
just what you would expect of meme-driven altruism in action. 
 
Memeplexes and the altruism trick 
 
Memes which have nothing to do with altruism can benefit from ‘copy-the-
altruist’ by just tagging along for free.  Like Kev the caveman’s flashy blue-
feathered arrows, some memes may just by luck happen to be carried by more 
altruistic people, but this luck is not a memetic process that can be relied on.  
Instead, we can expect memes to have devised strategies for getting into 
altruistic people without actually being altruism memes themselves (or more 
accurately – memes that happened to have such strategies should have survived 
better than those without, and we should be able to observe them around us).  
Are there such examples? 
Yes.  They range from little groups of co-memes to very complicated

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    169 
memeplexes.  Remember that the essence of any memeplex is that the memes 
inside it can replicate better as part of the group than they can on their own.  
Some simple ones will show the principle.  For the first type we need to assume 
that people want to be liked.  This is part of the principle I have been following 
that people imitate people they like more than people they do not.  Imitating 
people you like should be a good way to become liked yourself and being liked 
should ensure that people are nicer to you. 
Now, let us take some actions a parent might try to persuade a child to do, 
such as keep clean, say please and thank you to Auntie Dawn, or stay a virgin 
until after marriage.  Why should children obey the instructions?  They might 
obey out of fear or coercion, but a common trick is to turn the instruction into 
‘Good children keep their clothes clean’, ‘Nice people say please and thank 
you’, or ‘Good girls don’t have sex before marriage’.  These simple memeplexes 
consist of just two parts; the instruction and the idea of being good.  ‘People 
won’t like you if you do that’ is another, as are hints that nice people vote 
conservative, people like us eat dinner at eight, or kind people go to church. 
More complicated memeplexes can build up around the kinds of altruism I 
considered before, such as kindness to animals or recycling, and lots of other 
memes can jump on board.  The recycling symbol is a little scrap of information 
that has been very successfully copied around the world.  The names and logos 
of all the charities are other examples, as are the collecting boxes that are rattled 
in the street, the practices of having charity shops, of distributing special bags to 
collect goods in, and many other activities that thrive in the world of charitable 
giving.  As memeplexes evolve and become more complicated, new niches are 
created in which new kinds of meme can thrive.  In the examples I have given 
here, the spread of charitable giving opens up niches for all sorts of other memes 
to thrive. 
You can even sell music and fashions using altruism.  Bob Geldof really did 
give money to the starving in Africa but he sold millions of records at the same 
time.  Princess Diana’s memorial fund really is funding her charities but it is 
spreading millions of Diana memes in the process – pictures, stories, personal 
reminiscences, speculations and scandals, videos of her life and times, not to 
mention the words and tune of Candle in the Wind. 
These are simple examples, but they are sufficient to show that meme-driven 
altruism is an obvious meme-trick ready for exploitation.  It should not, 
therefore, surprise us to find that many of the most powerful and widespread 
memeplexes use it in various forms.  Pre-eminent are the religions.  One of the 
mechanisms is simple, once you think about it memetically.  A religion which

170    THE MEME MACHINE 
persuades its followers to be more altruistic will spread because of the altruism 
trick-. 
I was once cycling in a park in Bristol when my bicycle chain fell off.  
Before I could jump off to put it back two young men raced up to me, politely 
offered help, expertly put the chain back on, and stood smiling kindly at me.  
‘Thank you very much’, I said, feeling a little bewildered.  For I had never seen 
them before and I was not a ravishing sight in my Felix-the-cat bike helmet.  
God was soon on their lips, quickly followed by Joseph Smith and Salt Lake 
City.  The Mormon faith is ably and deliberately spread by the altruism trick.  It 
doesn’t work on everyone, but it works well enough to keep the memes alive. 
The altruism trick works like this.  Take a political party, a religious sect, a 
cult, a local benevolent society, or any complex belief system.  Incorporate 
within it the idea that its followers should do good works.  These good works 
will then make the followers more likeable and so people will copy them – 
copying in the process all the other memes in the belief system.  Of course, this 
mechanism does involve actual ‘good works’, as did Geldof and Diana.  Others 
only give the appearance of doing good, or just persuade their followers to think 
they are doing good.  Others exploit the sense of obligation induced by giving 
gifts – the proselyte does you a good turn, you now feel obligated to him, and 
the obvious way to repay this obligation is to do what he wants, that is, to take 
on his memes (or at least give the appearance of doing so).  There are many 
variations on this basic ‘altruism trick’.  I will consider how some of them work, 
as well as further implications of Allison’s (1992) beneficent norms, when 
dealing in more detail with religions. 
Note that this trick effectively makes people work for the memes they carry.  
People who join the cults or adopt the ideologies give away their possessions, do 
good works, or help others, because this helps copy the memes that have 
infected them.  Other people then copy them and they also begin to work for the 
memes.  This is one reason why memeplexes that use this trick have survived in 
the past and why there are so many of them around now.  This is the second time 
we have met the idea of people working for their memes (the first was in relation 
to sex and spreading memes rather than genes) and we will meet it again.  In this 
sense we can say that the memes are driving human behaviour. 
If this seems frightening then we need to ask ourselves why.  What does 
drive human behaviour?  Much of the antagonism towards Darwinism, 
sociobiology, and indeed any science of human behaviour, stems from an 
apparent desire to see ourselves as magical autonomous agents in charge of our 
own destinies.  I shall tackle the basis of this view later, but for now just say that

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    171 
yes, memetics does undermine this view.  We can describe any behaviour in 
numerous different ways for different purposes, but underneath them all lies the 
competition between the replicators.  Memes provide the driving force behind 
what we do, and the tools with which we do it.  Just as the design of our bodies 
can be understood only in terms of natural selection, so the design of our minds 
can be understood only in terms of memetic selection. 
 
Debts, obligations and bartering 
 
Can the theory of memetic altruism be tested?  One approach would be to test 
the basic assumptions on which it rests.  The main assumption is that people 
preferentially copy the people they like.  I have assumed this because there are 
substantial hints in the literature that this is so.  In his widely cited book on the 
psychology of persuasion, the American psychologist, Robert Cialdini (1994) 
renews the evidence that people are more easily influenced by, and more likely 
to agree to a request or buy a product from people they like.  Tupperware parties 
work because the hostess invites friends who like her and are therefore more 
likely to buy products they do not want.  Successful car dealers charm their 
intended purchasers by complimenting them, appearing to be similar to them, 
giving away small concessions or appearing to take their part against the boss, 
all of which increases the clients’ liking for the dealers and hence the ease with 
which the victims can be separated from their money.  The major factors that 
increase liking include physical attractiveness, similarity, cooperativeness, and 
the belief that the other person likes you.  One record-breaking salesman even 
used to send out thirteen thousand cards a month to his clients saying ‘I like you’ 
– and presumably he was not wasting his money. 
What is not so clear is whether liking leads directly to imitation.  This has not 
been much studied by social psychologists, perhaps because the importance of 
imitation per se has not been emphasised.  If it does, the other consequences 
should follow; that people buy products from, are persuaded to change their 
minds by, and more often agree with people they like.  In other words, the social 
psychological findings described above may be a consequence of a deeper 
underlying tendency to want to copy people we like.  The experiments that need 
to be done, therefore, should look more closely at the imitation of actions carried 
out by likeable and unlikeable people.  For example, we might ask people to 
watch liked and disliked models carrying out a task in different ways, and then

172    THE MEME MACHINE 
do the task themselves.  Experiments could then go on to find out just how best 
to manipulate liking so as to produce the most effective imitation.  If the same 
manipulations affect simple imitation of actions as well as persuasion and 
agreement with beliefs, this would be suggestive that a similar process is going 
on in both.  I have also assumed that altruistic behaviour makes people more 
likeable.  This may seem too obvious to need testing, but we could use similar 
experiments to test the main consequence of this – that is, that acting 
altruistically will induce people to imitate you.  If these predictions were not 
born out the entire basis of this kind of meme-drive altruism would be 
undermined. 
The outcome of such experiments might be complicated by the effects of the 
‘reciprocation rule’.  It is well known in social psychology that people feel 
obliged to repay any kindness shown to them, and feel obligated if they do not 
(Cialdini 1995).  This tendency is culturally widespread and probably related to 
the fact that aid from rich to poor countries is not always well received 
(Moghaddam et al. 1993).  Presumably, reciprocity stems from our evolved use 
of reciprocal altruism.  Now, if an observer in one of our experiments has a 
kindness done to them they may feel obligated to the model – an unpleasant 
feeling which might disincline them to like the model and so complicate the 
issue.  The most interesting outcome from the memetic point of view would be if 
imitating the altruist (i.e. taking on their memes) acted as a kind of reciprocation.  
By this I mean that one person could ‘pay back’ a kindness by taking on the 
other person’s ideas. 
This effect can be seen to follow from a combination of the ‘reciprocation 
rule’ which derives from reciprocal altruism, and Allison’s beneficent norm ‘Be 
good to those who imitate you’.  According to this rule, if A imitates B, B 
should now feel obliged to A.  So, for example, not only does the professor want 
to be nice to her students but all of us should be kinder to people who agree with 
us, or take on our ideas, or imitate us in other ways.  If the process works both 
ways then if C gives D a gift, D will feel obligated to C and may pay back the 
obligation by agreeing with C (or taking on her memes in some other way).  In 
ordinary life we may be seeing this in the tendency of guests to agree with their 
host’s ideas, or of people in subordinate positions to agree with those who have 
power over them, or in the tricks used by religions that I discussed above.  
Finally, this could lead to people trading off their obligations by bartering goods 
against imitation in all possible combinations.  So, for example, the guest who 
brings a fine present should feel under less obligation to agree with the host than 
one who does not. 

THE ALTRUISM TRICK    173 
If the idea of exchanging goods for taking on memes seems unfamiliar, we 
might think of the bartering of memes that goes on all around us.  We are used to 
the idea of paying for the information we want, by buying books or newspapers, 
paying our TV licence, or buying tickets to the cinema, but if people want to 
impose their ideas on us then they have to pay to get our attention, like 
advertisers and politicians do.  I shall return to this in considering the way that 
information is put onto the Internet at the cost of the provider, not the user. 
All these exchanges could be investigated.  Imagine an experiment in which 
James expresses some unpopular idea, or solicits people to join his organisation, 
or whatever.  Among a group of people present, Greg gets up and publicly 
agrees with James.  Now James should feel obliged to Greg and so be more 
likely to act generously towards him than to the others.  Such experiments could 
find out whether exchanging memes could become a kind of currency like 
exchanging goods. 
Other experiments might bring together people of opposed viewpoints, or 
people who disagree about the right way to do something, and find out what 
methods they actually use to change one another’s minds.  Studies of attitude 
change have often been done where material gain is at stake, such as in 
advertising and political persuasion, but this theory predicts that people will, if 
given the chance, be more generous to people they are seeking to convince – 
even when there is no material gain involved.  In addition, there is no point 
being generous to people who already agree with you, nor to those whom you 
judge as being beyond conversion.  The greatest altruism should be shown to 
those who are capable of being convinced (Rose 1997). 
The effects of reciprocation are a little more complex, however.  Imagine the 
following experiment.  Just two people are involved (though in practice we 
would need to repeat it with many pairs).  Janet is asked to express her opinion 
on some controversial topic while Meg listens in silence.  Janet now acts 
generously in some way towards Meg (perhaps by buying her a coffee or 
offering to help with something).  Meg is then asked to say how much she likes 
Janet.  We should obviously expect that Meg will express greater liking for Janet 
when she has been generous towards her than when she has not.  Now we give 
Meg the chance to say what she thinks about the controversial topic and again 
measure her liking for Janet.  The theory makes two predictions.  The first is 
more obvious, that Meg is more likely to express agreement when Janet has 
given her something.  The second is less so, that expressing agreement acts as a 
kind of repayment of the kindness.  So we should predict that if Meg now 
publicly agrees with Janet (whether that is really her opinion or not) she will

174    THE MEME MACHINE 
now like Janet more than if she does not.  In other words, Meg likes Janet not 
only because she was kind to Meg, but because Meg has paid off her debt by 
agreeing and so need no longer feel under any obligation to Janet. 
This is an extremely artificial situation but I have tried to keep it simple.  
More realistic ways of taking on someone’s memes might be to copy their 
actions in some more concrete way, to agree to pass on information to someone 
else, to write down what they say, to join a group they belong to, and so on, but I 
hope the principle is clear – that liking for a generous model would be increased 
if the subject were given the chance to imitate her, because the sense of 
obligation was reduced.  This is, I suggest, a counter-intuitive outcome that 
could not readily be predicted or explained on any other theory. 
If these predictions are correct they suggest that memes and resources can be 
bartered against each other in all sorts of ways.  We should be able to pay people 
to accept our ideas, agree with people to pay off debts, and force people into 
agreement by what appear to be generous actions.  There are interesting 
implications here for the power of money to coerce people into agreement.  
Some of the predictions are fundamental to the processes underlying meme-
driven altruism and therefore, if they do not work out, my theory is wrong. 

Memes of the new age 
 
 
 
One day in 1997, a young student came to interview me for his media project.  
After several predictable questions he said ‘Dr Blackmore, you are well known 
for your theory that alien abductions are really a form of sleep paralysis.  Well I 
have experienced sleep paralysis and I have been abducted by aliens, and I can 
tell you they are not the same thing at all.’ 
It was my turn to ask the questions.  Over many hours he told me of multiple 
abductions, starting when he was five years old and continuing into his 
adulthood.  He told of aliens landing in the fields outside his house, of their 
visits to his bedroom and of operations they performed on him inside their 
spaceship.  To top it all he showed me a tiny metallic object that the alien 
creatures had implanted in the roof of his mouth and which he had removed after 
two weeks of discomfort.  Would I, with my ‘closed mind’ on UFOS, be 
prepared to analyse it scientifically? 
Naturally I said yes.  My own sceptical view of abductions was open to test 
by just this kind of object.  There have been thousands of claims that people 
have been abducted, and several well-known academics prepared to support 
them (Jacobs 1993; Mack 1994).  The stories are fairly consistent, and the 
people who tell them are known to be of at least average intelligence and 
education, and generally psychologically healthy (Spanos et al. 1993).  But 
absolutely no convincing physical evidence has ever been provided, unless you 
count some stained clothing and a few previous ‘implants’.  But you never 
know, this one might be it – every scientist’s dream – an object of unimaginable 
consequence – a piece of technology from an alien civilisation.  Of course I 
wanted to analyse it. 
The analysis was simple and so was the answer, The mysterious object, 
though it looked very much like other ‘implants’ under the electron microscope, 
turned out to be made of dental amalgam.  The young man was partly 
disappointed and partly relieved, but as far as I know he is still convinced that he 
has been abducted, even though he is not now so frightened of the creatures 
implanting more objects in his body. 
So what is going on?  Accusing these people of either making up their 
incredible stories, or suffering delusions, is unfair when many of them (and I 
have met many) appear perfectly ordinary, sane people.  They have clearly been
CHAPTER 14 

176    THE MEME MACHINE 
frightened by something that has happened to them, and are convinced that 
aliens are to blame. 
 
Alien abduction as a memeplex 
 
I suggest that the aliens are a memeplex; a memeplex consisting of the idea of 
four-foot high skinny, large-headed creatures with big black eyes, an image of 
the ships they come in and the operations they perform, their intentions in 
visiting our planet, and all the other details we are fed through the media.  As 
Elaine Showalter argues in her book Hystories (1997), such epidemics are 
spread by stories (though I would not describe them all as hysterical).  
Interestingly, the alien intentions vary with the group you favour.  Followers of 
John Mack are inclined to the ecologically friendly type of alien who is coming 
to warn us of impending catastrophe, while followers of the Jacobs’ School are 
abducted as part of an alien breeding programme making half-human-half-alien 
babies to invade our planet. 
The memetic approach to alien abductions is to ask why these ideas should 
propagate so successfully, when they are not true.  There is no mystery about 
why true and useful ideas should propagate successfully – they do so because 
people want and can use them.  So memetics does not provide much advantage 
over other ways of looking at the world when it comes to understanding the 
success of good scientific theories or accurate needs.  However, memetics does 
help when it comes to explaining the spread of untrue, bizarre, and even harmful 
ideas.  One such is alien abduction. 
One key to alien abduction experiences is the phenomenon of sleep paralysis.  
During dreaming sleep most of our muscles are paralysed so that we do not act 
out our dreams.  By the time we wake up this paralysis has usually worn off and 
we know nothing about it (unless experimenters intervene).  However, the 
mechanism that keeps waking and dreaming apart can sometimes fail, especially 
in people who work shifts or have very disrupted sleep.  Sometimes people wake 
up, can look around and think clearly, and yet are quite unable to move.  
Common sensations accompanying the paralysis include buzzing and humming 
noises, vibrations of the body or bed, a powerful sense that there is somebody or 
something in the room with you, and strange lights floating about.  Since sexual 
arousal in dreams is common this can also persist into the paralysis.  Sometimes, 
people feel as though they are being touched or pulled or even lifted from their 
bodies.  If you recognise the symptoms, and can keep your cool, the best 
response is to relax and wait; the paralysis wears off within a minute or two.  If

MEMES OF THE NEW AGE    177 
you try to struggle you only make matters worse. 
If you have no idea what is going on, the experience can be terrifying, and a 
natural reaction is to blame someone or something, or to seek an explanation.  In 
previous periods of history and different cultures, various ‘explanations’ have 
been available.  The incubus and succubus of medieval times were evil spirits 
sent to tempt the wicked into sexual activities.  Until the early twentieth century, 
people in the south of England blamed witches for what they called ‘hag-riding’, 
and even today there are people in Newfoundland who have been visited by the 
‘Old Hag’ who comes at night to sit on their chests and stop them breathing.  
Kanashibari in Japan, Kokma in St Lucia, and the Popobawa in Zanzibar are just 
some of the other current sleep paralysis myths.  These myths are all successful 
memes. 
Our culture is now full of stories of outer space, spaceships, UFOs, and 
sinister aliens.  If you suffer from sleep paralysis and do not know what it is, 
your mind supplies the most readily available ‘answer’.  Once you start to think 
about aliens in a terrified and paralysed state, the aliens will seem all the more 
real.  No wonder people think they have been abducted. 
This explanation is supported by evidence that abductees suffer sleep 
disturbances, including sleep paralysis, more often than control groups (Spanos 
et al. 1993).  I would expect, although it has not been tested, that people who 
understand the psychological basis of sleep paralysis are unlikely to have 
abduction experiences, because they already have a better explanation for their 
experience. 
Some people have only faint memories of disturbing experiences and are left 
wondering what happened.  If they come across a hypnotist who specialises in 
‘recovering memories’ of alien abduction then they are encouraged to relive the 
experience again and again until the story they tell comes to be indistinguishable 
from a real memory and is full of details of the aliens and their craft. 
But this is not the whole story.  The myth of abduction is a successful set of 
memes for other reasons too.  For one thing, it is extremely hard to test, which 
has protected it from being demolished.  The aliens, after all, are so clever that 
they can slip in through your ceiling without disturbing the plaster, whisk you 
away, do their wicked experiments and put you back, all without anyone else 
seeing you, or them.  They are also adept at suppressing your memories of the 
abduction, and you may be left only with a fragment of uncertain memory and a 
tiny unexplained scar on your leg or nose.  It may take an experienced hypnotist 
(who has plenty of experience with other abductees and knows just what 
questions to ask) to bring your full ‘memory’ back.  The aliens are rarely 
captured on radar or successfully photographed because they have such

178    THE MEME MACHINE 
advanced technology.  And if you want to know why no government has 
evidence of alien landings, well you know the answer – there’s a conspiracy.  
Governments do, of course, have whole spaceships and even frozen alien bodies 
in store but they employ lots of people to ensure the evidence is concealed and 
the public is never allowed to know.  If you wonder why none of these 
employees has ever let on, this just proves how powerful the conspiracy is.  
Interestingly, evidence that might appear to be against the myth, such as 
demonstrating that a claimed implant is really a filling, has almost no effect.  
Strong believers quite rightly point out that one piece of negative evidence 
cannot disprove their beliefs, and non-believers never thought it was an implant 
in the first place. 
The abduction memeplex has been enormously successful and we can now 
see why.  First it serves a genuine function.  That is, it provides an explanation 
for a scary experience.  I suspect that if my student had known about sleep 
paralysis before he had his first abduction experience, it never would have 
turned into an abduction experience.  Second, the idea appeals in modern 
American (and to a lesser extent European) culture.  Humans, like many of their 
primate relatives, have evolved to defer to high-status males and to be afraid of 
them.  God thrives on this natural tendency but so too do the more modern 
wonderful beings, who use the trappings of our scientific world and prey on 
genuine fears of technology.  Third, the idea is promoted by television 
companies who have viewers eager to watch sensational programmes, and 
participants eager to tell their amazing, unique, fantastic, first-hand, real-life 
stories and to feel very special (and possibly even get rich) by doing so.  And 
finally, the idea is more or less irrefutable, and protected by a more or less 
plausible conspiracy theory. 
Just how good the protection is will determine how long the memeplex lasts.  
Like a virus, it will spread to infect as much of the susceptible population as it 
can reach and then, like a virus, stop spreading.  Because its only genuine 
function depends on people being ignorant about sleep paralysis, the 
dissemination of scientific understanding of sleep may undermine it.  Also, as 
many people ask for concrete evidence and none is forthcoming, the claims may 
eventually wear thin.  Since this kind of television feeds on novelty and surprise, 
the producers will not keep asking abductees to come and tell their amazing 
stories forever.  This particular memeplex, although successful, has a limited 
life.  Others look a bit more secure. 

MEMES OF THE NEW AGE    179 
Death and the truth trick 
 
Research shows that people of all ages and backgrounds have somewhat similar 
experiences when they come close to death and are revived (Blackmore 1993).  
Although most experience nothing, those who do report experiences tend to 
describe going down a dark tunnel towards a bright light, leaving the body and 
viewing their body from above, travelling to a beautiful place where beings of 
light await them, occasionally experiencing scenes from their life replayed all at 
once, and finally having to make a difficult decision to return to ordinary life.  
Normally, the experience is happy and peaceful, although occasionally it can be 
hellish.  Above all, it feels absolutely real – ‘realer than real’.  I have had this 
experience myself (although I was not close to death) and it was vivid, beautiful, 
absolutely realistic, and had a dramatic effect on my life.  Reports from as long 
as two thousand years ago and from many different cultures suggest that the 
basic experience is common to humans everywhere and can affect them 
profoundly. 
The core features of this complex experience can be understood in terms of 
what is going on in a brain under stress.  For example, the surprisingly positive 
emotions are probably due to the brain releasing endorphins (morphine-like 
chemicals) under stress.  Fear and stress also result in widespread random firing 
of neurons throughout the brain which, depending on where it occurs, has 
different effects.  For example, stimulation of the temporal lobes (which can be 
done experimentally) can induce floating and flying sensations, memory 
flashbacks, and feelings of religious significance.  Perhaps most interesting is 
the origin of the tunnel.  Cells throughout the visual system are organised so that 
many are devoted to the centre of the visual field and far fewer to the periphery.  
So when all the cells fire randomly, the effect is like a bright light in the middle 
fading out towards the edges, or bands and lines in spirals and rings.  This may 
be the origin of the near-death tunnel as well as the tunnels that are common in 
Shamanistic drawings and certain drug experiences. 
Some near-death expediencies are happy to find rational explanations, but 
many reject them.  They know they saw Jesus.  He was as real as real can be.  
They know that they have a spirit that left their body, travelled down the tunnel 
and went to heaven.  And they know their experience is proof of life after death. 
What is interesting from the memetic point of view is that Christians 
typically see Jesus while Hindus meet Hindu deities (Osis and Haraldsson

180    THE MEME MACHINE 
1977).  Some people encounter ‘beings’ of no particular religion, but there is no 
recorded case in which a religious person has met a deity from a different 
religion.  Some Christians even meet St. Peter at his pearly gates, while Hindus 
are more likely to be budged by Chitragupta who has their names written in his 
great book.  Americans are likely to go along with the heavenly beings they 
meet while Indians are more likely to resist when they meet Yamraj, the King of 
the Dead, or his messengers, the Yamdoots, who have come to take them away.  
Americans are likely to meet their mothers but Indians rarely encounter female 
figures. 
The experienced ‘realness’ of the visions leads many people who have them 
to reject any naturalistic explanation at all, and in the scientific literature the 
debate is dichotomised between those who are convinced that near-death 
experiences (NDEs) are evidence of life after death and those, like myself, who 
are not (Bailey and Yates 1996).  In fact, the experience cannot be evidence of 
life after death because all the people who described the experiences were still 
alive.  Nor can any naturalistic explanation, however full and satisfying, prove 
there is no life after death.  So the argument is ultimately sterile.  But from the 
memetic point of view this is not the issue.  Instead, we should ask a different 
question – why are NDE memes so successful? 
The answer is similar to that for abductions.  The NDE story serves real 
functions.  First, there are underlying brain states that predispose certain kinds of 
experience when people come close to death and which cry out for explanation.  
These are interpreted with the memes available to that person at the time, 
whether those memes come from television, science or their religious 
upbringing.  The classic NDE story also serves another function in reducing fear 
of death and providing reassurance about the meaning and purpose of life.  Fear 
of death is a far more potent motivator than fear of sleep paralysis, and the desire 
for life after death an excellent hook for NDE memes.  Memes do not need to be 
true to be successful. 
They do, however, claim to be true.  Natural selection has generally equipped 
us to choose ideas that are true over those that are false.  Our perceptual systems 
are designed to provide as accurate a model of the external world as possible.  
Our capacity to think and solve problems is designed to give true rather than 
false answers, so in general, true memes should thrive better than false ones.  
But this provides an opportunity for deception – for truth mimicry.  First, false 
claims can sneak into memeplexes under the protection of true ones.  We might 
call this the ‘truth trick’.  Second, memes can simply claim to be true – or even 
‘The Truth’.  So, for example, UFO believers claim that the conspiracy is 
suppressing The Truth.  NDErs claim to have Seen The Truth with their own

MEMES OF THE NEW AGE    181 
eyes.  And believers in God and life after death know The Truth.  This is a 
slightly different version of the ‘truth trick’, for it need have no element of 
validity at all. 
Finally, NDE memes use the ‘altruism trick’.  People who come close to 
death and survive are often changed by the experience, becoming more caring of 
others and less concerned with themselves (Ring 1992).  The limited evidence 
available suggests that this change is a function of simply facing up to death, not 
of having a near-death experience, but when NDErs behave altruistically this 
helps spread their NDE memes – ‘I’m a nice person, I’m not so selfish now, 
believe me.  I really did go to heaven’.  Wanting to agree with this honestly nice 
person helps spread the memes.  And if the NDE survivor really does help you, 
then you may take on the NDE memes as a way of returning the kindness.  Thus, 
NDE memes spread, and among them is the idea that people who have had 
NDEs behave more altruistically. 
Other forms of the altruism trick are nastier.  The Christian version of NDEs 
depends heavily on the idea that only good people go to heaven.  Having a 
beautiful NDE implies you are a good person and should be believed.  This also 
means that people who have hellish NDES are less likely to report them, and 
their memes will do less well (not to mention the fear and loneliness they must 
feel if they cannot talk about their experiences).  Disbelievers in life after death 
and researchers who pursue brain-based explanations are treated as nasty people 
who, if only they were nicer, would come to The Truth – another tactic that 
gives heavenly NDE memes the edge.  No one wants to share the beliefs of a 
nasty person. 
The most successful NDE memeplex in North America today is a rather 
sickly Christian version.  Experiencers describe heavenly scenes, a classic Jesus, 
judgements based on the most narrow interpretation of moralism, and lessons to 
be learned in this schoolroom of life.  Their books stay on the best-seller lists for 
months and some of them become rich.  In Europe, other versions seem to 
survive the competition a little better but, so far, scientific explanations are 
faring badly. 
If we have to set naturalistic explanations against heavenly ones, then a 
memetic viewpoint is far more compatible with the former.  But memetics 
cannot settle this impossible issue one way or the other.  What it can do is 
explain why powerful myths spread through whole cultures and provide a shape 
for some of the most profound experiences of people’s lives.  These strange 
experiences are, like all our experiences, dependent on a brain state that has been 
shaped by both genes and memes.  I suggest we will come to understand them 
better when we stop toning to draw a line between ‘real’ and ‘unreal’

182    THE MEME MACHINE 
experiences, and ask how particular experiences are created by natural and 
memetic selection. 
From alien abductions and near-death experiences we can glimpse a general 
formula for certain kinds of successful memeplex.  Take a highly emotional 
naturally occurring human experience with no satisfactory explanation, provide 
a myth that appears to explain it, and include a powerful being or unseen force 
that cannot easily be tested.  As optional extras include other functions such as 
social coercion (the O1d Hag gets you when you do wrong), reduction of fear 
(you’ll live forever in heaven), use the altruism trick (good people have this 
experience or believe this myth) or the truth trick (this explanation is The Truth). 
Until recently, no one designed such memeplexes on purpose.  They were 
designed by memetic selection.  ‘We may imagine that hundreds of thousands of 
myths and stories have been invented over the millennia and passed on by 
thousands and millions of people.  The few that survived were the ones that had 
all the good tricks to aid their recall and propagation.  Modern culture is the 
legacy of thousands of years of memetic evolution. 
 
Divination and fortune-telling 
 
From magic crystals and Tarot cards to the healing power of aromatherapy and 
homeopathy, memeplexes spread using the tricks I have described, and some of 
their carriers get rich at other people’s expense.  Take Tarot cards, for example.  
Imagine you go to a Tarot reader and have the unnerving experience that she 
seems to know all about your life and personality and can give you advice over a 
problem that is troubling you.  She seems to understand you uncannily well and 
gives details you think she could not possibly have known.  Perhaps she says 
something like this (as you read this, try to imagine it is being said directly to 
you by a sincere looking, sympathetic woman who gives every sign of caring 
about you and your troubles, and looks deeply into your eyes between glances at 
the cards in front of her). 
 
You have a need for other people to like and admire you, and yet you tend to be 
critical of yourself.  Disciplined and self-controlled on the outside, you tend to be 
worrisome and insecure on the inside.  At times you have serious doubts as to 
whether you have made the right decision. 
I see from this card that you love animals.  You have a cat, and the cards tell 
me you went to France last year.  I know you are worried about the pain in your 

MEMES OF THE NEW AGE    183 
back but the orientation of this card shows that it will improve soon.  I can see 
you playing as a child – now you may not know this yourself, but if you look 
carefully you will find you have a scar in your left knee. 
 
Evidence suggests that Tarot readers succeed by (mostly unconsciously) 
using the perfectly normal skills of responding to feedback,, reading subtle body 
language, and using the ‘Barnum Effect’ – that is, using statements that almost 
everyone will judge as true of themselves but not of others.  I took the first three 
sentences frond the classic Barnum Personality Reading (Forer 1949).  Other 
Barnum statements include positive ones (few people should admit to not being 
kind-hearted), double-headed statements (one half is bound to be true of you) 
and ambiguous ones (read in what you like).  Correct names and dates can be 
homed in on by trial and error in the certainty that clients will forget all the 
strong tries, and will remember questions as though they were statements of fact.  
The little details I gave there ones I had heard so often that I included them in a 
survey of over 6000 readers of a British newspaper (Blackmore 1997).  Among 
the results were that 29 per cent opened a cat, 27 per cent had been to France in 
the past year, 30 per cent were suffering pain in their back (and that’s not 
including all the ones who might have had back pain in the past) and 34 per cent 
had a scar on their left knee (note the importance of scars in abductions too).  
You do not need to get every statement right to snake a good impression. 
So clients go away impressed and the Tarot reader betonies even more 
convinced of her powers, but that is not all.  In the process, the clients pick up 
lots of Tarot card memes.  The reader has special powers that you do not have.  
Tarot cards hold ancient mysteries that cannot be tapped by unbelievers.  When 
you shuffle them they rnagically tune in with the rhythms of the universe and 
unfold your secret destiny.  They will reveal the good in you and put you in 
touch with your higher nature – and so on. 
These memes are successful because they seem to explain the client’s 
experience and include all the right tricks.  The fear they prey on is the fear of 
uncertainty and of making the wrong decisions in a horribly complex world.  
People typically go to psychics when they are at their lowest and want guidance.  
This means they are all the more likely to fall for claims of higher powers or of 
special insight.  The ‘illusion of control’ also works in favour of these memes.  
Stress is reduced when control over a situation is increased – and if real control 
is not possible, an illusion of control will do (Langer 1975).  Many experiments 
have shown the power of this illusion, and believers in the paranormal are more

184    THE MEME MACHINE 
prone to it than disbelievers (Blackmore and Troscianko 1985).  Similar 
arguments apply to the memeplexes associated with clairvoyance, palmistry, 
Feng Shui, divination with pendulums, and dowsing with twigs.  Literally 
thousands of experiments have demonstrated without a shadow of a doubt that 
the claims of astrology are false (Dean et al. 1996) and yet one-quarter of 
American adults believe in the basic tenets of astrology and 10 per cent read an 
astrology column regularly (Gallup and Newport 1991).  I think these disturbing 
facts are better explained in terms of the power of the memes to replicate 
themselves than by writing off so many people as simply stupid, ignorant or 
gullible. 
Note the powerful use of the altruism trick in some New Age phenomena.  
Crystals imbued with special powers are created to help you; the ancient 
Egyptian food supplement will improve your life and fill you with natural 
vitality; a consultation with the colour therapist will harmonise your energies 
with the universe.  The psychic is a spiritual person who is there only to help 
you (and does not really want to charge a fee).  In fact, these methods of 
divination are just ways of appearing to see the future or read a person’s mind, 
but they are routinely associated with goodness, love, compassion, and 
spirituality.  ‘We rarely ask the obvious question – what is ‘spiritual’ about 
astrology or a crystal ball?  There is no obvious answer and yet these methods 
trade on that association.  Bookshops categorise them all as ‘Mind, Body and 
Spirit’.  This is not good news for true compassion or spirituality.  It is very 
good news for the moneymaking memes of the New Age. 
I have deliberately chosen to tackle what some people might consider to be 
the most trivial memeplexes first.  They may be trivial but they exert 
phenomenal power in modern society and are responsible for the movements of 
vast amounts of money.  They shape the way we think about ourselves and, 
perhaps most importantly, they cause many people to believe things that are 
demonstrably false.  Anything that can do all this deserves to be understood.  
The stakes are even greater when it comes to alternative medicine and the sale of 
ineffective therapies. 
 
The sale of health 
 
One survey estimated that every year Americans make 425 million visits to 
providers of unconventional therapy, spending over 13 billion dollars, and that 
50 per cent of Americans use such therapies (Eisenberg et al. 1993).  Often 
alternative or complementary medicine is more narrowly defined, lower

MEMES OF THE NEW AGE    185 
estimates (as low as 10 per cent) have been obtained, and it is claimed that the 
boom may now be over in Britain (Ernst 1998).  Nevertheless, big money is at 
stake. 
Some therapies may be effective in appropriate circumstances, such as 
relaxation, hypnosis, aromatherapy (massage with scented oils), and some kinds 
of herbal medicine.  Others may work but not for the reasons usually given.  For 
example, acupuncture works as an analgesic but the effect is now explained in 
terms of endorphins (the brain’s own morphine-like chemicals) rather than the 
traditional Chinese theory of ch’i energy (Ulett 1992; Ulett et al. 1998).  
Chiropractic includes effective manipulations, although its traditional theory is 
false and it can sometimes be dangerous, and many other therapies use mixtures 
of the effective and ineffective.  However, there are many therapies that are 
widely used and known to be completely useless or even harmful to health 
(Barrett and Jarvis 1993). 
From a memetic point of view we need not ask why people are so stupid as to 
pay good money for demonstrably useless treatments, nor how intelligent people 
can be fooled by charlatans so easily, nor even how supposedly caring therapists 
can be so wicked as to promote false beliefs in vulnerable patients.  Instead, we 
should look at what meme tricks these therapies are using.  Then we can 
understand why they spread so quickly and get such a powerful grip on our 
society, when far more effective therapies do not.  We do not even need to ask 
precisely which treatments work and which do not (though we should certainly 
do so when we are ill!).  The validity of therapeutic claims is only one criterion 
for the success of memes, and there are many others.  Once we start thinking this 
way the familiar signs are easy to see. 
Alternative medicine preys on fear; fear of pain, fear of disease, and fear of 
death.  It uses a natural human experience that (for most people) has no 
satisfactory explanation; that is, the experience of going to a therapist and 
feeling better.  There is no doubt that people do generally feel better after a visit 
to an acupuncturist, herbalist, chiropractor, or homeopath.  They have usually 
invested quite a lot of money in the visit or in the ‘treatments’ prescribed, and 
this is particularly effective in a country like England where conventional 
medicine is free on the National Health Service.  ‘Cognitive dissonance’ theory 
explains why this is important – anyone who pays fifty pounds for a treatment 
that does not work will suffer the dissonance of concluding that they must be 
daft or have wasted good money – so an obvious way to reduce the dissonance is 
to convince yourself that you feel better (and note that the bigger the fee the 
better you must feel).  The ‘illusion of control’ reduces stress, and hence some

186    THE MEME MACHINE 
symptoms, because at least you are doing something about your health.  Social 
pressures kick in when the therapist asks whether last week’s treatment worked 
and you feel an obligation to say yes, or at least something encouraging.  And 
once you say yes, the desire for consistency inclines you to convince yourself.  
The placebo effect is notoriously powerful and is increased when the therapist 
appears authoritative, and uses powerful sounding techniques, and impressive, if 
incomprehensible, explanations. 
The explanations use a mixture of scientific-sounding terms and mysterious 
ones.  Powerful beings and unseen forces are liberally invoked, including God 
and the spirits who act through the hands of the spiritual healer.  The most 
commonly used word in alternative medicine is probably ‘energy’ – but the 
energy cannot be seen or tested.  The ch’i of acupuncture and the ‘innate 
intelligence’ of chiropractic are so subtle that they cannot be investigated by any 
technique currently known to science, which neatly protects the memes from 
disproof.  Finally, the altruism trick is liberally used, as when ‘the power of 
love’ is invoked.  Alternative therapists are often genuinely caring people who 
really do want to help, and believe they are helping.  Their patients tell them 
they feel better and so the therapists naturally (if falsely) conclude that their 
healing theory was right.  Otherwise that may simply appear to be genuinely 
caring.  Either way, the patient is more likely to take on their memes – false 
memes as well as true ones.  All this amounts to a powerful formula for 
persistent and moneymaking memeplexes.  No wonder there are so many of 
them around. 

Religions as memeplexes 
 
 
 
Like it or not, we are surrounded by religions.  The ‘Great Faiths’ of the world 
have lasted thousands of years and affect our calendars and holidays, our 
education and upbringing, our beliefs and our morality, all over the world people 
spend vast amounts of time and money worshipping their gods and building 
glorious monuments in which to do it.  We cannot get away from religions, but 
using memetics we can understand how and why they have such power. 
All the great religions of the world began as small-scale cults, usually with a 
charismatic leader, and over the years a few of them spread to take in billions of 
people all across the planet.  Imagine just how many small cults there must have 
been in the history of the world.  The question is why did these few survive to 
become the great faiths, while the vast majoring simply died out with the death 
of their leader or the dispersal of their few adherents? 
Dawkins was the first to give memetic answers (Dawkins 1986, 1993, 
1996b), although his ideas on religion have frequently been criticised (Bowker 
1995; Gatherer 1998).  He took Roman Catholicism as an example.  The memes 
of Catholicism include the idea of an omnipotent and omniscient God, the belief 
that Jesus Christ was the son of God, born of the virgin Mary, risen from the 
dead after his crucifixion and now (and for ever) able to hear our prayers.  In 
addition, Catholics believe that their priests can absolve them from sins after 
confession, the Pope literally speaks the word of God, and when priests 
administer the mass, the bread and wine literally change into the flesh and blood 
of Christ. 
To anyone uninfected with any Christian memes these ideas must seem 
bizarre in the extreme.  How can an invisible God be both omnipotent and 
omniscient?  Why should we believe a two-thousand-year-old story that a virgin 
gave birth?  What could it possibly mean to say that the wine ‘literally’ becomes 
the blood of Christ?  How could someone have died for our sins when we were 
not even born?  How could he rise from the dead, and where is he now?  How 
could a prayer, said silently to yourself, really work? 
There are many claims for the efficacy of prayer in healing the sick, and even 
a little experimental evidence (Benor 1994; Dossey 1993), but few of the
CHAPTER 15 

188    THE MEME MACHINE 
experiments have controlled adequately for placebo effects, expectation, and 
spontaneous recovery, and some have shown that people with the strongest 
religious faith were less likely to recover from acute illness (King et al. 1994).  
Against the claims are hundreds of years of people praying for the health of their 
royal families or heads of state with no apparent effect, and the inability of 
modern-day religious healers to make any obvious difference in hospitals.  Then 
there are all those countless wars in which both sides routinely pray for God to 
help their side and kill the enemy.  Yet millions of people all over the world 
profess themselves Catholics and pray to Jesus, his mother Mary, and God the 
Father.  They spend vast amounts of their valuable time and money supporting 
and spreading the faith to others, and the Catholic Church is among the richest 
institutions in the world.  Dawkins (1993) explains how religious memes, even if 
they are not true, can be successful. 
The Catholic God is watching at all times and will punish people who 
disobey His commandments with most terrible punishments – burning forever in 
hell, for example.  These threats cannot easily be tested because God and hell are 
invisible, and the fear is inculcated from early childhood.  A friend of mine 
showed me a book he once treasured as a child.  It had pictures of a little good 
boy and a little bad boy.  You could open up the flaps of their blazers and inside 
the good boy find a white and shining heart, while the bad boy had a black spot 
for every sin he had committed.  Imagine the power of that image when you 
cannot see inside your own body and must only imagine the little black spots 
piling up and piling up – when you talk in class or cheat in a test, when you take 
your sister’s toy or steal a chocolate biscuit, when you think a bad thought, or 
doubt God’s truth and goodness . . . every one a black spot. 
Having raised the fear, Catholicism reduces it again.  If you turn to Christ 
you will be forgiven.  If you honestly repent of your sins, bring up your children 
as Catholics, and go regularly to mass, then, even though you are unworthy and 
sinful, God will forgive you.  God’s love is always available but at a price, and 
that price is often overlooked completely because it is paid so willingly.  It is the 
price of investing massive amounts of time, energy and money in your religion – 
in other words, working for the memes.  As Dawkins pointed out, Catholics 
work hard to spread their Catholicism. 
I previously described several meme tricks that New Age memeplexes use.  
All these can be found in religions too.  First, like alien abduction and near-death 
experience memes, religions serve a real function.  They supply answers to all 
sorts of age-old human questions such as: Where do we come from?  Why are 
we here?  Where do we go when we die?  Why is the world full of suffering?

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    189 
The religious answers may be false but at least they are answers.  Religious 
commitment may give people a sense of belonging, and has been shown to 
improve social integration in the elderly (Johnson 1995).  Religions may also 
incorporate useful rules for living, such as the dietary laws of Judaism or rules 
about cleanliness and hygiene which may once have protected people from 
disease.  These useful functions help carry other memes along. 
The truth trick is liberally used.  In many religions, God and Truth are 
virtually synonymous.  Rejecting the faith means turning away from Truth; 
converting others means giving them the gift of the true faith.  This may seem 
odd when so many religious claims are clearly false, but there are many reasons 
why it works.  For example, people who have a profound experience in a 
religious context are inclined to take on the memes of that religion; people who 
like or admire someone may believe their truth claims without question.  At the 
extreme, people will even tell lies for God and manage to convince themselves 
and others that they do so in the name of truth – as when ‘Creation Scientists’ 
proclaim ‘The Truth’ that the earth is only six thousand years old, and back it up 
with denials of the fossil record, or claims that the speed of light has slowed 
since the creation so as to give the illusion of a vast universe and an ancient 
planet (Plimer 1994). 
Beauty inspires the faithful and brings them closer to God.  Some of the most 
beautiful buildings in the world have been constructed in the name of Buddha, 
Jesus Christ, or Mohammed.  Then there are the beautiful statues and alluring 
stories in Hinduism; stained glass, inspiring paintings, and illustrated 
manuscripts; uplifting music sung by tremulous choir boys and vast choirs, or 
played on great organs.  Deep emotions are inspired to the point of religious 
ecstasy or rapture which then cries out for – and receives – an explanation.  The 
ecstasy is real enough, but from the memes’ point of view, beauty is another 
trick to help them reproduce. 
The altruism trick permeates religious teachings.  Many believers are truly 
good people.  In the name of their faith they help their neighbours, give money 
to the poor, and try to live honest and moral lives.  If they are successful then 
generally people come to like and admire them and so are more inclined to 
imitate them.  In this way not only does good and honest behaviour spread, but 
the religious memes that were linked to that behaviour spread too.  Alongside 
this comes merely the semblance of good behaviour.  Hypocrisy can flourish 
when goodness is defined not only as kind and altruistic behaviour, but as 
sticking to the rules and obligations of the faith.  Much of the money donated to 
churches, temples, or synagogues is not used for the poor or needy, but to

190    THE MEME MACHINE 
perpetuate the religion’s memes by erecting beautiful buildings or paying for 
clergy.  Activities that spread memes are also defined as ‘good’ even though 
their benefit is questionable, such as saying prayers at specified times, saying 
grace at every meal, and keeping one day of the week as a day of worship.  In 
this way huge chunks of every believer’s time are willingly devoted to 
maintaining and spreading the faith. 
Many people think of Mother Teresa as a saint.  Indeed, she may soon be 
officially sanctified by the Catholic Church.  She is many people’s idea of the 
truly gentlest and altruistic heroine.  But what did she actually do?  Some of the 
inhabitants of Calcutta accuse her of diverting attention from the real needs of 
the city’s poor, of giving Calcutta a bad name and of helping only those who 
were prepared to take on Catholic teachings.  Certainly, she was fiercely anti-
abortion and anti-birth-control.  Many of the people she helped were young 
women with no access to contraceptives, little ability to avoid being raped, and 
almost no access to health care if they became pregnant.  Yet she steadfastly 
maintained her Catholic opposition to the one thing that would have helped them 
most of all – control over their own reproductive lives.  Whatever we may think 
about how much she really helped the starving people of Calcutta there is no 
doubt that her behaviour effectively spread Catholic memes by using the 
altruism trick. 
Even evil and cruelty can be redefined as good.  The Koran states that it is 
good to give a hundred lashes to an adulteress and to have no pity on her.  You 
might think that Muslim women can avoid this by not committing adultery, but 
Warraq (1995) explains in unpleasant detail what life can be like in countries 
that adhere strictly to Islamic law.  Women may be powerless to resist sexual 
abuse, and afterwards must take the punishment while the men who abused them 
get off free.  Since women are objects of disgust, a man is supposed not to touch 
a woman he does not have rights over.  Women are routinely locked away and, 
if they are allowed out, must walk behind the man and be suitably covered – 
which in many countries means being covered head to toe in a smothering 
garment with just a tiny grille to look out of.  Obeying such rules to the letter 
makes a Muslim ‘good’, regardless of the misery it creates. 
Returning to more honest uses of goodness and altruism, Allison’s (1992) 
theory of ‘beneficent norms’ applies especially well to religions.  One of his 
general rules is ‘Be good to your close cultural relatives’; the memetic 
equivalent of kin selection.  But how do you know who they are?  This rule 
tracks biological kinship in cultures with predominantly vertical transmission, 
since in these cultures you acquire most of your memes from biological

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    191 
relatives, but with horizontal transmission other means of recognition are 
needed.  One is ‘Be good to those who act like you’.  It works like this.  If you 
see someone else who acts the same way as you do, it is likely that you both 
have cultural ancestors in common.  If you now help him you make it more 
likely that he will be successful, and hence that he will pass on his memes, 
including the rule ‘Be good to those who act like you’.  Allison calls this a 
‘marker scheme’.  He gives the examples of wearing a turban or abstaining from 
certain foods, but we might add supporting Manchester United or listening to 
hip-hop, as well as genuflecting or wearing a little portrait of your guru round 
your neck.  He adds that markers that are costly or difficult to learn can deter 
exploitation by outsiders.  Apart from languages, a good example is religious 
rituals.  Many of these require years to learn and others, such as ritual 
circumcision, are certainly costly for an adult. 
The result of this kind of altruism is that people are kind and generous to the 
in-group and not to outsiders.  This boosts the well-being of the group’s 
members and hence makes them more likely to be imitated, and so pass on the 
faith.  This is exactly what we see in many of the world’s greatest religions.  
Although the instruction to ‘love thy neighbour as thyself’ is commonly taken to 
mean ‘love everyone’, in the tribal context in which it was first rewritten it may 
have been meant more literally – in other words love your own tribe, and your 
own family, but not everybody else (Hartung 1995).  Even the admonition not to 
kill may originally have applied only to the in-group.  Hartung points out that 
the rabbis of the Talmud used to hold an Israelite guilty of murder if he 
intentionally killed another Israelite, but killing other people did not count. 
Some religions positively encourage murder and war against people of other 
faiths.  Islam has fatwas and jihads to justify killing unbelieving, and especially 
those who harm or renounce the faith.  In February 1989, the Ayatollah 
Khomeini delivered his famous fatwa on the author Salman Rushdie.  This is a 
direct call to all Muslims to murder Rushdie for daring to blaspheme against the 
holy Koran in his book Satanic Verses.  When the punishment for renouncing or 
criticising a religion is so severe, the memes are very ably protected. 
Hindus, Muslims, and Christians alike have gone to war again and again in 
the name of God.  When a few hundred Spaniards murdered thousands of Incas, 
leading to the destruction of an entire civilisation, they did it for the glory of 
God and the holy Catholic Faith.  In a subtler way religious missionaries are still 
destroying ancient cultures even today.  People have been tortured, burned alive, 
and shot because they believed the wrong thing.  Religions teach that God wants 
you to spread his True understanding to all the world and it is therefore good to

192    THE MEME MACHINE 
maim, rape, pillage, steal, and murder. 
We saw how the conspiracy theory protects UFO memes; similar 
mechanisms protect religious memes.  As Dawkins (1993) points out, good 
Catholics have faith; they do not need proof.  Indeed, it is a measure of how 
spiritual and religious you are that you have faith enough to believe in 
completely impossible things without asking questions, such as that the wine is 
really turned into blood.  This assertion cannot be tested because the liquid in 
the cup still tastes, looks and smells like wine – you must just have faith that it is 
really Christ’s blood.  If you are tempted by doubt, you must resist.  Not only is 
God invisible but he ‘moves in mysterious ways’.  The mystery is part of the 
whole package and to be admired in its own right.  This untestability protects the 
memes from rejection. 
Religious memes are stored, and thus given improved longevity, in the great 
religious texts.  The theologian Hugh Pyper (1998) describes the Bible as one of 
the most successful texts ever produced.  ‘If “survival of the fittest” has any 
validity as a slogan, then the Bible seems a fair candidate for the accolade of the 
fittest of texts’ (p. 70).  It has been translated into over two thousand languages, 
exists in many different versions within some of those languages, and even in a 
country like Japan, where only one or two per cent of the population are 
Christians, more than a quarter of all households possesses a copy.  Pyper argues 
that Western culture is the Bible’s way of making more Bibles.  And why is it so 
successful?  Because it alters its environment in a way that increases the chances 
of its being copied.  It does this, for example, by including within itself many 
instructions to pass it on, and by describing itself as indispensable to the people 
who read it.  It is extremely adaptable, and since much of its content is self-
contradictory it can be used to justify more or less any action or moral stance. 
When we look at religions from a meme’s eye view we can understand why 
they have been so successful.  These religious memes did not set out with an 
intention to succeed.  They were just behaviours, ideas and stories that were 
copied from one person to another in the long history of human attempts to 
understand the world.  They were successful because they happened to come 
together into mutually supportive gangs that included all the right tricks to keep 
them safely stored in millions of brains, books and buildings, and repeatedly 
passed on to more.  They evoked strong emotions and strange experiences.  
They provided myths to answer real questions and the myths were protected by 
untestability, threats, and promises.  They created and then reduced fear to create

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    193 
compliance, and they used the beauty, truth and altruism tricks to help their 
spread.  That is why they are still with us, and why millions of people’s 
behaviour is routinely controlled by ideas that are either false or completely 
untestable. 
 
No one designed these great faiths with all their clever tricks.  Rather, they 
evolved gradually by memetic selection.  But nowadays people deliberately use 
memetic tricks to spread religions and make money.  Their techniques of 
memetic engineering are derived from long experience and research, and are 
similar to those used in propaganda and marketing; with radio, television and the 
Internet, their memes can spread far further and faster than ever before.  Billy 
Graham’s style of tele-evangelism is a good example.  He starts by evoking fear, 
reminding people of all the terrible things happening in the world and of their 
own impotence and mortality.  He presents science as having no answers and as 
a cause of the world’s ills, and then persuades people to surrender to the all-
powerful God who is their only hope of salvation.  The experience of surrender 
raises powerful emotions and people turn to God in huge numbers. 
Other evangelists use healing to spread the Word.  ‘We have seen how 
perfectly normal psychological processes can make people feel better, even 
when they are not actually cured, and this is a powerful incentive to take on the 
God memes that often accompany the healing.  The trip to Lourdes is expensive 
and difficult.  Expectations are high.  Spiritualist healers are kind and plausible, 
and really do seem to care about your troubles. 
Some use fake healing.  In the 1980s, Peter Popoff and his wife Elizabeth 
brought millions of Americans to God, and millions of dollars to the Popoffs, 
through their healing missions.  Their vast audiences sang and prayed, and 
watched seriously ill people stagger onto the stage, raising powerful emotions as 
the Popoffs appealed for donations.  As Peter correctly diagnosed illnesses and 
announced the sufferers cured, people forgot that an hour before Elizabeth had 
wandered through the audience collecting prayer cards on which people write 
their names, addresses, ailments and other crucial facts.  She took these to the 
computer database backstage and beamed the information to a receiver behind 
Peter’s left ear (Stein 1996). 
Miracles of all kinds have been used to convert unbelievers.  Jesus walked on 
water and brought a dead man back to life, nineteenth-century spiritualist 
mediums created spirit forms made of ‘ectoplasm’, and the advanced 
practitioners of transcendental meditation claim to levitate.  Some people

194    THE MEME MACHINE 
effectively combine special powers with the altruism trick, such as England’s 
much-loved grandmotherly medium Doris Stokes who packed her audiences 
with clients whom she already knew, and fooled millions (I. Wilson 1987).  
Many of those clients were recently bereaved wives, husbands or parents who 
gained comfort from Stokes’s messages but who might have coped better with 
their grief if they had been helped to accept the reality of death. 
I do not mean to imply, from all I have said, that there are no true ideas 
anywhere in any religion.  The memetic mechanisms I have described would 
allow religions to flourish that were based on complete falsehoods and nothing 
else, but there may be true ideas embedded in them as well.  Just as some 
alternative therapies thrive by including a few treatments that work, so religions 
may include valid insights as well as misleading myths. 
At the heart of many religions lie the mystical traditions, like that found in 
the fourteenth-century Cloud of Unknowing or the teachings of Julian of 
Norwich in Christianity; the Sufi teachings of Islam; or the stories of 
enlightenment in Buddhism.  These traditions emphasise direct spiritual 
experience which is often ineffable and therefore hard to pass on.  In 
spontaneous mystical experiences people typically feel they have been given a 
glimpse of the world as it really is.  They feel that self and other have become 
one, the entire universe is as it is, or that everything is oneness and light.  These 
may indeed be valid insights (I believe they are), but on their own they are not 
very successful as memes, and rapidly get overtaken by all the more powerful 
religious ideas I have described above. 
Buddhism provides a good example.  If the stories are to be believed, the 
Buddha sat under a tree, with a fervent desire to understand, until finally he 
became enlightened.  He then taught what he had seen, that everything is empty 
of self-nature, that life is unsatisfactory, that suffering comes about through 
craving or attachment, and that the cessation of craving leads to freedom from 
suffering.  He laid down an ethical code of behaviour and taught his disciples to 
work out their own salvation with diligence, by calming the mind and practising 
attention in every moment.  None of this is very comforting.  Basically, it means 
you are on your own in a fundamentally unsatisfactory world with no one to 
help you.  If you look to anything at all to try to make it better then you are 
caught up in craving and hence suffering.  Enlightenment is not something to be 
attained; it is simply the giving up of – well everything really.  As one of my 
students put it ‘I couldn’t bear not to want chocolate.  I couldn’t even imagine 
not craving chocolate, let alone not craving anything.’ 
So what happens to difficult ideas like these?  Perhaps surprisingly they can

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    195 
and do survive, often by being passed in an unbroken chain from inspiring and 
enlightened teachers to hard-working pupils.  Zen Buddhism sticks quite closely 
to the simplest teachings and includes no deities or hidden powers; no altruism 
nor beauty tricks.  One is told to find out the truth for oneself and trained simply 
to sit and watch the mind until it becomes clear.  These difficult ideas have 
survived almost dying out in the East and are now spreading widely in the West 
(Batchelor 1994).  However, other forms of Buddhism are much more popular 
all over the world, such as Tibetan Buddhism, with its numerous powerful 
deities, beautiful buildings and paintings, stories of marvellous deeds, reciting of 
sutras, chants, and liturgies.  Whether or not there are true insights at the heart of 
any religion, the fact is that clever memes will tend to beat them in the battle for 
replication. 
We can now see how and why religions have the power and persistence they 
do.  I want now to consider two further questions.  First, have they played any 
part in meme-gene coevolution?  And second, how are religions changing now 
that memes are being spread by modern technology? 
 
The coevolution of religions and genes 
 
The coevolutionary question is this.  Have the religious memes that thrived in 
the past had any effect on which genes were successful?  If so, this would be 
another example of memetic driving.  I shall speculate here and hope that some 
of the questions I raise may be answered by future research. 
We know little of the earliest religions.  There is evidence of burial of the 
dead from the Neanderthals who lived from 130 000 to 40 000 years ago, but it is 
likely that they were not our ancestors.  About 50 000 years ago came what is 
sometimes called the ‘Great Leap Forward’, characterised by improvements in 
toolmaking, the beginnings of art, and the creation of jewellery which was 
sometimes buried with the dead.  We can only guess at religious beliefs but 
burial rites at least suggest tone idea of an afterlife.  Modern hunter-gatherer 
societies have varied religious beliefs, including ancestor worship, special 
powers attributed to the priest or shaman, and belief in an afterlife.  So we might 
guess that early human religions were something like this. 
Early humans lived in bands or tribal societies and only gradually did more 
complex stratified societies evolve.  In chiefdoms or states there is enough 
division of labour for some people to be completely freed from food production;

196    THE MEME MACHINE 
these are typically rulers of various kinds, together with soldiers and priests.  
Diamond (1997) argues that the function of ideologies and religions in 
chiefdoms is to justify the redistribution of wealth, the authority of the rulers, 
and warfare.  Chiefs typically take enormous amounts of wealth from working 
people and use some of it to build grand temples or public works as visible signs 
of their power.  The people may accept their wealth being taken from them, as 
they accept taxation in modern societies, if they obtain benefits in return.  These 
benefits may include the reduction of violence within the society, protection 
from enemies, or facilities for public use.  Sometimes the ruler and priest are the 
same person, but in larger societies separate priests take on the religious 
functions.  The priests promote and police the religious beliefs; the beliefs are 
then used to justify the conquest of other peoples from whom more goods and 
power can be stolen. 
In memetic terms what this amounts to is that the religious memes are more 
likely to survive and replicate than competing memes are.  For example, 
religions that required no priests, that took no taxes, or that built no impressive 
buildings, would have been at a disadvantage.  This meant the proliferation of 
highly organised and stratified societies and of priests who taught and 
maintained the religion.  Religious memes have therefore played an important 
role in the development of human societies. 
The coevolutionary question is whether they have affected the genes along 
the way.  E. O. Wilson (1978) treated religions as a challenge to his new science 
of sociobiology and speculated about the ways in which religious belief could 
provide a genetic advantage.  For example, religions often include prohibitions 
against eating potentially contaminated foods, and against incest and other risky 
sexual activities, and encourage believers to have large and well-protected 
families.  In these and other ways religious belief would benefit the genes of 
believers and so be expected to continue.  The evolutionary psychologist Steven 
Pinker (1997) has argued that religious beliefs are by-products of the brain 
modules that were designed to do other things; spirits and gods are based on our 
concepts of animals and people; supernatural powers are inferred from natural 
powers; the idea of other worlds is based on dreams and trances.  As he puts it: 
‘religious beliefs are notable for their lack of imagination (God is a jealous man; 
heaven and hell are places; souls are people who have sprouted wings)’ (Pinker 
1997, p. 557).  These authors argue either that religions provide a genetic 
advantage, or that they are the by-product of things that once provided genetic 
advantage.  They do not consider the possibility of memetic advantage, nor of 
memes driving genes. 

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    197 
There are several ways in which memes might have influenced genes.  Priests 
attain power and status by predicting (or appearing to predict) weather, disease, 
or crop failures; by building or being associated with temples and other grand 
buildings; by wearing expensive and impressive clothes; and by claiming 
supernatural powers.  In many cultures the priests or rulers are given divine 
status.  We know that women prefer to mate with high-status men, and that these 
men leave more offspring, either by having more wives or by fathering children 
by women who are not their wives.  Even in societies in which the priesthood is 
celibate and could not (or at least should not) pass on their genes, other people 
could acquire power by association.  If this religious behaviour helped people 
acquire more mates, then any genes that inclined them to be more religious in 
the first place would also flourish.  In this way genes for religious behaviour 
would increase because of religious memes. 
The idea of ‘genes for religious behaviour’ is not at all implausible – all it 
means is genes that make people more inclined towards religious beliefs and 
behaviour.  Brain development is under genetic control and it is known that 
some brains are more prone to religious belief and experience than others.  For 
example, people with unstable temporal lobes are more likely to report mystical, 
psychic and religious experiences, and to believe in supernatural powers, than 
those with stable temporal lobes (Persinger 1983).  Like many other 
psychological variables, religiosity is known to have a heritable component even 
today.  For example, identical twins are more similar in religiosity than non-
identical twins or siblings.  In our past there may have been as much genetically 
controlled variation in religious behaviour as there is now, or even more.  If so, 
two effects are possible.  First, the memetic environment could have influenced 
whether genes for religious behaviour were positively selected or not (increasing 
or decreasing religious behaviour in general).  Second, the religion of the time 
could have influenced the kinds of genes that survived (i.e. those that produced 
the kind of religious behaviour best suited to that religion).  That would be 
memetic driving at work. 
 
Group selection 
 
There is another way in which religious memes might conceivably drive the 
genes: through group selection.  The whole concept of group selection has had a 
troubled history and been beset by controversy.  Earlier this century it was 
invoked to explain all kinds of behaviours that might conceivably benefit groups 
or societies, and biologists often appealed to ‘group adaptations’ or ‘the good of

198    THE MEME MACHINE 
the species’ without any idea of possible mechanisms.  Williams’s classic book 
Adaptation and Natural Selection (1966) pointed out the errors: for example, 
that selfish individuals could always infiltrate altruistic groups and thrive at their 
expense.  Also groups have a slow lifecycle compared with individuals, and 
individuals can often move between groups.  This means that individual 
adaptations will almost always predominate over adaptations for the group.  
Therefore, we should not look to group selection as a force that can make 
individuals sacrifice their own genetic interests for the ‘good of the group’. 
Most biologists now consider that group selection is only a weak force in 
nature (Mark Ridley 1996).  However, selection at the level of the group can 
sometimes occur.  Dawkins’s distinction between the replicator and the vehicle 
is helpful here.  In most of biology the replicator (the thing that gets copied) is 
the gene, while the vehicle is the whole organism.  Whole organisms; that is 
individual cats, donkeys, orchids or cockroaches, live or die, and in the process 
either pass on their genes or not.  All the genes in that vehicle share the same 
fate.  In this (the most common) case selection is taking place at the level of the 
organism. 
In some cases, however, whole groups of organisms live or die, and so all the 
genes in the group are killed off at once.  If this occurs then the group is the 
vehicle and we can say that selection is happening at the level of the group.  This 
applies, for example, to whole species that go extinct, or to isolated populations 
of animals, such as those on small islands, in which some groups survive and 
some do not.  In these cases there is no conflict between individual and group 
selection (as there was in the argument about altruistic behaviour) but selection 
has acted at the level of the group. 
Ridley (1996) concludes that group selection works only if migration rates 
are implausibly low and group extinction rates implausibly high.  Another way 
of putting it is that group selection is favoured by mechanisms that reduce the 
differences in biological fitness within the groups and increase differences 
between groups, thus concentrating selection at the group level (D. S. Wilson 
and Sober 1994). 
Memes may provide just this kind of mechanism.  Indeed Boyd and 
Richerson (1990) have used mathematical models to show that group selection is 
particularly likely to occur when behavioural variation is culturally acquired, 
and that it can even occur with large groups and substantial rates of migration.  
The important point is that memes can have precisely the effect of decreasing 
within-group differences and increasing between-group differences. 

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    199 
Let us take dietary habits as an example.  Suppose that one group of people 
eat shellfish as a major part of their diet and develop ways of cooking mussels or 
clams and getting them out of their shells, while another group of people hold a 
taboo against eating shellfish.  People within each group are more similar to 
each other, and different from people in the other group.  Emigration between 
groups is made difficult by long habits of taste, and the difficulty of learning 
how to prepare the food.  In some environments the first group may do better 
because they get more protein, while in other environments the second group 
may do better because they survive a lethal disease from infected food.  When 
disease strikes or famine threatens it is whole groups that live or die.  Food 
taboos are an important part of many religions.  Orthodox Jews do not eat 
shellfish or pork and avoid mixing meat with milk.  Many Buddhists and Hindus 
are vegetarians because they do not want to kill animals.  The beliefs that 
underpinned these taboos may have caused some groups of people to survive 
and others to go extinct; and both their genes and their memes would have gone 
with them. 
Religions also dictate sexual practices, promote certain kinds of cooperative 
behaviour, and regulate aggression and violence.  Although many people believe 
that primitive tribes live an idyllic and peaceful existence, this myth (like so 
many in anthropology) has been exploded.  The anthropologist Napoleon 
Chagnon (1992) lived for many years with the Yanomamö, who live in the 
Brazilian rain forest by hunting and growing food in temporary gardens.  He 
describes a violent life in which war between villages is common and murders 
are revenged with more murders.  Similar stories come from many parts of the 
world.  In New Guinea, a group of nomads called the Fayu live in small family 
groups who only rarely meet other families because of the revenge murders that 
ensue when they do.  Gatherings, for example to exchange brides, are fraught 
with danger.  In many tribal societies murder is a leading cause of death 
(Diamond 1997).  Although many people in modern cities believe that they face 
ever increasing risks of being killed they are in fact far safer than they would 
have been in a band or tribal society.  The organisation that comes with 
government and religion therefore decreases these kinds of violence.  However, 
it also provides the justification for large-scale wars. 
The history of warfare is largely a history of people killing each other for 
religious reasons.  Religions give people a motive, other than genetic self-
interest, for sacrificing their lives for others – something that does not happen in 
band and tribal societies.  Young men may believe that it is good to die for God, 
heroic to be killed in a religious war, or that they will have a place reserved for

200    THE MEME MACHINE 
them in heaven.  A society in which brave young men are prepared to die for 
their beliefs is likely to win a war against a society in which they are more 
concerned about protecting themselves or avenging their family.  Such a victory 
is a victory for the memes that created the difference in the first place, and for 
the genes of the survivors. 
We can now see why group selection might be important in memetics.  
Religions are a good example of a mechanism that decreases within-group 
differences, while increasing between-group differences and rates of group 
extinction.  In many religions conformity is encouraged, forbidden behaviours 
are punished, differences between believers and unbelievers are exaggerated, 
fear or hatred of people with other beliefs is nurtured, and migration to a 
different religion made difficult or impossible.  Wars between religious groups 
are common and in our evolutionary history many groups have lived or died for 
their religion.  All this makes it more likely that group selection has occurred.  If 
there were genetic differences between the groups to start with, then the survival 
of some groups and extinction of others would have had effects on the gene 
pool.  In this case we could say that the religious memes have driven the genes. 
This is likely to be most interesting if, for example, there was some genetic 
reason why one group took up one religion while a different group took up a 
different religion.  Let us imagine two neighbouring groups of early hominids in 
which, by chance, one group had more of a genetic tendency to want to bury 
their dead in elaborate ways.  This is not at all far-fetched if you remember that 
digging and burying behaviour is under genetic control in many species, from 
worms and wasps to rabbits and dogs.  This genetic propensity then encouraged 
these people to develop a religion based on ancestor worship and an afterlife – 
we can call them the ‘Afterlifers’.  Meanwhile, the other group developed a 
religion based on worshipping nature spirits – we can call them the ‘Naturists’.  
The Afterlifers then developed a taste for war, believing their ancestors’ spirits 
would aid them, and that they would individually go to heaven if they killed an 
enemy, whereas the Naturists just got on with their own interests.  In 
consequence, the Afterlifers won more of the wars against the Naturists; their 
memes spread – and so did their genes.  Genes for the original ritual burying 
behaviour were selected for by group selection driven by memes. 
I am not suggesting that this precise series of events has actually happened, 
but that this general mechanism could have shaped human nature and given us 
our religious tendencies.  The principle is a general one and could theoretically 
apply to all kinds of genetic predispositions, such as conformity, having

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    201 
religious experiences, enjoying ritual and worship, or believing in life after 
death.  This process could even have acted to favour genes that would otherwise 
be detrimental to fitness, or to wipe out genes that would otherwise have been 
fitness-enhancing.  So some aspects of human nature could have been 
determined not for the sake of the genes but for the sake of the memes.  Our 
beliefs could have moulded the way genetic selection took place.  If this has 
happened it means that human beings might now be naturally religious creatures 
because of our long memetic history. 
Religions have held enormous power for millennia, but times are changing 
and religions with them.  One obvious change is that vertical transmission is 
giving way to the faster horizontal transmission (p. 132).  As people are 
increasingly exposed to new ideas from television, radio, newspapers and the 
Internet, they begin to make comparisons and ask difficult questions.  So it is, 
sadly, not surprising to learn that Afghanistan’s Taliban Islamic movement has 
forbidden televisions and radios, and has set about destroying any they find, and 
punishing their owners.  Meanwhile, in countries with thriving communications, 
some of the tricks the old religions use may not work so well any more.  When 
people can see films, go to art galleries, and listen to any music they like, the 
beauty trick is less effective, when we are subjected on television to the 
gruesome results of religious wars, the altruism trick wears thin.  When 
Christian leaders argue over whether homosexuality is really a sin, the truth trick 
begins to weaken its grip. 
In the past, religions that promoted large families were successful because 
they created more people to adopt the faith from their parents.  Lynch (1996) has 
given many examples of religions, from the ancient Islam to the relatively new 
and thriving Mormonism, that spread by increasing the number of their 
offspring, but he does not clearly differentiate the effects of vertical and 
horizontal transmission.  With modern horizontal transmission people are less 
bound by their parents’ beliefs; as memes spread faster and faster the birth rate 
becomes less and less significant.  ‘We should therefore expect proselytic 
religions to do better in technologically advanced societies.  We may expect new 
religions of this kind, and also that old faiths which can adapt their memes to 
changing times may survive while others will become extinct. 
I doubt that human beings will ever be entirely free of religion.  If the 
arguments above are right then religions have two very strong forces going for 
them.  First, human minds and brains have been moulded to be especially 
receptive to religious ideas, and second, religious memes can use all the best 
meme tricks in the book to ensure their own survival and reproduction.  This

202    THE MEME MACHINE 
may explain the persistence of religion in scientifically literate societies and in 
societies in which political dogma has tried to erase all religious behaviour – and 
failed.  Perhaps our brains and minds have been moulded to be naturally 
religious and it really is difficult to use logic and scientific evidence to change 
the way we think – difficult, but not impossible. 
 
Science and religion 
 
I have implied that science is, in some sense, superior to religion, and I want to 
defend that view.  Science, like religion, is a mass of memeplexes.  There are 
theories and hypotheses, methodologies and experimental paradigms, 
intellectual traditions and long-standing false dichotomies.  Science is full of 
ideas that are human inventions, and have arbitrary conventions and historical 
quirks built into them.  Science is not ‘The Ultimate Truth’ any more than any 
other memeplex.  However, memetics can provide a context in which to see why 
science offers a better kind of truth than religion. 
‘We are designed by natural selection to be truth-seeking creatures.  Our 
perceptual systems have evolved to build adequate models of the world and 
predict accurately what will happen next.  Our brains are designed to solve 
problems effectively and to make sound decisions.  Of course, our perception is 
partial and our decision-making less than brilliant – but it is a lot better than 
useless.  If we had no memes, that would be that; we would have the best 
understanding of the world that could be acquired in the circumstances.  But we 
do have memes, and with memes come not only new ways of controlling and 
predicting the world, but meme tricks and free-loading memes, misleading 
memes and false memes. 
Science is fundamentally a process; a set of methods for trying to distinguish 
true memes from false ones.  At its heart lies the idea of building theories about 
the world and testing them, rather like perceptual systems do.  Science is not 
perfect.  Scientists occasionally cheat to gain power and influence, and their 
false results can survive for decades, misleading scores of future scientists.  
False theories thrive within science as well as within religion, and for many of 
the same reasons.  Comforting ideas are more likely to last than scary ones; 
ideas that exalt human beings are more popular than those that do not.  
Evolutionary theory faced enormous opposition because it provided a view of 
humans that many humans do not like.  The same will probably be true of

RELIGIONS AS MEMEPLEXES    203 
memetics.  However, at the heart of science lies the method of demanding tests 
of any idea.  Scientists must predict what will happen if a particular theory is 
valid and then find out if it is so.  That is precisely what I have tried to do with 
the theory of memetics. 
This is not what religions do.  Religions build theories about the world and 
then prevent them from being tested.  Religions provide nice, appealing and 
comforting ideas, and cloak them in a mask of ‘truth, beauty, and goodness’.  
The theories can then thrive in spite of being untrue, ugly, or cruel. 
In the end, there is no ultimate truth to be found and locked up forever, but 
there are more or less truthful theories and better or worse predictions.  I do 
defend the idea that science, at its best, is more truthful than religion. 

Into the Internet 
 
 
 
In our house we have four telephone lines, two fax machines, three television 
sets, four hi-fi systems, seven or eight radios, five computers and two modems.  
And there are only four of us.  We also have many thousands of books and a few 
compact disks, audiotapes and videotapes.  How did all this stuff come to exist 
and why? 
If you have never asked yourself the question you might think the answer is 
obvious.  All these things are great inventions, created by other people to make 
our lives better or more fun.  But is this the right answer?  Memetics provides an 
entirely different answer, one that is somewhat counter-intuitive. 
I suggest that memetic selection created them.  As soon as memes appeared 
they started evolving towards greater fidelity, fecundity, and longevity; in the 
process, they brought about the design of better and better meme-copying 
machinery.  So the books, telephones, and fax machines were created by the 
memes for their own replication. 
This may sound odd when we know that memes are just information being 
copied from one person to another.  How can bits of information create radios 
and computers?  But the same question could be asked of genes – how can bits 
of information stored in DNA create gnats and elephants?  The answer is the 
same in both cases – because the information is a replicator that undergoes 
selection.  This means the evolutionary algorithm runs, and the evolutionary 
algorithm produces design.  The design of computers by memetic selection is, in 
this sense, no more mysterious than the design of forests by genetic selection.  
The consciousness of a designer is not the causal factor in either process.  
Design comes about entirely from the playing out of the evolutionary algorithm. 
 
We are used to the idea of animals and plants being designed by natural 
selection, but we must also think about the evolution of the replication 
machinery that makes natural selection possible – for both have evolved 
together.  This is the analogy I shall to draw here.  Memes do not yet have 
precise copying machinery as DNA has.  They are still evolving their copying 
machines and this is what all the technology is for. 
CHAPTER 16 

INTO THE INTERNET    205 
It is helpful to look back at what must have happened in the case of genes – 
the only other replicators we know much about (Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 
1995).  When the first ever replicator arose on this planet it was presumably not 
DNA but some simpler precursor, or even some completely different replicating 
chemical.  Whatever it was, we can be sure that the cellular machinery for 
copying it did not exist.  Natural selection in the very early days of life was not 
selecting between complex organisms like cats and dogs, or even different kinds 
of simple cell, but between little bits of protein or other chemicals.  Any of these 
proteins that got copied more often or more accurately, or that lasted longer, 
would have survived at the expense of the rest.  Gradually, from these 
beginnings, natural selection would produce not only more proteins but proteins 
that took part in the copying of other proteins.  Eventually, there evolved the 
system of groups of replicators, replicating machinery, and vehicles that we see 
today.  The system settled down so that all creatures on the planet use the same 
(or a very similar) replication system which produces extremely high-fidelity 
copying of long-lasting replicators. 
I suggest that the same process is now going on with memes, except that it is 
still in its infancy.  As Dawkins put it, the new replicator is ‘still drifting 
clumsily about in its primeval soup’ (Dawkins 1976, p. 192).  That soup is the 
soup of human culture, human artefacts, and human-made copying systems.  
You and I are living during the stage at which the replication machinery for the 
new replicator is still evolving, and has not yet settled down to anything like a 
stable form.  The replication machinery includes all those meme-copying 
devices that fill my home, from pens and books to computers and hi-fi. 
Looking at it this way we can see all sorts of critical inventions of human 
culture as phases in the evolution of meme replication.  I have already explained 
how treating language this way provides a new theory of the origins of language.  
I want now to go on from spoken language itself to the invention of writing, and 
then to modern information-processing technology.  As before, we should expect 
the evolutionary process to involve increases in the fidelity, fecundity, and 
longevity of the replicators. 
 
Writing 
 
Writing is obviously a useful step for memes because it increases the longevity 
of language.  We have already seen how language itself increases the fecundity 
and fidelity of copyable sounds; the problem was longevity.  Stories told using 
language can be remembered in human brains but, that aside, the sounds of

206    THE MEME MACHINE 
language are necessarily ephemeral.  Writing is the first step towards creating 
long-lived language. 
No one knows how many times writing was independently invented from 
scratch, but the task is formidable.  To start from scratch means making a large 
number of decisions about how to divide up speech and how to organise the 
marks that are going to stand for that speech.  The Sumerians of Mesopotamia 
invented writing about five thousand years ago; the Mexican Indians some time 
before 600 BC; and Egyptian and Chinese systems may also have arisen 
independently.  Sumerian cuneiform began, like many writing systems, as an 
accounting system representing sheep and grain.  It started with clay tokens and 
gradually evolved into a system of marks on clay tablets, with conventions about 
making the marks in order from left to right and top to bottom.  Other systems, 
naturally enough, use different conventions.  From a memetic point of view we 
can imagine lots of people trying out different ways of using the marks and 
some ways being copied more than others.  This selective copying is memetic 
evolution at work, and the result is better and better writing systems. 
Many writing systems have taken a starting point from other systems, or even 
just borrowed the idea of writing itself.  In 1820, a Cherokee Indian called 
Sequoyah observed that Europeans made marks on paper and went on to devise 
a system for writing down the Cherokee language.  Although he was illiterate 
and knew no English, his observations were enough for him to devise a writing 
system so successful that Cherokees were soon writing, reading, and printing 
their own books and newspapers (Diamond 1997). 
I have suggested that human consciousness is not the driving force behind the 
creation of language (or anything else for that matter) and Sequoyah looks like 
the ideal case to prove me wrong.  In fact, I chose him as a perfect opportunity 
to explain what I mean.  Sequoyah was presumably as conscious as any human 
being.  In discussions about creativity people often assume that consciousness is 
somehow responsible for creativity, but this view meets with serious problems 
as soon as you try to imagine exactly what it means.  You are almost forced into 
adopting a dualist position, with consciousness as something separate from the 
brain, that magically leaps in and invents things.  A more common view in 
science is to ignore consciousness and treat creativity as a product of the 
intelligence and ability of the individual concerned – ultimately taking the 
process back to brain mechanisms.  This escapes from the dualist trap but leaves 
out the importance of all the ideas already available in the creator’s 
environment.  The memetic view includes all this.  What I am proposing is this. 

INTO THE INTERNET    207 
Human brains and minds are a combined product of genes and memes.  As 
Dennett (1991, p. 207) puts it ‘a human mind is itself an artefact created when 
memes restructure a human brain in order to make it a better habitat for memes’.  
In Sequoyah’s case he must have had an exceptional brain, with exceptional 
determination and motivation, and he happened to come across a writing system 
that was already available at a time when his own people were in a position to 
take up his ideas and use them.  Sequoyah’s thinking was an essential part of the 
process, but was itself created out of the interplay between memes and genes.  
All this is a wonderful example of replicators creating design out of nowhere.  
As ever, there is really no designer other than the evolutionary process. 
There are basically three strategies for writing systems.  Signs can be used to 
stand for whole words, for syllables, or for just single sounds.  The differences 
are important for the memes each syllable will be able to transmit.  A system 
based on whole words is clumsy because there are so many words.  Every time a 
new word is invented a new sign has to be created as well.  At the other extreme 
systems using signs for single sounds can use few signs and combine them in 
many different ways, such as the alphabet of twenty-six letters in which this 
book is written.  The cognitive load placed on the brains of people using the 
system varies in the same way.  It is relatively easy to learn twenty-six letters 
and their sounds, although even this typically takes schoolchildren many months 
or even years of work.  But learning Japanese kanji takes much longer, and 
unless you know two or three thousand of them you cannot read a Japanese 
newspaper. 
For many reasons, writing systems based on sounds can convey more memes 
for less effort, and therefore are likely to win out in competition with other 
systems.  Of course, the competition is not straightforward.  The historical 
process by which writing systems are created means that there are all sorts of 
quirks, oddities, and arbitrary conventions which, once learned by sufficient 
numbers of people, attain some kind of stability.  In biological evolution an 
important principle is that evolution always builds on what it has available at the 
time.  There is no evolutionary God who can look at the design of the eye and 
say ‘it would be better if we got rid of this bit and started again’.  There is no 
starting again.  The same applies to the design of writing systems.  They evolve 
gradually from wherever they have got to at any point.  So, the alphabet of 
twenty-six letters is far from the ideal that a memetic God would create, but it is 
better than many other systems, and therefore, when direct competition arises, 
tends to win.  Many languages, like Turkish for example, have changed over 
from more cumbersome systems to the Roman one.  Many languages use

208    THE MEME MACHINE 
variations on the system, adding umlauts or circumflexes, diphthongs, or even 
new letters.  We have yet to see whether the economic and cultural power of 
Japan is enough to ensure the survival of its complicated writing system in a 
world in which the transmission of memes is everything, and English written 
with the Roman alphabet is dominant.  For memetic reasons I suspect it will not 
be. 
A similar argument applies to numerical systems.  Arithmetic is formidably 
hard using Roman numerals but easy with any system that relies on the position 
of a numeral, like the Arabic system that we, and most of the world, now use. 
This drive towards uniformity is interesting, and is stronger than was the case 
for the evolution of language.  In the case of writing, the invention of a new 
system is so difficult that borrowing one from elsewhere is more common, and 
novel systems are at a disadvantage.  Once an adequate system has begun to 
evolve it has a natural advantage, in spite of any shortcomings due to historical 
accident and arbitrary conventions.  When just a few systems exist, the one that 
produces slightly more, slightly better or slightly longer-lived copies begins to 
fill the world with its products, and the products take the idea of that copying 
system ‘with them.  The result is pressure towards one copying system taking 
over entirely from all the others. 
We are all too familiar with this process.  The standard QWERTY keyboard 
was devised to prevent the letters sticking together in the earliest manual 
typewriters; it is far from the optimum for modern keyboards and yet is almost 
universally used.  Once music could be recorded and stored, vinyl disks of just 
two sides and three rotation speeds captured the market, but have now mostly 
disappeared.  Standard reel-to-reel tapes hung on for a while after the invention 
of the much smaller cassette tape but then cassettes persisted in a single format 
until the compact disk appeared, and may or may not continue to survive 
alongside it.  Whether they do or not should be predictable from memetic 
principles.  The number of memes that can be crammed on to a CD is 
dramatically greater than the number on tape, and CD technology allows rapid 
random access.  Therefore, once cheap CD copying devices become available, 
CDs will surely outnumber cassettes, carrying with them the memes for that 
copying mechanism.  The number of compact disks in the world is now so huge, 
not to mention the number of factories legitimately making them, and the even 
larger number illegally copying them, that an enormous step forward in fidelity 
or fecundity of copying would be needed to oust the system for a new one.  The

INTO THE INTERNET    209 
same has happened with the format of computer disks. 
Bearing in mind the dangers of comparing memes and genes, we can 
speculate that the same process works in both cases, producing a uniform high-
fidelity copying system capable of creating a potentially infinite number of 
products.  The genes have settled down, for the most part, to an exquisitely high-
fidelity digital copying system based on DNA.  The memes have not yet reached 
such a high-quality system and will probably not settle on one for a long time 
yet. 
Returning to writing, I have described its evolution as a step towards greater 
longevity for memes based on language.  That step opens the way for further 
steps in increasing fidelity and fecundity.  Spelling can vary greatly, leading to 
ambiguity and low fidelity.  Many languages began with optional spelling that 
gradually gave way to ‘correct’ ways of spelling every word, dictionaries that 
specifies the correct spelling and, more recently, spell checkers that enforce the 
rules in electronically stored text. 
Fecundity is obviously limited when writing is slow and difficult, as it was 
for marking clay or making clay tokens to stand for words.  For most of its 
history, writing was a skill confined to a few specially trained scribes.  This 
made political sense because of the power it gave to rulers.  They alone could 
command scribes to keep records of barter, financial transactions, and taxes, or 
to maintain holy texts for the justification of oppression and war.  In any case, 
the early writing systems were only capable of recording limited kinds of 
information.  It took political and economic changes, as well as changes in 
writing itself, before writing could be used for poetry, novels, personal letters 
and recording history.  Widespread literacy came later with its dramatic increase 
in the number of memes stored and passed on as marks on paper. 
The printing press was a critical step for both fecundity and fidelity.  Up until 
the fifteenth century, all copying of texts in Europe was done by scribes, often 
monks who spent a large proportion of their time copying and illuminating 
religious works.  The work was slow and they made many errors.  These errors 
are now of great interest to historians tracking the history of texts, but they 
certainly did not help fidelity.  The time taken meant that few copies could be 
made, and books were an expensive commodity for only the richest and most 
powerful people.  This restricted the ideas in books to those for which there was 
financial backing – that is, ideas maintaining political, economic, and religious 
power.  Once books were cheaply available the kinds of memes contained in 
them could proliferate and change.  Written material is no longer confined to 
lists of taxes and religious tracts, but is constrained by quite different market

210    THE MEME MACHINE 
forces.  The memes took a great step forward when they got into books. 
Memes in books provide a good example of a selection system at work.  In 
this system, the replicators are the memes: the ideas, stories, theories or 
instructions conveyed in the printed words.  These either get copied or not, and 
their content affects the likelihood of their being copied.  The copying 
machinery is the publishing houses, printing presses, and factories in which the 
books are made.  The selective environment is the minds of authors in which 
memes compete to get into the final text, a world full of bookshops that stock 
the books or not, the book reviewers and magazines that publicise the books or 
not, and the people who buy and read them and recommend them to their friends 
– or not.  We humans are, obviously, critical to the whole process.  However, 
our creative role is not that of an independent designer conjuring ideas from 
nowhere.  Rather we are the copying machines, and parts of the selective 
environment, in a vast evolutionary process driven by the competition between 
memes. 
As I write this book I think of my mind as a battleground of ideas.  There are 
far more of them than can possibly find their way on to the final printed pages.  
‘I’ am not an independent conscious entity creating the ideas out of nowhere.  
Rather, this brain has picked up millions of memes from all its education, 
reading, and long hours of thinking, and they are all fermenting in there as the 
fingers type.  After this internal selective process is over and the manuscript is 
sent off there will be more selection, by the readers chosen by the publisher, and 
ultimately by the reviewers, bookshops and readers out there in the world.  
Whether the book sells a few hundred copies or a few hundred thousand copies 
will depend entirely on that selective process, 
 
Communications 
 
Railways, roads and ships may not seem to be directly concerned sprite memetic 
copying, but they play a role in speeding up the process of memetic competition.  
They carry to distant places the letters in which memes are written and the goods 
and people who convey ideas.  They also increase the number of people who are 
in contact with each other which provides a larger and more varied meme pool.  
Just as biological evolution produces more species on large landmasses than on 
small islands, so memetic evolution produces more developments when more 
people are joined together into a memetic system, Roads, railways, and airlines

INTO THE INTERNET    211 
connect larger and larger numbers of people together, just as common languages 
and writing systems do. 
In a 1901 classic, Cosmic Consciousness, the mystic Richard Bucke 
predicted that with the invention of ‘aerial navigation’, cities would no longer be 
needed and rich people would live in beautiful places, evenly spread out across 
the globe.  In fact, cities have increased dramatically in population and rural 
depopulation is the norm.  Why is this?  A memetic answer, though a slight 
digression from copying technology, takes a familiar form.  People who live in 
cities meet more people and therefore pick up and pass on more memes than 
people who live in isolated places.  Among these memes are behaviours that are 
only possible (or are much easier) in cities – eating out and going to pubs, going 
to cinemas, theatres, museums and art galleries, visiting friends at a moment’s 
notice, or having a high-powered job at the centre of the action.  The city-
dweller not only picks up these memes but meets other people who also have 
them.  Once these habits are picked up they are hard to drop. 
Meanwhile, the people who live in the country meet fewer people, and do not 
have the opportunities to pick up the habits of exciting city life – unless they go 
to the city, in which case they may be lured by all the memes they find there.  
There is a critical imbalance operating here.  When city-dwellers go to the 
country they meet few rural dwellers because they are widely spread out, and 
pick up few rural memes because few exist; but when country folk go to the city 
they meet lots and lots of city people and lots of new ideas.  The consequence is 
memetic pressure for city-dwelling. 
You may object that people make their choices about where to live either out 
of economic necessity or by freely choosing the life they know will make them 
happier.  But is this really so?  Economic necessity is often not a question of 
food and clothes for the family, but of buying televisions and cars and all the 
other trappings of a meme-rich life.  The more we are exposed to memes the 
more we seem to acquire a hunger for them that is rarely satisfied.  And 
happiness is very hard to judge.  We may think that having a more exciting life, 
closer to the centre of the action, will make us happier, but we may be wrong.  I 
suggest that we are, to a far greater extent than we would like to believe, driven 
to our choices by the pressure of memes. 
This memetic argument suggests that there will be pressure for people to live 
in vast cities whenever the following conditions obtain: first, that there is enough 
communication between the country and the cities to set up the imbalance, and 
second, that people’s main form of communication is still face to face, or via 
cheap local phone calls.  If memetic transfer were truly independent of distance

212    THE MEME MACHINE 
then the demographic pressures would change 
 
The telegraph and telephone, radio and television, are all steps towards 
spreading memes more effectively.  They increase the fecundity of the copying 
process, and the distance over which it operates.  People have often been unable 
to predict how such inventions would actually be used and which would last and 
which not, but from a memetic point of view prediction should be relatively 
easy.  Anything with higher fidelity, fecundity, and longevity than its rivals 
should be successful.  From the first electric telegraph, in 1838, to the telex 
machine and fax, fidelity and fecundity have gone on increasing – opening up 
new niches for further development along the way. 
The telephone was bound to be a success.  People are genetically evolved to 
chat and gossip (Dunbar 1996), and want to exchange news and views, creating 
lots of memes in the process.  They can spread the memes by letters which take 
minutes or hours to write, and days to arrive, or they can ring each other up.  
People who use the phone will get more ideas spread simply because it is 
quicker, and those ideas include the idea of using the phone.  Mobile phones 
have progressed very rapidly from being an executive luxury to being 
indispensable to every doctor, plumber, and aspiring teenager. 
Letters will win out only when there is a need for longevity over fecundity.  
Fax machines combine the fidelity and longevity of writing with the speed (and 
hence fecundity) of the telephone.  Photocopiers were a fantastic step for 
fecundity.  Interestingly, people keep predicting the end of books.  When radio 
came along predictions were made that no one would read any more.  The same 
was proclaimed with the advent of television and then personal computers.  In 
fact, books of a TV series can sell millions, and bookshops are selling more, not 
fewer, books than ever.  Perhaps this is because memes can take different routes 
to success, just as genes do with their alternative strategies under r-selection and 
K-selection (p. 100).  Electronic-mail messages go for high fecundity, low 
fidelity, and low longevity (people send out lots, do not bother to write carefully 
or correct the mistakes, and throw them away).  Letters go for low fecundity, 
high fidelity, and high longevity (people write fewer letters, construct them 
carefully and politely, and often keep them).  Books are high on all three. 
All this makes a lot more sense if you look at the process as memetic 
competition.  Any copying process that produces a successful combination of

INTO THE INTERNET    213 
high-fidelity, long-lasting copies of memes will spread more memes and, in the 
process, spread itself.  As this process continues more memes spread faster and 
faster.  Note that the consequence of this is a headache for humans.  Competition 
in business, publishing, the arts and science all depends on the transfer of 
memes.  As memetic transfer speeds up so the competition speeds up, and 
people without the latest technology fail in that competition.  We are driven by 
the latest technology to have to read all those books today, send that fax now, or 
be on the end of a phone line to Japan at three in the morning.  We may think all 
this progress is designed for our own happiness, and indeed we may sometimes 
very much enjoy our meme-rich lives, but the real driving force behind it all is 
the interest of the memes. 
 
From copy-the-product to copy-the-instruction 
 
So far, I have talked about increasing fidelity in rather general terms.  I want 
now to be more specific and apply two further principles to how copying 
systems increase their fidelity.  The first is the switch from analogue to digital 
systems and the second the switch from copy-the-product to copy-the-
instruction. 
Digitising information is a good way to increase fidelity because it reduces 
errors in storage and transmission (p. 58).  Language includes discrete words and 
is therefore more digital than other communications such as cries, howls, and 
calls.  Writing extends the digitisation by committing certain sounds to certain 
letters, enforcing standard spellings and, above all, by allowing the vagaries of 
handwriting to be ignored by anyone who has learnt an alphabet.  The ability of 
humans to read scrawly idiosyncratic handwriting is amazing, and computers are 
still bad at it.  We are essentially able to interpret a wide variety of scribbles as 
being the letter ‘p’ or the letter ‘a’, thus creating a digital signal out of an 
analogue one.  The same has been true of sound-receiving technology as it 
switched from grooves in disks or analogue magnetic signals stored on tape, to 
digital recording and storage.  Indeed, it was the advent of digital sound 
recording that made it obvious that digital is better than analogue.  Many radio 
stations have already changed over to entirely digital systems with a significant 
improvement in qualify.  The copying of DNA has built-in error-correction 
mechanisms that far exceed anything the memes have yet created. 
The second step is to copy the instructions rather than the product.  I 
previously gave the example of a recipe for soup.  It may be possible for a cook

214    THE MEME MACHINE 
to taste the soup and copy it, but the copy is likely to be better if he works from 
a recipe.  Why?  The general principle is that following recipes is not a 
reversible process.  Whether we are talking about the genetic instructions for 
making a body, or the recipe for a cake (Dawkins 1982).  Follow the genetic 
instructions in the right way and under the right conditions and you get a body, 
but you cannot take the body and follow the instructions back to arrive at a 
person’s genome.  The same is true of the soup.  Of course you can try, but 
errors are bound to creep into the reverse engineering required to copy the 
product.  You have to work out how it was done, and then do it yourself.  If 
copies of copies are made the errors are compounded, and any good tricks 
invested in the original product are soon lost.  It is far better to have clear 
instructions to follow. 
The invention of writing makes possible all sorts of steps in this direction.  
Recipes for food are only one example, others are car-maintenance manuals, 
instructions on how to get to the party, user manuals for hi-fi systems or gas 
ovens, instructions for building model aeroplanes or decorating your house in 
the latest fashionable styles.  In these, and many other cases, you may see a 
product or action and guess at how it was made, but verbal or rewritten 
instructions are a great help. 
Copying written instructions is also far more secure.  Writing is digital and 
highly redundant so that errors in spelling or syntax, or degradation by 
photocopying, are routinely ignored in passing on recipes or instructions.  The 
same instruction can be copied to millions of people, as many computer manuals 
have been, and each person receives the same information.  The booklet can be 
passed on to reader after reader without losing any detail. 
I am returning to this principle because it has been so important in the 
computer revolution.  Computer programs are instructions.  They work on the 
basis of copy-the-instruction not copy-the-product.  Take a familiar suite of 
programs such as the word processor I am using to write this book – Word 6.0.  
Word has evolved gradually through several stages and there are now millions of 
copies of its various versions in the world living inside millions of PCs in offices 
and houses.  Some people buy them on disks or CDs, others copy them (legally 
or not) from each other.  When installed the programs all do the same things.  
They put up letters on a screen, move text around when commanded by the user, 
send data to printers, and so on.  No human being, from watching the word 
processor at work or seeing the documents it creates, could reconstruct the 
machine code on which it is based.  The fantastic success of the memes inside 
Word 6.0 is due not only to its usefulness to the humans who use it, but to the 
digital copying machinery on which it operates and the fact that it is instructions

INTO THE INTERNET    215 
and not products that are copied.  These memes, or some of them, will outlive 
Word 6.0.  If Word 8 or 9 is made it will doubtless reuse much of the code that 
formed earlier versions. 
Note that the billions of products created by these word processors are not 
copied in the same way as the memes inside the word processor itself.  But nor 
are they irrelevant to the copying process.  If people were not happy with the 
program, and could not easily write all their letters, articles and books with it, 
then Word 6.0 would not be copied at all.  It is the quality and quantity of the 
documents created that determines the success of the word processor they were 
created with.  We can now see that these documents play for the memes, a 
similar role to that played by organisms for the genes.  In this sense they are a 
vehicle, except that they do not carry the replicators around inside them.  The 
documents themselves may disappear, but their existence determines which of 
the instructions for making them are copied and which are not.  And potentially 
these instructions can be copied on for ever, just as genes can. 
Many meme-copying steps have gone into the creation of the computers on 
which all this depends.  They include the invention of language, its increased 
longevity by writing, increased communication between people by the building 
of roads and railways, the invention of telephones and televisions, the invention 
of digital computers, programming languages, digital storage devices, and 
finally the creation of user packages such as word processors, statistical 
packages, spreadsheets, and databases, which consist of memeplexes whose 
vehicles are the documents they make possible.  We may expect this process to 
continue with the creation of more and more computer-based instructions whose 
operations are inscrutable to their users but whose products determine whether 
they are replicated or not. 
Note that this evolutionary process has made memetic-copying mechanisms 
more similar to genetic ones.  One of the great worries for memetics was the 
accusation that memes are passed on by Lamarckian ‘inheritance of acquired 
characteristics’.  We can now see that with further developments of meme-
copying technology the tendency is, just as it presumably was for genes, towards 
a non-Lamarckian mechanism – that is, copy-the-instruction not copy-the-
product.  The precise way it is done will always be different for memes and 
genes but the basic evolutionary principles are the same.  The competition 
between replicators forces the invention of better and better systems for copying 
those replicators.  The best systems are digital, have effective error-correction 
mechanisms, and copy the instructions for making the products, rather than the 
products themselves. 

216    THE MEME MACHINE 
Caught in the web 
 
In 1989, the World Wide Wed was invented.  The Internet had already been 
expanding for many years, and what had begun as a small scheme linking a few 
government scientists, rapidly became a worldwide system through which 
anyone with a computer and modem could fetch stored information from all 
around the world.  This was a great step for the memes.  Memes can now be 
stored on the hard disk of a computer in, say, Melbourne, and at any time of day 
or night be copied almost without errors over phone lines or satellite connections 
to another computer in London, Florence, Chicago, or Tokyo, using the energy 
resources of countless human beings along the way. 
These memes can be used to create other products (say school projects or 
business plans).  They can be saved on disks at the new location, or to save 
space just the link be saved and the information called up again whenever 
needed.  This last fact mirrors an interesting trick used by the human visual 
system.  The visual world is so complex that storing even tiny fractions of the 
changing image would overwhelm even the vast storage system of the human 
brain.  Instead, the brain throws away most of the information and relies on our 
ability simply to look again.  We may have the impression that when we look 
out of the window we have a beautifully rich visual image, but in fact all our 
brains are holding is a little piece of the central image, a very rough sketch of the 
rest, and the ability to respond quickly to change and look again when necessary 
(Blackmore et al. 1995).  In the same way, when using the Net we can mark 
information we might want again without actually keeping it on our own 
computers.  The memes stay where they always were, in Sydney or Rome; and 
we just have a quick route for getting them again. 
Use of the World Wide Web is free.  This may change, but at the end of the 
twentieth century you pay only for the computer and phone lines that connect 
you to the system.  Out there in cyberspace lie all the stories, and pictures, and 
programs, and games, that millions of people have lovingly put onto their Web 
sites, creating a virtual world of digital information.  There are multi-user 
domains, or MUDS, that are imaginary places that people have constructed for 
others to come and play in.  For some people these virtual worlds are more real 
than ordinary life (Turkle 1995).  There are controls on who can enter a MUD 
but they are not financial controls.  This is odd if you think of the Internet as 
something that humans created for their own benefit, because you might expect 
them to pay for it.  It makes more sense when you think of the memes as having

INTO THE INTERNET    217 
created the Web to aid their own replication, and competing with each other to 
get your attention.  If memes can get copied they will, and the Internet copies a 
lot of memes. 
Does the Net need us?  Yes, at the moment it does, though not necessarily for 
ever.  We made the hardware and software on which it depends and we need to 
keep maintaining it, or the copying system will collapse.  More importantly, our 
biologically evolved nature still drives, to a very large extent, which memes are 
successful.  They are, naturally enough, those to do with sex, food, and fighting.  
The most common topic for searches on the World Wide Web is sex.  MUDS 
allow people to take on invented identities and engage in meeting, chatting up, 
and having virtual sex with people whose location and even biological sex they 
may not know.  The vast majority of computer games are based on killing and 
warfare.  Any memes which can get into or tag along with such memeplexes are 
more likely to succeed.  In this sense, the Internet still needs us, and is driven by 
human genes as well as memes. 
However, many changes lie ahead.  Already there are free-floating programs 
which move around in cyberspace, called bots (short for robotic programs).  The 
way forward in artificial intelligence seems to be to build small and stupid units 
that together do clever things.  We can imagine the Net becoming full of such 
autonomous stupid creatures that run about doing useful jobs.  For example, as 
the Net increases in size and complexity, which memetic principles dictate that it 
must, there will be increasing problems of traffic flow and control.  One idea is 
to create little programs based on insects laying chemical trails, that move 
around providing information about traffic flow on different routes.  Others 
might perform error-correction tasks or censorship duties.  At the moment, the 
only viruses or parasites are ones deliberately created by malicious (or just 
mischievous) human beings, but could bots mutate into viruses and start 
clogging up the system?  Certainly, copying errors happen in any system and 
occasionally they lead to a product that proliferates.  General evolutionary 
principles suggest that this may occur if the fantastic copying and storage system 
of the Net is maintained for long enough. 
Other programs simulate people; they can carry on conversations and do 
things like psychic readings, or take part in games.  There are ‘chatterbots’ with 
whom you can converse when you get lonely.  In multi-user games people have 
been fooled by bots claiming to be real people.  In a large system over a long 
time such bots could presumably mutate into more and more efficient ‘people’. 
Many people seem to assume that because we built the machinery on which

218    THE MEME MACHINE 
the net runs, we are in control of it.  This is clearly not so.  British Telecom can 
no longer understand its own telephone network, and the whole worldwide 
system looks set to become bigger and more complex still.  Indeed, if the 
memetic analysis I have given here is correct, then so long as human beings 
maintain the infrastructure, the system will proliferate out of anyone or 
anything’s control – like a vast natural ecosystem. 
The same applies to robots.  At the moment, they mostly carry out simple 
tasks under human control, but memetics raises the following interesting 
possibility.  For robots to become like humans – in other words, to have human-
like artificial intelligence and artificial consciousness – they would need to have 
memes.  Rather than being programmed to do specific tasks or even to learn 
from their environment as some already can, they would have to be given the 
ability to imitate.  If they could imitate the actions of people or other robots, then 
robot memes would begin to spread from one to another, and a new kind of 
memetic evolution take off, perhaps inventing new kinds of language and 
communication.  The robot memes would drive the robots to new activities, 
giving rise to motivations that we could only guess at.  We humans might not be 
capable of imitating everything the new robots did and so we might be quite 
excluded from their kind of cultural evolution.  We would certainly not be in 
control of it. 
All this raises interesting, and perhaps frightening, questions about the nature 
of human control and human identify.  In any case, memetics raises those 
questions from its very foundations.  I have carefully avoided them so far but the 
time has come to ask the difficult ones.  Who am I, and what am I here for? 

The ultimate memeplex 
 
 
 
‘We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators’.  So 
ends Dawkins’s book The Selfish Gene in which the whole idea of memes 
began.  But who is this ‘we’?  That is the question I want to ask now.  The 
‘ultimate memeplex’ of my title is no science fiction futuristic invention, but our 
own familiar self. 
Think for a moment about yourself.  I mean the ‘real you’, the inner self, that 
bit of yourself that really feels those heartfelt emotions, the bit of you that once 
(or many times) fell in love, the you that is conscious and that cares, thinks, 
works hard, believes, dreams and imagines; I mean who you really are.  Unless 
you have thought about this a good deal you probably jump to many conclusions 
about your self – that it has some kind of continuity and persists through your 
life, that it is the centre of your consciousness, has memories, holds beliefs and 
makes the important decisions of your life. 
Now I want to ask some simple questions about this ‘real you’.  They are: 
What am I?  Where am I?  What do I do? 
 
What am I? 
 
You may be one of the large majority who believes in the existence of a soul or 
spirit.  Ethnographic studies show that most cultures include notions of a soul or 
spirit, nearly half believing that the soul can separate from the body (Sheila 
1978).  Surveys show that in the United States 88 per cent believe in a human 
soul, and in Europe 61 per cent, figures in line with high levels of belief in God, 
life after death, and supernatural phenomena (Gallup and Newport 1991; 
Humphrey 1995).  Presumably, people assume that the soul is their inner self or 
‘real me’ and will survive when their body dies. 
There is a long history of philosophers and scientists brining to make sense of 
such a view.  In the seventeenth century, the French philosopher René Descartes 
took a wonderfully sceptical view of the world, doubting every belief and 
opinion he had.  He decided to treat everything as though it were absolutely false 
‘untie I have encountered something which is certain, or at least, if I can do
CHAPTER 17 

220    THE MEME MACHINE 
nothing else, until I have learned with certainty that there is nothing certain in 
the world.’ (Descartes 1641, p. 102).  Amidst all his doubts, he concluded that 
he could not doubt that he was thinking.  Thus he came to his famous ‘Cogito 
ergo sum’ – I think- therefore I am – and to what is now known, after him, as 
‘Cartesian dualism’: the idea that that thinking stuff is different from physical, or 
extended, stuff.  Our bodies may be a machine of sorts but ‘we’ are something 
else. 
Dualism is tempting but false.  For a start no such separate stuff can be 
found.  If it could be found it would become part of the physical world and so 
not be a separate stuff all.  On the other hand if it cannot, in principle, be found 
by any physical measures then it is impossible to see how it could do its job of 
controlling the brain.  How would immaterial mind and material body interact?  
Like Descartes’ ‘thinking stuff’, souls, spirits and other self-like entities seem 
powerless to do what is demanded of them. 
Nevertheless, a few scientists have developed dualist theories.  The 
philosopher Sir Karl Popper and neuroscientist Sir John Eccles (1977), suggest 
that the self controls its brain by intervening at the synapses (or chemical 
junctions) between neurons.  Yet as our understanding grows of how neurons 
and synapses work there is less and less need for a ghost to control the machine.  
Mathematician Roger Penrose (1994) and anaesthetist Stuart Hameroff (1994) 
Suggest that consciousness operates at a quantum level in the tiny microtubules 
inside the membranes of neurons.  Yet their proposal just replaces one mystery 
with another.  As the philosopher Patricia Churchland (1998, p. 121) observes 
‘Pixie dust in the synapses is about as explanatorily powerful as quantum 
coherence in the microtubules’.  These attempts to find a self that lurks in the 
gaps in our understanding just do not help, and few scientists or philosophers are 
convinced by them. 
The opposite extreme is to identify the self with the whole brain, or whole 
body.  This might seem appealing.  After all, when you talk about Simon you 
mean him – the whole body, the entire person.  So why not say the same of 
yourself?  Because this does not get at the problem we are struggling with – that 
it feels as though there is someone inside who is consciously making the 
decisions.  You can point to your body and say ‘that is me’ but you do not really 
mean it.  Let us try a thought experiment.  Imagine for a moment that you are 
given a choice (and you cannot say neither).  Either you will have your body 
completely swapped for another body and keep your inner conscious self, or you 
will have your inner self swapped for another unspecified self and keep the 
body.  Which will it be? 

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    221 
Of course, this is both practically and conceptually daft.  Unless we can 
identify this inner self the experiment could not be done, and even then it 
implies a further self to do the choosing.  However, the point is this.  I bet you 
did make a choice and I bet you chose to keep your inner self.  However daft the 
notion is, we seem to have it, and have it bad.  We think of ourselves as 
something separate from our brains and bodies.  This is what needs explaining, 
and so far we are not getting on very well. 
This problem applies to any scientific theory that leaves the sense of self out 
of the picture.  The most thorough-going reductionist view of this kind is what 
Nobel laureate Francis Crick calls ‘The Astonishing Hypothesis’: 
 
The Astonishing Hypothesis is that ‘You’, your joys and your sorrows, your 
memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal identify and free will, are in 
fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve cells and their 
associated molecules.  As Lewis Carroll’s Alice might have phrased it: ‘You’re 
nothing but a pack of neurons’ (Crick 1994, p. 3). 
 
There are at least two problems with this.  First, you do not feel like a pack of 
neurons.  So what the theory needs, and does not provide, is an explanation of 
how a pack of neurons comes to believe that it is actually an independent 
conscious self.  Second, the theory does not say which neurons.  It cannot be all 
neurons because did am not consciously aware of most of what goes on in my 
brain; ‘I’ do not identify with the neurons that control glucose levels in my 
blood or the fine movements that keep me sitting up straight.  On the other hand 
if you try to identify ‘self’ neurons you are doomed to trouble.  All neurons look 
much the same under the microscope and all of them are doing something all the 
time regardless of what ‘I’ am doing.  Crick is working on the theory that 
neurons bound together by simultaneous firing at 40 cycles per second form the 
basis for visual awareness, but this is not the same as a theory of a conscious 
self. 
Note that this theory is more reductionist than many others.  Crick not only 
assumes that you are utterly dependent upon the actions of nerve cells – most 
neuroscientists assume that – but that you are nothing but the pack of neurons.  
Other scientists assume that new phenomena may emerge from simpler ones, 
and cannot be understood by understanding the underlying neurons and their 
connections.  For example, we cannot understand human intentions, motivations, 
or emotions just by obsessing the behaviour and connections of neurons, any 
more than we can understand the activity of a desktop computer by looking at its 
chips and circuits.  On this more common view the intentions depend completely

222    THE MEME MACHINE 
on the neurons (just as the computation depends completely on the chips in the 
computer) but to understand them we must work at an appropriate level of 
explanation.  But what is the appropriate level of explanation for the self’?  The 
behaviour of neurons seems to miss it. 
Another approach is to identify the self with memory or personality.  
Victorian spiritualists believed that ‘human personality’ was the essence of the 
self and could survive physical death (Myers 1903).  However, personality is 
nowadays understood not as a separate entity but as a fairly consistent way of 
behaving that makes one person identifiably different from another.  This way of 
behaving reflects the kind of brain we were born with and our lifetime’s 
experiences.  It cannot be separated from our brain and body any more than our 
memories can.  The more we learn about personality and memory the more 
obvious it is that they are functions of a living brain and inseparable from it.  In 
an important sense you are your memories and personality – at least, you would 
not be the same person without them – but they are not things, or properties of a 
separate self.  They are complex functions of neural organisation. 
A final way of looking at the self is as a social construction.  If I asked you 
who you are, you might answer with your name, your job, your relationship to 
other people (I’m Sally’s mum or Daniel’s daughter), or your reason for being 
where you are (I’m the cleaner, Adam invited me).  All of these self-descriptions 
come out of your mastery of language, your interactions with other people, and 
the world of discourse in which you live.  They are all useful in certain 
circumstances, but they do not describe the sort of ‘inner self’ we free looking 
for.  They describe no persistent conscious entity.  They are just labels for an 
ever-changing social creature.  They depend on where you are and who you are 
with.  We can find out a lot about how such constructions are created – indeed 
social psychologists do just that – but we do not find a conscious self this way.  
The inner ‘me’ seems to be mighty elusive. 
 
Where am I? 
 
You probably feel as though ‘you’ are located somewhere behind your eyes, 
looking out.  This seems to be the most commonly imagined perspective, though 
others include the top of the head, the heart, or even in the neck, and there are 
apparently cultural differences in this imagined position.  The location may 
change with what you are doing, and you may even be able to move it around at 
will.  Blind people report feeling themselves in their fingertips when reading

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    223 
Braille, or in their long white cane when walking.  Drivers sometimes inhabit the 
edges of their cars and wince if something passes too close.  So is there anything 
actually at this imagined spot?  Presumably not in the case of the stick or the car, 
but it still feels as though there is a self in there somewhere.  Where, then, 
should we look for the self? 
The most obvious place to look is in the brain.  Drugs that affect the brain 
affect our sense of self, and damage to various areas of the brain can destroy or 
change it.  Stimulating the brain with electrodes can produce changes in body 
image, feelings of shrinking or expanding, or sensations of floating and flying.  
Yet we do not feel as though we are inside a warm, wet, and pulsating organ.  In 
a lurid thought experiment Dennett (1978) imagines his brain being removed to 
a vat in a life-support lab while his body roams around as usual, connected to his 
body as intricately as it ever was before, but by radio links instead of nerves.  
Now where would Dennett feel he was?  As long as he could see and hear, he 
would feel as though he was wherever his eyes and ears were.  He would not 
fancy himself to be inside the vat.  Of course, we cannot do the experiment to 
check his intuitions, but it suggests the disturbing conclusion that Dennett would 
still imagine he was living in there, somewhere behind his eyes, even if the skull 
were empty and his brain were controlling things from the vat. 
If we look inside the brain we do not see a self.  To the naked eye a human 
brain looks like a lump of rather solid porridge with a convoluted shiny surface 
and various areas of paler or darker grey; it is hard to believe that all our 
thinking goes on in there.  Only with high magnification and the techniques of 
modern neuroscience can we find out that it contains about a hundred billion 
neurons or nerve cells.  The neurons are connected up in fantastically complex 
ways and, by virtue of these connections, store and process the information that 
controls our behaviour.  However, there is no centre of action where a self might 
reside.  There is no one place into which all the inputs go, and from which all the 
instructions get sent out.  This is an important point, and deeply disturbing.  We 
feel as though we are a central observer and controller of what goes on, but there 
is no place for this central controller to live. 
Let us consider what happens when you perform a simple task.  For example, 
find a letter ‘p’ on this page and then point to it.  What has gone on?  It may feel 
as though you have decided to find a ‘p’ (or not if you could not be bothered), 
searched the next few lines, found one, and then commanded your finger to 
move into position and touch it.  The role of the self seems obvious, ‘you’

224    THE MEME MACHINE 
 decided to act (or not), ‘you’ moved your finger and so on. 
From an information-processing point of view the role of the ‘you’ is not at 
all obvious.  Light enters the eye and is focused on a layer of light-sensitive 
cells.  The output from these goes into four layers of cells in the retina which 
extract edges and brightness discontinuities, enhance differences across 
boundaries, change the coding of colour information from a three-receptor 
system to one based on pairs of opposites, and throw away a great deal of 
unnecessary detail.  The part-digested information is then compressed and 
passed along the optic nerve into the thalamus inside the brain.  Here, different 
types of information about the image are separately processed and the results 
passed on to other parts of the visual cortex at the back of the brain.  As the 
information passes through it is at some times and places coded like a map, with 
neighbouring positions corresponding to neighbouring locations in the world, 
but, at other times and places, as more abstract information about shape, 
movement or texture.  Throughout the system there are numerous things going 
on at once. 
From the visual cortex, outputs go off to other parts of the brain, for example, 
those dealing with language, reading, speech, object recognition and memory.  
Since you know how to read, a search identities a letter ‘p’.  Some of the 
information goes to the motor cortex which co-ordinates action.  From here a 
movement such as pointing with your finger, will be pre-processed and then 
coordinated with visual feedback as it happens, so that the finger ends up in line 
with the ‘p’. 
The details of this do not matter.  The important point is that the description 
that neuroscientists are building up of the way the brain works leaves no room 
for a central self.  There is no single line in to a central place, nor a single line 
out; the whole system is massively parallel.  In this description there is no need 
for a ‘you’ who decided to find the ‘p’ (or not) and who started the finger 
moving.  The whole action inexorably created itself, given this book with its 
instruction, and your brain and body. 
You might think that there is still room for a central self as some kind of 
informational or abstract centre rather than an actual place.  There are several 
theories of this kind, such as Baars’s (1997) global workspace theory.  The 
workspace is like a theatre with a bright spotlight on the stage; the events in the 
bright spot are the only ones ‘in consciousness’.  But this is only a metaphor and 
can be a misleading one.  If there is any sense to the idea of a spotlight, it is that 
at any time some information is being attended to – or actively processed – 
while other information is not.  However, this focus of activity changes

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    225 
continuously with the complex demands of the task we are performing.  If there 
is a spotlight, it is one that switches on and off all over the place and can shine in 
several places at once; if there is a global workspace it is not located in any 
particular lace.  It cannot tell us where ‘I’ am. 
The theatre metaphor may do more harm than good to our thinking about self 
and consciousness.  Dennett (1991) argues that although most theorists now 
reject Cartesian dualism, they still secretly believe in what he calls the 
‘Cartesian Theatre’.  They still imagine that somewhere inside our heads is a 
place where ‘it all comes together’; where consciousness happens and we see 
our mental images projected on a mental screen; where we make our decisions 
and initiate actions; where we agonise about life, love, and meaning.  The 
Cartesian Theatre does not exist.  When sensory information comes into the 
brain it does not go to an inner screen where a little self is watching it.  If it did, 
the little self would have to have little eyes and another inner screen, and so on.  
According to Dennett, the brain produces ‘multiple drafts’ of what is happening 
as the information flows through its parallel networks.  One of these drafts 
comes to be the verbal story we tell ourselves, which includes the idea that there 
is an author of the story, or a user of the brain’s virtual machine.  Dennett calls 
this the ‘benign user illusion’.  So maybe this is all we are; a centre of narrative 
gravity; a story about a persisting self who does things, feels things and makes 
decisions; a benign user illusion.  And illusions do not have locations. 
 
What do I do? 
 
Hold out your arm in front of you and then, whenever you feel like it, 
spontaneously and of your own free will, flex your wrist.  You might like to do 
this a few times, making sure you do it as consciously and spontaneously as you 
can.  You will probably experience some kind of inner dialogue or decision 
process in which you hold back from doing anything, and then decide to act.  
Now ask yourself, what began the process that led to the action?  Was it you? 
This task formed the basis of some fascinating experiments carried out by the 
neurosurgeon Benjamin Libet (1985).  His subjects had electrodes on their 
wrists to pick up the action, and electrodes on their scalps to measure brain 
waves, and they watched a revolving spot on a clock face.  As well as 
spontaneously flexing their wrists they were asked to note exactly where the spot 
was when they decided to act.  Libet was therefore timing three things: the start

226    THE MEME MACHINE 
of the action, the moment of the decision to act, and the start of a particular brain 
wave pattern called a readiness potential.  This pattern is seen just before any 
complex action, and is associated with the brain planning the series of 
movements to be carried out.  The question was, which would come first, the 
decision to act or the readiness potential? 
If you are a dualist you may think that the decision to act must come first.  In 
fact what Libet found was that the readiness potential began about 550 
milliseconds (just over half a second) before the action, and the decision to act 
about 200 milliseconds (about one-fifth of a second) before the action.  In other 
words, the decision to act was not the starting point – a finding that can seem a 
little threatening to our sense of self.  There was much controversy over his 
results and many criticisms of the experiments, but given all I have said above, 
his results were only to be expected.  There is no separate self jumping into the 
synapses and starting things off.  My brain does not need me. 
So what does my Self do?  Surely it must at least be the centre of my 
awareness; the thing that receives impressions as I go about my life?  Not 
necessarily.  This false view is just part of Dennett’s illusory Cartesian Theatre.  
You can think about this either logically, or from the point of view of your own 
experience.  We have already considered the logic; so now let us try to 
introspect carefully.  Sit down comfortably and look at something uninteresting.  
Now concentrate on feeling the sensations from your body and on hearing what 
is going on around you.  Stay like that long enough to get used to it and then ask 
yourself some questions.  Where is that sound?  Is it inside my head or over 
there?  If it’s over there, then what is hearing it?  Can I be conscious of the thing 
that is hearing it?  If so, am I separate from that thing as well? 
You can make up your own questions.  The general idea is an old one, and 
has been used in many meditation traditions over the millennia.  Staring 
determinedly into your own experience does not reveal a solid world observed 
by a persisting self but simply a stream of ever-changing experience, with no 
obvious separation between observed and observer.  The eighteenth-century 
Scottish philosopher David Hume explained that whenever he entered most 
intimately into himself he always stumbled upon some particular perception – of 
heat or cold or pain or pleasure.  He could never catch himself without a 
perception, nor observe anything but the perception.  He concluded that the self 
was no more than a ‘bundle of sensations’ (Hume 1739–40).  The very natural 
idea that ‘I’ hear the sounds, feel the sensations, or see the world may be false. 
Another series of experiments by Libet (1981) adds an interesting twist to the

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    227 
argument.  Conscious sensory impressions can be induced by stimulating the 
brain, but only when it is continuously stimulated for about half a second.  It is 
as though consciousness takes some time to build up.  This would lead to the 
odd idea that our conscious appreciation of the world lags behind the events, but 
because of a process Libet calls ‘subjective antedating’ we never realise it is 
lagging behind.  The story we tell ourselves puts events in order.  Further 
experiments showed that with short stimuli (too short to induce conscious 
sensation) people could nevertheless guess correctly whether they were being 
stimulated or not (Libet et al. 1991).  In other words they could make correct 
responses without awareness.  Again the implication is that consciousness does 
not direct the action.  Conscious awareness comes all right, but not in time.  The 
hand is removed from the flame before we consciously feel the pain.  We have 
whacked the tennis ball back before we can be conscious of it coming towards 
us.  We have avoided the puddle before we were conscious of its existence.  
Consciousness follows on later.  Yet we still feel that ‘I’ consciously did these 
things. 
Something else we think we do is to believe things.  Because of our beliefs 
we argue vehemently over dinner that President Clinton really could not have 
done it, that the Israelis ought (or ought not) to have built those homes, that 
private education ought to be abolished, or that all drugs should be legalised.  
We are so convinced of our belief in God that we will argue for hours (or 
perhaps even go to war or lay down our life for Him).  We are so convinced by 
the alternative therapy that helped me that we force its claims on all our friends.  
But what does it mean to say that I believe?  It sounds as though there must be a 
self in there who has things called beliefs, but from another perspective there is 
only a person arguing, a brain processing the information, memes being copied 
or not.  We cannot actually find either the beliefs or the self who believes. 
The same can be said of memory.  We speak as though the self pulls up 
memories at will from its personal store.  We conveniently ignore the fact that 
memories are ever-changing mental constructions, that often we fail to 
remember accurately, that some memories come unbidden and that we often use 
complex memories with no conscious awareness at all.  It is more accurate to 
say that we are just human beings doing complex things that need memory and 
who then construct a story about a self who does the remembering. 
In this, and many other ways, we seem to have an enormous desire to 
describe ourselves (falsely) as a self in control of ‘our’ lives.  The British 
psychologist Guy Claxton suggests that what we take for self control is just a 
more or less successful attempt at prediction.  Much of the time our predictions

228    THE MEME MACHINE 
about what we will do next are reasonably accurate and we can get away with 
saying ‘I did this’ or ‘I intended to do that’.  When they go wrong we just bluff.  
And we use some truly outrageous tricks to maintain the illusion. 
 
I meant to keep my cool but I just couldn’t.  I’m supposed not to eat pork but I 
forgot.  I’d decided on an early night but somehow here we are in Piccadilly 
Circus at four a.m. with silly hats and a bottle of wine . . .  If all else fails – and 
this is a truly audacious sleight of hand – we can reinterpret our failure of control 
as an actual success!  ‘I changed my mind,’ we say (Claxton 1986 p. 59). 
 
Claxton concludes that consciousness is ‘a mechanism for constructing 
dubious stories whose purpose is to defend a superfluous and inaccurate sense of 
self’ (1994, p. 150).  Our error is to think of the self as separate, persistent, and 
autonomous.  Like Dennett, Claxton thinks that the self is really only a story 
about a self.  The inner self who does things is an illusion. 
 
The function of a self 
 
Where have we got to in this brief exploration of the nature of self and 
consciousness?  I can summarise by comparing two major kinds of theory about 
the self.  On the one hand are what we might call ‘real self’ theories.  They treat 
the self as a persistent entity that lasts a lifetime, is separate from the brain and 
from the world around, has memories and beliefs, initiates actions, experiences 
the world, and makes decisions.  On the other hand are what we might call 
‘illusory self’ theories.  They liken the self to a bundle of thoughts, sensations, 
and experiences tied together by a common history (Hume 1739–40; Parfit 
1987), or a series of pearls on a string (Strawson 1997).  On these theories, the 
illusion of continuity and separateness is provided by a story the brain tells, or a 
fantasy it weaves. 
Everyday experience, ordinary speech and ‘common sense’ are all in favour 
of the ‘real self’, while logic and evidence (and more disciplined experience) are 
on the side of the ‘illusory self’.  I prefer logic and evidence and therefore prefer 
to accept some version of the idea that the continuous, persistent and 
autonomous self is an illusion.  I am just a story about a me who is writing a 
book. When the word ‘I’ appears in this book, it is a convention that both you 
and I understand, but it does not refer to a persistent, conscious, inner being 
behind the words. 
Now, having accepted that, a new question arises.  Why do we humans tell

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    229 
this story?  If no persistent conscious self exists, why do people believe it does?  
How is it that people routinely live their lives as a lie? 
The most obvious kind of explanation to try is that having a sense of self 
benefits the replication of our genes.  Crook (1980) argues that self-
consciousness arose from using Machiavellian Intelligence and reciprocal 
altruism, with its need for balancing the trust and distrust of others.  In a rather 
dualistic version of a similar theory Humphrey (1986) suggests that 
consciousness is like an inner eye observing the brain.  As primates developed 
ever more complex social structures, their survival began to depend on more 
sophisticated ways of predicting and outwitting others’ behaviour.  In this, he 
argues, Homo psychologicus would win out.  Imagine a male who wanted to 
steal a mate from his rival or get more than his fair share of a kill.  Predicting 
what the rival would do next would help, and one way to predict what others 
will do is to observe your own inner processes.  These and other theories suggest 
that a complex social life makes it necessary to have a sense of self, to tot up 
scores in reciprocation, and to develop what psychologists now call a ‘theory of 
mind’ – that is, the understanding that other people have intentions, beliefs, and 
points of view. 
However, this does not explain why our theory of mind is so wrong.  Surely 
one could understand one’s own behaviour without creating the idea of a 
separate and persistent self when it does not exist.  Crook and Humphrey jump 
from the idea that early hominids might have benefited genetically by having an 
accurate model of their own behaviour to the idea that they would therefore 
acquire the idea of a separate self.  Our self, the self we are trying to understand, 
is not just a model of how our own body – and by inference other bodies – is 
likely to behave, but a false story about an inner self who believes things, does 
things, wants things and persists throughout life. 
Self-deception can have benefits.  According to Trivers’ (1985) theory of 
adaptive self-deception, hiding intentions from oneself may be the best way to 
hide them from others, and so deceive them.  However, this theory does not help 
in the case of inventing a central self.  Dennett (1991) describes us as adopting 
‘the intentional stance’; that is, we behave ‘as if’ other people (and sometimes 
animals, plants, toys and computers) have intentions, desires, beliefs, and so on.  
He argues that this metaphor of agency is a practical necessity of life; it gives us 
new and useful tools for thinking with.  The problem is, it seems to me, that we 
apply this intentional stance too thoroughly to ourselves – we fall too deeply into 
the ‘benign user illusion’.  We do not say to ourselves ‘it’s as if I have 
intentions, beliefs and desires’ but ‘I really do’.  I am left wondering how we get

230    THE MEME MACHINE 
from the evolutionary advantage of having a theory of mind, or the practical 
advantage of adopting the intentional stance, to living our lives as a lie, 
protecting our ideas, convincing others of our beliefs, and caring so much about 
an inner self who does not exist. 
Perhaps we create and protect a complex self because it makes us happy.  But 
does it?  Acquiring money, admiration, and fame gives some kind of happiness, 
but it is typically brief.  Happiness has been found to depend more on having a 
life that matches your skills to what you are doing than to having a rich lifestyle.  
The Chicago psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1990) studied the fulfilling 
experience of ‘flow’ that artists describe when they lose themselves in their 
work.  ‘Flow’ comes to children planning games, people deep in conversation, 
people skiing or mountain climbing, playing golf or making love.  These all 
entail the same sense of happiness through loss of self-consciousness. 
What makes you happy?  Or consider the reverse: what makes you unhappy?  
Probably it is things like disappointment, fear of the future, worry about loved 
ones, not having enough money, people not liking you, living too stressful a life, 
and so on.  Many of these things are only relevant to a creature that has self-
awareness and the idea of a self as the owner of experience.  Other animals can 
show disappointment, as when food does not arrive when they expect it, but they 
cannot have the deep disappointment of not getting a job, the fear of being 
thought stupid, or the misery of thinking someone they care about does not like 
them.  We construct many of our miseries out of the idea of a persistent self that 
we desperately want to be loved, successful, admired, right about everything, 
and happy. 
According to many traditions this false sense of self is precisely the root of 
all suffering.  This idea is probably clearest in Buddhism with the doctrine of 
anatta or no self.  This does not mean that there is no body, nor that there is 
literally no self at all, but that the self is a temporary construction, an idea or 
story about a self.  In a famous speech, the Buddha told the monks ‘actions do 
exist, and also their consequences, but the person that acts does not’ (Parfit 
1987).  He taught that because we have the wrong idea about our self, we think 
that we will be happy if we gain more material things, or status or power.  In fact 
it is wanting some things and being averse to others that makes us unhappy.  If 
only we could realise our true nature then we would be free of suffering because 
we would know there is no ‘me’ to suffer. 
Now we can see the difference between Dennett’s view and the Buddhist 
one.  Both understand the self to be some kind of story or illusion, but for 
Dennett it is a ‘benign user illusion’ and even a life-enhancing illusion, while for

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    231 
the Buddhist it is the root of human suffering.  Either way it is an untruth.  There 
is no doubt that having a clear sense of identity, a positive self-image and good 
self-esteem are associated with psychological health, but this is all about 
comparing a positive sense of self with a negative one.  When we ask what good 
is done by having a sense of self at all, the answer is not obvious. 
 
The selfplex 
 
Memetics provides a new way of looking at the self.  The self is a vast 
memeplex – perhaps the most insidious and pervasive memeplex of all.  I shall 
call it the ‘selfplex’.  The selfplex permeates all our experience and all our 
thinking so that we are unable to see it clearly for what it is – a bunch of memes.  
It comes about because our brains provide the ideal machinery on which to 
construct it, and our society provides the selective environment in which it 
thrives. 
As we have seen, memeplexes are groups of memes that come together for 
mutual advantage.  The memes inside a memeplex survive better as part of the 
group than they would on their own.  Once they have got together they form a 
self-organising, self-protecting structure that welcomes and protects other 
memes that are compatible with the group, and repels memes that are not.  In a 
purely informational sense a memeplex can be imagined as having a kind of 
boundary or filter that divides it from the outside world.  We have already 
considered how religions, cults, and ideologies work as memeplexes; we can 
now consider how the selfplex works. 
Imagine two memes.  The first concerns some esoteric points of astrology: 
that the fire element in Leo indicates vitality and power, while Mars in the first 
house indicates an aggressive personality, and transits of stars should be ignored 
unless the aspect is a conjunction.  The other meme is a personal belief – ‘I 
believe that the fire element in Leo . . .’  Which meme will fare better in the 
competition to get into as many brains, books and television programmes as 
possible?  The second will.  A piece of information on its own may be passed on 
if it is relevant to a particular conversation, or useful for some purpose, but it is 
just as likely to be forgotten.  On the other hand, people will press their beliefs 
and opinions on other people for no very good reason at all and, on occasion, 
fight very hard to convince others about them. 
Take another example: the idea of sex differences in ability.  As an abstract 
idea (or isolated meme) this is unlikely to be a winner.  But get it into the form ‘I

232    THE MEME MACHINE 
believe that boys and girls are equally good at everything’ and it suddenly has 
the enormous weight of ‘self’ behind it.  ‘I’ will fight for this idea as though I 
were being threatened.  I might argue with friends, write opinion pieces, or even 
go on marches.  The meme is safe inside the haven of ‘self’, even in the face of 
evidence against it.  ‘My’ ideas are protected by the behaviour they induce. 
This suggests that memes can gain an advantage by becoming associated 
with a person’s self concept.  It does not matter how they do this – whether by 
raising strong emotions, by being especially compatible with memes already in 
place, or by providing a sense of power or attractiveness – they will fare better 
than other memes.  These successful memes will more often be passed on, we 
will all come across them and so we, too, will get infected with self-enhancing 
memes.  In this way our selfplexes are all strengthened. 
Note that we do not have to agree with or like the memes we pass on, but 
only to engage with them in some way.  Whether it’s eating pasta, watching The 
Simpsons, or listening to jazz, the memes are passed on not just in eating the 
food or playing the music but in statements such as ‘I like . . .’ ‘I hate . . .’ ‘I 
can’t stand . . .’  Pyper concludes that ‘Dawkins himself has become a “survival 
machine” for the bible, a “meme nest” for its dispersed memes which may 
induce readers who would otherwise leave their bibles unread to go back to the 
text’ (Pyper 1998, pp. 86–7).  Presumably, Dawkins did not intend to encourage 
religious memes in this way but his powerful response to religion has had that 
effect.  Memes that provoke no response fare poorly, while those that provoke 
emotional arguments can induce their carrier to pass them on.  By acquiring the 
status of a personal belief a meme gets a big advantage.  Ideas that can get inside 
a self – that is, become ‘my’ ideas, or ‘my’ opinions, are winners. 
Then there are possessions.  Some other animals, without memes, might be 
said to have possessions: a robin owns the territory he guards, a powerful male 
owns his harem of females, and a lioness owns her kill.  Human possessions can 
serve similar functions, such as enhancing personal status and providing a 
genetic advantage.  But we should not overlook a big difference, that our 
possessions seem to belong to the mythical ‘I’, not just to the body it supposedly 
inhabits.  Think of something you own and care about, something you would be 
sorry to lose, and ask yourself who or what actually owns it.  Is it sufficient to 
say that your body does?  Or are you tempted to think that it is the inner 
conscious you who owns it?  I am, I realise, with some dismay, that I am partly 
defined by my house and garden, my bicycle, my thousands of books, my

THE ULTIMATE MEMEPLEX    233 
computer, and my favourite pictures.  I am not just a living creature, but all these 
things as well; and they are things that would not exist without memes and 
would not matter without ‘me’. 
An interesting consequence of all this is that beliefs, opinions, possessions 
and personal preferences all bolster the idea that there is a believer or owner 
behind them.  The more you take sides, get involved, argue your case, protect 
your possessions, and have strong opinions, the more you strengthen the false 
idea that there is not only a person (body and brain) talking, but an inner self 
with esoteric things called beliefs.  The self is a great protector of memes, and 
the more complex the memetic society in which a person lives, the more memes 
there are fighting to get inside the protection of the self. 
As the number of memes we all come across increases, so there are more and 
more chances for memes to provoke strong reactions and get passed on again.  
The stakes are thereby raised, and memes must become ever more provocative 
to compete.  The consequence is that stress levels increase as we are bombarded 
by memes that have successfully provoked other people.  We acquire more and 
more knowledge, opinions, and beliefs of our own, and in the process become 
more and more convinced that there is a real self at the centre of it all. 
There is no ‘I’ who ‘holds’ the opinions.  There is a body that says ‘I believe 
in being nice to people’, and a body that is (or is not) nice to people.  There is a 
brain that can store knowledge of astrology and the tendency to talk about it, but 
there is not in addition a self who ‘has’ the belief.  There is a biological creature 
who eats yoghurt every day but there is not in addition a self inside who loves 
yoghurt.  As the memosphere becomes more and more complicated, selves 
follow suit.  To function in our society we are all expected to hold opinions on 
science, politics, the weather, and relationships; to hold down a job, bring up a 
family, read the paper, and enjoy our leisure time.  With constant memetic 
bombardment our lives and our selves become more and more stressful and 
complicated.  But this is a ‘Red Queen’ process.  No one benefits because 
everyone has to keep running just to stay in the same place.  I wonder just how 
much memetic pressure selfplexes can take before they blow apart, become 
unstable, or divide into fragments.  The unhappiness, desperation, and 
psychological ill-health of many modern people may reveal just this.  Today’s 
psychotherapy is a kind of memetic engineering, but it is not based on sound 
memetic principles.  That is something for the future. 
In conclusion, the selfplex is successful not because it is true or good or 
beautiful; nor because it helps our genes; nor because it makes us happy.  It is 
successful because the memes that get inside it persuade us (those poor

234    THE MEME MACHINE 
overstretched physical systems) to work for their propagation.  What a clever 
trick.  That is, I suggest, why we all live our lives as a lie, and sometimes a 
desperately unhappy and confused lie.  The memes have made us do it – because 
a ‘self’ aids their replication. 

Out of the meme race 
 
 
 
Now we have a radically new idea of who we are.  Each of us is a massive 
memeplex running on the physical machinery of a human body and brain – a 
meme machine.  Crick was wrong.  We are not ‘nothing but a pack of neurons’; 
we are a pack of memes too.  And without understanding the pack of memes we 
can never understand ourselves. 
The sociobiologists have missed a crucial point.  Their achievement is to 
explain much of human behaviour in terms of the past selection of genes; to 
apply Darwin’s great theory to psychology.  But in concentrating on genes alone 
they miss out on the importance and power of the social world.  To stick to their 
Darwinian framework they have to treat all of culture as part of the environment 
of genetic selection, and so they fail to see that it has its own evolutionary 
processes and its own power to effect change.  Without the concept of the 
second replicator sociobiology must always remain impoverished. 
By contrast, sociologists have long realised the power of social forces.  As 
Karl Marx (1904, p. 11) argued ‘It is not the consciousness of men that 
determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines 
their consciousness.’  Social scientists study the way that people’s lives and 
selves are constructed by their roles, and by the texts in which they are 
embedded.  But they have no evolutionary theory within which to understand the 
processes going on.  For them the biological world and the social world are 
explained in entirely different ways and must remain divorced.  Only when we 
see a human being as a product of both natural and memetic selection can we 
bring all aspects of our lives together within one theoretical framework. 
What I am saying about human nature is so easy to misunderstand that I want 
to spell it out very carefully. 
‘We humans are simultaneously two kinds of thing: meme machines and 
selves.  First, we are objectively individual creatures of flesh and blood.  Our 
bodies and brains have been designed by natural selection acting on both genes 
and memes over a long period of evolution.  Although each of us is unique, the 
genes themselves have all come from previous creatures and will, if we 
reproduce, go on into future creatures.  In addition, because of our skill with
CHAPTER 18 

236    THE MEME MACHINE 
language and our memetic environment, we are all repositories of vast numbers 
of memes, some of them simply pieces of stored information, others organised 
into self-protecting memeplexes.  The memes themselves have come from other 
people and will, if we speak and write and communicate, go on into yet more 
people.  We are the temporary conglomerations of all these replicators and their 
products in a given environment. 
Then there is the self we think we are.  Among all these memeplexes is an 
especially potent one based around the idea of an inner self.  Each selfplex has 
been put together by the processes of memetic evolution acting in the relatively 
short period of one human lifetime.  ‘I’ am the product of all the memes that 
have successfully got themselves inside this selfplex – whether because my 
genes have provided the sort of brain that is particularly conducive to them, or 
because they have some selective advantage over other memes in my memetic 
environment, or both.  Each illusory self is a construct of the memetic world in 
which it successfully competes.  Each selfplex gives rise to ordinary human 
consciousness based on the false idea that there is someone inside who is in 
charge. 
The ways we behave, the choices we make, and the things we say are all a 
result of this complex structure: a set of memeplexes (including the powerful 
selfplex) running on a biologically constructed system.  The driving force behind 
everything that happens is replicator power.  Genes fight it out to get into the 
next generation, and in the process biological design comes about.  Memes fight 
it out to get passed on into another brain or book or object, and in the process 
cultural and mental design comes about.  There is no need for any other source 
of design power.  There is no need to call on the creative ‘power of 
consciousness’, for consciousness has no power.  There is no need to invent the 
idea of free will.  Free will, like the self who ‘has’ it, is an illusion.  Terrifying as 
this thought seems, I suggest it is true. 
 
Free mid 
 
Benjamin chose cornflakes this morning for breakfast.  Why?  He did so because 
he is a human with human tastes and the genetic make-up that inclines him 
towards carbohydrates in the morning, especially this morning when he was 
rather hungry.  He lives in a rich society where cornflakes have been invented 
and he has enough money to buy them.  He responds positively to the picture on 
the packet and the advertisements he sees.  Memes and genes together produced 
this behaviour in this environment.  If asked, Benjamin will say that he chose the

OUT OF THE MEME RACE    237 
cornflakes because he likes them, or that he made a conscious decision to eat 
them today.  But this explanation adds nothing.  It is just a story Benjamin tells 
after the fact. 
So does Benjamin have free will or not?  The critical question to ask is who 
do you mean by Benjamin?  If by ‘Benjamin’ you mean a body and brain, then 
certainly Benjamin had a choice.  Human beings make decisions all the time.  
Like frogs, cats, and even robots, they have plans, desires, and aversions, and 
they act accordingly.  The more memes they acquire the cleverer are the things 
they can do, and the larger the range of options.  They can find themselves in 
situations in which they have many potential choices, or few, or none.  Is this 
sufficient for what we call free will? 
I think not, because at the heart of the concept of free will lies the idea that it 
must be Benjamin’s conscious self who made the decision.  When we think of 
free will we imagine that ‘I’ have it, not that this whole conglomeration of body 
and brain has it.  Free will is when ‘I’ consciously, freely, and deliberately 
decide to do something, and do it.  In other words ‘I’ must be the agent for it to 
count as free will. 
But if the memetic view I have been proposing here is right, then this is 
nonsense, because the self that is supposed to have free will is just a story that 
forms part of a vast memeplex, and a false story at that.  On this view, all human 
actions, whether conscious or not, come from complex interactions between 
memes, genes and all their products, in complicated environments.  The self is 
not the initiator of actions, it does not ‘have’ consciousness, and it does not ‘do’ 
the deliberating.  There is no truth in the idea of an inner self inside my body 
that controls the body and is conscious.  Since this is false, so is the idea of my 
conscious self having free will. 
Dennett (1984) has described many versions of the idea of free will and 
argues that some of them are worth wanting.  Unlike Dennett I neither think the 
‘user illusion’ is benign, nor do I want any version of free will that ascribes it to 
a self who does not exist. 
 
Consciousness 
 
I have no grand theory of consciousness to offer.  Indeed, the term is used in so 
many contradictory ways that it is hard to know what such a theory would have 
to accomplish.  Nevertheless, I do not view the whole attempt as hopeless, as 
does Pinker (1998), nor as a ‘hard problem’ of quite a different order from any 
other scientific problem as does Chalmers (1996).  I even think the theory of 
memetics may help. 

238    THE MEME MACHINE 
First, by consciousness I mean subjectivity – what it’s like being me now (p. 
2).  This subjectivity comes about in ways we do not understand, yet we do 
know that it depends critically on what the brain is doing at any time.  We can 
look at it this way – the quality of my consciousness at any time depends on 
what the whole brain is doing, but particularly on the way the brain’s processing 
resources are divided up, and the stories that are being constructed about who is 
doing what.  In our normal state of consciousness the whole experience is 
dominated by the selfplex which uses words and other useful memetic constructs 
to weave a very fine tale.  It sets everything in the context of a self who is doing 
things.  However, when gazing in awe at the view from a mountain top, or 
engrossed in a creative task, the selfplex does not dominate and other states of 
consciousness are possible.  Then there can be consciousness without self-
consciousness. 
Note that here my view departs from Dennett’s.  For him ‘Human 
consciousness is itself a huge complex of memes (or more exactly, meme-effects 
in brains)’ (Dennett 1991, p. 210).  This means that a person is conscious by 
virtue of having all the thinking tools that memes provide, including the ‘benign 
user illusion’ and all the self memes, and without them they would, presumably, 
cease to have ‘human consciousness’.  By contrast, I suggest that the user 
illusion obscures and distorts consciousness.  Ordinary human consciousness is 
indeed constrained by the selfplex, but it does not have to be.  There are other 
ways of being conscious. 
There are implications here for artificial consciousness and for animals.  If 
ordinary human consciousness is entirely dominated by the selfplex then only 
systems that have a selfplex can be conscious in that way.  So, since other 
animals do not generally imitate and cannot have memes, they cannot have the 
human kind of self-consciousness.  This does not, however, rule out the 
possibility that there is something it is like to be a bat, or a rat, or even a robot. 
Second, I want to emphasise that consciousness cannot do anything.  The 
subjectivity, the ‘what it’s like to be me now’ is not a force, or a causal agent, 
that can make things happen.  When Benjamin poured out his cornflakes he may 
have been conscious, but the consciousness played no role in making him do it.  
The consciousness simply arose as what it was like to be that human being, 
taking those decisions, and doing those actions, and with a memeplex inside 
saying ‘I am doing this’.  Benjamin may think that if ‘he’ did not consciously 
make the decision then it would not happen.  I say he would be wrong. 
Critics of the analogy between genes and memes often argue that biological 
evolution is not consciously directed, whereas social evolution is.  Even

OUT OF THE MEME RACE    239 
proponents of memetics sometimes make the same distinction, saying for 
example that ‘much cultural and social variation is consciously guided in a way 
that genetic variation is not’ (Runciman 1998, p. 177).  My colleague Nick Rose 
(1998) accuses these theorists of ‘self-centred selectionism’, a mistake 
equivalent to the idea of directed evolution in biology.  The whole point about 
evolutionary theory is that you do not need anyone to direct it, least of all 
consciously.  When human beings act, our actions have effects on memetic 
selection, but this is not because we were conscious.  Indeed, the most mindless 
and least conscious of our actions can be imitated just as easily as our most 
conscious ones.  Cultural and social variation is guided by the replicators and 
their environment, not by something separate from them all called 
consciousness. 
 
Creativity 
 
Tamarisk has written a science book.  This suggests that she consciously 
authored the book, but there is another way of looking at it.  Tamarisk is a gifted 
writer because the genes have created a brain that handles language well, and a 
determined individual who likes solitary work; because she was born into a 
society that values books and pays for them; because her education gave her the 
opportunity to discover how good she was at science; and because she has spent 
years studying and thinking until new ideas came out of the combinations of the 
old.  When the book was completed it formed a new complex of memes: 
variations on old ones and new combinations created by the complicated 
processes inside a clever thinking brain.  When asked, Tamarisk might say that 
she consciously and deliberately invented every word herself (though she is 
quite likely to say that she has no idea how she did it).  1 would say that the 
book was a combined product of the genes and memes playing out their 
competition in Tamarisk’s life. 
This view of creativity is alien to many people.  In discussions of 
consciousness it is common to raise the issue of creativity, as though it somehow 
epitomises the power of human consciousness.  How could we create great 
music, inspiring cathedrals, moving poems, or stunning paintings unless we have 
consciousness? – people ask.  This view of creativity betrays a commitment to a 
false theory of self and consciousness, or to Dennett’s Cartesian Theatre (p. 
225.).  If you believe that you live inside your head and direct operations, then 
creative acts can seem especially good examples of things that ‘you’ have done.

240    THE MEME MACHINE 
But, as we have seen, this view of self does not hold up.  There is no one inside 
there to do the doing – other than a bunch of memes. 
I am not saying that there is no creativity.  New books are written, new 
technologies invented, new gardens laid out, and new films produced.  But the 
generative power behind this creativity is the competition between replicators, 
not a magical, out-of-nowhere power such as consciousness is often said to be.  
The creative achievements of human culture are the products of memetic 
evolution, just as the creative achievements of the biological world are the 
products of genetic evolution.  Replicator power is the only design process we 
know of that can do the job, and it does it.  We do not need conscious human 
selves messing about in there as well. 
Of course selves are not irrelevant.  Far from it.  By virtue of their 
organisation and persistence, selfplexes are powerful memetic entities that affect 
the behaviour of the people who sustain them, and of all those who come into 
contact with them.  But as far as creativity is concerned selves can often do more 
harm than good, for creative acts often come about in a state of selflessness, or 
loss of self-consciousness, when the self seems to be out of the way.  Artists, 
writers and runners often say they are at their best when acting spontaneously 
and without self-consciousness.  So selves have effects but not as the originators 
of conscious creativity. 
 
Human foresight 
 
Humans are often credited with having real foresight, in distinction to the rest of 
biology which does not.  For example, Dawkins compares the ‘blind 
watchmaker’ of natural selection with the real human one.  ‘A true watchmaker 
has foresight: he designs his cogs and springs, and plans their interconnections, 
with a future purpose in his mind’s eye.  Natural selection . . . has no purpose in 
mind’ (Dawkins 1986, p. 5).  I think this distinction is strong. 
There is no denying that the human watchmaker is different from the natural 
one.  We humans, by virtue of having memes, can think about cogs, and wheels, 
and keeping time, in a way that animals cannot.  Memes are the mind tools with 
which we do it.  But what memetics shows us is that the processes underlying 
the two kinds of design are essentially the same.  They are both evolutionary 
processes that give rise to design through selection, and in the process they 
produce what looks like foresight. 
As Plotkin (1993) points out, knowledge (whether in humans, animals, or 
plants) is a kind of adaptation.  So is foresight.  When a daffodil bulb starts into

OUT OF THE MEME RACE    241 
growth it is predicting the summer ahead, but we know this prediction was a 
result of past selection.  When a cat predicts which way a mouse will go and 
pounces at the right moment we know that the ability to behave that way was 
naturally selected.  Both these creatures have foresight of a kind, even though 
their genes did not.  When a person predicts what she will do tomorrow or 
designs a new computer we somehow think this is different.  The difference may 
seem a large one; for there is a much cleverer brain making the predictions, and 
the predictions may be much more complicated and precise, such as predicting 
the exact time of high tide or the moment when an asteroid will hit the earth.  
However, this kind of foresight also comes about by selection, only in this case 
it is selection between memes.  There is no magical conscious mind that ‘really’ 
has some other kind of foresight. 
 
The ultimate rebellion 
 
Where does this leave us with respect to Dawkins’s claim that ‘We, alone on 
earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators’.  Dawkins is not 
alone in taking the view that there is someone or something inside us who can 
step out of the evolutionary process and take it over. 
Csikszentmihalyi (1993) explains how memes evolve independently of the 
people who nurture them; how the memes of weapons, alcohol and drugs are 
successful while doing us no good.  He describes the artist not as originator but 
as the medium through which artworks evolve.  Yet his final message is that we 
must take conscious control of our lives and begin directing evolution towards a 
more harmonious future.  ‘If you achieve control over your mind, your desires, 
and your actions, you are likely to increase order around you.  If you let them be 
controlled by genes and memes, you are missing the opportunity to be yourself’ 
(Csikszentmihalyi 1993, p. 290). 
In his book Virus of the Mind, Brodie exhorts us to ‘consciously choose your 
own memetic programming to better serve whatever purpose you choose, upon 
reflection, to have for your life’ and says of the memes ‘you get to choose 
whether programming yourself with them aids or hinders your life purpose’ 
(Brodie 1996, pp. 53, 188). 
But this is all a cop out.  As Dennett says ‘The “independent” mind 
struggling to protect itself from alien and dangerous memes is a myth’ (1995, p. 
365).  So we must ask who gets to choose?  If we take memetics seriously then 
the ‘me’ that could do the choosing is itself a memetic construct: a fluid and 
ever-changing group of memes installed in a complicated meme machine.  The

242    THE MEME MACHINE 
choices made will all be a product of my genetic and memetic history in a given 
environment, not of some separate self that can ‘have’ a life purpose and 
overrule the memes that make it up. 
This is the power and beauty of memetics: it allows us to see how human 
lives, language, and creativity all come about through the same kind of replicator 
power as did design in the biological world.  The replicators are different, but 
the process is the same.  We once thought that biological design needed a 
creator, but we now know that natural selection can do all the designing on its 
own.  Similarly, we once thought that human design required a conscious 
designer inside us, but we now know that memetic selection can do it on its own.  
We once thought that design required foresight and a plan, but we now know 
that natural selection can build creatures that look as though they were built to 
plan when in fact there was none.  If we take memetics seriously there is no 
room for anyone or anything to jump into the evolutionary process and stop it, 
direct it, or do anything to it.  There is just the evolutionary process of genes and 
memes playing itself endlessly out – and no one watching. 
What then am I to do?  I feel as though I have to make a choice – to decide 
how to live my life in the light of my scientific understanding.  But how do I do 
that if I am nothing but a temporary conglomeration of genes, phenotype, 
memes, and memeplexes.  If there is no choice, how am I to choose? 
Some scientists prefer to keep their scientific ideas and their ordinary lives 
separate.  Some can be biologists all week and go to church on Sunday, or be 
physicists all their life and believe they will go to heaven.  But I cannot divorce 
my science from the way I live my life.  If my understanding of human nature is 
that there is no conscious self inside then I must live that way – otherwise this is 
a vain and lifeless theory of human nature.  But how can ‘I’ live as though I do 
not exist, and who would be choosing to do so? 
One trick is to concentrate on the present moment – all the time – letting go 
of any thoughts that come up.  This kind of ‘meme-weeding’ requires a great 
concentration but is most interesting in its effect.  If you can concentrate for a 
few minutes at a time, you will begin to see that in any moment there is no 
observing self.  Suppose you sit and look out of the window.  Ideas will come up 
but these are all past- and future-oriented; so let them go, come back to the 
present.  Just notice what is happening.  The mind leaps to label objects with 
words, but these words take time and are not really in the present.  So let them 
go too.  With a lot of practice the world looks different; the idea of a series of

OUT OF THE MEME RACE    243 
events gives way to nothing but change, and the idea of a self who is viewing the 
scene seems to fall away. 
Another way is to pay attention to everything equally.  This is an odd practice 
because things begin to lose their ‘thingness’ and become just changes.  Also, it 
throws up the question of who is paying attention (Blackmore 1995).  What 
becomes obvious, in doing this task, is that attention is always being 
manipulated by things outside yourself rather than controlled by you.  The 
longer you can sit still and attend to everything, the more obvious it becomes 
that attention is dragged away by sounds, movements, and most of all thoughts 
that seem to come from nowhere.  These are the memes fighting it out to grab 
the information-processing resources of the brain they might use for their 
propagation.  Things that worry you, opinions that you hold, things you want to 
say to someone, or wish you hadn’t – these all come and grab the attention.  The 
practice of paying equal attention to everything disarms them and makes it 
obvious that you never did control the attention; it controlled – and created – 
you. 
These kinds of practices begin to wear away at the false self.  In the present 
moment, attending equally to everything, there is no distinction between myself 
and the things happening.  It is only when ‘I’ want something, respond to 
something, believe something, decide to do something, that ‘I’ suddenly appear.  
This can be seen directly through experience with enough practice at just being. 
This insight is perfectly compatible with memetics.  In most people the 
selfplex is constantly being reinforced.  Everything that happens is referred to 
the self, sensations are referred to the observing self, shifts of attention are 
attributed to the self, decisions are described as being made by the self, and so 
on.  All this reconciles and sustains the selfplex, and the result is a quality of 
consciousness dominated by the sense of ‘I’ in the middle – me in charge, me 
responsible, me suffering.  The effect of one-pointed concentration is to stop the 
processes that feed the selfplex.  Learning to pay attention to everything equally 
stops self-related memes from grabbing the attention; learning to be fully in the 
present moment stops speculation about the past and future of the mythical ‘I’.  
These are tricks that help a human person (body, brain and memes) to drop the 
false ideas of the selfplex.  The quality of consciousness then changes to become 
open, and spacious, and free of self.  The effect is like waking up from a state of 
confusion – or waking from the meme dream (Blackmore in press). 
This kind of concentration is not easily learned.  Some people are naturals 
and can do it relatively quickly, but for most people it takes many years of

244    THE MEME MACHINE 
practice.  One of the problems is motivation – it is hard to practise consistently 
just because someone else tells you this is a better way to live.  This is where 
science can help.  If our scientific understanding of human nature leads us to 
doubt the inner self, the soul, the divine creator, or life after death, that doubt 
can provide the motivation to look directly into experience; to try living without 
a false sense of self or false hope.  Science and spirituality- are often opposed 
but they should not be. 
I have described these practices as being done for a few minutes while sitting 
quietly, but can all of life be lived that way?  I think so, but the results are 
somewhat unnerving.  If I genuinely believe that there is no ‘I’ inside, with free 
will and conscious deliberate choice, then how do I decide what to do?  The 
answer is to have faith in the memetic viewer; to accept that the selection of 
genes and memes will determine the action and there is no need for an extra 
‘me’ to get involved.  To live honestly, I must just get out of the stay and allow 
decisions to make themselves. 
I say the result is unnerving because at first it is odd to observe that actions 
happen whether or not ‘I’ will them.  I used to have two possible routes home, 
the main road and the prettier but slower lanes.  As I drove up to the junction I 
was often torn by indecisiveness.  How could I decide?  Which would I enjoy 
most?  Which would be best?  One day I suddenly realised that ‘I’ didn’t have to 
decide.  I sat there, paying attention.  The lights changed, a foot pressed the 
pedal, a hand changed gear, and the choice was made.  I certainly never went 
straight on into the stone wall or bang into another car.  And whichever way I 
went was fine.  As time went on I found that more and more decisions were like 
this.  It brought a great sense of freedom to let so many decisions alone. 
You do not have to try to do anything or agonise about any decision.  Let us 
suppose you are in the bath and the water is beginning to get cold.  Do you get 
out now, or snuggle under the water a bit longer?  Er . . . um.  This is a trivial 
decision but, like getting out of bed in the morning, can colour your life.  
Knowing there is no real self to choose and no free will, you can only reflect that 
this body either will or will not get up, and indeed it does.  Getting up decisively 
turns out not to be a matter of self-control and will-power, but of letting the false 
self get out of the way, and the decisions slake themselves.  The same is true of 
more complicated decisions; the brain may turn over the possibilities, argue the 
case one way or the other, come down on one side or other, but all of this can be 
done without, in addition, the false idea that someone inside is doing it.  Rather 
the whole process seems to do itself. 
Desires and hopes and preferences are probably the most difficult to deal 
with – I hope he’ll get here in time, I must pass that exam, I hope I’ll live to a

OUT OF THE MEME RACE    245 
ripe old age and get rich and famous, I want the strawberry one.  All these hopes 
and desires are based on the idea of an inner self who must be kept happy, and 
their occurrence feeds the selfplex.  So one trick is just to meet them all with a 
refusal to get involved.  If there is no self then there is no point hoping or 
wishing for things for the sake of someone who does not exist.  All these things 
are in another moment, not now.  They do not matter when there is no one for 
them to matter to.  Life really is possible without hope. 
The result of this way of living seems somewhat counter-intuitive; that 
people become more decisive rather than less.  On a second look this is not so 
surprising after all.  From the memetic point of view the selfplex is not there to 
make the decisions, or for the sake of your happiness, or to make your life 
easier; it is there for the propagation of the memes that make it up.  Its 
demolition allows more spontaneous and appropriate action.  Clever thinking 
brains, installed with plenty of memes, are quite capable of making sound 
decisions without a selfplex messing them up. 
A terrifying thought now raises its head.  If I live by this kind of truth – 
without a self that takes responsibility for its actions, then what of morality?  
Surely, some would say, this kind of living is a recipe for selfishness and 
wickedness, for immorality and disaster.  Well is it?  One of the effects of this 
way of living is that you stop inflicting your own desires on the world around 
you and on the people you meet.  This alone can mean quite a transformation. 
Claxton describes the effect of giving up the illusion of a self in control.  
‘The thing that doesn’t happen, but of which people are quite reasonably scared, 
is that I get worse.  A common elaboration of the belief that control is real . . . is 
that I can, and must control “myself”, and that unless I do, base urges will spill 
out and I will run amok.’  Luckily, he goes on, the premise is false.  ‘So the 
dreaded mayhem does not happen.  I do not take up wholesale rape and pillage 
and knocking down old ladies just for fun.’ (Claxton 1986, p. 69).  Instead, guilt, 
shame, embarrassment, self-doubt, and fear of failure ebb away and I become, 
contrary to expectation, a better neighbour. 
In fact, we could reasonably have had faith in this from our understanding of 
memetics and of meme-driven altruism.  Also, if it is true that the inner self is a 
memeplex and its control is illusory, then surely living a lie cannot be morally 
superior to accepting the truth.  But if the self is a memeplex and can be 
dismantled, then what is left when it is gone?  There is a human being, body, 
brain and memes, that behaves according to the environment it finds itself in and 
the memes it comes across.  We know that the genes are responsible for much 
moral behaviour – they brought about kin-selection and reciprocal altruism, love

246    THE MEME MACHINE 
of one’s children, one’s partners, and one’s friends.  And the memes are 
responsible for other kinds of sharing and caring.  These behaviours will all still 
go on whether or not there is a selfplex cluttering the mind up as well. 
Indeed, the selfplex can be blamed for much of the trouble.  By its very 
nature the selfplex brings about self-recrimination, self-doubt, greed, anger, and 
all sorts of destructive emotions.  When there is no selfplex, there is no concern 
about the future of my inner self – whether people like me or whether I did the 
‘right’ thing or not – because there is no real ‘I’ to care about.  This lack of self-
concern means that you (the physical person) are free to notice other people 
more.  Compassion and empathy come naturally.  It is easy to see what another 
person needed or how to act in a given situation, if there is no concern about a 
mythical self to get in the way.  Perhaps the greater part of true morality is 
simply stopping all the harm that we normally do, rather than taking on any 
great and noble deeds; that is, the harm that comes from having a false sense of 
self. 
Memetics thus brings us to a new vision of how we might live our lives.  We 
can carry on our lives as most people do, under the illusion that there is a 
persistent conscious self inside who is in charge, who is responsible for my 
actions and who makes me me.  Or we can live as human beings, body, brain, 
and memes, living out our lives as a complex interplay of replicators and 
environment, in the knowledge that that is all there is.  Then we are no longer 
victims of the selfish selfplex.  In this sense we can be truly free – not because 
we can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators but because we know 
that there is no one to rebel. 

References 
 
 
 
Alexander, R. (1979). Darwinism and Human Affairs, Seattle, WA, University of 
Washington Press. 
Allison, P.D. (1992). The cultural evolution of beneficent norms. Social Forces, 71, 
279–301. 
Ashby, R. (1960). Design for a Brain. New York, Wiley. 
Baars, B.J. (1997). In the Theatre of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind. New 
York, Oxford University Press. 
Bailey, L.W. and Yates, J. (eds.) (1996). The Near-death Experience: A Reader. New 
York/London, Routledge. 
Baker, M.C. (1996). Depauperate meme pool of vocal signals in an island population of 
singing honeyeaters. Animal Behaviour, 51, 853–8. 
Baker, R.R. (1996). Sperm Wars: Infidelity, Sexual Conflict and other Bedroom Battles. 
London, Fourth Estate. 
Baker, R.R. and Bellis, M.A. (1994). Human Sperm Competition: Copulation, 
Masturbation, and Infidelity. London, Chapman and Hall. 
Baldwin, J.M. (1896). A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist, 30, 441–51, 536–
53. 
Baldwin, J.M. (1909). Darwin and the Humanities, Baltimore, MD, Review Publishing. 
Ball, J.A. (1984). Memes as replicators. Ethology and Sociobiology, 5, 145–61. 
Bandura, A. and Walters, R.H. (1963). Social Learning and Personality Development. 
New York, Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L. and Tooby, J. (eds.) (1992). The Adapted Mind: 
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. New York, Oxford 
University Press. 
Barrett, S. and Jarvis, W.T. (eds.) (1993). The Health Robbers: A Close Look at 
Quackery in America. Buffalo, NY, Prometheus. 
Bartlett, F.C. (1932). Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Barton, R.A. and Dunbar, R.I.M. (1997). Evolution of the social brain. In Machiavellian 
Intelligence: II. Extensions and Evaluations, (ed. A. Whiten and R.W. Byrne), pp. 
240–63. Cambridge University Press. 
Basalla, G. (1988). The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge University Press. 
Batchelor, S. (1994). The Awakening of the West: The Encounter of Buddhism and 
Western Culture. London, HarperCollins. 
Batson, C.D. (1995). Prosocial motivation: Why do we help others? In Advanced Social

248    THE MEME MACHINE 
Psychology, (ed. A. Tesser), pp. 333–81. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Bauer, G.B. and Johnson, C.M. (1994). Trained motor imitation by bottlenose dolphins 
(Tursiops truncatus). Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 1307–15. 
Benor, D.J. (1994). Healing Research: Holistic Energy, Medicine and Spirituality. 
Munich, Helix. 
Benzon, W. (1996). Culture as an evolutionary arena. Journal of Social and 
Evolutionary Systems, 19, 321–62. 
Berlin, B. and Kay, P. (1969). Basic Color Terms.. Their Universality and Evolution. 
Berkeley, CA, University of California Press. 
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and Species. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press. 
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I. (1992). A theory of fads, fashion, custom 
and cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy, 100, 
992–1026. 
Blackmore, S.J. (1993). Dying to Live: Science and the Near Death Experience. Buffalo, 
NY, Prometheus. 
Blackmore, S.J. (1995). Paying attention. New Ch’an Forum, No. 12, 9–15. 
Blackmore, S.J. (1997). Probability misjudgment and belief in the paranormal: a 
newspaper surrey. British Journal of Psychology, 88, 683–9. 
Blackmore, S.J. (in press). Waking from the Meme Dream. In The Psychology of 
Awakening: Buddhism, Science and Psychotherapy, (ed. G. Watson, G. Claxton and 
S. Batchelor). Dorset, Prism. 
Blackmore, S.J. and Troscianko, T. (1985). Belief in the paranormal: Probability 
judgements, illusory control, and the chance baseline shift. British Journal of 
Psychology, 76, 459–68. 
Blackmore, S,J., Brelstaft G., Nelson, K. and Troscianko, T. (1995). Is the richness of 
our visual world an illusion? Transsaccadic memory for complex scenes. Perception, 
24, 1075–81. 
Blakemore, C. and Greenfield, S. (eds.) (1987). Mindwaves. Oxford, Blackwell. 
Bonner, J.T. (1980). The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton, NJ, Princeton 
University Press. 
Bowker, J. (1995). Is God a Virus? London, SPCK. 
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P.J. (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago, IL, 
University of Chicago Press. 
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P.J. (1990). Group selection among alternative evolutionarily 
stable strategies. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 145, 331–42. 
Brodie, R. (1996). Virus of the Mind.. The New Science of the Meme. Seattle, WA, 
Integral Press. 
Bucke, R. M. (1901). Cosmic Consciousness.. A Study in the Evolution of the Human 
Mind. (London, Arkana, Penguin, 1991.) 
Buss, D.M. (1994) . The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. New York, 
Basic Books. 
Byrne, R.W. and Whiten, A. (eds.) (1988). Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise 

REFERENCES    249 
and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes and Humans. Oxford University 
Press. 
Call, J. and Tomasello, M. (1995). Use of social information in the problem solving of 
orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus) and human children (Homo sapiens). Journal of 
Comparative Psychology, 109, 308–20. 
Calvin, W. (1987). The brain as a Darwin machine. Nature, 330, 33–44. 
Calvin, W. (1996). How Brains Think, London, Phoenix. 
Campbell, D.T. (1960). Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in 
other knowledge processes. Psychological Review, 67, 380–400. 
Campbell, D. (1965). Variation and selective retention in sociocultural evolution. In 
Social Change in Developing Areas: A reinterpretation of evolutionary theory (ed. 
H.R. Barringer, G.L. Blanksten and R.W. Mack), pp. 19–49. Cambridge, MA, 
Schenkman, 
Campbell, D.T. (1974). Evolutionary epistemology. In The Philosopby of Karl Popper, 
Vol. 1, (ed. P.A. Schlipp), pp. 413–63. La Salle, IL, Open Court Publishing. 
Campbell, D.T. (1975). On the conflicts between biological and social evolution and 
between psychology and moral tradition. American Psychologist, 30, l103–26. 
Carlson, N.R. (1993). Psychology: The Science of Behaviour, (4th edn). Boston, MA, 
Allyn & Bacon. 
Cavalli-Sforza, L.L. and Feldman, M.W. (1981). Cultural Transmission and Evolution: 
A Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press. 
Chagnon, N.A. (1992). Yanomamö, (4th edn). New York, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press. 
Cheney, D.L. and Seyfarth, R.M. (1990). The representation of social relations by 
monkeys. Cognition, 57, 167–96. 
Churchland, P.S. (1998). Brainshy: Nonneural theories of conscious experience.  In 
Toward A Science of Consciousness: The Second Tucson Discussions and Debates, 
(ed, S.R. Hameroff, A.W, Kaszniak and A.C. Scott), pp. 109–26. Cambridge, MA, 
MIT Press. 
Churchland, P.S. and Sejnowski, T. (1992). The Computational Brain. Cambridge, MA, 
MIT Press. 
Cialdini, R.B. (1994). Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York, Morrow. 
Cialdini, R.B. (1995). The principles and techniques of social influence, In Advanced 
Social Psychology, (ed. A. Tesser), pp. 257–81 . New York, McGraw- Hill. 
Claxton, G. (ed.) (1986). Beyond Therapy: The Impact of Eastern Religions on 
Psychological Theory and Practice. London, Wisdom. (Dorset, Prism, 1996.) 
Claxton, G. (1994). Noises from the Darkroom. London, Aquarian. 
Cloak, F.T. (1975). Is a cultural ethology possible? Human Ecology, 3, 161–82. 

250    THE MEME MACHINE 
Conlisk, J. (1980). Costly optimisers versus cheap imitators. Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organisation, 1, 275–93. 
Crick, F. (1994). The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the Soul. New 
York, Charles Scribner’s Sons. 
Cronin, H. (199 1). The Ant and the Peacock. Cambridge University Press. 
Crook, J.H. (1980). The Evolution of Human Consciousness. Oxford University Press. 
Crook, J.H. (1989). Socioecological paradigms, evolution and history: perspectives for 
the 1990s. In Comparative Socioecology (ed. V. Standen and R.A. Foley). Oxford, 
Blackwell. 
Crook, J.H. (1995). Psychological processes in cultural and genetic coevolution. In 
Survival and Religion: Biological Evolution and Cultural Change, (ed. E. Jones and 
V. Reynolds), pp. 45–110. London, Wiley. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York. 
Harper & Row. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). The Evolving Self: A Psychology for the Third Millennium. 
New York, HarperCollins. 
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain. New 
York, Putnam. 
Darwin, C. (1859). On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. London, 
Murray. (London, Penguin, 1968). 
Darwin, C. (1871). The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. London, John 
Murray. 
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press. (Revised edition with 
additional material, 1989.) 
Dawkins, R. (1982). The Extended Phenotype. Oxford, Freeman. 
Dawkins, R. (1986). The Blind Watchmaker. Harlow, Essex, Longman. 
Dawkins, R. (1993). Viruses of the mind. In Dennett and his Critics: Demystifying Mind, 
(ed. B. Dahlbohm), pp. 13–27. Oxford, Blackwell. 
Dawkins, R. (1994). Burying the vehicle. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17, 616–17. 
Dawkins, R. (1996a). Climbing Mount Improbable. London, Penguin. 
Dawkins, R. (1996b). Mind viruses. In Ars Electronica Festival 1996: Memesis: The 
Future of Evolution (ed. G. Stocker and C. Schöpf), pp. 40–7, Vienna, Springer. 
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the 
Human Brain. London, Penguin. 
Dean, G., Mather, A. and Kelly, I.W. (1996). Astrology. In The Encyclopedia of the 
Paranormal, (ed. G. Stein), pp. 47–99. Buffalo, New York, Prometheus. 
Delius, J. (1989). Of mind memes and brain bugs, a natural history of culture. In The 
Nature of Culture. (ed. W.A. Koch), pp. 26–79. Bochum, Germany, Bochum 
Publications. 
Dennett, D. (1978). Brainstorms.. Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. 
Montgomery, VT, Bradford Books. 

REFERENCES    251 
Dennett, D. (1984). Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. 
Cambridge, MA., Bradford Books. 
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA, Little Brown. 
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. London, Penguin. 
Dennett, D. (1997). The evolution of evaluators. Paper presented at the International 
School of Economic Research, Siena. 
Dennett, D. (1998). Personal communication (Dennett suggested the terms ‘meme-
fountain’ and ‘meme-sink’). 
Descartes, R. (1641). Discourse on Method and the Meditations. (London, Penguin, 
1968.) 
Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, Germs and Steel. London, Cape. 
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of 
Culture and Cognition. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press. 
Donald, M. (1993). Précis of Origins of the modern mind: Three stages in the evolution 
of culture and cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 737–91. (with 
commentaries by others.) 
Dossey, L. (1993). Healing Words: The Power of Prayer and the Practice of Medicine. 
San Francisco, CA, HarperCollins. 
Dunbar, R. (1996). Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. London, Faber 
and Faber. 
Durham, W.H, (1991). Coevolution.. Genes, Culture and Human Diversity. Stanford, 
CA, Stanford University Press. 
Du Preez, P. (1996). The evolution of altruism: A brief comment on Stern’s ‘Why do 
people sacrifice for their nations?’ Political Psychology 17, 563–7. 
Edelman, G.M. (1989). Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection. 
Oxford University Press. 
Eisenberg, D.M., Kessler, R.C., Foster, C., Norlock, F.E., Calkins, D.R. and Delbanco, 
T.L. (1993). Unconventional medicine in the United States. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 328, 246–52. 
Eagly, A. H. and Chaiken, S. (1984). Cognitive theories of persuasion, In Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 17, (ed. L. Berkowitz), pp. 267–359. New 
York, Academic Press. 
Ernst, E. (1998). The rise and fall of complementary medicine. Journal of the Royal 
Society of Medicine, 91, 235–6. 
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford, CA, Stanford 
University Press. 
Fisher, J. and Hinde, R.A. (1949). The opening of milk bottles by birds. British Birds, 
42, 347–57. 
Fisher, R.A. (1930). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford University 
Press. 
Forer, B.R. (1949). The fallacy of personal validation: A classroom demonstration of 
gullibility. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44, 118–23. 

252    THE MEME MACHINE 
Freeman, D. (1996). Margaret Mead and the Heretic.. The Making and Unmaking of an 
Anthropological Myth. London, Penguin. 
Gabora, L. (1997). The origin and evolution of culture and creativity. Journal of 
Memetics, 1, http://www..cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1997/vol1l/gabora_l.html. 
Galef, B. G. (1992). The question of animal culture. Human Nature, 3, 157–78. 
Gallup, G.H. and Newport F. (1991). Belief in paranormal phenomena among adult 
Americans. Skeptical Inquirer, 15, 137–46. 
Gatherer, D. (1997). The evolution of music – a comparison of Darwinian and dialectical 
methods. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems, 20, 75–93. 
Gatherer, D. (1998). Meme pools, World 3, and Averroës’s vision of immortality. 
Zygon, 33, 203–19. 
Gould, S.J. (1979). Shades of Lamarck. Natural History, 88, 22–8. 
Gould, S.J. (1991). Bully for Brontosaurus. New York, Norton. 
Gould, S.J. (1996|). Full House. New York, Harmony Books. (Published in the UK as 
Life’s Grandeur, London, Cape.) 
Gould, S.J. (19965). BBC Radio 4. Start the Week Debate with S. Blackmore, S. Fry and 
O. Sacks, 11 November. 
Gould, S.J. and Lewontin, R. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian 
paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society, 8205, 581–98. 
Grant, G. (1990). Memetic lexicon. http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/memes.html 
Gregory, R.L. (1981). Mind in Science: A History of Explanations in Psychology and 
Physics. London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Grosser, D., Polansky, N. and Lippitt, R. (1951). A laboratory study of behavioral 
contagion. Human Relations, 4, 115–42. 
Hameroff, S.R. (1994). Quantum coherence in microtubules: A neural basis for 
emergent consciousness? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 1, 91–118. 
Hamilton, W.D. (1963). The evolution of altruistic behaviour. American Naturalist, 97, 
354–6. 
Hamilton, W.D. (1964). The genetical evolution of social behaviour: 1. Journal of 
Theoretical Biology, 7, 1–16. 
Hamilton, W.D. (1996). Narrow Roads of Gene Land: 1. The Evolution of Social 
Behaviour. Oxford, Freeman/Spektrum. 
Hartung J. (1995). Love thy neighbour: the evolution of in-group morality. Skeptic, 3:4, 
86–99. 
Harvey, P.H. and Krebs, J.R. (1990). Comparing brains. Science, 249, 140–6. 
Heyes, C.M. (1993). Imitation, culture and cognition. Animal Behaviour, 46, 999–1010. 
Heyes, C.M. and Galef, B.G. (ed.) (1996). Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of 
Culture. San Diego, CA, Academic Press. 
Hofstadter, D. R. (1985). Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of Mind and 
Pattern. New York, Basic Books. 
Hull, D. L. (1982). The naked meme. In Learning, Development and Culture, (ed. H.C. 
Plotkin), pp. 273–327. London, Wiley. 

REFERENCES    253 
Hull, D.L. (1988a). Interactive versus vehicles. In The Role of Behaviour in Evolution, 
(ed. H.C. Plotkin), pp. 19–50, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
Hull, D.L. (1988b). A mechanism and its metaphoric: an evolutionary account of the 
social and conceptual development of science. Biology and Philosophy, .3, 123–55. 
Hume, D. (1739–40). A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford. 
Humphrey, N. (1986). The Inner Eye. London, Faber and Faber. 
Humphrey, N. (1995). Soul Searching: Human Nature and Supernatural Belief. London, 
Chatto & Windus. 
Jacobs, D.M. (1995). Secret Life: First band accounts of UFO abductions. London, 
Fourth Estate. 
Jerison, H.J. (1973). Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. New York, Academic 
Press. 
Johnson, T.R. (1995). The significance of religion for aging well. American Behavioral 
Scientist, 39, 186–209. 
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe: The Search for laws of Complexity. 
Oxford University Press. 
King, M., Speck, P. and Thomas, A. (1994). Spiritual and religious beliefs in acute 
illness - is this a feasible area for study? Social Science and Medicine, :38, 631–6. 
Krings, M., Stone, A., Schmitz, R.W., Krainitzki, H., Stoneking, M. and Pääbo S. (1997) 
Neanderthal DNA sequences and the origin of modern humans. Cell, 90, 19–30. 
Langer, E.J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 32, 311–28. 
Leakey, R. (1994). The Origin of Humankind. London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Levy, D.A. and Nail, P.R. (1993). Contagion: A theoretical and empirical review and 
reconceptualization. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs. 119, 
235–84. 
Libet, B. (1981). The experimental evidence of subjective referral of a sensory 
experience backwards in time. Philosophy of Science, 48, 182–97. 
Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in 
voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain sciences, 8. 529–39. (With commentaries 
539–66; and BBS, 10, 318–21.) 
Libet, B., Pearl, D.K., Morledge, D.E., Gleason, C.A. Hosobuchi, Y. and Barbaro, N.M. 
(1991), Control of the transition from sensory detection to sensory awareness in man 
by the duration of a thalamic stimulus: The cerebral ‘time-on’ factor. Brain, 114, 
1731–57. 
Lumsden, C.J, and Wilson, E.O. (1981). Genes, Mind and Culture. Cambridge, MA, 
Harvard University Press. 
Lynch, A. (1991). Thought contagion as austral evolution. Journal of Ideas, 2, 3–10. 
Lynch, A. (1996). Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads through Society. New York, 
Basic Books, 

254    THE MEME MACHINE 
Lynch, A., Plunkett, G.M., Baker, A.J. and Jenkins, P.F. (1989). A model of cultural 
evolution of chaffing song derived with the memo concept. The American Naturalist, 
133, 634–53. 
Machiavelli, N. (c.1514). The Prince. (London, Penguin, 1961, trams. G. Bull.) 
Mack, J.E. (1994). Abduction: Human encounters with aliens. London, Simon & 
Schuster. 
Mackay, C. (1841). Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. 
(Reprinted, New York, Wiley, 1996.) 
Marsden, P. (1997). Crash contagion and the Death of Diana: Memetics as a now 
paradigm for understanding mass behaviour. Paper presented at the conference 
‘Death of Diana’, University of Sussex, 14 November. 
Marsden, P. (1998a). Memetics as a new paradigm for understanding and influencing 
customer behaviour. Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 16, 363–8. 
Marsden, P. (1998b). Operationalising genetics: suicide, the Werther Effect, and the 
Carl of David P. Phillips. Paper presented at the Fifteenth International Congress on 
Cybernetics, Symposium on Memetics, Namur, August. 
Marx, K. (1904). A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Chicago, IL, 
Charles H. Kerr. 
Maynard Smith, J. (1996). Evolution – natural and artificial. In The Philosophy of 
Artificial Life, (ed. M.A. Boden), pp. 173–8. Oxford University Press. 
Maynard Smith, I. and Szathmáry, E. (1995). The Major Transitions of Evolution. 
Oxford, Freeman/Spektrum. 
Mead, M. (1928). Coming of Age in Samoa. (London, Penguin, 1963.) 
Meltzoff, A. N. (1988). Imitation, objects, tools, and the rudiments of language in human 
ontogeny. Human Evolution, 3, 45–64. 
Meltzoff, A.N. (1990). Towards a developmental cognitive science: the implications of 
cross-modal matching and imitation for the development of representation and 
memory in infancy. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 608, 1–37. 
Meltzoff, A.N. (1996). The human infant as imitative generalist: A 20-year progress 
report on infant imitation with implications for comparative psychology. In Social 
Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture, (ed. C.M. Heyes and B.G. Galef), pp. 
347–70, San Diego, CA, Academic Press. 
Meltzoff, A.N. and Moore, M.K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual gestures by 
human neonates. Science, 198, 75–8. 
Mestel, R. (1995). Arts of seduction. New Scientist, 23/30 December, 28–31. 
Midgley, M. (1994). Letter to the Editor. New Scientist, 12 February, 50. 
Miller, G. (1993). Evolution of the Human Brain through Runaway Sexual Selection. 
PhD thesis, Stanford University Psychology Department. 
Miller, G. (1998). How mate choice shaped human nature: A review of sexual selection 
and human evolution. In Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology.. Ideas, Issues, and 
Applications (ed. C. Crawford and D. Krebs), pp. 87–129, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

REFERENCES    255 
Miller, N.E. and Dollard, J. (1941). Social Learning and Imitation. New Haven, CT, 
Yale University Press. 
Mithen, S. (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind. London, Thames and Hudson. 
Moghaddam, F.M., Taylor, D.M. and Wright, S.C. (1993). Social Psychology in Cross-
cultural Perspective. New York, Freeman. 
Myers, F. W. H. (1903). Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death. London, 
Longmans, Green. 
Osis, K. and Haraldsson, E. (1977). Deathbed observations by physicians and nurses: A 
cross-cultural survey. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 71, 
237–59. 
Otero, C,P. (1990). The emergence of homo loquens and the laws of physics. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 13, 747–50. 
Parfit, D. (1987). Divided minds and the nature of persons. In Mindwaves, (ed. C. 
Blakemore and S. Greenfield), pp. 19–26. Oxford, Blackwell. 
Penrose, R, (1994). Shadows of the Mind: A Searcb for the Missing Science of 
Consciousness. Oxford University Press. 
Persinger, M.A. (1983) Religious and mystical experiences as artifacts of temporal lobe 
function: A general hypothesis. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 57, 1255–62. 
Phillips, D.P. (1980). Airplane accidents, murder, and the mass media: Towards a theory 
of imitation and suggestion. Social Forces, 58, 1000–24. 
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York, Morrow. 
Pinker, S. (1998). How the Mind Worls. London, Penguin. 
Pinker, S. and Bloom, P. (1990), Natural language and natural selection. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 13, 707–84. (with commentaries by others.) 
Plimer, I. (1994). Telling Lies for God. Milsons Point, NSW, Australia, Random House. 
Plotkin, H.C. (ed.) (1982). Learning, Development and Culture: Essays in Evolutionary 
Epistemology. Chichester, Wiley. 
Plotkin, H.C. (1993). Darwin Machitles and the Nature of Knowledge. London, Penguin. 
Popper, K.R. (1972). Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford 
University Press. 
Popper, K.R. and Eccles, J.C. (1977). The Self and its Brain: AN Argument for 
Interactionism. Berlin, Springer. 
Provine, R.R. (1996). Contagious yawning and laughter: Significance for sensory feature 
detection, motor pattern generation, imitation, and the evolution of social behaviour. 
In Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture, (ed. C.M. Heyes and B.G. 
Galef), pp. 179–208. San Diego, CA, Academic Press. 
Pyper, H.S. (1998). The selfish text: the Bible and memetics. In Biblical Studies and 
Cultural Studies, (ed. J.C. Exum and S.D. Moore), pp. 70–90. Sheffield Academic 
Press. 
Reiss, D. and McGowan, B. (1993). Spontaneous vocal mimicry and production by

256    THE MEME MACHINE 
bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus): Evidence for vocal learning. Journal of 
Comparative Psychology, 107, 301–12. 
Richerson, P.J. and Boyd, R. (1989). The role of evolved predispositions in cultural 
evolution: Or, human sociobiology meets Pascal's wager. Ethology and Sociobiology, 
10, 195–219. 
Richerson, P.J. and Boyd, R. (1992). Cultural inheritance and evolutionary ecology. In 
Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behaviour, (ed. E.A. Smith and B. Winterhalder), 
pp. 61–92. Chicago, IL, Aldine de Grunter. 
Ridley, Mark (1996). Evolution, (2nd edn). Oxford, Blackwell. 
Ridley, Matt (1993). The Red Queen.. Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. London, 
Viking. 
Ridley, Matt (1996). The Origins of Virtue. London, Viking. 
Ring, K. (1992). The Omega Project. New York, Morrow. 
Rose, N.J. (1997). Personal communication. 
Rose, N.J. (1998). Controversies in meme theory. Journal of Memetics: Evolutionary 
Models 
of 
Information 
Transmission, 
2, 
http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-
emit/l998/vol2/rose_n.html 
Runciman, W.G. (1998). The receptionist paradigm and its implications for sociology. 
Sociology, 32, 163–88. 
Sheils, D. (1978). A cross-cultural study of beliefs in out-of-the-body experiences. 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 49, 697–741. 
Sherry, D.F. and Galef, B.G. (1984). Cultural transmission without imitation: milk bottle 
opening by birds. Animal Behaviour, 32, 937–8. 
Showalter, E. (1997). Hystories: Hysterical Epidemics and Modern Culture. New York, 
Columbia University Press. 
Silver, L.M. (1998). Remaking Eden: Cloning and Beyond in a Brave New World. 
London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: role of waist-
to-hip ratio. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 293–307. 
Skinner, B.F. (1953). Science and Human Behavior. New York, MacMillan. 
Spanos, N.P., Cross, P.A., Dickson, K., and DuBreuil, S.C. (1993). Close encounters: 
An examination of UFO experiences. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 624–32. 
Speel, H.-C. (1995). Memetics: On a conceptual framework for cultural evolution.  
Paper presented at the symposium ‘Einstein meets Magritte’, Free University of 
Brussels, June. 
Sperber, D. (1990). The epidemiology of beliefs. In The Social Psychological Study of 
Widespread Beliefs, (ed. C. Fraser and G. Gasket), pp. 25–44. Oxford University 
Press. 
Stein, G. (ed.) (1996). The Encyclopedia of the Paranormal. Buffalo, NY, Prometheus. 
Strawson, G, (1997). The self. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4, 405–28. 
Symons, D. (1979). The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York, Oxford University 
Press. 

REFERENCES    257 
Thorndike, E.L. (1898). Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative 
processes in animals. Psychological Review Monographs, 2, No. 8. 
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A.C. and Ratner, H.H. (1993). Cultural learning. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 16, 495–552. 
Tooby, J. and Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of culture. In The 
Adapted Mind.. Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, (ed. J.H. 
Barkow, L. Cosmides and J. Tooby), pp. 19–136. New York, Oxford University 
Press. 
Toth, N. and Schick, K. (1993). Early stone industries and inferences regarding language 
and cognition. In Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution (ed. K. 
Gibson and T. Ingold), pp. 346–62. Cambridge University Press. 
Trivers, R.L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 
46, 35–56. 
Trivers, R.L. (1972). Parental investment and sexual selection. In Sexual Selection and 
the Descent of Man, (ed. B. Campbell), pp. 136–79. Chicago, IL, Aldine de Grunter. 
Trivers, R.L. (1985). Social Evolution. Menlo Park, CA, Benjamin/Cummings. 
Tudge, C. (1995). The Day before Yesterday: Five Million Years of Human History. 
London, Cape. 
Turtle, S. (1995). Life on the Screen.. Identity in the Age of the Internet. New York, 
Simon & Schuster. 
Ulett, G. (1992). Beyond Yin and Yang: How Acupuncture Really Works. St. Louis, MO, 
Warren H. Green. 
Ulett, G.A., Han, S. and Han, J. (1998). Electroacupuncture: Mechanisms and clinical 
application. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 129–38. 
Wagstaff, G.F. (1998). Equity, justice and altruism. Current Psychology, 17, 111–34. 
Walker, A. and Shipman, P. (1996). The Wisdom of Bones: In Search of Human Origins. 
London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Wallace, A.R. (189l). Natural Selection and Tropical Nature: Essays on Descriptive and 
Theoretical Biology. London, Macmillan. 
Warraq, I. (1995). Why I am not a Muslim. Buffalo, NY, Prometheus. 
Watson, J. D. (1968). The Double Helix. London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Whiten, A. and Byrne, R.W. (1997). Machiavellian Intelligence: 11. Extensions and 
Evaluations. Cambridge University Press. 
Whiten, A., Custance, D. M., Gomez, J.-C., Teixidor, P. and Bard, K.A. (1996). 
Imitative learning of artificial fruit processing in children (Homo sapiens) and 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 110, 3–14. 
Whiten, A. and Ham, R. (1992). On the nature and evolution of imitation in the animal 
kingdom: Reappraisal of a centum of research. In Advances in the Study of Behavior, 
Vol. 21, (ed. P.J.B. Slater, J.S. Rosenblatt, C. Beer and M. Milinski), pp. 239–81. 
San Diego, CA, Academic Press. 
Williams, G. C. (1966). Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton, NJ, Princeton 
University Press. 

258    THE MEME MACHINE 
Wills, C. (1993). The Runaway Brain: The Evolution of Human Uniqueness. New York, 
Basic Books. 
Wilson, D.S. and Sober, E. (1994). Reintroducing group selection to the human 
behavioral sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17, 585–654 (with 
commentaries by others). 
Wilson, E.O. (1978). On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press. 
Wilson, 1. (1987). The After Death Experience. London, Sidgwick & Jackson. 
Wispé, L.G. and Thompson, J.N. (1976). The war between the words: biological versus 
social evolution and some related issues. American Psychologist, 31, 341–84. 
Wright, D. (1998). Translated terms as meme-products: The scruple for existence in 
Late Qing chemical terminologies. Paper presented at the conference ‘China and the 
West’, Technical University of Berlin, August. 
Wright, R. (1994). The Moral Animal. New York, Pantheon. 
Yando R., Seitz, V., and Zigler, E. (1978). Imitation: A Developmental Perspective. 
New York, Wiley. 
Young, J.Z. (1965). A Model of the Brain. Oxford, Clarendon. 
Zentall, T.R. and Galef, B.G. (ed.) (1988). Social Learning: Psychological and 
Biological Perspectives. Hillside, NJ, Erlbaum. 

