
The Subprime Solution 

The Subprime Solution 
How Today’s Global Financial Crisis Happened, and What to Do about It 
Robert J. Shiller 
Princeton University Press 
PRINCETON AND OXFORD 
 
2

The author is the Arthur M. Okun Professor of Economics, Cowles Foundation 
for Research in Economics, and professor of finance at the International Center 
for Finance, Yale University; research associate at the National Bureau of 
Economic Research; and co-founder and principal of two U.S. firms that are in 
the business of issuing securities: MacroMarkets LLC and Macro Financial LLC. 
The views expressed herein are solely those of the author and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of these institutions. 
Copyright © 2008 by Robert J. Shiller 
 
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work should be sent to 
Permissions, Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New 
Jersey 08540 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, 
Oxfordshire OX20 1TW 
 
All Rights Reserved 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Shiller, Robert J. 
 
3

The subprime solution : how today's global financial crisis happened, and 
what to do about it / Robert J. Shiller. 
p.    cm. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 978-0-691-13929-6 (hbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Mortgage loans.  2. Secondary mortgage market.  3. Real estate 
investment.  4. Financial crises.  I. Title. 
HG2040.15.S45    2008 
332.7´22—dc22 
 
 
 
 
 
2008013734 
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available 
 
This book has been composed in Minion 
 
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞ 
 
press.princeton.edu 
Printed in the United States of America 
 
4

 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
 
5

A general bonfire is so great a necessity that unless we can make of it an orderly and 
good-tempered affair in which no serious injustice is done to anyone, it will, when it 
comes at last, grow into a conflagration that may destroy much else as well. 
John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, 1919 
 
6

Contents 
1 
Introduction 
1 
2 
Housing in History 
000 
3 
Bubble Trouble 
000 
4 
The Real Estate Myth 000 
5 
A Bailout by Any Other Name 
000 
6 
The Promise of Financial Democracy 000 
7 
Epilogue 
000 
Index 
 
7

The Subprime Solution 
 
8

Introduction 
1 
The subprime crisis is the name for what a historic turning point in our economy and our 
culture. It is, at its core, the result of the deflating of a speculative bubble in the housing 
market that began in the United States in 2006 and has now cascaded across many other 
countries in the form of financial failures and a global credit crunch. The forces 
unleashed by the subprime crisis will probably run rampant for years, threatening more 
and more collateral damage. The disruption in our credit markets is already of historic 
proportions and will have important economic impacts. More importantly, this crisis has 
set in motion fundamental societal changes—changes that affect our consumer habits, our 
values, our relatedness to each other. From now on we will all be conducting our lives 
and doing business with each other a little bit differently. 
Allowing these destructive changes to proceed unimpeded could cause damage 
not only to the economy but to the social fabric—the trust and optimism people feel for 
each other and for their shared institutions and ways of life—for decades to come. The 
social fabric itself is so hard to measure that it is easily overlooked in favor of smaller, 
more discrete, elements and details. But the social fabric is indeed at risk and should be 
central to our attention as we respond to the subprime crisis. 
History proves the importance of economic policies for preserving the social 
fabric. Europe after World War I was seriously damaged by one peculiar economic 
arrangement: the Treaty of Versailles. The treaty, which ended the war, imposed on 
Germany punitive reparations far beyond its ability to pay. John Maynard Keynes 
 
9

resigned in protest from the British delegation at Versailles and, in 1919, wrote The 
Economic Consequences of the Peace, which predicted that the treaty would result in 
disaster. Keynes was largely ignored, the treaty remained in force, and indeed Germany 
never was able to pay the penalties imposed. The disaster he had predicted in fact came 
about—in the form of intense resentment and, a generation later, World War II. 
A comparable disaster—albeit one not of quite the same magnitude—is brewing 
today, as similar concerns are hammering at our psyches. Once again, many people, 
unable to repay their debts, are being pursued aggressively by creditors. Once again, they 
often feel that the situation is not of their own making, but the product of forces beyond 
their control. Once again, they see once-trusted economic institutions collapsing around 
them. Once again, they feel that they were lied to—fed overly optimistic stories that 
encouraged them to take excessive risks. 
 It is impossible to predict the nature and extent of the damage that the current 
economic and social dysphoria and disorder will create. But a good part of it will likely 
be measured in slower economic growth for years to come. We may well experience 
several years of a bad economy, as occurred, for example, after the profligate mortgage 
lending booms in both Sweden and Mexico in the early 1990s. There could even be 
another “lost decade,” like that suffered by Mexico in the 1980s after its spending spree 
during the oil price boom, or by Japan in the 1990s after the bursting of the bubble in its 
housing market in the 1980s. 
In this book I argue that the housing bubble that created the subprime crisis 
ultimately grew as big as it did because we as a society do not understand, or know how 
 
10

to deal with, speculative bubbles. Even intelligent, well-informed people—who certainly 
knew that there had been bubbles throughout history and could even recite examples—
typically did not fully comprehend what was happening in the run-up to the subprime 
crisis. Business and government leaders did not know how to deal with this situation, nor 
did they establish the kinds of new financial institutions that could have managed it. 
The view that the ultimate cause of the global financial crisis is the psychology of 
the real estate bubble (with contributions from the stock market bubble before that) has 
certainly been expressed before. But it would appear that most people have not taken this 
view to heart, and at the very least that they do not appreciate all of its ramifications. 
Accounts of the crisis often seem instead to place the ultimate blame entirely on such 
factors as growing dishonesty among mortgage lenders; increasing greed among 
securitizers, hedge funds, and rating agencies; or the mistakes of former Federal Reserve 
chairman Alan Greenspan. 
It is time to recognize what has been happening and to take fundamental steps to 
restructure the institutional foundations of the housing and financial economy. This 
means taking both short-run steps to alleviate the crisis and making longer-term changes 
that will inhibit the development of bubbles, stabilize the housing and larger financial 
markets, and provide greater financial security to households and businesses, all the while 
allowing new ideas to drive financial innovation. 
 
11

A Crisis in a Bubble 
By now the whole world has heard the story of the problems in the subprime 
mortgage market, which began to show up in the United States in 2007 and then spread 
around the world. Home prices and homeownership had been booming since the late 
1990s, and investing in a house had seemed a sure route to financial security and even 
wealth. 
U.S. homeownership rates rose over the period 1997–2005 for all regions, all age 
groups, all racial groups, and all income groups. According to the U.S. Census, the 
homeownership rate increased from 65.7% to 68.6% (which represents at least a 4.4% 
increase in the number of owner-occupied homes) over that period. The increases in 
homeownership were largest in the West, for those under the age of 35, for those with 
below-median incomes, and for Hispanics and blacks. 
Encouraging homeownership is a worthy and admirable national goal. It conveys 
a sense of participation and belonging, and high homeownership rates are beneficial to a 
healthy society. Later in this chapter I trace the evolution of the systems put in place in 
the United States in the twentieth century to promote homeownership. But the subprime 
housing dilemma in the United States points up problems with over-promoting 
homeownership. Homeownership, for all its advantages, is not the ideal housing 
arrangement for all people in all circumstances. And we are now coming to appreciate the 
reality of this, for the homeownership rate has been falling in the United States since 
2005. 
What was the chain of events in the subprime crisis? Overly aggressive mortgage 
lenders, compliant appraisers, and complacent borrowers proliferated to feed the housing 
 
12

boom. Mortgage originators, who planned to sell off the mortgages to securitizers, 
stopped worrying about repayment risk. They typically made only perfunctory efforts to 
assess borrowers’ ability to repay their loans—often failing to verify borrowers’ income 
with the Internal Revenue Service, even if they possessed signed authorization forms 
permitting them to do so. Sometimes these lenders enticed the naïve, with poor credit 
histories, to borrow in the ballooning subprime mortgage market. These mortgages were 
packaged, sold, and resold in sophisticated but arcane ways to investors around the world, 
setting the stage for a crisis of truly global proportions. The housing bubble, combined 
with the incentive system implicit in the securitization process, amplified moral hazard, 
further emboldening some of the worst actors among mortgage lenders. 
High home prices made it profitable to build homes, and the share of residential 
investment in U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) rose to 6.3% in the fourth quarter of 
2005, the highest level since the pre–Korean War housing boom of 1950–51. The huge 
supply of new homes began to glut the market, and, despite the optimistic outlooks of 
national leaders, U.S. home prices began to fall in mid-2006. As prices declined at an 
accelerating rate, the boom in home construction collapsed. 
At the same time, mortgage rates began to reset to higher levels after initial 
“teaser” periods ended. Borrowers, particularly subprime borrowers, began defaulting, 
often owing more than their homes were worth or unable to support their higher monthly 
payments with current incomes. Now many of the financial institutions that participated 
in what once seemed a brave new world of expanding homeownership and exotic 
financial innovation are in varying degrees of distress. The world’s credit markets have 
shown symptoms of locking up. 
 
13

We may be in for a severe economic contraction that could create hardship for 
millions of people, spreading far beyond the subprime borrowers at the center of the 
crisis. Major losses occurred in U.S. banks and brokerage firms. The heads of Citibank, 
Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley lost their jobs. The situation remains critical. 
The crisis has bled over to other sectors besides housing. Credit card and 
automobile loan defaults have been ominously increasing. The credit ratings of municipal 
bond insurers are being downgraded, creating a risk that the problem will spread to state 
and local government financing. The market for commercial paper has suffered a severe 
shock, and the market for corporate loan obligations appears troubled as well. 
Nor did the subprime crisis end at America’s borders. Booming real estate 
markets have shown signs of peaking, or at least of flattening out, around the world. The 
effects of the financial crisis have also filtered into other countries, as witnessed by the 
failures of IKB Deutsche Industriebank AG and SachsenLB Bank in Germany, the failure 
of funds sponsored by BNP Paribas in France, and the run on the Northern Rock Building 
Society in the United Kingdom. 
Then again, these problems from outside the United States have fed back into the 
country, manifested in a declining dollar, a faltering stock market, and more financial 
failures, notably that of the venerable U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns. This grim 
feedback loop—with problems moving from the United States to the rest of the world and 
back again to the United States—has certainly not yet run its course. 
Mend It, Don’t End It 
The current financial crisis is often viewed as a reason to sound retreat—to return 
to yesterday’s simpler methods of financial dealing. This would be a mistake. On the 
 
14

contrary, the current situation is really an opportunity to redouble our efforts to rethink 
and improve our risk-management institutions, the framework that undergirds our 
increasingly sophisticated financial sector. Despite the present crisis, modern finance has 
produced historic achievements in recent decades and serves as a powerful engine of 
economic growth, from underwriting new businesses in the private sector to supporting 
vital research in the universities to building schools and hospitals in the public sector. 
Every crisis contains the seeds of change. Now is the time to restructure the 
institutional firmament of financial activity in positive ways that will stabilize the 
economy, rekindle the wealth of nations, reinforce the best of financial innovation, and 
leave society much better off than if there had not been such a crisis. 
This book is an effort to explain the current subprime crisis and lay the foundation for 
such an institutional rebirth. It suggests both commonsense short-run fixes and deeper 
long-term improvements that will serve us into the indefinite future. The book cannot 
consider all the proposals and counterproposals that others have offered to deal with the 
crisis—there are simply too many of them. But it will set forth the greater goals around 
which future solutions might cluster. 
The book is intended for readers in countries all over the world. The subprime 
crisis is now a truly international event, and the solutions offered here can generally be 
adapted to other countries as well. 
As already noted, institutional reform means providing a stronger framework 
within which our real estate and financial markets can operate. No matter how powerful 
 
15

and technologically sophisticated the train, it is only as good as the track on which it runs. 
Regulatory and insurance institutions are the track that carries our financial and real 
estate markets. But these existing risk-management institutions are old and unstable. We 
are running bullet trains on ancient track. Our leaders in government and in business must 
overhaul and replace the rails and ties. The subprime solution is all about institutional 
reform: the vision to see beyond short-term fixes and the courage to undertake reform at 
the highest levels. 
Lessons from the Last Big Housing Crisis 
While the implications of the subprime crisis are global, the crisis itself must be 
understood in its place and time of origin, twentieth-century America. Before the current 
problem, the last major housing crisis in the United States took place in 1925–33. Home 
prices fell a total of 30% over this interval, and the unemployment rate rose to 25% at the 
peak of the Great Depression. The crisis revealed glaring defects in the financial 
institutions of the period. At that time most people borrowed with short-term mortgages 
of five years or less, which they expected to roll over shortly before they came due. As 
the crisis took hold, borrowers increasingly found that they were unable to refinance their 
mortgages, and so they stood to lose their homes. 
No public institutions were in place at the time to prevent borrowers from being 
evicted from their homes owing to their inability to secure new mortgages. But because 
concerted efforts were made by leaders to change the institutional framework, mass 
evictions were avoided and recovery was eventually achieved. 
 
16

The policy responses to that historical crisis are an inspiration for the kind of 
solutions that should be promoted to address the current crisis. As the housing problems 
of the Depression era worsened, major innovations appeared in the private and public 
sectors. While history has emphasized the importance of Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s 
New Deal, the significant changes were not simply the result of one man’s policies. 
Rather, they reflected an effort, involving leaders from government and business alike, to 
try to understand the crisis and change the institutional infrastructure of the U.S. 
economy. 
The National Association of Real Estate Boards, a precursor to today’s National 
Association of Realtors, proposed in the early 1930s that Congress create a new home-
loan banking system, parallel to the Federal Reserve System that had been legislated in 
1913. Just as the Federal Reserve System had twelve regional banks, so too did the new 
Federal Home Loan Bank System. Just as the Federal Reserve System had the power to 
discount assets of its member banks, so too could the Federal Home Loan Bank System 
provide the same help to mortgage originators. This was large-scale thinking in response 
to a large-scale crisis. The Federal Home Loan Bank System has since been modified, but 
it is still with us today, providing assistance during the current crisis by supplying 
funding for mortgages. 
Private-sector reforms were equally innovative. In 1932 the real estate appraisal 
industry pulled itself together to become a truly professional organization with the 
founding of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, whose successor today is 
the Appraisal Institute. It was not formally called the Appraisal Institute until it merged 
with the Society of Real Estate Appraisers in 1991. Yet by the early 1930s its accredited 
 
17

members were already putting the initials M.A.I., for “Member, Appraisal Institute,” after 
their names as a credential. Under the pressure of the crisis, the newly professionalized 
appraisal industry began taking advantage of the latest developments in information 
technology, processing data on a large scale using punched cards and computing systems 
produced by Remington Rand and the International Business Machines Corporation. The 
improvements that originated in the private sector during the housing crisis of the 1930s 
have continued to the present day, helping prevent—or at least limit—further crises by 
providing a more secure valuation of homes for mortgage lenders. 
A landmark change occurred on the legislative front as well, in response to the crush 
of foreclosures against homeowners. The U.S. Congress approved a new bankruptcy law 
in 1933, near the end of the administration of Herbert Hoover, which made it possible for 
the first time for most ordinary wage earners to avail themselves of bankruptcy 
protection. Thus the crisis led to reforms that not only stabilized the housing sector but 
further democratized the financial institutions of the day, creating public goods that made 
more effective financial technology available to everyone. 
The reforms did not stop there. In 1933, with Roosevelt as the new president, 
Congress created the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC), which lent to local 
home-financing institutions, taking risky home mortgages as collateral, and thereby 
provided a government subsidy to home mortgages. But the HOLC did more than simply 
provide a subsidy: the organization changed the very standards of the mortgage industry. 
The HOLC insisted that the new mortgages it sponsored be fifteen-year loans that were 
both fixed-rate and self-amortizing, that is, that were paid off by steady monthly 
payments with no large payments due at maturity. 
 
18

In 1934 Congress created the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), which was 
intended to promote homeownership among those who could not then afford homes. The 
FHA went even further than the HOLC in improving the institution of mortgages, raising 
maturities to twenty years and also requiring, as did the HOLC, that mortgages be fixed-
rate and self-amortizing. This began a trend to the familiar fixed-rate mortgage of today; 
starting in the 1950s, mortgages began to be thirty-year instruments, again with FHA 
encouragement. 
Also in 1934 Congress created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which 
insured our banking system against the kind of terrible collapse that had occurred in 1933 
in connection with the housing crisis. Deposit insurance on a national scale was a radical 
new idea then; it has served us very well, and there has not been another bank run in the 
United States since. 
A further innovation introduced in 1934 was the creation by Congress of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), a regulatory agency that was dedicated 
from the start to making financial markets work. The SEC has dealt constructively with 
the financial community, doing its job in a way that is fair and useful to all parties. 
In 1938 Congress created the Federal National Mortgage Association, later 
nicknamed (and now officially renamed) Fannie Mae, which further supported the 
mortgage industry and eventually fostered the widespread securitization of mortgages. 
The soundness of the ideas implemented in response to the financial crisis of the 
1930s is evident in the durability of the institutions created: all but the HOLC are still in 
existence. Moreover, these institutions have become models for similar institutions the 
world over. While it took many years, and often decades, for some of these institutional 
 
19

models to be disseminated across the globe, every country with developed economic 
institutions now has the equivalent of the SEC, some such organizations having been 
established as recently as the 1990s. Virtually every major country of the world also has 
deposit insurance for its banks and institutions to encourage homeownership for those 
with lower incomes. 
Band-Aids for a Burst Bubble: Today’s Response 
Despite the severity of the current subprime crisis, the response by government today 
has been disappointingly limited relative to that in the 1930s, and totally inadequate given 
the scope of the problem. 
The FHASecure bailouts announced by President George W. Bush in the summer of 
2007 were supposed to help borrowers whose adjustable-rate mortgages were resetting at 
prohibitively high rates. But even if they had lived up to initial expectations, they would 
have covered only about 2% of the mortgages guaranteed by Fannie Mae. And in practice 
they have fallen short of that. 
The Master Liquidity Enhancement Conduit (MLEC) “Super S.I.V.” rescue plan, 
proposed in the fall of 2007 by U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr., would 
have been, at maximum, less than a tenth the size of the Federal Home Loan Bank 
System that fortunately is still with us from Great Depression reforms. As it turned out, 
the MLEC was canceled altogether. 
The standards for adjustable-rate mortgage resets promoted by the American 
Securitization Forum in late 2007 are likely to result in mortgage payment adjustments 
that amount to less than 1% of the deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation. 
 
20

The Project Lifeline extensions of time before foreclosure that the Bush 
administration announced it had negotiated in February 2008 were only a thirty-day 
extension of the time to failure. All this amounted to but a statement of intent on the part 
of major lenders in response to the president’s calls for action. 
Other measures taken include interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve; the Term 
Auction Facility (TAF), announced December 21, 2007; the Term Securities Lending 
Facility (TSLF), announced March 11, 2008; and its Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
(PDCF), announced March 16, 2008, as well as the passage of the Economic Stimulus 
Act of 2008, signed into law by President Bush on February 13, 2008. Although perhaps 
helpful, the tax rebates in the stimulus package, and the total size of the TAF, TSLF, and 
PDCF loans, have so far been on the order of only 1% of U.S. annual GDP; while they 
have been increasing, they are still not up to the magnitude of the problem. Even if their 
scope were greatly expanded, we do not know that any of these specific measures would 
do much to solve the fundamental crisis of confidence that lies at the heart of the 
subprime crisis.* 
None of these proposals represents a true institutional innovation that would create a 
better environment to support our real estate and financial markets. They are all merely 
quick fixes that fail to address the full scope of the problem. 
The U.S. Congress has been slow to react to the crisis. U.S. Senator Charles Schumer 
(D-NY), at a 2007 Joint Economic Committee hearing at which I was a witness, said, “I 
fear that we still don’t appreciate the seriousness of the problem we are facing. Our 
policy responses are not matching the magnitude of the risk that still lies ahead.”† That 
was some months before this writing, and the Fed and Congress have since paid more 
 
21

focused attention to the crisis, but it is still unclear that they are going to be effective in 
committing the substantial resources the situation demands. As the crisis worsens and 
begins to consume significant amounts of government resources, they may simply not be 
able to keep up. The crisis continues to deepen, and nothing of truly fundamental 
significance is being done about it. 
Framing Institutional Reform for the Future 
Reporters repeatedly ask me what I think is the probability of a protracted recession 
spurred by the subprime crisis. Only rarely do they ask me what I think should be done to 
solve the fundamental problems highlighted by the subprime crisis, or inquire about how 
we could set up new or reformed institutions that might help insulate our society against 
the fundamental problems that underlie the crisis. But these are exactly the questions we 
should be asking ourselves. A plan to dramatically reduce our vulnerability to financial 
crises like the current subprime crisis would rest on two principles. 
In the immediate short run, government and business leaders must deal with the 
problem created by the bubble and its aftermath. The ship is sinking, and we have to save 
it before we do anything else. In fact, we have to bail out some people who have fared 
particularly badly, and we also have to arrange bailouts in certain extreme cases to 
prevent failure of our economic system. These bailouts must be done promptly and 
correctly, so that they do not come across as unjust or unfair. This situation also calls for 
a short-term government intervention designed to shore up those mortgages that are 
teetering on the edge of default, perhaps modeled after the Home Owners’ Loan 
Corporation of the 1930s. 
 
22

In the longer run, as noted above, we need to develop stronger risk-management 
institutions to inhibit the growth of bubbles—the root cause of events such as the current 
subprime crisis—and to better enable the members of our society to insulate themselves 
against them when they do develop. 
This proposed subprime solution means embracing the following objectives: 
First, improving the financial information infrastructure so that the maximum number 
of people can avail themselves of sound financial practices, products, and services. This 
means delivering enhanced financial information, better financial advice, and greater 
consumer protection to larger segments of society, and also implementing an improved 
system of economic units of measurement. These steps will set the necessary 
groundwork, so that all consumers and households can make financial decisions based on 
the best possible intelligence rather than rules of thumb or, worse still, mere whimsy. 
Better financial information and decision making would, by themselves, check the 
incidence of bubbles. 
Second, extending the scope of financial markets to cover a wider array of economic 
risks. Such an initiative would include, in the first instance, vastly expanded markets for 
handling real estate risk, but markets for other vital economic risks as well. These broader 
markets, coupled with a more sound information infrastructure, would provide the 
financial foundation for a variety of new initiatives that would help to inhibit the growth 
of bubbles. 
Third, creating retail financial instruments—including continuous-workout 
mortgages, home equity insurance, and livelihood insurance—to provide greater security 
to consumers. Today the typical household has as its principal investment its home. A 
 
23

home represents a highly leveraged exposure to a single, stationary plot of real estate—
about the riskiest asset one can imagine. The standard mortgage provides no protection 
against difficulties in repaying the lender due to changes in the marketplace. But 
mortgages can and should be designed to compensate for these changes by including 
provisions to ensure homeowners against their major risks. Other retail institutions can 
protect those who have paid off their mortgages, and they can protect non-homeowners 
from economic contractions as well. 
If we work toward these goals, we would not only curb the creation of the bubbles 
that fuel crises such as today’s subprime disaster but also afford greater protection against 
risks, encourage better financial behavior and enhanced household wealth, strengthen the 
social fabric, and create the conditions for greater economic stability and growth. 
Implementing these and other important institutional changes in all their detail is a 
tall order. But this is a project for leaders from all segments of society, not merely a 
president’s or a prime minister’s inner circle. It will require the combined efforts of 
policy makers, business executives, the media, and academics. Fortunately we still have 
the time, resources, and intellectual capital to do this—if only we recognize the urgent 
necessity for change. 
From Subprime Blues to Financial Democracy 
Although the subject comes up only rarely in the public discourse on the current 
financial crisis, the advent of subprime mortgages during the 1990s reflected a start, 
albeit primitive, toward extending the benefits of financial innovation to more and more 
people—in other words, toward democratizing finance. Prominent commentators, from 
former Fed chief Alan Greenspan through the late real estate economist Edward 
 
24

Gramlich, considered the subprime mortgage movement a positive development (despite 
some abusive lending practices) because it effectively expanded the franchise for asset 
ownership to millions of low-income people. 
But subprime mortgages, for all their lofty social aspirations, were a disaster in their 
implementation: they lacked the kind of risk-management institutions necessary to 
support the increasingly complex financial machinery needed to underwrite them—the 
subject of this book. 
If safe, effective, and enlightened approaches to designing risk-management 
institutions can be deployed as the basis for future market activity, the subprime crisis 
cannot merely be solved—it can be transformed in its aftermath into a better environment 
for extending the financial franchise, for further democratizing finance. 
The first assumption underlying such an effort is the need to better understand the 
risks inherent in real estate and to acquire the know-how to more efficiently spread these 
risks. The subprime mortgages, for all their democratic appeal, were launched with a 
woeful failure to understand real estate risks. 
A second assumption is that the democratic extension of the innovations of modern 
financial technology must be done with a clearer understanding of human psychology, so 
that the spreading of risk can foster proper economic incentives and limit moral hazard. 
The subprime crisis was essentially psychological in origin, as are all bubbles. The crisis 
was not caused by the impact of a meteor or the explosion of a volcano. Rather it was 
caused by failure to anticipate quite obvious risks—by “irrational exuberance” at the 
prospects for profits, if one bought into the concept of an ever-expanding bubble. 
 
25

Ultimately the solution to the economic problems revealed by the subprime crisis 
requires our doing a much better job of extending the innovations of modern financial 
technology, together with effective safeguards, throughout society, and of being unafraid 
to think and act on the scale of the New Deal–era reformers. Democratizing finance is 
crucial in this process: by spreading risk, it places economic life on a firmer foundation. 
Financial democracy is thus not only an end in itself, but a means to another, equally 
worthy, end: the propagation of greater economic stability and prosperity by financial 
means. 
The democratization of finance has in a limited sense already been embodied in the 
so-called microfinance revolution. The 2006 Nobel Peace Prize, awarded to Muhammad 
Yunus and the Grameen Bank, has given new impetus to the innovations they set in 
motion. The microfinance revolution consists of novel institutions that make loans to the 
tiniest of businesses, often in the least-developed parts of the world. 
Yunus has received a sympathetic hearing from world leaders in China, Russia, and 
elsewhere. More broadly, leaders in emerging countries around the world are showing 
interest in bringing financial services to more and more people. Mexican president Felipe 
Calderón has called for policies to promote “financial culture” in his country. The Inter-
American Development Bank has launched an action campaign to expand the range of 
financial services available to the general population throughout Latin America. 
Some of the components of the subprime solution outlined in this book are in the 
same vein as these initiatives, yet there are differences. The measures called for here are, 
in the first instance, intended for the most advanced countries. They are not only for the 
poor, but also for people who are struggling to make do with modest incomes, and indeed 
 
26

 
27
for everyone. This book is about dealing with the subprime crisis, and future crises like it, 
by developing a new financial infrastructure for the entire population, and doing so using 
the most advanced technology at our disposal. 
A Road Map of This Book 
In the remaining chapters of this book I describe the current subprime crisis with an 
eye toward understanding its dimensions and its psychological origins. Then I detail both 
short-term and long-term solutions. Central to this brief manifesto will be the need for 
action. Reforming the institutional framework is an urgent task, to which we must turn 
immediately if we are to halt the damage caused by the subprime crisis and learn from it, 
so that we can move forward to a new and better economic system. 

 
Housing in History 
2 
The housing bubble was a major cause, if not the cause, of the subprime crisis and of the 
broader economic crisis we now face. The perception that real estate prices could only go 
up, year after year, established an atmosphere that invited lenders and financial 
institutions to loosen their standards and risk default. Now the defaults are happening, 
massively and contagiously. 
The bursting of this bubble is setting in motion an array of other changes in the 
national and global economic culture that are of grave concern. According to the 
Standard & Poor’s<th>/<th>Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, which I helped create, U.S. 
home prices have already fallen nearly 15% in real, inflation-corrected terms since the 
2006 peak. In some cities or sectors the real fall has been 25% or more. 
Before the crisis is over, real price drops from recent historic peaks amounting to 
40–50% or more may well come to pass in some cities or sectors. Such price declines 
will severely test our economic institutions. The relatively slight price declines already 
recorded have thus far produced a crisis of mortgage defaults for only a small portion of 
the universe of mortgage holders, and the impact to date on the financial institutions that 
issued, insured, or held these mortgages may be minor compared to the damage that may 
yet unfold. 
Many hedge funds are highly leveraged, and further declines in asset values may 
put those who are, as of now, still looking strong far under water. Their failure would in 
turn put pressure on banks and other financial institutions. The crisis we have already 

witnessed in the United States may be only the first manifestation of greater problems to 
come. While we may wish to think of the subprime problem as a one-act play, soon to 
end, it could in fact be but the first act of a long and complex tragedy. 
Revealing History 
In 2004, when I was writing the second edition of Irrational Exuberance—
updating and expanding what had been a book largely about the stock market boom of 
the 1990s to cover the real estate boom of the 2000s as well—I wanted to include an 
analysis of the long-term performance of the housing market. This would have paralleled 
the approach I had taken to the stock market in the first edition. 
To my surprise, everyone I asked said that there were no data on the long-term 
performance of home prices—not for the United States, nor for any country. Stop and 
think about that. If the housing boom is such a spectacular economic event, wouldn’t you 
imagine that someone would care if this kind of thing had happened before, and what the 
outcome had been? But, amazingly, nobody seemed interested in what had happened 
more than thirty or so years ago. This is at once a lesson in human behavior and a 
reminder that human attention is capricious. Clearly no one was carefully evaluating the 
real estate market and its potential for speculative excess. 
I found that, at various times over the past century or so, economists had indeed 
constructed price indices of existing homes, but only for relatively short time intervals. 
Until recent decades, no one had produced these on an ongoing basis. Thus the earlier 
price indices remained as merely isolated scraps of historical data. 
So I constructed my own index of U.S. existing-home prices dating all the way 
back to 1890. I did so by linking together various available series that seemed to be of the 
 
29

highest quality. I chose only indices that were designed to provide estimates of the price 
of a standard, unchanging house, so that the price index would represent the outcome of 
an investment in a house and would not be affected by the general upward trend in the 
size and quality of homes through time. I could find no index at all for the years 1934–53, 
and so I had my research assistants fill that gap by tabulating prices in for-sale-by-owner 
ads in old newspapers. That period remains the weakest link in my index, but I did the 
best I could do to fill the gap. 
Figure 2.1 in the second (2005) edition of Irrational Exuberance showed the real 
(corrected for consumer price inflation) home-price index, along with building costs, the 
population of the United States, and the long-term interest rate, over the period 1890–
2004. The very same figure is shown here, also as Figure 2.1, updated; the continuations 
of the curves since 2004 are shown in gray rather than black. I wrote in the second edition 
that home prices were looking very anomalous at that time, like a “rocket taking off.”* 
Real home prices for the United States as a whole increased 85% between 1997 and the 
peak in 2006. Home prices certainly did not seem justifiable in terms of changes in the 
other variables shown in the figure. It looked like the rocket might come crashing back 
down to earth. 
<FIGURE 2.1 NEAR HERE> 
And, as is obvious from the gray segment of the home price curve, the very latest 
data do indeed show a sharp drop in home prices. The rocket has started to fall—and the 
bust after the peak was not explainable by any significant change in the other variables. 
Ratios of home prices to building costs had soared in the run-up to the peak of the 
market in 2006, as had ratios of home prices to rent and home prices to personal income. 
 
30

Now these ratios are falling The misalignment of home prices with economic 
fundamentals is strongly suggestive of economic instability. And it is evidence of a 
problem that may not go away until prices correct massively. There are certain basic 
economic laws that—while they may be bent over short intervals—ultimately always 
assert themselves in the long run. 
Diversity of Price Paths 
The seemingly unprecedented behavior of national home prices since the late 
1990s is in fact not unprecedented if one looks at individual cities. Housing markets in 
some cities have gone through spectacular booms in the past. But the fraction of cities 
experiencing booms has increased dramatically in the recent boom. Figure 2.2 shows 
examples of some of our major metropolitan areas, again with the S&P/Case-Shiller 
Home Price Indices corrected for inflation. The figure reveals differences in price 
behavior across cities. Real estate is still a market where location counts. But despite 
these differences across cities before the peak in 2006, now they are all declining. The 
rate of decline is roughly inversely proportional to the speed of the increase. As the figure 
shows, Las Vegas, Miami, and San Francisco have both risen faster before 2006 and 
declined faster afterward than the more stable cities Chicago and New York. 
<FIGURE 2.2 NEAR HERE> 
In addition to differences across metropolitan areas, there were also differences 
across segments within these markets. Note that there are separate markets by price tier: 
low-priced homes behave considerably differently through time than high-priced homes. 
Figure 2.3 shows the example of metropolitan San Francisco, broken down into three 
price tiers. 
 
31

<FIGURE 2.3 NEAR HERE> 
The lowest price tier showed the biggest increases during the recent boom, until 
2006, and the biggest drop afterward. The same phenomenon may be observed in many 
cities. What accounts for this difference across tiers is not known precisely, but a good 
candidate to explain it is the subprime phenomenon. The steep increases are due to the 
rapid expansion since 2001 of subprime loans, which were provided in increasing 
numbers to lower-income buyers and for the purpose of financing the purchase of lower-
priced homes and investor properties. And the more rapid fall in lower-tier home prices 
since the 2006 peak of the boom appears to be consonant with the problems of default 
and foreclosure in that tier. 
However, even though there have been differences in price behavior across price 
tiers, we still see that the behavior of all price tiers is basically similar. There was a boom 
in low-priced homes, in midprice homes, and in high-priced homes, and now the boom is 
unraveling in all these markets. 
We can extend our analysis of price behavior across cities to consider behavior 
across countries. Figure 2.4 shows a comparison of real home prices in greater London 
and greater Boston. The overall similarity between the cities, on opposite sides of the 
Atlantic, is striking. There are of course differences, but the broad patterns are indeed 
similar. Both cities experienced booms in the 1980s. Both experienced collapse in the 
early 1990s. Both cities experienced rapidly rising home prices in the early 2000s. Home 
prices in both are declining sharply according to the latest data. 
<FIGURE 2.4 NEAR HERE> 
The pervasiveness of the boom of the early 2000s across cities, across price tiers, 
 
32

 
33
and across countries suggests that something very broad and general has been at work. 
We cannot explain the bubble in terms of factors specific to any one of these markets. I 
argue in the next chapter that an important ultimate cause of these extraordinary price 
movements in so many different places is related to the contagion of market 
psychology—a contagion that knew no borders because of the global nature of the story 
that fed it. 

 
Bubble Trouble 
3 
Let us look again at Figure 2.1, which shows home prices since 1890. What in the world 
has been happening since the late 1990s to propel home prices up so dramatically? 
The figure shows that there were no fundamental changes in construction costs, 
population, or long-term interest rates at the time of the boom. So what was the cause? 
Whatever it was, it was not seen by national leaders, especially not in the United 
States, where pride in the superiority of our capitalist system sometimes seems to 
approach religious fervor. During this housing boom, most of our authorities simply 
denied there was a problem. Alan Greenspan, in his 2007 book The Age of Turbulence, 
recalled what he used to say about the housing boom: “I would tell audiences that we 
were facing not a bubble but a froth—lots of small local bubbles that never grew to a 
scale that could threaten the health of the overall economy.”* 
President Bush virtually never mentioned the housing boom in his public 
pronouncements while it was happening. He referred only to successes. In one of his 
weekly radio addresses to the nation, in 2005, he boasted that “mortgage rates are low. 
And over the past year the homeownership rate in America has reached record levels.”† 
Ben Bernanke, then chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, 
said in 2005: “House prices have risen by nearly 25 percent over the past two years. 
Although speculative activity has increased in some areas, at a national level these price 
increases largely reflect strong economic fundamentals, including robust growth in jobs 

and incomes, low mortgage rates, steady rates of household formation, and factors that 
limit the expansion of housing supply in some areas.”‡ 
These people were certainly aware of the possibility of bubbles. Indeed 
Greenspan must have been thinking of this when I and my colleague John Y. Campbell, 
along with others, were asked to testify before the Federal Reserve Board on December 3, 
1996, two days before Greenspan made his famous “irrational exuberance” speech. He 
heard us out. His autobiography reveals that he was wrestling with the idea of bubbles. 
But he concluded, as did so many others, that bubbles were not tangible enough to justify 
any policy changes. 
Something was going on—in both the stock market bubble of the 1990s and the 
real estate bubble that followed it—that these leaders found very difficult to see as it was 
happening. So it will necessarily be something of a challenge for us to understand what it 
was. 
A Contagion of Ideas 
While every historical event is the outcome of a combination of factors, I believe, 
as I argued in Irrational Exuberance, that the most important single element to be 
reckoned with in understanding this or any other speculative boom is the social contagion 
of boom thinking, mediated by the common observation of rapidly rising prices. This 
social contagion lends increasing credibility to stories—I call them “new era” stories—
that appear to justify the belief that the boom will continue. The operation of such a 
social contagion of ideas is hard to see because we do not observe the contagion directly, 
and it is easy to neglect its underlying causes. 
Some observers seem to be ideologically opposed to the idea that contagion of 
 
35

thought patterns plays any role in our collective thinking. Indeed, people think the world 
is led by independent minds who invariably act with great intelligence. Since the bubble 
years of the late 1990s, intellectual arrogance of this kind appears to have exerted a 
growing influence over the world economy. 
Alan Greenspan, in a Financial Times op-ed piece in March 2008, recognized—
well after the bubble was over—that there had indeed been “euphoria” and “speculative 
fever.” But, he wrote, “The essential problem is that our models—both risk models and 
econometric models—as complex as they have become—are still too simple to capture 
the full array of governing variables that drive global economic reality. A model, of 
necessity, is an abstraction from the full detail of the real world.”§ 
Greenspan thus did eventually acknowledge the obvious reality of bubbles, but he 
never seemed to embrace the view that a good part of what drives people’s thinking is 
purely social in nature. He espoused the idea that the mathematical econometric models 
of individual behavior are the only tools that we will ever have with which to understand 
the world, and that they are limited only by the amount and nature of our data and our 
ability to deal with complexity. He does not seem to respect research approaches from the 
fields of psychology or sociology. 
Perhaps his lack of attention to bubbles reflected, at least in part, an overly strong 
ideological alignment with some of the views of his former mentor, the philosopher Ayn 
Rand. Rand idealized the strength of individual, independent, courageous action and the 
superiority of the heroic “economic man.” But a tendency to base one’s self-esteem on a 
belief in the possibility of economic success through individual action goes far beyond 
the admirers of Ayn Rand. 
 
36

What seems to be absent from the thinking of many economists and economic 
commentators is an understanding that contagion of ideas is consistently a factor in 
human affairs. Just as there are interregional differences in matters of opinion (as 
evidenced, for example, by the geographic concentration of support for political parties), 
so too are there intertemporal differences. The changing zeitgeist drives common opinion 
among the members of society at any point in time and place, and this zeitgeist changes 
as new ideas gain prominence and recede in importance within the collective thinking. 
Speculative markets are merely exceptionally good places in which to observe the ebb 
and flow of the zeitgeist. 
Understanding such a social contagion is a lot like understanding a disease 
epidemic. Epidemics crop up from time to time, and their timing often baffles experts. 
But a mathematical theory of epidemiology has been developed, and it can help medical 
authorities better understand these apparently mysterious events. 
Every disease has a contagion rate (the rate at which it is spread from person to 
person) and a removal rate (the rate at which individuals recover from or succumb to the 
illness and so are no longer contagious). If the contagion rate exceeds the removal rate by 
a necessary amount, an epidemic begins. The contagion rate varies through time because 
of a number of factors. For example, contagion rates for influenza are higher in the 
winter, when lower temperatures encourage the spread of the virus in airborne droplets 
after infected individuals sneeze. 
So it is in the economic and social environment. Sooner or later, some factor 
boosts the infection rate sufficiently above the removal rate for an optimistic view of the 
market to become widespread. There is an escalation in public knowledge of the 
 
37

arguments that would seem to support that view, and soon the epidemic spirals up and out 
of control. Almost everyone appears to think—if they notice at all that certain economic 
arguments are more in evidence—that the arguments are increasingly heard only because 
of their true intellectual merit. The idea that the prominence of the arguments is in fact 
due to a social contagion is hardly ever broached, at least not outside university sociology 
departments. 
In the recent speculative housing boom, an optimistic view of the market was 
certainly much in evidence. In a survey that Karl Case and I conducted in 2005, when the 
market was booming, we found that the median expected price increase among San 
Francisco home buyers over the next ten years was 9% a year, and the mean expected 
price increase was 14% a year. About a third of the respondents reported truly 
extravagant expectations—occasionally over 50% a year. On what did they base such 
outlooks? They had observed significant price increases and heard others’ interpretation 
of such increases. We were witnessing the contagion of an interpretation or a way of 
forming expectations. 
An important part of what happens during a speculative bubble is mediated by the 
marketplace, to which many people are attentive, and by the prices that are observed 
there and subsequently amplified by the news media. What do we mean by “amplified” in 
this context? The media weave stories around price movements, and when those 
movements are upward, the media tend to embellish and legitimize “new era” stories with 
extra attention and detail. Feedback loops appear, as price increases encourage belief in 
“new era” stories, promote the contagion of those stories, and so lead to further price 
increases. The price–story–price loop repeats again and again during a speculative 
 
38

bubble. 
The feedback loops also take the form of price–economic activity–price loops. 
Speculative price increases encourage genuine economic optimism, hence more 
spending, hence greater economic growth, hence yet more optimism, hence further 
bidding up of prices. Most persons can be forgiven for not seeing that the sense of 
economic prosperity that usually attends a major speculative bubble is actually caused by 
the bubble itself and not by economic fundamentals. 
Under certain circumstances the explanations for contagion and feedback during 
speculative bubbles may be perfectly rational, and “rational bubbles” can be part of the 
story. A number of economic theorists have discussed the possibility of such bubbles. 
The essential element of these rational bubble theories is that people may learn 
about the information that others have by observing their behavior. They cannot respond 
directly to the information that others have, since they cannot see inside their heads. But 
they may base their own decisions on the actions of others (as when they bid up 
speculative prices), which they interpret, wholly rationally, as reflecting valid 
information about economic fundamentals. 
The problem is that we can arrive at a situation in which people are generally 
adopting an excessively optimistic (or excessively pessimistic) view, because they are 
rationally but mistakenly judging the information that others have. To borrow a term used 
by economic theorists Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 
speculative bubbles may be caused by “information cascades.” An information cascade 
occurs when those in a group disregard their own independent, individually collected 
information (which might otherwise encourage them not to subscribe to a boom or other 
 
39

mass belief) because they feel that everyone else simply couldn’t be wrong. And when 
they disregard their own independent information, and act instead on general information 
as they perceive it, they squelch their own information. It is no longer available to the 
group and so does not figure in further collective judgments. Thus, over time, the quality 
of group information declines. 
Psychological, epidemiological, and economic theory all point to an environment 
in which feedback of enthusiasm for speculative assets, or feedback of price increases 
into further price increases, can be expected to produce speculative bubbles from time to 
time. They make clear that these bubbles can have complicated—sometimes random and 
unpredictable—dynamics. 
Other “Causes” of the Bubble 
The interpretation of the bubble that I have just offered is not the conventional 
wisdom. Other factors are widely cited as the cause of the housing boom. I argue here 
that, to a large extent, these other factors were themselves substantially a product of the 
bubble, and not exogenous factors that caused the bubble. 
The U.S. Federal Reserve cut its key rate, the federal funds rate, to 1% in mid-
2003 and held it there until mid-2004, roughly the period of most rapid home-price 
increase. Moreover, the real (inflation-corrected) federal funds rate was negative for 
thirty-one months, from October 2002 to April 2005, an interval again centered on the 
most rapid rise in home prices. Since 1950 the only other period of low rates as long as 
this one was the thirty-seven-month interval from September 1974 to September 1977. 
We should not, however, view this period of very loose monetary policy as an 
exogenous cause of the bubble. For the monetary policy—both that of the Fed and that of 
 
40

other central banks around the world—was driven by economic conditions that were 
created by the bursting of the stock market bubble of the 1990s, and the real estate boom 
was itself in some ways a repercussion of that same stock market bubble. 
This loose policy would not have been implemented if Alan Greenspan and others 
involved with monetary policy had comprehended that we were going through a housing 
bubble that would burst. Thus the monetary policy appears to have been driven at least in 
part by the same lack of understanding that produced the bubble itself. The Fed was 
excessively focused on preventing recession and deflation because they honestly saw the 
home-price increases as continuing—if at a reduced pace—indefinitely, even if they were 
to implement a monetary policy that would feed the bubble. 
The interest rate cuts cannot explain the general nine-year upward trend that we 
have seen in the housing market. The housing boom period was three times as long as the 
period of low interest rates, and the housing boom was accelerating when the Fed was 
increasing interest rates in 1999. Moreover, long-term interest rates, which determine the 
rates for fixed-rate conventional mortgages, did not respond in any meaningful way to 
these rate cuts until 2001–03. 
The impact of the loose monetary policy was amplified by the large number of 
adjustable-rate mortgages issued after 2000, particularly to subprime borrowers. These 
mortgages were more responsive than fixed-rate mortgages to the cuts that the Fed had 
made. So the rate cuts might have had the effect of boosting the boom, more than would 
otherwise have been the case, during its time of most rapid ascent, around 2004. 
Adjustable-rate mortgages were common because those who had been influenced 
by bubble thinking and wanted to get into real estate investments as heavily as possible 
 
41

were demanding them. The mere fact that interest payments would be going up soon did 
not deter them. They expected to be compensated by rapidly increasing home prices, and 
they believed that those higher prices would permit them to refinance at a lower rate. 
Subprime borrowers wanted these mortgages in disproportionate numbers both because 
they were less quantitatively sophisticated and because they were consumed by the mere 
thought of somehow gaining a foothold in the housing market. 
The demand for loans made with more flexible standards was accommodated by 
lenders because they themselves (as well as the investors in the mortgages that they sold 
off) believed in the bubble. That is why the period of soaring real estate prices 
corresponded to a time when no-documentation loans became common and when option 
ARMs and other questionable new mortgage types proliferated. 
Moreover, the rating agencies that pass judgment on securitized mortgages 
persisted in giving AAA ratings to mortgage securities that ultimately were vulnerable 
because they too believed that there would be no bursting of the bubble. Even if they did 
harbor some doubts about the continuation of the boom, they were not about to take the 
drastic step of cutting ratings on securitized mortgage products on the basis of the theory, 
not widely held, that home prices might actually fall. That would have been an unusually 
courageous step—and one that was all too easily postponed in favor of other business 
decisions that were easier to make, until it was too late. 
Another factor often mentioned as a cause of the housing bubble is the failure of 
regulators to rein in aggressive lending. Ever since the Depository Institutions 
Deregulatory and Monetary Control Act of 1980 effectively ended state usury laws, and 
made it possible for originators to make a profit with subprime lending by charging a 
 
42

high enough interest rate to offset the costs of the inevitable defaults and foreclosures, 
there had been a need for expanding the scope of regulation. Yet the expanded regulation 
never came, and over time during the 1990s and into the 2000s, a “shadow banking 
system” of nonbank mortgage originators was allowed to develop without anything like 
the regulation to which banks are subject. 
But the lack of urgency among regulators in doing their job must ultimately have 
originated in their inability to believe that there could ever be a housing crisis of the 
proportions we are seeing today. 
When I gave talks near the peak of the bubble in 2005 at the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, both major 
bank regulators in the United States, I found staff members there in disagreement about 
what to do about the lending boom. I urged them to take prompt action to stop the excess 
of mortgage lending that was feeding an unsustainable bubble. The reaction I got was 
that, yes, they understood that maybe they should, and that indeed some among them 
thought so, but that it was just taking time—and negotiation—to arrive at any strong 
consensus. I had the feeling that many of them viewed me, with my argument that the 
bubble would burst, as an extremist who deserved a skeptical response. 
When in October 2006 I participated in a panel sponsored by the Yale Investment 
Club, I shared the dais with Frank Nothaft, chief economist at Freddie Mac, a major 
securitizer of home mortgages. As I recall the event now, I asked him if Freddie Mac had 
stress-tested the impact on itself of a possible housing price decline. He answered that 
they had, and they had even considered the possibility of a 13.4% national drop in home 
prices. I protested: “What about the possibility of a drop that is bigger than that?” He 
 
43

answered that such a drop had never happened, at least not since the Great Depression. 
During the housing market debacle after the 1980s home-price boom, the U.S. 
government passed the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act 
of 1992 (GSE Act), which in turn created the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise 
Oversight (OFHEO) to oversee the risks to such government-sponsored enterprises as 
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. One of OFHEO’s objectives, specified in the act, was to 
prevent even the possibility of a financial freeze-up. OFHEO is still with us today, 
watching out for possible systemic risks. The GSE Act required that OFHEO develop a 
stress test that simulates possible adverse interest rate and credit risk scenarios, and 
OFHEO has done so. 
However, in its annual reports to Congress through 2007, OFHEO never showed 
any recognition of the housing boom that has been the main cause of the risks, let alone 
any understanding of its psychological origins. These regulators did not seem to see the 
risk, and they allowed Freddie and Fannie to go on supporting the housing boom. 
Ultimately an important reason why all these factors fed the bubble has to be that 
the very people responsible for oversight were caught up in the same high expectations 
for future home-price increases that the general public had. In many cases they may not 
have believed as zealously in the housing boom, but they nevertheless accepted the 
received wisdom that it could not end badly. And that was the end of the story. 
Disarray and Financial Freeze-Up 
Evidence that institutions never expected these costly defaults can be seen in the 
total disarray in which many found themselves as the subprime market melted down. For 
example, by the end of 2007 banks were begging to be relieved from the requirements of 
 
44

Financial Accounting Standard 114. This rule, issued by the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board, requires banks to report bad loans (so-called impaired loans) based on 
the present value of future cash flows. It is an attempt to standardize the reporting of such 
liabilities and thus make it harder to conceal them in regulatory filings. The banks 
protested that they had never developed the computing power to handle the volume of 
such loan restructuring. They didn’t develop it because they absolutely did not see the 
crisis coming. 
This disarray is shown most clearly in the financial freeze-up that we have been 
experiencing around the world. Businesses of all varieties, in many countries, left their 
balance sheets vulnerable to changes in the prices of assets that were—directly or 
indirectly—tied to the real estate market. 
The weakening of credit standards that led to this situation is part of the normal 
process of a speculative bubble, as was argued long ago by economists Hyman Minsky 
and Charles Kindleberger. In a climate of excessive optimism, people tend to take full 
advantage of a strong economy instead of protecting themselves from the possibility of a 
major correction—an eventuality that seems to them utterly remote. 
Changes in the Thinking That Creates Bubbles 
So the new belief that investing in homes was just an awfully good idea fed the 
bubble after the late 1990s. But, one wonders, why did this happen just then? Why had 
such thinking not caught on, nationally or internationally, before? What made bubble 
thinking especially contagious after 2000? 
It is not as if people were not interested in speculation before 2000. Hardly. In 
fact, land speculation was a widespread and well-known phenomenon, going far back 
 
45

into history. 
In his 1932 book The Great American Land Bubble: The Amazing Story of Land-
Grabbing, Speculations,and Booms from Colonial Days to the Present Time, the historian 
Aaron Sakolski argued that an atmosphere of speculation dates back to the beginnings of 
U.S. history. The opening line of the book says it all: “America, from its inception, was a 
speculation.”** It was widely perceived by the eighteenth century, Sakolski argued, that 
America would eventually be populated much more densely by vast numbers of 
immigrants. Land speculators from the late 1600s onward would buy thousands of acres 
for a shilling an acre and hope to sell them many years later to immigrants, doubling or 
tripling their money. There were waves of speculative mania, and land apparently 
sometimes became overpriced, leading to drops and to the ruination of speculators. 
Indeed the fever for land speculation infected some in the highest places. No less an early 
American than George Washington, according to Sakolski, was a land speculator. 
Homer Hoyt, in his 1933 book One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago: 
The Relationship of the Growth of Chicago to the Rise in Its Land Values, 1830–1933, 
paints a similar picture of speculation in land values in the city of Chicago. But, like 
Sakolski, Hoyt was talking about land speculation (in choice lots and blocks within the 
Chicago metropolitan area), not about individual homeowners buying homes in the hope 
of making a profit. 
It is not coincidental, by the way, that both of these classic accounts of real estate 
speculation appeared right at the peak of the last great real estate crisis in the 1930s. That 
was when the public was most interested in real estate speculation. We have entered 
another era of heightened attention to real estate speculation, and new books about 
 
46

housing speculation have been appearing in great numbers. The focus on the real estate 
market that has increased the social contagion of bubble thinking appears to be related to 
the aftereffects of the stock market boom of the 1990s. 
That boom involved a transformation of people’s thinking about their role in the 
economy. The idea developed that we ought to expect to make a lot of money investing. 
The transformation went well beyond opinions about particular investment strategies to 
alter the very self-esteem mechanism that supports our egos. The Protestant work ethic 
that had underlain the national psyche for so long underwent a makeover. To a substantial 
extent, we no longer admired those who were merely hard workers. To be truly revered, 
one had to be a smart investor as well. 
Since the 1990s we have also come increasingly to think that the movers and 
shakers of the world are smart investors too. We began to believe that nascent capitalism 
in China, India, Russia, Brazil, and other less-advanced countries was producing a vast 
new class of the wealthy, who would bid up the price of real estate and other assets that 
were in limited supply. Of course these countries really were developing. The mistake 
was in exaggerating the significance of these stories of emerging capitalism for the real 
estate market of today. 
What is different with the recent bubble, in comparison with earlier bubbles, is 
that the “new era” story is one of economic pressures that will raise the price of every 
available piece of real estate. Real estate bubbles from other times in history have always 
been relatively local, and the story that was seen to explain the bubble did not generalize 
to cover real estate everywhere. 
The Florida land bubble that peaked in 1925, the biggest real estate bubble during 
 
47

the first half of the twentieth century, apparently spread a good deal beyond Florida, but 
it nevertheless had a relatively modest effect on urban home prices nationwide. National 
real home prices increased only 19% between 1921 and the peak of the bubble in 1925. 
The story then was essentially that Florida was being discovered, as the automobile 
proliferated, as an accessible place, and that land there was running out. That story would 
never be seen as justifying a boom in Cincinnati or Toronto. 
Local housing booms certainly occurred long ago. There were housing booms 
even in the legendary days when the cowboys and Indians still roamed the American 
West. How could there have been a housing boom then, when the American West was 
still very much a frontier and land was extraordinarily abundant? But there was—in 
southern California, when people from all over the country converged there to speculate 
in homes. And, yes, there was a story then about California that justified the bubble, once 
again a story that did not generalize to other states. 
The California bubble built up in the 1880s, peaked in 1887, and burst in 1888. 
Newspapers around the United States wrote abundantly about it as it happened, and the 
articles repeatedly praised the wonderful climate, beautiful scenery, and California 
lifestyle. 
On the other hand there was also a great deal of contemporary skepticism as to 
why the California boom had assumed the proportions it did. A story in the Los Angeles 
Times of December 27, 1887, entitled “The Southern Boom,” recounted the observations 
of one reporter from out of town: 
<COMP: Next three paras are an extract, but no tag provided for same in style 
sheet linked to this file as received.> 
 
48

At Los Angeles, the true home of the boom, you arrive at the hotel and are 
told they can give you meals but no bed. You scowl, scratch your head, and wish 
that every fool had not come to town the same day that you did. You sally forth, 
and at last are given a cot in the hall, and you are happy. 
In the morning you start out to see the sights, and you begin to see them 
within the first block you go, and the further on you travel the more you see. You 
are continually inclined to paraphrase the old song “Mine eyes have seen the glory 
of the lord” with “Mine eyes have seen the marvel of the boom.” But they have not. 
You can travel around for days in Los Angeles and not see it all. It is useless to 
attempt to describe it. As well try to count the stars in Heaven as to number the new 
buildings in construction at the present time. . . . 
“What has done all this?” you ask. We answer: “The boom.” “Well, what is 
the boom?” you inquire. We made the same inquiry of dozens of men in all 
avocations of life, and none could give us an answer. We were told it is something 
unprecedented in the financial and economic experience of the country. We asked 
if it would last, and were told that as it came unbidden, it would probably be as 
erratic in its going.†† 
The talk reported in this article is much the same as that we heard in the 2000s, 
with the same amazement about the price surge and the resulting construction activity, 
the same puzzlement about why it was happening. 
Judging from newspaper stories written around the United States during the boom 
of the 1880s, the boom was national in the sense that everyone around the country had 
heard of it, and many from other states were rushing to southern California to participate 
 
49

in it. But there was no suggestion that it was national in the sense that people thought it 
would infect their city. For the story accompanying this boom always stressed that this 
was a California boom, and that it was driven by the appreciation of the rare beauty and 
climate of that area. 
Still there are puzzles. California is a vast area, and the wonderful climate covers 
much of this area, and there was abundant farmland and raw land in the 1880s on which 
new homes could be built. But it must have seemed somehow plausible to many that the 
cities of California were shaping up to be such unique and desirable places that homes 
there were uniquely valuable and would stay that way. 
How else could they justify paying high prices for a home in the 1880s in a 
California city when they could buy a huge farm just a short distance away? In a way, of 
course, they were right: urban areas in southern California today remain very important—
hubs of social, cultural, and economic activity. The error in thinking then was one of 
proportion—of thinking that prices would rise so much and so fast from the 1880s going 
forward. It was also an error of attribution—of attributing the sudden rise in prices to the 
abrupt recognition around the country of the importance of the cities of California, rather 
than to the psychological effects of the boom. As we have seen, there were some who 
seemed to understand the psychology of the boom, and some of them even wrote for 
newspapers. But plenty of others just didn’t get it, and they were not astute enough 
judges of human nature to realize that they were being caught up in a vortex of 
extraordinary market psychology. They were the ones who bought properties and drove 
the boom. 
A boom needs a story—one that people will believe, one that justifies the price 
 
50

increases as something other than temporary aberrations. Not everyone has to believe the 
story, as long as enough do to drive up the market. 
The failures in understanding the true nature of the bubble are never credible as 
rational responses to information, for they are at their heart stories of contagion of 
thought. A story that can be constructed to justify a bubble and that sounds somehow 
superficially plausible to some segment of the population becomes amplified and 
contagious by the very fact of the bubble. 
Understanding Public Thinking during the Recent Bubble 
What has changed since the 1990s to suddenly make us avid speculators in homes 
in so many different places? Trying to answer that question requires that we go back to 
consider the forces that generate bubbles. Why was there a tulip mania in Holland in the 
1630s—and why has the speculative fascination with tulips since left our collective 
consciousness? 
I discussed this subject at some length in Irrational Exuberance, especially its 
second edition, and I present only some basic ideas here. There is something about the 
current collection of easily recalled views and ideas that encourages bubble thinking 
about homes, though it is hard to pin down. One factor is that the “new era” story we 
have been experiencing during this massive housing bubble somehow conflates land 
values with housing values. This admixture is in part simply the result of the bubble 
itself. It used to be that the underlying land typically constituted only 15% or so of the 
value of a home in a typical city. So people thought of their homes as depreciating 
manufactured goods, like cars and boats, which require a lot of upkeep and eventually go 
out of style. But now that land value (defined as the price of a home minus the estimated 
 
51

cost of building the structure) is often over 50% of home value, we are starting to think of 
houses as if they are land. Since we see homes every day, there is a naturally high 
contagion rate, during a new bubble, for a story that describes homes as the best 
investment one can make. 
The error that we are making is to think of this situation of heightened land values 
as a new equilibrium. There will be a natural process of finding ways to build homes on 
less land, or less expensive land. This can be achieved either through building higher-
density housing, such as more and taller apartment buildings or infill development in 
urban centers, or founding new urban areas. But such considerations are three steps ahead 
of the average home buyer’s thinking. 
In fact there is plenty of cheap land available. The new thinking is that the land in 
cities is somehow very different from land elsewhere, that we cannot substitute cheaper 
land for expensive urban land, even in the long run, and that that will justify the very high 
expectations for its future price. This is such an important part of our bubble thinking that 
the next chapter will consider it at length. 
The Forecastability of Housing Prices 
To understand the recent home-price bubble, it is necessary to reflect on the 
amazingly high level of forecastability of home prices. The housing market is totally 
different from the stock market, where prices more nearly resemble a “random walk.” In 
the stock market, prices may go up one day and down the next, with relatively little 
apparent pattern. But, with housing, the market seemed to go in the same direction year 
after year. U.S. home prices increased every year from 1997 to 2006. The rate of increase 
of home prices, which was negative in 1991, increased at a generally increasing rate in 
 
52

most years until 2005—a fourteen-year run of mostly increasing rates of increase of 
home prices. 
Bubble thinking means thinking that the trend in prices will continue. Such 
thinking is mostly irrational for the stock market, since price trends are usually not 
consistent there. But, oddly, it seems quite rational for the housing market, at least when 
it is at the height of a boom. Looking at any of the figures in the last chapter, one is struck 
by how easy it has often been to forecast the housing market in recent decades. 
Karl Case and I first confirmed this forecastability of home prices in an article we 
wrote for the American Economic Review in 1989. The real innovation in that article was 
our repeat-sales home-price index, which showed for the first time how home prices have 
actually been behaving. My former student Allan Weiss wanted to put this index into 
practice, and so in 1991 we set up a company, Case Shiller Weiss Inc., which he headed, 
to produce the indices. We sold the company in 2002 to Fiserv Inc., which now produces 
the indices, and they have been further developed and continue to be issued by Standard 
& Poor’s. 
The home-price index that was most talked about when company, the simple 
median of home prices published by the National Association of Realtors, was very noisy 
because there were rapid changes in the mix of sales from month to month. Large or 
high-quality houses may sell in one month, small or low-quality houses in another, and so 
the series looked noisy, just like the stock market. But when Case and I cleared out the 
noise by basing our index only on changes in prices of individual homes, thereby 
eliminating this mix problem, we found that home prices move exceptionally smoothly 
through time. 
 
53

How can prices be so forecastable? Isn’t it supposed to be very hard to forecast 
speculative prices, and aren’t such prices supposed to at least approximate a random 
walk? Yet our statistical analysis confirmed that home prices are quite forecastable. 
But how can this be? Isn’t this the proverbial “money left on the table” that, 
according to economic theory, just should not happen? Couldn’t somebody make a lot of 
money simply buying property in a housing boom and selling a year or so later? How can 
it have been so easy to make money in real estate? 
The answer is, in fact it was easy to make money in real estate during the boom in 
the 2000s—if one understood the momentum in home prices. Apparently, with better 
home-price data being published in the 1990s, some smart-money investors decided to 
take a flyer on this booming market, and those who did it and got out in time generally 
did succeed. It shouldn’t have been that hard to get out in time, either. We had two years 
of warning of a slowdown before prices actually started dropping. 
This apparent profit opportunity was an important cause of the bubble, in that it 
sustained the feedback that generated the bubble. Indeed people were thinking that they 
could make a lot of money by buying housing, since they had seen others do it, year after 
year. 
Then why did so many get caught by the bubble? They stopped seeing the bubble 
as a case of simple momentum that one could ride for a while but that must be exited 
before the market reversed course. Instead they came to believe the story that the boom 
would never end, as we shall see in the next chapter. 
 
54

The Real Estate Myth 
4 
The recent bubble has greatly encouraged public belief in a long-standing myth—the 
myth that, because of population growth and economic growth, and with limited land 
resources available, the price of real estate must inevitably trend strongly upward through 
time. 
Since the late 1990s people have increasingly come to believe in our existing 
cities—in their uniqueness, in their special status. As we saw in Chapter 3, the strength of 
this belief seems to be associated more with the idea that the increasingly capitalist world 
is growing rapidly richer than with the observation that simple population growth is at 
work in producing higher prices. 
Indeed the GDP of advanced countries has been increasing at about 3% a year for 
many decades, and it stands a good chance of continuing to do so over the long run. The 
rate of GDP growth is even higher in less-developed countries. This might suggest to 
some that real home prices should rise at a similar rate. In fact that is not what has been 
happening, and it is not likely to happen in the future. 
The fraction of incomes that is spent on housing in the national income accounts 
has been fairly constant over the decades—but the rising incomes are expressed not in 
rising home prices but in increasing amounts of housing consumed. 
 If one looks squarely at the issue, it is clear that the rise in value of existing urban 
areas has shown no tendency at all to make investors rich. If the real prices of homes had 

risen at just 3% a year over the past century, then we could generally not afford houses 
that are any better or bigger today than we could then. But we know that homes have in 
fact gotten much larger and better. 
According to the U.S. Census, the average floor area in new one-family houses 
rose from 1,525 square feet in 1973 to 2,248 square feet in 2006, almost a 50% increase. 
And floor space is only one measure of home quality. 
One can compare the average price of a new home with the Constant Quality 
Index of Home Prices, computed by the U.S. Census Bureau since the 1960s. The 
average nominal price of a new home rose by a factor of 8.605 in the thirty-five years 
between 1963 and 1998. (I chose a time period ending before the recent bubble, to avoid 
distortions.) But the Constant Quality Index of New Home Prices, also computed by the 
Census Bureau, rose by a factor of only 5.928. The ratio of those two factors is 1.452, 
which could be interpreted to mean that new homes were 45% better overall in 1998 than 
they were in 1963. By this measure, then, the rate of growth in new home quality was 
1.1% a year. This is a good fraction of the growth of real per capita income over that 
interval, which was 2.4% a year. Moreover, average household size fell from 3.29 
persons in the 1960 census to 2.63 persons in the 1990 census, a decline of 0.7% a year. 
We were able to spend our increased incomes on bigger homes and in spreading out 
among more homes. And we still had money left over to improve our standard of living 
in other ways, such as traveling more, spending more on entertainment, and demanding 
better health care. It is very clear that we were not struggling with relentless increases in 
home prices that even kept pace with our income. 
 
56

Construction of New Homes—Outside the Glamour Cities 
The economist William Baumol has posited what has come to be known as 
Baumol’s law: the costs of those goods or services whose production is amenable to 
technological progress will tend to decline over time relative to the costs of goods or 
services that are by their nature not so amenable to technological progress. Thus, for 
example, the cost of education (which relies on traditional classroom teaching, not 
something that is heavily benefited by technological progress) will tend to increase over 
time relative to the cost of manufactured goods (whose production can be improved with 
new tools, methods, and materials). Baumol’s law therefore suggests that the price of 
homes (at least the structure component of home prices) should fall over time. 
Yet the actual building costs for which we have records do not show such a 
downward trend over the whole century plotted in Figure 2.1, although they did from 
1900 to the Depression of the 1930s and over the past twenty years. Clearly, at least the 
spirit of Baumol’s law is being followed: home prices have not shown a strong or 
consistent upward trend before the bubble that started in the 1990s. 
Of course land cannot be built; except for a few artificial islands in Dubai and 
some other suitable places, the quantity of land is fixed forever. But land is just one input 
into the production of homes, and if higher land prices in urban areas are pushing up 
home prices, then there is an incentive for builders to find alternatives to heavy use of 
this scarce resource. 
They can build more densely in urban areas. While there are political forces 
arguing against increased density (notably the owners of existing homes, who see such 
construction as a threat to their home values), it is hard to believe that those forces can 
 
57

win out in the long run, given the moral argument for supplying people with homes and 
the persistence of developers in pursuing opportunities to ply their craft. 
And there is a great deal of land to expand to. According to the U.S. Census for 
the year 2000, urban land area accounts for only 2.6% of total land area in the United 
States. The high value of homes in major cities is accounted for by their location relative 
to the built environment, not the unique value of the land. That kind of environment can 
be reproduced by planned and coordinated efforts. 
Urban Patriotism and Parochialism 
The belief in so-called glamour cities as loci for fantastic real estate investments 
has a tinge of patriotic feeling behind it. Many seem to consider their own city as 
possessing an illusory greatness, to an unhealthy extent. 
I had the pleasure of giving an outdoor lunchtime talk to an international group of 
investment professionals at the beautiful seaside resort of Ozdere, near Izmir, Turkey. In 
these pristine surroundings, with a spectacular view over the Aegean Sea to the Greek 
island of Samos, where the mathematician Pythagoras and the astronomer Aristarchus 
once lived, I told them about the incredible loyalty that people often show to their own 
homelands. For example, I told them of Californians’ feelings about their home state. I 
explained that they are very proud of their pleasant weather and beautiful scenery. 
Californians often say “everyone wants to live here.” I know they say that in great 
numbers, because they write it with some regularity on questionnaires I have sent out 
asking the recipients to comment on the real estate situation in their home states. 
 
58

I asked the assembled group in Turkey for a show of hands: “Would you really 
rather be in California?” No one raised a hand. Probably many of these individuals in 
Turkey have little knowledge of all the beautiful places in California, just as Californians 
have little knowledge of all the beautiful places in Turkey. The belief that we are unique 
(psychologists call it the spotlight effect) encourages thoughts that one’s own city is more 
special than it is. 
Loyalty to one’s city or state may sound like a good thing, and perhaps that is 
what programs to promote homeownership are supposed to foster. But it also produces 
speculative bubbles, and California has been the bubbliest state in America. 
The solution to this problem is to open up the real estate marketplace to the hard 
glare of market discipline. We must democratize our markets, as I shall discuss in 
Chapter 6. Turks—indeed people from all over the world—will be more than happy to 
sell California real estate short during the next bubble, once markets are liquid enough 
that they can do so. And that will help prevent mispricings such as those that contributed 
to the subprime crisis. Such an open market won’t prevent all bubbles, of course, but it 
will most likely enable a system of checks and balances that would prevent a repetition of 
the extraordinary run-up of home prices, and attendant phenomena in the credit markets, 
that we have seen recently. 
Construction Costs: Myth and Reality 
There has been a lot of casual talk during the bubble about “exploding 
construction costs” in much the same way as there has been talk about running out of 
 
59

land. This talk has fed the impression that we may be running out of building materials, 
and that this scarcity will make homes much more expensive in the future. 
The building cost index that appears in Figure 2.1 does not confirm this scenario, 
although some other cost measures did show jumps during the bubble, probably 
reflecting construction bottlenecks. For example, during a housing boom there tends to be 
a shortage of skilled construction workers, until we eventually train more of them. But 
the real time period for judging home prices is the long run. Are we really running out of 
building materials? 
The main materials from which dwellings are made today are lumber, plaster, 
concrete, glass, and steel. How close is the world to running out of these? 
Lumber is a renewable resource; it cannot be exhausted. Our principal 
commercial forests are managed on a continuing basis. Population pressures have not 
been high in lumber-producing regions. Technical progress has been making the use of 
lumber more efficient, relying on optimal harvesting rather than clear-cutting, 
computerized sawmills that reduce waste, improved types of particleboard, and other 
innovations. Indeed global warming is considered likely, if anything, to increase the 
supply of lumber. Genetic engineering may improve the growth rate of trees. 
Gypsum, the main ingredient of plaster and wallboard, is a very common mineral. 
The White Sands National Monument in New Mexico, famed for its views of massive 
white gypsum-sand dunes as far as the eye can see, contains 275 square miles of nearly 
pure gypsum sand. Although this particular site is protected, it is worth noting that White 
 
60

Sands alone would be enough to supply the world’s construction industry for hundreds of 
years. 
Limestone, the principal ingredient of the cement used for concrete, represents 
approximately 10% of all sedimentary rock formations on earth. 
Glass is made primarily, and sometimes entirely, from quartz. Quartz is the 
second most common mineral in the earth’s crust. 
Iron, the major ingredient of steel, is the fourth most abundant element on the 
earth’s surface, constituting 5% of the surface. It is true that hematite, a popular ore, has 
been largely depleted in many countries, and fears of running out of iron were expressed 
there, especially during the two world wars. But there are many other sources and types 
of ores. Additional iron can come from the recycling of motor vehicles, bridges, the 
structural components of large buildings, ships, and other scrap materials. 
Any of these building materials, should there be a shortage, could be replaced 
with others. We can build homes without significant amounts of lumber or plaster, or 
without concrete, or without steel, or even without glass. In the history of housing, many 
materials have been used to build homes, including mud, sod, straw, bamboo, paper, 
snow—even wooly mammoth tusks, bones, and hides. In the future, just as we found 
substitutes for the wooly mammoth materials, we will find substitutes for any of our 
current favorites that run short. We can in fact expect to see far more imaginative 
alternatives than in the past, as technology continues to advance at an ever greater pace. 
 
61

Of course, the biggest single component of housing construction costs is labor. 
But with the productivity of labor in manufacturing growing, again thanks to 
technological progress, at roughly 2% a year, these costs too should decline substantially 
as a fraction of our incomes. 
There are some concerns that shortages of energy or water may inhibit the 
construction of new homes. To the extent that that is so, it argues for investing in energy 
or water supplies, rather than homes, which are priced separately. 
As the world develops, we are certainly going to be faced with shortages of some 
things. But it is hard to foresee that housing will be high on the list. The demand for 
housing is a demand for shelter, a space to have a family and raise children that is close 
to a job and schools, a place to eat and sleep in privacy. It is a demand for those services, 
not for any single resource such as lumber or concrete. One of the most basic lessons of 
economics is that when one resource becomes scarce, people will find substitutes for it. 
There are so many different resources available to provide construction materials that it is 
hard to believe that housing services will become relatively more scarce than anything 
else. 
The public, of course, does not understand this basic economic fact. And this lack 
of understanding has helped produce a massive speculative bubble based on a faulty 
impression that we are running out of the resources used in home construction. 
 
62

Massive Urban Planning 
The scarcity value that homes convey is due to a perceived scarcity of urban 
centers. But new urban centers, new towns or cities, can be built from scratch. 
The new urbanism movement, which began in the 1980s, has attempted to counter 
the urban sprawl that represented the chief mode of growth of the built environment in 
the United States and other countries for the past half century. Suburbs are built up 
around existing major cities; they lack effective town centers, spread out so much that 
they consume large amounts of land, and force residents to rely on the automobile for an 
increasingly difficult commute into the center city. 
The new urbanism as originally conceived was often about building small town 
and neighborhood centers. More recently some urban theorists have stressed the need to 
build entirely new large urban centers. 
Christopher Leinberger, for example, has argued that there is a significant unmet 
demand for large, walkable urban centers—little Manhattans, so to speak. There is high 
demand, he argues, for well-designed urban centers in general, not just the existing ones. 
A great many persons like to live in crowded cities, where the vitality of human activity 
makes for a stimulating life. We are a gregarious species, and most of us are happy to 
confine our visits to the wilderness to a few well-planned vacations. 
People appreciate living in a walkable city, where opportunities of every sort are 
within a pleasant stroll through an agreeable environment amidst interesting crowds. 
 
63

Some of the world’s great cities come to mind: London, New York, Paris, Tokyo. The 
key idea is to build new ones, and on a large scale. This is a demand that can in fact be 
met. It requires only sustained and coordinated effort. 
There is indeed ample historical precedent for such new urban construction. The 
creation of new capital cities, built from scratch in relatively rural areas, has set the 
example. Washington, D.C., was built in this way starting in the 1790s, and it is now a 
major metropolis in which property is highly valued. Brasilia, Canberra, and Islamabad 
were built in the same way. The high urban property values in these cities are proof of the 
concept: we can build vital, thriving, new urban centers away from the congestion of the 
existing ones. 
There are an increasing number of private examples as well. One is Reston Town 
Center, near Washington, D.C., built by Robert E. Simon (whose initials form the first 
syllable of the name of the city). His efforts began in the 1960s, and the Town Center was 
dedicated in 1990. It is a cluster of high-rise buildings placed in what was then a rural 
area. It apparently has enough of the qualities of a more traditional city that real estate 
there has begun to command high prices. And high real estate prices will increasingly 
promote a supply response, with new urban areas like Reston Town Center being 
developed to meet demand. 
There are more recent examples as well. Mesa del Sol, near Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, is now being built on twenty-five square miles of undeveloped land by Forest 
City Enterprises and Covington Capital Partners, and the plans include bringing in jobs 
and industries that will provide the new city with a unique character. The city will be 
 
64

particularly distinguished by serving as home to a motion picture industry. It is planned 
to accommodate residents from all income levels, avoiding the common modern problem 
of service workers who cannot afford to live in the city whose residents they serve. 
In China, the new city of Dongtan is being built on an island just off the coast of 
Shanghai. Designed by the British firm Arup Group, it is planned to be home to half a 
million people by 2050. It will be a walkable city—indeed the plans call for conventional 
cars to be banned from Dongtan altogether. 
When I was recently in Russia I met an executive involved with the construction 
of the new city of Konstantinovo, which is being built just outside Moscow. At twelve 
square miles, it is about half the size of Mesa del Sol. It too will be a carefully planned 
community. Coincidentally its planners are also designing it to be home to a motion 
picture industry. The Russian executive I met said that he had never heard of Mesa del 
Sol, yet the two cities show substantial similarities. Creative minds all over the world are 
looking at the problem of congested cities and doing something about it, ultimately 
because of the expressed demand, the existence of modern construction technology, and 
progress in urban design theory. 
These new urban projects are part of a long-run trend that will work against 
accelerating home prices. It is not that there isn’t a shortage of land in the places 
surrounding the areas most people favor today. It is instead that the history of the world 
has for centuries seen the development of more and more land, the more intensive use of 
it, and migration to exploit the availability of land in other areas and other countries. 
 
65

Moreover, world political history has been significantly driven by resentment of the 
economic inequality that arises from the privileges of property owners at the expense of 
others. In an effort to address that inequality, land reforms that change the laws relating 
to ownership have occurred with some regularity. 
Indeed the subprime crisis in the United States is itself, in a sense, the result of 
another such land reform: the U.S. government’s intensifying commitment to promote 
homeownership, a major theme in recent elections. The regulatory tolerance in the 1990s 
and 2000s of loose lending practices sprang from that policy goal. More generally, the 
land use restrictions that create wealth for existing landowners and homeowners by 
preventing new construction are politically fragile, and they tend eventually to be 
overturned. 
At present, there is no foreseeable end to these safety valves that would justify a 
major home-price surge. By planning around the problems that beset major urban centers, 
we can create new urban centers that will be, if not quite as big as the old centers, more 
numerous and in many ways better. These new centers will eventually compete with the 
old centers and steal much of their value, bringing home prices down in those locations. 
Short-Run and Long-Run Responses 
There has been a peculiar tendency during this housing bubble (as with other 
bubbles) to regard price increases as generally good news. When I speak with news 
reporters of the outlook for declining home prices, I am often told that I am a Cassandra. 
But it is in no way bad news if home prices fall. If home prices go down relative to our 
 
66

incomes, we become wealthier, better able to invest in new homes. Most of us have 
children or even grandchildren, and they are usually more numerous than we. We care 
about them and about others in our society, and we want these others to be able to afford 
homes in the future. Scarcity is not good news—low prices are. 
The idea that public policy should be aimed at validating the real estate myth, 
preventing a collapse in home prices from ever happening, is an error of the first 
magnitude. In the short run a sudden drop in home prices may indeed disrupt the 
economy, producing undesirable systemic effects. But, in the long run, the home-price 
drops are clearly a good thing. 
This short run–long run paradox calls to mind an analogous paradox of Keynesian 
economic theory: in the short run we fear a sudden increase in the savings rate, which 
might trigger a recession, but in the long run we want a higher savings rate, because we 
need the resources for investment for the future. 
We must therefore consider the short run and the long run separately, and the 
policy responses to the two are very different. The next chapter focuses on short-run 
aspects of the subprime solution; the chapter after that proposes long-run solutions. 
 
67

A Bailout by Any Other Name 
5 
Virtually all the solutions to the subprime crisis already tried or already proposed in the 
United States have aspects of a bailout to them. This is true of the interest rate cuts by the 
Fed; the Fed’s lending to troubled institutions under the auspices of the TAF, the TSLF, 
and the PDCF; the tax rebate checks mailed out to individuals; the extension of loan 
limits by the FHA; and the extension of mortgage ceilings by the government-sponsored 
enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
Let us be clear about what the word bailout means. Actually the term has only 
recently acquired prominence, and the word itself is not yet even listed in the Oxford 
English Dictionary. A bailout is a rescue by the government or another entity of an 
irresponsible person or entity arising from a failure to follow rules or take reasonable 
precautionary steps. In the popular use of the term, a parent who offers a late-night meal 
to a child who refused to sit down at the family dinner, and is now whining about being 
hungry, is offering a bailout. 
The earliest use I could find of the word bailout in this sense, from a computer 
search of English-language newspapers, was in 1950, in the context of criticizing the 
activities of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, established during the Great 
Depression to rescue failing companies by lending them money. Prior to that, the term 
appears to have been used exclusively to refer to the act of a pilot parachuting from an 
airplane in trouble. 

Of course, any postcontract government action that invalidates a prior contract or 
expectation will be called unfair by some. In the nineteenth century the preferred 
expressions were the “sponge of insolvency” or “premium on hazard and overtrading.” 
But the term bailout is more intense, with its suggestion of abandoning an aircraft in 
midflight—leaving it to crash and burn on someone else. 
The term was rarely used until much more recently, and in its modern meaning it 
also connotes unfairness and lack of consistency. A bailout is unfair to those who, 
because they were more responsible, did not get into trouble and thus did not qualify for 
the bailout. The other child, who followed the rules and sat down to dinner at the 
appointed time, feels unappreciated. In the case of government financial bailouts, it is 
ultimately the taxpayer who is typically on the line to pay for the bailout. 
The use of the term bailout also often seems to connote deception of one sort or 
another. The parent who is bailing out the one child is hoping that the other child, who 
followed the rules, does not notice that the disobedient child is getting special attention. 
The disobedient child offers a phony excuse to justify having missed dinner. The parent 
may accept the phony excuse in front of the other child, to justify the bailout and simply 
keep the peace. The pattern of behavior may even become a sort of unacknowledged 
secret pact between parent and pampered child. But the obedient child sees the hypocrisy, 
feels wronged, and may be less motivated to follow rules in the future. 
When the subprime crisis prompted the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates 
sharply to protect failing companies, its actions were necessarily having the biggest effect 
on the most irresponsible or risk-taking companies, who were near failure. Cutting 
 
69

interest rates provides resources for them, but those resources do not magically appear. 
They come in part from those who are living off income from funds they have invested in 
short-term vehicles like money market funds or savings accounts. They will see their 
income decline. If the interest rate cuts ultimately result in higher inflation, then anyone 
who has assets denominated in currency terms will suffer. Like the parent giving more 
attention to the disobedient child, the Fed does not mention who will ultimately suffer as 
a result of the bailout. 
When the subprime crisis prompted the Federal Reserve to launch its TAF in 
December 2007 to rescue failing depository institutions, it was again aiding some of the 
less responsible institutions at the expense of others. Even though it takes the form of an 
auction open to all depository institutions, the TAF does enable the neediest among them 
to gain help at rates they could not obtain in the marketplace. If the Fed auctions off 
enough funds—and accepts, at taxpayers risk, collateral that is so compromised, with an 
insufficient discount—it is clearly a bailout. Essentially the same goes for the Fed’s 
lending programs, the TSLF and PDCF. With these, the rescue is truly historic, since for 
the first time since the 1930s it extends Fed bailouts beyond banks that are under the 
Fed’s direct supervision. With these programs the Federal Reserve is offering to take as 
collateral for loans securities, including subprime paper, for which there is no ready 
market. 
Obviously, if there existed a viable market offering a good price for those 
securities, the firms would simply sell them on that market. The Fed is offering 
something unavailable in the marketplace. The problem is that no one knows what the 
 
70

securities are worth, and so the Fed is effectively taking a risk by investing in securities 
that others would not touch. That is a bailout. The Fed does not emphasize that it is 
taking risks, and it claims that the collateral is appropriate for the loan, but the fact 
remains that the Fed is a government agency accepting securities that others would not 
take, at least on the same terms. 
Who is paying for this bailout? Of course, if the Fed never loses on this collateral 
no one will have to pay. But if losses on the collateral mean that there are not enough 
funds to cover the defaulted loans, this will be reflected in lower payments by the Fed to 
the federal government, hence ultimately either higher taxes for individuals, greater 
Federal debt, lower levels of government services, or some combination of these 
outcomes. 
When the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 was enacted, providing for the mailing 
of tax rebate checks to individual consumers, to stimulate them to make purchases, this 
was also, in a sense, a bailout. It was a bailout in part because the rebate checks were sent 
primarily to lower-income taxpayers, and not at all to higher-income taxpayers. The 
rebates will have to be paid for by higher taxes for all, predominantly those with higher 
incomes. 
Even disregarding the fact that the rebates were not mailed to high-income 
taxpayers, they are ultimately a sort of trick—if not an outright deception—relying for 
their intended result on the inability of most recipients to realize that the rebate check 
today will result in higher taxes in the future. Therefore the rebate has no real effect on 
 
71

lifetime after-tax income, and it should have no effect on consumption by a rational, far-
thinking person. 
Lower-income people may rightly suspect that the rebate check is really a gift to 
them, one that they will never have to pay for in higher taxes in the future. They should 
spend the money now, expecting further bailouts in the future—and indeed this 
consumption effect is why the government is giving proportionally larger rebate checks 
to them. 
When the government raised the loan limits for the FHA and the Veterans 
Administration, and for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, it sounded like a boon for troubled 
home buyers who could not qualify for a mortgage and for those who could not sell their 
homes to these buyers at a good price. But what is the ultimate source of that boon? The 
government is not in the business of creating wealth, merely taking it from one person 
and giving it to another. Who is ultimately paying for these actions? 
Not surprisingly, it is again the taxpayer, and that means the losers are 
disproportionately those people who have prudently been staying out of the housing 
market bubble. These government agencies and government-sponsored enterprises are 
ultimately, if not always officially, backed by the U.S. government. Should these 
mortgages default in the future, the taxpayer may well be made to bail them out again. 
That is what differentiates these entities from private businesses, and what makes it clear 
that this is a bailout. 
 
72

Why Some Bailouts Are Necessary Now 
Despite the unpleasant consequences just mentioned, the principal short-term 
remedy for the subprime crisis, is, unfortunately, some combination of bailouts. Of 
course, these may not work. Bailouts are focused—and focus public attention—on 
extreme cases, at the possible expense of the general taxpayer. While they prevent some 
dominoes from falling, they may also harm general confidence. The use of bailouts may 
be compared to trying to halt a disease epidemic by lavishing emergency care on the 
sickest and those nearest to death. But—given the magnitude of the subprime crisis, and 
the disproportionate extent to which its consequences fall on the less advantaged 
members of our society—bailouts must be attempted. It is this component of the 
subprime solution to which the rest of the chapter is devoted. 
Though they rarely use the word bailout, governments have long been in the 
business of managing risk for their citizens. In his 2002 book When All Else Fails: 
Government as the Ultimate Risk Manager, David A. Moss argues that “risk management 
constitutes a potent and pervasive public policy in the United States. Our economy would 
be unrecognizable without it.”* In fact, financial theorists must always take account of 
the underlying, unstated risk-management contract that governments around the world 
have with their citizens and businesses. It would be a serious theoretical mistake to 
neglect this ubiquitous contract. 
Let’s return once more to the metaphor of the child who will not eat dinner at the 
appointed time. Now imagine that there lives in the same house a grandparent who is 
 
73

suffering from a painful disease or is mentally impaired; perhaps one of the child’s 
parents is in some emotional distress. Having a child throw a tantrum in this situation 
would be too emotionally draining on the whole household. A wise parent might indeed 
bail out the unruly child now, and think later about lessons to be learned. 
The dynamics of families and nations are not entirely dissimilar. Many families 
have long-simmering tensions. Disagreements and resentments can be smoothed over, but 
they may reappear from time to time. Old memories resurface. In moments of stress, it is 
important to avoid harsh statements that will be remembered later—even years later—
only to become a source of further conflict. 
By the same token, policy makers must strive to prevent economic misfortunes 
that will create long-standing distrust in our economic institutions. The events of the 
1930s are far behind us—at least chronologically. Though we have not forgotten them, 
we have reached a state of mind where they are no longer emotionally relevant. 
The events that marked the start of the Great Depression set the tone for the 
decade to follow. People with good and apparently steady jobs were cast out and suffered 
a train of catastrophes, such as losing their homes to foreclosure. Some were left with so 
few resources that they had to take the humiliating step of standing in a bread line or 
showing up at a soup kitchen. Middle-aged men were reduced to selling apples on the 
street to try to make a living. Photographs of those lines, of those sidewalk sellers, were 
published in newspapers, adding to the humiliation. These images, burned into the 
national psyche, became symbols of the times, reflecting the shame of a generation. 
 
74

The trail of evidence of financial wrongdoings led back to the early 1930s, as a 
huge web of investment companies began to fail. People felt wronged when the banks 
they had been told were sound were suddenly shuttered—especially if they had not gotten 
to the banks in time to withdraw their deposits and were left without recourse. 
Photographs of long lines of those trying to retrieve their money from failing banks 
provided yet another vivid image. Anger and disillusionment were added to the emotional 
mix. 
These experiences, and the enduring images they spawned, marked a dramatic 
change in Americans’ inner assumptions. The changes were fundamental, reflecting deep 
psychological distress. Frederick Lewis Allen, in his 1931 book Only Yesterday: An 
Informal History of the 1920s, remarked that “one could hardly walk a block [at the 
beginning of the 1930s] in any American city or town without noticing some of them.”† 
Women’s fashions changed: short skirts disappeared and a more formal and less 
provocative style emerged. Gone was the excited sense that we were entering a new era 
in which taboos would be abandoned. Romantic and poetic plays and novels reappeared, 
replacing others that had challenged contemporary values. Admiration for entrepreneurs 
and savvy businessmen waned. Delight in the then-shocking theories of avant-garde 
Freudian psychologists became less common. Even religious thinking returned to more 
traditional forms. 
In 1932 psychiatrist W. Beran Wolfe wrote that a “psychological pall has settled 
over the whole country. . . . The unemployed American sits at home, listens to his radio if 
he has not been dispossessed, stands humbly in a bread line, applies apologetically to a 
 
75

social agency for relief, and, if refused, submits to the most intolerable human indignities. 
Slave morality has returned.”‡ 
In the 1930s radical sentiment intensified. In his 1968 book The Heyday of 
American Communism: The Depression Decade, Harvey Klehr detailed how Americans, 
both workers and intellectuals, began to be won over to communist theories; the 1930s 
have been called the “Red decade.” Labor-management relations deteriorated into 
hostility, and labor disputes were unusually intense, sometimes becoming violent. In 
terms of threats to economic confidence, the current subprime crisis in some ways 
resembles the onset of the Great Depression. 
In his 2007 book La crise des années 1930 est devant nous, François Lenglet, the 
editor of the French business magazine Les Echos, sees parallels in the changes in values 
and customs and in the loss of confidence, even the onset of despair, all reflecting a 
descent from the euphoria of the bubble years. In good times people are willing to 
cooperate and accommodate others, but when optimism for the future starts to sour, they 
can become introverted, angry, fearful, and selfish. 
Benjamin Friedman, in his 2005 book The Moral Consequences of Economic 
Growth, cites evidence from world history that, at times when people see encouraging 
prospects for the future, they are better able to work together constructively, supporting 
democratic principles and political and social liberalization. When perceived prospects 
for growth falter, there are major setbacks. 
 
76

Friedman points out that in much of the world, particularly Europe, the Great 
Depression of the 1930s demonstrated all the consequences that his theory would predict: 
the rise of fascism, anti-Semitism, racism, nationalism, and eventually the outbreak of 
World War II. But the United States in the 1930s, he claims, “stands out as an 
exception—in many respects the exception”—to his theory.§ Somehow a spirit of 
cooperation and change developed here, ultimately embodied in the New Deal; while 
there was great unrest, there was also a sense of positive institutional change and 
progress, which offset the despair of the Depression. Hostility between labor and 
management, and between rich and poor, was tempered by the sense that we were all 
moving together toward a more enlightened world. 
According to Klehr, the sharp increase in communist sympathies in the United 
States in the 1930s was halted by two principal factors: the Roosevelt administration’s 
aggressive actions to deal with the communists’ very complaints and the 1939 Nazi-
Soviet pact, which forever discredited communism in the eyes of most Americans. While 
the latter was a purely external event, the former was a matter of deliberate action by U.S. 
policy makers. A notable milestone occurred in May 1933, when First Lady Eleanor 
Roosevelt waded through ankle-deep mud to visit the communist-inspired Second Bonus 
Army, encamped outside Washington, D.C. She addressed them with such personal 
warmth that her remarks were interpreted as evidence of the administration’s sympathy 
with and willingness to act on the group’s concerns, if not their immediate demands. 
The differing reactions to the Depression in the United States and Europe had an 
earlier parallel in the response to the end of World War I. We can see this clearly from 
 
77

the evidence presented in The Economic Consequences of the Peace by John Maynard 
Keynes. The arguments by the victorious allies for heavy reparations from defeated 
Germany were made without regard for the damage, economic and otherwise, that these 
conditions would inflict on that country and on national sentiments among both victors 
and vanquished. Keynes wrote: “Will France be safe because her sentries stand on the 
Rhine, if her own finances are in ruinous disorder, if she is spiritually isolated from her 
friends, if bloodshed, misery and fanaticism prevail from the Rhine eastward through two 
continents?”** 
History proves that Keynes was right to worry about the social changes brought 
on by the unfortunate economic arrangements of that time, for they would be among the 
causes of World War II a generation later. We must always be concerned about public 
perceptions of fairness and evenhanded treatment, about public confidence that our 
economic system is moving forward to provide opportunities for all. That confidence is 
being seriously eroded in today’s subprime crisis. 
We are at risk that reaction to the current economic crisis could set us far back, 
economically as well as socially. We must act now to prevent even the possibility that a 
severe crisis could endanger our comity. The loss of trust and belief in the economic 
system can have consequences not only for the economy itself, but for the social fabric as 
a whole, leading us all to suffer needlessly. 
The immediate fix that is needed is similar to that called for by the Great 
Depression. In the words of Henry B. Steagall, chairman of the House Banking and 
Currency Committee, in 1932, “Of course, it involves a departure from established 
 
78

policies and ideals, but we cannot stand by when a house is on fire to engage in lengthy 
debates over the methods to be employed in extinguishing the fire. In such a situation we 
instinctively seize upon and utilize whatever method is most available and offers 
assurance of speediest success.”†† 
The fire analogy is an apt one, since the real problem we were facing then, and are 
facing now, is a sort of conflagration—a problem that spreads rapidly from person to 
person and business to business. The more serious consequences of the subprime crisis 
fall into the category of “systemic effects”—effects that will be felt throughout the entire 
economic system. In medicine, the systemic effects of a trauma are those that involve the 
whole body, including parts that were distant from the initial trauma. For example, an 
injury to a limb leads it to become gangrenous, and this will result in death unless the 
affected limb is amputated. 
In economics, systemic effects are all about externalities, especially those that 
show up in extreme circumstances. Often these systemic effects on the economy have to 
do with investor confidence and psychological or social contagion. The classic example 
is a nationwide bank run spurred by the failure of a single bank or a small number of 
banks. When depositors even suspect that they might lose their money, they may 
withdraw their money from all banks. Even the soundest banks maintain only a fraction 
of the reserves that would be needed to meet such a catastrophic demand. Fractional-
reserve banking involves multiple equilibria: People trust their banks, and thus the banks 
come to be seen as trustworthy. But, conversely, if people lose trust in their banks, 
withdraw their funds, and cause the banks to fail, the lack of trust has become a self-
 
79

fulfilling prophesy. The jump from one equilibrium to the other is still not easily 
understood, since it encompasses social contagion as well as economic contagion. 
The onset of the Great Depression of the 1930s, which followed the stock market 
crash of 1929 and infected the United States and other advanced countries around the 
world, was such a systemic failure. The crisis actually began before 1929—in the housing 
market. Only later did it spread to the stock market, then triggering a severe banking 
crisis that had repercussions for almost all businesses. 
Economic historian Christina Romer has argued that the onset of the Great 
Depression of the 1930s coincided with adverse public reaction to the stock market crash 
of 1929. She finds that forecasters reacted to the economic effects of that crash very 
differently than they had to the economic downturns of 1920–21 and 1923–24. Right 
after the 1929 crash, the forecasters, although they did not predict the depression that was 
to follow, expressed unusual uncertainty about the economic outlook. Romer believes 
that it was this uncertainty that led to the sharp contraction in consumer spending that 
ultimately caused the Depression. 
An economic downturn can ultimately change the nature of political support for 
economic policies—even to the point of exacerbating the downturn. One consequence of 
the strengthening of pro-labor sentiment during the Depression, as argued by economists 
Harold Cole and Lee Ohanian, is that government policy encouraged firms to accede to 
union demands, even if those demands were really for the benefit of insiders and at the 
expense of the outsiders—those who were currently unemployed. The National Industrial 
Recovery Act of 1933, one of the less inspired innovations of the New Deal, gave the 
 
80

president the power to allow firms to collude on prices so long as they accepted certain 
demands by unions. Even after the act was declared unconstitutional in 1935, the 
Roosevelt administration continued to be lenient in bringing antitrust actions against 
firms that were compliant with union demands. 
There is today the possibility of what, in Irrational Exuberance, I called an 
attention cascade, leading us to start worrying about possible economic problems that had 
left our consciousness. In an attention cascade, economic events or problems become the 
subject of more and more talk and of stories in the media, until they come to dominate 
public thinking. The changes are qualitative—taking the form of greater salience of 
certain stories, theories, and facts—and are not measured by the various consumer 
confidence indices that are so widely disseminated. In fact long-lasting and severe 
changes can take place before conventional economists have any clue about them. 
The subprime crisis was not on the list of possible scenarios for which we might 
have made plans. We are stuck with contractual arrangements that were made in error. 
Although many were clearly lured into financial deep water by the prospect of easy 
money and quick riches when they should have exercised greater prudence, others are in 
trouble through no fault of their own and are resorting to desperate fixes. Much as we 
might like to, we cannot quickly and reliably sort out who is at fault and who is not. 
I emphasize that the possible systemic effects are much more important than the 
loss of home values in a potential collapse of the real estate market. For however much 
home values may drop, they will still remain the same homes, offering the same services 
to all of us. But if the rate of output in the economy falls, that is a real loss, not just a 
 
81

paper one. The balance sheet problems into which people fall if their homes lose value 
are purely financial losses. But they can be converted into substantial real losses to the 
economy if they are allowed to destroy public confidence. 
In a financial system seize-up such as the one we are now experiencing, we must, 
putting aside our political and policy differences, fall back immediately on a more basic 
social contract—one that dictates that we as a society will protect everyone from major 
misfortune and keep existing problems from spreading further, subject to the dictates of 
common sense. That social contract is our most valuable protection, for we as a society 
can never plan for all possible contingencies. 
Indeed bailouts of one sort of another have been part of the underlying 
stabilization mechanism of economies, ours as well as those of other countries, for 
centuries. The Federal Reserve has been bailing out troubled banks since it opened for 
business in 1914. The Bank of England has been doing the same for hundreds of years. 
We must face up to the fact that we have not been able to avoid bailouts in the past, and 
we cannot do so today. 
While it is natural to emphasize the unfairness of bailouts to those who do not 
receive them, judgments of what is fair and unfair are far from clear-cut. There is an 
inherent unfairness in our economy, evidenced by its sharp income inequalities. Some of 
this represents vestigial effects of injustices of long ago, notably the importation of blacks 
to the United States as slaves. To this day, black Americans as a group have not 
completely managed to shake off the economic aftereffects of this history of oppression. 
 
82

The FHA, as well as such government-sponsored enterprises as Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac, in their role as subsidizers of housing for those with low incomes, can be 
viewed as rectifying at least some of the income inequality in our society. Moreover, 
subsidizing low-income housing probably has positive social externalities whose value is 
incalculable. There is a better prospect for social harmony if some of the more marginal 
members of our society feel invested in its success through ownership of their own 
homes. If this is a time for increased bailouts of those with low incomes, then maybe that 
is all to the good. Perhaps the subprime crisis is sharpening our social conscience, if only 
in indirect ways. 
A New Home Owners’ Loan Corporation 
We need a new organization modeled after the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation 
that was established in 1933, during the last major housing crisis, to make credit more 
readily available to home borrowers. By the time this book reaches print, there is a 
chance we will already have some aspects of such an organization in place or at least in 
the works. Plans along these lines enjoy strong support, including the backing of 
economists such as Alan Blinder and Martin Feldstein and legal scholars such as Michael 
Barr. Yet the prospect of Congressional action on this proposal remains highly 
controversial, and it is best considered as still nothing more than a proposal. Any action 
eventually taken by Congress may be watered down or handled ineffectively, and, even if 
it does act meaningfully, Congress may not respond in the future with sufficient 
additional funds for the institution if the subprime crisis worsens. 
 
83

The HOLC accepted mortgages as collateral for loans to mortgage lenders, so 
long as the mortgages had more enlightened terms than were customary at the time. In 
that way the HOLC both dealt with the immediate problem of foreclosures and also 
encouraged longer-term economic innovation. That is what a new HOLC can and should 
do today. 
It is essential that the potential cost of bailouts be paid by the broad public, and 
that it not be dumped into the laps of a small set of investors. Ben Bernanke has been 
widely described as asking our nation’s bankers to write down the principal on millions 
of mortgage loans. What he really said was that principal writedowns “could be in the 
best interest of both borrowers and lenders.”‡‡ Of course, some limited writedowns are in 
the interest of lenders: if a lender fails to improve the mortgage terms for a troubled 
homeowner, then the owner may simply abandon the property, often in damaged 
condition, thus imposing substantial legal costs and delays on the lender. Lenders 
understand very well that it is in their own interest to keep homeowners in place if there 
is reasonable hope they can pay on somewhat reduced terms. Bernanke is rightfully 
concerned that his language not suggest that some unfortunate group of investors should 
bear the cost of dealing with systemic effects on the U.S. economy. But by limiting his 
attention to actions that would mutually benefit borrowers and lenders, he is proposing 
only that lenders should continue to do what they already do. His talk is not effective in 
dealing with the subprime crisis because it carries no economic weight. 
U.S. Senator Christopher Dodd (D-CT) proposed a federal Homeownership 
Preservation Corporation that would be a modern-day version of the HOLC. Dodd later 
 
84

dropped the idea of such a new corporation, but in a press conference he and U.S. 
Representative Barney Frank (D-MA) together spoke of empowering the FHA to 
guarantee up to $300 billion in refinanced mortgages to distressed borrowers. They did 
not describe this as a bailout or a burden on taxpayers—but of course it has the potential 
to become one if default rates turn out to be high. 
It may be better to create a new agency, like Dodd’s now-withdrawn 
Homeownership Preservation Corporation, rather than merely extend the financing of the 
FHA, because a new organization is more likely to do more than just funnel money to 
mortgage lenders. A new agency is more likely to attract leaders interested in 
fundamental change; creating such an agency is a way of signaling serious intent to solve 
the subprime problem. We need to see other aspects of the HOLC solution implemented 
now as well. In particular we need to see our reborn HOLC establish new mortgage-
writing conventions, as I discuss in the next chapter. 
Getting the Short-Run Solutions Right 
Just as important as the specific short-run solutions to be implemented is the 
underlying mindset. We must get these solutions right, and get them right the first time. 
This means facing up to the scope of the problem, allocating sufficient resources to 
solving it, and setting the correct fundamental policy goals. 
If any of the short-run solutions discussed here are to have a chance of success, 
our leaders must, in the first place, admit that a serious problem exists. It does not help 
matters if leaders continually assert that a turnaround is just around the corner. That was 
 
85

the strategy played by Herbert Hoover during the Great Depression, and it has been 
trotted out by virtually every leader in government and business since then when faced 
with the necessity of truly fundamental reform. Such an attitude only leads to accusations 
that those in charge are attempting to manipulate the public mind through the power of 
suggestion. 
We have to be ready for the possibility that many more tax rebates will be 
necessary, perhaps for years to come. These rebates may eventually have a significant 
negative impact on the national debt. That possibility can only be accepted if we truly 
recognize the seriousness of the problem. 
We need to pay attention as well to the capital adequacy of banks and broker-
dealers, who are likely to come under increasing pressure if, as is likely, there are 
continued substantial falls in home prices, further impairing their assets. Their inadequate 
capitalization will be evident to everyone with whom they do business, and this will lead 
to further freeze-ups of the system, which may spread rapidly in a worsening crisis. 
We must be willing to devote sufficient resources to doing the bailouts right. 
Leaders should face the fact that they are bailouts and get on with carefully and calmly 
explaining the reason for them. Only then can enough money be spent on them to have 
the desired effects. 
Setting the proper policy focus is also crucial. The purpose of the bailouts should 
not be to maintain high values in the housing market, the stock market, or any other 
speculative market. The essential purpose is to prevent a fundamental loss of economic 
 
86

confidence in our institutions and in each other, and to maintain a sense of social justice. 
As such, the bailouts should focus most intensely on preventing distress among people of 
modest means. 
With regard to housing prices, government policy should be just the opposite of 
supporting them. We need more planned large urban centers, and building more of these 
would increase supply and thereby bring urban home prices down. The framers of the 
1968 Housing and Urban Development Act understood this need, and the act set up a 
mechanism whereby builders of whole new towns could apply to the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development for support. That legislation has led to some new urban 
centers, but the act was not enough, and legislation is needed to support development of 
new urban communities. 
In terms of the immediate crisis, the problem is quite different. We have to be 
willing to spend money on securing economic justice. That means allocating resources to 
determining—to the extent that this is possible—who among mortgage borrowers were 
misled and mistreated, and then focusing the bailouts on them. 
Certain nonprofit organizations, such as Self-Help (www.self-help.org) or the 
Neighborhood Assistance Corporation of America (www.naca.com) are willing to spend 
time with individual homeowners to help them work things out. But the resources of 
these organizations are dwarfed by the scale of the current crisis. The government’s Hope 
Now initiative is failing to provide enough solutions because it really has no official 
resources; it is merely a government-led alliance of businesses. If home prices continue to 
 
87

fall, many more homeowners will be in trouble in the coming years, amounting to a very 
expensive problem and putting even more stress on an already inadequate system. 
The government can spend money now to reorganize the system of bailouts so 
that it operates on a more systematic basis. A new HOLC could tackle the expensive and 
complex process of modifying individual loans, rewarding those mortgage lenders who 
will spend the time and energy to help individual borrowers understand their specific 
situations and make government assistance available to those who qualify. 
After we have succeeded in preventing the subprime crisis from escalating, we 
must turn to the long-term solutions that will prevent a recurrence of the situation in 
which we find ourselves. That aspect of the subprime solution is the subject of the next 
chapter.
 
88

The Promise of Financial Democracy 
6 
The key to the subprime solution, to preventing future crises like the current one, as well 
as mitigating its aftereffects, is democratizing finance—extending the application of 
sound financial principles to a larger and larger segment of society, and using all the 
modern technology at our disposal to achieve that goal. 
Doing this will reduce the long-run incidence of speculative bubbles like the 
housing bubble that we have just experienced. And to the extent that such bubbles still 
occur, it will establish a rational context for responding to them, instead of the after-the-
fact scurrying for quick fixes that we have seen since the onset of the subprime crisis in 
2007. 
There used to be tremendous instability in the banking sector. For example, there 
were severe U.S. banking crises in 1797, 1819, 1837, 1857, 1873, 1893, 1907, and 1933. 
Those problems were largely fixed by a number of institutional changes over the years, 
notably the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and the New Deal reforms of 
the early 1930s. But effective reforms haven’t reached all segments of our economy, 
especially the household sector, which continues to limp along with practically medieval 
financial insight. Unless we think more broadly about financial reforms that will 
encompass the majority of households, we will continue to experience crises. 
As the events leading up to the subprime crisis make plain, it is remarkable that 
the imperfections of our basic economic institutions have not been more widely 

discussed. While markets bubble and burst, most people have only minimal protections 
against their biggest economic risks, hold dangerously undiversified portfolios, and risk 
ruin when they lose their jobs or fall ill. 
These problems are regarded as inevitable features of the system, and the system 
itself is considered impervious to reform, as if it were a product of nature. But successful 
institutional reform efforts such as those of the New Deal era belie this widely held 
orthodoxy. Basic institutional reform is not only possible but necessary. 
The subprime crisis has revealed a poverty of imagination on the part of leaders in 
initiating the reforms needed to build the new institutional foundations for a more secure 
economic environment. This chapter suggests ways of beginning just such an institutional 
reform initiative. 
It’s the Technology 
Institutional reform starts with understanding the available technology. 
Information technology is the story of our time. It is key to the subprime solution. The 
continued growth of computers, data collection and processing capabilities, “smart” 
technology, and rapid, inexpensive communications all provide dramatically effective 
tools to implement the subprime solution—to correct some of the egregious faults in the 
economy’s institutional foundation. 
Along with this expanding information technology, there has been over recent 
decades a magnificent development of our knowledge in the field of mathematical 
finance. This theory, as part of economics, in turn allows us to harness the full potential 
of risk-management technology—especially when it is implemented on a sufficiently 
large scale, as our information technology now allows. The theoretical advances are 
 
90

important, for they tell us where and how to look for opportunities to use financial 
technology to advance human welfare. 
Mathematical finance theory helps us understand how both sides of a financial 
contract can benefit from the contract, and it suggests how we can optimize the 
participation of the two sides so that human welfare as a whole is enhanced. We must 
rely on such theory if we are to avoid inconsistent and erratic policy proposals to deal 
with crises, such as capriciously awarding bailouts to some without properly considering 
the context, the appropriate incentives, or who is on “the other side,” paying for the 
bailouts. 
Modern financial theory has as an important component in agency theory. Agency 
theory explains how to motivate agents to behave as much as possible in the interests of 
all parties to a transaction, not just themselves. It is a theory that explains how to keep 
moral hazard under control by structuring financial institutions with just the right balance 
of incentives. 
In a similar vein, the human sciences—psychology, sociology, anthropology, and 
neurobiology—are increasing our understanding of the mind by leaps and bounds, and 
this knowledge is now being applied to finance and economics. We have a much better 
grasp of how and why people make economic errors, and of how we can restructure 
institutions to help avoid these errors. 
There has been an important revolution with the development, in the past few 
decades, of the fields of behavioral economics and behavioral finance. These disciplines 
incorporate insights gained in other social sciences. For that reason, many financial 
theorists of the old school have resisted this revolution, for they fear that it renders their 
 
91

mathematical models useless. On the contrary—it opens up their models to far richer and 
more successful applications. 
Denying the importance of psychology and other social sciences for financial 
theory would be analogous to physicists denying the importance of friction in the 
application of Newtonian mechanics. If one is permitted to apply Newtonian mechanics 
only in realms where friction can be completely disregarded, then one is confining its 
application largely to astronomy. Once we add a theory of friction, Newtonian mechanics 
can begin to be applied to earthly problems as well, and it becomes an essential tool for 
engineers who are designing devices to improve our daily lives. We have a comparable 
opportunity today with the advent of behavioral economics and behavioral finance, which 
have the potential to facilitate exciting advances in financial engineering. 
New institutions can be developed to solve many of the world’s fundamental risk 
problems. But, as noted previously, this can be achieved only if the institutional 
foundations are retrofitted to produce greater economic growth through steadily expanded 
asset ownership—especially homeownership. 
What follows is a package of proposed reforms that leaders—government, civic, 
and business, both here and abroad—can forge into a new institutional foundation for the 
housing market and other asset markets. Taken together, these proposed measures 
resonate with the spirit and letter of the reforms introduced during the New Deal era as a 
response to the financial failures of the 1930s, and with other institutional reform 
initiatives, such as the Basel II reforms deployed to secure today’s international banking 
system. 
 
92

Since these proposals in some cases represent significant departures from 
established practice, there will be those who will doubt that they can ever be put into 
practice. But we have to remember that the history of finance is one of periodic major 
breakthroughs in method and form. These breakthroughs have often happened at times of 
financial crisis, just as the innovations of the New Deal era occurred during the Great 
Depression. And the time for further institutional innovations is now right. 
The changes proposed here are significant, but a number of them have been tried 
on a smaller scale, and all are distinctly within the realm of possibility. The net effect of 
this package of reforms would be to stress-proof the whole economy, building greater 
ballast into the institutional framework so that buyers and sellers are better able to 
conduct business with confidence rather than through desperate speculative moves. 
A New Information Infrastructure 
Promoting an improved information infrastructure—the knowledge base used by 
people and firms to manage their financial affairs—is not only good policy but also good 
economics. According to economic theory, information that is freely available is a public 
good, which tends to be undersupplied by the private sector. Moreover, the lack of 
information can have systemic effects, a negative externality that government should try 
to prevent. Strengthening the information infrastructure would have a fundamental 
impact in altering the social contagion and information cascades that underlie the 
formation of speculative bubbles. 
Government promotion of a fundamentally improved information infrastructure 
can capitalize on the advances we have made in recent years in both information 
technology and behavioral finance. Thus far some apparently promising innovations in 
 
93

information technology have proven unsatisfactory in practice because they have not 
been properly human-engineered. For example, public use of financial planning web 
sites, the so-called financial engines, has been disappointing. This is probably the case 
because people tend not to take action on important financial matters based on 
information that is provided to them only by computer. They must talk to a person before 
they make major changes in their financial behavior. Behavioral finance offers many 
such lessons for the proper use of information technology. 
In this section I consider six major ways of improving the information 
infrastructure: promoting comprehensive financial advice, establishing a consumer-
oriented government financial watchdog, adopting default conventions and standards that 
work well for most individuals, improving the disclosure of information regarding 
financial securities, creating large national databases of fine-grained data pertaining to 
individuals’ economic situations, and creating a new system of economic units of 
measurement. 
 
94

Comprehensive Financial Advice 
Low-income individuals who took out risky subprime mortgages, with interest 
rates that would soon be adjusted upward, were often unaware of the known risks 
inherent in such mortgages. They had no clue that there was a real risk that, in the event 
of a crisis, they would not be able to refinance their mortgages. Why not? Because there 
was little economic impetus to provide such information through established 
communication channels. Thus these new homeowners unwittingly assumed hazardous 
risks. 
Financial advice magazines did indeed report on these risks. So, while the higher-
income subscribers to those publications got the story and stuck overwhelmingly to 
conventional fixed-rate mortgages, many lower-income people were left with personal 
tragedies. 
The first step in correcting this failure of public education is to promote 
comprehensive financial advice for everyone through institutions that will make sure that 
all individuals, not just the most wealthy, receive such advice. Most financial advisers 
ignore middle- to lower-income customers because they can make money only by 
charging a fee based on the fraction of assets under management or by receiving 
commissions contingent on the purchase or sale of a security—income available only 
through servicing wealthier clients. As part of their efforts to operate efficiently and 
profitably, many financial advisers also streamline their practices, limiting their advice to 
narrow windows, such as portfolio management advice or tax strategies. 
Most people need broad elementary financial advice, and they need to get it from 
knowledgeable and trustworthy sources. Unfortunately only wealthier people feel they 
can afford such advice. 
 
95

The alternative is for financial advisers to offer their services for a flat hourly fee, 
in much the same way as do other professionals, such as lawyers or accountants. The 
National Association of Personal Financial Advisors has a sound approach to the 
problem. It requires its member advisers to sign a fiduciary oath not to accept 
remuneration from third parties for the sale of financial products or for referrals. But it 
remains a relatively small organization. Meanwhile, most other financial advisers have 
resisted the move to fee-only practices, for the simple reason that there is not enough 
demand for such services at the prices they would have to charge. 
As a result, low-income people are left with only biased sources of advice. For 
example, when they are home buyers, they typically deal with a real estate agent and a 
mortgage broker. The real estate agent represents the seller of the house and thus has an 
incentive to make the sale happen at a good price for the seller. The mortgage broker has 
an incentive to arrange a loan that carries a high interest rate. Moreover, mortgage 
brokers who may appear to be helping their clients obtain a mortgage at the best rate are 
often, unknown to those clients, collecting fees from the lenders. 
The U.S. government in effect subsidizes financial advice by making it tax 
deductible. But this tax deduction works only to encourage high-income people to seek 
out financial advice. People in low tax brackets do not benefit significantly from itemized 
deductions and thus usually do not itemize. Moreover, the deduction for financial advice 
is a miscellaneous deduction, which, even for those who do itemize, is deductible only to 
the extent that the sum of such deductions exceeds 2% of adjusted gross income. Thus 
low-income taxpayers have little or no tax incentive to pay for financial advice. 
 
96

The government needs to reverse this bias and effectively subsidize fee-only, 
comprehensive, independent financial advice for everyone. One way to do this would be 
to set up a co-pay arrangement like that already in place for Medicare, Medicaid, and 
private health insurance plans, under which the practitioner can apply for partial 
reimbursement of fees. The analogy to health insurance is apt: we need both medical and 
financial advice on an ongoing basis, and failure to obtain either ultimately imposes costs 
on society when our health—medical or financial—suffers. Another form of subsidy 
would be to switch the current incentive for financial advice from an itemized deduction 
to a refundable tax credit that is obtainable upon filing one’s income tax return, even if 
one does not choose to itemize. 
Qualification for the subsidy should require that the adviser sign a statement that 
he or she will accept no other remuneration from third parties for this customer, so that 
the advice rendered is impartial. Professionals who collect commissions for selling 
financial products are certainly providing a helpful service, for otherwise many useful 
products would not reach their intended markets. But their commissions—and their 
current tax deductibility on personal income taxes via basis calculations for capital 
gains—ought to be incentive enough for them to pursue such commission-based sales 
without having their fees subsidized by the government 
What if, when they were buying their homes in the run-up to the subprime crisis, 
low-income people had had access to good-quality, comprehensive financial advice, 
delivered to them one-on-one, Suze Orman–style, by trusted advisers? The crisis might 
never have occurred. While the true magnitude and extent of the housing bubble may not 
have been apparent to many financial advisers as it was happening, most of them must at 
 
97

least have had some sense that the housing boom might not continue. Surely they would 
have known when a low-income family was taking on excessive risk with an adjustable-
rate mortgage or a mortgage that was simply too large for their income. 
Another example, from after the bursting of the bubble, will illustrate the 
necessity for financial advice that springs from a pure incentive to help the client, and 
compensation based solely on the time taken to do so. Today, with falling home prices, 
many elderly people who need care and special services are postponing moving to a 
continuing care retirement community (CCRC) because they are unwilling to accept the 
loss of value of their homes if they sell now. They need to sell their houses before they 
can move into a CCRC, in order to be able to pay the entrance fees, but they are worrying 
about the decline in home prices and are thus deferring this important step. Many of them 
will hold out for years, hoping to sell their homes at a better price, and this trend is 
already being reflected in high vacancy rates in CCRCs today. Thus these elderly 
homeowners may go for years without proper care, often in isolation and loneliness. All 
they really need is to have a trusted counselor, expert in the specialty of elder finance, 
who will, for an hourly fee, consider all aspects of their situation—including health needs 
and tax consequences—and put things into perspective. Losing, say, $30,000 on the quick 
sale of a house in a slow market may in the final analysis be the right thing to do, given 
their other concerns. 
There is, of course, the question of how many will actually avail themselves of 
financial advice, even if its cost is reduced considerably. We will only know the answer if 
we set the subsidy in place. If we provide the impetus for a new financial advice industry 
by subsidizing it, the hope is that its practitioners will find new marketing strategies, new 
 
98

delivery channels for their advice, or new means of bundling their advice with other 
products and services—strategies designed to induce people who have never before done 
so to start using personalized financial advice. 
If government makes the business of providing such useful and impartial advice 
economically viable by subsidizing it, then it is likely that business will make the 
necessary investments to deploy new information technology on a significantly expanded 
scale. The provision of low-cost financial advice would be a natural application for such 
technology. The financial engine web sites will be reinvented so that they operate hand-
in-hand with the personal advice furnished by advisers, and thus work effectively for 
most people. These sites might further evolve, wiki-style, into places where people can 
share financial information with each other and with a variety of experts. 
If we reform our tax policy to subsidize the services of fee-only, comprehensive 
financial advisers, technology will carry us forward into new dimensions of democratized 
financial sophistication that we cannot now imagine. 
A New Financial Watchdog 
The second step in correcting the inadequacies of our information infrastructure, 
as outlined by legal scholar Elizabeth Warren, would be for the government to set up 
what she calls a financial product safety commission, modeled after the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission. Its primary mission would be to protect the financial 
consumer, to serve as an ombudsman and advocate. It would provide a resource for 
information on the safety of financial products and impose regulations to ensure such 
safety. Remarkably, such concern for the safety of financial products is not the primary 
charge of any major financial regulatory agency in the United States today. 
 
99

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration maintains data on highway 
and motor vehicle safety and statistics on accidents. In the same way, we must fund a 
government organization empowered to accumulate information on the actual experience 
that individuals have with financial products—and the “accidents,” rare as well as 
commonplace, that happen with them—with an eye toward preventing such accidents in 
the future. 
The U.S. Treasury’s March 2008 “Blueprint” for restructuring financial regulation 
proposed a business-conduct regulator that resembles Warren’s concept for a financial 
product safety commission. The proposal emphasized that the domains of regulatory 
authorities should be defined in terms of their objectives—and consumer protection is 
indeed plausible as the domain for an entirely separate regulatory agency. 
Default-Option Financial Planning 
The third step in renovating the information infrastructure is to set up 
standardized default-option financial plans that operate well when people are inattentive 
and fail to act. A default option is the choice that is automatically made if an individual 
fails to make an intentional choice among available options. One might say that the 
fundamental cause of the subprime crisis was that many people simply did not pay 
attention. They fell into traps of one sort or another because they did not know or 
understand what was happening in the marketplace. When their attention lapses, 
consumers are more likely to accept whatever financial contract is offered first, or seems 
standard or conventional. Therefore designing standard contracts, including prudent 
default options, should be a serious enterprise for both government and business. Careful 
research has revealed how immensely susceptible people are to whatever they see as 
 
100

standard provisions in their decisions about investments. 
 The economist Brigitte Madrian and her colleagues studied how individuals 
choose whether to participate in an employer-sponsored retirement savings plan. They 
found that automatic enrollment of the employee in a retirement plan boosts participation 
immensely, even if the employee is free to drop the plan at any time by merely asking to 
opt out. Moreover, employees in these plans typically accept the default-option 
contribution rate and portfolio allocation that are built into the plans. 
I noted in Chapter 1 that one of the great innovations to come out of the housing 
crisis of the Great Depression was the extension of mortgage terms from the then-
common period of five years to fifteen years or more, providing borrowers with a greater 
cushion of time to pay off their mortgages. The change was made by the Home Owners’ 
Loan Corporation in 1933, and, while that government-sponsored enterprise no longer 
exists, its legacy lives on today in the form of long-term mortgages. Why didn’t the 
private sector make the adjustment itself, without government intervention? The answer 
apparently lies in the difficulty of introducing new products in the face of initial buyer 
resistance and entrenched social norms. The cost of educating the public about the 
wisdom of a new form of mortgage is a type of public good, yet the private firm that 
incurs it may never fully recoup the cost, since the benefits will be shared by all firms 
that choose to offer the new mortgage. 
This calls for the authoritative assertion of new standard boilerplate for common 
contracts such as mortgages. Most individuals will accept a standard contract if it is put 
forward by those whom they consider experts, and they will not try to judge the issues for 
themselves. A new HOLC could, as we shall discuss below, make improved mortgage 
 
101

contracts the standard by accepting as collateral for loans to mortgage lenders only 
mortgages including the new features. Such a standard-setting enterprise by the new 
HOLC would in turn be likely to drive an array of other financial innovations, such as the 
development of derivative markets for income risks and home-price risks. 
In the subprime crisis many mortgage borrowers blandly accepted the mortgage 
terms that were offered them, in many cases likely thinking that these somehow had the 
imprimatur of experts—even when no consumer protections whatsoever were in place. 
Changing the standard mortgage contract would thus constitute a huge improvement in 
the information infrastructure. And reform in this area might encourage a concerted effort 
by experts in business and government to decide on other kinds of financial advice and 
improved mortgage products that could be made standard and generic for most people, 
thereby democratizing the information available to consumers. Other mortgage products 
could certainly still be developed, for those borrowers who might take the initiative to go 
beyond the default option. 
Another possible default option would be a requirement that every mortgage 
borrower have the assistance of a professional akin to a civil law notary. Such notaries 
practice in many countries, although not in the United States. In Germany, for example, 
the civil law notary is a trained legal professional who reads aloud and interprets the 
contract and provides legal advice to both parties before witnessing their signatures. This 
approach particularly benefits those who fail to obtain competent and objective legal 
advice. The participation of such a government-appointed figure in the mortgage lending 
process would make it more difficult for unscrupulous mortgage lenders to steer their 
clients toward sympathetic lawyers, who would not adequately warn the clients of the 
 
102

dangers they could be facing. 
Improved Financial Disclosure 
The fourth step in enhancing the information infrastructure is to improve the 
disclosure of information that is relevant to people’s financial and economic lives. 
Apparently almost no one had an economic incentive to do the investigative work to 
unearth and share information about the off-balance-sheet accounting that eventually 
doomed the Enron Corporation in 2001. Nor was there anyone with an economic 
incentive to reveal the excesses of the structured investment vehicles that banks were 
using to move certain risks off their balance sheets beginning in 2007. Word never got 
out in a way that was useful to the broad public. 
Those who bought residential-mortgage-backed securities based on subprime 
mortgages typically did so with little more information than that contained in the ratings 
given them by rating agencies. And the rating agencies themselves released only the 
ratings—not all the underlying data that would have permitted others to check them—and 
then did so with caveats. 
Disclosure of financial information took a major step forward in the United States 
in 1934 with the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The effectiveness 
of that disclosure was further enhanced in 2000 with the SEC’s issuance of Regulation 
Fair Disclosure (Regulation FD), which directed firms to post their announcements 
electronically and immediately, thus making material information available at the same 
time to all investors, large and small. The SEC also sponsors a web site called EDGAR 
that provides detailed information on public securities and the companies that issue them, 
including real-time access to filings made with the SEC. 
 
103

Despite the significant strides it has made in making information available to the 
public, however, the SEC provides only general information regarding public securities, 
and only for certain kinds of securities and situations. Little information is provided about 
private securities, such as residential-mortgage-backed securities. Thus no one could have 
evaluated the soundness of the subprime residential-mortgage-backed securities because 
no one outside the rating agencies could “look inside them” to really gauge the soundness 
of the mortgages on which they were based. Thus the stage was perfectly set for 
unscrupulous mortgage originators to lend to low-income people who were likely to 
default, and for mortgage securitizers to sell the soon-to-default mortgages off to 
unsuspecting investors. 
The SEC posts on its web site some weak proposals to extend disclosure, but 
these are minor. It is time that government mandate carefully crafted increases in 
disclosure requirements for financial activities. Of course, no such requirements should 
impose excessive disclosure costs on the entities required to report. But, as information 
technology continues to advance, the costs of providing information continue to fall, and 
the scope of disclosure, at constant or even declining cost, should generally widen over 
time. Those who must disclose are generally inclined to resist increased requirements, but 
well-designed reporting requirements can in fact be in their own best interests, since their 
very presence promotes public trust in the industry as a whole. 
In addition, the EDGAR web site should be internationalized, so that it can 
consistently report information about public and private securities from the entire world. 
In his 2001 book Republic.com, legal scholar Cass Sunstein argued that the 
requirement for electronically disseminated disclosures, modeled after the SEC’s, should 
 
104

be expanded to cover many other organizations whose activities could possibly affect the 
climate of our communications. The required disclosure of questionable activities can 
sometimes be enough to stop those activities in their tracks. Sunstein wrote of the 
importance for a democratic republic of exposure to a wide range of information: “To be 
sure, such a system depends on restraints on official censorship of controversial ideas and 
opinions. But it depends on far more that. It also depends on some kind of public domain 
in which a wide range of speakers have access to a diverse public—and also to particular 
institutions and practices, against which they seek to launch objections.”* 
In our age of electronic communications, mandatory disclosure of information is 
more feasible than ever before. In the context of financial dealings, mortgage lenders and 
other financial firms that interact with the general public should be required to disclose 
on the Internet activities that are questionable—if not, strictly speaking, illegal—thus 
opening them up to public scrutiny. 
Improved Financial Databases 
The fifth step toward an improved information infrastructure is for the 
government to subsidize the creation of large economic databases on both individuals and 
all firms, under a protocol that allows this information to be used to develop risk-
management contracts and at the same time assures privacy. 
We have already seen the development of large private databases of information 
on the incomes and economic activities of individuals, but these databases are fragmented 
and rarely used for good economic purposes. No one has the whole financial picture; only 
pieces are visible. A protocol for the sharing of information among such databases needs 
to be developed, so that the current fragmented sources can be pooled. The enlarged pool 
 
105

of data should then be used for beneficial purposes, such as providing consumers and 
homeowners with more accurate pictures of their financial situations. Such enlarged 
databases would permit the financial engine web sites to offer customized, real-time 
information to their customers—information that relates to their particular circumstances. 
Large publicly available databases of privacy-protected data on individual 
incomes are a real possibility, given that income taxes are now largely filed 
electronically. It is already possible for an individual in the United States to make 
information on his or her tax return available to financial counterparties by filing Form 
4506-T. The government would of course have to take the next step, making identity-
protected information appropriately and widely available for the public good. Other 
databases could be linked to the income database. This would permit, for example, the 
construction of an array of up-to-date and specific personal income indices by 
occupation, demographics, or health status. The data could then serve as the basis for the 
settlement of individually tailored risk-management contracts, such as the livelihood 
insurance described below. Risk-management engines could access the complete, fine-
grained picture of the nation’s economic situation—a degree of transparency that remains 
impossible today. A whole new world of risk management would be opened up. 
Improved databases will permit the development of better measures of ability to 
pay in the case of mortgage workouts. Given our constantly improving information 
technology and expanded financial databases, we ought to be able to see econometric 
advances that make this possible. Indeed, in just the past twenty years, credit-history-
based econometric measures of ability to pay, notably the FICO score, have emerged as 
major forces in the lending industry. But the FICO score is not responsive to general 
 
106

economic conditions and is not used to adjust repayment schedules. FICO is ultimately 
limited by the scope of the database that supports it. A whole new world of such 
measures could be made available for use in a democratized system of financial 
contracting. 
A New System of Economic Units of Measurement 
So many people find understanding our economic system a challenging task. To 
help them, the government needs to set up a new system of economic units of 
measurement. This part of the subprime solution would be a truly revolutionary step, akin 
to the creation of the metric system after the French Revolution. Such a system would 
help prevent human error in economic thinking, which underlies many economic 
problems, including the subprime crisis. 
Units of measurement would be defined for many common economic values, 
including income, profits, and wages. But of greatest importance would be new units of 
measurement for inflation. 
I have been arguing for years that we can help avoid confused thinking about 
inflation by adopting an inflation-indexed unit of account, like the unidad de fomento 
(UF) that the government of Chile created in 1967 and that has since been adopted by 
other Latin American governments. 
The UF is just the daily price of a market basket of goods and services, as 
measured by an interpolated Chilean consumer price index. But it has been singled out 
for publication by the government as a unit of account for commerce, replacing money. 
People in Chile commonly quote prices in UFs, although they still make actual payments 
in pesos using the peso-UF exchange rate (which is commonly available, in particular on 
 
107

a web site). By giving this unit of account a simple name, encouraging people to use it as 
a standard of value for commerce, and training them to think in indexed terms, its 
government has made Chile the most inflation-aware country in the world. 
In contrast, the traditional currency units used by countries all over the world are 
a poor measure of value, since their buying power changes unpredictably over time. 
Measuring value in pesos or dollars is like measuring length with a ruler that expands or 
contracts from year to year. Engineers would find design a daunting task indeed with a 
meter rod that changed constantly—but that is exactly what people have to contend with 
when they deal in terms of money. No wonder they become confused. In the modern 
information-rich economy, there is no reason why the medium of exchange and the unit 
of value measurement need still be the same. 
I would give these inflation-indexed units a simple name, baskets, to make clear 
that they represent the value of the market basket of goods and services upon which the 
consumer price index is calculated. If sellers name their prices in baskets, they are 
effectively asking to be paid in terms of the real goods and services that underlie the 
consumer price index—to be paid in real things rather than unstable currency. When we 
have a simple word to describe inflation-indexed quantities, even young children will 
learn to do inflation indexation, merely by using the word. 
The government should write the tax code in terms of baskets, rather than dollars, 
to fully index the tax system and to force people to learn the new units. Credit card point-
of-sale terminals and other electronic payment systems could be programmed to accept 
payments in baskets. 
 
108

If people had become accustomed to such inflation-indexed units of measurement, 
the recent housing boom might have been averted. One of the most significant errors that 
has infected the housing market in recent decades has been the failure on the part of the 
general public to understand inflation. The governments of the major countries of the 
world have been publishing consumer price indices for nearly a century now, and the 
public at some level is able to use them. But confusion about inflation remains 
widespread and causes huge errors. 
When U.S. inflation was very high, in the early 1980s, people could hardly afford 
to buy a home with conventional mortgages, since the inflation-zapped interest rates 
often approached 20% a year, and the purchase of a house worth just three years’ income 
would entail mortgage payments approaching 60% of one’s income. As inflation 
continued, mortgage payments would eventually come down dramatically in real terms, 
but that would not happen for years. Few could afford the early payments in those years, 
and so it became very difficult to buy a home. Home prices dropped, though the price 
drop was limited because there was an intense supply response to the high interest rates: 
residential investment as a share of U.S. GDP fell to 3.2%, the lowest point ever recorded 
in the period since World War II. All this could have been prevented if people had simply 
adopted inflation-indexed mortgages, but the public seemed unable to grasp the concept. 
Yet it would have been perfectly natural for them to do so had they already become 
accustomed to dealing in baskets. 
The stock market was low in value in the early 1980s, reflecting the fact that 
nominal interest rates were very high, even though real (inflation-corrected) interest rates 
were not. This outcome is called the Modigliani-Kohn effect after the economists Franco 
 
109

Modigliani and Richard Kohn, who documented it in the late 1970s. (The late Franco 
Modigliani, who was the inventor of the price-level-adjusted mortgage, was also my 
teacher, mentor, and occasional co-author, and ultimately the inspiration for this book.) 
As inflation came down after the early 1980s, the stock market went up. This 
excessive movement of the stock market might have been prevented if accounting had 
been performed in terms of baskets, so that the public would have been less confused by 
so-called money illusion, the tendency to think of money in nominal, not real, terms. 
The housing boom since the 1990s is also due in part to the public’s difficulty 
with understanding inflation. We remember home prices from long ago since they are 
such important purchases for us, and so the contrast between those prices and the prices 
today attracts our attention much more than the contrast between the price of a loaf of 
bread then and now. We get the false impression that homes have been a spectacular 
investment when in fact their increase in value, measured in baskets, even over many 
decades, would generally have been—at least until the recent housing boom—nil. 
In 2008 the National Association of Realtors (NAR) launched a $40 million 
public awareness campaign entitled “Home Values.” The campaign was designed to put 
thousands of advertising spots on radio and television, as well as ads in the print media, 
on billboards, and on bus shelters, These repeat the slogan “On average home values 
nearly double every ten years.” The association claims that this statement is supported by 
their data for the past thirty years. Indeed it should be, for in the past thirty years 
consumer prices have nearly doubled twice, and we are at the end of a home-price bubble 
that caused real values to double once: that’s three decades of doubling in nominal terms. 
It is highly deceptive to suggest from these data that homes will be spectacular 
 
110

investments, but the NAR can get away with it because of public confusion about 
inflation. 
Indeed, even the Great Depression of the 1930s was intimately related to 
confusion about inflation. As Ben Bernanke points out in his 2000 book Essays on the 
Great Depression, it is now well known that, while prices in general were falling in the 
early 1930s, real wages (wages corrected for inflation) were high, and higher in countries 
that were harder hit by unemployment. 
The simple story of the Great Depression is that employers could not cut the 
nominal wages of their workers enough to keep real wages constant, because cutting 
nominal wages would be misperceived by employees and their unions as a terrible insult, 
as an invitation to a fight. As a result, companies could not remain profitable while 
keeping their entire labor forces employed: their revenues would have fallen more than 
their costs did. The effects of the Great Depression would never have been as severe as 
they were if it weren’t for confusion over inflation. 
If people had been accustomed to quoting wages in baskets before the Depression, 
employees would have seen their real wages rising and presumably would not have had 
the same angry response to nominal wage cuts. Employers would not have had to shut 
down operations to remain solvent. 
If we had been accustomed to quoting home prices in baskets since 1890, then 
people would generally have known that home prices haven’t basically changed in a 
hundred years (until the recent bubble), and they would never have gotten the idea—as 
they did in the early 2000s—that home prices always go up. 
 
111

Creating a new system of economic measurements would have countless other 
beneficial effects. In the context of some themes discussed earlier in this book, it is worth 
noting that we have allowed inflation (and income growth) to erode some of the 
important financial protections that were the product of enlightenment in years past. 
When the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was created in 1934, the insured 
limit was $5,000—and this was twelve years’ average per capita personal income. That 
limit was last raised in 1980, reflecting inflation and income growth, to $100,000. But 
$100,000 is less than three years’ average per capita personal income today. 
The insured limits of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC), which 
protects customers when brokerage firms fail, were also last raised in 1980. They remain 
at $100,000 in cash accounts and $500,000 in securities—figures which may still sound 
large but which are not large enough to prevent panicked withdrawals by substantial 
numbers of brokerage customers should a major crisis ensue. 
The erosion of these important protections has been compromising the resilience 
of our economic system. Defining the insurance limits of the FDIC and SIPC in nominal 
currency terms has been a serious design error. Defining the limits in terms of baskets 
would be better—and it would be even better to use another indexed unit of account tied 
to nominal personal income rather than inflation. 
While the U.S. Congress has shown some inclination to make the appropriate 
fixes from time to time, as with the Federal Deposit Insurance Reform Act of 2005, the 
institutions remain seriously compromised by their lack of consistency. It is only through 
adopting a new system of economic units of measurement—so that correctly defining a 
 
112

quantity becomes as easy as saying a word—that we will avoid such mistakes in the 
future. 
Information Infrastructure: A Summary 
These six steps, taken together, would unleash the power of better information 
and help prevent economic crises like the current one from ever starting. Once we 
provide the economic and governmental incentives for the development of a better 
information infrastructure, and once that infrastructure has been in place for several 
years, then imagination and entrepreneurship will take over, pushing us into uncharted 
territory in the exploitation of that information. We will witness the creation of entirely 
new kinds of for-profit information providers, both computer-based and human-services-
based, all interacting with each other to promote improved financial decision making by 
individuals and businesses. 
 New Markets for Risks That Really Matter 
The history of finance over the centuries has been one of gradual expansion of the 
scope of markets. Over time, more and more kinds of risks are traded, and there are more 
and more opportunities for hedging those risks. Now is the time to encourage the further 
development of markets in a way that truly democratizes them, that is, so that the markets 
cover the specific risks that ultimately matter to individual people.† 
New Markets for Real Estate 
Most urgently needed is a truly liquid market for real estate, especially the single-
family homes that constitute the single largest asset of most households. 
I and my colleagues have been campaigning for innovative new markets for real 
 
113

estate for twenty years. Our big breakthrough came when the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange (CME, now part of the CME Group, after its 2007 merger with the Chicago 
Board of Trade) created single-family home-price futures markets using the S&P/Case-
Shiller Home Price Indices that Karl Case and I initially developed. These markets—
spearheaded by Sam Masucci at the company we co-founded, MacroMarkets LLC—were 
launched in May 2006 for ten U.S. cities and for a composite U.S. index. They are the 
only true home-price futures markets in the world today. Unfortunately liquidity in these 
markets remains low, and they are struggling to gain a foothold, but we still have high 
hopes for them. 
Such derivative markets have the potential to tame speculative bubbles in real 
estate. Without such markets, there is no way for investors to sell real estate short. There 
is no way for skeptical investors, who perceive that a bubble is in progress, to express this 
opinion in the market, except by actually getting out of the market, that is, selling their 
homes, which is of course a drastic and very difficult step. 
If we did have a liquid market in real estate futures by city, then any skeptic 
anywhere in the world could, through his or her actions in the marketplace, act to reduce 
a speculative bubble in a city, for such a bubble represents a profit opportunity for short 
sellers. If the market were widely watched, then home builders would see the projected 
price declines and scale back their own activities, thus averting huge construction booms 
such as the one we have recently witnessed in the United States. If home builders adopted 
the enlightened practice of hedging their homes while they were still in production, then 
the losses would be felt before they even began building. 
Some concerns have been expressed over the years that the creation of derivative 
 
114

markets might possibly increase, rather than decrease, the volatility of the underlying 
prices. However, according to a survey of the scholarly literature by financial economist 
Stewart Mayhew, “The empirical evidence suggests that the introduction of derivatives 
does not destabilize the underlying market—either there is no effect or there is a decline 
in volatility—and that the introduction of derivatives tends to improve the liquidity and 
informativeness of markets.”‡ 
The relevance of these findings to the market for homes is not entirely clear; the 
residential real estate market is exceptionally illiquid, and its prices are very salient to the 
broad public. However, in my mind, this all the more reason to believe that introducing 
futures and bringing professionals into the market for homes will improve its functioning. 
Indeed, as economist Milton Friedman pointed out half a century ago, trading 
professionals ought to help stabilize markets at least to some extent, for if they are 
destabilizing markets (buying high and selling low), they are losing money—not a 
strategy that will keep them in business for long. 
The prices in the CME housing futures markets have been predicting large 
declines in home prices in the United States almost since the markets’ inception in May 
2006. Had these markets been around and matured even earlier, well before 2006, and 
had they been widely known and understood, then the boom in construction whose 
consequences we now see would probably never have happened: builders would have 
seen the handwriting on the wall in the form of the authoritative price predictions that 
such markets generate. 
The CME housing futures markets need committed and well-capitalized market 
makers who will confidently quote bid and offer prices for large institutional orders. 
 
115

Many potential investors have been discouraged from participating after seeing that the 
market is not yet very liquid, making it costly to trade there. 
Well-heeled capitalists are willing to shell out billions of dollars to play the 
market for collateralized debt obligations and to consolidate failing mortgage originators, 
but up to now they have not seemed motivated to facilitate the development of important 
new derivative property markets that would require relatively low capital commitments 
and that have the potential to transform existing financial institutions for the better. 
Other kinds of markets for macro real estate risks include options, swaps, 
forwards, and similar derivative instruments. The CME launched an options market for 
single-family home prices in 2006, based on the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, at 
the same time that it launched single-family home-price futures. 
If they ever reached their potential, these real estate markets could be as big as or 
bigger than all of the world’s stock markets combined. Indeed, according to Federal 
Reserve estimates, the market value of real estate held by households in the United States 
is 30% larger (as of the fourth quarter of 2007) than the entire market value of U.S. 
domestic corporations. So it is not implausible that derivatives markets for residential real 
estate prices could grow to dwarf the entire stock market. 
Commercial real estate is also starting to see such markets develop. The IPD 
indexes of commercial real estate in the United Kingdom have already seen the 
origination of nearly £12 billion of notional value. That is still quite small compared to 
the total value of commercial real estate in the United Kingdom, but it is an encouraging 
beginning. 
 
116

Other New Markets 
I place greatest emphasis on real estate markets in this book because real estate 
has been so important to business fluctuations, and particularly so in the current crisis. 
But there are many other kinds of new markets that need to be, and will be, created as we 
move to a more fully developed financial sector. 
Foremost among these will be markets for long-term claims on incomes—
individual incomes, incomes by occupation, incomes by region, and national incomes. 
These markets are important because they represent livelihood risk, the most important 
risk that each individual faces. Markets for occupational incomes—such as futures, 
forwards, swaps, and exchange-traded notes—will ultimately make it possible for people 
to hedge their lifetime income risks. The markets would be of fundamental importance 
for the issuers of continuous-workout mortgages, discussed below. 
National incomes, sometimes measured by gross domestic product or GDP, 
deserve their own markets as well. These could in fact already exist, since GDP 
accounting is well developed, and data are maintained for every country in the world. 
Sovereign governments should issue national debt that is indexed to their GDPs. 
The simplest form is perpetual debt that pays a dividend which is a share of GDP. My 
colleague Mark Kamstra of York University, who has been working with me to promote 
the adoption of such government securities in Canada, has suggested calling these trills, 
since it would be natural to have each share pay a trillionth of a year’s GDP. This would 
mean that one Canadian trill would be currently paying an annual dividend of about 
CA$1.50, and one U.S. trill would be paying an annual dividend of about US$15.00. 
These dividends would go up or down through time depending on the level of 
economic success of the country. The market price of one Canadian trill might today be 
 
117

in the vicinity of CA$30, and that of one U.S. trill roughly US$300. The price of a trill 
would fluctuate with information about the future prospects of the country, just as a 
company’s stock price fluctuates with information about the future prospects of the 
company. Presumably there would be a lively and interesting market for these securities. 
Most importantly, a market for trills would allow countries to hedge their national 
economic risks. If the U.S. government had issued trills over the years, and if a 
substantial fraction of the national debt were trills, then the U.S. government would find 
that it had freed up sufficient resources to allow it to deal promptly with an emergency 
like the subprime crisis. In an economic slowdown, the government would find that the 
burden of interest on the national debt would, in effect, fall below expectations. It would 
thus have more resources available to deal with the crisis. That is fundamental risk 
management, applied on a national scale. 
Of course trills have never yet been issued by any government. There have been 
some GDP-linked securities, notably Argentina’s issue in 2005 of GDP warrants. And 
there are the beginnings of interest in GDP-linked securities, for example at the United 
Nations Development Programme, the International Monetary Fund, and the World 
Bank. 
New Retail Risk-Management Institutions 
 
 
The new markets described above are intended to create a general infrastructure 
for risk management. But the general public cannot be expected to use sophisticated risk-
management techniques. For example, most people will never trade in futures markets: 
they are not accustomed to doing so, and such trading poses significant challenges to the 
uninformed. For them we need to design simple retail products that will allow them to 
 
118

participate in these new markets, thus truly achieving the democratization of finance. 
The analogy is to the kind of risk management that grain elevators provide to 
individual farmers. Farmers do not generally hedge their risks on futures markets; that is 
often too difficult a strategy for the individual farmer. But a farmer will sign a contract 
for delivery of his grain to the local grain elevator, and that contract pushes some of the 
farmer’s market risk to the owner of the elevator—who will in turn hedge the risk in the 
futures markets. 
That simple concept is a model for vastly improved risk management for 
individuals. Retail organizations can channel the benefits of the risk markets described 
above to individuals. 
Continuous-Workout Mortgages 
A new kind of home mortgage that I call a continuous-workout mortgage would 
have terms that are adjusted continuously (in practice probably monthly) in response to 
evidence about changing ability to pay and changing conditions in the housing market. 
The mortgage contract would schedule an automatic workout every month—much as is 
currently done on a one-time-only basis during the mortgage workouts offered to 
defaulting homeowners. Continuous-workout mortgages would be privately issued, and 
the government would be involved only in providing appropriate regulation and 
infrastructure. 
One type of continuously adjusted mortgage made its appearance as far back as 
the high-inflation, high-interest-rate period of the late 1970s to the early 1980s. The 
price-level-adjusted mortgage allowed payments to respond monthly to changes in a 
single economic indicator: the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index. 
 
119

Today we can do much better than that, for the consumer price index would be only one 
of many factors to be taken into account in any mortgage workout. 
The continuous-workout mortgage would exemplify the democratization of 
finance since the benefits of such mortgages would naturally accrue to everyone. The 
workouts would be systematized and automated, so that they would land in the laps of all 
who could appropriately benefit from them—not just those who were savvy about finding 
a good lawyer, proactive in asserting their rights, or prone to arousing sympathy as 
conspicuously needy. 
I argued in the last chapter that bailouts of some sort are a necessary part of the 
subprime solution, to avoid an economic crisis that would destroy public confidence and 
possibly lead to systemic failure. Unfortunately, such bailouts have a side effect: they 
encourage moral hazard. People may act irresponsibly because they come to expect 
bailouts. But this side effect occurs only when the bailouts are neither arranged in 
advance nor freely chosen by all parties. If people pay in advance, in a free market, for 
the right to a bailout, then it is no longer a bailout; it is an insurance policy. If it 
nevertheless encourages undesirable behavior, it is at least undesirable behavior whose 
costs have been covered. 
Continuous-workout mortgages are one way of providing for a “responsible” 
bailout. These financial devices, set up in advance, would do what bankruptcy courts do 
on an emergency basis after the fact: they would adjust the terms of a loan to the 
borrower’s ability to pay. But, unlike bankruptcy proceedings, continuous-workout 
mortgages operate on an ongoing basis, responding to fluctuations in income as they 
occur and not allowing problems to build up to crisis level. Think of them as regular 
 
120

checkups and preventive care rather than a sudden trip to the emergency room. Nor do 
they entail the embarrassment and loss of reputation associated with a bankruptcy. Indeed 
continuous-workout mortgages continue to function under circumstances that otherwise 
would trigger a bankruptcy claim, allowing the lender to continue collecting a stream of 
payments that, while perhaps reduced, is at least uninterrupted. 
There remains of course a potential moral hazard with continuous-workout 
mortgages: a borrower might deliberately lose his job in order to trigger reductions in 
loan payments or, worse yet, work in the shadow economy and not report any income. 
Moral hazard is inherent in all risk management, including insurance and bankruptcy, and 
risk-management institutions can, with sufficient diligence, reduce it to manageable 
levels. Dealing with moral hazard is likely to be much more effective if the responses to 
income loss are planned in advance, rather than as part of an ad hoc bailout, by risk-
management institutions that have an incentive to contain moral hazard. 
One way to structure continuous-workout mortgages to reduce moral hazard is to 
write into the loan contract a payment formula that relies not only on the borrower’s 
actual income but also on indicators of the earning ability of others in the same 
geographic area and occupational category. Under such a plan, a borrower could 
intentionally reduce her own income, but this would not have much effect on the payment 
schedule, since she could not influence the other indicators. So-called occupational 
income indices, if designed properly, could achieve the ideal of loan terms truly 
dependent on ability to pay while minimizing moral hazard. 
Continuous-workout mortgages clearly ought to be a central pillar of any plan to 
deal with the subprime crisis. The fact that mortgage workouts are now being advocated 
 
121

so strongly, and by people of so many political persuasions, implies that the workouts 
should be institutionalized, regularized, and made permanent. Continuous-workout 
mortgages do just that. 
Home Equity Insurance 
Decreases in home values can reduce or even eliminate a homeowner’s equity, 
making it difficult or impossible for the owner to refinance with a new mortgage. The 
homeowner may conclude that it is impossible to move to another home, even if such a 
move would allow her to take advantage of a lucrative job offer. The mortgage may 
eventually end in default, especially since the homeowner may decide that it is just not 
worth struggling to make further payments on a mortgage when she can just walk away 
from the whole mess. 
Home equity insurance contracts can be written on the market values of homes in 
a metropolitan area, protecting homeowners against declines in the value of their homes 
within their local markets. Home equity insurance would eliminate the risky, often highly 
leveraged, position in which so many homeowners find themselves today. Such contracts 
would go a long way toward preventing many homeowners from ever falling into 
negative equity positions, thus allowing them to remain in their homes. This in turn 
would foster the various social and psychological benefits of homeownership, 
encouraging the maintenance of neighborhoods and promoting civic participation. 
With fire insurance, there is always the moral hazard that a homeowner will 
deliberately burn down the home in order to collect on the insurance. If we wrote home 
equity insurance policies directly on the selling prices of homes, then we would have an 
analogous moral hazard: the homeowner would lose any incentive to maintain the home 
 
122

properly or to negotiate the best price on its sale. Any loss would be incurred by the 
insurance company. But if the insurance is written on the aggregate value of the homes in 
a city, rather than on the value of an individual home, then there is no moral hazard. 
Home equity insurance would also eliminate the panic selling that sometimes 
devastates housing values, when owners see home prices starting to fall and decide to bail 
out. Had such insurance contracts been available in the past, we might not have seen the 
collapse of home values in major cities undergoing racial change, and the transitions 
could have been smoother and gentler than the “white flight” that actually occurred—a 
sort of negative speculative bubble built, in that case, around a racial story. The economic 
destruction of neighborhoods in such cities as Detroit, Philadelphia, and Washington 
might have been minimized or perhaps avoided altogether. Had city centers remained 
vital, industry might have been more inclined to remain in place, further supporting the 
vitality of the cities. 
Home equity insurance has been tried before. The first attempt took place in Oak 
Park, Illinois, in 1977. An important recent experiment, in the city of Syracuse, New 
York, was carried out by some of my colleagues at Yale, with the help of the 
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation. This pilot program was innovative in that it 
was based on a home-price index for the city of Syracuse rather than on the selling price 
of the individual homes, thereby controlling moral hazard. 
The concept of home equity insurance can also be implemented, essentially, 
through options. The options for single-family home prices now traded at the CME offer 
a clear route that homeowners can use today to protect themselves against the risk of 
falling home prices tomorrow. Anyone can buy a put option on home prices at the CME, 
 
123

which acts like an insurance policy that pays off if home prices fall below the strike price 
of the option. 
These put options are available to the general public today, but few avail 
themselves of them, let alone have any appreciation of the financial theory of risk sharing 
that lies behind them. Options are widely thought of by the public as financial gimmicks 
for reckless investors, when in fact they are effective devices for spreading and canceling 
risks. But skepticism has always greeted the introduction of new investment vehicles in 
the retail marketplace, and properly conducted programs of education will eventually 
allow the general public to understand and benefit from the concepts of real estate 
options. 
 Livelihood Insurance 
Today, when a middle-aged person loses a steady job, as when an industry shuts 
down or the demand for that person’s services drops, it may lead to a loss of income that 
becomes a crushing lifetime disaster. Louis Uchitelle, in his 2007 book The Disposable 
American: Layoffs and Their Consequences, discovered that those on whom this 
misfortune falls are truly suffering—but suffering mostly in silence, out of a sense of 
shame and of being at fault. 
Livelihood insurance would be a significant step toward addressing the 
consequences of job loss. It would build on another existing risk-management institution: 
disability insurance. But it would expand its coverage beyond just medical risks to take 
account of economic risks to livelihood as well.§ When disability insurance was invented, 
the level of information technology was such that medical risks to ability to earn an 
income were sufficiently measurable and verifiable to allow insurance policies to be 
 
124

written on those risks. But disability insurers of the time had no reliable way of 
measuring economic effects on an individual’s livelihood. Today we have sophisticated 
econometric indices of livelihoods based on large databases—and these indices can and 
no doubt will be improved even further over time. 
To avoid moral hazard, livelihood insurance cannot of course simply guarantee a 
specified level of income to the insured, lest that individual stop working and begin living 
off the insurance settlement. But—in parallel with continuous-workout mortgages and 
home equity insurance—it ought to be possible to write livelihood insurance policies 
whose payouts are connected only partly, if at all, to the insured’s own income, while still 
insuring against specific risks to that income. Occupational income indices appropriate to 
an individual’s line of work could be used to define an insured loss without inducing 
moral hazard. If there were markets for occupational income risk, then a private insurer 
could hedge the risk it was incurring by writing such policies. 
The existing disability insurance industry provides a natural infrastructure upon 
which to build livelihood insurance. 
Livelihood insurance might be viewed as a more modern and effective 
embodiment of the concept of unemployment insurance, a century-old concept. When 
unemployment insurance was invented in the United Kingdom in 1911, and implemented 
under the leadership of David Lloyd George, The Times of London wrote, “But for the 
unemployment scheme there is no precedent. It is really a ‘leap in the dark,’ and an 
uncommonly bold one.”** The gamble on the new scheme paid off. Over time 
unemployment insurance has been copied all over the world, and the entities that provide 
it have largely been able to keep moral hazard under control. Yet unemployment 
 
125

insurance in its present form never really managed to insure long-term livelihoods 
effectively. 
Given our much-improved information technology and more sophisticated 
financial theories, we should be able to advance the mission first taken up by the framers 
of unemployment insurance. Because of the complexity of its implementation, livelihood 
insurance should probably be offered by private insurance companies, facilitated by the 
government through regulation, infrastructure, and support of associated public goods, 
such as education. 
 The subprime crisis coincides with a time of transition for many people into, if 
not permanent unemployment, then permanent loss of the ability to earn substantial 
income for the rest of their lives. Livelihood insurance would go a long way toward 
mitigating the effects of such a trend. This time of crisis—when millions stand to 
undergo transitions to significantly reduced circumstances over their lifetimes—is the 
ideal time to consider it. 
Risk Management versus Risk Avoidance 
The adoption of risk-management devices like those discussed above would have 
fundamental effects. When we lack such devices, we tend to avoid risks in less optimal 
ways. Risk-avoidance behavior can, for example, have undesirable consequences for our 
decisions about where we work and live. Unable to insure against the risks inherent in our 
choice of geographic area, we may tend to choose safe jobs that we think we can never 
lose. We may elect to work in large metropolitan areas, where a wide variety of job 
opportunities are available, rather than in small rural communities or towns far from city 
centers, where the job markets are likely to be more specialized. Thus we tend to be more 
 
126

conventional in our choice of occupations and more dependent on big cities and their 
suburbs than we may want to be. 
Risk-avoidance behavior also has an impact on the behavior of city, regional, and 
even national governments. Fearing the uncertainties associated with new economic 
development initiatives, these governments typically choose to play it safe and model 
themselves along conventional lines. They slavishly imitate other successful entities 
when they ought to be cultivating their locales as vital centers for specific emerging 
technologies or industries. 
The result of all this avoidance behavior is a depressing uniformity and lack of 
adventure in our society. People should certainly avoid essential risks—risks to society at 
large—but not necessarily insurable risks, which can be spread out across large segments 
of the population and thereby blunted. But people tend to avoid both kinds of risks, 
draining society of much of its creativity and vitality. 
What If? The Combined Effect of the Elements of a Long-Term Solution 
Imagine our society equipped with a well-established information infrastructure 
that reached out to all its members; derivative markets for both owner-occupied and 
commercial real estate; well-developed retail products, like continuous-workout 
mortgages, home equity insurance, and livelihood insurance, that facilitate risk 
management for individuals; and default options that naturally lead people to use risk-
management devices intelligently. 
The crazily inefficient pricing in the market for owner-occupied homes would 
come to an end. The exaggerated swings of home prices, reflecting speculative thinking, 
would be tempered by the market actions of international investors and thus would be far 
 
127

less likely to cause the kind of disruptions we have been seeing in the current subprime 
crisis. A major source of business instability, fluctuations in real estate investment, would 
be rationalized. 
Our society could look forward to nothing less than more stable markets and, in 
turn, a more rational economy. 
 
128

Epilogue 
7 
The key to long-term economic success is rightly placed confidence in markets. In 
contrast, bubbles are the result of misplaced confidence. 
The various components of the subprime solution described in this book are 
designed to facilitate such rightly placed confidence, by making the markets and their 
associated risk-management institutions work as they ideally can, for the benefit of all of 
us. 
The short-term component of the solution described here is the most urgent. 
People are suffering and businesses are collapsing. The memories of these traumas will 
harm confidence and trust in our markets for years to come, just as they did during the 
Great Depression. With each passing day more damage is done to our social fabric. 
But the long-term component of the subprime solution is also ultimately needed to 
consolidate our stabilization. We must seize the opportunity today to make changes that 
will allow everyone to participate in the construction of a better future. The process of 
economic development is not over—we are learning from the current crisis, and the 
changes we make now can lead to a permanently better world. 
The long-term solution that I have offered here may strike some as rather 
unexpected. Suggesting as it does the further development of our financial markets and 
institutions, freeing them to work better, the solution may seem to be moving us in 
exactly the wrong direction. There are those who imagine that the entire solution to the 
subprime crisis is to be found in more bailouts, regulations, rules, penalties, and prison 
sentences. 

I have argued that, in the short term, bailouts should indeed play some role in our 
response to the crisis. Whenever the economic system is discovered not to have insured 
people properly, bailouts are a sign of our attentive humanity for each other. 
Our sense of trust in each other is itself substantially the legacy of former humane 
actions that at times took the form of bailouts. Consider the Marshall Plan, which was in 
a sense a gift from the United States to the damaged nations of Europe after World War 
II. The payments were not made in fulfillment of any prearranged insurance contract. 
They were the embodiment of the principles that Keynes had laid out in his Economic 
Consequences of the Peace a generation earlier. They were humane responses to the 
terrible situation in which Europe found itself after the war. In his 2005 book How to 
Cure a Fanatic, novelist and social critic Amos Oz claimed that “It was the Marshall Plan 
that won the cold war. Not ray guns and star wars, but the Marshall Plan. I think that 
communism was defeated through the Marshall Plan, though its overthrow took thirty or 
forty years more to realize. It was Harry Truman, not Ronald Reagan, who won the cold 
war through the Marshall Plan.”* 
We can only hope that some of the same generosity toward those who have been 
ill treated will appear again in the current financial crisis. 
But we cannot go forward with an assumption that ad hoc bailouts will be an 
appropriate mechanism for protecting human economic and social welfare in the future. 
The same moral premise that underlies bailouts today requires that we get to work to set 
up systematic procedures to deal in advance with comparable future crises. 
We must institutionalize generosity to the unfortunate. Doing so ultimately means 
producing risk-management contracts. Doing this is a natural extension of the trend in our 
 
130

society, over the past two hundred years, of replacing many of our charitable institutions 
with insurance-based institutions. 
Are people less grateful when the reimbursement they receive is a payout of an 
insurance policy rather than an act of charity? Probably. But gratitude is not our objective 
here. Close on the heels of gratitude may come a sense of shame and personal failure. 
Social stability, lack of discord, is enhanced most of all by a general sense that we have 
institutions that treat all of us in a fair and compassionate way, even though the actions of 
these institutions do not require any spontaneous impulse to generosity. 
The aftermath of the subprime crisis has involved considerable finger-pointing, It 
is natural to want to blame what has happened on some combination of evildoers. The 
danger is that the emphasis on placing blame may cause us to lose sight of the real 
solution. 
Of course, there have been evildoers. Every financial boom creates opportunities 
for the unscrupulous among us, and the opportunities demand that they hide behind a veil 
of corporate correctness, which makes their behavior all the more galling after the truth is 
known. During the subprime crisis, some of them had been especially insufferable, with 
their self-interested claims that there was no problem in the housing market, arguing with 
each successive month that the market would bottom out in the next month or so. It is 
easy to feel little sympathy with these people after the dénouement. 
It is no surprise that the heads of some of the biggest investment banks and 
broker-dealers have now been fired; the person at the helm is frequently let go, if only to 
symbolize hopes for a new beginning. But we do not want to let our desire for retribution 
go beyond this, to the punishment of the institutions themselves and their principles. 
 
131

The reaction to the stock market crash of 1929 and the resulting depression led to 
considerable anger in Europe, and a desire to punish the financial markets. That was a 
major turning point for Europe, for it only led to a further weakening of the continent’s 
financial system. In contrast, in the United States in the 1930s, the reaction to the 1929 
financial crisis was to try to strengthen our financial sector rather than punish it. The 
mistaken venting of European hostility on smoothly functioning financial markets was 
fully appreciated only half a century later. We do not want to repeat that mistake today. 
A related, parallel development complicates the issue: for several decades there 
has been a steady rise in economic inequality in the United States, as well as in most of 
the developed nations of the world. With each passing year, the continued worsening of 
that inequality further strains our tolerance of those who make large amounts of money in 
the financial markets. 
But this should not be an occasion for punishing the technology that has created 
the riches—for finance is indeed a powerful technology, and it can be a powerful means 
for making everyone better off. It can even be used to reduce economic inequality. A 
good deal of the economic inequality in the modern world is due to the persistence of 
unmanaged risks, and financial technology is ideally suited to deal with these risks. 
It is true that the rise in inequality has in part been due to cronyism on corporate 
boards, whose members have increasingly felt that top managers are entitled to exorbitant 
levels of compensation. But we should not assume that this is the main cause of the rise 
in inequality, and it certainly does not suggest that waging war on the financial elite is the 
best way to deal with the problem. 
I believe that in many cases it is true that top executives in the world of finance 
 
132

are not the most caring people—or at least that they are in less caring stages of their lives, 
caught up as they are in the game of finance, too filled with the competitive spirit and too 
busy to think about the needy. Clearly they are not nurses or kindergarten teachers. But 
public policy directed against their activities is not the solution to our problems. 
It may be difficult, in the present climate of public anger directed at our financial 
markets, for political candidates to get elected on the promise of expanding and 
developing our financial markets. But that is exactly what is needed now to solve the 
subprime crisis and prevent a recurrence of similar economic crises in the future. 
 
133

 
                                                           
* Some have argued that the TAF should have no effect on the overall level of confidence 
in our financial institutions as measured by interest rate spreads, and in fact there has 
been no consistent effect. See John B. Taylor and John C. Williams, “A Black Swan in 
the Money Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April 2008, 
http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2008/wp08-04bk.pdf. 
† Charles E. Schumer, “Opening Statement,” Joint Economic Committee Hearing, 
“Evolution of an Economic Crisis? The Subprime Lending Disaster and the Threat to the 
Broader Economy,” September 19, 2007, p. 2, 
http://jec.senate.gov/Hearings/09.19.07SubprimeSpilloverHearing.htm. 
* Robert J. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, 2nd Edition (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press), 2005, p. 12. 
* Alan Greenspan, The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World (New York: 
Penguin, 2007), p. 231.  
† George W. Bush, “President’s Radio Address,” August 6, 2005, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2005/08/20050806.html. 
‡ Ben S. Bernanke, “The Economic Outlook,” October 20, 2005, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/econ-outlook20051020.html. 
§ Alan Greenspan, “We Will Never Have a Perfect Model of Risk,” Financial Times, 
March 17, 2008, p. 9. 
** Aaron Sakolski, The Great American Land Bubble: The Amazing Story of Land-
Grabbing, Speculations, and Booms from Colonial Days to the Present Time (New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1932), p. 1. 

                                                                                                                                                                             
†† “The Southern Boom,” Los Angeles Times, December 26, 1887, p. 6. 
* David A. Moss, When All Else Fails: Government as the Ultimate Risk Manager 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002), p. 1. 
† Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New York: 
Harper and Brothers), 1931, p. 289. 
‡ W. Beran Wolfe, “Psychoanalyzing the Depression,” Forum and Century 87(4): 209–
15, 1932. 
§ Benjamin M. Friedman, The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth (New York: 
Knopf, 2005), p. 159. 
** John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace (London: 
Macmillan, 1919), p. xi. 
†† “Henry B. Steagall Tells How New Body Will Aid Business,” New York Times, 
January 24, 1932, p. 26. 
‡‡ Ben S. Bernanke, “Reducing Preventable Mortgage Foreclosures,” speech at the 
Independent Community Bankers of America Annual Convention, Orlando, Florida, 
March 4, 2008, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20080304a.htm. 
* Cass Sunstein, Republic.com (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001), p. 201. 
† A more extensive earlier development of these ideas for new markets is presented in 
Robert J. Shiller, Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest 
Economic Risks (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
 
135

 
136
                                                                                                                                                                             
‡ Stewart Mayhew, “The Impact of Derivatives on Cash Markets: What Have We 
Learned?” Terry College of Business, University of Georgia, February 3, 2000, 
http://www.terry.uga.edu/finance/research/working_papers/papers/impact.pdf. 
§ Livelihood insurance was proposed, and the concept developed, in Robert J. Shiller, The 
New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2003). 
** “Unemployment Insurance,” The Times, May 13, 1911, p. 11. 
* Amos Oz, How to Cure a Fanatic (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press), p. 79. 

