I 
A P11ican Book J( Jl 3 '6

MICHAEL YOUNG 
THE RISE OF THE 
MERITOCRACY 
I 870- 2033 
An Essay on 
Education and 
Equality 
PENGUIN BOOKS 

Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex 
A us·rnALIA: Penguin Books Pty Ltd, 762 Whitehorse Road, 
Mitcham, Victoria 
First published by Thames and Hudson 1958 
Published in Penguin Books I g61 
CopYJight © Thames and Hudson, 1958 
Made and printed in Great Britain 
by Western Printing Services Ltd, 
Bristol 
This book is sold subject to the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, 
re-sold, l1ircd out, or otherwise disposed 
of without the publisher's consent, 
in any form of binding or cover 
other than that in which 
it is published 

CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
PART ONE: RISE OF THE ELITE 
I CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
I Civil service model 
2 All things bright and beautiful 
3 Family and feudalism 
4 Spur of foreign competition 
5 Socialist midwives 
6 Summary 
2 THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
I Third force in the schools 
2 Agitation defeated 
3 The Leicester hybrid 
4 Summary 
3 ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION
I The most fundamental reform 
2 Higher salaries for teachers 
3 Boarding grammar schools 
4 Progress of intelligence testing 
5 Summary 
4 FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT
I The class of old men 
2 Factories cease to be schools 
3 Challenge to age 
4 Summary 
9 
I I  
19 
22 
29 
31 
36 
39 
40 
46 
52 
55 
57 
60 
63 
69 
77 
79 
81 
85 
94 

CONTENTS 
PART TWO: DECLINE OF THE 
LOWER CLASSES 
5 ST A TUS OF THE WORKER 
I Golden age of equality 
103 
2 Gulf between the classes 
ro6 
3 Pioneers of dirty work 
III 
4 The new unemployment 
I 16 
5 Domestic servants again 
120 
6 Summary 
123 
6 FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
I Historic mission 
126 
2 Decline of parliament 
134 
3 The technicians 
139 
4 Adjustment in the unions 
143 
5 Summary 
149 
7 RICH AND POOR 
r Merit money 
152 
2 The modern synthesis 
155 
3 Summary 
161 
8 CRISIS 
I The first women's campaign 
163 
2 Modern feminist movement 
170 
3 Coming of the crisis 
175 
4 New Conservatism 
180 
5 A rank and file at last 
185 
6 From here, where? 
188 

'The courage and imagination with which 
the development plan is drawn, the energy 
and judgement with which it is carried into 
effect, will not only determine the future of 
our educational system, but may largely 
shape the future course of the nation's for­
ward march.' 
The Nation's Schools 
Ministry of Education, 1945 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to acknowledge the 
valuable help and encouragement received 
from: A. L. Bacharach, Vincent Brome, 
Daphne Chandler, Margaret Cole, C. A. R. 
Crosland, Dorothy Elmhirst, Jean Floud, 
Geoffrey Gorer, A.H. Halsey, Irving Kristal, 
Peter Marris, Enid Mills, Edward Shils, J. H. 
Smith, Prudence Smith, R. H. Tawney, Peter 
Townsend, Peter Willmott, Leonard Woolf, 
Joan Young. 

INTRODUCTION 
WHAT was the connexion between the gutting of the 
Ministry of Education and the attempt on the life of the 
Chairman of the T. U. C.? Between the unofficial trans­
port strike and the equally unofficial walk-out of domes­
tic servants? All these questions are rendered doubly 
topical by the general strike which the Populists have 
called for the coming May, on the first anniversary of 
the troubles. Will there be a response? Will 2034 repeat 
1789 or merely 1848? I would submit that more topical, 
and more important, a subject could hardly be discussed. 
It touches on a clear and present danger to the state. 
The Prime Minister, in his frank report to the House 
of Lords, put part of the responsibility for the May 
Affair upon administrative failings. The wrecking of 
Wren's store at Stevenage the Prime Minister regards as 
a local disturbance; its 2,000 shop assistants were un­
doubtedly incensed by the management's unexpected 
rejection of the four-day week. Destruction of the atomic 
station at South Shields might never have happened 
with a less provocative director. The walk-out of domes­
tic servants was precipitated by the slowness of the Price 
Review, similar trouble in the other Provinces of 
Europe being evidence enough for that. Feelingagainst 
the Education Ministry was stimulated by the publica­
tion in April of the last report of the Standing Commis­
sion on the National Intelligence, and so on. All this I 
readily accept, yet it is not the whole story. We also 
have to explain why administrative miscalculations, that 
in an ordinary yearwould have passed almost unnoticed, 
should on this occasion have provoked such fierce and 
l l 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
concerted protest. To understand what happened, and 
so be prepared for what is going to happen, we have to 
take the measure of the Populist movement, with its 
strange blend of women in the lead and men in the 
rank and file. 
The women's circles have produced evangelists be­
fore; their eclipse has usually been as sudden as their 
rising. Not so the leaders by whom we are now plagued. 
They have consolidated their strength. The Convention 
they organized at Leicester shortly before Christmas 
2032 was their decisive moment. The women's circles 
would be mustered - that was well known; the women's 
sections of the Technicians' Party would be there - that 
was half allowed for. What was not expected was the 
attendance of so many representatives, men as well as 
women, from local branches of the Party and the 
Unions. In defiance of their leaders, they came from all 
over the country, and particularly from the North of 
England and Scotland - this hostility to London and 
the South is a sinister aspect of the agitation too much 
played down by government sociologists. Even the 
Association of Scientific Benefactors was represented. 
From Leicester sprang the ill-assorted conglomeration 
which has come to be known as the Populist Movement, 
with its strange charter. For the only time within living 
memory a dissident minority from the elite has struck up 
an alliance with the lower orders, hitherto so isolated 
and so docile. Their union fomented the local incidents 
in Kirkcaldy and Stevenage, South Shields and White­
hall, into the national crisis oflast May. 
What does it all mean? Only the historians of the 
future will know, perhaps even they will not agree. 
Close as we are to the crisis, with every day bringing 
fresh news, it is impossible for anyone to be more than 
12 

INTRODUCTION 
tentative in his opinions. No consensus has yet formed. 
The official view is that such an alliance across class­
lines is a misalliance, the background of leaders and led 
so different, and the common interest between them so 
slight, that the movement cannot last. The Sunday Scien­
tist has in a much-quoted, if scurrilous, phrase likened 
some of the leaders to 'Rimsky-Korsakov in a Lyons 
Corner House'. Has Somerville vulgarized itself with­
out finding any deep response? I think not, at least I do 
not agree about the response. The Populists could not 
have gathered such momentum, the May Affair reached 
such dimensions, unless there were more than passing 
resentments to feed on. My reading is that these resent­
ments have their roots deep in history. 
* 
The purpose of this essay is to discuss some of the his­
torical causes of the grievances that erupted in the May 
risings. My theme is that, whether or not these were 
explicitly organized by the Populists, they were cer­
tainly organized by history. One belief is implicit 
throughout: there are no revolutions, only the slow 
accretions of a ceaseless change that reproduces the past 
while transforming it. I am not thinking of the thousand 
and one technical innovations which have, from one 
point of view, made of the last century an aeon. These 
commonplaces I will not deal with but rather try to 
show that, however odd our great-grandfathers may 
now seem, the twenty-first century is woven on the same 
loom as neo-Elizabethan times. I shall illustrate my 
essay with references to the period, between 1914 and 
1963, on which I specialized at the Manchester Gram­
mar School. I would like to acknowledge my debt to my 
13 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
sixth-form master, Mr Woodcock, for first pointing out 
to me how revealing a study of that time could be for an 
understanding of the progress man has made in the last 
century. He first introduced me to historical sociology as 
it has been developed in the ancient universities. 
At the beginning of my special period, 1914, the 
upper classes had their fair share of geniuses and morons, 
so did the workers; or, I should say, since a few brilliant 
and fortunate working men always climbed up to the 
top despite having been subordinate in society, the in­
ferior classes contained almost as high a proportion of 
superior people as the upper classes themselves. Intelli­
gence was distributed more or less at random. Each 
social class was, in ability, the miniature of society itself; 
the part the same as the whole. The fundamental 
change of the last century, which was fairly begun 
before 1963, is that intelligence has been redistributed 
between the classes, and the nature of the classes 
changed. The talented have been given the opportunity 
to rise to the level which accords with their capacities, 
and the lower classes consequently reserved for those 
who are also lower in ability. The part is no longer the 
same as the whole. 
The rate of social progress depends upon the degree 
to which power is matched with intelligence. The 
Britain of a century ago squandered its resources by con­
demning even talented people to manual work; and 
blocked the efforts of members of the lower classes to 
obtain just recognition for their abilities. But Britain 
could not be a caste society if it was to survive as a great 
nation, great, that is, in comparison with others. To 
withstand international competition the country had to 
make better use of its human material, above all, of the 
talent which was even in England, one might say always 
14 

INTRODUCTION 
and everywhere, too scarce. Schools and industries were 
progressively thrown open to merit, so that the clever 
children of each generation had opportunity for ascent. 
The proportion of people with I.Q.s over 130 could not 
be raised - the task was rather to prevent a fall - but 
the proportion of such people in work which called upon 
their full capacities was steadily raised. For every 
Rutherford there have in modern times been ten such 
magnates, for every Keynes two, and even Elgar has 
had a successor. Civilization does not depend upon the 
stolid mass, the homme moyen sensuel, but upon the crea­
tive minority, the innovator who with one stroke can 
save the labour of IO,ooo, the brilliant few who cannot 
look without wonder, the restless elite who have made 
mutation a social, as well as a biological, fact. The ranks 
of the scientists and technologists, the artists and the 
teachers, have been swelled, their education shaped to 
their high genetic destiny, their. power for good in­
creased. Progress is their triumph; the modern world 
their monument. 
And yet, if we ignore the casualties of progress, we fall 
victim, in the sphere of human relations, to the insidious 
complacency which in natural science we so much 
deplore. In the balanced view of sociology we have to 
consider the failures as well as the successes. Every 
selection of one is a rejection of many. Let us be frank 
and admit that we have failed to assess the mental state 
of the rejected, and so secure their necessary adjust­
ment. The danger that has settled in upon us since the 
shock administered by the events of the last year is that 
the clamouring throng who find the gates of higher edu­
cation barred against them may turn against the social 
order by which they feel themselves condemned. Do not 
the masses, for all their lack of capacity, sometimes 
15 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
behave as though they suffered from a sense of indig­
nity? Do they necessarily see themselves as we see them? 
We know it is only by giving free rein to well-trained 
imagination and organized intelligence that humanity 
can hope to reach, in centuries to come, the fulfilment 
it deserves. Let us still recognize that those who com­
plain of present injustice think they are talking about 
something real, and try to understand how it is that 
nonsense to us makes sense to them. 

PART ONE 
RISE OF THE ELITE 

CHAPTER ONE 
CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
I. CIVIL SERVICE MODEL 
THE I87os have been called the beginning of the modern 
era not so much because of the Commune as because of 
Mr Forster. Education was then made compulsory in 
Britain, patronage at last abolished in the civil service 
and competitive entry made the rule. Merit became the 
arbiter, attainment the standard, for entry and advance­
ment in a splendid profession, 1 which was all the more an 
achievement because so many of our great-grandfathers 
were positively hostile to 'competition wallahs' in Brit­
ish government. Considering the opposition, it is re­
markable that by I 944 the most brilliant young men 
from Cambridge and Oxford were already going into 
the administrative class, there to guide the destinies of 
the nation; outstanding young men from the provincial 
universities into the hardly less important scientific and 
technical grades; worthy young men and women from 
the grammar schools into the executive grades; the less 
1. The authors of the Northcote-Trevelyan report were com­
mendably aware of what was needed. 'It would be natural to ex­
pect that so important a profession would attract into its ranks the 
ablest and the most ambitious of the youth of the country; that the 
keenest emulation would prevail among those who had entered it; 
and that such as were endowed with superior qualifications would 
rapidly rise to distinction and public eminence. Such, however, is 
by no means the case. Admission into the civil service is indeed 
eagerly sought after, but it is for the unambitious, and the indolent 
or incapable, that it is chiefly desired.' Northcote-Trevelyan 
Report on the Organization of the Permanent Civil Service (Feb­
ruary 1854). 
19 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
outstanding joined the junior clerical grades; and the 
fine body of men and women who were the backbone of 
the service entered the manual and manipulative grades 
straight from the elementary (later called secondary 
modern) schools. Here was a model for any sensible 
organizer to emulate. It was copied a thousand times in 
commerce and industry, at first mainly by the large 
companies like Imperial Chemicals and Unilever, and 
later by the ever-proliferating public corporations. 
The flaw in these otherwise admirable arrangements 
was, of course, that the rest of society, and in particular 
education, was not yet run on the civil-service principle. 
Education was very far from proportioned to merit. 
Some children of an ability which should have qualified 
them as assistant secretaries were forced to leave school 
at fifteen and become postmen. Assistant secretaries 
delivering letters! - it is almost incredible. Other chil­
dren with poor ability but rich connexions, pressed 
through Eton and Balliol, eventually found themselves 
in mature years as high officers in the Foreign Service. 
Postmen delivering demarches! -what a tragic farce! The 
civil service, wrestling with an intractable problem, did 
something to make up for iajustice in the larger society 
by enlarging opportunities for elevation within its own 
ranks. Particularly in wartime, it substituted late devel­
opers from the lower grades for early deterioraters who 
managed to pass their final examinations only to sink 
exhausted into the Treasury. Clever clerks could even in 
peacetime climb on to a quite different ladder; a few of 
them became executives, and in their later years a few 
of these broke into the lower ranks of the administrative 
class. The limits were the deficiencies of the general edu­
cational system. Only when the school did its job were 
the Civil Service Commissioners able to do theirs. 
20 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
When no more assistant secretaries had to leave school 
at fifteen, and no more postmen were sent to Balliol, the 
great reform begun in the 1870s could at last be 
completed. 
The force of this example is difficult to over-estimate. 
The names in the Imperial Calendar a hundred years 
ago adorned a civil service renowned, for good reason, 
as the best in the world. How close the analogy with 
modern society! Today we have an elite selected accord­
ing to brains and educated according to deserts, with a 
grounding in philosophy and administration as well as 
in the two S's of science and sociology. The administra­
tive class in the old civil service was also picked for 
brains and given an education which was far more than 
vocational, and yet had a bearing (like the Roman and 
unlike that other great Imperial Civil Service, of China) 
upon the tasks they were later called upon to perform. 
Today we frankly recognize that democracy can be no 
more than aspiration, and have rule not so much by the 
people as by the cleverest people; not an aristocracy of 
birth, not a plutocracy of wealth, but a true meri­
tocracy1 of talent. Likewise, the old civil service exer­
cised, with skill and tact, a great deal more power than 
Parliament because it was so well chosen and well 
trained. Today each member of the meritocracy has an 
attested minimum rating of 125 (with the top posts for 
psychologists, sociologists, and Permanent Secretaries 
reserved since the Crawley-Jay award of 2018 for the 
over 160s): has not Tauber's retrospective method 
I. The origin of this unpleasant term, like that of 'equality of
opportunity', is still obscure. It seems to have been first generally 
used in the sixties of the last century in small-circulation journals 
attached to the Labour Party, and gained wide currency much 
l ater on.
21 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
shown that a century ago the majority of the adminis­
trative class already had indices higher than I 2 5? These 
were the rudiments of the modern system. If today in­
telligence reigns supreme and in three-quarters of the 
world unchallenged, a modest tribute must be paid to 
the far-sighted pioneers of the British civil service. It is 
an exaggeration, an excusable one, to say that our 
society is a memorial to them no less than to the early 
socialists. 
2. ALL THINGS BRIGHT AND BEAUTIFUL 
Until the civil service reforms the greater part of society 
was governed by nepotism. In the agricultural world 
which predominated until well on in the nineteenth cen­
tury, status was not achievable by merit, but ascribed 
by birth. Class by class, status by status, occupation by 
occupation, sons followed faithfully in the footsteps of 
fathers, and fathers as faithfully behind grandfathers. 
People did not ask a boy what he was going to be when he 
grew up; they knew - he was going to work on the land 
like his ancestors before him. For the most part there 
was no selection for jobs; there was only inheritance. 
Rural society (and its religion) was family writ larger. 
With the father at the head, the status of the other 
members of the family was graded in a hierarchy, with 
eldest son ranking before younger1 and sons before 
1. From the time that primogeniture became generally estab­
lished, younger sons who had to leave the family threshold were the 
tillers of achievement and merchants of social change. But until 
the nineteenth century, population increased but slowly, and it 
was comparatively rare for there to be more than one son alive to 
inherit at the death of the father. In my special period the Nazis 
deliberately reintroduced primogeniture in Germany in order to 
drive younger sons off the land into the army and to the short­
lived colonies in Eastern Europe. 
22 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
daughters. As in the family so in the village. The lord of 
the manor was the patriarch, and below him in their 
proper degrees were the farming population, the free­
holders ranking above copyholders, copyholders above 
cottagers, cottagers above farm servants. 
The rich man in his castle, 
The poor man at his gate, 
He made them high and lowly 
And ordered their estate. 
All things bright and beautiful, etc. 
As in the village, so in the kingdom: the Royal Family, 
headed by the Father of his country, stood over the 
orders and estates of the realm. As in the kingdom on 
earth, so in the Kingdom of Heaven. The same man was 
always at the head of the table. Such a rule was hardly 
designed to encourage youthful ambition. 
In holding a mirror to the past, even the historian can 
seldom escape the image of his own inquiring face, and 
it is practically impossible for any layman, taking for 
granted as he does the logic of human engineering, to 
understand the apparent folly of his ancestors. Of course 
there was tyranny, waste, and rigidity in the old system. 
But that was not all. Lord Salisbury once said he could 
not think of a logical defence of the hereditary principle 
and, for that reason, was disinclined to give it up. He 
was able to speak with such assurance because, to any­
one whose roots were in the countryside, 1 the justifica­
tion for inheritance when agriculture was a family 
affair was almost self-evident. Agriculture demanded 
1. Things were different in the towns, graced as always, by
people of the 'middle sort'; where, in Defoe's words, 'Draymen 
and Porters fill the City Chair; and Footboys Magisterial Purple 
wear.' 
23 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
hard and unremitting exertion, and, in the prevailing 
mental climate, this was best secured when men knew 
they were working for children and grandchildren who 
would benefit from improvement as they would suffer 
from neglect. Agriculture demanded that the toilers 
should be attached to the soil, lest the always precarious 
supply of food should fail, and this attachment was best 
safeguarded when children were set to learn and love, 
at an age when they were at their most impressionable, 
the little peculiarities of the land they would one day 
inherit. Agriculture demanded that the fertility of the 
soil should be continuously nourished, not exploited for 
temporary gain; and the long view was instilled in 
people who had at heart the interests of posterity, as 
embodied in their own family. Inheritance at once 
prompted exertion, instilled responsibility, and pre­
served continuity. 
The soil grows castes; the machine makes classes. The 
old system was good enough as long as England de­
pended upon primitive agriculture, but as industry 
grew, feudalism was more and more of a restraint upon 
efficiency. It was not so much inheritance of property1 
that mattered. Indeed, the more riches a father be­
queathed, the more often his children did nothing apart 
from the labour of spending their money. When the 
family was pensioned off, the power descended from the 
fathers to paid managers selected for their ability, 
r . An amusing instance of the tendency of socialists to live in the 
past was their continued insistence, long after wealth in land had 
ceased to count, on the need for equalizing holdings of property. For­
tunately, as it has turned out, they were very much less concerned 
with the distribution of power, which is by no means equated with 
the distribution of wealth in any but an agricultural society. Fenn's 
first maxim for the student of historical sociology - where goes 
power, there go I - was not first for nothing. 
24 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES. 
which was just as it should be. What mattered most wM 
the number of children who inherited power and posi­
tion as well as wealth. It is amazing how many doctors 
were the sons of doctors, how many lawyers the sons of 
lawyers - and likewise with professions of many kinds. 
In industry and commerce, many successful men pre­
ferred to send their children up the social ladder into the 
professions; even in business job succession was quite 
common enough to be a very serious impediment to 
productivity. Naturally enough, able fathers did bear 
able children - though less often before the spread of in­
telligenic marriages - who were doubly entitled to their 
power, by merit, as well as birth. But how sadly frequent 
was the opposite - the son who did not match his father, 
whose ability was perhaps of a different kind, whose 
leanings were to art or philosophy instead of business, 
or whose energy was curdled by the nearness of his 
parent - and yet down he sat at his father's desk and 
kept the seat warm for his own son. Many sons did their 
best, by training and application, to abide by Goethe's 
instruction: 
Really to own what you inherit 
You first must earn it by your merit. 
But what was the use? There are limits to self-deception. 
Human tragedy was also social waste. 1 Until the Butler 
r. The importance of calculating this wastage was urged by one
of the most far-sighted pioneers. Professor Hogben said in 1938 that 
'we may investigate how far the process of occupational recruit­
ment is based on special aptitude for a particular occupation; and 
the problem of political arithmetic is then to estimate the remedi­
able wastage due to defective social organization and the loss of 
social efficiency resulting therefrom'. Political Arithmetic, I 938. 
Some years earlier Kenneth Lindsay had calculated, in an influ­
ential book, that proved ability to the extent of at least forty per 
cent of the nation's children was then being denied expression. 
25 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Act began to take effect in the seventies and eighties, 
Britain was outstanding among industrial countries as 
the home and fount of nepotism in a hundred subtle 
forms. 
Almost any intelligent observer could see how crimi­
nal this was. In the last century countless crises and 
,disasters were caused by the wrong father's son or 
{sometimes) daughter being in the wrong place at the 
wrong time. Why then did a system of inheritance suit­
.able to agriculture survive for so long? Britain had been 
.an industrial country for well over a century before it 
rnoted out nepotism. Why such a gap between the end 
of dependence upon the soil and the end of dependence 
upon caste? One of the reasons is obvious enough. This 
island enjoyed a doubtful blessing: it was never invaded, 
never completely defeated in war, never shaken by poli­
tical revolution. The country was, in short, never jolted 
into making a fresh start. As with all countries which 
decline slowly and steadily, decline, that is, in a stable 
way, today was never, after 1914, as brilliant as yester­
day. Britain lived on ancestral capital, and the more it 
did so, the more it had to do so; the dimmer the present, 
the greater the justification for escaping from it. A 
strange doctrine, I know, for a modern sociologist, but I 
Social Progress and Educational Waste, 1 924. It was not until much 
later, however, that Professor Marlow was, on a body of cogent 
-assumptions, able to estimate the wastage in the U.K. as having 
been equal to about thirty-eight megaunits per annum in the for­
ties, falling to about thirty-three in the sixties, to about eighteen by 
the nineties and to s-2 megas in the 2020s. This is said to be the 
irreducible minimum, or in technical terms the Marlow Line, 
beyond which social efficiency cannot further be improved. But 
after all that has happened in the past century, who can safely 
predict what further progress may still be possible? Nor is the basis 
of these calculations yet altogether satisfactory. 
26 

CLASH OF SO CIAL FORCES 
am not alone in saying that too many people had tod" 
sharp a sense of history, along with too dull a sense of 
what the future might be persuaded to yield. It was not 
like this in the nineteenth century, but by the middle of 
the twentieth, tradition was over-valued, continuity tooi 
much revered. For every change there had to be pre­
cedent. Britain, in other words, remained rural-minded 
long after eighty per cent of its population were col­
lected together in towns - altogether as strange an 
example of cultural lag on a mass scale as China before 
the Mao Dynasty. 
Ancestor-worship took the form of reverence for old 
houses and churches, the most amazing coinage, the 
quaintest weights and measures. Guards, regiments, 
public houses, old cars, cricket, above all the hereditary 
monarchy and in a less obvious way the class around 
the monarchy, namely the aristocracy, which could 
trace its descent from a more splendid past. Even poli­
ticians, as Privy Councillors, borrowed some of the royal 
glamour; civil servants coyly called themselves HMG.1 
The State itself had high prestige because it attracted 
some of the status of the aristocracy who used to govern 
the government. In the United States (without an aris­
tocracy) it was for long assumed that all government 
was bad, whereas in Britain people were always indig­
nant that governments were not better. Not only the 
government, all the most important institutions of the 
country, from the Universities to the Royal Society, 
from the Marylebone Cricket Club to the T.U.C., from 
1 .  In England piety never went to quite such an excess as in 
Japan, where the prevailing sentiment was expressed in a famous 
poem, 
Precious are my parents that gave me birth, 
So that I might serve His Majesty. 
27 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
the merchant marine to Fortnum & Mason, were at one 
time blessed by royal patronage, and there was hardly 
a leading company in any industry which could not 
boast of a peer on its board. The aristocracy was the 
father-figure in the collective unconscious; its influence 
.so pervasive that brilliant people, successful in their own 
right, were sometimes ashamed of their lowly origins, 
instead of proud that they had risen above them. Of all 
their admired characteristics, the most widely emulated 
was the habit aristocrats were supposed to have of not 
working, or rather of exerting themselves only at work 
which was sanctified by being unpaid. 1 In industry top 
management slavishly copied these drones. Contempor­
ary accounts show in harrowing detail that as late as 
1975 managers of important firms were still behaving 
( often without knowing why) as though they were 'gen­
tlemen of independent means'. In the army they were 
not men but officers; in industry not men but gentle­
men. They pretended, in a ritualistic way, that they did 
not have to earn their living at all - managers arrived at 
their jobs two or three hours after their manual em­
ployees; came dressed in a suit cut for the club rather 
than the factory; occupied an office which looked like a 
drawing-room, with not a sign to be seen of anything so 
vulgar as a digital computer; nourished themselves from 
a cocktail cabinet just like the one at home; ate at the 
firm's expense in a canteen laid out to look like a private 
drawing-room; and toiled on late into the evening in 
the hours for which they were not paid. They made work 
L Magazines of the rg6os and r97os report sightseers enor­
mously impressed by the lords and ladies who acted as guides to the 
Longleats and Knoles. The glamour of owners who could be 
admired, and at the same time more pitied than feared, brushed 
off on their paymasters. 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
into hobby as much as they made hobby into work: the 
serious business of life began when they mimicked the 
sporting squire of old at the first tee.1 This elaborate 
pretence was naturally and disastrously imitated by 
subordinates at every level. Strikes beset the manage­
ment who tried to stop the labourers from taking time 
off, at frequent intervals, for tea. The long arm of the 
aristocracy had productivity securely under arrest. 
3• FAMILY AND FEUDALISM 
Aristocratic influence would never have lasted so long, 
even in England, without the support of the family: 
feudalism and family go together. The family is always 
the pillar of inheritance. The ordinary parent (not un­
known today, we must sorrowfully admit) wanted to 
hand on his money to his child rather than to outsiders 
or to the state; the child was part of himself and by 
bequeathing property to him the father assured a kind 
of immortality to himself: the hereditary father never 
died. If parents had a family business which in a sense 
embodied themselves, they were even more anxious to 
pass it on to someone of their own blood to manage. 
Parents, by controlling property, also controlled their 
children; a threat to cut a child out of a will was almost 
as effective an assertion of power in industrial as it had 
1. The fixation on birds which reached such extraordinary
dimensions after the General Election of 1971 was another of the 
strange legacies of the sporting squire and parson. The old aristo­
crats bred birds which they tenderly shot, studied their amorous 
habits with field glasses, and themselves developed the appearance 
of their quarry. Oscar Wilde said of the English face - ' Once seen, 
never remembered' - it did not apply to these strange people. 
Ornithology bridged two worlds by making a pastime for the pro­
fessional into a science for the amateur. 
29 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
been in agricultural Britain. Even if they had no pro­
perty, parents wanted their children to find, if not the 
same job, then a slightly better job than themselves. 
Study upon study has shown how impelling these drives 
were ( and are) and how strong the motive possessed by 
parents to advance their children. To imagine merit 
where none existed was the sanctioned psychosis of a 
million homes. 
For hundreds of years society has been a battleground 
between two great principles - the principle of selection 
by family and the principle of selection by merit. Vic­
tory has never gone fully to one principle or the other. 
The champions of the family have argued that for rear­
ing children there has not yet been any adequate sub­
stitute for the device which has served mankind so far. 
Children raised in orphanages, even the most en­
lightened, seem to lack the inner assurance needed to 
convert potential into actual ability. If all went to 
orphanages, all would have equal opportunity, true, 
but at the cost of making everyone equally unhappy. 
Steady affection from the same parents - this has been 
generally accepted since the experiments in the late 
1 980s - is necessary for the full glandular development 
of the infant. Love is biochemistry's chief assistant. 
We have had to put up with the failings of the family. 
We have had to recognize that nearly all parents are 
going to try to gain unfair advantages for their off­
spring. The function of society, whose efficiency de­
pends upon observing the principles of selection by 
merit, is to prevent such selfishness from doing any 
serious harm. The family is the guardian of individual, 
the state the guardian of collective efficiency, and this 
function the State is able to perform because citizens arc 
themselves divided in their interests. As members of a 
30 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
particular family, they want their children to have every 
privilege. But at the same time they are opposed to 
privilege for anyone else's children. They desire equal 
opportunity for everyone else's children, extra for their 
own. By standing for the general interest, the State 
therefore commands some support to uphold it against 
the bitter opposition which it provokes. Up till a few 
years ago, the general view amongst intelligent people 
was that the State had performed with admirable effect 
its functions of policing the family, so as to prevent 
it from having any undue influence on the occupa­
tional system. We underestimated the resistance of the 
family. The home is still the most fertile seed-bed of 
reaction. 
My purpose at this point is not so much to review the 
recent evidence of family discontent as to outline its his­
torical background. My intent is to stress that, despite 
the manifold changes of the last centuries, the family is 
still much the same kind of institution, inspired more by 
loyalty than reason, that it used to be in feudal times. 
4. SPUR OF FOREIGN COMPETITION 
Historical analysis indicates the inevitability of family 
opposition to progress; also the necessity of the merito­
cracy. The aristocracy and the family - twin springs of 
inertia - have not, we know, managed to stop social 
progress. The reason is simple: that Britain has had to 
vie with other nations in a competitive world. If it had 
not been for the spur of international rivalry, the inter­
nal society would not have become more vigorous; 
competitive selection in the civil service would never 
have become the exemplar for the nation as a whole. 
The wars of the last century, as the apotheosis of 
3 1  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
international competition, were also the great forcing­
house for merit. At the time people used to say that in 
war there were no victors; victor and vanquished, all 
suffered alike. In the perspective of history we can see 
how untrue this was. Before nuclear fission arrived, war 
benefited everyone, especially the defeated countries -
witness Russia, Germany, China. War stimulated in­
vention, and, even more important, war stimulated the 
better use of human resources. In the First World War 
the U.S. Army put two million recruits through intelli­
gence tests, 1 so successfully that practically all armies 
adopted the same practice when they were mobil­
ized on later occasions. In the Second World War the 
British Army again demonstrated the extraordinary 
effectiveness of psychological selection. These were in 
their time great achievements. War woke people up to 
the fact that the nation possessed a supply of ability 
never ordinarily used to the full. Every child from an 
elementary school who became an officer in the Hitler 
war - many as they were, once merit rather than parent­
age became the test - was an argument for educational 
reform. It was no accident that the three great educa­
tion Acts of the first half-century, in 1902, 1918, and 
I. The directive setting out the objectives the U.S. Army wished 
to achieve has an air of extraordinary pre3cience about it. The test 
was to 'designate and select men whose superior intelligence indi­
cated the desirability of advancement or special assignment; to 
select and recommend for "development battalions" such men as 
were so inferior intellectually as to be unsuited for regular military 
training; to enable officers to build up organizations of uniform 
mental strength, or in accordance with definite specifications con­
cerning intellectual requirements; to select men for various types 
of military duty or for special assignments; to eliminate men whose 
intelligence was so inferior as to make it impossible to use them at 
all.' Quoted Eysenck, H. J. Uses and Abuses of Psyclwlogy. 1953.
32 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
1944, were put on the statute book at the end of the 
three wars, nor that the cause of reform, in civil service 
and army alike, was in the previous century so strongly 
assisted by the Crimea. 
Competition with other countries was the pacemaker 
of peacetime too. The Englishman was made to fear 
that his effortless superiority might be a contradiction 
in terms: above the cosiness of Lords, the exclusiveness 
of Ascot, and the somnolence of the Federation of 
British Industries loomed the shadow of the clever 
foreigner. This internal class system was eventually 
changed by the international class system with which 
Englishmen were likewise obsessed - for ever discussing 
whether their country was a first-class power, or (after 
some setback) second-class, third-class, or no class at all. 
At the beginning of the last century the fear was of Ger­
many; in the middle years, of American and, even 
more, of Russian competition; at the end, of Chinese. 1 
At each stage the threat of the other country's arma­
ments, the other country's trade and, more and more, 
the threat of the other country's science, was used to 
batter down resistance to change. It was always a ques­
tion of quality. The other countries had chosen better 
raw material and, by better training, had produced 
from it better aeronauts, better physicists, better ad­
ministrators, and, above all, better applied scientists. 
If Britain did not do likewise she was inviting defeat 
either in war or in trade; the recurring crises in the 
balance of payments made the second seem almost as 
deadly a threat as the first. For the sake of survival, the 
country had to meet the challenge of other countries less 
1. The battle in the 1990s against making Chinese the second 
language in schools was an interesting example of continuing con­
servatism in a profession whose primary role is discouraging it. 
B 
33 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
hampered by rural ideas; which had benefited from 
more thorough social revolutions; which were not han­
dicapped by island-psychology. Britain survived so long 
because it had repeated blood-transfusions from Aus­
tralia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Canada, coun­
tries less handicapped by inheritance, who sent their 
talent to their mother-country. This could not go on 
for ever, and in science, if not in the arts, the supply 
from the Commonwealth began to dry up after 1945. 
On this issue many old warnings are still most mov­
ing. The doughty Mr Forster, when introducing the 
first great Education Bill, on 17 February 1870, said: 
We must not delay. Upon the speedy provision of elementary 
education depends our industrial prosperity. It is of no use try­
ing to give technical teaching to our artisans without elementary 
education; uneducated labourers - and many of our labourers 
are utterly uneducated - are for the most part, unskilled 
labourers, and if we leave our workfolk any longer unskilled, 
notwithstanding their strong sinews and determined energy, 
they will become over-matched in the competition of the world . 
. . . If we are to hold our position among men of our own race 
or among the nations of the world we must make up the small­
ness of our numbers by increasing the intellectual force of the 
individual .1 
Nearly a century later, Forster was echoed by the last 
but one of the great aristocrats in government. 
In the last ten years, said Sir Winston Churchill, the Soviet 
higher technical education for mechanical engineering has been 
developed both in numbers and quality to an extent which far 
1. Hansard, 17 February 1870. Quoted in English Historica l 
Documents XII (1). Ed. Young, G. M., and Handcock, W. D., p.
914· 
34 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
exceeds anything we have achieved. This is a matter which needs 
the immediate attention of Her M aJesty' s Government . . .  if we 
are - not to keep abreast - but even to maintain our porportion­
ate place in the world. 1 
The reasons for the sorry state to which Sir Winston 
referred were that higher education was too limited and 
enjoyed by the wrong people. In 1 945 as many as half 
of the small number of students at the universities did 
not have an adequate intelligence at all. 'At present 
rather less than two per cent of the population reach the 
Universities. About five per cent of the whole popula­
tion show, on test, an intelligence as great as the upper 
half of the students, who amount to one per cent of the 
population.'2 Ten years later many able working-class 
children were still not getting to universities at all. 3 So 
little intelligence at the universities! Many able people 
not getting there at all! No wonder the annual pro­
ductivity increment in the thirty years after 1945 was 
only three per cent! No wonder the famous Ministry of 
Education report on Early Leaving lamented the mass of 
' wasted academic ability' which was squandered on 
mere manual jobs instead of being cultivated in the 
1. Reported in The Times, 6 December 1955. At that time Great
Britain was producing fewer graduates in engineering and other 
applied sciences than almost any other major country. 2,800 a 
year, or 57 per million of population, in Britain; compared with 
22,000, or 136 per million, in U.S.A.; and 60,000, or 280 per 
million, in the U.S.S.R. France was producing 70 per million, 
Western Germany 86 per million, and Switzerland 82 per million. 
See Technical Education, 1956. H.M.S.O. Cmd. 9703. 
2. Barlow Report on Scientific Manpower. May 1946. H.M.S.O.
Cmd. 6824. 
3. Report on university education published for the Committee
of Vice-Chancellors and Principals by the Association of U niver­
sities of the British Commonwealth, 1957. 
35 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
grammar schools. Fortunately, the danger of being 
' over-matched in the competition of the world' was so 
real and was stressed so vigorously in the last half of the 
century, the need to subordinate everything else to the 
claims of production so pressing, that education was at 
last decisively reformed and the family torn away from 
the feudal embrace. 
Or so we thought. 
5• SOCIALIST MIDWIVES 
Progress would have been forfeit had it not been for the 
relentless efforts of the now famous ' midwives of pro­
gress'. The socialists accelerated the growth of large­
scale organizations, and, unlike small businesses, these 
encouraged promotion by merit. 1 The Coal Board was 
in its own way as influential as the civil service. The 
socialists attacked all family influence and job succes­
sion. Labour pamphlets in the 1920s and 1 930s (many 
of them republished in Harvard Socialist Documents) 
made a practice of ridiculing the current criterion of 
success - ' it's not what you know but who you know that 
counts'. They denounced inheritance of property. 
Death duties were not their triumph alone but it was 
they who so powerfully nourished the moral conviction 
that the children of rich parents should never receive 
advantage denied to the children of poor. For many 
1. Large enterprises also needed more educated people. In 1 930 
the Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Company, to take an example, 
employed some w,ooo people of whom nearly 2,000 required 
some form of organized education. In 1 956 the company had 
25,000 employees of whom 1 6,000 had to have some organized 
education. By 1 982 6 1 ,000 out of a total of 74,000 had education 
up to the standard of Higher National Certificate, as it was then 
called. Times Educational Supplement, 1 7 February 1 956. 
36 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
years parents dodged death duties (the duties having to 
be avoided because the occasion could not be) by giving 
away much of their property before they died. The 
socialists eventually stopped this evasion by the first 
of their capital levies. Even these successes pale by the 
side of their greatest achievement - the progressive and 
fundamental improvement of the educational system. 
Pressure for greater equality of opportunity was un­
ceasing, and as a result elementary schools were im­
proved, secondary education made free, and the num­
ber of university scholarships multiplied. Although the 
Education Act of 1944 was introduced by a Conserva­
tive Minister in a Coalition Government, the purpose 
was that of the Labour Party. After that Act children 
were educated according to their ' age, ability, and 
aptitude', those with greater ability getting more edu­
cation. 
All in all, the British socialists of the first three­
quarters of the last century (like Saint-Simon and his 
followers in France 200 years ago) were most commend­
able for the single-Inindedness with which they attacked 
the evils of inheritance in property, job, and education. 
In so far as they were opposed to inequality it was to the 
kinds flowing from inheritance, and the form of equal­
ity they fostered most was in the truly vital theatre of 
opportunity. It is all very well for our modern feininists 
to say that in their discriinination they do not count 
these men as socialists; history is always being rewritten, 
but to carry conviction it needs to be done with more 
finesse than that. The socialists were the men who pro­
duced a new mental climate within the span of less than 
a century. 
The greatest of their intellectual leaders did more 
than elaborate a critique of inheritance. The Morrises, 
37 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Tawneys, and Coles quaintly spoke of the ' dignity of 
labour' as though manual and mental work were of 
equal worth; overshadowing them, the greatest of the 
Fabians saw a vision of the new social order which 
would rise, on the foundation of human ability, from 
the unplanned chaos of the old. When they struck, they 
indeed struck hard. The tiny Fabian Society had gal­
vanized the unthinking masses of Labour; so would the 
elite of the future inspire and direct the unthinking 
masses of the great society. Echoing Plato and Aristotle, 
Wells in The Modern Utopia conceived the brilliant 
notion of the Samurai; the rulers whom no power cor­
rupts, as wise as they were disinterested. The Webbs 
went further and discovered the Order of the Samurai 
incarnate in the Vocation of Leadership of the Soviet 
Communist Party. The Webbs have an honoured place 
today because they saw that in the Soviet Union, 
though marred both then and for many years after by 
the forms of a quite unnecessary political dictatorship, a 
dedicated, disciplined, and above all educated minority 
were chosen primarily for their ability, and that this 
minority exercised, with a success which history con­
firms, that 'leadership without which democracy, in 
any of its forms, is but a mob' . 1 Shaw himself described 
the goal with characteristic pungency. 
This haphazard Mobocracy, he cried, must be replaced by 
democratic aristocracy: that is, by the dictatorship, not of the 
whole proletariat, but of that five per cent of it capable of con­
ceiving the job and pioneering in the drive towards its divine 
goal.2 
1. Webb, S. and B. Soviet Communism - A New Civilization. 
Longmans, 1935. 
2. Fabian Essays. Postscript to 1948 Edition on 'Sixty Years of 
Fabianism '. 

CLASH OF SOCIAL FORCES 
In his great Everybody's Political What's What?1 Shaw 
elaborated this plea so strikingly that it is still read to­
day by serious students of social thought. 
6. SUMMARY
This sketch of the social forces which have shaped our 
time is familiar enough. We should hardly need remind­
ing that progress has ever been born of conflict. The 
monarchy, the aristocracy, and the gentry, all the things 
that went with our agricultural past, were too long held 
in reverence; and as a result the family, always conser­
vative in its influence, was so buttressed by the feudal 
tradition as to uphold inheritance, of wealth, of job, and 
above all, of prestige, long after the claims of efficiency 
had been more fully recognized in other countries. 
These forces on the one side only yielded after a long 
struggle to superior strength on the other. The necessity 
to withstand international competition in peace and war 
was borne home upon all the most intelligent people; 
and the Labour Party, expressing the grievances of those 
with nothing to inherit or bequeath, drew up the masses 
in good order behind the more far-sighted leaders of all 
political persuasions. 
1 .  See, for instance, pp. 345 ff., 1944. 

CHAPTER TWO 
THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
I .  THIRD FORCE IN THE SCHOOLS 
THE last century was still bent upon the conquest of 
Nature. What vanity this now seems! Science penetrates 
her secrets not for the sake of human dominance (illu­
sory as this always is) but in order to discover the laws 
which man must obey. The highest fulfilment lies in sub­
mission. Of nothing is this more true than of society; and 
here no lesson has been more simple, and yet more pain­
ful than the fact of genetic inequality. The condition of 
progress is submission to the frugality of Nature. For 
every man enlivened by excellence, ten are deadened by 
mediocrity, and the object of good government is to 
ensure that the latter do not usurp the place in the social 
order which should belong to their betters. Of one 
method by which this has been done I have already 
spoken - it was by weakening the power of the family. 
The other complementary method of advance, to which 
I now turn, has been to enhance the influence of the 
school. 
I have, in the previous chapter, given the Labour 
Party due credit for the truly vital part it played in 
undermining the old hereditary system. I must now, in 
order to redress the balance, explain that in the middle 
of the century the Party changed its clothes. Previously 
Labour, with support from lowҀcastc ability, stood for 
progress against the high-caste leadership of the Con­
servatives. Then the two changed sides, and the Con­
servatives, with the new meritocracy growing in 
40 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIV:E SCHOOLS 
strength behind them, came to represent progress (up 
till just recently, that is) against socialists who obstin­
ately persisted in their increasingly irrelevant attach­
ment to egalitarianism. I do not mean to castigate the 
whole Labour Party. At no time did the left-wing cham­
pions of comprehensive schools command a firm and 
consistent majority in the counsels of the Party. They 
had a substantial influence all the same, and until their 
campaign fizzled out, the educational reforms, which I 
will briefly relate in this chapter, could not be com­
pleted. 
Till the middle of the century practical socialists 
identified equality with advancement for merit. The 
trouble started when the left wing emphasized a differ­
ent interpretation of equality, and, ignoring differences 
in human ability, urged that everyone, those with talent 
as well as those without, should attend the same schools 
and receive the same basic education. The issue attained 
extraordinary prominence in the political controversies 
of the 1960s and 1970s. Dr Nightingale has shown in his 
Social Origins of the Comprehensive Schools that the move­
ment was inspired very largely by sentimental egali­
tarianism of the modern sort, far removed from the 
hard-headed realism of Bernard Shaw, and it is this 
which constitutes its significance for us today. The ex­
tremists used every argument that came to hand. The 
future development of children could not be accurately 
assessed at the tender age of eleven. The strain upon 
parents and children of the competitive examination 
was too great. Once children were shepherded into 
separate pens it was too difficult for those who developed 
late to transfer from one to another. Their chief interest 
was not, however, so much - educational as social; the 
left-wingers claimed that to segregate the clever from 
41 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
the stupid was to deepen class divisions. They proposed 
that all children, irrespective of sex, race, creed, class 
(that was all right but they went on), or ability, should 
be lumped together. 
The long debate was never purely domestic in scope. 
International competition between economies was also 
competition between schools; as this truth became tru­
ism, people became almost as interested in foreign tech­
niques of education as in foreign techniques of produc­
tion. Especially the socialists. Which countries, they 
rhetorically asked, have the highest productivity? Are 
not these the same countries that have comprehensive 
schools - Australia, New Zealand, Scotland, Sweden, 
Canada, above all, Russia and America? Is not the 
moral obvious, that the battle for production will be 
won on the playing-fields of the common schools? Here, 
with all its habitual appeal, was the old and fallacious 
argument by analogy. 
English socialists were slow to appreciate the force of 
the transatlantic model: America, they thought, could 
not be socialist because it had no socialist movement. 
But they eventually woke up to the fact that the country 
had no socialist movement for a different reason, be­
cause in essentials it was already socialist. They then 
hailed the United States as the nearest thing on earth to 
a classless society, 1 and, their prejudices being what they 
were, naturally turned truth upside down by attribu­
ting responsibility for this remarkable phenomenon to 
the comprehensive high schools. Practically all Ameri­
can children attended these as a matter of course before 
so many rich parents began to patronize the private 
I. One of the first indications of this change was the influential 
book, The Future of Socialism, written by the young Mr C. A. R. 
Crosland in 1956. 
42 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
schools which expanded in the U.S.A. at the same time 
as they contracted in Britain. It is easy to see why 
English left-wingers had such sympathy for their Ameri­
can brothers. Their underlying attitudes were so much 
alike. The dispossessed emigrants who set the tone of 
American society were in revolt against the patronizing 
airs of European snobbery; so were the underprivileged 
socialists of Britain. Americans, far from prizing brain­
power, despised it, despised it because they feared the 
claims of intellect as the most wounding of all. So did 
many of the socialists. The distinction of the Americans 
was that they put their beliefs into practice. In the con­
tinent of the common man they established common 
schools which recognized no child superior to another. 
Whatever their name, tongue, race, or religion, and 
whatever their talent, all children were subject to the 
same 'education' in the same high schools. What the 
socialists did not permit themselves to recognize was the 
reason for this success. The socialists could not under­
stand the reasons why the tree could not be trans­
planted. They could not understand that in America 
common schools were needed, in a way they were never 
needed in Europe, to wrest nationhood from polyglot 
chaos. The restless were responding to an inner neces­
sity of their society far more compelling than in Britain 
when they professed that: 
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with cer­
tain inalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, the 
the pursuit of happiness, and a high school diploma. 1 
Vaunting American comprehensive schools, a tonic 
1 .  Quoted by Richmond, W. K. Education in the United States.
1956. 
43 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
to the apostles, only confirmed the opposition of more 
right-thinking people. American education was notori­
ous for low standards. Age for age, the British child 
was invariably better educated; grammar schools were 
superior in scholarship to American colleges, and as for 
comparing Manchester University, say, with Kansas 
State College! What could be expected when schools 
were treated as institutions not for education but for 
social levelling? The left-wingers did no good to their 
cause by drawing so much attention to America; the 
model was of what not to do. 
The enthusiasts had a last trump to play - the Soviet 
Union. Political antipathies were for many years so 
strong, that to say that any institution existed in Russia 
was enough to condemn it. The mood began to change 
in the late 1950s. When travel to the U.S.S.R. was per­
mitted, visitors reported 1 that comprehensive schools 
were to be spied there too; and what's more, free from 
some of the defects of the American ones. All Soviet chil­
dren attended the same Middle Schools from seven 
until seventeen, without selection and without stream­
ing. But the Russians had good teachers, relatively far 
better-paid than America, the children were more dis­
ciplined, had to work harder, and were not given the 
same absurd multiplicity of choice of subjects. Academic 
standards were a good deal higher than in the other 
United States. In 1 957, at the time of the first Sputnik, 
r. An early instance was the report on Education in the Soviet 
Union published by The Educational Interchange Council in 
1957. See p. 4. ' With the exception of a limited number of educa­
tionally sub-normal children, all go to the same school . . .  within 
the same school any attempt to stream children according to their 
ability is strictly forbidden. The dullest child works side by side 
with the ablest in the same classroom and keeps pace as best he 
can.' 
44 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
a U.S. Government report admitted that the Russian 
adolescent had a better grounding in mathematics, 
physics, and chemistry, and in the humanities too, than 
his American counterpart. All the same, standards were 
certainly not so high as in the better English grammar 
schools. Refusal to segregate the able from the stupid 
meant that there was no sixth-form work of the type 
which has always been the pride of the better sort of 
school in England. 
The left-wing socialists were shrewd enough to know 
the best colours to fly in a Britain at long last becom­
ing aware of its economic backwardness. They praised 
America and Russia for their efficiency and claimed 
that high schools were responsible. In fact the truth was 
the other way round - the United States of East and 
West could afford to waste human talent, yet still fare 
well in international competition, just because they 
were relatively so rich in other resources of Nature. Like 
each other in so many ways, both countries also com­
pensated for absence of competition in the schools by 
pressing it home afterwards. Russian universities only 
admitted the best candidates after a stiff examination, 
which incidentally kept standards up in the Middle 
Schools; the businessmen of America did their best to 
make up for the deficiencies of the educational system 
by selecting the most able after they became adults. In 
Britain competition was at school, in America after. But 
detailed social research in the 1960s showed that neither 
Russian universities nor American businessmen could 
overcome the initial handicap imposed by the common 
schools. Not even the virtuoso could make up later for 
the years wasted in childhood being treated as though 
he were an ordinary person. Exceptional brains require 
exceptional teaching: Russians and Americans could 
45 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
not see it. They forced every child to do what he was not 
good at as well as what he was. By showing that all men 
are equally duffers at something -what could be more 
easy? - they went as far as they could to show that no 
man is a genius at anything - what could be more dan­
gerous? In the name of equality they wantonly sacrificed 
the few to the many. 
The debate jogged on until the 1980s, when the 
socialists were for once silenced by the facts. In that 
decade our modern notions passed the acid test of pro­
ductivity. Thanks in part to atomic power which re­
leased Britain from dependence on oil and coal, in part 
to the economic advantages of European unification; 
but thanks mainly to the scientific management of 
talent, in productivity little Britain began to leave the 
giants behind. The 1944 Education Act began to tell, 
and our country has continued to forge ahead ever 
since. From being first with the Industrial Revolution 
of the nineteenth century, Britain became first in the 
intellectual revolution of the twentieth. The workshop 
of the world became the grammar school of the world. 
2. AGITATION DEFEATED 
To us the failure of comprehensive schools does not seem 
to require explanation. We can hardly conceive of a 
society built upon consideration for the individual 
regardless of his merit, regardless of the needs of society 
as a whole. But as students of historical sociology, we 
must always try to understand the events of the past, 
not as we see them, but as the people of the time used to 
see them. We have to try to think ourselves into their 
minds in the social situations which confronted them. If 
we do this, we are bound to recognize that the left-wing 
46 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
socialists did have a chance. The 1960s and 1970s were 
their historic moment. The hereditary class system of 
birth and wealth was crumbling fast. People were un­
sure of their values, even doubting whether there was 
any such thing as progress, and as always when people 
are unsure they were gullible. They were told that in a 
classless society they would feel safe again, the compre­
hensive school the ship that would sail them home. Had 
there been nothing to the movement except wishy­
washy idealism, then of course it would have evaporated 
harmlessly in a hundred summer schools. As it was, the 
leaders actually had followers. The idealists were backed 
by the discontented, people who had suffered from the 
judgement of educational selection, and were just intelli­
gent enough to be able to focus their resentment on 
some limited grievance, the streaming of infant schools, 
the eleven plus exam, the smaller classes in grammar 
schools, or whatever it might happen to be. They were 
backed by parents whose children were allotted, in all 
fairness in everyone's eyes except their own, to second­
ary modern schools; and by frustrated adults who 
blamed their own schooling for later disappointments, 
and wanted to deprive others too of the chances which 
they felt they themselves had missed. It was a motley 
band, yet as always when intellectual idealism chimes 
with lumpen frustration, it was formidable. We there­
fore need to turn the question around, and ask - why, 
with these assets, did the movement not after all succeed? 
I spoke in the last chapter of the evils of the aristo­
cratic embrace -of all the cheap imitations of the image 
of nobility enshrined in the popular mind. Britain 
suffered sorely from a caste snobbery planted too deeply 
in the national character for anything but a social revo­
lution on the American or Russian scale to eradicate. If 
47 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
this was our curse, and curse it was, it was also our bless­
ing. This great paradox is the clue to Britain's social 
history. In our island we never discarded the values of 
the aristocracy, because we never discarded the aristo­
cracy. It displayed an amazing resilience which allowed 
it, as so often in previous centuries, to disappoint the 
many critics waiting to attend its funeral. Its institu­
tions, the monarchy, the peerage, the ancient universi­
ties, and the public schools, adapted slowly but all the 
more surely to the changing needs of a changing society, 
which therefore remained in a fundamental sense hier­
archical. Englishmen of the solid centre never believed 
in equality. They assumed that some men were better 
than others, and only waited to be told in what respect. 
Equality? Why, there would be no one to look up to any 
more. Most Englishmen believed, however dimly, in a 
vision of excellence which was part and parcel of their 
own time-honoured aristocratic tradition. It was be­
cause of this that the campaign for comprehensive 
schools failed. It was because of this that we have 
our modern society: by imperceptible degrees an 
aristocracy of birth has turned into an aristocracy of 
talent. 
All depended upon timely educational reform. In the 
nineteenth century this was delayed too long. If the 
Education Act of 187 1 had come fifty years earlier 
there would perhaps have been no Chartism; had the 
1902 Act coincided with the Great Exhibition, no 
Labour Party. Sir Keir Hardie would have gone from a 
secondary school to the Board of Education, and Bishop 
Arthur Henderson would have watched over the 
finances of the Ecclesiastical Commission. Wise rulers 
know that the best way to defeat opposition is to win 
over its leaders; England was slow to learn that, in an 
48 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
industrial society, this means appropriating and educa­
ting the able children of the lower classes while they are 
still young. But eventually the rulers did learn; in a 
competitive world they had to. To such effect that by 
the last quarter of the century the Labour extremists 
were fatally weakened. Since the ablest children were 
already in the grammar schools, their parents had the 
stoutest of stakes both in the existing educational sys­
tem and in the existing social order. Their proxy place 
in the hierarchy made them deaf to the heralds of the 
common school. 
Opposition from parents, teachers, and children -
from the whole grammar stream in society - was the 
main reason for the failure of the comprehensive 
schools. These were not conceived as an entirely new 
kind of school - when it came to detailed planning the 
American model was fortunately forgotten. Their advo­
cates realized well enough that some children were 
brighter than others. Yet at the same time they wanted 
children of grammar-school ability to walk beside their 
inferiors in a deceit of equality. For the full success of 
their plans, they needed to combine grammar schools 
with secondary modern. About the latter there was no 
problem; their status could only be raised by unifica­
tion. Grammar schools were in a quite different state: 
they had nothing to gain, and almost everything to lose, 
by the change. This hard fact daunted the most resolute 
of Labour Education Committees, and some of them 
were certainly determined. But they were up against 
grammar-school masters who knew that Labour aspira­
tions were simply impractical, and, to the country's 
undying credit, this has usually been sufficient to con­
demn anything. One of the great High Masters of Man­
chester Grammar School, writing as early as 1951, put 
49 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
the issue as succinctly as it could be put today. The 
Professor Conant of whom he speaks was an American 
Professor apparently well known at the time - he illus­
trates again the intrusion of the United States into our 
domestic forum. 
When Prefessor Conant demands ' a  common core ef general 
education which will unite in one cultural pattern the future car­
penter, factory worker, bishop, lawyer, doctor, sales-manager, 
prefessor, and garage mechanic', he is simply asking for the 
impossible. The demand for such a common culture rests either 
on an altogether over-optimistic belief in the educability ef the 
majority that is certainly not justified by experience or on a 
willingness to surrender the highest standards of taste and judge­
ment to the incessant demands ef mediocrity. 1 
There might have been a different outcome had the 
country's population been growing fast, as it was in the 
United States when their high schools were established; 
then the authorities could have issued a fiat that new 
schools should be comprehensive, instead of grammar. 
But with relative stability of population, not many new 
grammar schools were built. What was the purpose of 
having many more when even the existing grammar 
schools could not get as many able children as they 
could accommodate? As it was, comprehensive schools 
were largely confined to Labour strongholds whose 
population was expanding fast, to a few rural areas 
which could not afford a complete range of schools, and 
to places where a badly-housed second-rate grammar 
school was ready to amalgamate in return for favours 
from the authorities. 
Though such comprehensive schools as were started -
I. James, E. Education/or Leadership. 1951. 
50 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
there was a small wave of them in the I g6os - must by 
the verdict of history be judged retrogressive, they were 
not nearly so dangerous as some of the socialist threats 
portended. In a hierarchical system like ours every insti­
tution has always modelled itself on the one immedi­
ately superior, which has usually meant the older - the 
new professions on the old, the modern universities 
on the ancient, and the comprehensive schools on the 
grammar. The planners were (happily for posterity) 
terrified by the kind of criticism fired at them by the 
grammar schools, and did their best to show it baseless. 
They imported old principles into new framework and 
made the core of the comprehensive not so much a common 
curriculum as a miniature grammar school. They made 
a grammar school first and added on the other bits later. 
To justify having a sixth-form of grammar size they 
were even prepared to make the whole school much 
larger than it otherwise need be - some of the early 
comprehensives actually had more than 2,000 in a veri­
table city of children. The interests of the clever chil­
dren came first, or at least were not ignored. Obviously 
it would have been wrong to place the bright children 
in the same class as the dull, for then the former would 
have been held back to the pace of the slowest. In prac­
tice, the comprehensive schools, by dividing the goats 
from the sheep, continued to abide by the segregation of 
ability which was the saving grace of the whole educa­
tional system. More intelligent children continued in 
the main to get higher standard teaching not so much 
inferior to that which they would have obtained in a 
grammar school proper. This much is clear from some 
eye-witness accounts of the early comprehensive schools 
in action. One survey in the 1950s (by a Mr Pedley) 
said that: 
51 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
with the opening in September r953 ef a new school at Llan­
gefni, Anglesry completed its provision of comprehensive second­
dary schools for the island, and was able to abandon its selection 
examination. But one of the first steps of the heads of the two 
comprehensive schools visited was to arrange internal tests for 
the newly-arrived pupils; and on the basis ef what these 
revealed, together with junior school records, to grade the pupils 
in order of ability. Nor were Anglesry and the Isle ef Man 
unusual in adopting this attitude. The five ' interim-compre­
hensive ' schools which I saw in London, and other schools in 
Middlesex and Walsall, all used the external examination test 
to assist them in classifying incoming pupils. 1 
Even though comprehensive schools had grammar 
streams they were unable to persuade parents with 
clever children to regard them with favour. Given a 
choice, parents naturally plumped for the grammar 
school proper, rather than for its less venerable imita­
tion. In the long run ambitious parents always brought 
to grief the best-laid schemes of egalitarian reformers. 
3. THE LEICESTER HYBRID 
When it became apparent that the new schools were not 
satisfying the hopes of their champions, a sect within the 
socialist movement changed its tactics, and put forward 
another demand. The primary schools were at that time 
common schools for children of all grades of ability. So 
why not extend a kind of primary school to include all 
children up to fourteen or fifteen, as well as below 
eleven? The American high schools had originally been 
a kind of projection of the elementary; let Britain fol­
low. All children would then go at eleven to a high 
school, and only later to a grammar school. 
1. Pedley, R. Comprehensive Schools Today. 1954. 
52 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
The proposal had several advantages.1 Politically, it 
was far more acceptable because it did not seem to sug­
gest a radical change, and, as I have said, the best way 
to do anything new in England was to pretend that it 
was not. The common school was merely to be pro­
jected forward instead of built afresh, the grammar 
schools preserved. This reform would also have either 
abolished or postponed selection for the grammar 
school and so avoided the undesirable strains of the 
existing eleven plus examination upon parents and chil­
dren (including those who would not anyhow stay at 
school beyond the minimum age). 
An experiment of this kind was in fact tried out by 
the Leicestershire County Council,2 and many varia­
tions of it were later adopted by other education authori­
ties. Why did not this movement carry all before it? 
The reasons are again illuminating. The educational 
reforms of the last century, being superimposed upon a 
hierarchical society, stood or fell by the success with 
which they enabled the clever child to leave the lower 
class into which he was born and to enter the higher 
class into which he was fitted to climb. English schools 
too had a vital social function, though a different one 
from the American. The educational ladder was also a 
social ladder - the scruffy, ill-mannered boy who started 
at five years old at the bottom had to be metamor­
phosed, rung by rung, into a more presentable, more 
polished, and more confident as well as a more know­
ledgeable lad at the top. He had to acquire a new 
accent - the most indelible mark of class in England -
1. An early version was put forward by the Croydon Education
Committee, and ably amplified by Pedley, R., in Comprehensive 
Education, 1956. 
2. See The Leicestershire Experiment. Stewart C. Mason. 1957.
53 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
and to any but the most determined man, that was well­
nigh impossible unless he started young. When he fin­
ished his climb, he could then stand comparison with 
others who had begun their ascent from a much higher 
level. The social ladder was so long - the gap between 
the styles of life of upper and lower classes so wide - that 
promising children had to begin their climb through the 
schools at the earliest age possible. Postponing social 
assimilation until eleven was bad enough. If clever low­
class children had not been able to move in the more 
stimulating atmosphere of the grammar schools, along­
side many of the same age from higher classes, until 
they were sixteen, some of them would then have been 
too old ever to shake off their origins and so overcome 
their handicap. The schools would then have failed to 
fulfil one of their essential purposes in a progressive class 
system; they would not have been society's escalators 
for the gifted. 
The second reason for rejection of selection at fifteen 
was that, as educators realized full well, clever children 
had to be caught young if they were to achieve, as 
adults, the highest standards of which they were capable 
and with the growth in complexity of science and tech­
nology only the highest standards were high enough. 
Scientists, whose best work is often done before they are 
thirty, need from the earliest possible years to get an 
intensive education of the sort that few Americans1 have 
been able to get since high schools came into vogue, and 
1. One absurdity of the American university system in particu­
lar, until 1986, was that so many good students, instead of getting 
adequate scholarships, had to work not at acquiring knowledge, 
but at washing dishes. They had to 'work' their way through 
college by not working at the purpose for which the institution 
ostensibly existed. Per ardua ad irifema! 
54 

THREAT OF COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOLS 
Benjamin Franklin out. If the start of serious work were 
delayed till sixteen, and meanwhile they were being 
taught in a high school which could never attract staff 
as good as the grammar schools, they might not finish 
their education in time to take advantage of the few 
really fruitful years allowed by Nature. The grammar 
schools were responsible for Britain's fame in pure 
science even before Queen Elizabeth II came to the 
throne. Lord Cholmondeley has shown that, taking the 
last century as a whole, the number of fundamental dis­
coveries was in relation to its population 2·3 times 
larger than Germany, 4·3 times larger than the U.S.A., 
and 5· r times larger than the U.S.S.R. Would cosmic 
radiation have been understood without Simon? Distant 
stellar exploration possible without Bird himself? The 
south-western counties concreted over and reserved for 
cars without Piper? Babies ever carried safely at a speed 
of Mach 102 without Percy? But for the grammar 
school might not all these great men have been shop­
keepers and mechanics? Pity was that until the end of 
the century Britain's science was nowhere near matched 
by its achievement in technology. Still, it is a proud 
record, and would have been forfeit to the 'incessant 
demands of mediocrity' had common uneducation per­
sisted into adolescence. 
4• SUMMARY 
Before the schools could evolve into the modern system 
described in the next chapter, the threat from the left 
had to be warded off. Socialists who wanted all chil­
dren, regardless of their ability, educated as in America 
and Russia, commanded enough popular support for 
a time to convert what should have been a purely 
55 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
educational question into a major political issue. Yet 
they were bound to fail. To succeed with education they 
needed a social revolution which would overthrow the 
established hierarchy, values, and all. But with the 
masses dormant and their potential leaders diverted in­
to self-advancement, what hope was there? Grammar 
schools remained. Comprehensive schools withered. 
Even the Leicester hybrid never bloomed. The vandals 
were vanquished and the city stood. 

CHAPTER THREE 
ORIG I N S  OF MODER N EDUCATION 
I. THE MOST F UND A MENTAL REFORM
ONCE general opinion, even in the Labour Party, 
turned against comprehensive schools, it became pos­
sible to concentrate upon the most fundamental of 
reforms, that is, upon the all-round improvement of 
grammar schools. Above all they needed more money, 
more money to retain their best scholars, and more 
money for the teachers. 
The Hitler war transformed the social composition 
of these schools. Full employment and larger wages, fost­
ering higher aspirations, made lower-class parents able 
and anxious to get better education for their children, 
and the 1944 Act1 helped by making secondary schools 
free. The consequences were dramatic. In the 1930s 
only a minority of able low-class children had more than 
the most primitive education; twenty years later prac­
tically all clever children were installed in the seats of 
learning. A sociological study of the I 950s was able to 
report that 'in very many, if not in most, parts of the 
country the chances of children at a given level of 
ability entering grammar schools are no longer depend­
ent on their social origins' .2 
However, it was one thing for able children from the 
1. The date has perhaps been given an importance beyond its 
deserts by the tendency of schoolmasters to teach history by its
important dates - 1870, 1902, 1918, 1944, 1972, and so forth. 
2. Floud, J. E., Halsey, A. H., and Martin, F. M. Social Class 
and Educational Opportunity. 1956. 
57 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
lower classes to enter grammar schools, another for them 
to stay there. Here prosperity was a handicap. Even 
against the wishes of their parents, many scholars were 
tempted by high wages to leave school early - and 
flocks of them did so at the minimum age. 1 Prosperity 
did not create the problem, but it accentuated one of 
long-standing. In every decade children matured physi­
cally earlier than before. Constant shortening of child­
hood in the biological and social sense and constant 
lengthening of childhood in the educational sense posed 
a dilemma which was only resolved in the long run by 
treating grammar-school children as adults. 
The superior classes took for granted that their chil­
dren should enjoy higher education; the difficulty was 
not to get the able to stay at school, but to get the stupid 
to leave and put up with the manual jobs for which their 
intelligence fitted them. In the lower classes the situa­
tion was reversed. The higher the wages that could be 
earned at a machine by the children of manual workers, 
the more dreary seemed the school-desk. No age is more 
acquisitive than adolescence. The remedy was clear: the 
State had to prevent children from suffering for their 
cleverness by giving them and their parents a privileged 
status within the lower classes. The first step was to pay 
very much larger maintenance allowances - later scaled 
in ratio to intelligence - for grammar-school children 
staying the full course. But this was not enough. Inquiry 
showed that some irresponsible parents were spending 
the allowances on themselves, not on the children for 
whom they were intended. The obvious thing to do -
r. In the early 1950s very many of the grammar-school boys 
capable of finishing the course left before doing so, and most of 
these were the children of manual workers. See Early Leaving, pub­
lished by the Ministry of Education in 1954. 
58 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
eventually even to Ministers of Education - was to pay 
a learning wage direct to grammar-school pupils. At 
first it was equal to the average earnings of juveniles in 
ordinary industry; then the newly formed B.U.G.S.A. 
(the British Union of Grammar School Attenders) 
attacked the injustice of equality, rightly too, since the 
ability of the earner was usually so much lower than 
that of the pupil. In 1972 the government approved 
a learning wage on a sliding scale sixty per cent above 
industrial earnings. After that very few children left 
grammar schools prematurely for economic reasons. In 
modern times we could hardly imagine a grammar 
school without its weekly pay-day. 
The universities paid wages to students (in the form 
of scholarships) long before grammar schools, but other­
wise preserved some curious anachronisms of their own. 
Poorer parents were at a disadvantage in grammar 
schools, richer parents in universities. In the 1950s 
clever children of the middle-rich were deprived of 
grants because their parents were quite wrongly sup­
posed to have enough money to pay, with the shocking 
result that some of them never got to university at all -
surely a supreme example of the excesses of egalitarianism 
in its heyday! Closed 'scholarships' also gave pupils 
from certain public schools privileged entry to otherwise 
reputable colleges at Oxford and Cambridge; and.in the 
middle of the century it was still not unknown for King's 
or Balliol to detect some special merit in sons whose 
fathers had been there before. Such barbaric practices 
were even excused in public from time to time by old­
fashioned dons who declared it was better, educationally 
mind you, for the bright students to be mixed up with 
the dull. The dons had once again lost touch: the 
modern world no longer required the clever to mingle 
59 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
with the stupid, except when assigned to social intelli­
gence work among the lower classes. \,\Then the die­
hards died, universities came into line with national 
policy and selected all their entrants on merit properly 
tested in the examination-room. By 1972 public school­
boys had either to compete openly with the Bradford 
Grammar School or seek ' gringo admission ' to South 
American universities. Few willingly incurred that 
stigma. 
2. HIGHER SALARIES FOR TEACHERS 
The learning wage and the universalization of univer­
sity scholarships followed upon a change in the attitude 
of the State to spending on education, which itself re­
flected growing recognition that investment in brains is 
much more rewarding than investment in property. But 
politicians always wanted the impossible - the quick 
results education can never give. They kept tinkering 
with the top of the educational system instead of build­
ing securely from the bottom. They were as willing to 
spend on the universities as they were unwilling to 
spend on the primary schools. Politicians would not 
realize that the milk monitors were the future leaders of 
the nation. Faced with a shortage of engineers, the 
government said very well, spend more upon the en­
gineering colleges. Of scientists, spend more upon the 
science faculties. Of technologists generally, then build 
more schools of technology. This was futile. For if the 
government attracted more promising youngsters into 
engineering, fewer were left behind for science. More 
for the civil service meant less for industry, more for 
laboratories less for teaching. The egalitarian doctrine 
that any man can be trained to substitute for any other 
was so deeply rooted that our ancestors only slowly came 
60 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
to appreciate the full significance of one simple fact: 
that all the professions were competing with each other 
for·a limited supply of intelligence. It was not until well 
on into the last half of the century that the national 
scarcity of intellect became obvious to all those who had 
it. The government learned that the only way simul­
taneously to get more and better engineers, more and 
better physicists, more and better civil servants up to 
the limits set by Nature was to start with the three­
year-olds, to ensure that from that age on no ability 
escaped through the net, and, most important, to make 
certain that the future physicists, psychologists, and the 
rest of the elite continuously had the best teaching they 
could get. 
It did not matter so much about the defective, mal­
adjusted, and delinquent upon whom up to 1972 
England ( as a sign of the times) spent more than upon 
the brilliant. It did not matter so much about the 
secondary modern schools. In an ideal world, not 
hampered by shortage of resources, the unfortunate 
could have large sums spent on them too. But it was not, 
has not been, nor ever will be, an ideal world. The 
choice was between priorities, and there was no doubt 
how the decision had to go. What mattered most were 
primary schools, where the pupils were being divided 
into the gifted and the ungifted; and, above all, the 
grammar schools where the gifted received their due. 
They had to have more generous endowments. And 
they got them. 
From the moment that Sir Anthony Crosland was 
persuaded that the battle for national survival would be 
won or lost in the 'A' streams all the way from nursery 
to grammar school, the money began to flow. Spending 
on education was still only 2·7 per cent of the gross 
61 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
national product in 1953; 1 by 1963, 3·9 per cent; by 
1982, after the ' marvellous decade', it was 6· 1 per cent. 
Most of the extra went on teachers. For more of them -
it was still common in those grim middle years of the 
last century for one single teacher to have a mob of forty 
children in a class and who could she then be but a 
Joseph Lancaster!2 And for better ones. So far were 
teachers' salaries behind industry that in the early 1960s 
some grammar schools did not have a solitary physics 
teacher. At a time when the Atomic Energy Authority 
was clamouring for physicists! Many of the leading 
officials at the Ministry of Education and the Treasury, 
though they had read their Plato, had seemingly for­
gotten that none but the guardians themselves could be 
trusted to teach future guardians. Second-rate teachers, 
a second-rate elite: the meritocracy can never be better 
than its teachers. Things improved until at last the 
teachers attained their ideal of superiority of esteem. 
One of the wisest strokes of the marvellous decade was 
to put the salaries of science teachers on the same level 
as scientists in industry and all grammar-school 
teachers on the same level as their scientific colleagues. 
The schools could then attract good scientists; they got 
the very pick of other teachers. 
r. This earlier figure was found in Wiles, P. J. D., The Nation's 
Intellectual Investment. (Bull. 0. U. Inst. of Stats. August 1956, p. 
279) ; the latter are from the ordinary, popular editions of Educa­
tion Statistics. 
2. ' We want ten, and by jingo we want to know when' was as 
effective a slogan, used in the campaign for raising the pupil­
teacher ratio in grammar schools to 1/10, as the earlier slogan 
' We want eight, and we won't wait', used in the campaign for 
more dreadnoughts. ' We want scholarships, not battleships', 
another. The Small Class was merely substituted for the Big 
Navy. 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
The logic of the system can be portrayed in a simple 
table. 
Distribution of Intelligence between tyf;es of Secondary School ( r!)89) 
I. Q. level of No. of pupils I. Q. level of
Type of school 
pupils
per teacher 
teachers 
E.S.N. (Educationally 
50-80 
25 
100--105 
Subnormal) School 
Secondary modern 
81-1 1 5  
20 
105-1 IO
Secondary grammar 
I 16-180 
I O  
1 35-180 
Boarding grammar 
1 25-180 
3 
1 35-180 
3. BOARDING GRAMMAR SCHOOLS 
The movement for comprehensive schools did more 
than threaten standards in the grammar schools. If suc­
cessful, it would have led to indefinite postponement of 
the quite vital reform of the public schools. Knowing 
that their children would get no better than a second­
rate training in State schools, parents with the means to 
pay would never have been restrained from purchasing 
the advantages of private education; and equality of 
opportunity would have remained a dream. 
The demise of the public school was freely prophesied 
between 1939 and 1945. It was feared that impoverish­
ment of the middle classes would remove their capacity 
to pay fees, and some of the strongest supporters of the 
public schools looked to the State to prevent catas­
trophe. They were not only ready to accept a propor­
tion of poor pupils, they pleaded with the State to pay 
for their places. 1 The future was not as expected - it 
1 .  See the Fleming Report: The Public Schools and the General 
Educational System. 1944.

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
seldom is. The middle class proved as tough as ever; 
they survived high taxation and high prices and went 
on sending their children to the same old venerable 
schools. In the middle 1950s, of people with more than 
£1,000 p.a. - a miserable enough sum by modern 
standards - nineteen out of every twenty sent their chil­
dren to private schools. 1 Incidentally, this included 
many ' socialists'. As Sir Hartley Shawcross said in 
I 956 - ' I  do not know a single member of the Labour 
Party, who can afford to do so, who does not send his 
children to a public school, often at great sacrifice - not 
for snobbish reasons or to perpetuate class distinction, 
but to ensure his children get the best.' 
.. Public-school pupils made up about a quarter of the 
sixth forms in all kinds of schools, State and private to­
gether. Since they paid more, on the whole they enjoyed 
a better education than their fellows in State schools. 
To judge from autobiographies and novels, there may 
have been some truth in the saying that at a public 
school the pupil was taught how to grow up into a boy, 
but, if so, at least he was an educated boy and therefore 
better fitted to take his place in a complex society than 
an uneducated man. There was no harm in the public 
schools imparting a superior education - it was all to 
the good; what was wrong was that the privileged were 
chosen by other criteria than merit. They were selected 
by their parents' bank accounts. They unashamedly in­
herited their education, and with it their future status in 
the society they should have been intent to serve. 
How was such nepotism to be abolished? It was a 
long and bitter business, perhaps only paralleled by the 
I . ' Savings and Finances of the Upper Income Classes'. Klein, 
L. R., Straw, K. H., Vandome, P. Bulletin of Oxford Institution of 
Statistics. November 1956.

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
crusade for the abolition of slavery in the previous cen­
tury, and only successful because the energy which had 
been previously directed into comprehensive schools 
was diverted and harnessed to this more constructive 
task. Year by year, but especially in I 958, Labour Party 
statements said that 'Labour must no longer hesitate to 
tackle the greatest source of social inequality and class 
division in our society - the private schools.' But they 
did hesitate, even though the leaders of Labour were 
guilty public-school men themselves. The schools could 
not be effectively closed down or nationalized by decree; 
unless the parents had been forbidden to spend money 
on their children - itself too grave an interference with 
the family to be politically practical - they would have 
started up their own black-market establishments else­
where. One Eton closed would have been another Eton 
opened. Parents had to be appeased as well as bullied. 
The 1958 declaration, Learning to Live, was most sensible 
and far-sighted when it said that: 
Labour concludes that at present no scheme for ' taking over' 
or ' democratizing' the public schools shows sufficient merits to 
justify the large diversion of public money that would be in­
volved. In time to come, when maintained schools are improved, 
when the prestige of the public schools is consequently dimin­
ished, and when substantial changes in the distribution of 
wealth and in public opinion have occurred, the question, in a 
changed form, will once more arise. 
Final triumph was the result of an ingenious pincer­
movement. Research showed that most of the fees for 
public schools were paid out of capital. The upper 
classes, for fear of the duties, very largely stopped pass­
ing money from one generation to another upon death. 
The established practice was for grandparents, while 
C 
65 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
still alive, to transfer property not so much to their chil­
dren as to their grandchildren for the purchase of a 
privileged education. Death duties were powerless to 
stop this kind of three-generation abuse, acted indeed as 
an incentive to it, and had to be supplemented by a 
series of capital levies. The sixth Labour Government, 
with Crosland and Hughes working as a team in the 
two key Ministries, initiated a great capital levy, and 
thenceforward the capital gains tax prevented the acqui­
sition of new fortunes. The public schools feltthesqueeze 
right away. The effect of the levy was somewhat offset 
by the growing inequality of earned incomes, but not so 
much as totally to defeat its object. Conditions were 
certainly harsher for the public schools in 1970 than 
they had been twenty years earlier. 
Of greater importance than capital levy was the 
steady improvement in the standards of grammar 
schools themselves. It all came down, as I have said, to 
pounds, shillings, and pence. Why was Rugby superior 
to the Walsall Grammar School? It was quite simple, 
Rugby spent so much more per boy, therefore Rugby 
got better teachers and more teachers. When the money 
spent on Walsall was multiplied - a portion of the capi­
tal levy was earmarked for new grammar-school labora­
tories and other buildings - the quality of the school was 
improved out of all recognition. As long as the State 
could keep down total expenditure on public schools, 
and step up expenditure on its own schools, victory was 
in the long run assured. Parents besieged Walsall in­
stead of Rugby, and found their children had to com­
pete on level terms with all other children, none but the 
best being chosen. Only if their children were too stupid 
to gain entry to Walsall did they fall back on Rugby, 
which could hardly remam a first-rate school if its 
66 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
pupils were second-rate. The prestige balance between 
public and grammar was gradually, but decisively, 
tilted in the latter's favour. 
Private schools did not have to be abolished; the best 
of them abolished themselves. Wide-awake public­
school headmasters worried about the stupidity of the 
children they were attracting, and as the drift of events 
became clear, and as the Treasury became more open­
handed, solved their problems by negotiating with the 
State for inclusion on the roll of ' grant-aided boarding 
grammar schools ', as they were ponderously called in 
official language. For this enviable status to be secured 
they had to agree to take a majority of children chosen 
in the ordinary way by the local authorities from the 
primary schools. Eton in 1972 reduced its entrance age 
to eleven and undertook to accept eighty per cent of 
Queen's scholars, pushed home to one hundred per cent 
in 1991. Where Eton led, others followed. 
Unless Her Majesty's Inspectors granted the school a 
certificate of efficiency, only done if academic standards 
were at least as high as in day grammar schools, it could 
not be admitted to the roll. All the better-known public 
schools - in fact nearly all associated with what was 
called the Headmasters' Conference - were in time ad­
mitted and thrown open to talented children who 
needed a boarding-school education for one good 
reason or another - say because they had no parents, or 
came from homes moved frequently, or because they 
lived in the countryside too far for daily attendance at 
an ordinary grammar school. Other private schools, the 
majority, were allowed to go their own way. Since they 
nurtured no first-rate brains, the State was not particu­
larly concerned what went on behind their class-room 
doors - as long, that is, as they reached the minimum 
67 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
standards of hygiene and efficiency in practical crafts 
laid down for the modern schools to which ordinary 
run-of-the mill children were sent. Naturally enough, 
once the private schools were reserved for the mediocre, 
they no longer conferred any social cachet and the num­
ber of parents willing to waste their money on them 
diminished year by year. This was, of course, apart from 
the anthroposophists, diet reformers, and latter-day 
anarchists who clung obsessively to their own educa­
tional foundations. 
The integration of the two types of grammar school 
led to many beneficial changes in the content of educa­
tion. The day schools were famed for their healthy con­
centration on science; the best of them not only en­
couraged specialization in order to bestow intensive 
knowledge of at least one limited branch, what is far 
more important they bred that scientific attitude, pre­
cise, curious, speculative, sceptical, that humility 
towards Nature though not towards man, that passion­
ate detachment, which is the modern attitude to life. 
The private schools, less at home in the world of indus­
try, technology, and science, gave too much attention to 
Athens and too little to the atom. Until the 1960s the 
Common Entrance Examination for public schools still 
covered Latin! But no science! The classical education 
received by the hereditary social classes of Britain was 
part of their undoing. It led them to overvalue the past, 
Rome and Athens as well as their own history. It in­
duced a fatalistic acceptance of the decline of the British 
Empire which had to follow the Roman precedent. The 
meritocracy replaced Gibbon by Galton, and once 
teachers and ideas interchanged freely, the grammar 
persuaded the former public schools to adapt them­
selves more completely to a scientific age. So quickly did 
68 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
some of them learn, that Eton was in fact the first school 
to install a cyclotron, and Christ's Hospital the first to 
send a parcel of boys to the moon. 
The gain was not all one way. Education for leader­
ship was the professed aim of the public schools; and 
.mighty was their empire until soldiers and administra­
tors succumbed to scientists and technicians. With inte­
gration the grammar schools were able to share in that 
part of the tradition which was still of value and so pur­
sue their vocation of cultivating the elite with all the 
more confidence. Public schools had learnt how to re­
lease children from dependence on their families by 
creating substitutes for the narrow loyalties of kinship. 
The grammar schools needed all the more to do the 
same since so many of their pupils came from homes be­
longing to a lower culture, and they borrowed some of 
the same techniques. Eye-witness accounts vouch for 
the value of the full development of the house system, of 
the regular dedication meetings in the laboratory and 
of the week-end and evening clubs for scientific and 
other hobbies. These have become so active that ado­
lescent children no longer need to spend any of their 
spare time with their families. Their homes have be­
come simply hotels, to the great benefit of the children. 
4 .. PROGRESS OF INTELLIGENCE TESTING 
The success of these reforms depended upon continuous 
growth in the efficiency of selection methods. How 
pointless it would have been to set aside superior schools 
without the means of identifying the elect! Progress did 
not, of course, always proceed at the same pace on each 
of these complementary tasks. By and large, the seclu-
11ion of grammar schools went ahead more smoothly 
69 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
than selection of pupils. But the more widely recognized 
it was that better schools should be reserved for the 
more able, the greater the pressure upon the educa­
tional psychologists to improve their techniques. They 
responded. Necessity once again played its customary 
part. 
Following 1944, there was a large increase in the 
demand for grammar school places without any corre­
sponding expansion of supply. Competition was sharper; 
how were the winners to be picked? The value of intelli­
gence tests as a guide to personnel selection in the Forces 
had been fully demonstrated during the war, and it was 
therefore natural to adopt the same kind of method for 
the peace-time purpose, especially in a stratified society 
prepared by habit of mind to recognize a hierarchy of 
intelligence as soon as it was pointed out. The results 
were remarkable: by 1950, merely a few years after the 
Act, most of the children in the country were taking 
these tests before they left their primary schools, and, 
although older methods of examination were also used, 
high I.Q. was established as the chief qualification for 
entry to the elite. Educational psychology assumed a 
central place in pedagogy from which it was never later 
entirely dislodged. 
Progress in the next decades was, it is true, slowed 
down by socialist obstruction. The people who cam­
paigned for the common school constantly attacked the 
segregation of clever from stupid which it was the pur­
pose of intelligence tests to accomplish. From their 
point of view this was quite consistent: once grant their 
premise that everyone was in some unexplained way the 
equal of everyone else, and it became as sensible to 
decry the efficiency of the means by which children 
were classified one above the other as it was to condemn 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
the consequences. If one child was not in fact more able 
than another, then intelligence tests must be a fraud. The 
critics mocked the psychologists, and seemed to think 
their case was proved when they declared ( quite rightly) 
that the tests did not, and could not, measure the 
abstraction of all-round intelligence. All the critics did 
was to surround the subject with further verbal con­
fusion. The confusion was to some degree inevitable (as 
with physics in the seventeenth century) in a new 
branch of science touching, as it did, upon strong com­
mitments to metaphysics. How could men be equal in 
the eyes of God and yet unequal in the eyes of the 
Psychologist? 
The socialists made the muddle worse. Very few lay­
men could at first understand that intelligence was not 
an abstraction, but an operational concept. Psycholo­
gists were not assessing all-round intelligence, there is 
no such thing, but the qualities needed to benefit from 
a higher education. If this bundle of qualities was 
labelled as 'intelligence', that was only done as a con­
venience. The test of the tests was empirical: did they 
work? And the answer was that on the whole they did. 
Most of the children who scored high on the tests also 
performed well in the grammar schools. It was really a 
statistical question, a matter of establishing that high 
performance in the tests ( they could have been called 
the Idiocy tests for all the difference it would have 
made) was correlated 1 with high performance in the 
1. One might add, it was also correlated with performance in 
other tests for verbal ability, verbal fluency, numerical ability, 
spatial ability, perceptual ability, memory; for driving ability, 
accident proneness, digital dexterity, analogizing power, mechani­
cal aptitude, clerical aptitude, emotional maturity; for tone dis­
crimination, sexual attraction, taste sensitivity, colour blindness, 
accuracy, persistence, neurosis, and powers of observation. Results 
7 1  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
grammar school, high performance at the university, 
and high performance in life. It must be admitted that 
the psychologists and sociologists were somewhat slow in 
devising tests for the tests; many of them were still 
tangled in thickets of ideology. They were not all as 
clear-sighted as that High Master who urged that ' the 
greatest encouragement must be given to those re­
searches designed to relate the subsequent success of 
men and women selected for various purposes with the 
diagnosis of their capacities given by different methods' . 1 
His advice was not fully taken until later. 
The socialists were not alone in the wilderness. For a 
time they succeeded in partially discrediting the I.Q., 
and, at the height of their influence in the fifties and 
sixties, frightened a number of local education com­
mittees into abandoning the tests altogether. But their 
success was bound to be short-lived. Every time they 
were presented with a fresh crop of children, the autho­
rities had to find some way of separating the wheat from 
the chaff. How? If they discarded intelligence tests, they 
were thrown back on results of ordinary written exami­
nations, and if they discarded the written examinations, 
they were thrown back on teachers' reports. They were 
then in even greater trouble. The teachers had a hard 
enough job to do in all conscience without forcing them 
to bear the resentment of every parent whose child they 
failed. Teachers had to be protected. 'Progressive' 
authorities were sometimes faced by demands from their 
own teachers to restore the I.Q. What was more, re­
search demonstrated conclusively that teachers' reports 
are nowadays all coded on the one National Intelligence card 
which accompanies a person throughout his life, unless he has 
conscientious objections. 
I. James, E., op. cit. 
72 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
and ordinary examinations were less fair to lower-class 
children. Teachers unconsciously favoured children 
from their own class; old-fashioned exams were kinder 
to the more cultured homes. Intelligence tests, less 
biased, were the very instrument of social justice, a 
finding which not even the most fanatical socialists of 
that day could totally ignore. 
More moderate socialists, infected with mysticism 
too, though less virulently, drugged themselves with the 
belief that the efficiency of selection would remain so 
low that many able children would always escape the 
net. They dare not openly espouse inefficient selection 
and urge that some clever children should be denied 
opportunity for their faculties; but, privately, they wel­
comed it - when it happened. They were the secret 
Catholics in a Protestant town. In the transition period 
from a pre-merit society, this was a happy adjustment, 
a source of personal peace of mind, yet no barrier to 
progress. But it was the comfort of the ostrich. These 
moderate mystics should have known that you cannot 
stop the march of science; or rather, since they knew, 
they should have heeded. Once human behaviour be­
gan to be studied systematically, so that once gained, 
knowledge was cumulative, nothing could arrest the 
steady advance in techniques for testing and, with the 
tests, selecting, the bearers of different combinations of 
genes. 
Progress was, as always, uneven, a period of stability 
being succeeded by a sudden jump forward. Man had 
to wait until - 1989 for the leap of the century. Long 
before that the ' cyberneticists' had realized that man 
would best understand his own brain when he could 
imitate it. As men became more like machines, mach­
ines became more like men, and when machines were 
73 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
built to mimic people, the ventriloquist at last under­
stood himsel£ Modern mental capacity standards date 
from that year, a common unit of measurement being 
possible as soon as it was realized that a machine also 
can have its ' intelligence' tested and scored as much as 
a human brain. ' Pamela', Bird's pi-computer in the 
National Physiological Laboratory, with its constant 
I.Q. of mo, became the recognized national stanµard, 
and all the questions in the examination papers were first 
put to her before being distributed to the schools and 
other centres. 
Well before 1 989, psychologists had succeeded in 
identifying the problems which had to be solved. They 
realized that the brain was no more separable than the 
sexual organs from the biochemical economy of the indi­
vidual, and the individual no more separable than his 
lungs from the environment, social as well as physical, in 
which he lived. Many people with high potential in­
telligence were prevented from making use of it by 
anxiety due to psychic disturbances. Some had lower 
intelligence, others higher, when the environment was 
unfavourable. Hence the I.Q. berserkers with an I.Q. 
of 140 at some times and go at others, and not only 
when in love or before breakfast - an affliction from 
which some leading members of the Technicians Party 
are alleged to suffer. Psychologists tackled the task of 
bringing the actual nearer to the potential. Advances in 
therapy were a beneficent by-product of educational 
selection. 
The Spens Committee said in 1 938 that it is ' possible 
at an early age to predict with some degree of accuracy 
the ultimate level of a child's intellectual powers'. That 
is true now; it was not true then. No wonder resentment 
was aroused when the main tests were given once, at 
74 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
eleven! A person's performance at that one age de­
cided whether he went to a grammar school. If he failed 
he could, in theory, get a second chance later on. In 
practice he seldom did. Late developers were too late. 
The boy or girl whose capacity flowered even as young 
as fourteen was lucky indeed to get a transfer from a 
modern to a grammar school. He was usually stuck 
with the stupid, and classed with them for the rest of 
his life. That was a cruel injustice for the individual and 
a shocking waste for society - so much so that in a small 
way comprehensive schools actually did some good by 
making it easier for people to swim from one stream to 
another. People knew that in some people intelligence 
reached its height at twelve, in others it only came to 
full fruition at thirty - but they did not act as if they 
knew. As this truth was driven home, educators sought, 
with increasing success, to make intelligence assessment 
continuous throughout school life. I.Q.s were tested at 
seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, and fifteen, and at each 
stage a person whose score was higher than it had been 
previously was taken away from his inferiors and lodged 
with his equals. Yet the people whose ability developed 
only when they had left school escaped the net of selec­
tion altogether. Even in the 1980s, a man who suddenly 
came to his senses at the age of twenty-five had the 
greatest difficulty in securing proper recognition for his 
talents. 
Here it is that the modern development of adult edu­
cation has proved so vital. School came to last for life. 
By the end of the century the right of every person to 
be judged according to his ability was honoured in more 
than the breach. It was at last accepted that, as a mat­
ter of quite elementary justice, neither man nor child 
should be judged stupid until he was proved to be. The 
75 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
presumption was always of cleverness. So at any age any 
person became entitled, more than entitled, encouraged 
to apply every five years for re-test at a Regional Centre 
for Adult Education, and if his hopes were realized, 
then justice was invariably done. The copy of his Nat­
ional Intelligence card at H.Q. was destroyed, and a 
new card substituted containing the re-test score, so that 
no employer ( or fiancee) who applied in the ordinary 
way for his I.Q. and aptitude scores would ever know 
about the lowlier status he had once had. It was also 
decided in the Courts that there was no obligation on 
anyone to put anything more than his current I.Q. in 
his Who's Who entry. A successful re-test was quite 
genuinely a fresh start. 
No doubt this has led to difficulties. Some children have 
become excessively ambitious on behalf of their parents 
and have exerted too much pressure on them to strive 
for reclassification. Books on the care of parents have 
become too avidly studied. Some workmen have dis­
played jealousy when their elderly workmates have 
been sent away to university or gymnasium. But in the 
long interim period while methods of selection have 
been in process of improvement, the disadvantages have 
been far outweighed by the advantages. Now, of course, 
the psychologists have refined their methods to such a 
point that they can allow for most of the imponderables 
which delay development and forecast not only the I.Q. 
but the ages at which it will fructify. Exciting as the 
advance is to every scientifically-minded person, it has 
to be admitted that the discussions it has unloosed have 
been grist to the critics of the established order. 

ORIGINS OF MODERN EDUCATION 
5• S U M MARY 
This chapter has sketched once again the great story of 
educational reform. The government, when won round 
to a contemporary sense of values, recognized that no 
spending was more productive than spending on the 
generation of brain-power. Miserliness became muni­
ficence, teachers and school buildings a first charge upon 
the national income. The independence of the gram­
mar schools was preserved. The better public schools 
were merged and cross-fertilized with the grammar 
schools. The new system was sustained by methods of 
identifying ability that became steadily more effective. 
By the rg8os the foundations of our modern system of 
education had been laid. 
Progress was possible because, as I explained in a 
previous chapter, the socialists collapsed as an organ­
ized force. The same thing did not happen to the senti­
ments they expressed. All babies are creeping socialists 
and some never grow out of it. But the hard core of 
psychological egalitarians who never recover from the 
envies of the nursery only become a danger to the State 
when they are joined by large numbers of other people 
whose hopes are thwarted in adult life. The rg6os were 
one of those times, the present day another. People were 
frustrated then because they ( or their children) were 
deprived of the superior education to which they ima­
gined themselves entitled; people are frustrated now for 
the same reason, not so much by segregation in the 
schools (most people have got used to that now) as by 
the suggestion that the Regional Centres for Adult 
Education have outlived their usefulness. The Centres 
have become much prized by some of the more capable 
technicians, the very kind of people who, though lowly, 
77 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
are just intelligent enough to have been the core of every 
revolutionary movement. Is not any hint of closing the 
doors of the regional centres bound to arouse discon­
tent? If my analysis is correct, this new departure, as I 
shall explain more fully later on, is one of the under­
lying reasons for the recent troubles. 

CHAPTER FOUR 
F R O M  S E N I O R I T Y  T O  M E R I T  
I .  THE CLASS OF OLD MEN 
FoR a half-century schools were the target for reform, 
and quite rightly too, the achievement was brilliant. 
But the reformers were as always (perhaps had to be) 
too single-minded. They focused on schools to the ex­
clusion of everything else, with the distressing result that 
for many years the efficiency with which manpower was 
used in industry lagged far behind the efficiency with 
which it was used in education. Our grandfathers did 
not fully realize that promotion of adults by merit, with 
all that it implied for industrial organization, was as 
necessary as promotion of children by merit. A society 
which acknowledged the claims of talent in the schools, 
but not in industry, was a house divided against itself. 
They did not fully understand that when castes were 
abolished, or rather converted into our modern kind of 
classes, there was still another category of people to 
circumvent - the class of old men. They did not fully 
appreciate that having the wrong man in a position of 
power merely because he was of superior age was every 
bit as wasteful as having the wrong man in a position of 
power merely because his parents were of a superior 
class. In an open society the few who are chosen out of 
the many who are called should be chosen on merit; age 
is as much an irrelevant criterion as birth. 
Within the span of human history age has been the 
most enduring ruling class: once established, every 
.aristocracy, every plutocracy, every bureaucracy, has 
79 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
also been a gerontocracy; and even under democracy, 
government by the people, of the people, for the people, 
meant government by old people, of young people, for 
old people. In pre-industrial times the autocrat of the 
farm did not share his authority with any school­
master when his sons were young, and he retained his 
dominion over them when they were grown men, re­
strained only by the fear that if he irked his children 
overmuch his eventual fate might be that of King Lear. 
After the introduction of industry, fathers still did all 
they could to secure advancement for their own over 
other men's sons, but never over themselves, and to this 
end the solidarity of seniority made all fathers into a 
band of brothers. After the establishment of the new 
elite fathers could no longer gain privilege for their own 
sons, but they still continued to do all they could to 
ensure that other men's sons, however able, did not gain 
supremacy over themselves. 
The meritocracy threatened, in short, to become yet 
another gerontocracy. Had this danger not been 
averted, the intellectual revolution would have been 
incomplete. 
With education reformed, some people imagined they 
had matriculated to the millennium. The winners from 
school and university were inclined to lean upon their 
laurels. They entered, as if to a haven, professions still 
governed by a restrictive guild mentality. They 
accepted rule by the elders of their profession. They 
comforted themselves that they would continue to make 
the same steady progression through the age-grades as 
they had done at school, until in proper season they be­
came sacred elders in their turn. It was only the relent­
less facts of the modern world which roused people from 
their torpor and sent competition to storm industry as 
80 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
well as school. In order to combine the best of England, 
our regime for children, with the best of America, their 
regime for adults, competition had to last for life. 
2. FACTORIES CEASE TO BE SCHOOLS 
Up till the Hitler war and for some years after, educa­
tion determined prospects for promotion almost as 
much as it does in modern times. The manual worker 
who left school at the minimum age ordinarily re­
mained a manual worker for life, the farthest he could 
go being to charge-hand and foreman, or, if he was 
lucky, by another route to general secretary of a trade 
union. The progress chaser taken away early from gram­
mar school might climb to works manager, the pay­
clerk to accountant. In most work-places it was prac­
tically impossible to transfer from the ladder selected to 
start with according to the age at which the boy left 
school to another ladder which would take him higher; 
the foreman remained a foreman instead of beginning 
again on the ladder of works management, the account­
ant remained an accountant and was not in the run­
ning for director. Education decided the point of entry 
to industry, and the point of entry decided where one 
finished up. 
This structure would have been well enough had the 
schools been rationalized. But when neither quality nor 
quantity of education were yet determined by intelli­
gence, many clever children left school too soon, many 
stupid too late. A minority of more perceptive em­
ployers, following the civil service model which I have 
already described, set out to correct the injustices of the 
educational system and profit themselves at the same 
time. They gave their clever employees opportunities to 
81 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
rise within the firm in place of the opportunities they 
had missed at school. At its most complete ( and to us 
most ridiculous), this practice made it possible for the 
tea-boy from the manual workers and the office-boy 
from the clerical to rise up to the board of directors. The 
first industries to be nationalized made some effort to do 
at least as well as the civil service. On British Railways 
a clerk could, for instance, if he moved off the lowest 
rungs when he was very young, transfer from the cleri­
cal ladder to one of the lower administrative posts. 1 
Electricity supply was more enlightened still. 
Employees in the industry are considered to be on a common 
ladder, rising as openings occur, and in open competition accord­
ing to experience and ability for the particular vacancy. 2 
The statement is entertaining, practice not being quite 
like precept, because it shows how it was thought things 
should work. Some employers were so proud of their 
promotion schemes and ladder plans that they preferred 
to take on children straight from school and train them 
on the job than recruit university graduates. This atti­
tude was regrettably common amongst leading execu­
tives who had not been to university themselves; there 
were of course many such ' self-made men' in those 
distant days. The school's shame was the factory's pride. 
The beginning of the second phase, which has lasted 
until the present day, is usually put in the 1950s. The 
1944 Act took ten to twenty years before its effect was 
generally felt in industry. Not many employers were as 
quick as the High Master to see its significance. 
1. For an account see Acton Society Trust. Training and Promo­
tion in Nationalized Industry. 1950. 
2. Report of a Committee of Enquiry into the Electricity Supp{y Indus­
try. Para. 171. Cmd. 9672, 1956. 
82 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
No longer, said Sir Eric, will industry or commerce be able 
to recruit at fifteen or sixttJen boys who, as in the past, are of 
a quality to work their way up to positions of the highest 
managerial responsibility. 1 
In the fullness of time only the most dim-witted em­
ployers failed to learn this lesson. The evidence came 
through the door at the end of every term. Whatever 
opportunities there might be for secondary modern chil­
dren to climb the industrial ladder, the hard fact was 
that fewer and fewer of them had the ability to do so. 
The grammar schools were retaining the ' likely lads' 
who in previous generations might have entered indus­
try as fifteen-year-olds, and the cleverest of the clever 
were going on to the university. Since the only ladder 
plan that mattered was the educational one, the cap­
tains of industry had to fit in with that. Either they 
could attract a share of grammar school graduates, and 
a seasoning from the university; or their businesses 
would perish. To sustain top management they had to 
recruit cadets from higher education, even if it meant 
incurring the hostility of the trade unions to introducing 
outsiders, particularly well-educated outsiders. The 
union leaders claimed, in the interests of their own 
members, that a man who had ' come up the hard way' 
by working his passage upwards was inherently superior 
to others of purely academic education. But that was 
before education came to be held in the high respect it 
later enjoyed. The view was obvious nonsense - there 
was no harder way of coming up than the grammar 
school. 
Awareness that shortage of talent was more serious 
than any other fanned the competition between business 
1. James, E., op. cit. 
83 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
executives. According to a contemporary report only a 
few years after r 944 -
One young man in his second year at university had already been 
offered a post at £750 by one large company for when he should 
graduate, and was being assiduously courted by another vast 
company, whose managing director entertained him to lunch. 1 
This was nothing to what happened later; eventually 
every forward-looking company had its teams of talent 
scouts combing the universities and grammar schools 
and most science masters and lecturers were offered re­
tainers if they would regularly supply reports on prom­
ising students. Newspapers were filled with employers' 
appeals to scholars; college magazines grew larger and 
larger on the proceeds of advertisements. This hectic 
competition was sometimes unfair, as many trade associ­
ations alleged, and sometimes led to abuse. Some clever 
grammar school pupils were dissuaded from continuing 
into the sixth forms by offers of generous apprentice­
ships, and others from seeking admission to the univer­
sity by glib scouts who promised them not only high 
salaries immediately but university education later at 
company expense. Retainers and assistance with re­
search expenses were not the best way of augmenting 
science teachers' salaries. 
The N.U.S. (National Union of Students) and 
B.U.G.S.A. had to protect their members and in 1969 
the Ministry of Education and the Federation of British 
Industries drew up the Code of Fair Practice for Utili­
zing the Products of Higher Education. Although a 
worthy endeavour, this proved so ineffective in prac­
tice that government control over the allocation of 
intellectual resources became imperative. When it was 
I. Acton Society Trust, op. cit. 
84 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
instituted priorities could be generally enforced. Effec­
tive brain-power planning is not only necessary to end 
one of the kinds of competition between employers that 
is wasteful, but gives the government strategic power to 
control the whole economy. 
3. CHALLENGE TO AGE
Industry surrendered to teachers the function of select­
ing recruits for management with a good enough grace 
when it saw that surrender was essential to survival. 
From that time on most of those who at the ages of 
nineteen or twenty-three entered the higher reaches or 
industry, commerce, and the professions were the pick. 
of their age-groups. Managerial cadets were chosen on 
merit through competitive selection in the schools. But 
there, in this transition period, free competition stopped. 
As soon as the newcomer arrived in factory or office, he 
no longer had the chance to pit his talents against all 
and sundry in the promotion stakes. He was no longer 
permitted, even after he had spent several years learn­
ing the business, to stand up in open competition with 
people much older than himself. While he was a junior 
man, whether he had the capacity of Henry Ford or 
Lord Nuffield it made no matter, he had to be content 
with being at best a junior executive. In all the most im­
portant jobs promotion was still by seniority, so much so 
that without exceptional luck even the best-educated 
could not hope to reach the top of the ladder until they 
were fifty or sixty. The story of the third and most 
recent phase is the story of the way in which the prin­
ciple of seniority has gradually yielded to the principle 
of merit, and industry been modelled on the schools. 
It is once again difficult for us to realize how strongly 
85 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
entrenched the old were in those days, especially in 
Britain. Status for age had once been linked with here­
ditary status, but it was far less easy to discredit. By the 
middle of last century it was extremely rare to hear any­
one openly defending a hereditary system. Kinship con­
nexions were no longer thought to confer merit on a 
man. But age was. The rights of the old did not have to 
be publicly acclaimed, they were so widely taken for 
granted. Age was accorded deference for no better 
reason than that, and people did not even have to ac­
knowledge the existence of any dilemma when on the 
one hand they talked in favour of promotion by merit 
and on the other acted in favour of promotion by age. 
They resolved the dilemma before it was properly posed 
by enormously over-estimating the value of 'experi­
ence' which was imagined to be the product purely of 
years. There was a mystique about it: people said 'Ah, 
yes, but he's got more experience', as though that was 
the last word. Respect for age was as much the rule of 
society as respect for the aristocracy from which it had 
grown. 
Seniores priores - there is no stronger testament to its 
influence than the schools. They weakened their own 
progressive role by upholding the very principle with 
which they were fundamentally at loggerheads. Prefects 
were one of the most distinctive features of the old 
public schools. These prefects were older boys who exer­
cised day-to-day government over their younger fellows, 
some of whom were selected as 'fags' to perform the 
duties of servants. The maintenance of discipline was in 
large part the responsibility of the prefects, who had the 
power to secure obedience by beating any little boy who 
incurred their displeasure. The prefect system was un­
fortunately taken over by the grammar schools too. 
86 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
Consequently, the regard younger children always have 
for older was converted into an awe which often lasted 
for life. The old, by allowing the young to have author­
ity when it was not a threat to themselves, helped to 
ensure that their own power would later go unchal­
lenged. The abolition of prefects was an important 
reform which started in the ' progressive' co-educational 
schools and later spread to the more orthodox. 
I have no space to trace the subtle and individually 
infinitesimal changes which have combined to create a 
new spirit; all I can do is to pinpoint some of the coun­
ter-forces which have in the end proved too strong for 
the gerontocracy. I will deal briefly with each of them 
in turn. 
1. Pressure from the young. No solid progress could be 
made until the young had generated more confidence 
in themselves. As long as they accepted the dominance 
of the old there was no hope of a shift in the distribution 
of power, any more than there had been any hope of 
change while the superiority of the higher classes in a 
hereditary system was recognized by the lower. The 
right of the old to power had first to be questioned as 
strenuously as the legitimacy of inheritance, and for the 
same reason. Inheritance was denounced for the simple 
reason that a developing industrial country in competi­
tion with others could no longer afford second-rate 
leaders; the needs of the economy reshaped society. 
This campaign was not called off just because one vic­
tory had been won, but was turned against the old. 
Members of every fresh generation revolted against their 
elders; youth of mettle to oppose the pretensions of age 
instead of siding with it for the sake of favours to come. 
Some cried destruction on the established order, some 
87 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
tried, more constructively, to remove the blocks to their 
own advancement. The most rebellious knew instinc­
tively that the fastest progress occurs anywhere when 
the old have to surrender their power before their span 
of life is complete - the essence of every social revolution 
is the earlier transfer of authority from one generation 
to another; the wisest knew that the surest progress is 
made by the mouse, by nibbling at the establishment 
instead of by taking arms against it. The best policy 
was to criticize the worth of individual old people 
in an empirical manner rather than the class as a 
whole. 
The young succeeded as much as they did in oppos­
ing private practice because they had the resources of 
the public culture to support them. They declared that 
youth was generally entitled, on the grounds of merit, 
to more preferment than it received. They were quite 
right. In any rapidly changing society the young are 
more at home than the old: it is easier for them to learn 
for the first time than for the old to unlearn, and learn 
again, for a second or third time, especially when nos­
talgia for their own youth makes the old disinclined 
even to try. This is more than ever true when the 
schools are progressing even more rapidly than their 
host society. Then children not only learn different 
things, attuned to the needs of their own day (particu­
larly when the teachers are also young); they also learn 
more because standards are higher and methods of 
pedagogy better. Compare the boy who learns physics 
today with an elderly man who was at the same univer­
sity in the eighties before Shag was even born. The 
change is so dramatic, it is not really the same subject at 
all. Given the same native ability, there is no doubt 
which of them should obtain an important post in the 
88 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
laboratories, say at H.Q. in Eugenics House. I say 
' given the same native ability' - but of course this is 
implausible. The content of higher education has not 
only advanced; methods of selecting those to benefit 
from it have improved at least as fast. Each ten-year 
age-cohort of the elite has up till recently had more in­
nate capacity than the previous one; the university 
alumnus of 2000 more talent, as well as better training, 
than the alumnus of 1 990; of 201 0  more than of 2000. 
The revelation that the graduate of 2020 was only very 
slightly superior to the graduate of 2010 is one of the 
disturbing facts which has led to the present turmoil. 
2. Support from the old. There was never any hard-and­
fast division between young and old: class-lines were 
always blurred. Some easy-going young people welcomed 
age-stratification for the sake of a quiet life, without spur 
to compete with their peers. Some old people were, on 
the other hand, ' traitors to their age-group'. Observance 
of promotion by seniority, though it was in the interests 
of most older people, was never in the interests of all of 
them. 
Nearly every non-manual occupation was age­
graded. A bank clerk, for instance, started at the bottom 
and then every few years added an increment to his 
salary and a notch to his status, until eventually he 
became chief cashier or even branch manager. But if he 
lost his job, say at the age of forty, it might be through 
no fault of his own, perhaps as a result of office-auto­
mation, 1 what was he to do then? After Labour's first 
1 .  The large firm, with a wide spread of interests, could offer 
greater security, which was one of its attractions for many young 
people, and one of the causes of the relative growth of the large-
11cale units in the economy. 
89 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
National Superannuation Act he could at least take his 
pension with him. But not his status. Ifhe tried to enter 
another bank, or another employment altogether, on to 
what rung of the promotion ladder was he to step? Ifhe 
started at the beginning again, he would suffer the loss 
of all the increments he had received in twenty years. If 
at the same level as other men of forty, he would be 
filling a position coveted by an existing employee of 
thirty-five. This was usually ruled out by the opposition 
of all the younger people in the line of promotion. Since 
the old insisted on preferment for seniority, to protect 
themselves, they could not turn about when the same 
principle was invoked by the young, on behalf of their 
own prospects of slow but steady ascent. Consequently 
the old were only secure as long as they remained in one 
employment - middle-aged fear of dismissal was a main 
cause of the caution which led to stagnation in many 
companies. They were terrified by the cry of ' too old at 
forty', a maxim feared by all except the outstandingly 
brilliant whom no age-barrier could halt. 
The middle-aged, who had to accept demotion to get 
any job at all after they had once lost their place on the 
ladder, were sometimes as keen on promotion by merit 
as the younger colleagues whose inferior status they 
shared. That was a useful alliance for youth. Another, 
stronger one was struck up with the retired. Early and 
fixed retirement from work was the consequence of pro­
motion by seniority. The usual retirement age was at 
one time sixty-five. However able the manager, and 
however anxious he was to continue, he was under great 
pressure not to. If he postponed his retirement by a 
couple of years, the whole shuffiing progress below him 
came to a stop. The assistant manager of sixty had to 
wait two extra years for his promotion, so did the 
go 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
deputy assistant manager of fifty-five, so did the assist­
ant deputy assistant manager of fifty, all the way down 
to the lad of thirty just recently post-graduated from the 
university. They were all waiting for the 'old man' to 
start pottering in his garden instead of with the busi­
ness, hoping that they would not become too exhausted 
waiting for his desk. Every age-grade therefore united 
against the top to ensure that the rules of the game were 
kept. Before the meritocracy was fully established, age­
stratification as a substitute for the hereditary order may 
have been necessary for the sake of social stability. But 
the cost was very high. Every year hundreds of thous­
ands of elderly men, some of whom would have been 
much more assets than liabilities to their employers, 
were forced to retreat into idleness, and deprived of 
their own self-esteem, by the rigidity of the promotion 
system. Those who thought they would have held on to 
their posts on grounds of ability alone naturally sided 
with the youngsters who expected they would achieve 
more rapid promotion if the rules were changed. 
The consequences of disregarding merit became more 
and more serious with the increasing number of old 
people who lasted out their span of life, and the 
lengthening of that span. The elderly were not merely 
the only large reserve of labour and intelligence, they 
were also a growing one. Eventually Britain was con­
strained to follow the example of other industrial 
societies with less out-of-date retirement rules. But when 
the retiring age was raised to seventy, the political con­
sequences were so grave that we had to wait twenty 
years for the age to be raised further to eighty, and 
another twelve years before the fixed age was abolished 
altogether. Raising the age quickened the spread of the 
new principles, for seniority lost its appeal when all the 
91 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
people waiting in the promotion queue suddenly had 
their prospects darkened; they became more willing to 
put their trust in merit. The elderly whose retirement 
had been postponed did not usually stay as leaders; few 
people over fifty-five are today in full membership of 
the meritocracy. They had (like manual workers before 
them) to reconcile themselves to demotion as their capa­
city fell off, measured either absolutely or relatively to 
new arrivals from the schools. The managing director 
had to become an office mechanic in someone else's firm 
if not in his own; the professor an assistant in the library. 
There have been judges who have become taxi-drivers, 
bishops curates, and publishers writers - the old shine 
in jobs where reliability is important. The re-employ­
ment of retired people performed one great service by 
dissociating authority from age. Youngsters used to feel 
uncomfortable when giving orders to old people other­
wise in the same social class as themselves. The re­
employed showed so little resentment towards their 
youthful superiors, they were so thankful to have work 
at all, that the diffidence of their youthful superiors was 
dispelled, and their confidence in command more 
nearly equated to their abilities. 
3. Improvement of merit-rating. Perhaps the greatest rea­
son for the change in mental climate is that merit has 
become progressively more measurable. In the old days 
seniority had the splendid advantage of being an objec­
tive standard, even if it was irrelevant, whereas merit 
was still subjective even though relevant. Indeed, for a 
long time, 'merit' was little more than a respectable 
disguise for nepotism. Fathers secured promotion for 
their relatives and friends, and pretended to themselves 
and to others they were doing nothing except give merit 
92 

FROM SENIOR.ITY TO MERIT 
its due. But if they concealed their fault from them­
selves, others were not so easily deceived. The trade 
unions, in particular, were only too well aware of the 
pitfalls of selecting by 'merit', when the father was his 
own judge and psychologist, and were justifiably sus­
picious that when outsiders were introduced into the 
line of promotion something less than justice had been 
done. They therefore stood by promotion by seniority, 
which was at least one better than vile nepotism. The 
world could see whether, according to this particular 
idea of fairness, right prevailed or not. If on any lad­
der, a man of thirty was given superiority over a man of 
forty ( or rather a man with ten years' service preferred 
to a man with twenty), then all could see the mis­
carriage of justice. 
This vicious circle - the vagueness of merit leading to 
its rejection - was only broken when the means of selec­
tion employed in the schools were adapted for use in the 
economy. Intelligence tests and aptitude tests were ob­
jective, and a good deal more reliable than the older 
forms of examination which they supplemented. The 
first stage, as we have seen, was for the level of perform­
ance achieved in the tests (when taken together with 
the level of education with which the test results were 
correlated) to determine the level of entry into industry. 
Once people were ready, it was then but a step to ex­
tend the sway of the tests until the markings controlled 
promotion as well as selection. To begin with, employers 
had to submit candidates to their own house-tests; yet 
such was the suspicion in industrial relations at that 
time, their impartiality was distrusted just because they 
were the employer's responsibility. The atmosphere 
was much sweetened when the government established 
its chain of Regional Adult Education Centres and 
93 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
community centres as a common service to industry, 
and, after a very long and acrimonious debate, gave 
employers access to the results of intelligence tests from 
the Centres as well as the schools. Employers now have 
as close an interest as employees in the quinquennial re­
valuations at the regional centres, and many of them 
show their appreciation on the Prize Days of their 
factories. 
One thing the regional centres could not do. They 
could not measure the qualities of character expressed 
in effort expended by an employee in the course of his 
work. Intelligence and effort together make up ,merit 
(I+ E = M). The lazy genius is not one. Here employers 
have made their own contribution to the cause of pro­
gress. 'Scientific management' pioneered by Taylor, 
the Galbraiths, and Bedaux has led to modern time and 
motion study, and this in its turn to the measurement of 
effort. The art of work measurement has become more 
of a science, with the consequence that wages can be 
assessed, and related to effort, in a more and more pre­
cise manner. I shall return to this subject in a later chap­
ter. Dr Roskill's great contribution was to show how the 
principle of work study could be applied to mental pro­
cesses. After that the employer had by him a Roskill 
chart as well as the scores from the education centres, 
and if he chose wrongly withal, it was high time he had 
a re-test himself. The trade unions' right of access to 
management scores is one of the guarantees that, if new 
tests are necessary, they will be administered willy-nilly. 
4• SUMMARY 
These, then, are some of the steps by which the old 
rigidities have been removed from industry. When 
94 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
intelligent public opinion as a whole recognized that
efficiency must be raised, in the general interest of man­
kind as well as of the part of it inhabiting these islands, 
the claims of youth could not be denied. Emergency was 
youth's opportunity. This was shown in every war - the 
young denounced ' brass-hats' and ' politicians' because 
they were out of date, and made headway precisely 
because bad brass-hats and bad politicians would have 
let the enemy in at the gates. International competition 
was also effective in peace. Native ability frozen in in­
ferior age-groups or inferior social classes always had 
one strong ally - the clever foreigner. 
Change has, as always too, created its own resistance. 
The protests of the past were the protests of youth. By 
rebelling against conventions and restrictions imposed 
on them by their elders, they at last made a new world. 
Where youth is the leader, age is the led; and not all old 
people have submitted to their new inferiority. Every 
now and then an old man, overtaken by a younger, and 
disappointed in work, turns to blame not so much his 
successor as the social order which makes possible the 
indignity he feels. He may not play rebel as grandly as 
the young man a hundred years ago - the outlandish 
narrow trousers, draped coats, and beards which some 
old men sport are a trifle pathetic - but he has the same 
kind of discontent, springing from the same sources. We 
do not need to look further for one of the strands in the 
support given to the reformers. In the light of sociology 
the old men at their meetings do not seem so much at 
odds with the vivid young girls on the platform. 
* 
95 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
I have now finished the first part of my essay, and with 
it my sketch of the means by which opportunities were 
equalized. Since I have had to compress more than a 
century's progress into a few pages, I am aware that I 
have done less than justice to the part of individuals in 
the intellectual renaissance. Too severe a sociological 
analysis may suggest that history has slid to its present 
conclusion as inevitably as the morning rocket arrives 
on the moon. That would be quite wrong. There is 
nothing mechanical about history. Stupidity has not 
been routed by sociology, but by the heroes who have 
combined high conscience with high intelligence. Think 
of Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and Bernard Shaw - the 
modern Conservative Party is carrying on their battle; 
think of Forster, Fisher, Ramsay MacDonald, Butler, 
Wyatt, Crosland, Stewart, Hailsham, Taylor, Dobson, 
and Clauson - their cause was our cause. What the 
Populists have done by their recent apostasy is to forfeit 
any right to claim descent from these great men and 
women. The Technicians have surrendered the mantle 
of greatness to the Conservatives. 
The great political theorists of the past century 
changed the mental climate of their time by reinter­
preting old values in terms of new situations - for in­
stance, by hailing the post-1944 educational system in 
the name of equality. They appealed in a characteris­
tically empirical manner to the common-sense predica­
ment of our island in a common-sense, competitive 
world. Supporting the theorists were the great adminis­
trators. They called out the psychologists and protected 
them from public assault. They made the grammar 
schools the elite's training ground. They battered the 
Treasury into accepting the new view of economy - that 
to spend money on education was in the long run the 
96 

D 
97 
FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
only way of raising the national product, and with it, 
the taxable capacity of the country. They overcame by 
a hundred expedients the unsavoury obscurantism of 
the public schools, and eventually promoted their amal­
gamation with the other kind of grammar school. They 
dethroned the old and made youth the prince of indus­
try. Let us praise them all. 
* 
But I have written this essay less to honour famous men 
than to warn my fellow intelligences. I said so at the 
beginning of this book, and I say again, that we shall 
show ourselves unworthy of our scholarships if we scorn 
our opponents. As individuals, I agree, few are excep­
tional. But as a mass they are formidable, the more so 
because by its forward motion the society we have 
created renews their strength daily. I shall be more ex­
plicit. Who are the lower classes of modern England? 
We can distinguish two main groups: 
(I) The majority who are second-generation lower class.
These comprise all the offspring of lower-class parents
except for clever children who have risen higher by
means of the educational ladder.
(2) The minority who are first-generation lower class.
These are the stupid offspring of upper-class parents,
found out in the schools and demoted to the social class
appropriate to their inferior capacity.
I shall return to the first group, numerically over­
whelming, in Part Two of this book, for I want to 
attempt there the difficult task of showing, against the 
background of their general status in society, why we 
can expect even some of these native proletarians to be 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
discontented. For the moment, in order to make my 
point as forcefully as I can, I shall do no more than dis­
charge the easier task of drawing attention to the resent­
ment in the second group, the stupid born of the clever. 
Painstaking retrospective study (for which the Uni­
versity of York has earned a well-deserved reputation) 
has made it seem at least reasonably probable that 
before the rg8os 'downward mobility' was uncommon. 
Upper-class parents with dull children did everything 
possible to hide their handicap. They usually made up 
by their own frantic determination for any lack of will 
on the part of their children. For instance, they bought 
places at private schools which would never have been 
awarded on merit. They spent, for the sake of stimulus, 
even more on books and travel than other rich people. 
And, when the combined pressure of home and school 
had produced, as it often did, a person superficially not 
too dull, the parents eased the loved one into a cosy 
corner of one of the less exacting professions, such as law 
or stockbroking. These anti-social parents were able to 
keep a hold on the old professions and also on family 
firms which for one reason or another enjoyed some 
small but effective monopoly. The old upper class found 
jobs for nearly all its children, while most of the addi­
tional jobs in the new professions, especially in science 
and technology, went to cadets drawn from the lower 
classes. The old upper class in absolute terms suffered 
but little diminution, merely lost its relative pre­
dominance ata time when the proportion of white-collar 
jobs in the economy was increasing fast. 
After the r 980s the scene began to change very 
rapidly. I suppose the decisive innovation was the recog­
nition of merit in industry, and at last even in the pro­
fessions. The stupid found it harder and harder to pass 
98 

FROM SENIORITY TO MERIT 
as clever. They found it harder and harder to get 
through the selection boards, and if they managed to 
squeeze through, their incapacity for work becoming 
more and more demanding was as often as not spotted 
by increasingly efficient personnel departments. After 
the reform of the public schools they were also deprived 
of the chance of a first-class education, unless it was pro­
cured at truly colossal expense by hiring private tutors. 
Nitwits could still go to second-rate public schools - can 
even do so today if their parents are wealthy enough -
but what was the use, if the education was second-rate? 
The closing of the bolt-holes has been made less irk­
some by the fine work of the Regional Centres in one of 
their less well-known manifestations. The Commis­
sioners have persuaded many parents that, if they love 
their stupid children, they will not cloud their lives with 
a lie - by pretending to them and everyone else that an 
I.Q. of go is really one of I IO. I do not for one moment
contend that modern notions of parental duty are every­
where accepted, but I would still maintain that we need
not be too anxious about the older generation. There
are so few clever parents with nothing but stupid pro­
geny, with a whole brood of ugly ducklings. The
younger generation have reacted less well, I mean the
children who can fool themselves no longer after they
have suffered dismal results in successive examinations.
They are brought up in our most honoured homes, and,
as infants, share the esteem which the community
accords to their fathers and mothers. They may, too, get
used to a standard of life which they will never again
enjoy once they have entered a manual occupation at
the appropriate level. Reared in a house with an enter­
tainment centre at its core, bespoke cooking and open
wood fires, the poor boy may find it hard indeed to get
99 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
used to an ordinary council house with heat pump but no 
open fires, with three-dimensional tape-recorders instead 
of an entertainment centre, with pre-packaged meals in­
stead of bespoke cooking. The rest of his life may be a 
backward look; scientific selection for jobs, though it has 
done much, has not taken all the moodiness out of nos­
talgia. Of course it may not happen like this. To be 
truthful, we cannot yet be sure just how much resent­
ment the declasse person does feel. The very fact that he 
is stupid means that he is inarticulate, and the fact that 
he is inarticulate means that he cannot explain too 
clearly how he does feel. Some psychologists who have 
specialized on these subjects have advanced the theory, 
which I myself find perfectly plausible, that they do 
suffer, but have been prevented by their intellectual 
limitations from saying so. Certainly they have not 
organized any concerted attack on the society of which 
they might claim to be the victims. Is it not possible 
that for fifty years some of them have been smouldering 
for the leadership which they cannot provide for them­
selves? 

PART TWO 
DECLINE OF THE 
LOWER CLAS SES 

CHAPTER FIVE 
S TA T U S  OF T H E  W O R K E R  
I .  GOLDEN AGE O F  E Q.UALITY 
I HA VE in the first part of this book reviewed the mearu 
by which our modern elite has been established, and 
what a splendid result it is! No longer is it just the 
brilliant individual who shines forth; the world beholds 
for the first time the spectacle of a brilliant class, the 
five per cent of the nation who know what five per cent 
means. Every member is a tried specialist in his own 
sphere. Mounting at a faster and faster rate, our know­
ledge has been cumulative from generation to genera­
tion. In the course of a mere hundred years we have 
come close to realizing at one stroke the ideal of Plato, 
Erasmus, and Shaw. But, if sociology teaches anything, 
it teaches that no society is completely stable; always 
there are strains and conflicts. In the first part of this 
essay I have mentioned some of the tensions - between 
family and community, between different parts of the 
educational structure, between young and old, between 
the declasse and the other members of the proletariat -
incident to the rise of the meritocracy. Now I turn, in 
this second part, to consider from the same point of 
view, the consequences of progress for the lower class, 
and, as I have said, particularly for those born into it. 
My method of analysis is historical; the comparison I 
draw once more with a century ago. Taylor has called 
that time the golden age of equality. 1 A sort of egali-
1. Taylor, F. G. The Role of Egalitarianism in Twentieth-century 
England. 2004. 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
tarianism flourished then because two contradictory 
principles for legitimizing power were struggling for 
mastery - the principle of kinship and the principle of 
merit - and nearly everyone, in his heart of hearts, 
believed in both. Everyone thought it proper to advance 
his son and honour his father; everyone thought it 
proper to seek out ability and honour achievement. In­
dividuals were riven as much as society. The conse­
quence was that anyone who had reached privilege be­
hind the shield of only one of these principles could be 
attacked with the sword of the other - the man born 
great was criticized because, by another reckoning, he 
did not deserve his fortune; and the base-born achiev­
ing greatness could be charged half impostor. The 
powerful were, by this whirligig, unfailingly unseated. 
Many people were catapulted forward by their 
parents' riches and influence; not only did they benefit 
from the culture festooning their homes, they were sent 
to the best schools and colleges, dispatched on trips 
abroad and given expensive training for Bar, counting­
house, or surgery - all the advantages, in short, which 
we in our day try to keep for the deserving. But since 
such treatment was sanctioned by only half the moral 
code, the beneficiaries were only half at home in their 
station in life. They could not say to themselves with 
complete conviction ' I  am the best man for the job' 
because they knew that they had not won their place in 
open competition and, if they were honest, had to recog­
nize that a dozen of their subordinates would have been 
as good, or perhaps better. Although they sometimes 
sought to deny self-doubt by too brassy an assertion of 
self-confidence, such denial was hard to sustain when it 
plainly ran against the facts. The upper-class man had 
to be insensitive indeed not to have noticed, at some 
1 04 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
time in his life, that a private in his regiment, a butler 
or ' charlady' in his home, a driver of taxi or bus, or the 
humble workman with lined face and sharp eyes in the 
railway carriage or country pub - not to have noticed 
that amongst such people was intelligence, wit, and 
wisdom at least equal to his own, not to have noticed 
that every village had its Jude the Obscure. lf he had so 
observed, if he had so recognized that his social in­
feriors were sometimes his biological superiors, if the 
great variety of people in all social classes had made 
him think in some dim way that ' a  man's a man for a' 
that', was he not likely to respond by treating them with 
a kind of respect? 1 
· Even if the superiors deceived themselves, they could 
not their subordinates. These knew that many bosses 
were there not so much because of what they knew, as 
who they knew, and who their parents were, and went 
on, with wanton exaggeration, to denounce all bosses 
on like account. Some men of talent took pains (if 
contemporary novels are to be relied on) to make it 
known in the factory, if not in the golf club, that they 
had 'come up the hard way'. But who could tell for 
certain how far success had been accident, or lack of 
scruples offset lack of brains? The workmen had their 
doubts. They let fly with their criticism of the powers­
that-be, and so kept even the able under restraint. The 
energy wasted on criticism and counter-criticism was 
colossal. 
I. In an earlier age the sumptuary laws passed by Henry VII to 
force lords to eat in the same great hall as their retainers were not 
only for the benefit of the retainers. In modern times there is 
nothing to be gained from social mixing, in school, in residence, or 
at work, because the upper class now have little or nothing to learn 
from the lower. 

106 
THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
An even more important consequence of the conflict 
in values was that the workers could altogether dissociate 
their own judgements of themselves from the judgement 
of society. Subjective and objective status were often 
poles apart. The worker said to himself: ' Here I am, a 
workman. Why am I a workman? Am I fit for nothing 
else? Of course not. Had I had a proper chance I would 
have shown the world. A doctor? A brewer? A minis­
ter? I could have done anything. I never had the chance. 
And so I am a worker. But don't think that at bottom 
I am any worse than anyone else. I'm better.' Educa­
tional injustice enabled people to preserve their illu­
sions, inequality of opportunity fostered the myth of 
human equality. Myth we know it to be; not so our 
ancestors. 
2. GULF B E TWEEN TH E CLASSES 
This evocation of the past shows how great the change 
has been. In those days no class was homogeneous in 
brains: clever members of the upper classes had as much 
in common with clever members of the lower classes as 
they did with stupid members of their own. Now that 
people are classified by ability, the gap between the 
classes has inevitably become wider. The upper classes 
are, on the one hand, no longer weakened by self-doubt 
and self-criticism. Today the eminent know that suc­
cess is just reward for their own capacity, for their own 
efforts, and for their own undeniable achievement. 
They deserve to belong to a superior class. They know, 
too, that not only are they of higher calibre to start 
with, but that a first-class education has been built 
upon their native gifts. As a result, they can come as 
close as anyone to understanding the full and ever­
growing complexity of our technical civilization. They 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
are trained in science, and it is scientists who have in­
herited the earth. What can they have in common with 
people whose education stopped at sixteen or seventeen, 
leaving them with the merest smattering of dog-science? 
How can they carry on a two-sided conversation with 
the lower classes when they speak another, richer, and 
more exact language? Today, the elite know that, ex­
cept for a grave error in administration, which should 
at once be corrected if brought to light, their social 
inferiors are inferiors in other ways as well - that is, in 
the two vital qualities, of intelligence and education, 
which are given pride of place in the more consistent 
value system of the twenty-first century. Hence one of 
our characteristic modern problems: some members 
of the meritocracy, as most moderate reformers admit, 
have become so impressed with their own importance 
as to lose sympathy with the people whom they govern, 
and so tactless that even people of low calibre have been 
quite unnecessarily offended. The schools and univer­
sities are endeavouring to instil a more proper sense of 
humility - what does even modern man count beside 
the wonders which Nature has wrought in the universe? 
- but for the moment the efficiency of public relations 
with the lower classes is not all that it might be. 
As for the lower classes, their situation is different 
too. Today all persons, however humble, know they 
have had every chance. They are tested again and 
again. If on one occasion they are off-colour, they have 
a second, a third, and fourth opportunity to demon­
strate their ability. But if they have been labelled 
'dunce ' repeatedly they cannot any longer pretend; 
theirl.image of themselves is more nearly a true, un­
flattering, reflection. Are they not bound to recognize 
that they have an inferior status-not as in the past because 
107 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
they were denied opportunity; but because they are in­
ferior?1 For the first time in human history the inferior 
man has no ready buttress for his self-regard. This has 
presented contemporary psychology with its gravest 
problem. Men who have lost their self-respect are liable 
to lose their inner vitality ( especially if they are inferior 
to their own parents and fall correspondingly in the 
social scale) and may only too easily cease to be either 
good citizens or good technicians. The common man is 
liable to sulk for his fig-leaf. 
The consequences of so depressing the status of the 
inferior and elevating that of the superior have natur­
ally engaged the full attention of social science. We can­
not pretend that its path has always been smooth. Dr 
Jason's ' tadpole' argument which amounted, when 
stripped of verbiage, to saying that on the whole all 
tadpoles were happier because they knew that some of 
them would turn into frogs, was at best a half-truth. 
The young might be happier; but what of the many 
older tadpoles who knew they would never become 
frogs? The tadpoles only confused counsel. Since Lord 
Jason himself became a 'frog', research has proceeded 
more steadily. 
The situation has been saved by five things. First, 
by the philosophy underlying teaching in secondary 
modern schools. When these were started, no one quite 
knew what to do about the content of education for the 
lower classes. Children were taught the three R's as 
well as how to use simple tools and to measure with 
1. This is not entirely a new realization. My colleague, Mr
Fallon, has drawn my attention to an old cartoon in the New 
Torker, an ostensibly humorous American periodical, circa 1954. 
It showed a large psychiatrist confronting a small patient, saying, 
'You haven't got an inferiority complex. You are inferior.' 
1 08 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
gauges and even micrometers. But this was only the 
formal skeleton of a course without an ideology to guide 
it. The schools had a far more important function than 
to equip their pupils with a few elementary skills; they 
also had to instil an attitude of mind which would be 
conducive to effective performance of their future tasks 
in life. The lower classes needed a Mythos, and they got 
what they needed, the Mythos of Muscularity. Luckily 
they already had this in a rudimentary form, which the 
modern schools have been able to promote into the 
modern cult of physical (as distinct from mental) prow­
ess. The English love of sport was traditional, and no­
where stronger than in the lower classes. The modern 
schools were not breaking with the past, they were 
building on it, when they encouraged their pupils to 
value physical strength, bodily discipline, and manual 
dexterity. Handicrafts, gymnastics, and games have 
become the core of the curriculum. This enlightened 
approach has achieved a double purpose. Appreciation 
of manual work has been cultivated, and leisure made 
more enjoyable. Of the two, education for leisure has 
been the most important. More capable pupils have 
been trained to participate in active games which they 
can continue to play when they leave school; and the 
others who form the great majority have been given 
heightened appreciation of boxing, football, and other 
sports displayed before them nightly on the screens in 
their own homes. They esteem physical achievement 
almost as highly as we of the upper classes esteem mental. 
Secondly, the adult education movement has, in its 
maturity, not only maintained and enlarged the 
regional centres but has arranged for everyone, irre­
spective of previous results, to attend there for a 
periodic intelligence check at intervals of five years. 
109 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Tests can be even more frequent at the behest of the 
individual. A few remarkable changes of I.Q. both up 
and down, have occurred in middle life. Widely pub­
licized in the popular newspapers, the reports have 
given new heart to many an ambitious technician. Now 
that psychiatric treatment is freely available in every 
workplace, many people with emotional blocks to the 
realization of their potential have been fully cured. 
Thirdly, even when they have abandoned hope them­
selves, all parents have been solaced by the knowledge 
that, however low their own I.Q., their child ( or grand­
child) will have the chance to enter the meritocracy. 
The solace is a real one. Psychologists have shown that 
parents, whose own ambitions are thwarted, invariably 
displace those ambitions on to their children. They are 
satisfied if they think that their own child may achieve 
what they could not achieve themselves. ' Do as I wish, 
not as I do,' they say. The relationship can even be 
expressed in quantitative terms: according to the well­
known principle of compensating aspirations, the 
greater the frustrations parents experience in their own 
lives, the greater their aspirations for their children. 
Almost from the moment when they fail their first in­
telligence tests at school, children can comfort them­
selves that one day they will have offspring who will do 
better; and even when it is dismally clear from teachers' 
reports that the offspring too are dull, there are still the 
grandchildren.1 Personal failings are not so painful if 
there is a vision of vicarious triumph. As long as all have 
opportunity to rise through the schools, people can 
1. Three-generation interlocking of aspirations in the extended 
family was discussed in an interesting way by Michael Young in 
'The Role of thˤ Extended Family in Channeling Aspirations, ' 
British Journal of Sociolo˥; March 1967. Note the earliness of the 
date. 
I IO 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
believe in immortality: they have a second chance 
through the younger generation. Also, the more chil­
dren, the more second chances, which helps to account 
for the higher birth-rate in the second half of last 
century, after the reforms. 
The fourth saving feature has been the very stupid­
ity which has assigned the lower classes to their present 
status. A common mistake of some sociologists is to 
impute to the lower orders the same capacity as them­
selves - a way of thinking akin to anthropomorphism. 
Sociologists would naturally be aggrieved were they to 
be denied their proper status. But the lower classes are 
the objects of study, not the students. The attitude of 
mind is quite different. People of low intelligence have 
sterling qualities: they go to work, they are conscien­
tious, they are dutiful to their families. But they are 
unambitious, innocent, and incapable of grasping 
clearly enough the grand design of modern society to 
offer any effective protest. Some are sulkily discon­
tented, without being too sure what to do about it, and 
find their way to the psychologist or the priest. Most are 
not, for they know not what is done to them. 
3. PIONEERS OF DIRTY WORK 
The fifth, and most important, saving feature has been 
the application of scientific selection to industry. In the 
previous chapter I showed how promotion by merit 
gradually replaced promotion by seniority - how the 
grammar school and university streams were eventually 
extended into working life. I will now deal with the 
treatment of the secondary modern stream. 
The modern schools have been reproduced in indus­
try just as surely as the grammar schools, and with 
I I I  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
consequences just as far-reaching. The starting-point is 
again the Hitler war. In the early years of that war the 
methods of distributing recruits were almost as hap­
hazard as in industry. Only after several disasters was 
a more sensible practice adopted, described as follows 
in the words of a leading Command Psychiatrist in one 
of the official histories of the war: 
In allocating personnel, the basic principle should be that no 
man is to be employed on work which is definitely above, or, on 
the other hand, definitely below his ability. Any other method of 
allotment is wasteful of ability, or destrur:tive of unit efficiency. 1 
What wise and far-sighted words! 
By the end of the war the instruction was obeyed and 
very few men entering the Forces were assigned to any 
branch until their intelligence and aptitudes had been 
ascertained as accurately as the crude methods of the 
time allowed. Much greater efficiency was obtained in 
the utilization of manpower when the stupid were kept 
together, and the lesson was not lost on some of the bet­
ter brains in civilian industry. This was long before 
advertisers began to include 'State I.Q.' (soon short­
ened to S.I.Q.) in their copy; and longer still before 
H.Q. (at Eugenics House) supplied I.Q. certificates to 
authorized inquirers by teleprinter. The flower of that 
experiment of the 1940s was the Pioneer Corps. When 
this indispensable body of hewers and drawers was con­
fined to men with I.Q.s below the line required to get 
them into the Intelligence Corps, the rise in efficiency 
was spectacular. The morale of these dull-witted men 
was better. They were no longer daunted by having 
superior people to compete with. They were amongst 
1 .  F. A. E. Crew, F.R.S. The Army Medical Services. H.M.S.O., 
1955·
1 1 2 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
their equals - they had more equal opportunities since 
they had more limited ones - and they were happier, 
had fewer mental breakdowns, and were harder work­
ing. The Army had learnt the lesson of the schools: that 
people can be taught more easily, and get on better, 
when they are classed with people of more or less equal 
intelligence, or lack of it. 
Not until the 1 960s did this same lesson strike home 
in civil life. Intelligent people used to ask themselves 
what they thought was a profound poser: 'Who', they 
asked, 'will do the dirty work in the future common­
wealth? ' Those who knew the right answer apparently 
said: ' Machines, of course; they will be the robots of the 
future.' It was a good answer as far as it went, but, in 
view of the many jobs which can never be taken over by 
machinery, at best a partial one. Then as they became 
aware of the new and revolutionary developments in 
intelligence testing, aptitude testing, and vocational 
selection, managements realized that a permanent 
peace-time Pioneer Corps was a practical possibility. 
At first tentatively, they suggested the correct answer to 
the old question: 'Who will do the dirty work? ' The 
correct answer was: 'Why, men who like doing it, of 
course.' 
They could see the need for a kind of permanent civi­
lian Pioneer Corps, men with large muscles and small 
brains (selected by other men with small muscles and 
large brains) who were not only good at emptying dust­
bins and heaving loads but liked doing it. They were 
never to be asked to do more than they were proved to 
be fit for. They were never to be forced to mix with any­
one who made them feel foolish by emptying dustbins 
more quickly or, what was worse at that time, by con­
signing all dustbins to the rubbish-heap - a sure sign 
1 1 3 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
either of mental deficiency or genius. As I say, pro­
gressive managements were very tentative and even a 
little shamefaced. They were easily put off by refer­
ences to Mr Huxley's gammas and Mr Orwell's proles. 
The managers did not see that these two gentlemen had 
both 'been attacking not equal opportunity, but the 
effects of conditioning and propaganda. By these means 
even intelligent people were to be brought to accept 
their fate as manual workers. We know that in the long 
run this is impossible, and in the short run absurdly 
wasteful and frustrating. The only good manual work­
ers, we know, are those who have not the ability for 
anything better. Enlightened modern methods have 
nothing in common with these brave new worlds. But at 
first not all managers realized that so signally to square 
efficiency with justice, and order with humanity, was 
nothing less than a new stage in the ascent of man, 
brought within his reach by the early advances in the 
social sciences. 
The Pioneer Corps was the essential counterpart of 
the administrative class in the civil service; its historical 
significance is as great as that. The success of open com­
petition in government employment established ,the 
principle that the most responsible posts should be filled 
by the most able people; the Pioneers that the least 
responsible jobs should be filled by the least able people. 
In other words, a society in which power and responsi­
bility were as much proportioned to merit as education. 
The civil service won acceptance far more easily - no 
one wanted to be blown up by hydrogen bombs or 
starved of foreign exchange because something less than 
the finest brains were ensconced in Whitehall. The 
Pioneers encountered far more opposition. The com­
munity of principle governing the civil service and the 
1 14 

ST A TUS OF THE WORKER 
Pioneers was not at once recognized. The objectors, 
amongst them a growing number of socialists, com­
plained of' indignity'. A vague word, to conceal a vague 
concept. The brute fact is that the great majority of 
minds were still thinking in pre-merit terms. 
In the dark England of the distant past it made the 
best of sense to plead for equality. In the main way that 
counts, in their brain-power, the industrial workers, or 
the peasantry, or whoever it might be, were as good as 
their masters. What the anti-Pioneers did not realize 
was that the gradual shift from inheritance to merit as 
the ground of social selection was making ( and has 
finally made) nonsense of all their loose talk of the 
equality of man. Men, after all, are notable not for the 
equality, but for the inequality, of their endowment. 
Once all the geniuses are amongst the elite, and all the 
morons amongst the workers, what meaning can equal­
ity have? What ideal can be upheld except the principle 
of equal status for equal intelligence? v\,'hat is the pur­
pose of abolishing inequalities in nurture except to 
reveal and make more pronounced the inescapable 
inequalities of Nature? 
The decisive fact was the happiness of the Pioneers, 
or hand-workers, as they were at first called to dis­
tinguish them from brain-workers. No one wanted to 
flood the chronic wards of the mental hospitals, yet that 
is just what industry had for many years been doing 
by setting sub-standard people to perform tasks beyond 
their reach. No one wanted, least of all the socialists, to 
cause unnecessary suffering. The principle - ' From each 
according to his capacity, neither more nor less ' - was 
empirically justified. The workers were more content, 
and so, for the same reason, were the large middle­
classes with I.Q.s broadly between 100 and 1 25. It was 
1 15 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
shown time and time again by the psychologists that to 
put a highly intelligent man on a routine job was as 
disastrous - reflected as it was in sickness, absenteeism, 
and neurosis1 - as the obverse. Matching of intelli­
gence and job in the various streams of society was 
everywhere demonstrated as the highest expression of 
both efficiency and humanity; as the very engine of 
productivity at the same time as the liberator of man­
kind. Without the scientific study of human relations in 
industry, resentment against the declining status of the 
lower classes, and the widening gap between them and 
the upper classes, would have disrupted society long 
ago. 
4. THE NEW UNEMPLOYMENT
The axiom of modern thought is that people are un­
equal, and the ensuing moral injunction that they 
should be accorded a station in life related to their capa­
cities. By dint of a long struggle, society has at last been 
prevailed upon to conform: the mentally superior have 
been raised to the top and the mentally inferior lowered 
to the bottom. Both wear clothes that fit them, and, as 
I say, it is doubtful whether the lower classes would have 
1 .  An investigation made just after the Hitler war was, to judge 
from the press, given insufficient attention at the time. 'The 
women, who were on jobs requiring skill that did not correspond 
with their intelligence, had a higher incidence of recent definite 
neurosis than those on jobs whose skill requirements did corre­
spond: the incidence of neurosis was equally high, irrespective of 
whether the skill required by the job was too high or too low com­
pared with the worker's intelligence.' Russell Fraser. The Incidence 
ef Neurosis amongst Factory Workers. Industrial Health Research 
Board Report, No. go, H.M.S.O., 1947. An earlier report of the 
same Board said that 'severe boredom is usually found associated 
with more than average intelligence'. I.H.R.B., No. 77, I;I.M.S.O., 
1937-
I I 6  

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
become so docile unless they had, in fact, found the 
clothes comfortable. The psychologists gave the world 
the means of identifying people without ability. But, 
burdened in this way, what work were they to do? It 
was no use having a Pioneer Corps unless there was a 
job for it. 
In my own special period, that is before 1963, few 
contemporary observers were aware that economic pro­
gress threatened to produce a new kind of selective un­
employment. The trend was visible enough, if they had 
but looked, but this for the most part they signally failed 
to do. 1 Or rather they noticed one trend, that of in­
creasing mechanization, but not its inescapable human 
consequences. They knew that the prime purpose of 
machinery was to save labour, but did not ask - what 
kind of labour? Mass unemployment which afflicted the 
clever and the stupid alike was the kind that people 
understood; this other kind of sub-intellectual unem­
ployment was still hidden from all but the most discern­
ing. 
Following what was called the ' industrial revolution', 
when processes previously performed by hand were 
gradually taken over by machines, hand-work was far 
from being rendered redundant: machinofacture and 
manufacture proceeded side by side. Early machinery 
was a godsend to the stupid. It still had to be operated 
by hand, and repetitive machine-minding was well 
within the compass of low-grade employees, unskilled 
or semi-skilled. In a fairly typical mid-twentieth-cen­
tury factory there was a division between the skilled 
men and the rest. On the one side were the trained 
1. One notable exception was Sir George Thomson, F.R.S., in 
his book The Foreseeable Future, 1955. See particularly the section on 
' The Future of the Stupid'. 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
designers and draughtsmen, the administrators and 
inspectors, the maintenance men and setters who pro­
vided, supervised, and repaired the machinery. On the 
other were the operators who fed the machine with 
material, pressed a few simple levers in response to a 
few simple signals, and extracted the material after pro­
cessing; or who added a component to an assembly 
moving forward in a batch or on a belt. In the course of 
time this division became sharper and sharper, repro­
ducing the division in society itself, with the technical 
staff being constantly upgraded as the machinery in 
their care became more complex, and the routine 
operators being constantly downgraded as the work for 
which they were responsible became more simple. 
More and more was demanded of the skilled men, 
less and less of the unskilled, until finally there was no 
need for unskilled men at all. Their work was merely 
routine, and so it could by definition be progressively 
taken over and performed by mechanical means. The 
more simplified a job became, the more easily could it 
be done by a machine which would feed itself with 
material, press the lever, and extract the finished article. 
Semi-automatic became fully automatic. Displacement 
of low-grade labour became very rapid after the Hitler 
war with the development of electronics, and especially 
of servo-mechanisms well-suited to direct industrial pro­
cesses broken down into their simplest components. So 
marked was the progress that a new word - ' automa­
tion' - was coined for the old business of mechanization 
in the new form it was taking. 
Displacement of labour did not at first show itself 
openly. The trade unions naturally did not make any 
distinction between clever and stupid; to them men 
whose jobs had been forfeit to technical change were 
1 18 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
members to be protected like any other, and they in­
sisted that people whose jobs were taken away from 
them by labour-saving machinery should not be dis­
missed but kept on to do some quite unnecessary work, 
perhaps merely watching instead of ' minding' the robot 
at its work. The more intelligent members of the unions 
did not recognize that it was only the low-calibre work­
ers incapable of doing any complicated work whose 
interests were menaced; sharing the general egalitarian 
view that one man was much like another, they identi­
fied themselves with the redundant, and supported the 
unions' attempts to prevent dismissals. The employers 
often acquiesced for the sake of good relations with their 
staff, or because they thought it was their responsibility, 
rather than the State's, to care for ' weaker brethren'. It 
took a very long time for employers to become fully 
conscious of the need to reduce labour costs to a mini­
mum, and, until then, they did not know how heavy 
was the load of passengers they were carrying on their 
pay-roll. As late as the 1950s a large force of low-grade 
unskilled workers were constantly drifting in to one 
employment and out to another, always on the move 
because they were not capable of holding down a steady 
job anywhere. Millions changed jobs every year. The 
employer was perhaps aware that his labour turnover 
was high, but since he did not as yet test the capacity of 
new recruits, he had no way of knowing that the pri­
mary reason was that most had not the minimum ability 
required for the work. As people were not, in a period of 
'full employment', registered as unemployed, except 
for the odd period now and then, no one appreciated 
the existence of this vast floating army. Very few of 
those endlessly moving were in fact making any ade- · 
quate return for the wages they received. 
I Ig 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Many for whom there was no place in industry came 
to rest in routine clerical work, or in distribution. That 
was a happy solution, though not a permanent one. 
Mechanization, starting in the factory, did not end 
there: offices and shops were also invaded. In the middle 
of the century book-keepers and typists were still com­
mon in offices; by the last quarter they had almost dis­
appeared. Accounts were the responsibility of calcula­
ting machines and typists were no longer needed as 
intermediaries between the spoken and the written 
word. As for shops, in the middle of the century they 
still employed millions of people; twenty-five years 
later, although shop assistants had not by any means 
disappeared, there were certainly less of them. The 
large shop with its more economical use of staff had 
supplanted many smaller ones, the speedy spread of 
self-service in something like its modern form had 
reduced the number of assistants needed, and piped 
distribution of milk, tea, and beer was extending 
rapidly. 
5• D OMESTIC SERVANTS A GAIN 
The Clauson Committee, which reported in 1988, took 
the view that by that date about a third of all adults 
were unemployable in the ordinary economy. The com­
plexity of civilization had grown beyond them; owing 
to lack of intelligence, they could not find niches in the 
ordinary occupational structure and needed some form 
of sheltered employment. What was to be done with 
them? There was only one possible answer. The people 
who had ended their school lives either in the schools 
for the educationally sub-normal or in the lower streams 
of secondary modern schools were only capable of 
meeting one need: for personal service. For instance, 
120 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
most of them could, if carefully prepared in Govern­
ment Training Centres and carefully supervised there­
after, serve in public restaurants and places of enter­
tainment, in transport and as caretakers. 
That was a start. But as Lord Clauson foresaw, the 
lower classes would only be fully employed when large 
numbers of them were engaged in personal service not 
only outside the home, but in it. His recommendations 
were hotly contested in Parliament and on the hustings. 
But what other way was there? The critics had few con­
structive proposals to make. The absurdity was that 
many highly intelligent people were wasting much of 
their time performing purely menial tasks for them­
selves. A well-endowed person was given a long educa­
tion at the expense of the State, first at a grammar 
school and then at a university, and when he came 
down he was entrusted with a highly responsible post in 
industry or commerce. His work should have claimed 
his full energies and his leisure be used for recuperation. 
But what happened? He spent many valuable hours not 
at the job for which he had been so elaborately trained, 
but trailing around the self-service stores buying the 
odd packet of potatoes or bucket of frozen fish, cleaning 
his flat, or cooking the fish, or making his bed. I say ' he' 
but of course the waste was much more widespread 
for the highly intelligent and hence highly educated 
woman. After marriage she was not permitted, such 
was the prevailing anarchy, to carry on the work she 
could so well do for society; instead, she had to pretend 
that she had never had a higher education at all, and 
try to accustom herself to behaving as though house­
hold drudgery was the proper reward for cum laude, in 
the'ҁsame way as a mere secondary modern girl. That 
was" the҂ p6int - there was no need for much of the 
1 2 1  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
drudgery to fall to the lot of the intelligent, it was much 
better left to the person who would not regard it as 
drudgery at all because she was not capable of doing 
anything higher. Drudgery for the one hundred and 
thirty could be joy for the eighty-five. Had nothing been 
learnt from the Pioneers? 
The critics protested that domestic service was not 
just service, it was servile. They had tradition on their 
side, but did not seem to realize how short-lived this 
was. For thousands of years it was the accepted thing 
for the upper class to have servants. They only vanished 
between the demise of the old aristocracy and the birth 
of the new; in the egalitarian age when no man was held 
worthy enough to deserve service from his fellows; in the 
interim period when no one was sure of anything except 
that Jack was supposed to be as good as his master. 
When the conditions fostering egalitarianism passed 
away, there was no further need for this one of its mani­
festations. Domestic service could be restored once it 
was again accepted that some men were superior to 
others; and done without resentment because the in­
ferior knew their betters had a great part to play in the 
world and beyond, and were glad to identify with them 
and wait on them. Far better to perform a recognized 
and valuable service for an important person than to 
languish on the dole. Naturally, there were safeguards. 
No one wanted to see a return of the abuses which used 
to exist in the nineteenth century. All domestic servants 
were formally enrolled in the Home Help Corps - it 
topped the ten million mark by the turn of the century ­
and every private employer had to pay the wages laid 
down; provide sanitary living-space; release the servant 
two nights a week to attend a sports club run by the 
Corps; pay for a refresher course every summer; and 
1 22 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
not demand more than forty-eight hours a week except 
with permission from the local office. As far as female 
servants are concerned, the new arrangement has on the 
whole worked well, even if morons have sometimes done 
very silly things to air-conditioners. The trouble has 
been the men. Despite all experiments at the Corps 
research centres, no really adequate modern counter­
part has been found for the butler and the footman of 
old. Male unemployment has been higher than female 
for forty years or more. 
6. SUMMARY 
Under the new dispensation the division between the 
classes has been sharper than it used to be under the old, 
the status of the upper classes higher, and that of the 
lower classes lower. In this chapter I have discussed 
some of the repercussions upon the social structure. Any 
historian knows that class conflict was endemic through­
out pre-merit times, and, in the light of past experience, 
might perhaps expect that any rapid diminution in the 
status of one class would necessarily aggravate such con­
flict. The question is: why have the changes of the last 
century not led to such an issue? Why has society been 
so stable in spite of the widening gulf between the bot­
tom and the top? 
The cardinal reason is that stratification has been in 
accord with a principle of merit, generally accepted at 
all levels of society. A century ago the lower classes had 
an ideology of their own - in essentials the same as that 
which has now become paramount - and were able to 
use it as much to advance themselves as to attack their 
superiors. They denied the right of the upper classes to 
their position. But in the new conditions the lower 
1 23 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
classes no longer have a distinctive ideology in conflict 
with the ethos of society, any more than the lower 
orders used to in the heyday of feudalism. Since bottom 
agrees with top that merit should reign, they can only 
cavil at the means by which the choice has been made, 
not at the standard which all alike espouse. So much, so 
good. Yet we would be failing in our duty as socio­
logists did we not point out that such widespread recog­
nition of merit as the arbiter may condemn to helpless 
despair the many who have no merit, and do so all the 
more surely because the person so condemned, having 
too little wit to make his protest against society, may 
turn his anger against, and so cripple, himself. 
The situation has been saved by the Mythos of Mus­
cularity, adult education, displacement of ambitions on 
to children, and natural stupidity. Above all by extend­
ing into adult life the main lineaments of the educa­
tional system. If, in the adult world as much as in the 
school, the stupid are kept together, they are not re­
minded at every turn of their inferiority. By the stand­
ards of the group in which they move and have their 
being they are, indeed, not stupid; here they are 
amongst their equals; they can even, in a modest way, 
shine in the display of their more commendable attri­
butes. When they are amongst their equals, the great 
society does not press harshly upon them, nor resent­
ments linger. They have the respect of their fellows in 
their own intelligence-grade. This class solidarity, pro­
vided it is not coloured with a rebellious ideology, can 
be, I would say certainly has been, a most valuable aid 
to the cohesion of society. For a time all was threatened 
by a species of technological unemployment, but 
once the Home Helps Corps was firmly established, 
what looks like a permanent and most constructive 
1 24 

STATUS OF THE WORKER 
outlet was provided for the graduates of our modern 
schools. 
It is not unfair to give some credit to Crosland, Tay­
lor, Dobson, Clauson, and all the other founders of 
modern society for the solid way in which they built. 
But if we take for granted the permanence of the struc­
ture, we do so at our peril. Any sociological analysis, of 
the kind I have attempted in this chapter, shows full 
well how much depends upon an intricate system of 
checks and balances. Discontent cannot be totally re­
moved even from our rational society. Here and there 
lurks the inferior paranoid man, harbouring resent­
ment against some monstrous injustice which he ima­
gines has been done to him; the romantic who hankers 
after the disorder of the past; the servant who feels 
isolated in her meritorium, even from the children 
whom she tends. 

C H A P T E R  SIX 
FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
I .  H I S T O R I C  MISSION 
THE many followers of Professor Diver hold that politi­
cal imtitutions are always secondary to others; merely 
products, never creators, of the primary institutions in 
the economic and educational spheres. I do not deny 
the plausibility of this thesis, and yet at the same time 
I cannot accept it in its usual formulation. No doubt it 
is true of the present. But is it of the past? Of the 
twentieth century in particular? The Cambridge school 
has achieved nothing if it has not demonstrated the 
critical importance of the Labour Movement in the era 
of transition. In a sense, of course, its role was secondary 
even then. Social change stemmed from the economy, 
the pressure was international competition, the instru­
ment was education. And yet the need for adaptation 
had to be translated into a language which people 
could make their own. The historic mission of the 
Labour Movement was to win people's minds to the 
new view of life. 
Socialists gained the prize of equal opportunity by 
preaching equality, and, until the battle was over, there 
was no harm in that. But once equality of opportunity 
was a fact, to go on preaching equality was obviously 
not only unnecessary, it was calculated to undo the very 
achievement for which Labour could take so much of 
the credit. Unlike the root-and-branch egalitarians who 
have continued to erupt spasmodically in the cabals of 
1 26 

FALL OF THE LAlWUR MOVEMENT 
which the Populists are the heir, the main body of the 
Movement has meshed smoothly with the new age. The 
standing of the Movement had to fall along with the 
standing of manual workers generally, for if it had not, 
the lower classes would hardly have been induced to 
accept their lot. We might have had not evolution, but 
catastrophe. If I am right, an understanding of the last 
century cannot be complete without appreciating the 
peculiar function of socialists, in their rise and in their 
fall. 
Improvement in methods of social selection was the 
condition of progress. But before the harvest could be 
reaped there was another social revolution to complete, 
and as profound. All would have been in vain unless 
select minds had been prepared for their high vocation. 
Had they been unwilling to shoulder their responsi­
bilities, the new social order would have been stillborn. 
Everyone had to be imbued with eagerness to rise as 
high as his abilities justified. Before modern society 
could reach maturity, ambition had to be forced 
ever upwards, and the ideology of the people brought 
into conformity with · the needs of the new scientific 
age. 
In effecting this vital psychological change - making 
discipline voluntary by putting a goad inside the mind ­
socialism has played an indispensable part. In the be­
ginning there was protestantism. As Weber and Taw­
ney showed long ago, the function of protestantism was 
to fire the acquisitive urge. The successful adaptation of 
religion to economic requirements was what made ex­
pansion possible in Western Europe and the parts of the 
world which once formed part of the British Empire. 
The failure of older religions elsewhere to supply the 
fuel was likewise the reason for the emergence of the new 
127 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
and linked religions of communism and nationalism, 1 
and for the revolutions which accompanied the trans­
ition. To make the Russian, Chinese, or Arab mind 
receptive to turbo-generators, electrostatic wands, and 
atomic piles, communism in alliance with nationalism 
was as necessary as a mother to a child. In Britain 
puritanism-protestantism took the country through the 
early stages of the first industrial revolution. But beyond 
a certain point it could not go, until protestantism, 
through the medium of the nonconformist churches, 
became transmuted into anglo-socialism, the new 
evangelical movement, of the sort which held sway in 
the first half oflast century. 
The limitation of protestantism was that while it 
encouraged the acquisition of wealth it did not stress the 
necessity of social mobility. It even sanctioned the accu­
mulation of wealth with the very motive of hoarding 
for descendants. In its essentials it was therefore but a 
compromise, though at that time a necessary one, with 
the hereditary extremism of the feudal system. The 
great, though temporary, contribution of socialism was 
that it picked out one element in the Christian teaching 
and gave it prominence to the exclusion of all else. It 
emphasized equality. Christians had, if often in muted 
r. Dr Straker has pointed out in his Studies of World Revolution the
very close similarity between socialism and nationalism-com­
munism. These were both creeds of the underdog, one reacting 
against the pretensions of superior classes, the other against the 
pretensions of superior nations. They both started by demanding 
equality, while in reality striving for superiority of the classes and 
nations they represented. They were both successful because, 
amongst the inferior classes and nations, were many intelligent 
people deprived of recognition for their talents. It is in the long run 
impossible to keep large numbers of able (as distinct from stupid) 
people in servitude; they will revolt - the disaster in South Africa 
is a particularly telling example within living memory. 
1 28 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
tones, taught that as all men were the children of God, 
so were all men equal in the eyes of their Father. To the 
father, children; to each other, brothers. 1 Socialists 
developed this doctrine into a powerful weapon. They 
used the weapon to destroy resistance to change. 
'What right', they asked, ' has one man to wealth 
when another has none, what right has any man to rule 
over his brother? Is not inequality an affront to the dig­
nity of man?' These notions were the pure milk of the 
gospel. So influential were they that many early social­
ists were only won round to accept the need for the full­
est opportunities for individual ascent by the brilliant 
invention of the idea of equality of opportunity. When 
opportunity was coupled with equality it was made 
more than respectable; it became the Holy Grail. 
Socialists did not see that, as it was applied in practice, 
equality of opportunity meant equality of opportunity 
to be unequal. This structural blindness was necessary 
if the socialists were to concentrate with vigour upon 
opening wide the doors to talent. In practice, as I men­
tioned earlier, they attacked with most energy the 
forms of inequality due to inheritance. Death duties, the 
decay of nepotism, free secondary and university educa­
tion, the integration of the public schools, wages for 
children, the abolition of the hereditary House of 
Lords, these are their most momentous achievements. 
I am maintaining that the hereditary principle would 
never have been overthrown, a psychological change on 
the vast scale that the economy required never accom­
plished, without the aid of a new religion - and that 
r .  An interesting survival is that even the members of A.S.S.E.T. 
and other technical unions still refer to each other as brothers. 
There is some justification because identical twins are the only 
siblings with identical I.Q.s, initially at any rate. 
E 
1 29 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
religion was socialism. It undermined resistance in two 
ways. It dealt, firstly, with the upper caste. After a long 
struggle the wealthy were, to the greatest extent possible 
without transferring newborn children straight to 
residential nurseries, 1 prevented from transmitting 
privilege to their children. How was this to be done? 
Parental selfishness had to be socialized - that is, made 
subordinate to the interests of society. Parents had to be 
educated to understand it was a sin to seek high posi­
tions for stupid children - if they did so, the advantage 
of the community would be sacrificed to the selfish 
interests of one small family amongst many. Such a 
high standard of civilized behaviour has never yet been 
fully attained. But what ceaseless socialist agitation did 
was to convince wealthy parents of the futility of open
resistance. Why were death duties not opposed more 
strongly, the integration of private schools not opposed 
to the bitter end? The wealthy could not fight because 
their morale was sapped by socialist teaching, all the 
more so when, for the sake of their own survival, the 
Conservatives quietly came to terms with their oppo­
nents: the Conservatives of that day were the supreme 
example of those who live, as someone said of the Arabs, 
by stealing each other's washing. Attacked as moral cul­
prits by the socialists, deserted by their own champions, 
those with inherited wealth eventually succumbed, 
leaving only a few crazy women to carry on the fight. 
The holders of power and possessors of wealth need, in 
r. Some socialists virtually wanted to go so far. There is on
record an interesting statement by a local government officer in 
r 949 at the high point of socialist success. ' We look forward ', he 
said, ' to the day when children of all social classes will be foundĬin 
our state nurseries.' Many over-enthusiastic teachers, impatient of 
parental pretensions, would have agreed with him. 
1 30 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
all societies, to have the assurance of the best of moral 
titles to their fortune. Otherwise no ruling class can rule 
with the unbounded assurance which is the hidden 
spring of charisma. In feudal times blood was the un­
challenged title to power. In capitalist times wealth was 
its own title. But as conditions changed, the hereditary 
rich could no longer hold up their heads. They lost the 
confidence to rule, and step by step they relinquished 
power to the self-made and even more notably to the 
school-made men who had the heavenly support of 
society's deep-seated moral approval, and hence of their 
own. The new rulers were those who, according to the 
new values, deserved to wear the purple mantle. 
The second achievement was to instil ambition into 
the working class. For the socialists nothing succeeded 
like success in the short run just as, in the long run, 
nothing failed like success. Every advance towards 
greater equality of opportunity in education, or to­
wards the widening of opportunity in industry, stimu­
lated aspiration. In the well-adjusted personality am­
bition lies always close to the surface, ready to stir to 
life at the caress of hope. Each new opportunity did 
something to sharpen appetite. Demand, as always, 
helped to create its own supply. 
Until well on into Elizabethan times family succession 
to jobs was much more common in the lower than in the 
middle classes. In London or Liverpool the docker's son 
followed his father's occupation, despite every blandish­
ment of his mistress at school, because he had the absurd 
idea that it was the finest calling in the world. So did 
coal-miners' sons in Durham villages, farm-workers' 
sons in distant parts of Somerset, steel-men at Corby 
and Scunthorpe. The improvement of communications 
helped to root out such wickedness by advertising the 
1 3 1  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
standards of the wealthy and the glittering lives of 
thousands of people far beyond his own community to 
every child in the country. All subjective judgements 
about the status of different jobs were assimilated to the 
one national model. In later years, the famous argu­
ment by analogy from sport - a shrewd touch this -
figured powerfully in the armoury of the adult educa­
tors. Would any British technician choose his local foot­
ball team from the sons of past flyers, whether or not 
they were the best men? Then why management? Only 
recently has the argument been twisted round. The re­
formers ask what, if there is nothing to do but play 
first-class football, is to happen to all those not good 
enough to get a place in the team? 
The extension of opportunity and the improvement 
of communication, once they had begun to gather 
momentum, made psychological transformation pos­
sible; they did not make it necessary. Without the fer­
ment of socialist agitation, the working man would have 
remained sunk in apathy, lacking sufficient drive to take 
advantage of his great new chances. Every intelligent 
generation, it seems, must re-discover for itself the 
resignation with which the ordinary man accepts his 
lot. The technician is always liable not only to feel that 
he might as well put up with his job since he has little 
chance of anything better, but that his son should do 
likewise. From this apathy he has to be repeatedly res­
cued by those who have a truer sense of values. Social­
ism was once the liberator. It fought against compla­
cency. It taught the technician that he was the equal of 
the Corporation President, who therefore had no right 
to his greater wealth. By preaching equality, it goaded 
people with envy, and envy put the spur to competition. 
When a man determines to excel his superior, he is 
132 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
giving vent, in sublimated form, to his infantile wishe!I 
to surpass his father. A profound energy is released and 
harnessed to a constructive purpose. When coupled 
with brain-power, this energy is irresistible. But it had 
to be unlocked, and socialism was the key. If envy has 
become a public virtue instead of a private vice, we 
know to whom credit must be given. 
The great dilemma of industrial society is that am­
bition is aroused, in lesser measure but still aroused, in 
the minds of stupid children and of their parents as well 
as in the minds of the intelligent. This is inevitable since 
no one has been able to foresee with complete accuracy 
where ability is going to sprout. Everyone has to be 
ambitious so that no one with talents of a high order 
shall fail to make use of them. Yet when ambition is 
crossed with stupidity it may do nothing besides foster 
frustration. Hence the following of intellectual egali­
tarians. Though they are superior people, they are so 
much afraid of being envied that they identify them­
selves with the underdog, and speak for him. They de­
mand that equality be more than opportunity: they 
demand equality in power, education, and income; they 
demand that equality be made the ruling principle of 
the social order; they demand that the unequal be 
treated as though they were equal. 
Socialism ceased to be an accelerator, and became a 
brake. It achieved its mission when first education, and 
then industry, had been so much reorganized that 
nearly all the able people in the country were concen­
trated in the upper classes. The Labour Party could no 
longer be the force it had been once the classes it repre­
sentedhad lostthe intelligent from their ranks. The Party's 
standing in the country was bound to suffer. Another 
blow was the decline of parliament. Redistribution of 
133 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
intelligence is the cause of deterioration in the House 
of Commons, as well as in the Labour Party; the one has 
reinforced the other. 
2. D E C LINE O F PARLIAMENT
The British genius - if such a word can be applied to a 
nation which is in intelligence almost as much a cross­
section of mankind as any other - the British genius is 
pouring new beer into old bottles. We believe in evolu­
tion, and not revolution, precisely because we know that 
change can be all the more rapid when, on the surface, 
there is no change at all. It has happened with the 
Commonwealth. It has happened with the monarchy. 
It has happened with the Labour Movement. It has 
happened with parliament. 
Democracy, in so far as it meant that power resided 
in an all-powerful elected legislature, was a typical pro­
duct of the transition from caste to class; its basic 
assumption of one man, one vote, was egalitarian. The 
mother of a problem family submerged in Brighouse 
and Spenborough had the same vote as a Beatrice 
Webb. The parliamentary system, as Maine1 put it, 
was 'listening nervously at one end of a speaking-tube 
which receives at its other end the suggestions of a lower 
intelligence '. 
In feudal times the country was governed by a ruling 
caste. In modern times we have a casteless society and 
the country is governed by a ruling class. In between it 
was governed by neither caste nor class, rather by a 
combination of both. For hundreds of years, blood 
shared power with brain; long after withering of the 
hereditary principle had begun to concentrate ability at 
1 .  Popular Government, 1886.
1 34 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
the top, each class, however lowly, still possessed its 
superior men and women. In these circumstances, uni­
versal suffrage was only facing the facts. To give equal 
weight to each class was as good a way as any other of 
securing a parliament of talent. The textile workers, the 
miners, the steel workers, the farmers, and other groups 
·elected from their own ranks men of above-average 
intelligence. Their M.P.s were fit to rule. 
The supremacy of parliament was no sooner assured 
than it began to be threatened by the ever-growing 
complexity of the state. The men shall we say of Camp­
bell Bannerman's administration, or even of the first 
Labour Government under Ramsay MacDonald, were 
worthy of their place. The issues were still so simple that 
the intelligent amateur - the proud status of the ancient 
M.P.s - could make a wise decision. Under conditions 
of primitive technology this was true. By the time of the 
Butler Government the ordinary business of state had 
become so extraordinary that the amateur, however 
gifted, could do little more than go through the motions 
of grappling with it. Even to g·o through motions was so 
much a full-time job that M.P.s could not easily make 
up their income from outside work. This was rendered 
more and more necessary, while less and less possible, 
by one of the more fortunate victories of egalitarian 
sentiment - the limiting of M.P.s' salaries. The able 
could less and less afford to go into parliament and the 
quality of the Labour and other Parties suffered in con­
sequence. Intelligence has always followed power: 
when power slipped away to the civil service, the out­
standing men tiptoed after it: when the outstanding 
men left politics, fewer were left behind to resist the 
encroachment of Whitehall. Nowadays double-firsts 
from Oxford and Cambridge do not regard a political 
135 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
career as either their interest or their duty. Interest does 
not bid them wait upon a fickle electorate; duty calls 
them to serve society by filling a post of the highest 
responsibility, which parliament, for ninety-eight per 
cent of M.P.s, can no longer offer. Modern Gladstones 
are at Harwell. Another cause of the decline is that the 
lower classes, although progressively denuded of ability, 
have not stopped electing their own kind. They have 
clung to their democratic rights, with the result that the 
level of I.Q. in parliament has fallen progressively. The 
elected representatives of the common people no longer 
have the brains; they no longer wield the power. 
To cope with this problem two main alternative solu­
tions have been proposed, the first revolutionary, the 
second evolutionary. The ' revolutionaries' have de­
manded that form should be brought into line with 
reality and either parliament abolished or election made 
dependent on an I.Q. qualification. They have also 
sought proportional representation, whereby the num­
ber of votes a man has would be proportional to his 
intelligence. All this was surely short-sighted. As our 
forbears said, no one but the wearer knows where the 
shoe is pinching. Whenever decisions cause suffering, 
the ordinary man should be able to express his griev­
ance to his M.P. 1 When this right exists, the civil ser­
vice, and even the social scientists, are kept ever alert. 
Moreover, simple issues arise from time to time on 
which the opinion of the ordinary man (when advised 
by the competent authorities) is as valuable as the 
opinion of the meritocracy, and on these rare occasions 
I. In the way that Beatrice Webb, that wise woman, would have 
approved: 'we have little faith in the " average sensual man ", we 
do not believe that he can do much more than describe his 
grievances, we do not think that he can prescribe the remedies'. 
Our Partnership. 
136 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
we lose nothing by giving the House of Commons the 
chance to air its views. 
By a typically British compromise the purpose of the. 
revolutionaries has been partly achieved not by abolish­
ing the Commons but by reconstituting the Lords. 
Thorough-going reform was for many years opposed by 
members of the Labour Party on the significant ground 
that once the House of Lords ceased to be a hereditary 
chamber its prestige would be so high as to challenge 
the Commons. Better, they said, to let the Lords die. In 
the prevailing mental climate, the objection (however 
well-founded) could not permanently be sustained. The 
hereditary principle was too indefensible. A socialist 
spokesman of the fifties put the more enlightened view 
when he said: 
It is important to remember exactly what Labour's objection to 
the present House of Lords really is. It does not stem primarily 
from the weakness or unfairness of the ɲstem of creating peers 
so much as from the absurdity of the inherited element. 1 
The Labour Party ended up as active for reform as their 
opponents. The banning of hereditary peers, the restric­
tion of membership to life peers, women as well as men, 
chosen from among the most eminent people in the 
Kingdom, the payment of generous honoraria - these 
reforms, starting in 1958 and continued over the next 
twenty years, eventually made the upper chamber into 
a body far more influential than its junior partner. 
Selection largely replaced election. Skipping all the 
intermediate stages of democracy ( as some countries 
have jumped straight from railways to rockets), instru­
ment of the aristocracy was by one brilliant stroke made 
I. Anthony Wedgwood Benn, M.P. The Privy Council as a Second 
Chamber. Fabian Society, 1957. 
137 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
instrument of the meritocracy. The hold of the Lords 
of Parliament was assured when by a constitutional con­
vention the Ministry of Education was in all cabinets 
reserved to the upper chamber. The House is now quite 
as distinguished as the Central Committee which con­
tains the appointed, self-perpetuating rulers of Com­
munist China - the House of Lords is the central com­
mittee of our elite class. 
The other way of evolution was to compensate for the 
inevitable weakness of parliament by strengthening the 
civil service. Nourished by first-class selection in the 
schools and first-class training in the universities, fer­
tilized by new techniques of research and administra­
tion, buttressed by the tradition and camaraderie of 
more than a century's unselfish devotion to duty, the 
collective competence of the civil service has, with only 
a few setbacks, continued to soar. Confronted with this 
composite wisdom, nearly all amateur politicians in 
Ministerial office have been content to take the glory 
and abandon the power. The dangerous exception is 
the politician so stupid or so vain that he does not even 
recognize his own incompetence. He may, like Queen 
Victoria, actually demand that his nominal power be 
made real. Part of the lore of the civil service consists in 
the accumulated knowledge of how to defeat such pre­
tension.1 I am speaking of thirty years ago. Fortunately 
I .  Even in the great days of the House, the civil servant was very 
much the power behind the scenes. Here is one piece of advice to 
those drafting answers to Parliamentary Questions. 'It might be 
said, cynically, but with some measure of truth, that the perfect 
reply to an embarrassing question in the House of Commons is one 
that is brief, appears to answer the question completely, if chal­
lenged can be proved to be accurate in every word, gives no open­
ing for awkward "supplementaries", and discloses really nothing.' 
Dale, H. E. The Higher Civil Service. 
1 38 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
there have been no Prince Alberts in the parliaments of 
this century. As conflict in society has been reduced, the 
civil servants, now that they no longer need keep aloof, 
have taken a more active part in politics to make up 
for the devitalization of the two-party system. Both they 
and the vital House of Lords belong to a meritocracy of 
growing power. The House of Commons has not yet 
followed the horse - let us hope it never will - let us 
hope it has now, like the monarchy, found a permanent 
niche in the constitution, the old merging in the new, 
the new in the old, on a higher level. 
3• THE TECHNICIANS 
The historian's puzzle is why the Labour Party lasted 
so long: what could more perfectly illustrate the prin­
ciple of social inertia? Like democracy itself, the Labour 
Party was a reaction against the feudal tradition. It 
arose out of the old working class as it was called, 
which had such solidarity because its name belied it: it 
was not so much class as caste. Universal suffrage in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries gave political power 
to the workers. They held together and, advancement 
of other kinds being partly denied to them, made full 
use of this political power to challenge high-caste 
authority. Able and ambitious leaders whose individual 
ascent was barred by the hereditary system bent their 
efforts to improve the lot of their class as a whole, their 
class and not just themselves within it! A whole class 
was to rise, quite without respect to the capacity of its 
members! 
They formed a mighty army, until by their very suc­
cess, the socialist achievement of which I spoke earlier, 
they stormed the citadel and opened the gates to talent. 
139 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Victory reduced the army to brigades, platoons and 
then, at last, to lone snipers. By the I 960s the outstand­
ing children of manual fathers were no longer gravely 
handicapped by their origin. On the strength of sheer 
individual merit they could rise up the social ladder as 
far as their ability would stretch. This was a boon to 
them and a boon as well to their parents. But for the 
working class as a whole the victory was a defeat. Sated 
by conquest, the class began to crumble from within. 
More and more parents began to harbour ambitions for 
their children rather than for their class. The cult of the 
child became the drug of the people; inspired by hope, 
vitalized by ambition, the whole nation began to ad­
vance as never before from the moment that the Labour 
Party came to a standstill. 
The Labour Party made the inevitable compromise 
with the new society it had done so much to create: it 
ceased to exist. Fewer and fewer electors, however 
brawny, responded instinctively to the appeal of 
'labour'. Drawn upwards by their aspirations for their 
children, all but the lumpenproletariat, to re-adopt a 
term still in vogue in the first half of the century, con­
ceived of themselves as a cut above the labourer at the 
bottom of the heap. ' Workers' became a discredited 
word. The canny leaders of the mid-century Labour 
Party (which still contained many highly competent 
men) recognized full well the need for change. They 
scrapped the appeal to working-class solidarity and 
concentrated on the middle class, partly to capture new 
sections of the electorate, more to keep pace with their 
own supporters who had, in their outlook, moved up­
wards from their point of origin. One of the symptoms 
of rampant ambition was the upgrading by name alone 
of occupations which could not be upgraded in any 
140 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
other way. We no longer have to be so hypocritical. We 
can recognize inferiority and dare to label it so. But in 
those days rat-catchers were called 'rodent officers', 
sanitary inspectors ' public health inspectors ', and lava­
tory cleaners ' amenities attendants'. Employers con­
formed to the changing mores by dismissing their 
'workers' and hiring none but technicians, clothed in 
white coats instead of dungarees. The Labour Party 
finally made the same adjustment. ' Labour' was a mill­
stone; 'worker ' was taboo; but ' technician', what 
magic was there! And so the modern Technicians Party 
was born, catering in the broadest possible manner for 
technicians by hand and by brain. 
The trade unions followed. The Transport and 
General Workers Union became the Transport and 
General Technicians Union; the National Union of 
General and Municipal Workers, the National Union 
of General and Municipal Technicians. This did not 
altogether save them from the competition of that other 
great general union, the Association of Supervisory 
Staffs and Engineering Technicians, which enjoyed the 
advantage of correct name and status from the start. 
The Mineworkers became the Mine Technicians (still 
a force in the early days of the Technicians Party), the 
Woodworkers the Wood Technicians, the Textile Work­
ers the Textile Technicians, the Clerical Workers the 
Office Technicians, and so forth. Likewise the Tech­
nical Unions Congress and the Technicians' Education 
Association. Higher grades had to notch up their own 
classification in order to maintain the vital differentials 
of status. Laboratory technicians could not, for instance, 
retain such a designation without being confused with 
charring technicians. They styled themselves labora­
tory specialists, and for the same reason certain of the 
1 4 1  

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
unions (other than A.S.S.E.T.) adopted new names -
the Association of Building Technicians, for instance, 
became the A.B.S. and the Association of Psychological 
Technicians the A.P.S. The Association of Scientific 
Workers had, like the House of Lords which its mem­
bers adorn, to jump over a whole stage in social develop­
ment. The more so after it had amalgamated with the 
Association of Local Government Sociologists, it con­
sidered A.S.S. not altogether appropriate and so boldly 
adopted the title of Benefactors - the A.S.B. as it is 
now justly esteemed far beyond the circles whose im­
mediate work lies in the benefactories and compartment 
stores. 
The high-I.Q. unions have exercised influence in the 
T.U.C. disproportionate to their numbers, if not yet 
quite proportionate to their intelligence. They have 
helped to speed the transformati1m of work into play as 
fast as the play of the meritocracy has (for the assess­
ment of income) been converted into work. They have 
helped to concentrate the attention of the technical 
unions on adult education of the modern sort. They 
have exposed the I.Q.-crammers. They led the success­
ful campaign for the adoption of the metric system in 
weights, measures, and money. They have taught their 
technical colleagues to take a sober view of the role of 
the Technicians Party in the modern state. And all the 
time they have had to battle against the sentimental. 
The old egalitarianism could not be wiped out over­
night, and the sentimentalists have continued to praise 
the virtues of the good old days and protest, in the 
name of equality, against every advance towards social 
justice. 
142 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
4. ADJ USTMENT I N  T H E  U N I O N S  
To appreciate how far we have come, cast your mind 
back to a meeting of the tripartite National Joint 
Council for Industry, say, in 1950. There sat Ministers 
of the Crown with representatives of the T.U.C., the 
F.B.I., and the public corporations. Did any group have 
more ability than another? Were the trade unionists 
outmanoeuvred in argument because they left school at 
thirteen or fourteen while the leaders of private indus­
try had been to Cambridge and the chiefs of the pub­
lic corporations to Sandhurst? Were the trade union 
leaders at a disadvantage because they were shoved into 
a factory at an age when the others were still in short 
trousers? Obviously not - if anything the advantage was 
the other way round. The trade unionists not only spoke 
from longer experience. They included some of the 
ablest men in the country. The sharing of power be­
tween the classes was the natural consequence of sharing 
the intelligence. These leaders commanded the con­
fidence of the followers from whose ranks they came, 
and deserved to. Many of them were Ministers in the 
first, second, third, and fourth Labour Cabinets, before 
the decline set in. The ability of the miners' leaders was 
especially high, for in colliery villages there were no 
other jobs for young men to take and little prospect of 
promotion to the middle class. It was not fully appre­
ciated in the 1950s and 1960s that these folk-heroes were 
not being succeeded by others equally able; the children 
of top trade unionists and Labour Ministers, and of 
other outstanding working men, were not becoming 
manual workers themselves. They were in attendance at 
grammar schools and universities, training for com­
merce and the professions, very large numbers of them 
143 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
even going to public schools. The children of the Labour 
leaders were the augurs of the future. 
Contrast the present - think how different was a 
meeting in the 2020s of the National Joint Council, 
which has been retained for form's sake. On the one 
side sit the I.Q.s of 140, on the other the I.Q.s of 99. On 
the one side the intellectual magnates of our day, on the 
other honest, horny-handed workmen more at home 
with dusters than documents. On the one side the solid 
confidence born of hard-won achievement; on the other 
the consciousness of a just inferiority. The trade union­
ists' ponderous, carefully rehearsed reflections have no 
more influence upon their colleagues, if we are frank 
with ourselves, than a pea-shooter upon an astro-rocket. 
Primed with their sociological surveys the civil servants 
know more about the state of opinion in the factories 
than the stewards who work in them. The union leaders 
seldom have the insight to see that the courtesy with 
which they are treated is pure formality. They do not 
know that instead of the substance of power, they are 
being flattered by its shadow. 
We do not need to ask why. The schools have begun 
to do their proper job of social selection - that is all. 
Once the long-called-for reforms were made, none of 
the ablest children in the country, unless by an unfor­
tunate mistake, had to take up manual work. They 
were trained by something better than the 'Workers 
Educational Association' (sic). Twenty years after 1944 
the brilliant children of manual workers automatically 
went to the best grammar schools in their district, from 
there on to Oxford and Cambridge, and, when they 
came down, they were eligible for travelling scholar­
ships and grants for the Imperial College of Science, the 
Inns of Court, and the Administrative Staff College. 
144 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
The Keir Hardies of later generations have been the star 
civil servants, physicists, psychologists, chemists, busi­
ness executives, and music critics of their day. 
Amongst children who left school for manual jobs in 
the 1940s one in twenty still had I.Q.s over 120; in the 
1950s - after the Act was working - there was one in 
fifty, by the 1970s only one in a thousand. By the last 
quarter of the century, the supply of really capable 
working men to fill the top union posts had dried up 
completely, and long before that, the fall in quality 
amongst Union M.P.s and branch and workshop 
officials, especially amongst the younger men, had be­
come very marked indeed. I should say that the rule of 
promotion by seniority, to which the unions remained 
attached, was not such a brake as it was in industry 
because the older officials were on the whole more able. 
Intelligence is, of course, by no means the only quality 
required by a union leader; they also need belligerence, 
doggedness, and capacity for hard work. But although 
intelligence is not the only quality, it is a necessary one, 
and the new leaders have been dreadfully handicapped 
by its absence. 
How, then, have the unions kept going at all? They 
have been saved by three kinds of adjustment - by the 
strengthening of their appointed staff, simplification of 
their functions, and enhancement of their respect­
ability. First, the weaknesses of the electoral method 
have been partially offset, in the trade unions as in par­
liament, by reinforcing the appointed 'civil service'. 
Very few university graduates have been elected as 
officials of manual unions, but increasingly, if far too 
slowly,1 the executive committees, conscious of the ever-
r . The Cooperative Movement was also very slow to react to 
educational change. A report in the 1930s commented that the 
145 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
growing complexity of the economy, impressed by the 
growing prestige of the universities, and aware of the 
need to make as good a show as possible with 
the employers and the government, have themselves 
appointed graduates to their research, production, and 
public relations departments. The Labour Party led in 
welcoming as M.P.s men from Winchester and other 
elite schools and then from the universities to replace 
the able manual workers who did not exist any more; 
by 1960 hardly any of the Party's leaders had been 
manual workers - a great change from 1924. After a 
time-lag the Unions did likewise with their officials. 
The universities have responded with special courses 
for suitable candidates who, despite high I.Q.s, are tact­
ful enough to suffer fools gladly -a very necessary qual­
ity this for the advisers of union executives. The notable 
sandwich course at the Leeds Institute of Technology 
prescribes a period in the ranks to gain practical ex­
perience; union and management cadets work happily 
together on the factory floor. The unions have incor­
porated into their top echelons many graduates who 
if not of the first rank are still good second-raters in the 
115-120 range. 
The unions have been preserved by men like Lord 
Wiffen. To appreciate the excellence of his qualifica­
tions one need do no more than compare his career with 
that of Ernest Bevin, who had no education worth the 
name. 
Cooperative Movement ' has failed to use even the trained ability 
which is made available for it by the present educational system. 
Even the advantages of secondary education have not been real­
ized, and recruitment from the universities is almost unknown. ' 
Carr-Saunders, A. M., Sargant, Florence P., and Peers, R. Con­
sumers Cooperation in Great Britain. 
146 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
Lord Wiffen 
(Born 9 August 1957, 
Bradford. 
Father, spinner) 
Mr Ernest Bevin 
(Born 9 March 1881, 
Winsford, Somerset. 
Father, farm labourer) 
5-11 A Stream Primary School. 5-1 1 Learnt to read and write
I.Q. 120
at village school 
11 11-plus exam. I.Q. 121 
11 Left school to take job as 
farm boy 
13 Bradford Grammar School. 
13 Kitchen boy, Bristol 
LQ. I 19 
14 Ditto. 
15 Ditto. 
16 Sixth form. I.Q. 1 18 
18 State scholarship, Cam­
bridge University. I.Q. 
120.
Subsequently 2nd
class B.Sc.(Sociology) and
M.Sc. (Mental Testing)
28 Lecturer on Human Rela­
tions in Industry. Acton 
Technical College. I.Q. 
123 
29 Commonwealth 
Fellow 
Harvard University. I.Q. 
1 15 
32 Deputy Research Officer, 
United Textile Factory 
Technicians Union. I.Q. 
I 15 
34 Ditto. 
147 
14 Grocer's errand boy 
15 Van boy 
16 Tram conductor, then van 
boy again 
18 Drayman 
28 Secretary, Bristol Right to 
Work Committee 
29 Secretary, Bristol Carmen's 
Branch of the Dock, Wharf, 
Riverside & General 
Labourers Union 
32 Assistant National Organ­
izer of Union 
34 National Organizer of 
Union 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
-4-r Research Officer of Union 
I.Q. r r4 
59 K.C.T.U.C., Secretary of 
Union. 
Member 
of 
General Council. I.Q. I 1 6  
64 Raised to peerage. I.Q. 
r r6 
72 Chairman, 
Education 
Committee T.U.C. I.Q. 
I I 2  
76 Assistant Lecturer, Acton 
Technical College (where 
he now is). I.Q. ro4 
41 General Secretary, Trans­
port and General Workers 
Union 
59 Minister of Labour 
64 Foreign Secretary 
Walter Wiffen and his like have given the leadership 
which the Bevins once gave to the manual workers. 
The second adjustment is that the functions of the 
trade unions have, in a more sensibly organized society, 
become almost completely routine, so that there is very 
little call for initiative or innovation. Shop stewards and 
local officials are no longer any match for the employers 
but this matters very little now that any negotiations 
there are about wages and conditions have become fully 
centralized at national level, where the influence of the 
paid staff is predominant. The British Productivity 
Council has continuously fed the unions with publicity 
material, films, and cartoons for their members, and the 
National Joint Council has also become ever more vital 
since it assumed responsibility for the annual price 
review. None but trained statisticians can follow the 
complexities of the review, so the experts employed by 
the Unions settle the details in discussion with their col­
leagues from the Central Statistical Office. Up till last 
148 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
May there had been no ' strike' since the one at 
Leamington in I 99 I. 
Third, the trade unions, have, like the monarchy, 
been given an ever more honourable place in the social 
order. Today there is not a national body of any conse­
quence on which they are unrepresented. Joint consul­
tation has been carried so far by the government as well 
as by every employer that the unions ( except for those 
in which Populist cliques have gained control) are told, 
at least a day or two in advance of the public pronounce­
ment, of nearly every important decision. Now that the 
Royal Order of the T.U.C. has been created and all 
members of the General Council knighted automatically 
on election, now that the award of honours to rank-and­
file workmen has been multiplied, intelligence and tact 
have retrieved what might admittedly have become a 
very ugly situation. The Populists claim there is a basic 
lack of sympathy between the paid staff and the union 
rank and file. Any sociologist must recognize the dan­
ger. But the remedy is not to move backwards into a 
past golden only in imagination. The remedy is, as the 
universities have realized, to perfect the social surveys 
and opinion polls which are the eyes and ears of the 
intelligent public. 
5. SUMMARY 
I started this chapter by praising the socialists for the 
massive attack they once mounted against the heredit­
ary principle. Without them, castes might never have 
been replaced by classes, and the old aristocracy never 
converted into its modern form. But when their mission 
was accomplished and equality of opportunity achieved, 
they had to make a far-reaching and sometimes painful 
149 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
adjustment. The main body of the Labour Party, under 
its new name, became reconciled to the fall in its stand­
ing, and to the decline of its special vehicle, parliament. 
The technical unions were compensated for loss of 
power by gain in respectability. The organized tech­
nicians have become a lesser pillar of our society. But 
the minority movement of break-away socialists, some­
times working inside the official ranks, sometimes out­
side, has never been totally destroyed. The Populists can 
with some justice claim descent from the sentimental 
egalitarians who have for decades past plagued respect­
able technicians' leaders as much as they have the 
government. 
Today Lady Avocet likes to compare the meritocracy 
with the Mahicans who took away the best young men 
and women from a conquered tribe and reared them as 
members of their own families. She and her fellows 
claim that technicians need leaders who share their atti­
tudes of mind because they have been technicians them­
selves. 1 If they again had an Ernest Bevin to lead them, 
their morale would again be high because they could 
identify fully with him and take credit for his deeds. 
They would again belong to a cohesive society because 
they would possess a leader who would interpret its 
r. In their quarterly journal, Commonweal, some Populist writers 
have taken to sociology too, and advanced a new interpretation of 
the history of the Hitler war. They are quite right that psycho­
logists in the Royal Navy deliberately left some able men as able 
seamen, instead of sending them for special training, so that there 
would be good men in the ranks, knowing the ratings' problems, 
from whom officers could later be drawn. (See Vernon, P. E. and 
Parry, J. B. Personnel Selection in the British Forces.) What these 
writers overlook is that it was in those times thought positively 
desirable to promote adults from the ranks; with educational 
reform, such a thing is normally no longer necessary. 
1 50 

FALL OF THE LABOUR MOVEMENT 
needs to them in terms that they could understand. The 
Populists believe that, until native leadership emerges, 
their vocation is to act as trustees for the technicians. 
Until last year we thought such belief a pathetic 
whimsicality . . . .  

CHAPTER SEVEN 
R I C H  A N D  P O O R  
I. MERIT MONEY
CASTES or classes are universal, and the measure of 
harmony that prevails within a society is everywhere 
dependent upon the degree to which stratification is 
sanctioned by its code of morality. In the long period 
between the break-up of the old aristocracy and the 
arrival of the new, there was no agreed standard by 
which the division into classes could be justified. Con­
flict about the distribution of privileges and rewards was 
therefore both harsh and perpetual; and on no topic did 
feeling run stronger than money. The poor were for ever 
complaining that the rich had too much for their needs, 
and demanding more for themselves. The rich were for 
ever denying the charge, and claiming that, as judged 
by the contribution they made to the commonwealth, 
their rewards were too meagre. Between the opposing 
sides in this arena there could be no peace, at best a 
compromise truce. What a change there has been! The 
distribution of rewards has become far more unequal 
and yet with less strife than before. How has such a 
happy state arisen? The story must be divided into 
phases, before and after 2005. 
Throughout the last century, as organizations grew 
bigger and more complex, the spread of incomes neces­
sarily became wider. The industrial ladder lengthened 
and the number of salary-grades increased. A hundred 
years ago the small firm with ten employees divided 
into a mere three or four grades was still quite common. 
152 

RICH AND POOR 
The top man did not have to be much better off than 
the bottom. In the larger businesses which came to pre­
dominate there had to be hundreds of grades, all differ­
entiated from each other in salary. At the bottom was 
the man who got no more than the Minimum estab­
lished as the decent level below which no one should be 
allowed to fall. Here at any rate there was equality. The 
Minimum was the foundation from which the whole 
edifice of incomes rose. In the European Atomic 
Authority in 1992, for instance, a lift-man received the 
Minimum of £450 per annum. Above him were the 
other 221 grades, and as the average differential be­
tween the grades was £250, the President of the Author­
ity necessarily had to have an annual income of at least 
£55, 700. His net salary was in fact £60,000 ( excluding 
the Presidential Superannuation Provision). The differ­
ence between top and bottom was of the same order of 
magnitude in most other large organizations, and the 
smaller firms also had to pay comparable rates in order 
to attract their share of ability. 
It took many years to evolve this order out of the 
chaos which existed before. The difficult task was to fit 
the whole array and variety of jobs into an interrelated 
series of hierarchies, and this was only accomplished 
when merit rating was developed, to cite an early for­
mula of the British Institute of Management, as ' the 
systematic assessment of an employee in terms of the 
performance, aptitudes, and other qualities necessary 
for the successful carrying out of his job' . 1 There were 
still arguments when a new kind of job, the product of 
technical progress, had to be slotted into an existing 
hierarchy without causing too much disturbance. There 
were still arguments about the differentials between 
1. Merit rating. British Institute of Management. 1954. 
153 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
different levels, and in these the unions might still join 
if the industrial psychologists could not settle the issue 
out of hand. But there were no longer serious disputes 
once merit rating was widely understood and recog­
nized as the proper means of comparing one job with 
another. 
As I have said before, the general mood of our 
country was never egalitarian. Nearly everyone thought 
that some people were better than others - either the 
professional classes were superior to the manual workers 
or the manual workers were superior to the professional 
classes - the pity was only that everyone had a different 
standard by which to judge. In a way it was a relief 
when more and more people found they could agree 
about merit, or rather about the meaning which in 
practice they should give to it, both in education and in 
industry. 
The heat was removed from the old dispute, and a 
more empirical spirit allowed to play on the scene, as 
the result of abolishing inherited income. Although they 
got muddled between the two types, the main body of 
socialists were far more critical of the inequality due to 
unearned than to earned income - their stereotype was 
of the rich man who had inherited a fortune from his 
father. When death duties, capital levies, capital gains 
tax, and special super-tax on unearned incomes had 
done their work, the root of this criticism was cut away, 
and it was found that very few members of the lower 
classes had any objection to inequality as such. If a 
man won a good job after having fought his way up the 
educational ladder and received a large salary for doing 
it, why then he probably deserved it - good luck to him. 
154 

RICH AND POOR 
2. THE MODERN SYNTHESIS 
Though this was the general view it was never univer­
sally accepted. Criticism came from the usual quarter. 
The egalitarians could not object indefinitely to the 
most intelligent children getting the most intensive edu­
cation. When that happened everyone gained; the 
poorest technician was glad if when his wife was ill he 
could call a doctor with an l.Q. of at least 100. The 
socialists could not indefinitely object to the best people 
having the most power. Everyone gained from having 
the best men as Chiefs of Staff, Astronomers Royal, 
Vice-Chancellors of Universities, or Chairmen of the 
Social Science Research Council. The socialists had to 
put up with the elite. What a minority of them moaned 
about was that it should be so well paid. Granted (some 
of them would say), granted that the best astronomer 
should be made Royal, whyshouldhegetalarger emolu­
ment than the bricklayer who built his observatory? 
This was ever an irritating question, since it was in 
these terms unanswerable. These strange people rushed 
frantically around (and in England of all countries) ask­
ing, in an almost metaphysical way, Is this right? Is 
that right? The question could of course only be an­
swered by another question, ' Right according to what 
principle? ' One could say it was wrong to pay one man 
more than another because there should be distribution 
according to deeds. One could say it was wrong to pay 
the lazy scientist more than the diligent dustman be­
cause there should be distribution according to effort. 
One could say it was wrong to pay the intelligent more 
than the stupid because society should compensate for 
genetic injustice. One could say it was wrong to pay the 
stupid more than the intelligent because society should 
155 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
compensate for the unhappiness which is the usual lot 
of the intelligent. (No one can do much about the 
brilliant, they will be miserable anyway.) One could 
say it was wrong to pay the man who lived a long and 
serene life in Upper Slaughter as much as a scientist 
who wore himself out in the service of knowledge at the 
Battersea Poly. One could say it was wrong to pay 
people who liked their work as much as those who 
didn't. One could - and did - say anything, and what­
ever one said it was always with the support of the par­
ticular kind of justice invoked by principles implicit in 
the statement. 
To have prised agreement from this arid debate, and 
to have silenced the socialists for so many years, has 
been one of the triumphs of modern statecraft. The 
beauty of it all, for a country which thrives on pre­
cedent, is that there has been no sharp break with the 
past. Tax-free expenses had been becoming a more and 
more important part of remuneration right through the 
last century, and by the rggos a thousand new conven­
tions had struck root. Any knowledgeable historian does 
not have to do any more than scan the advertisement 
columns of the newspapers. Here is a fairly typical one 
of those days: 
COUNTY BOROUGH OF HARWELL. Applications invited for 
established pensionable post of ENDOCRINO-PSYCHIATRIST 
(Grade 24) in Infants Clinic. Salary starting at £10,850 and 
rising by annual increments of £135 ros to £r 2,205, with 
lunches provided. Application forms from Town Psychologist. 
The key words were well understood in local govern­
ment service. ' Lunches provided' meant that the 
Borough had, like most other progressive local authori­
ties, subscribed to the convention of the Association of 
156 

RICH AND POOR 
Municipal Corporations, whereby supplementary pay­
ments in kind, from lunches to holidays, were made to 
graduate staff of the Council. 
But why only lunches and holidays and the other 
fringe benefits? The question was indeed a pertinent 
one. Was it not the employers' responsibility to ensure 
that all their staff had a total environment conducive to 
high performance? After they had been trained at great 
expense to the public, it was ridiculous to tolerate ob­
structions, either at home or at work, to their maximum 
efficiency. For professional staff the division between 
work and leisure is, after all, purely artificial. Their 
entire lives are geared to their vocation. 
The issue was put squarely over thirty years ago by 
Mr Gulliver in his plea, famous perhaps just because it 
was so forthright, for a fair deal for the upper classes. 
The Elite's Work is Never Done - we all remember the 
title. 
We are the thinkers, he said, are we not? We are paid to 
think. Well, what do we need to do our work well? We need 
quiet - no man who is disturbed by noise can devote himself to 
single-minded concentration. We need comfort - no man who is 
forced to consider little physical irritations can scale the heights 
of achievement. We need ample holidays - history shows that 
scientists have often hit upon the missing link in a chain of 
thought quite unexpectedly when they were bathing in the sea, 
walking in the mountains, or drowsing by the Caribbean. A 
brilliant man can do a full year's work in eight months but not 
in twelve. We need secretaries at work and domestic servants at 
home - the chores of life exact energy from the talented which 
should be devoted to higher things. Just as a carpenter needs a 
chisel or a mechanic a spanner, we must have books to enlighten, 
pictures to stimulate, wine to soothe. It is not for ourselves we 
157 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
ask. It is for the good of sociery, to whose service our brains are 
dedicated. No jealousy, no vaniry, no selfishness must stand in 
the wqy ef human achievement and social progress. 
The measure of the change is the extent to which these 
crude ideas have, in a more refined form, secured 
general acceptance. 
Public-spirited employers increasingly adopted the 
new conception of the duty they owed their staff. Their 
duty was to provide the best possible conditions for 
mental activity, during the whole of every twenty-four 
hours, on the job and off the job. To do this took money, 
for the purchase of houses, for chauffeurs, for company 
cars and planes, for domestic service both at a man's 
work-station and at his home-station, and for wintering 
at Montego Bay, Tashkent, Kashmir, Caracas, Palm 
Beach, Llandrindod Wells, or wherever the industrial 
psychologist recommended. But the money was not in 
the possession of the employee. He could not do with it 
just as he pleased. It was not an income but a cost, and 
as such was rightly borne by the employer. 
Mr Idris Roberts was the first politician to see the 
possibilities in this situation. He could finally spike the 
critics by agreeing to their demands and establishing 
complete equality of all incomes. Members of the elite 
had always opposed equalization on grounds of effici­
ency: unless, they said, they had adequate incentives 
they could not be expected to give of their best. But they 
could readily appreciate that even large incomes, sub­
ject to heavy taxation as they were, no longer supplied 
an incentive to continuous effort. The elite was ready 
to accept equality because they no longer cared about 
income, and ordinary people because they still did care 
about it. Mr Roberts' Equalization of Income Act of 
158 

RICH AND POOR 
2005 married the interests of all classes in society in a 
most singular way. Since that time every employee of 
whatever rank has received the Equal (as emoluments 
are officially called) simply by virtue of being a citizen, 
and the differences between grades have been recog­
nized not any longer by salaries but by the payment of 
such varying expenses as could be justified by the needs 
of efficiency. Employers have, of course, been allowed to 
give benefits to technicians too, if they wished, and 
some of the most enlightened have done so by building 
cinder-tracks for athletes, concrete pitches for cricketers, 
and fields for footballers in the grounds of their fac­
tories. Technicians have a mere seven-hour stint and so 
naturally cannot claim the same consideration as pro­
fessional staff who are in effect on the job for twenty­
four hours every day. But morale, although an im­
ponderable, is worth cultivating, and from this point of 
view wisely administered expenditure out of company 
funds on such physical amenities is often worth while. 
Equalization of income has brought to an end much 
of the old, wearisome argument about differentials. The 
only differences now are not between people but be­
tween years. Mr Roberts and his reform government 
recognized that technicians had been accustomed to 
rises in their incomes from time to time, and if their legi­
timate expectations had been disappointed, they would 
have been too. An early sociologist, a Professor Hob­
house, once stated a profound truth. 
Question: What is the ideal income? 
Answer: Ten per cent more than you've got. 
The Act provided that the Equal drawn out of the 
common pool by each contributor to it should be ad­
justed at an annual Price Review. If prices rose in any 
159 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
year, the Equal had to be raised in proportion, and 
since prices have in fact been increasing steadily since 
2005, the ordinary man's remuneration has grown as 
well. There has been little dispute about the rightness 
of this procedure, only about the extent to which prices 
have in fact risen in any twelvemonth. Statisticians 
from the unions have been known on more than one 
occasion to produce price indices at the Review quite 
different from the official ones! What should be treated 
as an empirical question has been heated up into a 
political issue. The universities are attending to this. 
Professors of econometrics are shortly to introduce a 
more unified curriculum. 
The approach to sharing out improvements in 
efficiency has also been modernized. In the old days 
technicians used to claim that their 'wages' should go 
up with productivity. Since, they said, they had pro­
duced more, so should they benefit. This was obviously 
wrong: economic progress is due not to manual workers 
- they do not even work harder - but to the inventors
and organizers who devise new techniques. If anyone is
entitled to the increment, it is the meritocracy. Any­
way, increases in productivity must be spent on increas­
ing productivity still further and not frittered away on
ordinary people. A great country needs great invest­
ment. In the middle of last century investment was still
pitiably low in Britain, far more so than in Russia,
where economic power was securely in the control of an
elite who knew that to make their country rich the
citizens had to be kept poor. We at last learnt the lesson
that productivity and poverty are inseparable. Since
2005 the annual productivity increment has been
ploughed back, primarily in human resources, that is,
spent upon higher education and upon the maintenance
1 60 

RICH AND POOR 
at concert pitch of the people who are its products; and 
secondarily, upon mechanical equipment of all kinds. 
How, one might ask, could anyone object to such a 
sound, businesslike approach? But they did. The Popu­
lists have again managed the seemingly impossible. Let 
the technicians have a share, they say. Surely the nation 
can afford it? Productivity has been so buoyant that in 
2031 national expenditure - they have even tried to 
revive the outmoded term, national income - rose by 
fifty-four per cent, and last year by sixty-one per cent. 
But these figures are neither here nor there. The agita­
tors speak as if that old socialist myth, the Age of Plenty, 
had arrived at last. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. The country needs every scrap of human and 
material capital it can save if it is to contend with other 
great nations in the battle for survival. We are all poor, 
and shall always remain so, because the demands of a 
scientific age are insatiable. The extremists are, by their 
loose talk, threatening progress itself. 
3. SUMMARY 
The reform of the money structure has been one of the 
most successful of modern times. The perennial dis­
agreements of old sprang from the inevitable conflict 
between classes when each contained a cross-section of 
ability. The basic injustice was that intelligent members 
of the lower classes were not given their due, and in their 
attack on social disorder, which had for the time being 
to be waged without forfeiting the support of their class­
mates of all grades of intelligence, they seized on any 
and every available principle to justify their protest. 
When the basic injustice was remedied, and the intelli­
gent from every class were given their full opportunities, 
F 
161 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
those who would have been enemies of the established 
order became its strongest def enders. Agreement replaced 
disagreement, and merit was recognized as the principle 
which should guide economic, as well as educational, 
reform. But the elite has shown its wisdom, that is, its 
moderation, by not pushing the principle too far. All 
citizens even of the lowest class enjoy the same Equal as 
anyone else, and it is subject to adjustment from year to 
year. 
But even this good order has not escaped criticism. 
The Populists claim that the appearance of justice is 
deceptive. They say that the real reason why the 'hypo­
crisy', as they call us, have got away with so much is 
that the humble no longer have anyone - except them­
selves - to speak for them. That the unions are on the 
side of the establishment because the leaders do not 
have the capacity to see through, and show up, the 
double-dealing of the rich who are richer than ever now 
they are treated as business assets. That the bargaining 
over the distribution of national expenditure is a battle 
of wits, and that defeat was bound to go to those who 
lost their clever children to the enemy. They have 
therefore ridden into the lists as the self-appointed 
champions of the lower classes to fight for them in the 
way the unions can allegedly no longer do. We must 
admit that their ludicrous demand for a general share­
out of increments in productivity has found at least 
· some attentive hearers.

163 
CHAPTER EI.GHT 
CR I SIS 
I .  THE FIRST WOMEN'S CAMPAIGN 
I HA VE been trying to describe the growth of our 
society, particularly since 1944, in such a way as to 
reveal some of the deep-rooted causes of our present 
discontents. I do not gainsay the achievements of social 
engineering. I do not deny the fact of progress. I do 
maintain, however, that society never works smoothly. 
Despite all the advances of the last century, sociology 
is still in its infancy, and until it has reached the emi­
nence of its fellow sciences, we shall not know with any 
certainty the muster of laws which social engineering 
must obey. The Nature of human beings is still the most 
mysterious of all. As it is, the society we have contrived 
is no more than a counterpoise of opposing forces held 
in always delicate equilibrium. Every change creates its 
counter. The opening of schools to talent was bound to 
anger some of the old cast down from their seats. Demo­
tion for the stupid children of upper-class origin was 
bound to grieve their parents, and so forth - all the 
reactions I have mentioned before. My submission is 
that these at present inescapable strains account in 
some measure for the support upon which the ex­
tremists have been able to draw. I readily agree, how­
ever, that while this historical analysis may go some way 
to explain the possibility of such a movement, it does 
not explain why the movement has cohered in this par­
ticular form. What is the immediate pattern of organi"­
zation? And what the spark? 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
The first and most obvious point to make is that the 
most prominent present leaders of the Populists are all 
women, and have been so since the first decade of the 
century. That was the time when women first began to 
come to the fore in left-wing politics, and, as one would 
expect, their first essay was in the romantic style that 
suits them best. Taking their cue from the Russian 
Populists1 of the previous century after whom the 
modern movement is named, shaggy young girls from 
Newnham and Somerville, instead of taking the jobs as 
surgeons and scientists for which their education fitted 
them, scattered to Salford and Newcastle to become 
factory workers, ticket collectors, and air hostesses. They 
used lipstick, watched football matches, and went to 
Butlins for their holidays. They believed it was their 
mission to live as common technicians and by so doing 
to rouse them to a sense of the indignities from which 
they should feel they suffered. They joined the tech­
nical unions, stood for office, and agitated for strike 
action. They chained themselves to the seats of the 
British Productivity Council. They petitioned the 
T.U.C. to commit itself to ' Socialism'. They sent pro­
paganda far and wide. Perhaps their strangest achieve­
ment was the capture of The Times and its conversion, 
for a few months in 2009, into a popular newspaper. 
Even so, all their efforts were in vain. For the spark 
there was no tinder. The girls went home to Tunbridge 
1. These were composed of young intellectuals who on return 
from universities abroad decided, under the influence of Bakunin, 
Kropotkin, and Stepniak, to go to the people for inspiration, 
dressed themselves as peasants, lived in the villages, and tried to 
promote revolution. When the peasants merely gaped at them, 
they were driven to terrorism. Fortunately there were no Sophie 
Perovskayas in England; it is not easy to imagine British women 
with a bomb, hydrogen or any other kind. 
164 

CRISIS 
Wells and Bath, and the great majority of the tech­
nicians continued to go calmly about their daily occa­
sions, sharing in the general stability of employment, 
intent on the interests of their children. They were 
tolerantly amused by these antics; they were not moved 
to action. There is ordinarily no one so stolid as 
ordinary British technicians. They are the salt of the 
earth. 
But before they all went home, the girls struck up a 
strange alliance which has left a permanent mark on 
our subsequent political affairs. In the inner councils of 
the Technicians Party there were still some aged men 
who after having received their early training in the· 
ancient Labour Party had never emerged from their 
political adolescence. The old men were attracted to the 
young girls, and perhaps now and then it happened the 
other way round as well. They began to draft pro­
grammes and policies. Why, they asked, did the girls 
fail? They failed, went the answer, because they were 
not really technicians themselves. Their minds worked 
differently. They thought in the idiom of Somerville, 
not Salford. They had no feeling for the technicians' real 
problems. And therefore they were distrusted. But what 
if these girls, and even boys, with high I.Q.s, never left 
the technical classes? What if they refused to go to the 
universities? What if they left school at the same time as 
ordinary people? Then they would be trusted. They 
would be technicians at heart, if elite in brain. Their 
high intelligence at the service of their fellows, they 
would give the leadership that men like Bevin and 
Citrine once gave to the old trade unions. A new 
socialist movement would be built up from the grass 
roots, new meaning given to the old slogans of equality. 
It was a dazzling prospect. 
165 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
But when it came to practical proposals all the plan­
ners could suggest was that a proportion of the more 
able children in each generation should leave school at 
the minimum age and become technicians themselves. 
But how would they be chosen? By ballot? Some of 
them played with this idea, even suggesting that every 
tenth person among the over 125s, a tithe of the intelli­
gence in every generation, should be allocated to tech­
nical work. This was obvious nonsense, and was never 
pressed. But if not by ballot, then how? The reformers 
ended by proposing that teachers should stop bringing 
pressure on parents and children who were not keen on 
higher education. They wanted the Parent-Teachers 
Associations abolished, so that parents would be less 
influenced by the teachers. They actually wanted 
schools to close the evening and week-end classes for 
parents. They wanted all sorts of things that were 
clearly no longer practicable. The plain fact was ( and 
is) that most clever people want to get on in the world. 
There was little need for the schools to encourage. The 
children agreed with teacher before she spoke. 
In their dilemma the dissidents then turned back to 
an old idea much in vogue in the century before r 944 -
the idea that manual work was as valuable as mental. 
For a long time indeed, though never in any Commun­
ist country, the adherents of Karl Marx's labour theory 
of value professed to believe that manual work was 
actually more valuable than any other sort. (A strange 
idea, it seems to us, yet the historian can have no doubt it 
was once widely accepted.) And the theorists went on to 
urge a revival of these old notions. They really had 
no alternative. They had to admit that most clever 
children wanted to become brain-workers. They also 
thought the children wrong. Since they wanted the 
166 

CRISIS 
children to become manual workers of their own volun­
tary choice, they had to argue that the children should 
be satisfied to do manual work. In other words the very 
system of values had to change! They could reach 
no other conclusion. They said that the carpenter 
was as important as the crystallographer, ignoring 
the awkward fact that none of the theorists was a 
carpenter. 
The agitators of twenty-five years ago were led on to 
ask more and more questions about society. From these 
discussions derive the modern theories of equality with 
which we are grappling today. Why, they asked, is one 
man regarded as superior to another? It is, they said, 
because we put up with such narrowness in the para­
mount values, or criteria, by which men judge one 
another's worth. When Britain was governed by war­
riors who depended for their power on their ability to 
kill, the great fighter was the great man; and thinkers, 
poets, and painters were treated with scorn. When 
Britain was governed by landowners, men who made 
their living by trade or preaching or singing were all 
lesser breeds. When Britain was governed by manufac­
turers, all other men were regarded as inferior. But, 
they say, there has never been such gross over-simpli­
fication as in modern Britain. Since the country is 
dedicated to the one overriding purpose of economic 
expansion, people are judged according to the single 
test of how much they increase production, or the 
knowledge that will, directly or indirectly, lead to that 
consummation. If they do as little as the ordinary 
manual worker, they are of no account. If they do as 
much as the scientist whose invention does the work of 
ten thousand, or the administrator who organizes whole 
clutches of technicians, then they are among the great. 
167 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
The ability to raise production, directly or indirectly, is 
known as 'intelligence': this iron measure is the judge­
ment of society upon its members. 1 'Intelligence' is as 
much qualification for power in the modern state as 
'breeding' was in the old. The stress on this sort of 
ability was produced by a century of wars and threa~ 
of war, in which the kind of occupational achieve·ment 
which raised the national war-potential was lauded 
above all else; but, say the theorists, now that the threat 
is no longer so immediate, can we not encourage a 
diversity of values? 
In 2009 a local group of the Technicians Party issued 
the 'Chelsea Manifesto'. Although it attracted little 
public attention at the time, it has had a considerable 
influence, especially within the movement, during the 
last decade. It is a long and turgid document which 
begins by claiming (in an interpretation which no his­
torian could accept) that the primary aim.of the group, 
as of all their socialist predecessors and of the Church 
before them, is to cultivate variety. Their goal is the 
classless society. They oppose inequality because it 
reflects a narrowness of values. They deny that one man 
is in any fundamental way the superior ofanother. They 
seek the equality of man in the sense that they want 
every man to be respected for the good that is in him. 
Every man is a genius at something, even every woman, 
they say: it is the function of society to discover and 
honour it, whether it is genius at making pots, growing 
daisies, ringing bells, caring for babies, or even (to show 
their tolerance) genius at inventing radio telescopes. It 
1. They have, of course, no use for the orthodox view that it is
the very complication of modern society which demands the sort 
of basic intelligence which can speedily relate one part of a com­
plex whole to another. 
168 

CRISIS 
is perhaps worth quoting the last paragraphoftheMani­
festo; this summarizes the writers' odd views on what a 
classless society would be like. 
The classless sociery would be one which both possessed and 
acted upon plural values. Were we to evaluate people, not only 
according to their intelligence and their education, their occupa­
tion, and their power, but according to their kindliness aRd their 
courage, their imagination and sensitivity, their sympathy and 
generosity, there could be no classes. Who would be able to say 
that the scientist was superior to the porter with admirable 
qualities as a father, the civil servant with unusual skill at 
gaining prizes superior to the lorry-driver with unusual skill at 
growing roses? The classless society would also be the tolerant 
society, in which individual differences were actively encouraged 
as well as passively tolerated, in which full meaning was at last 
given to the dignity of man. Every human being would then 
have equal opportunity, not to rise up in the world in the light 
of any mathematical measure, but to develop his own special 
capacities for leading a rich life. 
The Manifesto reveals its archaism most quaintly in
the supporter whom it rustles forth from his grave - not 
one of the modem scientific 'divines' but, of all people, 
the almost-forgotten Matthew Arnold. It actually 
italicizes the absurd notion of' culture' in his Culture and 
Anarchy - which 'does not try to teach down to the level 
of inferior classes; it does not try to win them for this or 
that sect of its own, with ready-made judgements and 
watchwords. It seeks to do away with classes; to make 
the best that has been thought and known in the world 
current everywhere; to make all men live in an atmo­
sphere of sweetness and light, where they may use ideas, 
as it uses them itself, freely - nourished and not bound 
by them.' Oh God, oh Gaitan! 
R. M.-8 
169 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
In the light of this approach the authors of the Mani­
festo sought to give a new meaning to equality of 
opportunity. This, they said, should not mean equal 
opportunity to rise up in the social scale, but equal op­
portunity for all people, irrespective of their ' intelli­
gence', to develop the virtues and talents with which 
they are endowed, all their capacities for appreciating 
the beauty and depth of human experience, all their 
potential for living to the full. The child, every child, is 
a precious individual, not just a potential functionary 
of society. The schools should not be tied to the occupa­
tional structure, bent on turning out people for the jobs 
at any particular moment considered important, but 
should be devoted to encouraging all human talents, 
whether or not these are of the kind needed in a scien­
tific world. The arts and manual skills should be given 
as much prominence as science and technology. The 
Manifesto urged that the hierarchy of schools should be 
abolished and common schools at last established. These 
schools should have enough good teachers so that all 
children should have individual care and stimulus. 
They could then develop at their own pace to their own 
particular fulfilment. The schools would not segregate 
the like but mingle the unlike; by promoting diversity 
within unity, they would teach respect for the infinite 
human differences which are not the least of man­
kind's virtues. The schools would not regard children 
as shaped once and for all by Nature, but as a com­
bination of potentials which can be cultivated by 
Nurture. 
2. MODERN FEMINIST MOVE MENT
These first phases of reformism are important to us to­
day because they saw the formulation of the ideas which 
1 70 

CRISIS 
have since become so notorious. In point of organiza­
tion there has been little continuity. That generation of 
malcontents returned home and many of them are now 
the respected wives of some of our leading scientists. 
But not all; some did not marry, some kept their rebel­
lious spirit alive in the nursery. They have been joined 
by further recruits from some of the best homes in the 
country, culminating in the rush of the last three years. 
Why so many women 1 up in arms? It is not altogether 
easy to explain. I would, however, be no aspirant to 
sociology were I to allow any role to accident. That 
would, I believe, be a serious misinterpretation. It is 
worth noting, what is sometimes forgotten, that there 
were several excellent studies made of female psycho­
logy towards the end of last century before the resur­
gence in politics. The gist of them was that society 
seemed to many women, especially the able ones, in mind 
men if at heart women, to have been constructed ex­
pressly for the convenience of the opposite sex. Are 
there not, the indignant asked, as many intelligent girls 
born every year as there are boys? They get much the 
same education as any male cadet for the meritocracy. 
But what happens then? They take the post for which 
they have been trained only until they marry. From 
that moment they are expected, for a few years at any 
rate, to devote themselves to their children. The sheer 
drudgery of their lives has been much relieved by the 
revival of domestic service and the help of husbands. 
But they cannot, if they take any notice of the teaching 
1. Dr Puffin (of York University in an unpublished M.Sc. 
thesis) has pointed out how difficult it is to get reliable figures for 
membership, and asserts that, on a count he made at the Populist 
Convention at Leicester, women only numbered sixty-two per cent 
of the delegates, the rest being men, with the old predominating. 
1 7 1 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
of psychology, entrust the entire care of their offspring 
to a person of low intelligence. Infants need the love of 
a mother; they also need her intellectual stimulation, 
her tender introduction to a high culture, her diligent 
preparation for a dedicated life. She will neglect her 
motherly duties only at the peril of her children, not to 
speak of the displeasure of her husband. 
What these early studies showed were that this dual 
role - in her chosen profession and in her biological 
vocation - often gave rise to mental tension in all those 
women who could not feel that child-rearing is ( as it is 
in fact) one of the noblest occupations of them all, 
especially when it is part-time. The problem has never 
been an easy one to solve. Some women have taken their 
own way out by limiting the size of their families so that 
they can return to paid work as soon as possible - with 
the unfortunate result that the stock of intelligence has 
been endangered. Others have denounced the tradi­
tional family as an anachronism and transferred their 
motherly role entirely to servants. Others have signed 
the pledge that they would send their children only to 
the London School of Arts and Crafts, where science is 
not taught at all! Yet others, a small but significant 
minority, have been lured by the old mystique of 
equality. The early striving for social equality was 
greatly strengthened by its association with the move­
ment for emancipation of women. Equality irrespective 
of sex or class - it was a good slogan, only it lost much 
of its appeal when hereditary classes, though not here­
ditary sexes, were gradually abolished. But for some 
women the appeal remained as bright as ever. As they 
saw it, the sexes were treated as 'unequal'. They wanted 
sex. equality, but since this is obviously unobtainable, 
they displaced their antagonism from men in general 
I 72 

CRISIS 
on to the ' ruling classes', the scapegoat whom they 
imagined to be in some way responsible for the dic­
tatorship of biology. It was all the easier to vent their 
antagonism because many of them had time on their 
hands, once their children entered nursery school, 
which they could devote to discussions in their women's 
circles. Most of them did not react by going to the 
extreme of refusing to make use of domestic service. The 
determination of so many of the present leaders of the 
movement to do all their own household work is un­
usual and in some ways welcome since it means the 
married ones have little time left over for political 
organization. 
Through the women's circles, the activists have been 
able to assert their influence and show their menfolk, 
who perhaps show too little humility about the won­
ders with which they have furnished our estate, that 
they are a force to be reckoned with. In so doing they 
are making a protest against the standards, those of 
achievement, by which men assess each other. Women 
have always been judged more by what they are than 
by what they do, more for other personal qualities than 
for their intelligence; more for their warmth of heart, 
their vivacity, and their charm than for their worldly 
success. It is therefore understandable that they should 
wish to stress their own virtues, only regrettable that in 
this the quality have joined with women of no more 
than ordinary ability. 
Astringency has been added to the debate, first, by 
the 'impoverishment' of women, and second, by the 
eugenic campaign. The impoverishment is the result of 
the reform of remuneration which I described in the 
last chapter. Men are paid as business assets, and house­
wives cannot ordinarily pretend to be only that. Elite 
173 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
wives benefit indirectly from the new conception of 
home as just a branch office. Their servants are on the 
employer's expenditure roll. But they do not benefit as 
much as men. They do not attend so many stylish 
business dinners at the employer's expense; they do not 
need to travel abroad so often; they do not have two 
bars, one at work as well as one at home. Naturally they 
sometimes resent the privileged standard of living which 
their husbands, as business assets, have to enjoy whether 
they like it or not. This is one reason why the sex war 
has embraced politics. 
Then there has been the eugenic campaign. This was 
founded on ordinary common sense. Professor Eagle 
and his collaborators were really saying, to begin with, 
that before choosing their marriage partners people 
should consult the intelligence register. This was ob­
viously in the national interest; it was also in the interest 
of happy marriage. No man with a high I.Q. could in 
the long run be as proud of a child destined for a 
secondary modern school as of one destined for Oxford; 
yet the chance of such an unhappy issue was obviously 
greater, the lower the intelligence of the woman he 
married. A high-I.Q. man who mates with a low-I.Q. 
woman is simply wasting his genes and it is therefore 
common prudence for him to examine the records of her 
father and grandfather as well. Hence the success story 
of the pretty young mother who discovers she is going 
to be all right after all, the Registry has wrongly 
docketed her grandfather - it has become a favourite 
theme of popular fiction. Altogether this was, one 
would think, sensible advice. At any rate many men but 
not all - for what age is not an age of lust? - have 
thought so. It is now rare for a sober senior civil servant 
to consider marriage with any girl who cannot produce 
174 

CRISIS 
an I.Q. of over 130 at some point in her intelligence 
genealogy. For one thing, if he married beneath him 
there would be too great a danger of the news spreading 
through his department, and nothing would more 
surely give him the reputation of unreliability. 
But women - and for once I am bound to confess I 
do not understand why - have not taken so kindly to 
this advice. Where, they ask, is the romance in an in­
telligenic marriage? And to underline their question they 
have echoed the lower classes who esteem bodily prow­
ess and give a heightened value, a sort of symbolic 
value, to a superficial quality not at all related to in­
telligence, that is, to appearance. Beauty has become 
their flag. The more energetically Professor Eagle cam­
paigns against men who choose women for their 
appearance - he has been most ably assisted by his wife 
- the more do the Populists decry his efforts, and the 
more often do the chic cadres attend their own meetings 
clad in the most extravagant clothes, with Salpanas on 
their shoulders, and sandals on their feet, their faces 
decorated in the most beguiling way and their hair 
styled according to the latest decrees from the fashion 
committee. One of their favourite slogans is the ridi­
culous 'Beauty is achievable by all'. The remarkable 
appearance of the women members of the ' flying 
seminar' cannot be denied. They are not the sort of 
people who wear wool next to their skin. 
3• C O M I N G  O F  T H E  CRISIS 
Without the events to which I will now turn, this 
women's movement would have been no more than a 
high-spirited charade. It has been rendered a threat to 
the State by the sudden crystallization of an issue which 
175 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
has long remained submerged. I refer, of course, to the 
enunciation of the new revolutionary doctrine on the 
right wing of the Conservative Party. Lord Cecil and 
his followers have done what no one has dared to do 
within living memory: they have actually urged - not 
in so many words but that is their regrettable tenor -
that the hereditary principle should be openly restored 
to its former pride of place. The shock has been pro­
found. Extremism on the right has always led to ex­
tremism on the left. 
Their plea cannot be ignored, for they claim that 
they are only seeking the stamp of public approval for a 
trend which has been evident for at least twenty-five 
years. The fact is that every advance towards equality 
of opportunity creates resistance to going any further. 
A century ago educational reform was vital to reduce 
the waste of ability in the lower classes. But every time 
intelligence was skimmed off and transferred to the 
upper classes, the reasons for continuing the process 
were correspondingly weakened. By 1990 or there­
abouts all adults with I.Q.s of more than 125 belonged 
to the meritocracy. A high proportion of the children 
with I.Q.s over 125 were the children of these same 
adults. The top of today are breeding the top of to­
morrow to a greater extent than at any time in the 
past. The elite is on the way to becoming hereditary; 
the principles of heredity and merit are coming to­
gether. The vital transformation which has taken 
more than two centuries to accomplish is almost com­
plete. 
The meritocracy is undoubtedly more brilliant as a 
result. Fifty years ago many members of the elite were 
first-generation, and for that very reason suffered in 
comparison with their fellows. They came from homes 
1 76 

CRISIS 
m which there was no tradition of culture. 1 Their 
parents, without a good education themselves, were not 
able to augment the influence exercised by the teacher. 
These clever people were in a sense only half-educated, 
in school but not home. When they graduated they had 
not the same self-assurance as those who had the sup­
port and stimulus of their families from the beginning. 
They were often driven by this lack of self-confidence to 
compulsive conformity, thus weakening the power of 
innovation which it is one of the chief functions of the 
elite to wield. They were often intolerant, even more 
competitive in their striving for ascent than was neces­
sary, and yet too cautious to succeed. Now that so many 
of the elite are second-generation or better, these faults 
are no longer so evident, and society is no longer court­
ing the risk of degenerating into a stratified mob. No 
longer is it so necessary to debase standards by attempt­
ing to extend a higher civilization to the children of the 
lower classes. This is what the new Conservatives allege. 
They claim that the advantages of the new disposition 
should be frankly recognized - even to the extent of 
allowing to the elite not only the privileges which are 
their accepted right but also, and this is the moot point, 
the guarantee of a privileged education for their 
children. 
The shock administered by this demand has in a way 
1. One of the signs of the times is that T. S. Eliot is much read 
again - that is, his Notes towards the Definition ef Culture. Particularly 
his words 'An elite, if it is a governing elite, so far as the natural 
impulse to pass on to one's offspring both power and prestige is 
not artificially checked, will tend to establish itself as a class.' Less 
often quoted are the words that follow ' But an elite which thus 
transforms itself tends˦to lose its function as an elite, for the quali­
ties by which the original members won their position will not all 
be transmitted equally to their descendants.' 
177 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
been aggravated by some of the recent advances in the 
social sciences, whose consequences seem, quite inde­
pendently, to threaten some of our most cherished 
beliefs. The fact is that the accumulation of knowledge 
in psychology has made it possible to identify the intelli­
gence · and aptitudes of the individual at ever earlier 
ages. Up to the turn of the century, there was still such 
a margin of error about the tests as they were applied, 
even at fourteen, that if people had had their last 
chance at that age much ability would have been lost 
to the nation. The late developers could not be neglected 
if full meaning was to be given to equality of oppor­
tunity. Hence modern adult education. Hence the 
regional centres. Hence the opportunity for anyone to 
have himself re-tested at any stage of life. But step by 
step the rapid advances in their discipline have given 
the educational psychologists the means to identify in­
telligence during childhood, even though it is so far 
latent that the untrained observer cannot detect it, and 
to forecast the age in adult life at which it will develop. 
These discoveries weakened the rationale of the adult 
education movement. If on the basis of tests at the age 
of fifteen, the experts could predict the future, what 
purpose was any longer served by the Regional 
Centres? The experts merely had to tag the late 
developer and, at the appropriate age, confirm that 
their prediction was correct. Provided they made 
generous allowance for border-line cases, they could not 
go wrong. The organizers of adult education have 
fought against this iconoclasm (as it seems to them) and, 
quite apart from disputing the validity of the new find­
ings, have argued that their movement should continue 
if only to maintain the morale oflow-I.Q. subjects who 
would otherwise be without hope. 
1 78 

CRISIS 
The test-ages at which highly reliable predictions 
could be made have become steadily lower. In !2000, 
the reliable age was nine; in !WIS, the reliable age was 
four; in 2020 it was three. This was as severe a blow to 
many teachers as the earlier discoveries had been to the 
adult educators. The real justification for a common 
education in primary schools for everyone up to eleven 
was that no one could be quite sure of the ultimate value 
of any young boy or girl. It was only fair that they 
should not be segregated until their I.Q.s were finally 
known. But when ability could once be tested and 
identified at the age of three, there was really no point 
at all in the brighter children going to the same co­
intellectual school as others who would almost in­
evitably retard their development. It was much more 
sensible to segregate outstanding children from the ruck 
in separate kindergartens and primary schools, just in 
the same way as at the top the outstanding young 
people sent to Oxford and Cambridge were divided off 
from the others who could not rank any higher than the 
provincial universities. The late developers could re­
main with the hoi polloi until their time came, or be sent 
to experimental schools where the processes of nature 
would be hurried forward. 
Faced with these facts, some teachers reacted in the 
same way as the adult educators and said, granted that 
the R.A. is three, it is still necessary to pretend that it is 
not. Children cannot be condemned so early: they will 
cease to strive when they know that no effort will prove 
the psychologist wrong, except within a small margin of 
error. They must be given the stimulus of hope; so must 
the teachers, and so also, above all, must their parents. 
Any sociologist must admit the strength of the argu­
ment. Equality of opportunity has for so long been the 
179 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
ethos of education that it will not do to abandon it 
overnight. So important is social cohesion that we shall 
have to make haste slowly. 
But science does not move slowly. Three was not the 
limit. The R.A. was in effect pushed back into the 
womb. Dr Charles, the Nobel Prizewinner who has 
taught us so much about the mode of transmission of 
intellectual ability, has recently shown that the intelli­
gence of children could at last be safely predicted from 
the intelligence of their forbears. His early and remark­
able experiments on progeny testing were with rats. His 
X-hypothesis was later confirmed by the wide-scale
census tests of all three-year-old babies in 2016. In
Britain, at any rate, Eugenics House already has records
for four generations, from the 1950s onwards, as well as
a large number of retrospective estimates compiled as
the result of the most painstaking research, particularly
since the study of obituaries became a recognized
branch of sociology. By using these records, and making
all necessary allowances, the ability of the offspring of
any couple can be forecast with remarkable accuracy;
and indeed, on various assumptions about marriage
habits, and inward and outward migration, intelligence
trends and distributions have actually been calculated
for the next 1 ,ooo years.
4• NEW CONSERVATISM 
Dr Charles's work has undoubtedly helped to alter the 
attitudes of intelligent parents. They no longer need to 
send their children to an ordinary primary school, and 
if the State will not provide special ones, they are already 
in a few districts establishing private schools, where 
their children will mix only with their own special class. 
180 

CRISIS 
They no longer need to look questioningly into their 
cots, not knowing what kind of education the occupants 
will eventually deserve. Their children are, in their eyes, 
not just children but rulers born to a high destiny. All 
this has led to hardening of class sentiment. Once the 
need for common treatment of all children up to a 
minimum age was questioned, once the foundations of 
society were shaken in this way, some intelligent parents 
were stimulated to go further and ask whether equality 
of opportunity is not a wholly outdated idea. 
If the argument ended there, we defenders of the 
existing social order would not rest too uneasy. The 
flaw in the reasoning thus far is obvious, and all but the 
most bigoted and family-loving of the Conservatives, 
who have not even read Charles, heard of Galton, or 
paid attention to the most elementary genetics, are 
aware of it. The flaw is that intelligent people tend, on 
the whole, to have less intelligent children than them­
selves; the tendency is for there to be a continuous 
regression 1 towards the mean - stupid people bearing 
slightly more clever children as surely as clever people 
have slightly less. If it were not so, a ruling elite, once 
established, would rightly be hereditary. As it is, this 
brute fact makes some degree of social mobility essen­
tial, even though it need not be as great as a century ago. 
As I say, most of the Conservative leaders are fully 
1. The phenomenon of regression was well understood even in 
my special period of history, that just as children of tall parents 
tended to be tall, though not so tall as their parents, so with in­
telligence. As Professor Eysenck said, 'The average I.Q. of mem­
bers of the higher professional and administrative classes is in the 
neighbourhood of 1 50; that of their children is slightly in excess of 
1 20. The lower professional and technical executive groups have 
I.Q.s in the neighbourhood of 1 30; their children tend to be in the 
1 15 region on the average.' TM Uses and Abuses of Psychology, 1953. 
181 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
apprised of the tendency towards regression and have 
tried to take account of it in their schemes. Their pro­
posals differ, in emphasis if not in kind. The most ex­
treme right-wing asks, what does it matter? A few stupid 
children of clever parents may receive higher educa­
tion - and most of them will not be all that less intelli­
gent than their parents; but the polish given them in 
their homes will fit them to succeed to the elite, which 
they will man with no disgrace, if not adorn. Any loss of 
effectiveness in the meritocracy will be more than out­
weighed by the benefits of making it hereditary. Parents 
will be easier in their minds and their children will not 
have to go through all the psychological stresses of 
having to prove themselves in competition with chil­
dren from the lower classes. Nor will ambitions have to 
be aroused in the minds of all parents, however stupid, 
lest their children escape the attentions of education; 
and if their ardours can be left cool, the body politic 
will gain in stability. A further wave of social mobility 
may be necessary later on, they say, if the distribution 
of intelligence gets too much out of line with the dis­
tribution of power; but let it wait; give us a half-century 
of peace from the pandemonium of social mobility. 
Such professions have no chance of acceptance, they 
represent too sharp a break with our ethos. A more 
subtle school urges that the distribution of intelligence 
should be adjusted to the existing distribution of power; 
although the approach is the opposite of what the edu­
cational system aims at doing, the goal is the same. 
Some encouragement has been given to this group by 
the experiments carried out by Academician Donikin 
at Ulan-Bator, which cap a long sequence in many 
other countries, including our own. If the reports are to 
be believed, the biophysicists there have shown how, 
1 82 

CRISIS 
in the lower animals at any rate, controlled mutations 
in the genetic constitutions of the unborn can be in­
duced by means of radiation so as to raise the level of 
intelligence above that which would otherwise be 
yielded. Were anything really practical to come of this, 
the crucial question would be, whose children are to 
have their intelligence artificially raised in this man­
ner? The Conservative leaders claim that those who 
already have should have more, as the surrounding 
environment which the parents could provide would 
then be as favourable as possible to the nurturing of 
capacity; and that it would be absurd to tinker with 
ordinary have-nots since they already have quite as 
much ability as they need for their allotted functions. 
Obviously the decision must rest with the meritocracy, 
not the democracy who have no means of weighing the 
gravity of the issue. I recognize that any increase in 
knowledge must be welcomed for its own sake, but all 
the same I am bound to say that, speaking from the 
standpoint of sociology, the application of such know­
ledge, rather than its acquisition, cannot proceed too 
slowly. The rumours that have circulated about the 
tampering with the wives of leading civil servants at the 
Volunteer Maternity Centre on South Uist have already 
caused much alarm. 
Meanwhile, it has been proposed that the Ministry 
of Education should at once make its Adoption of Chil­
dren scheme mandatory upon all local authorities. 
Adoption of children is as old as man. Always, in all 
societies, would-be parents, unfortunate enough to have 
had no children themselves, or not as many as they 
would have liked, have sought out the kind of infants 
most approved - bonny-looking and chubby, fair with 
blue eyes, dark with grey eyes, boys or girls, small or 
183 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
big. The difference between us and other people in 
other times and other places is that we value intelligence 
more, and that the psychologists and biologists have 
given us the means of estimation even in the cradle. A 
genius without parents automatically becomes a ward 
of state. An intelligent orphan is now a prize for any 
family, especially for wives who are not prepared to 
seduce leading professors or seek artificial insemination 
from the few highly intelligent men attested by the 
Ministry as I.Q.-donors. The normal demand upon the 
Adoption Societies has been multiplied in recent years 
by members of the elite who wish to fill their quiver. 
The supply is grossly deficient; hence the disturbing 
growth in the black-market baby traffic, stupid babies 
from elite homes being sent, sometimes with princely 
dowries, 1 in exchange for clever ones from the lower 
classes. Desperate parents have even descended to baby­
snatching after keeping a watch on pregnant mothers 
of the lower classes whose intelligence genealogies are 
promising. Private detectives and geneticists have 
worked together in a scandalous compact. Better, plead 
the culprits, to adopt the elite into their future class 
when they are tiny than to do it much later and in 
a much more cumbersome way through the 'foster 
parents' of grammar school and university. After a very 
full government inquiry the Welfare of Children Act 
was passed in 2030. It provided that private adoptions 
should henceforth be void unless the local authority in 
the area where the adopting parents lived had intro-
r. In Rook v. Partner (4 QB, 2028) it was alleged that Mr and
Mrs Rook had promised £150,000 in exchange for an I.Q. of 140, 
and a sum of £50,000 to the doctor who arranged the deal. Mr 
Justice Finch's animadversions in his summing up led to the setting 
up of the Salmon Committee on the Adoption of Children. 
184 

CRISIS 
duced the model scheme, and conformed to the safe­
guards, laid down by the Ministry of Education. The 
Cheltenham, Bournemouth, Harrogate, and Bognar 
Education Committees immediately took advantage of 
this permissive Act, but their lead has so far been fol­
lowed by very few other L.E.A.s. The demand of many 
Conservatives is that all local authorities should now be 
obliged to comply, and it is this, on top of everything 
else, which precipitated the crisis of last May. 
5. A RANK AND FILE AT LAST 
The sociologist, with his trained insight, can perhaps 
understand even more clearly than others why these 
events, and the discussions surrounding them, have 
caused such a profound revulsion. Any hint, let alone 
the assertion in influential quarters, that the hereditary 
principle should be restored, after the struggles of two 
centuries to destroy it, is tantamount to an attack on the 
core and centre of our value system, and one all the 
more disquieting because events have moved so swiftly. 
Even the upholders of the lower classes, the Owenites, 
the Chartists, and the Socialists, were not as shocking 
as this to their social superiors two centuries ago. Those 
rebels could at least profess their affinity with the 
Christian religion. These other rebels, of the right as 
they are, cannot claim any such respectable descent: 
the doctrine of equal opportunity has won a complete 
ascendancy in the realm of practical ethics. The Con­
servatives want two luxuries at once - the luxury of 
inheritance and the luxury of efficiency. But they can­
not have them both. They have to choose, and they have 
chosen wrongly. Could we tolerate men as Directors of 
Eugenics House, of the Centre at South Uist, even as 
185 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
Prime Ministers, although that admittedly does not 
matter so much, who eajoyed power merely because 
they had clever fathers? Could we tolerate the clever 
sons of stupid fathers wasting their lives in some dingy 
Union office in Manchester? We could not. The sanc­
tion for such folly would be sharp. China and Africa 
would draw ahead in productivity. British and Euro­
pean influence would fade as our science became 
clumbered up by the second-rate. We should once again 
be 'over-matched in the competition of the world'. 
Does one need to say more? So obvious is it, that the 
Populists can now parade as protectors of what is best 
in our established society. A phantasmagoria indeed! 
Public opinion surveys have shown that the distur­
bances have been fired more by a sentiment of opposi­
tion to the Conservatives than by a sentiment of loyalty 
to the Populists. Whatever the combination of motives, 
there is no doubt about what happened. Every little 
dispute, which would ordinarily have been quietly 
smoothed out in the course of conciliation, has instead 
been charged with a bitterness without parallel in 
modern times. The events at Stevenage, Kirkcaldy, and 
South Shields, the action of the domestic servants, the 
deputations sent to the Ministry of Education and the 
T.U.C. - all overflowed their nominal purpose in a 
very flood of rebellion. A thousand petty grievances 
became one. 
Many of those who demonstrated were, of course, 
quite inarticulate about their aims, being reduced to in­
coherent murmuring when asked, in Court, to express 
themselves. They looked for upper-class leadership, and 
found it in the only one bizarre quarter where it existed. 
The women's circles, and their leaders, Urania O'Con­
nor, Lady Avocet, and the Countess of Perth, did not 
186 

CRISIS 
create the movement, the movement created them, and 
if the study of social history had not (until the last few 
years) been so neglected, it would have been obvious 
to all that such is the custom of politics. The women 
merely had to seize their historic opportunity, which 
they have done to the best of their considerable ability. 
They sailed when the wind blew. Bonds have been 
formed between the women's circles and dissident tech­
nicians of very different levels of intelligence, indeed 
with the dissidents from every walk of life whom I 
have described in previous chapters. Long moribund 
branches of the Technicians Party have been suddenly 
visited with hundreds of applicants for membership. The 
commotion came to a head in the Leicester Convention, 
where the Populists issued their now celebrated charter. 
What a strange document this is! With its echoes 
from the past in the quotations from the now long­
forgotten Tawney and Cole, William Morris and John 
Ball, the authors dress out their claim to be the ' heirs' 
( this word was surely a mistake?) of one of the great 
streams in British history. But they dare not vouchsafe 
more than a few trite words about domestic service lest 
their intelligent ladies desert them. They dare not 
espouse equality too openly, lest their upper-class sup­
porters take fright, though they came perilously close to 
it in the section of the peroration which starts 'Oh, 
sisters'. When stripped of its decoration the charter con­
tains few concrete demands apart from the banning of 
adoptions; the preservation of primary schools and adult 
education centres; more allowance for age and experi­
ence in industrial promotion; giving the technicians a 
share in increasing productivity; and, most revolution­
ary and perhaps most meaningful, even a trifle nostal­
gic, to a historian, the raising of the school-leaving age 
187 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
to eighteen, and the creation of 'common secondary 
schools for all'. On their face-value these demands do 
not constitute a political programme of more than the 
crudest sort, but the authors could not go further to 
concentrate the loyalties of their very diverse follow­
ers without antagonizing some of those upon whose sup­
port they lean. 
6. FROM HE RE, WHERE?
It was not my purpose in this essay to predict the course 
of events next May, but rather to show that the move­
ment of protest had deep roots in our history. If my 
view be accepted, opposition even to the greatest insti­
tutions of modern society is inevitable. The hostility 
now manifest has long been latent. For more than half 
a century, the lower classes have been harbouring 
resentments which they could not make articulate, 
until the present day. 
If I have succeeded in adding at all to understanding 
of this complex story and persuaded any of my fellows 
not to take present discontents too lightly, my purpose 
has been well achieved. But I am mindful that I may 
be expected to say a word about what is likely to hap­
pen. It can, of course, be no more than a personal 
opinion on which any reader of these pages is as well­
tutored as myself. Nevertheless, I hold firmly to the 
belief that May 2034 will be at best an 1848, on the 
English model at that. There will be stir enough. The 
universities may shake. There will be other disturb­
ances later on as long as the Populists survive. But on 
this occasion anything more serious than a few days' 
strike and a week's disturbance, which it will be well 
within the capacity of the police (with their new 
weapons) to quell, I do not for one moment envisage. 
188 

CRISIS 
The reason I have already referred to. The charter is 
too vague. The demands are, with one exception, not 
in any way a fundamental challenge to the government. 
This is no revolutionary movement but a caucus of dis­
parate groups held together only by a few charismatic 
personalities and an atmosphere of crisis. There is no 
tradition of political organization on which to draw. 
There are, indeed, already signs of dissension within the 
camp, as the result of the wise concessions which have 
been made. Since I began to write this essay a fortnight 
ago, the Chairman of the Social Science Research 
Council has proffered his weighty recommendations to 
the government. The Prime Minister quickly acted on 
these counsels of moderation, instructed Weather Con­
trol to bring on autumn a month early and announced, 
in his speech on 25 September at Kirkcaldy itself, that 
his party was going to expel half a dozen of its right­
wing members, that the adoption scheme would not be 
made mandatory for the present, that equality of oppor­
tunity would be maintained as official policy, and that 
there was no intention at present of tampering with the 
primary schools or with adult education. His speech has, 
as The Times put it, 'stolen the girls' thunder '. 
Behind the shift and turn of current politics is the 
underlying fact with which I opened my essay. The last 
century has witnessed a far-reaching redistribution of 
ability between the classes in society, and the conse­
quence is that the lower classes no longer have the 
power to make revolt effective. For a short moment they 
may prosper through an alliance with the odd and 
passing disillusion of a section of the upper classes. But 
such diclassi people can never be more than an eccen­
tric minority - the Populists have never been more than 
that as a serious political force - because the elite is 
189 

THE RISE OF THE MERITOCRACY 
treated with all the wise distinction that any heart can 
desire. Without intelligence in their heads, the lower 
classes are never more menacing than a rabble, even if 
they are sometimes sullen, sometimes mercurial, not 
yet completely predictable. If the hopes of some earlier 
dissidents had been realized and the brilliant children 
from the lower classes remained there, to teach, to 
inspire, and to organize the masses, then I should have 
had a different story to tell. The few who now propose 
such a radical step are a hundred years too late. This 
is the prediction I shall expect to verify when I stand 
next May listening to the speeches from the great 
rostrum at Peterloo. 1 
I . Since the author of this essay was himself killed at Peterloo, the 
publishers regret they were not able to submit to him the proofs of 
his manuscript, for the corrections he might have wished to make 
before publication. The text, even this last section, has been left 
exactly as he wrote it. The failings of sociology are as illuminating 
as its successes. 


