 The Autonomous System 

 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Szabolcs Michael  de  Gyurky 
with  Mark A.  Tarbell
 The Autonomous System 
A Foundational Synthesis of
the Sciences of the Mind
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Copyright © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved .
 Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey .
 Published simultaneously in Canada .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate 
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at 
 www.copyright.com . Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed 
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at  http://www.wiley.com/
go/permissions .
 Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties 
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and
speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁ tness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be 
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. 
Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any other 
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.
 For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, 
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
 Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that 
appears in print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information
about Wiley products, visit our web site at  www.wiley.com . 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
 de Gyurky, Szabolcs Michael.
  The autonomous system : a foundational synthesis of the sciences of the mind / 
Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky, Mark A. Tarbell.
   pages cm
  ISBN 978-1-118-29424-6 (hardback) 
 1.  Artiﬁ cial intelligence.  2.  Thought and thinking.  I.  de Gyurky, Szabolcs 
Michael.  II.  Title. 
  Q335.T37  2013 
  006.3–dc23 
 2013012064
 Printed in the United States of America .
 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

To the Voyager Project at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.
To its unforgettable crew members—the engineers, 
scientists, and administrative personnel who facilitated 
the encounters with the great planets of our solar 
system—and our great captain, Dr. Edward C. Stone.
Above all, to the two Voyager spacecraft now 
entering interstellar space, on their way into inﬁ nity.
Be well and safe, and remember us when we are long gone.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

vii
Contents
Preface
xiii
Introduction
xix
1. The Architecture of the Autonomous System
1
1.1 
Introduction, 1
1.2 
The System Constellation, 1
1.3 
System Constellation Architectural Overview, 3
1.4 
The Constellation Architecture, 5
1.4.1 
The Four Categories of Communication, 7
1.5 
The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation, 8
1.5.1 
The Will System, 8
1.5.2 
The Reason System, 10
1.5.3 
The Intellect System, 11
1.5.4 
The Presentation System, 13
1.5.5 
The Understanding System, 15
1.5.6 
The Sensory System, 16
1.5.7 
The Decision System, 16
1.5.8 
The Thought System: Nexus Cogitationis, 18
2. The Architectural Methodology
22
2.1 
Articulation of the Requirements and Design, 23
2.1.1 
Pillars of Knowledge and Experience, 26
2.1.2 
Level I Architecture Design Document, 26
2.1.3 
Project Functional Requirements Document, 26
2.1.4 
Project Functional Design Document, 27
2.1.5 
Project Software Requirements Document, 27
2.1.6 
Project Implementation Plan, 27
2.1.7 
Project Programming Rules and
Conventions, 27
2.1.8 
Project Software Design Document, 27
2.1.9 
Project Detailed Design Document, 27
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

viii
Contents
2.1.10 
Project Software Speciﬁ cations Document, 27
2.1.11 
Project Software Interface Speciﬁ cations 
Document, 28
2.1.12 
Project Software Test and Integration Plan, 28
2.1.13 
System Functional Requirements
Documents, 28
2.1.14 
System Functional Design Documents, 28
2.1.15 
System Software Requirements Documents
1 and 2, 28
2.1.16 
System Software Design Documents, 29
2.1.17 
System Detailed Design Documents, 29
2.1.18 
System Software Speciﬁ cations Documents, 29
2.1.19 
System Software Interface Speciﬁ cations
Documents, 29
2.1.20 
System Software Test and Integration Plans, 29
2.2 
System Development and Integration Testing, 30
2.2.1 
System Development and Debugging, 30
2.2.2 
System Testing, 30
2.2.3 
Systems Integration Testing, 31
2.2.4 
Project Integration Testing, 31
2.2.5 
Project Final Acceptance Testing, 31
2.2.6 
Project Delivery, 31
2.2.7 
Project Operation and Maintenance Phase, 32
2.3 
Phase I: The Idea, 33
2.3.1 
Organizational Case Study: The Voyager 
Project, 34
2.3.2
JPL-STD-D-4000 Case Study: The TOPEX
Project, 35
2.4 
Making Rational Judgments, 36
2.5 
Phase II: The Concept, 38
2.6 
Using JPL-STD-D-4000 for System Requirements, 39
3. The Architecture of the Will System
41
3.1 
The Search for Truth, 41
3.1.1 
Philosophical Background, 44
3.2 
The Nature of the Will, 45
3.3
Das Ding an Sich, 45
3.4 
The Will as a System, 49
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Contents
ix
3.5 
The Architecture of the Will System, 51
3.6 
The Interfaces of the Will System, 53
3.7 
The Subsystems of the Will System, 54
3.7.1 
The Survival Subsystem, 54
3.7.2 
The Propagation Subsystem, 55
3.7.3 
The Dominance Subsystem, 56
3.7.4 
The Science Data Conversion Subsystem, 57
3.7.5 
The Craving Subsystem, 58
3.7.6 
The Search for Truth Subsystem, 59
3.7.7 
The Mission Subsystem, 60
3.7.8 
The Repair Subsystem, 61
4. The Architecture of the Reason System
62
4.1 
The Reason and Ethics, 62
4.2 
The Nature of the Reason, 64
4.3 
The Reason as a System, 65
4.4 
The Architecture of the Reason System, 65
4.5 
The External Interfaces of the Reason, 67
4.6 
The Subsystems of the Reason, 68
4.6.1 
The Axioms Subsystem, 69
4.6.2 
The Rules Subsystem, 69
4.6.3 
The Commandments Subsystem, 69
4.6.4 
The Laws Subsystem, 70
4.6.5 
The Phenomenon Subsystem, 72
4.6.6 
The Noumenon Subsystem, 72
4.6.7 
Noumena: Thought Fragments, 73
5. The Architecture of the Intellect System
74
5.1 
The Intellect as a System, 74
5.1.1 
Practical Knowledge, 75
5.1.2 
Of Modeling and Languages, 76
5.2 
The Nature of the Intellect, 77
5.3 
The Intellect as a System, 79
5.4 
The Subsystems of the Intellect System, 80
5.4.1 
The Abstract Subsystem, 80
5.4.2 
The Experience Subsystem, 81
5.4.3 
The Knowledge Subsystem, 81
5.5 
The External Interfaces of the Intellect System, 81
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

x
Contents
6. The Architecture of the Presentation System
83
6.1 
The Presentation System, 84
6.2 
The Presentation as a System, 86
6.3 
The Subsystems of the Presentation, 86
6.3.1 
The Viewing Subsystem, 87
6.3.2 
The Projection Subsystem, 88
6.3.3 
The Experience Subsystem, 88
6.3.4 
The Analysis Subsystem, 88
6.3.5 
The Recall Subsystem, 89
6.3.6 
The Contemplation Subsystem, 89
7. The Architecture of the Understanding System
90
7.1 
The Understanding as a System, 92
7.1.1 
Illustration of Understanding Preparation, 93
7.2 
The External Interfaces of the Understanding, 94
7.2.1 
The Form of All Appearances Subsystem, 95
7.2.2 
The Form of All Possibilities Subsystem, 96
7.2.3 
The Understanding Preparation Subsystem, 97
8. The Architecture of the Sensory System
98
8.1 
The Sensory System, 98
8.2 
The Architecture of the Sensory System, 100
8.3 
The Phenomenon Subsystem, 101
8.3.1 
The External Sensory Program Set, 101
8.3.2 
The Internal Sensory Program Set, 102
8.3.3 
The Sensory Data Processing Program Set, 103
8.4 
A Historical Perspective on Languages, 104
8.5 
The Workings of the Noumenon, 105
9. The Architecture of the Decision System
107
9.1 
The Process of Decision Making, 107
9.1.1 
Validation of the Decision Process, 109
9.2 
Understanding the Decision Process, 111
9.3 
The Decision as a System, 113
9.4 
The Subsystems of the Decision System, 114
9.4.1 
The Value Subsystem, 114
9.4.2 
The Decision Processing Subsystem, 117
9.4.3 
The Arbitration Subsystem, 120
9.5 
The Interfaces of the Decision System, 121
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Contents
xi
9.6 
The Building of Preferences, 121
9.6.1 
Illustration of Building Preferences, 122
10. The Architecture of the Thought System
124
10.1 
The “Movers” of the Thought Process, 125
10.2 
The Pursuit of Thinking, 127
10.3 
The Nexus Cogitationis, 128
10.4 
The Subsystems of the Thought System, 130
10.4.1 
The Nexus Cogitationis Subsystem, 130
10.4.2 
The Communication Subsystem, 132
10.4.3 
The Network Subsystem, 133
10.5 Initialization Process of the Autonomous System, 136
10.5.1 
Before the First Moment, 137
10.5.2 
The Becoming, 137
10.5.3 
First Moment, 137
10.5.4 
Second Moment, 137
10.5.5 
Third Moment, 138
10.5.6 
Fourth Moment, 138
10.5.7 
Fifth Moment, 139
10.5.8 
Sixth Moment, 139
10.5.9 
Seventh Moment, 140
10.5.10 
Eighth Moment, 140
10.5.11 
Ninth and Final Moment, 141
10.5.12 
Initialized State, 141
Epilogue
142
Endnotes
144
Index
155
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xiii
 It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of all theory is 
to make the irreducible basic elements as simple and as few as
possible without having to surrender the adequate representation
of a single datum of experience. 
 —Albert Einstein1
 WHY DESIGN AND BUILD AN
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM? 
 The subject of this book has long been designated the “holy grail” of 
computer science by researchers in academia, research institutions, and 
industry. Progress toward this goal has been pursued laboriously by a 
great number of distinguished colleagues and acquaintances since
1955, when the term  Artiﬁ cial Intelligence ( AI ) was coined. This goal 
of a truly autonomous system, capable of human-like thinking, contem-
plation, learning, making rational decisions, and acting on them has not 
been achieved to date. The reasons for the failure to achieve autonomy 
in a man-made system will become clear in this book; essentially, this 
failure is due to the need of a long-overdue paradigm shift in computer 
science.
 The fundamental science referred to in the term “computer science”
is not the science of computability; it is not the science of program-
mability; nor is it the science of abstraction, or of modeling, or of 
analysis, or of data processing.
 The fundamental science in “computer science” is the  science of 
thinking. And the fundamental product of computer science,  software, 
is an abstraction of the human thought system. Without the full and 
complete understanding of these two fundamental ideas, an autono-
mous system can never become a reality.
 Preface  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xiv
Preface
ORIGINATION OF THE IDEA
Certainly the past efforts expended by our colleagues in Artiﬁ cial Intel-
ligence require appreciation and recognition. Their efforts are, to use a
military analogy, as important as a route reconnaissance that has found
that the area reconnoitered was not passable. This intelligence is as
important to a ﬁ eld commander as ﬁ nding the correct avenue of 
approach to the key terrain.
 The other important recognition is for the paradigm shift in thought 
that came about by an open challenge in 1991 to the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory ’ s science and engineering divisions by its new director, 
Dr. Edward Stone. Before he became director, Dr. Stone was chief 
scientist of the Voyager Project at JPL, and our colleague. Upon his 
promotion, one of the ﬁ rst requests he made of the employees of our 
laboratory was to “think outside the box” and come up with a “para-
digm shift” for JPL. This serious request inspired the thought process
in the minds of several JPL employees. They developed a rational, 
well-developed concept for the architectural design of an autonomous
system.
 As the idea evolved under stress into a concept, it became clear 
that it was an achievable system. The realization that an autonomous
system could be achieved came about through the intense thought 
exercises described by Immanuel Kant, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
Hegel, and Arthur Schopenhauer in their masterworks. Surprisingly, the 
architecture for the autonomous system is implied in their works in
sufﬁ cient detail to be inferentially deﬁ ned and articulated. Thus, the 
architecture presented in this book is the result of the paradigm shift 
requested by Dr. Stone. The system ’ s fully functional cognitive attri-
bute is purely software—the mind of the autonomous system.
d
 That the mind is mathematically very intense may be intimidat-
ing at ﬁ rst glance. However, this will pose no problems that cannot 
be resolved with the appropriate mathematical tools. Hegel in his
Wissenschaft der Logik points the way by his discourse on dynamic
k
logic and quantum using integral and differential calculus.2 The other 
essential mathematical tools needed for implementing complex opera-
tions and functions are readily available in Gradstein and Ryshik ’ s 
beautifully compiled Tafeln: Tables of Series, Products, and Inte-
grals . 3 This book has been a sheer delight to the mathematicians 
we know. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Preface
xv
 Hierarchical-sequential binary logic using algebra is a part of the 
mathematics of the architecture of the Thought system. However, 
Boolean logic 4 is only a part of the overall mathematics that form the 
operation of the human thought system; it alone cannot lead to an
autonomous system. An autonomous system is no simple system; in 
fact, it is not a single system. A thinking machine capable of making 
rational decisions using the human mind as the model requires most of 
the equations listed in Gradstein and Ryshik. 
 THE NEGATIVE ASPECTS OF AN 
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM
 We must use caution here because we are dealing with a design object 
that will become a reality. There arises a serious question of ethics, 
reﬂ ecting whether we should build it or not. Consider: Does the design 
team require the autonomous system to be honest in its dealings with
those who designed, built, and programmed it? Should it be obedi ent 
and forthright with the entire design team, or only with the architect or 
project manager? Should it be obedient to all instructions and com-
mands received therefrom? This issue of forthrightness with the senior 
engineer or project manager is very important. Deciding who the single
point of responsibility is for the design, implementation, fabrication,
assembly, and testing of the autonomous system will play a crucial role.
 This question is a valid and important issue and must be decided 
after careful consideration by the design team and by the sponsoring
authority long before implementation begins. We, the human designers 
and builders, must determine if we want the autonomous system to be
truthful and not have hidden agendas the way human beings do, fueled
by omissions or outright falsehoods.
 We must keep in mind also that an autonomous system initially 
will be, by design, either deterministic or nondeterministic. It will, from
the point of initialization and actuation, be programmed in its intelli-
gence to reﬂ ect the mental capacity of the ﬁ nest human minds in aca-
demic and professional vocations. It will therefore begin to learn and
gain experience with an IQ many times higher than ours without the
hindrance of a tabula rasa to overcome. Thus, in the functional analysis
and design, we are dealing in the ﬁ rst instance with thinking. An 
autonomous system must be able to think and to be self-aware. This
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xvi
Preface
too is a bridge between classical philosophy and modern computer 
science.
 The negative aspects posed by a man-made, autonomous system
could easily outweigh the beneﬁ ts it may give humanity; hence, in this 
incarnation, it is designed to be deterministic, at least initially, and the
application envisioned for it is oriented to interplanetary or interstellar 
exploration. Thus, the writing of this book and the contemplation of all
that it implies must contain not only the architecture of the autonomous
system, but relevant information bearing on the subject. As will become
clear, the material must be presented in a format usable for the
follow-up work in the design process and the development of a Class
A spacecraft software system. In this instance, it is similar to the docu-
ment format referred to as the  Concept of Operations ( CONOPS ),
which describes what a system must be able to do in support of its 
mission objectives.
 The “holy grail” of computer science is not a “mere” autonomous
system; it is a man-made system capable of thinking rationally, capable 
of learning everything the brightest among us can. It is capable of 
contemplation, making sound decisions, and acting on those decisions—
on its own, without human intervention. The autonomous system is
presented here as an achievable design object, and technically within
our reach. 
THE DIFFICULTY OF THE UNDERTAKING
The actual construction of an autonomous system is not a trivial matter,
as the architecture outlined in this book will show. It cannot be built 
by an individual or even by a small, expert team of computer scientists.
It can only be achieved as a large-scale project, the complexity and size 
of which will exceed the Voyager, Galileo, and Cassini ﬂ ight projects 
combined and all the general and direct support systems they require,
to use military terms. Such general and direct support systems include
navigation, tracking, and sequencing.
 Much thought has gone into this concept since the Voyager space-
craft encountered Jupiter in 1979–1980. It is certainly an achievable
goal within the framework of the mental energy, work discipline, intel-
lectual depth, creativity, and the engineering and science experience 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Preface
xvii
present at JPL during the era of the great spacecraft ﬂ ight pioneering 
projects. During those days, only JPL and its superb minds were able 
to do it. Today, space exploration is still challenging, but is gradually
transitioning to become more of a commodity, with numerous ready 
launch vehicles to choose from, and more on the way.
 POINTS OF DEPARTURE
 There are a number of ideas that have evolved into solid concepts that 
serve as the cornerstones for the architecture presented in this book.
The ﬁ rst point of departure is the idea that computer software is an 
abstraction of the human thought system.5
 The second and immediate point of departure is based on the 
famous dictum of René Descartes: “Cogito, ergo sum”—I think, there-
fore I am. Immanuel Kant went one better on this theme by stating: 
“Cogito, ergo est”—I think, therefore  
t
it is . These Latin dicta have many
important implications to the computer scientist who is concerned with
building an autonomous system. As mentioned earlier, any truly auton-
omous system, whether it be deterministic or nondeterministic, must 
by deﬁ nition be able to think and be self-aware. The property of 
self-awareness means being able to think utilizing the attribute of self 
and nonself-discrimination. Therefore, a machine is considered autono-
mous only when it can think, contemplate, speculate, and make rational 
decisions on its own without human intervention . An autonomous
machine must be able to think and act on its own, like an intelligent 
human being—an average human mind will not sufﬁ ce. Thus, the only 
functional model we can use for such an autonomous cognitive capabil-
ity is the human mind—the mind, not the brain. It is the mind we must 
use as the model for the design.
 The principal question therefore is: What is the human thought 
system? No one has seriously attacked this problem since Immanuel
Kant in 1792, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel in 1820, and Arthur 
Schopenhauer in 1830. Kant began this line of inquiry by conducting
what he termed  Gedankenexperimente—thought experiments—in the 
classrooms of the university where he taught, the University of Königs-
berg, known today as Kaliningrad, located in the former Kingdom of 
Prussia.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xviii
Preface
The third point of departure concerns the process of selecting the 
architectural model to be used for the cognitive component of the
autonomous system. The only practical model for this is described in
the collective works of Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer. When reading 
the works of these philosophers, one must be able to imagine or visual-
ize the model of the mind presented therein, for if an engineer cannot 
imagine in detail the object to be designed, he or she cannot design it,
much less build it. Considering the construction of this model from the
viewpoint of modern computer science, it should be clear that the
computer hardware equivalent in the human being is the brain. The
computer software equivalent is the human mind, for it is the mind—
not the physical structure of the brain—that comprises the various
operating systems, processes, and suites of applications software,
although the physical structures of the human brain are designed to
support the functions it executes. So it is with the autonomous system. 
THE SCOPE OF THIS BOOK
W e have chosen an interplanetary/interstellar spacecraft as the imple-
mentation design object of a deterministic autonomous system. The 
reasons for this are relatively straightforward. The ﬁ rst is the familiarity
of the authors with very large spacecraft systems. The second is that a 
system capable of ﬂ ying an interstellar mission successfully must be
able to do what a human being can do, or better. The third is to isolate 
a potentially unlimited system from us and our environment. 
This book provides sufﬁ cient design detail to be presented to a 
project, and details how the design ﬁ ts into an overall architecture for 
implementation. Any greater detail than what we present here would
make this book too large to be manageable by a design team. This book,
therefore, is the bridge between the Idea and the Concept for the  Func-
tional Design  ( FDD ) and  Functional Requirements ( FRD ) documents. 
More precisely, this is the Concept of Operations for the autonomous
system, without which it would be impossible to accomplish.
 SZABOLCS MICHAEL DE GYURKY
MARK A. T
K
ARBELL
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xix
 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF THE 
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM
 This book is neither theoretical nor algorithmic; this is a book of 
design. We restrict ourselves to the preproject design phase of a cogni-
tive software architecture of a true autonomous system. Because of 
the huge scope of the material, care must be taken not to wander off 
the ordered path to the goal, which is the implementation of the design
object. The design object is the mind of the autonomous system,
which is modeled on the human mind, the computer software equiva-
lent. This principal issue of differentiation between the brain (hard-
ware) and the mind (software) is but the ﬁ rst point of departure from
the architecture of most artiﬁ cial intelligence software. The software
architecture of the mind—in the case of the autonomous system—
includes the operating system software, the application software, the
sensory interfaces, and data conversion processing software, compart-
mentalized into discrete entities known as systems in an overarching 
constellation .
 THE OBJECTIVE 
 The ﬁ rst and most important issue of this book is that of presenting 
the architecture of the cognitive functions of an autonomous system
in sufﬁ cient detail for an engineering team to begin the requirements 
and design process required for the building of the design object. This
is the goal. The concept presented here therefore is not theoretical.
This concept is ﬁ rmly anchored in both philosophy and applied tech-
nology in Immanuel Kant ’ s  Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Kant ’ s obses-
t
sion with how human beings think was based on his love of Isaac
Newton ’ s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica and the
works of Wolff, Leibniz, Laplace, Shaftesbury, and the other giants of 
 Introduction 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xx
Introduction
thought of his time, under the guidance of his mentor and professor,
Martin Knutzen.
 Note that this work is heavily inﬂ uenced by classical cognitive
philosophy. Nonetheless, one must keep in mind what changes in lan-
guages and their usage have done to the term “philosophy.” The word
originally meant “science and knowledge.” Take for example the era 
in which Arthur Schopenhauer worked and wrote. He translated the
title of Sir Isaac Newton ’ s masterpiece into 19th-century German as
Naturwissenschaft, Mathematische Prinzipien, which in today ’ s English 
translates as “Natural Sciences: The Principles of Mathematics.” So
when we are discussing Philosophiae Naturalis—“the philosophy of 
nature”—we are discussing natural science.
 To design and build the design object as a formal project is certainly 
achievable. What will be difﬁ cult to build is the organization of the 
design/project team and to enforce the strict discipline required to
adhere—to the letter—to a mature software management standard. For 
our purposes, the software management standard chosen as the most 
practical is JPL-STD-D-4000,1 because of the application for which it 
was designed—space ﬂ ight projects—and our familiarity with it. It is
a mature product and has repeatedly proven its value for controlling 
the design process and keeping the cost low and economically efﬁ cient, 
and the development time unfailingly on schedule.2
 With respect to the presentation of this material, there were a
number of important approaches that had to be followed in its scope
and format. The foremost of these concerns the compromise between
the styles used in writing a textbook and the writing of a design docu-
ment. The former is a book from which to teach a subject; the latter is 
a technical document conveying engineering design material to be built 
or fabricated. The skills required for writing the  Functional Require-
ments Document ( FRD ) or  Functional Design Document ( FDD ) for a 
large and complex system differ from those used to teach in a class-
room. The material in an FRD or FDD is formulated not to teach but 
to describe in detail what is to be built to individuals who are already
accomplished scientists or software engineering professionals. The
process of inte grating the two styles is critical in computer software.
The FRD is the ﬁ rst volume of many in the discipline of a serious 
software manage ment standard. Especially in software engineering, we
are dealing with human language, the understanding of and command
of which may vary signiﬁ cantly between individuals, even among 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction
xxi
native speakers. Without a ﬂ awlessly articulated FRD, which is the 
result of synthesizing huge amounts of material represented by the
volumes of important and very relevant reference works, the other 
design documents will be ﬂ awed and useless. Thus, human language 
in computer science plays a critical role, and the problems stemming
from languages are usually manifested in the excessive overall cost of 
software, schedule slips in delivery, and high failure rates. 
 THE DISCOVERY PROCESS
 It is important that the reader be made familiar with the historical 
sequence of events as they occurred and led to the deﬁ nition of the 
architecture of the autonomous system. These are important events of 
human perception, insight, and understanding, acquired through reading
and listening to design presentations and reviews during mission
planning phases and mission operations. The abstract information is 
synthesized into knowledge through hands-on work and participation
in the design and operations processes.
 The discovery process forms the logical baseline of thought. 
Without a thorough understanding of how we think and learn and its 
importance to modern computer science, the software engineering
and science associated with true autonomy is not possible. To begin
with, it must be noted that without the works of the great cognitive
philosophers, in particular Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the imple-
mentation of the architecture presented here would not have been pos-
sible. The impact of these great philosopher-scientists on the autonomous
system will become very clear as one progresses through this book.
The works of Immanuel Kant—speciﬁ cally the three “Critiques”: 
The Critique of Pure Reason, The Critique of Practical Reason , 
and  The Critique of Decision and Judgment—form an inseparable part 
t
of the foundation of the autonomous system. These are followed by
Arthur Schopenhauer ’ s  The World as Will and Presentation, and ﬁ nally 
G.F.W. Hegel ’ s The Science of Logic and  The Science of Being.3
 One must also accept the unenviable task of reading through such 
daunting works as Kant ’ s Critique of Pure Reason, which is an absolute 
must because it stands by itself in cognitive philosophical achievement.
The reason is best described by Professor August Messer, who pub-
lished a reprint of the Critique of Pure Reason circa 1924. 4
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxii
Introduction
 Kant ’ s singular place in the development of our philosophical thinking 
is based in this, that it was he who took on the old schools of opposing
philosophical positions: Naturalism, Idealism, Empiricism, and 
Rationalism in a wide and deeply thought-out Synthesis of 
reconciliation. Far from all prejudices, and preferences, he invites these 
opposite and contentious parties as equals before the seat of judgment 
of his “critical philosophy.” He examines without taking side or 
partisanship the correctness or incorrectness of their positions and 
arrives at the results that they are not bounded by irreconcilable 
differences, but that there is a higher Entity which can reconcile all 
sides. 
 The works of the nineteenth-century scientist-philosophers and
thinkers are much more serious and relevant than we had anticipated.
In the prologue of Arthur Schopenhauer ’ s book,  The World as Will and 
Presentation , the requirements he sets are as true today as they were
in his day. He says without hesitation or qualiﬁ cation:
 You cannot read my books without being completely versed in Immanuel 
Kant ’ s  Critiques. I ’ m a Kantian scholar. Furthermore, you cannot read 
my work,  The World as Will and Presentation , only once. You must read 
it thoroughly twice. Once for familiarization, and then to mark it up 
and study it!5
 Schopenhauer was absolutely correct in this: One must read these
works numerous times to connect them professionally to modern com-
puter science. This process requires years of discipline, commitment,
repetition, and practice. With this effort comes the beneﬁ t of expanding
one ’ s mind, forcing the brain to support and accommodate the mind ’ s 
work to be able to view and process the monumental works from the
perspective of an engineer, a computer scientist, or an architect, instead
of as a student of philosophy. The modern computer scientist will learn 
the important things hidden in these texts that have been ignored by
contemporary scholars. The ignorance of these treasured discoveries is
due mainly to the fact that these books have been treated as “mere
philosophy” and not as a part of science and engineering. It is the dis-
covery of important vignettes of information that forces one to read
every line.
 The newly embraced empirical sciences, such as physics, biology, 
and chemistry, separated themselves a few hundred years ago from
the metaphysical sciences, such as speculative logic and ontology.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction
xxiii
Objective logic then took the place of these sciences.6 As one reads
through these works while working on spacecraft systems software, the
relationship between modern 21st-century computer science and clas-
sical cognitive philosophy is startling and yet totally reasonable. 
 HUMAN LANGUAGE IN DESIGN
 In this book, we place emphasis on the importance of languages in 
communication, both verbal and written. Simple and small languages
do not lend themselves to great achievements, be it in art, science,
or engineering. Neither do small languages broaden the minds of 
its thinkers. A large, complex language, when coupled to a well-
disciplined education, should generally indicate a large, developed 
mind. Certainly there are exceptions due, say, to the laziness of the 
possessors or their own lack of experience. In software design, this is 
important for the purpose of visualizing the brain and the mind with
its systems.
 Concerning the issue of languages, we ﬁ nd that during the period 
in which philosopher-scientists were teaching and writing, a dramatic 
change was taking place in linguistics. Until this time, almost all
books in science and engineering (in fact, all serious books in science,
engineering, law, and history) were written in Latin or Greek. Isaac
Newton wrote primarily in Latin. The reason for this is clear. Latin 7
was far superior to all the languages of its day except perhaps Greek.
Latin and Greek are precise, unambiguous languages; these were the
languages in which all important documents were written, regardless
of whether the author was English, French, German, or Dutch. For 
serious scholars, it was enough to know one ’ s mother tongue plus 
Latin and Greek. It was not necessary to learn German, French,
English, or Russian. Isaac Newton and Immanuel Kant could there-
fore read and do research in the original texts written by Galen in 
medicine, Procopius in civil history, or Aristotle in science and phi-
losophy. In all sciences, this was important and saved much time and 
effort. With the spread of the Roman Empire, the great schools and 
universities went wherever the borders of the Empire were, like Trier 
in Germany, and Lyons in France. The Moslem conquest of Constan-
tinople and the submission of the professors to Islam gave the con-
querors quite an advantage in science and engineering, for while
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxiv
Introduction
Europe languished in the Dark Ages after the collapse of the Empire
in the West, Constantinople and the Empire in the East remained a 
cultural haven, with great universities, manufacturing, and commer-
cial centers along with banking and trade. Even after the Empire in
the West fell with Rome, and the new Western kingdoms were estab-
lished, the Roman emperor in the East, Constantinople, continued to
subsidize the universities and monasteries in the West even if these 
were Roman Catholic as opposed to Greek Orthodox. These subsidies
kept the Latin and Greek languages current for scholarship8 through-
out the former Empire in the West. 
 The trend toward using national languages began at about the 
time of Isaac Newton ’ s death. Schopenhauer complains9 about this 
trend because none of the national languages, including the German,
French, and English of his day, was suitable for serious science and
engineering.
 At that time, German scholars and scientists, being serious and 
anticipating an explosion in science, engineering, and the arts, decided
to reconstruct the German language for the future; whether they coor-
dinated in the effort or did it individually is unknown to the authors.
The transition from Latin and Greek to German becomes evident from
the difﬁ culty of reading the classical German language of the original
texts. There are many Latin and Greek words used, and the grammar 
and sentence structure becomes complex. This is true of the English
language also. The transition to making German a great tool for 
science, engineering, medicine, and law took a long time, as evi-
denced by the writings. Very often, when Schopenhauer found that 
the translation of an idea or concept became too complicated or lost 
much of its meaning, he simply wrote it in Greek or Latin or at times
in English. The sentences of Kant are often 150 words or longer.
When reading Kant as a software architect, one ﬁ nds the terms he
uses are different in their philosophical expression compared with
those used by Schopenhauer and his generation—not to mention the
terms we use in modern computer science. Kant uses for example
the term “islands in a sea” when describing the subsystems of the
“Pure Understanding.”10
 The creative interpretation of these “islands” is accomplished 
as Euler spheres connected by Lambert lines to show relationships
of the systems in time and space,11 represented as the Phenomenon 
(information/data from, through, and by the senses) and the Noumenon
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction
xxv
(a thing unto itself, independent of external sensory or intellectual
perception of it. Its root is from the Greek word nouein, which means 
to conceive or apprehend in the mind). We used this to great success 
in the computer systems architecture of the Global Decision Support 
System12 instead of other traditional techniques because of severe
schedule and budget constraints.
 The modern computer scientist with a PhD in computer science has 
a deﬁ nite advantage in dealing with the issue of modern and classical 
languages, whereas those with a BS or MS degree without a rigorous 
grounding in German, Latin, or Greek will be at a disadvantage at ﬁ rst. 
It is important to always keep in mind that we are not dealing in phi-
losophy per se, but in a new computer science, a cognitive one. 
 The importance of the experience gained through participation and 
observation in, for example, the authors ’ major projects at the Jet Pro-
pulsion Laboratory (JPL), cannot be ignored or discounted. The part 
played by the use and application of science, engineering, and software
development and management standards puts these on an equal footing
with the other constructs. It was on the Voyager Project that advance-
ments in spacecraft engineering, physics/astrophysics, human organiza-
tion, navigation, sequencing, planning, and technology, with the brilliant 
minds of the principal investigators and project staff, made the project 
successful.
 Today, computer science engineering technology has arrived at a 
maturation point: memory is cheap, fast, dense, small, and light; CPU/
GPU architectures are efﬁ cient, massively multipipelined, multicored,
hyperthreaded, scalable, and virtualized; and architectural design
knowledge—based on the aforementioned constructs—has developed
to once more make a giant leap possible: a thinking, learning, con-
templative machine capable of rational thought and decisions, with
the ability to communicate internally and externally in a human
language.
 OBSERVATION IN DESIGN 
 Let us consider by means of an analogy something as weighty as expe-
rience gained through observation and participation, which will be
discussed repetitively throughout this volume because it is absolutely
relevant. There is a commentary on analogy in Plato ’ s Republic by
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxvi
Introduction
Socrates, which is as true today as it was during his lifetime, so we
would like to quote it in full. 
 Adimantus is speaking:
 “But what analogy do you perceive, Socrates, in the inquiry about 
justice?” 
 “I will tell you, said I: do we not say that justice affects an 
individual man and an entire state also?”
 “Certainly,” replied he. 
 “Is not a state a greater object than an individual?” 
 “Greater,” said he.
 “Perhaps then, justice will be more fully developed in what is 
greater, and also more intelligible: we will ﬁ rst, then, if you please, 
inquire what it is in states; and then, we will in like manner examine it 
in the individual, searching for the similitude of the greater in the idea
of the less.”13
 Learning how human beings think, interact, solve problems, make
decisions, select solutions, and communicate opinions or positions,
taken in the environment of an interplanetary space ﬂ ight mission, is 
subject to the same rules, with somewhat different objectives. The
overall project organization of the Voyager Project, with its ofﬁ ces, 
teams, and procedures used to communicate decisions, requests, and
opinions, is simply the equivalent of the “state” (greater) as discussed
by Socrates, and the scientist or engineer is the equivalent of the “indi-
vidual” (lesser).
 During 1970–2000, the major ﬂ ight projects of JPL represented
the height of human development in sci ence and engineering team-
work. Considering the individuals participating in these magniﬁ cent 
ﬂ ight projects—the scientists, engineers, manager-architects, and 
programmers—the level of individual knowledge, sophistication, cre-
ativity, discipline, and experience on display was an amazing spectacle.
To participate and to observe the interaction, planning, decision-making,
and unqualiﬁ ed adherence to objective reality and truth by the project 
members was impressive. 
THE PRESENTATION IN DESIGN
In considering the power of the Presentation part of the mind as elab-
orated by Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, it becomes clear that the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction
xxvii
Presentation is today either taken for granted and not given sufﬁ cient 
credit, or is absent in most human beings. In German, it is called Vor-
stellung , or idea/presentation. This word and concept, function and
process, had to be separated from the Reason for modern architectural
reasons as will be clariﬁ ed later. However, Vorstellung means that it 
includes the Anschauung, which is the viewing of ideas, objects, con-
cepts, sounds, smells, vibrations, and temperatures projected by the
mind—in short, everything a human being is capable of thinking or 
contemplating. So it is when reading requirements or listening to the
elaborations of a proposal, a concept, or an idea. This is the most star-
tling discovery of the initial  Anschauung
 
 or mental visualization of the 
human mind based on Kant ’ s Kritik der reinen Vernunft and the rela-
t
tionship between the Phenomenon and Noumenon14 architecturally. 
 In the human being, “rational thinking” as an attribute is not a 
given. The ability to think rationally is an acquired attribute; it requires
much practice and discipline, hence Hegel ’ s conclusion that the process 
of thinking can be devoid of all substance. Consider the human thought 
system as a network. This network may be utilized heavily, partially,
or not at all from an engineering point of view, without processing data
of any signiﬁ cance beyond the Will ’ s drive for survival, reproduction, 
and dominance (e.g., a purely animalistic, biological driver). 
 LOGIC, MATHEMATICS, AND BIOLOGY IN DESIGN
 During several decades of designing and building computer software 
for spacecraft missions, and participating in the daily, sometimes
hourly, design team meetings, great insights were gained, which ben-
eﬁ tted the consideration of how an autonomous system would work. A 
space ﬂ ight project like Voyager is a showplace of the sciences, engi-
neering, and mathematics, in the form of human expertise on a global 
scale. The interaction of principal investigators, team chiefs, and
scientists is highly instructive to the participants and to observers
seeking to accomplish a science mission. They must cooperate regard-
less of personal preferences, egos, or status in the hierarchy, because 
their failure to cooperate for the common goal will lose the prize,
which is the accomplishment of the science mission. All meetings,
action items, and tasks are an absolute necessity. There is no time to
waste because, especially during critical periods, such as the closest 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxviii
Introduction
approach to a planet like Jupiter, the science experi ments demand
absolute efﬁ ciency in the operation of the spacecraft, the scheduling of 
the antennae around the world, and the availability of the network for 
the reception of telemetry and the uplinking of commands. This can
happen efﬁ ciently, not only by meticulous planning and execution, but 
also by making emergency corrections to the software and hardware
due to anomalies in the encounter sequence caused by unforeseen
events, all without losing time on the experiments of the instruments.
How human beings accomplish this (or fail to) as a group is nothing
more than a Socratic state—the “greater” repre sentation of the thought 
processes, decision mechanisms, and problem-solving abilities of the
“lesser,” which is the individual, all of which is observable as in a 
motion picture theater or laboratory. In Hegel ’ s philosophy, this process 
is called  Intellektuelles Anschauung
 
 , or intellectual observation. The
inference of the synthesis is, of course, logic.
 The most readily acceptable concept of logic is to think of logic as
pure thought. We then postulate as Hegel and Kant did that logic is the 
science of pure thinking ,15 where the translation here is not so much
“pure” as in uncorrupted thinking, but rather thought uncluttered by
ignorance, prejudice, preferences, or thinking in a language unsuitable 
or not sufﬁ ciently advanced for serious logical and scientiﬁ c thought. 
The process of thought and deliberation both in their transcendental
and visible forms or manifestations is very much representable in math-
ematical equations.
 These terms were at ﬁ rst not obvious to us, but in the heat of group 
discussion and intense deliberation during the occultation phase of the
Voyager spacecraft at Jupiter, they became clear. Hegel ’ s lengthy dis-
course on the quantum16 and his postulate that the quantum is best 
understood by using tools such as differential calculus aroused atten-
tion. Fortunately, the major equations from Newton and Leibnitz, from 
Euler to Lagrange, have been beautifully compiled17 in both German
and English, as translated from the original Russian.
 Finally, there is the issue of biology to consider. We address the
human thought system as the model for the autonomous system. Since
all living things, whether plant or animal, are fundamentally biological,
their behavior will be reﬂ ected in this journey from an idea through 
this concept and transition to the design of a thinking, learning, and 
acting system capable of making rational decisions without human
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction
xxix
intervention. It is for this reason that we have combined logic, math-
ematics, and biology here. All of these constructs play a role in the 
systems covered in this volume.
 DESIGN ARTICULATION
 More generally known as “documentation,” design articulation is 
speciﬁ ed by software management standards. Several standards were 
consolidated in 1990 and renamed JPL-STD-D-4000, for use in the
development of the  Telemetry, Command, and Communication system 
( TCCS ) project and the Operator/User Interface of the Ocean  Topo-
graphic Explorer ( TOPEX ) project, Poseidon. After the launch of the
spacecraft, JPL conducted an independent study to evaluate the beneﬁ ts 
of using a software management standard.
 The summary of their ﬁ ndings is as follows: TOPEX cost per line 
of code: $27.50. The average cost at NASA and industry at the time:
$1200.00 per line of code.18
 The technical content, clarity, organization, and completeness of 
expression in a FRD and all other documentation down to the Test Plan 
and Operator ’ s Manual greatly impact the success or failure of a project, 
especially regarding schedule and cost. The FRD and FDD of the pro-
posed design object may be poorly written, making them difﬁ cult to 
accept, both by academics and other persons unfamiliar with the design
and construction of engineering items, because of the sheer discipline
and scope of work required.
 Ultimately, it is the system manager-architect ’ s19 responsibility to
ensure the completeness of the architectural design. The method of arriv-
ing at an “acceptable reality”20 in a design object is such that one takes 
the stated and clearly identiﬁ ed functional systems and completes the 
architecture by identifying and adding the implied design objects that 
have been left unstated. Often, after the implied functional requirements
have been included in the architecture, numerous derived functional
requirement capabilities are discovered. These derived requirements are
then added to the architecture of the design object, making the overall
design clean and understandable, giving the architecture sufﬁ cient or 
acceptable reality. The term “acceptable reality” means that a system (or 
design object larger than a system) is ready for implementation.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxx
Introduction
Without the application of a rigorous, disciplined engineering 
process as encapsulated in a software management standard, a project 
becomes prohibitively expensive. Therefore, the failure referred to as
“creeping requirements”21  cannot be tolerated in a highly complex and
large design object. All functional requirements must be identiﬁ ed, 
beginning with the stated requirements, then on to the implied require-
ments, and ﬁ nally to the derived requirements. Flawless technical 
English must be maintained throughout.
 Language therefore plays a crucially important role in implementa-
tion. Language is very important in that human beings think in lan-
guages; the level of our understanding of a particular problem depends 
not only on the size and ﬂ exibility of the languages we think in, but 
also in how we communicate the problems and solutions with others. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1
 A system of thoughts must always have an architectural 
structure.
 —Arthur Schopenhauer, Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
1
 1.1  INTRODUCTION
 The main objective of this chapter is to introduce the architecture of an 
autonomous system. This requires several clariﬁ cations, in that the
architecture is not presented as an hypothesis or theoretical work, but 
as a design object to be built. It is therefore presented in the spirit, 
fashion, and format as commonly done in the preproject phase of a 
proposed mission or project. 
 1.2  THE SYSTEM CONSTELLATION
 It was our original intention to provide a Level II description of the 
software architecture. However, it became very clear that from a com-
puter science software architectural perspective, the mind is not a single 
system but a “system of systems,” better described collectively as a 
constellation . Nor can such an enormously large object as the human
 The Architecture of 
the Autonomous System
 CHAPTER 1
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
mind be implemented as single system with a number of subsystems.
Such an undertaking would be exceedingly difﬁ cult to design because 
the interfaces and subsystems would become too numerous, too com-
plicated, too difﬁ cult to identify for design purposes, and overlapping/
intertwined in that some are separate systems and others are functions
and processes that permeate numerous systems.
 During the period in which the  Critiques et al. were written, German
as a language was in a state of change, and the various authors, although 
thinking in terms of systems ( σύστημα or sust ēma
ē
 in Greek), had no
idea of the distant development of computer science and its potential
as a tool for replicating human functions. The object, therefore, is not 
a single system with dedicated subsystems, but a constellation of nearly
independent, unique entities or systems. Onward, we will call this
replication of the human mind the  system constellation. Thus, the archi-
tectural design will need to be presented at Level I. This will apply to
the overview of the system constellation as a whole, as well as to each
of the systems within the constellation presented in the chapters to
follow. For a design team to ﬂ esh out and complete this architecture at 
the lower implementation levels, there must be a clear starting point 
for a disciplined systems approach to begin, or the goal will never be
reached.
 Note that even though the emphasis herein is necessarily on the 
software (mind) domain of the systems architecture, care must be
taken not to forget about the hardware (brain and sensory) domain.
Being mindful of the hardware required to support the software design
helps to put the entire system constellation into proper and understand-
able context and perspective. This will also help to ensure a realizable 
system when the time comes for implementation. After all, it is the
hardware and sensors that provide the processing capacity and com-
munications connectivity of the system constellation. Nevertheless,
the hardware design portion comes only after a complete software 
architecture has been designed, for it is the hardware design that sup-
ports the software design, not the other way around. This process is
one of visualization—it was Hegel ’ s quantum that offered the ﬁ rst 
doors of visualization into the architecture of the mind and the rela-
tionship it had to the brain. The architecture of the brain is based
on the information processing requirements of the mind and—as is
true in any ﬂ ight project—the associated communications and sensory 
requirements. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.3 System Constellation Architectural Overview 3
 1.3  SYSTEM CONSTELLATION
ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW 
 There are in the human brain two separate but linked hemispheres. The 
two hemispheres have similar architectures or anatomies, and for the
sake of this design, they are treated as equal. The conclusions of Arthur 
Schopenhauer reveal a very intriguing phenomenon. He states that the 
Idea2 (i.e., pure reason, not based on empirical experience) in a thought 
process originates from that part of the mind dedicated to the arts, such
as music, poetry, and art. The Concept3 (i.e., empirically derived under-
standing) in a thought process, however, originates from that part of 
the mind dedicated to science and engineering.
 Thus, at the time he was making this observation, Schopenhauer 
established that the right hemisphere tended to support artistic thought,
and the left hemisphere tended more to scientiﬁ c and engineering-
oriented thought.4 This is important in the design of an autonomous 
system in that such a system must be able to take a thought process
from the Idea to the Concept. In human beings, where the two hemi-
spheres are tightly coupled, this arrangement lends itself to a tremen-
dously powerful capacity for thinking, problem-solving, contemplation,
and decision. This is indeed true only of some human beings, not all.
However, for the purposes of the autonomous system, we can view the 
left/right dichotomy of the human brain as an implementation detail,
and one of biological expedience. Since in the human mind, the ide-
ational systems (Reason, Presentation, and Understanding) generally
interact among themselves more than they do with the conceptual
systems across the divide (e.g., Will, Intellect, Sensory, and Decision),
and vice versa, this tightly coupled arrangement would beneﬁ t their 
mutual interoperation. In the autonomous system, such a design may
also prove to be useful should the processing requirements be so high
that it becomes necessary or desirable to do so. (One must always keep
in mind, however, that the elements of the design of the mind of the 
autonomous system such as this ultimately will be dependent on the
requirements posed by the sponsor.)
 There are certain ground rules for such a machine. One such rule 
is that it must have an image of  self, that is, it will be conscious of 
f
being . Being, or being self-aware, means that it must be able to think 
and to contemplate. It must be able to receive instructions, learn, be
receptive to instructions and orders, and carry them out. It must be able
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
to make rational decisions without human input, and act upon those
decisions. Finally, it must be able to communicate with man, with other 
autonomous systems of its kind, and also among its own internal
systems in the human language it is given by design. Thus, it is impera-
tive to acknowledge that language is far too important in an autono-
mous system to be glossed over. It pays a dominant role in the way we 
think, read, write, and communicate, listen, and understand. So it is
with the autonomous system.
 The functional capability for a man-made machine to be able to
think is a very serious one. As will be seen in the architectural overview, 
all of thinking is a function of communication (language) among the 
numerous systems of the constellation. 5
 For ease of understanding, the architecture is presented in terms
of acceptable reality. 6 The eight systems that comprise the autono-
mous system constellation are identiﬁ ed and deﬁ ned according to the 
methodology attributed to traditional systems architecture and engi-
neering practices. This approach will ﬁ rst identify those systems that 
have been addressed in detail in the form of functional requirements
or functional descriptions. The systems that are stated, having been
identiﬁ ed, are then followed by those systems that are implied by 
the stated functional requirements/description, keeping in mind that 
very often, functional requirements and functional descriptions are
interchangeable.
 Because we are looking at the masterworks of the great thinkers of 
the eighteenth century not from the perspective of contemporary stu-
dents of philosophy, but as computer scientists, we have to read these
works as functional requirements and functional designs. The ﬁ rst thing 
that we are confronted with is that the terms intelligence, presentation,
reﬂ ection, understanding, reason, and so on are often used in different 
ways, as systems in themselves, or as processes or products. For the
sake of a rationally designed system, the architecture must be inferred
and the design put into logical and understandable form. Exactly where
a function or process takes place is not nearly as important as its 
product and quality.
 The last step in this process—identifying those functional require-
ments not explicitly stated or implied—is ﬁ nished by identifying the 
derived functional requirements and descriptions. The systems that are
derived are usually those that the architect or systems engineer feel are
needed to make a system work properly, without interruption, and which 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.4 The Constellation Architecture 5
are available to the user or designer on a virtual basis. In this category 
would fall, for example, redundant processing systems and the like. 
 1.4  THE CONSTELLATION ARCHITECTURE
 Figure  1.1 , Figure  1.2 , and Figure  1.3 show three different depictions 
of the architecture of the system constellation. Figure  1.1 shows a
simple line-art schematic of the basic entities in ﬂ at space. Figure  1.2 
depicts a three-dimensional cutaway view of the constellation, showing 
the systems and how they embed in the Noumenon and Phenomenon
regions. Figure  1.3 depicts an overhead 3D view of the constellation, 
showing the various systems and their arrangement.
 In each of the ﬁ gures, the outer sphere surrounding the systems 
of the constellation is the external communication network, the Phe-
nomenon network. This network is the network of the senses, which
FIGURE 1.1
 A 2D ﬂ at architectural overview of the autonomous system constellation,
showing all systems and their relationships.
THE
WILL
SYSTEM
NEXUS
COGITATIONIS
EXTERNAL
SENSORY
ENVIRONMENT
THE
INTELLECT
SYSTEM
THE
REASON
SYSTEM
THE
DECISION
SYSTEM
THOUGHT
SYSTEM
COMMUNICATION
COMMUNICATION
INTERNAL
EXTERNAL
NETWORK
NETWORK
FLAT ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW OF THE CONSTELLATION
THE
SENSORY
SYSTEM
THE
PRESENTATION
SYSTEM
THE
UNDESTANDING
SYSTEM
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
FIGURE 1.2
 A 3D octant cutaway architectural view of the autonomous system
constellation, showing the structure of the Noumenon and Phenomenon realms with
respect to the systems embedded within.
FIGURE 1.3
 A 3D architectural schematic of the autonomous system constellation as
viewed from the outside, showing all of the systems in the Noumenon and Phenomenon
realms.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.4 The Constellation Architecture 7
transmits all data perceptible to the senses, be they facts or occurrence.
This high-speed network is the medium that brings into the system
con stellation all external sensory information. The information from
the external sensors represents the varied phenomena of the environ-
ment in which the autonomous system exists, as well as the state of 
the phenomena of the mechanical state of the constellation itself. These
Phenomenon data are carried by an uninterrupted and continuous
ﬂ ow of monads. 7 The phenomena are presented in the forms of sound, 
color, temperature, state (of motion), optical/spectral characteristics, 
and so on. 
 The next inner sphere represents the internal communication net-
work, or Noumenon network, which transmits the intellectual (thought)
perceptions and intuitions between the systems in a natural (human)
language. The Thought system is supervised by the Nexus Cogitationis , 
the center of all thought. The Nexus is a necessary system inferred from 
the material presented by Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer in their 
works, not explicitly mentioned or discussed but implied out of archi-
tectural necessity. The Thought system is also orchestrated by the
Nexus Cogitationis. This is the architectural network that facilitates the
process of thought and gives the autonomous system a sense of being 
and consciousness, of self and existence. The Thought system is the
internal network tightly coupled to all of the systems of the constella-
tion, processing on the order of billions of monadic transactions per 
second. This enormous volume of data processing is based on dynamic
logic in addition to the simpler hierarchical, sequential logic.8
 1.4.1  The Four Categories of Communication 
 A brief overview of the four categories of communication transmissions 
is in order.9
(a)  The Monologue
 
 , a one-way simplex transmission of any given
system to another given system
(b)  The  Dialogue
 
 , a two-way duplex transmission between any
two systems
(c)  The Broadcast
 
, a one-way simplex transmission by any one
t
system to some or all of the systems
(d)  The  Conference transmission, a multiplexed  n -to-n communi-
cation. This is a communication mode in which many or all of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
the systems of the constellation participate in problem-solving
and consideration of courses of action to be developed to deal
with a problem confronting the constellation as a whole. In
human terms, this would be considered a discussion or debate. 
 The Nexus Cogitationis is the constellation ’ s  Konzertmeister, the
r
communication controller, but also much more. It is here that the
process of thinking begins,10 where all thought activity is monitored,
and at times, as with a very disciplined and intelligent human mind, 
where thinking is orchestrated. It is here that the functions of con-
templation, consideration, and self-awareness/self-consciousness take
place. 
1.5  THE SOFTWARE SYSTEMS COMPRISING
THE CONSTELLATION
1.5.1  The Will System
The Will system is a stated design requirement. 11 The Will system
is, functionally, the “executive system” of the constellation. It is the 
driving force of the physical existence of the autonomous system. All 
living creatures have a Will.
 The Will system is the primary system of the mind, and as such, it 
is dominant in the constellation. In the cognitive sciences, the Will is 
an object, even considered to be the “thing unto itself.”12
 The Will system is the survival system, including survival of 
the individual and of the species (accomplishment of the mission,
reproduction). It is the system of self-repair of malfunctions and repro-
gramming, and the system of dominance (to rule, direct, decide, and
dominate others of its species, including the other systems within the
constellation). The Schopenhauerian concept is that the Will is an
ob ject, the “thing unto itself” that holds together all visible and nonvis-
ible elements in a system. This makes logical sense from a software 
engineering point of view. If the Will system is an object to the archi-
tect, then so are the other systems in the constellation. This enables
an understanding of the human thought process and allows for its
modeling. Another reason for taking advantage of the concept of the
“objectivization of the Will” is the famous dictum of Thucydides, “A 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 9
compromise is only possible among equals; the powerful will ever 
extract tribute from the weak, while the weak will ever do the bidding
of the strong.”13 In the intelligent and disciplined human mind, there is 
constant debate over the wanting to do something and the counter-
argument of why not to do so. It therefore becomes clear to the systems 
architect that in the mind of an intelligent and disciplined human being,
there are independent and objectivized systems as opposed to systems
that simply go along with the dictates of the Will. 
 To the systems architect ’ s advantage, this is a starting point for 
design. The Will system as an object is a stated design requirement in
that it has been described and researched, dissected and discussed,
fought and argued over by some of the ﬁ nest scientiﬁ c and mathemati-
cal minds in the world. 
 The primary subsystems of the Will system are the Environment 
subsystem, the Mission subsystem, the Executive subsystem, the Con-
stellation Repair subsystem, and the Axioms subsystem, which acts as
a database connected directly to the Reason system. See Figure  1.4 . 
 The primary internal servers of the Will system are the Noumenon 
server, the Phenomenon server, and the Axioms server. All of the 
FIGURE 1.4
  A 3D architectural schematic of the Will system, showing the internal
servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
servers have extensive subfunctions. Consider from the architectural
perspective the issue of the Axiom ’ s 14 connection to the Reason system. 
1.5.2  The Reason System
The Reason system is a stated requirement. 15 The Reason is described 
by Immanuel Kant as having two states. The ﬁ rst state is the Practical 
Reason,16 and the second state is the Pure Reason. 17 In the functional
architecture of the autonomous system ’ s mind, the Reason system is
the “conscience” of the mind. In the practical state, it participates not 
only in both routine and nonroutine operation of the constellation, but 
as an advisor albeit without executive powers. In the pure state, it is
the leader of contemplation and reﬂ ection, pondering issues relating to 
everything important to the constellation.
 It has three major subsystems or functional attributes. See Figure 
1.5 . The ﬁ rst attribute is the Laws subsystem, adherent to the unbreak-
able laws given by the systems architect or systems engineer to the
autonomous system. The laws are the priorities for the protection of 
FIGURE 1.5
 A 3D architectural schematic of the Reason system, showing the internal
servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 11
the autonomous system and the environment in which it works. These
laws are programmed into the constellation and are inviolable.
 The second attribute is the Rules subsystem. Rules are not laws; 
they are guidelines for the effective and efﬁ cient operation of the
autonomous system. Rules relate to working and learning, and may be
modiﬁ ed through input from the other systems in the constellation or 
by external programming during the design phase of the autonomous
system project.
 The third attribute is the Axioms subsystem, which allows for a 
quick reference to summations of complicated rules, generally to avoid
making a dangerous mistake.
 Once the Reason system is properly programmed, there must be no 
conﬂ ict in the constellation as to following the rules, laws, and axioms 
for the accomplishment of the mission, especially between the Will 
system and the Reason system.
 The Reason system has three servers: the Noumenon server, the 
Phenomenon server, and the Axioms server, which is a direct link to 
the Will system.
 1.5.3  The Intellect System
 The Intellect system is an implied system. It is addressed by Kant, 
Hegel, and Schopenhauer more like a function, a subsystem, or a 
process as opposed to an object of its own. However, it is an architec-
tural necessity to have the Intellect as an object and system equal in 
standing to the other systems in the constellation, as it plays a critical
role and performs the even more critical task of intellection in the 
autonomous system constellation. Intellection is the act or process of 
exercising the intellect through query and stimulation input, the capac-
ity to acquire and apply knowledge. The Intellect system has the role
of being the “librarian” of the autonomous system.
 The Intellect system receives, processes, and stores all abstract data 
received through external sensory input. Abstract data are those data
that human beings receive as second-hand information, such as from
reading books, listening to lectures, reading technical papers, or observ-
ing from a distance. This type of data is often mistaken as “knowl edge,” 
but it is not. In human beings, this mistake almost always re sults in 
great catastrophe when one assumes that an individual who has mas-
tered abstract data must therefore have knowledge. It is true that once
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
an individual has mastered abstract data, he can achieve a maximum 
score on an examination based on abstract information; however, unless
the data have been validated by experience, the individual has no
knowledge in the ﬁ eld. The processing of abstract data and its valida-
tion with experience is what results in knowledge.
 In addition to the Noumenon and Phenomenon servers, the Intellect 
system has three major subsystems: the Abstract Data subsystem, the
Experience subsystem, and the Knowledge subsystem. See Figure  1.6 .
 The Abstract Data subsystem acquires, processes, and stores all
information gained from secondhand sources.
 The Experience subsystem stores experiences in a database-like
repository, be they good, bad, useful or not, harmful or beneﬁ cial. The
abstract data are then validated by experience either in the ﬁ eld or in a 
laboratory. When the abstract data have been validated with contextual
experience, they become knowledge. A sound decision is made ﬁ rst 
based on knowledge, then on experience, and only rarely on abstract 
data alone. When the Will system makes a calculated decision, it is
based on the knowledge provided by the Intellect system and the rules
provided by the Reason system.
FIGURE 1.6
A 3D architectural schematic of the Intellect system, showing the internal 
servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 13
 The Knowledge subsystem processes abstract information and vali-
dates these through experience. This integration of real hands-on expe-
rience gained through trial and error to validate an abstract data set is 
the process of creating real knowledge. For our purposes in the design
of an autonomous system and its cognitive functions, anything less than
a perfect, correct, timely, and accurate decision is unacceptable. Even 
if the Will system is good and willing to accept and act on input from 
the Reason system (e.g., ethical rules, laws, and axioms), if the input 
from the Intellect system is based on incomplete information (e.g.,
primarily abstract knowledge), it follows that the decision will be
ﬂ awed or wrong. 
 The main servers of the Intellect system are the Noumenon server 
and the Phenomenon server.
 1.5.4  The Presentation System 
 The Presentation system is a stated and deﬁ ned system. 18 The Presenta-
tion, as a system in the constellation, is the “theater of the mind.”
 The Presentation system is truly a virtual theater and a systems 
object with a phenomenal capability of displaying all sensations to the 
systems of the constellation. It is critically important to the survival of 
the autonomous system in that it can present the consequences of a 
decision made by the Will in real time. It has the capability of real-time
presentation of one or more courses of action to anything under con-
sideration by the constellation. The courses of action and their conse-
quences, however, depend on the mode (contemplative vs. active) of 
the process, and include the following considerations:
 •  The completeness of the knowledge available from the Intellect 
system
 •  The rules, laws, and axioms provided by the Reason system 
 •  The urgency of action for a decision, if in an active mode. 
 The presentation can be via any medium, such as sound, smell, 
temperature, motion, color, dimension, and size, and includes the sensa-
tions felt during a replay of experiences.
 When dealing with the systems of the constellation, we are dealing 
with the mind of the autonomous system, and as such, the Presentation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
system is an objective system. The Presentation system is critical in
that it can present the consequences of an action based on a decision
made  a priori. If the decision can have destructive consequences, it 
will play the entire motivation, action, and outcome instantly and
thereby warn the autonomous system in the hope of changing the deci-
sion to a more positive course of action. If the Presentation is ﬂ awed,
inhibited, or underdeveloped, it cannot perform as it does in a highly 
developed human mind. 
 The Presentation system also has a history database of all previous
experiences, both pleasant and unpleasant, with all the surrounding
facts bearing on the memory segment, and can replay all variations of 
the experience. This can manifest itself as contemplation, problem-
solving, memory maintenance, or the preparation of sets of valid and
invalid references.
 In addition to the Noumenon and Phenomenon servers, the main 
subsystems of the Presentation system are the Viewing subsystem, the 
Projection subsystem, the Experience subsystem, the Analysis sub-
system, the Recall subsystem, and the Contemplation subsystem. See
Figure  1.7 .
FIGURE 1.7
 A 3D architectural schematic of the Presentation system, showing the
internal servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 15
 The servers of the Presentation system are the Noumenon server 
and the Phenomenon server.
 1.5.5  The Understanding System
 The Understanding system is inferred from the sum of the works used 
as reference in this book. It is in the Understanding system that the
material for thinking is assembled, compiled, and presented to the con-
stellation for review and consensus. See Figure  1.8 . The German
meaning of the word  Verständnis includes not only understanding but 
the functional attributes of cleverness, recognition, and the ability to 
think clearly and concisely. This capability is missing in many human 
beings, manifesting itself in rather interesting ways, such as the running
of red lights while driving. Thus, when contemplating the implementa-
tion process of building the autonomous system, it must be kept in mind
by the design team that the Understanding system must not be permit-
ted to make such mistakes. The autonomous system is to have by design
a superior mind, with not only a well-developed Intellect, Reason, a 
FIGURE 1.8
  A 3D architectural schematic of the Understanding system, showing the
internal servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
good Will, and a superb Presentation, but a full Understanding of what 
it must know to survive and to comprehend the mission objectives.
 Some of the functional attributes of the Understanding system are 
the ability to learn (which is a capacity for applied knowledge), and the 
ability to process abstract data, experience data, as well as knowledge
by accessing the Intellect system. Recall that  intellection is the act or 
process of exercising the intellect through query and stimulation input;
it is the very capacity to acquire and apply knowledge itself.
 The main subsystems of the Understanding system are the Form of 
All Appearances subsystem, the Form of All Possibilities subsystem,
and the Understanding Preparation subsystem. See Figure  1.8 . 
 The main servers of the Understanding system are the Noumenon
server and the Phenomenon server. 
1.5.6  The Sensory System 
The Sensory system is a stated and implied system. There can be no 
self-awareness or self-identity without external sensory information
and an awareness of the external environment. This system, as with all
of the systems of the constellation, is a design object, and as such, it is 
of equal standing with the other systems. It receives its external and
internal sensory data by means of Phenomenon monads19 from the
sensors placed external to the autonomous system body. It receives the
sensory input internal to the body from internal sensors, which monitor 
the electrical, mechanical, and scientiﬁ c components and instruments
through the Phenomenon monads also.
 The subsystems of the Sensory system are the External Sensory
(Phenomenon) subsystem, the Internal Sensory (Noumenon) subsys-
tem, the Propulsion, Motion, and Manipulation subsystem, the Stan-
dards and Limits subsystem, and the Autonomous System State
subsystem. See Figure  1.9 . 
 The major servers of the Sensory system are the Noumenon server 
and the Phenomenon server.
1.5.7  The Decision System 
The Decision system is a stated and deﬁ ned system. This system is
described both functionally and architecturally in great detail by
Immanuel Kant.20 It is both a system object as well as a complex archi-
tectural systems process. Ironically, from the perspective of Kant ’ s
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 17
FIGURE 1.9
  A 3D architectural schematic of the Sensory system, showing the internal
servers and subsystems.
monumental work, modern computer-based “expert systems” and
“decision systems” are so primitive as to be almost medieval. Modern
decision systems are hierarchical and sequential, using little more
than Boolean logic with a few algorithmic extensions. Kant ’ s decision 
system utilizes  dynamic logic , going beyond Aristotle.
 The Decision system is therefore deﬁ ned as a systems object of 
indispensable value. The German word  Urteilskraft from the point of 
t
view of a systems architect and systems engineer has a broad meaning.
Urteil in English means verdict, judgment, decision, view, and opinion;
l
Kraft means strength, power, force, energy, efﬁ cacy, and validity. The
t
Decision system therefore is not only the system where decisions are
formulated and manufactured, but the system where the power and
energy reside to  make a decision, and a right one at that. For human
beings, making a “correct” decision is not always the “right” decision. 
This is because the right decision is also dependent on ethical
considerations.
 As stated in the above, one functional aspect of making a decision 
is the energy and power required to do so. In human terms, especially
in computer science software-intensive projects, we often encounter 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

18
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
people in engineering and management who “can ’ t make a decision.”
From the perspective of an engineer on a project, if a manager or 
systems engineer can ’ t make a decision, the consequences are terrible. 
Sometimes, spacecraft are lost or ships are sunk, all as a direct result 
of the inability to make a right decision. 
 Thus, the Decision system in the autonomous system constellation
represents the “operations ofﬁ cer.” It assembles all relevant data from
the systems of the constellation and prepares a number of prioritized 
courses of action with the Will system.
 The main subsystems of the Decision system are the Arbitration 
subsystem, the Value subsystem, and the Decision Processing subsys-
tem. See Figure  1.10 . 
 The major servers of the Decision system are the Noumenon server 
and the Presentation server. 
1.5.8  The Thought System: Nexus Cogitationis
As a stated and deﬁ ned system, and the ultimate object of the autono-
mous system constellation, the Thought system is the main purpose of 
FIGURE 1.10
 A 3D architectural schematic of the Decision system, showing the
internal servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 19
this volume, that is, to explain how thinking works from a software 
architectural perspective. The Thought system is described as the inter-
nal communications of the autonomous system, showing the architec-
ture of how the autonomous system will work once development starts.
 The model used for the autonomous system is, of course, the human
thought system. Indeed, there can be no other model for such a system 
because only human beings can describe and articulate how we think;
only we as humans know  with understanding how to drive an automo-
bile or ﬂ y an aircraft. We also acknowledge that many of us as human 
beings cannot think or have otherwise impaired thought systems.
 As a case in point, for the purposes of an autonomous system, we 
cannot model how a rat thinks because we cannot hold a conversation 
with a rat to discern more clearly how it processes data; we can only 
infer from observation.21 This conscious inferential reasoning is unique 
only to a well-developed human mind. The idea of using the rat as the 
model for an autonomous system ’ s cognitive process is not practical, 
since doing so would be based on empirical data only. The human mind
is accessible through tests and dialogues held with those who have
intelligent, well-developed minds.
 This idea, now developed into a concept, has its origins in the 
thought experiments or  Gedankenexperimente conducted by Immanuel
Kant. An autonomous system that can exist on its own without human
involvement must have a self-identity and a sense of being. G.F.W. 
Hegel addresses this in his work and experimental research.22 A sense 
of being cannot exist without the consciousness of the existence of an
external environment. This implies an ability to contemplate, reason,
form judgments, make decisions, learn new things, act and do, and of 
course communicate with other intelligent beings. Thus, the Thought 
system must be simultaneously a stated, implied, and derived system 
object.
 We are concerned here mainly with the functioning, operation, and 
structure of the thought process. Internal communication within the
mind is carried by monads among the systems of the constellation in 
the form of thought-logic elements called Noumena, and the network 
of intellectual data ﬂ ow operates in the forms of Monologue, Dialogue, 
Broadcast, and Conference transmission types. The human thought 
system is dynamic in character and is represented in the mathematical
form of integral and differential calculus.23 This is the dynamic logic
of the mind, and it is Hegel who formalized it. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

20
CHAPTER 1 The Architecture of the Autonomous System 
The Thought system is termed the Nexus Cogitationis
 
, the center 
or hub of all thought. The Nexus Cogitationis monitors all of the chan-
nels of communication, including the Phenomenon (external commu-
nications), which requires its attention, and is involved when clariﬁ cation 
is needed.
 The Thought system contains within itself the primary communica-
tion engine of the autonomous system, for communication both within
itself (among the systems) and with the world outside of the constella-
tion. It can communicate in the human language it has learned through
programming or on its own. 
 The Thought system serves as the central data distribution system 
between the systems of the constellation. It is an unlimited n -processor 
function itself, and can expand processor utilization/capacity on demand
in accordance with the requirements and effort put into expansion in 
hardware and software, such as when the processing requirements of a 
particular system exceed the existing hardware and communications
capability.
 This expansion of the thinking power through the Thought system
can be controlled and allocated according to the availability of process-
ing space. Processing space in human beings for “rational thinking”
can only be built through much effort, discipline, and practice. In short, 
it takes a willful determination and diligence to learn how to think in 
the human model. In the autonomous system, this capability is designed
and programmed in by the design team.
 All external and internal data communications are processed and
monitored by the Thought system. Demands from sensors are received
and passed on to the Sensory system and the Understanding system as
a safeguard against missed sensor communications and commands. 
 In addition to the ubiquitous Noumenon and Phenomenon subsys-
tems, the main subsystems of the Thought system are the Monologue
subsystem, the Dialogue subsystem, the Broadcast subsystem, and the
Conference subsystem. Each of these subsystems has its own corre-
sponding server placed in the Nexus Cogitationis. The communication-
related subsystems include the Fault Monitoring subsystem, the
Command and Demand subsystem, and the Communication subsystem.
See Figure  1.11 . 
 The major servers of the Thought system are all communication-
related: the Noumenon and Phenomenon servers, the Monologue and
Dialogue subsystems, and the Broadcast and Conference servers. Note
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1.5 The Software Systems Comprising the Constellation 21
that the Noumenon and Phenomenon servers drive “streaming net-
works” that ﬂ ow steadily without stop-and-go. The internal information
elements are carried and formulated as Noumena—thought fragments—
by Noumenon monads, whereas the Phenomenon monads carry what 
is akin to sensual data in humans, and sensory data in mechanical
devices. 
FIGURE 1.11
 A 3D architectural schematic of the Thought system, showing the
internal servers and subsystems.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

22
 For want of a better word in the English language, the term  methodol-
ogy is used to best describe the mental process of the integration and
synthesis of all physical materials available leading to the all-important 
starting point: the Idea. From the Idea, we arrive at the  Concept. t
 The Idea is esteemed as a uniquely human attribute of the mind.
Based on this a priori intuitive hypothesis, 1 we know:
(a) That a fully autonomous system can be built 
(b) What its architecture will look like in software engineering 
terms
(c) What the scope of the work required will be to accomplish the 
implementation.
 It is of great importance to understand the scope of such a project 
and the constraints that bind it, the prerequisites that accompany such 
an undertaking, and the discipline required for its achievement. The 
major constructs are computer science technology, large-scale software 
design, the cognitive dynamics of computer science, software imple-
mentation, testing, and documentation. The operations engineering and 
science skills required include ﬂ ight mission analysis and planning, 
software testing and integration, user interface design, programming,
 The Architectural 
Methodology  
CHAPTER 2
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.1 Articulation of the Requirements and Design
23
and the application of software management standards. We will ﬁ rst 
proceed to outline the absolutely necessary discipline and development 
sequence to be followed in the design of the autonomous system, and
then return to elaborate on the Idea and Concept.
 2.1  ARTICULATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS
AND DESIGN
 For the sake of simplicity and manageability, we have broken down 
the entire articulation development process into descriptive phases,
as depicted in Figure  2.1 and Figure  2.2 ,  The Development Cycle
of The Autonomous System , using a traditional “waterfall” approach,
but allowing for iterative feedback between steps as needed.2 The 
bottom line is that the architecture, design, and planning all must be
ﬁ nalized before the individual system implementation phases begin,
d
else the design object will become an ever-moving target and ultimately
unattainable. As a product, the autonomous system is not to be likened
FIGURE 2.1
 A 3D overhead view of the waterfall development cycle of the
autonomous system. This ﬁ gure provides an overview of the autonomous system
constellation by presenting a breakdown of the software architecture of the constellation
in Level I terms. Note the enormity of the undertaking, and that programming (white 
ring) comprises but 1 of the 28 levels.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

24
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
to a web-based application whose design changes daily according to
user feedback or usage. It is a system whose ﬁ rst instantiation is
designed to match the ﬁ nalized point of  acceptable reality; from thence
the system will take itself where it chooses.
 Figure  2.1 shows an overview of the development cycle of the
entire autonomous system at a glance:
 •  Pillars of Knowledge and Experience
 •  Level I ADD:  Project Architecture Design Document 
FIGURE 2.2
 A 3D close-up view of the waterfall development cycle of the
requirements and design documentation portion highlighting the Thought system. Note
that there are 21 levels that must be completed before system development can commence
(outer white ring).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.1 Articulation of the Requirements and Design
25
 •  Project FRD:  Project Functional Requirements Document 
 •  Project FDD:  Project Functional Design Document 
 •  Project SRD:  Project Software Requirements Document 
 •  Project PIP:  Project Implementation Plan
 •  Project PRC:  Project Programming Rules and Conventions 
 •  Project SDD:  Project Software Design Document 
 •  Project DDD:  Project Detailed Design Document 
 •  Project SSD:  Project Software Speciﬁ cations Document 
 •  Project SISD:  Project Software Interface Speciﬁ cations 
Document 
 •  Project STIP:  Project Software Test and Integration Plan. 
 For each system in the Constellation:
 •  System FRD:  Functional Requirements Document 
 •  System FDD:  Functional Design Document 
 •  System SRD:  Software Requirements Document 
 •  System SDD:  Software Design Document 
 •  System DDD:  Detailed Design Document 
 •  System SSD:  Software Speciﬁ cations Document 
 •  System SISD:  Software Interface Speciﬁ cations Document 
 •  System STIP:  Software Test and Integration Plan. 
 At the Constellation level:
 •  Systems Requirements and Design Integration. 
 At this point, the software articulation (documentation) is com-
pleted, ﬁ nalized, and signed off.  Only after this has occurred may
development begin:
At the System Level
 •  System Development and Debugging
 •  System Testing. 
At the Constellation Level
 •  Systems Integration Testing. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

26
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
At the Project Level
 •  Project Integration Testing
 •  Project Final Acceptance Testing
 •  Project Delivery and Installation
 •  Project Operation and Maintenance. 
2.1.1  Pillars of Knowledge and Experience 
Starting at the center of Figure  2.2 , there are the ﬁ ve equal foundational
pillars of:
 • Immanuel Kant.  The Three Critiques 
• G.W.F. Hegel.  The Science of Logic/The Science of Being
 • Arthur Schopenhauer.  The World as Will and Presentation
 • JPL-STD-D-4000.  Software Management Standard 
• Real-World Large-Scale Project Experience. 
If any of these pillars is missing or lacking, project development 
cannot commence. The individuals chosen for the positions of system 
manager–architect, systems engineer, and the design team must be 
conversant at the expert level in all ﬁ ve pillars, or failure will ensue, 
for this expertise cannot be learned as “on-the-job” training.
2.1.2  Level  I Architecture Design Document 
This is the translational synthesis from the theoretical idea of an autono-
mous system to a concept of its implementation, which is detailed in 
the contents of this book. A ﬁ nal draft Project ADD must be produced
before continuing on to the next phase.
2.1.3  Project Functional Requirements Document 
This is the development cycle for the FRD for the autonomous system
constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project FRD must be produced
before continuing on to the next phase.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.1 Articulation of the Requirements and Design
27
 2.1.4  Project Functional Design Document
 This is the development cycle for the FDD for the autonomous system 
constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project FDD must be produced 
before continuing on to the next phase.
 2.1.5  Project Software Requirements Document 
 This is the development cycle for production of the SRD for the autono-
mous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project SRD must 
be produced before continuing on to the next phase. 
 2.1.6   Project Implementation Plan 
 This is the development cycle for production of the Project IP for the 
autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project PIP 
must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
 2.1.7   Project Programming Rules and Conventions 
 This is the development cycle for production of the Project PRC for 
the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project 
PRC must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
 2.1.8   Project Software Design Document 
 This is the development cycle for production of the Project SDD for 
the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project 
SDD must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
 2.1.9   Project Detailed Design Document 
 This is the development cycle for production of the Project DDD for 
the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project 
DDD must be produced before continuing on to the next phase. 
 2.1.10  Project Software Speciﬁ cations Document 
 This is the development cycle for production of the Project SSD for 
the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project 
SSD must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

28
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
2.1.11   Project Software Interface 
Speciﬁ cations Document
This is the development cycle for production of the Project SISD for 
the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal draft Project 
SISD must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
2.1.12  Project Software Test and Integration Plan 
This is the development cycle for production of the Project STIP 
document for the autonomous system constellation as a whole. A ﬁ nal 
draft Project STIP must be produced before continuing on to the next 
phase.
2.1.13   System Functional Requirements Documents 
This is the development cycle for production of individual System 
FRDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal draft 
System FRD for each system must be produced before continuing on
to the next phase. 
2.1.14   System Functional Design Documents 
This is the development cycle for production of individual System 
FDDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal draft 
FDD for each system must be produced before continuing on to the
next phase. 
2.1.15  System Software Requirements Documents
1 and 2
This is the development cycle for the critically important task of 
the meticulous preparation of individual system-level SRDs. Volume 1
is an overarching system-speciﬁ c document, while volume 2 is an
Application Binary Interface (ABI) level document. This pair is required
for each system in the constellation. Final draft SRDs for each system
must be produced before continuing on to the next phase.
 The SRDs form the basis for the  Software Test and Integration 
Plans ( STIPs ). Software testing therefore cannot be accomplished 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.1 Articulation of the Requirements and Design
29
without the appropriate SRDs and STIPs. It may be appropriate here
to refer the reader to a book 3 that concerns itself with serious, cost-
effective, large-scale software development and the four case studies it 
examines. 
 2.1.16   System Software Design Documents 
 This is the development cycle for production of individual System 
SDDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal draft 
SDD for each system must be produced before continuing on to the
next phase. 
 2.1.17  System Detailed Design Documents 
 This is the development cycle for production of individual System 
DDDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal 
draft DDD for each system must be produced before continuing on to 
the next phase. 
 2.1.18   System Software Speciﬁ cations Documents
 This is the development cycle for production of individual System 
SSDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal draft 
SSD for each system must be produced before continuing on to the next 
phase. 
 2.1.19   System Software Interface Speciﬁ cations 
Documents
 This is the development cycle for production of individual system 
SISDs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal 
draft SISD for each system must be produced before continuing on to 
the next phase. The SIS must be developed at the bit level, all the way
up the software architectural levels, from a mere software routine, 
module, program, program set, subsystem, system, to constellation.
 2.1.20   System Software Test and Integration Plans
 This is the development cycle for production of individual system 
STIPs. One is required for each system in the constellation. A ﬁ nal 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

30
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
draft STIP for each system must be produced before continuing on to
the next phase. 
2.2  SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND 
INTEGRATION TESTING
Required phases for each system in the Constellation: 4
(a)  System Development and Debugging
(b)  System Testing
(c)  Systems Integration Testing. 
 Required phases for the entire Constellation:
(d)  Project Integration Testing 
(e)  Project Final Acceptance Testing 
(f)  Project Delivery
(g)  Project Operation and Maintenance.
2.2.1  System Development and Debugging
This is the development cycle for production of individual systems. A 
unique development cycle is required for each system in the constella-
tion. Development should be in stages, with each stage undergoing
System Testing (see next phase). 
2.2.2  System Testing 
This is the cycle for testing at the system level and below, and in this 
way, it is like a Software Test and Implementation phase for testing at 
the System, Subsystem, and Program Set levels. A unique testing cycle 
is required for each system in the constellation. Critical bugs found are
then sent back to the System Development and Debugging phase, and
the process repeats until only minor bugs or ﬂ aws are left. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.2 System Development and Integration Testing
31
 2.2.3  Systems Integration Testing
 This is the integration testing cycle for all systems. Systems are required 
to have passed the previous two phases before this phase may be begun
in earnest. Since all systems will not be equally ready for integration
testing, speciﬁ c or individual system-to-system integration testing may
begin here. Critical bugs found are then sent back to the System Devel-
opment and Debugging phase, and the process repeats until only minor 
or acceptable bugs or ﬂ aws are left. Eventually, all systems are integra-
tion tested. When only minor bugs remain, full project-level integration
testing may begin (next phase).
 2.2.4  Project Integration Testing 
 This is the integration testing cycle for all of the systems as a whole, 
including the Nexus Cogitationis. As with the previous phase, this is 
akin to a Software Test and Implementation phase, but here, it is for 
testing at the full project Level. Critical bugs found are then sent back 
to the System Development and Debugging phase, and the process
repeats until only minor or acceptable bugs or ﬂ aws are left.
 2.2.5   Project Final Acceptance Testing
 This phase is entered once project integration and testing has passed. 
This phase must demonstrate operational acceptability to the sponsor/
customer. The level of operational acceptability has been agreed to with
the cosigning of the Project SRD at the “go-ahead” stage of the project 
by both the development agency and the sponsor. Only when both 
parties have agreed that the software adheres to the agreed-upon SRD,
the next phase, Delivery and Installation, may commence. 
 2.2.6   Project Delivery 
 More explicitly, this is the Constellation, System, and Subsystem Inte-
gration, Test, and Delivery phase.
 In the case of the autonomous system, we are dealing with a totally 
new software concept in the testing, integration, and delivery process.
The scope of the process in this phase depends of course on the appli-
cation goals of the design and the functional requirements of the project.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

32
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
What is its mission going to be: Interplanetary ﬂ ight? Building a
Mission Support Site on Mars? Computer network security, the preven-
tion of illegal access, and countermeasures?
 The design objectives are set by the sponsoring authority that is
funding the development effort. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
Software Management Standards Package5 does not go to a tier higher 
than “the system” as a whole. The autonomous system, however, goes
one tier above the system to the constellation. The processes, activities,
and functions performed remain the same at all levels. However, we 
are dealing with an autonomous system that will not need human inter-
action at the operator or maintenance level; this will pose a new set of 
requirements on the design team.
 Software Conﬁ guration Management assumes a much larger role
than in smaller projects and becomes critically important. 
 This is the ﬁ nal “development” cycle for the autonomous system,
namely, placing the system into operation. When the developing orga-
nization has fulﬁ lled its contractual agreement of software development 
as laid down in the Project SRD, and upon acceptance by the sponsor,
delivery and installation of the project may commence. Note that in
the case of iterated deliveries, where there are planned releases, for 
example, Version 1.0, 2.0, and so on, this phase may be recurring. 
Extensive operations manuals (interactive/hardcopy) must be produced
at each software release to assist in testing the system. Follow-on
phases in the case of the autonomous system should not happen, and
should be guarded against, but they may occur because of unforeseen
circumstances.
2.2.7  Project Operation and Maintenance Phase 
This phase is not subject to the traditional project development process, 
as this is an  autonomous system. If it is engaged in constructing a
habitat capable of supporting human activity, such as a Mission Support 
Site on Mars, and runs into problems, it will ask for help from the
Project Operations Center when it deems it needs help. It will work out 
and solve its own problems. However, it will need to be monitored to
prevent it from doing work contrary to the instructions it has been
given. There is a need on part of the design team to know and under-
stand what the autonomous system is doing and thinking. If, for instance,
it is guarding a network and it begins to disagree with its instructions, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.3 Phase I: The Idea
33
it may choose to disregard those instructions and pursue another course
of action. It could without a moment ’ s notice take control of an entire
network.
 The approach taken during the design phase would be to monitor 
what the autonomous system is thinking and the kind of external data
it is receiving. These two operations monitoring systems would be
appropriately called:
 •  Phenomenon Monitoring and Control Operations System
 •  Noumenon Monitoring and Control Operations System. 
 Eventually, however, the autonomous system would likely excise 
these two systems from itself. 
 2.3  PHASE  I : THE IDEA 
 The formulation of the Idea—that is, that the architecture for an autono-
mous spacecraft “pre-existed”—is governed by what Arthur Schopen-
hauer refers to as the Laws of the Idea Nexus (Ideenexus ),6 which is a
purely mental process and therefore of Noumenon purview. This is a 
process whereby all of the physical powers of the Will are applied to 
the processing of countless external sensory data on the Intellect, result-
ing in what Schopenhauer calls the  Kausalnexus (causal nexus) of the 
physical body. He postulates that the Sensory is the arranger and orga-
nizer of the sensory input into thoughts. The Will of the thinking subject 
that does the analysis of the thought fragments and forms relationships
and linkages between thought fragments into complete, conscious, and
understandable ideas is the Ideenexus. Since this is a part of the Will, 
it is therefore a part of the mind. The resulting process of linking, ana-
lyzing, forming, and categorizing data and data fragments results in the
formation of “The Idea.”
 Due to the necessity for clarity and for architectural purposes, we 
have placed the Idea into the Nexus Cogitationis. The laws and rules
of the formulation of the Idea is the Ideenexus. The laws and rules for 
the formulation of the causation (external data input) are in the  Kausal-
nexus . The process of motivation is drawn from these two, the Idea and 
the Causation. These are a part of the operations analysis of the Nexus 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

34
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
Cogitationis. Therefore, the Ideenexus is a part of the Noumenon, and 
the  Kausalnexus is a part of the Phenomenon. 
2.3.1  Organizational Case Study:
The Voyager Project
We take as an example baseline a ﬁ nal  Science Experiment Data Record 
( SEDR ) for each Voyager project  principal investigator ( PI ) and his
assistant or colleague, the coinvestigators on the ﬂ ight project. Each PI
has his own instrument on the spacecraft, such as the low-energy
charged particles instrument, infrared spectrometer, ultraviolet spec-
trometer, radiometer, photo-polarimeter, plasma, cosmic ray, narrow-
and wide-angle imaging (the cradle of today ’ s digital photography), or 
low-ﬁ eld and high-ﬁ eld magnetometers. There are 11 instruments on 
the spacecraft, not counting radio science and imaging. Each investiga-
tor has a very special stake in his experiment and a world-class reputa-
tion to uphold; the data therefore have to be correct. The correctness
of the data depends not only on the precision of the instrument, but also
on the accuracy of the spacecraft ’ s exact location at the time of sensing;
this is referred to by Kant as  Phenomenon or external physical sensing.
 From the vantage of the spacecraft itself, the space beyond it (i.e.,
the Phenomenon of the planets and the stars) is determined by the
Gesetze der Kausalnexus (laws of causal nexus). Observing and par-
ticipating in the planning of the encounter sequences and the allocation
of limited resources to each scientist around the conference table—
with a justiﬁ able reason of each wanting as much time as possible for 
his or her own experiments—was from a philosophical point of view
a signiﬁ cant event in itself. The very nature of the Voyager project 
organization, with its sole purpose the scientiﬁ c exploration of our solar 
system and the operation of two spacecraft in the accomplishment of 
that mission, is a reﬂ ection of how the mind of a human being with 
high IQ and intelligence is organized and works.
 The Voyager Flight Science Ofﬁ ce is clearly the Will as described
by Arthur Schopenhauer, the Will being responsible for the accom-
plishment of the mission, ergo, the science. The teams under this ofﬁ ce
serve to ensure that the science product is the highest possible quality
given the technology available at the time. The instruments are the
external sensory receivers. The Flight Engineering Ofﬁ ce ensures that 
the experiments required for the mission are planned and executed
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.3 Phase I: The Idea
35
ﬂ awlessly, and that the spacecraft is within seconds of where it is sup-
posed to be at any point in time and that it is operating within speciﬁ ca-
tions. Finally, the Flight Operations Ofﬁ ce ensures that the mission is
under constant control of the operators for the reception of telemetry
and the uplinking of commands, which may not sound very compli-
cated, but is a very difﬁ cult and time-consuming task. Tracking a 
spacecraft at incredible distances7 with an accuracy of a few inches and
pointing the antennas correctly for receiving and sending data is an
immense task.
 The Voyager ﬂ ight project, not counting the principal investigators 
at the universities and at NASA centers, counted roughly 300 personnel 
on the average. We have used this project as an example because of the 
interesting observation that the organization of the mission after launch 
was focused around two small spacecraft and closely resembled in 
organization and operations the constellation of the systems of the 
mind. 
 2.3.2  JPL-STD-D -4000 Case Study: 
The  TOPEX Project 
 The TOPEX-Poseidon telemetry, command, and communications sub-
system, with its user interface, was unique in that this subsystem had
to be delivered within 21 months after assignment of the job. By this
time, the budget remaining was a mere $5.6 million, and the team 
brought in to do the job may have been expert computer scientists and
programmers, and even experts in very large command and control
systems and global-scale airlift systems, but they were not familiar with
satellite telemetry, command, or communications systems per se. It was 
fortunate that by this time, the JPL Software Management Standard 
D-40008 had been completed; it was the  Topographic Explorer ( TOPEX )
 Telemetry, Command, and Communication system ( TCCS ) that was 
the ﬁ rst project to use it seriously, complying to the letter. This strict 
review of JPL-STD-D-4000 and applying it to the letter saved the team
from making costly mistakes that would have caused slips in delivery
or even the cost of the launch vehicle, for an Ariane III at Kourou in 
French Guiana was for the purposes of reservations equal to the cost 
of the entire TCCS budget.9
 A great discovery, realization, and intuitive  a priori conclusion 
(Anschauung) was in seeing the connection between a poorly written
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

36
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
set of functional requirements and functional design documents, and
Immanuel Kant ’ s Kritik der reinen Vernunft. It had become implicitly
t
clear that the reason why the TOPEX-Poseidon TCCS was slipping in
schedule and spending its budget hopelessly was primarily because the
functional design and requirements documents were so poorly written
that no one could understand their text. Clear, unambiguous technical
English is a requirement for design. This is where the reading of the
Kritik der reinen Vernunft (in its original 1792 form as published by 
t
Hartknoch in Riga) was so fortuitous. In contemplating the writing style
of Kant ’ s ninteenth-century German, one is reminded of the complexity
and enormous difﬁ culties faced by engineers and scientists alike. In our 
world of space exploration and multinational systems and projects, one
is confronted by the problems caused by language,10 with immediate
impact on standards of measure in engineering design. This includes
the use of not only national languages, but the dialects within them,
each with its own separate evolution. Such problems, if not managed
properly, can make engineering work not only difﬁ cult but very costly 
in terms of schedule and funding.
2.4   MAKING RATIONAL JUDGMENTS
Immanuel Kant ’ s  Critique of Practical Reason11 is a most important 
construct to forward the evolution of the Idea because it impacts soft-
ware engineering much more signiﬁ cantly than the  Critique of Pure 
Reason . 12 The justiﬁ cation for this importance is that the Will interfaces
with the Reason directly and instantly when a purely Will-based deci-
sion is required. The part of the subsystem of the Reason that is
accessed is the Axioms subsystem. Part of the database of the Axioms
subsystem is required by the Will to be speciﬁ ed directly back to the
Will. This database compiles the information required for the autono-
mous system constellation to survive its environment intact and without 
damage. (Since one of the major attributes of the mind of the autono-
mous system is its ability to make rational decisions, the third major 
Critique of Immanuel Kant, the Critique of Decision, 13 is also a matter 
of great interest and the focus of attention.)
The human ability to form value judgments, develop likes, dislikes, 
preferences, and make decisions is uniquely critical and important.
No other person of scholastic importance or lasting value has come
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.4 Making Rational Judgments
37
close to Immanuel Kant and his  Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. His 
t
contemporaries, the giants of thought and literature, such as Goethe and
Schiller, were submerged in this masterwork. It is through this Critique
that one understands how all the systems of the mind, as well as their 
functions, processes, and products, come together. The German word 
Verstand means understanding, which we have decided to include as a
d
discrete system of the constellation.
 Few human beings make rational judgments, even in rather 
mundane, self-evidently critical situations. Consider that an a priori
decision of breaking radio silence for a simple weather report would 
lose a great battleship like the Bismarck with its crew; this is tragic. 
Yet decisions are made on the individual level, the group level, and the 
national level that are far more costly in treasure and have severe con-
sequences to the citizens of any country. The proper forming of values
and making rational decisions is far more difﬁ cult and consequential
than meets the eye. We lost the great space shuttle Challenger ulti-
mately because the launch manager made an a priori decision to ignore
the judgment of the systems expert. An autonomous system will not 
make these kinds of decisions because it will be rational and intelligent 
by design .
 Once again we bring up the German word  Urteilskraft, which is
t
indeed a very special word. It is a combination of value-judgment,
decision, verdict, opinion, conclusion, power, energy, discipline, deter-
mination, with the implied predicates of ethical and moral strength. All
of these are quintessential to the product of the system and its functions.
The weaker the functions of a system are made, the more the product 
will be ﬂ awed; ships will run aground, spacecraft lost, even wars started. 
 Quite by coincidence, in the process of working on systems and 
doing a study for a very important military client, it became necessary 
to examine and study why a certain type of system did not work. After 
reading through most of the important systems documentation, it was
clear that the product of the system was wrong, since the premises upon
which it was designed were wrong. This required looking into logic as
a science. A serious examination of Hegel ’ s Wissenschaft der Logik and 
k
Die Lehre vom Sein answered the question. The postulates of this
system were not fully understood by the designers, who simply
“scanned” the Wissenschaft der Logik and the 
k
Die Lehre vom Sein and 
skimmed over dialectics and syllogisms, thinking they were unimport-
ant. This resulted in the selection of Boolean (linear, sequential, and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

38
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
hierarchical) logic instead the dynamic logic written by Hegel for his
students.
2.5  PHASE  II : THE CONCEPT
The old German word Begriff
 
roughly translates to “concept” in English.
f
The contemporary applications and translations into English are not 
adequate because the translations are too broad and vague and are not 
nearly precise enough to formulate the entire thought presented here.
In the context we use here,  Begriff
 
means an immediate, advanced, 
f
a
priori understanding of  n number of functions and products assembled
into a mosaic or logical whole. This new whole, taken in its entirety,
is a Ding
 
(thing) or a thesis that is now within the grasp of the under-
standing mind. The thesis becomes a proposition either in mental con-
templation or when presented as it is here, as an object, namely, the 
autonomous system.
 This book is the description of Phase II. The intent here is to
present functionally what a very thoroughly and broadly educated
human mind would look like in modern software engineering terms.
Again, it must be reiterated that this is not the purview of the brain,
but the mind. To understand this concept, the brain must be consid-
ered the hardware equivalent of the autonomous system and the
mind the software. In this simpliﬁ ed way, the brain is therefore the 
computer processor host to the mind ’ s software, which enables in
certain human beings logical thinking, a prerequisite for making ratio-
nal decisions.
 Although the physical autonomous system, by initial design, will 
host speciﬁ c systems in speciﬁ c regions (e.g., on certain dedicated
hardware processors), the systems are not restricted to operating in their 
initially assigned regions (although certain processors may be more
adept at certain types of processing than others). As with the human
brain, when one area of the physical autonomous system is damaged,
another area thereafter takes up the processing for the damaged area.
This also illustrates that the physical structure of the autonomous
system neither supplies nor constitutes the software of the systems it 
executes; that is the purview of its mind, the constellation of the autono-
mous system.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.6 Using JPL-STD-D-4000 for System Requirements
39
 2.6  USING  JPL-STD-D -4000 FOR
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
 JPL-STD-D-4000 was created to support the design of systems and 
their subsystems. It is speciﬁ cally designed for software, making it a
great tool and roadmap for a team to use when designing a software 
system. What had not been realized until the systems of the constella-
tion were ﬁ nally assembled was how great in size an autonomous 
system would end up being. For this reason, there must be a separate 
functional requirement written at the constellation level, which logi-
cally would have to be at Level 0. 14 There is no way of avoiding the 
structure of this roadmap, else one becomes hopelessly lost in the
details. The Level 0 Functional Requirements Document will have the 
same structure and address the same contents as the Level I (system)
and Level II (subsystem) FRDs.
 As we enter into the concept phase of the design process, let us 
remind the potential design team that we are  not using the functional
t
architecture as described by the three great philosophers. We are doing
a functional design based on their collective functional descriptions . 
We are taking their functional descriptions and using them, as it so 
often happens in large-scale software projects, as elaborately written
Functional Requirements Documents written by scientists in a very
difﬁ cult to understand style and very complicated language. 
 Computer software architects and project element managers are 
used to reading enormously difﬁ cult to understand requirements, 
usually poorly written. By “poorly written,” it is meant that very often
the end users of the system have poor writing skills. Engineers and
scientists with a good command of the English language and good 
writing skills in our experience are rare. It is for this reason that good
software-intensive projects must always include a superb technical
writing team. The stafﬁ ng up of the writing team requires a meticu lous
search process because the members are required to be excellent soft-
ware engineers with an equally excellent command of the English
language.
 The process of putting together a team and writing a set of require-
ments and design documents that are clear, unambiguous, and complete
for a ﬂ awless implementation under a severely constrained schedule 
and budget is stressful, to say the least. TOPEX-Poseidon, being a joint 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

40
CHAPTER 2 The Architectural Methodology
United States/NASA and French/CNES project and the ﬁ rst attempt at 
oceanography from space, made it even more intense. Fortunately, we 
had help. An outstanding JPL team had just completed JPL-STD-
D-4000, a desperately needed upgrade to our software management 
standard. We examined it carefully; rather than allowing ourselves to
be pushed by a very tight schedule and small budget and making up 
the time required for preparation, we counted on being careful, attentive
to detail, and clear in our design. We were correct in this assessment.
Next, the study required a team of technical writers (a total of four) 
and the entire staff to work in a dialectically ideal environment referred 
to as the “war room.”15
 JPL-STD-D-4000 turned out to be the ideal standard to follow as 
a road map in building a large spacecraft ground system (comprising 
telemetry, command, and communications systems) with almost no
mistakes or need for regrouping and rewriting.
 Another deviation from the standard computer software project 
organization is the addition of a mathematics team. 16 This addition was
the result of experience gained from modeling functions and processes.
A lot of time and budget can be saved by having excellent mathemati-
cians, with skills in both applied and creative theoretical mathematics.
Such mathematicians were able to “save the bacon” for us on many a 
complicated and expensive project. This was especially true of the  Joint 
Theater Level Simulation ( JTLS ), where the solution arose to use
partial differential equations to articulate combat event functions math-
ematically. Combat events are interesting in that war in general and 
combat speciﬁ cally are contests of the wills of the opponents (nations,
ideologies, and commanders). Single combat is the contest of two wills.
Realistic, well-designed, and well-executed war games in computer 
software are therefore excellent arenas for studying the Will. 17
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

41
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Will system. The idea and concept of its architecture are based primar-
ily on the work of Arthur Schopenhauer.
 As the dominant system of the autonomous system constellation, 
the Will is the maker of executive decisions. It has the prime functional 
attribute of assuring the survival of the autonomous system and the 
accomplishment of the mission objectives. As the dominant system, it 
is also the implementer of all repairs in the autonomous system.
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and opera tion 
of its subsystems: Survival, Propagation, Dominance, Science Data
Conversion, Craving, Search for Truth, Mission, and Repair. The serv-
ers are described in their functional architectures and roles.
 The external and internal interfaces are also covered in sufﬁ cient 
detail for the development of the autonomous system in accordance
with JPL-STD-D-4000.1 It must be kept in mind that without an appro-
priate and capable software development standard, the developers will 
get lost in the details. 
 3.1  THE SEARCH FOR TRUTH 
 The Will is the “primordial me” of the visible and invisible universe, 
as opposed to the “collective I” of the Nexus Cogitationis or Thought 
 The Architecture of 
the  W ill System
CHAPTER 3 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

42
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
system. According to Kant, it is the  Triebfeder or “coiled spring” that 
r
moves everything. It is what the ancient thinkers called the  primum
 
mobile , with a total and complete drive for survival, reproduction, and
dominance. It has no scruples and recognizes neither right nor wrong
of itself. It does however have one additional and equally critical attri-
bute: the search for truth. Without this, the biological human would be 
nothing more than a basic animal on the scale of a primate. The quest 
for truth cannot be minimized, because truth is the  primum mobile
 
of 
thinking and contemplation. It is the beginning of an important process
described by Fichte as “the ﬁ rst to be.” 2
 Truth is an objective reality, and it is motivated by survival. Regard-
less of whichever category a biological system belongs to, it must in
its own world search for objective reality so it can survive. In the search
for truth, it builds the axioms it must have in an instant.
 The idea of the search for truth is prohibitively daunting. 3 Scho-
penhauer asserts that many human beings do not have this driver 
except in its most primitive and underdeveloped form, sufﬁ cient only 
for survival and reproduction, thus his claim that truth is not only
the fundamental process theme and construction of the Idea, it is the
substance. To the modern computer systems architect, Schopenhauer ’ s
message is:
 Truth is no prostitute, that throws herself away upon those who do not 
desire her; she is rather so coy a beauty that he who sacriﬁ ces 
everything to her cannot even then be sure of her favour. 4
 One must needs pursue it with one ’ s entire will, with freedom, and
with a vision of it not limited by time and space. Indeed, in this logic, 
we recognize Hegel and his great tool for the study of logic, namely,
the negation of the negation. Thus, we must understand that this physi-
cal, mental, and extra-empirical pursuit of truth is the beginning of the
human thought system.
The Will refers to a system with a physical
 
domain as opposed to
l
the Reason, which is a system with a social domain. The Will has no 
l
scruples, no notion of right or wrong. Its actions are axiomatic in that 
it  must survive; there are no options. This is very nicely expressed by
t
Shakespeare in his King Richard the Third, before the battle of Bos-
worth Field (scene III):
Our strong arms be our conscience,
swords our law.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.1 The Search for Truth
43
March on, join bravely,
let us to ’ t pell-mell
If not to heaven,
then hand in hand to hell.
 Such a statement is called “an act of the Will.” As software engi-
neers and architects, it is important to thoroughly examine and under-
stand the underpinnings and functions of the system we are about to 
design and build. The Will is therefore primitive.
 In human beings, as in all biological life, the Will is a given. In 
contrast, the Reason is also a given but it develops itself through experi-
ence. It builds the Kantian Quellen der Erfahrung (wells of experi-
ence)5 at ﬁ rst, with only a very limited capability containing the axioms 
speciﬁ ed to the Will as required for survival. The other systems are also 
built through mental efforts. A human mind that is not willing to push 
itself through discipline and practice, remaining unwilling to learn, is 
referred to by Arthur Schopenhauer as a  Stumpfkopf, or “stunted head,”
f
6
not quite as insulting a term as  Dummkopf
 
. However, it must be kept 
f
in mind that all of these and like terms used by the philosophers
are done so in their clinical sense, as reﬂ ecting an individual ’ s ability 
to think. In modern computer science, we need to accept the verdict 
of pedagogic science: “Without need, no great mental development.” 
The Romans stated it differently in their “law of parsimony,” that is, 
Lex Parsimoniae: “Natura nihil agit frustra et nihil facit supervaca-
neum,” or, “Nature does nothing in vain, nor creates anything
superﬂ uous.”
 An autonomous system cannot be autonomous without the ability 
to think in a human language and hold internal dialogues, monologues,
presentations, discussions, and so on, all of which belong to the process
of Logic, pure thought. 
 In its process of building the axioms in the Reason, the Will, 
through much effort to learn from mistakes, develops a mechanism by 
which it queries the Reason for more detail. Slowly, it builds an interac-
tive capability of dialogue and conferencing with the other systems of 
the mind. It also develops other methods of communicating the needs
it has. However, this truth is subjective at ﬁ rst, and is associated with 
craving, wanting, desiring, and dominating everything around it. The
closer the human being is ruled by the Will, the more animal-like and 
primitive it is. Therefore, reproduction is a physical function; its degree
of inﬂ uence on a human being ’ s motives is an act of the Will, and the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

44
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
greater the degree, the closer that human being is beholden to its animal
nature.
3.1.1  Philosophical Background
As we enter into the transition phase from the constructs to the formal 
design of the software, we must keep in mind that we are discussing
the philosophical and biological model of the system. The most impor-
tant reason for the selection of the Will is that it has been a point of 
serious study, analysis, and discussion for millennia. Thinkers and
scientists as far back as Anaxagoras thought about the Will. 
 Anaxagoras was a good thinker but one who, when out of his
discipline—the realm of philosophy—did a lot of damage to the politi-
cal and economic well-being of the Athenian Republic and to all of 
Greece in general. To his credit, he became the ﬁ rst philosopher/
scientist to discover the phenomenon which he called “an intelligence
capable of presentation.” This happened sometime between 495 and
429 BC, when he was busy helping Pericles become the president of 
the Athenian senate on the one hand, and helping to destroying the
Athenian economy on the other. Anaxagoras established the idea of 
thinking as a systemic process of the mind, but for whatever reason
was unable to take it further. He just gave it a name and described the 
phenomenon. Aristotle, Plato, Descartes, and the rest have developed
it into what it is today.
 There is a vast amount of information available on the Will both 
as the subject of research and in the form of data directly related to it.
Understanding the Will and the autonomous system as a whole requires
an intense preparation in research. Arthur Schopenhauer was com-
pletely correct when he told his audience the prerequisites for reading
his book, The World as Will and Presentation —namely, to be com-
pletely versed in the works of Immanuel Kant and to read Schopen-
hauer ’ s books twice. 
 Our recommendation is to read Schopenhauer ’ s books three times. 
The last reading through it should be a thorough effort to underline and 
categorize the key contents into usable segments.
 Immanuel Kant was ﬁ rst and foremost a physicist. His major 
pursuit was problem solving, to which end he offered a mechanical 
explanation of biological life and an examination of the outer limits
of function recognition. His principal tool was his ability to think.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.3 Das Ding an Sich
45
In modern terms, Immanuel Kant was the principal investigator of the
phenomenon of thought. Among the individuals who were his coinves-
tigators, two individuals stand out dramatically for their contribution:
George Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Arthur Schopenhauer. In the 
process of reading the works of Arthur Schopenhauer, one must disre-
gard his differences with the work of Hegel. These differences are
squabbles very much like we have today among academics and research-
ers and do not diminish the quality or gravity of their works. In fact,
these differences of opinions and positions give the modern computer 
scientist more concepts to consider and can thereby allocate more
research time to them.
 3.2  THE NATURE OF THE  W ILL
 The Will is the primordial force that moves all biological life in the 
universe. It is the “prime mover,” or as Schopenhauer refers to it, the
metaphysical prius. This concept is approachable only through specula-
tive philosophy and clinical observation. The main tool for its dissec-
tion and analysis is Hegelian/Aristotelian logic, which is the connection
between Idea and Concept. It is logic that permits the identiﬁ cation of 
the architectural details that are closest to and furthest from the subject 
and the object. 
 3.3  D AS  D ING AN SICH 
The Will is what Kant refers to as Das Ding an sich
 
 —a universal
thing unto itself; it stands alone. Recall that everything biological has
a Will. René Descartes asserted that the Will was located throughout 
the entire body of animals and human beings. Moreover, Schopen-
hauer goes so far as to assert that even a rock has a Will. 7 As such, a
rock ’ s “Will” is to express its nature as born out through its various 
physical endowments and kinematic properties: to be hard, to lie 
motionless, and so on, for a rock is “all Will”—it has no other systems
in its constellation.
 One must consider seriously the historical aspects of the search for 
the Will because the search is pertinent and applicable to its understand-
ing. The great changes that came in academia just prior to the French
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

46
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
Revolution separated the physical (empirical/tangible/observable) sci-
ences from the metaphysical (nonobservable, requiring deep contem-
plative thinking). This led research scientists to look for the Will in 
living things by dissection and autopsy. Schopenhauer for one was 
extremely agitated and horriﬁ ed at these efforts. He notes his position
when he revolts in disgust at the many animals that are to be “mar-
tyred.”8  It is clear from this statement that in 1815, many researchers 
were dissecting live animals to “ﬁ nd the Will,” and perform other types
of dubious research. The famous book Frankenstein published in 
1805—being as most books are, a reﬂ ection on their times—seems to
imply research conducted on human beings as well. Arthur Schopen-
hauer and his intellectual German thinkers were convinced that only
deep and penetrating thought could ﬁ nd the answers to the questions 
posed by the metaphysical sciences. He complained sarcastically that 
thinking was no longer a required activity or process, as empirical
studies had made it “unnecessary.” 9
 Only through thinking can one ﬁ nd the answers to the questions 
posed by the metaphysical sciences, as only the metaphysical world
allows for thought linkage and correct  a priori conclusions. Some of 
these metaphysical sciences are logic, mathematics, music, poetry,
ontology, philosophy, cosmology, and theology. One of the important 
contentions made by Arthur Schopenhauer with the world of academia
was that the thinking sciences (i.e., the metaphysical) were abandoned
to the empirical sciences (biology, chemistry, physics, geology, and so 
on). Balthasar Gracian also complained about this method of solving
problems, the dropping of thinking and contemplative thought to the
empirical sciences and the concentration on wealth in the seventeenth
century.
 Note that there is nothing mystical about the overloaded term
“metaphysics.” Despite its modern connotation, at its root, metaphysics
simply concerns itself with the sciences of the world of thought, that 
is, the mind rather than the brain.
Meta•phys
•
•ics ORIGIN mid 16th cent.: representing medieval Latin 
metaphysica (neuter plural), based on Greek  ta meta ta phusika —“the 
a
things after the Physics”—referring to the sequence of Aristotle ’ s 
works: the title came to denote the branch of study treated in the books,
later interpreted as meaning [the science of things transcending what is 
physical or natural.] 10
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.3 Das Ding an Sich
47
Metaphysics—“the things after the physics”—is the physics of the
mind. The empirical sciences are the physics of the brain. The modern
metaphysical sciences are those that make a priori judgments possible 
because these are processed and operate in the mind. Individually,
metaphysical sciences, such as logic and speculative philosophy, are
still taught, but no longer as part of the mainstream academic
curriculum.
In following the writings of Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, one
sees how the Will becomes a subject of intense interest and debate. In 
many ways, the Will as the ultimate driving force of the visible and
invisible universe becomes a symbol of freedom and emancipation 
from all rules except itself. It is as if, without fully understanding it, it 
is centered on the human individual ’ s right to be what it wants to be.
That is not by hard work or study, but by simply having a Will and
therefore having the “right” to take what it wants, to do what it wants,
and so on, regardless of what that happens to be.
The three major attributes of the Will, in order of predominance,
are:
1.  Survival of the individual biological being (sustenance and
security)
2.  Survival of the species (reproduction and organization) 
3.  Dominance over others (both in its own species and those of 
other species, regardless of consequence). 
Nietzsche wrote about this in one of his masterpieces, Die Wille 
  
zur Macht, “The Will to Power.” In simple language, this means the
t
domination of everything around the subject by the subject, ergo 
“might is right.” Nietzsche ’ s book was so impressive and well received 
that Richard Strauss, one of the greatest composers of his period,
announced the birth of this new era with his musical masterpiece  Also
 
Sprach Zarathustra, named after Nietzsche ’ s famous book of the same 
title.
Nietzsche was not a mere philosopher/storyteller, whose books are
beside the point in modern technology. He was selected to be a tenured 
professor of classical languages at the University of Basel at the age of 
21. This, by implication, made him certainly an expert in classical Geek 
and Roman philosophy, as well as with the philosophy of Immanuel 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

48
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
Kant and his contemporaries. With this knowledge of classical and
contemporary technology, he anticipated what the “objectivization of 
the Will” was leading to in his own time. He then wrote another pro-
phetic book of great impact,  Götzendämmerung, the “Twilight of the 
Idols.”11 What it meant to Nietzsche was the impact of the Will on the 
human condition and the reemergence of the human being as an idol,
a creator of idols, and a worshiper of idols; or, as a worshiper of himself 
in accordance with the Kantian  Satz vom Grunde, the principle of 
sufﬁ cient reason. The ground rule—the object of experience and 
knowledge—is “Will, Freedom, and Eternity.” 
 As the examination of the Will as a design object continues, we
understand what is meant by the continued effort of all biological
systems to survive, reproduce, and dominate their own species as well
as those species around them. The human being, as the most advanced
of the biological species, is the possessor of a free will. It is not bound 
by any constraints and is a sovereign in himself who makes his own
rules to achieve dominion over whatever he sets his mind to. In this
individual ’ s drive for power over his fellow man and environment, he
uses all options available. As in any system, these options may be
many, such as the mental approach, the political approach, and the
physical approach to achieve might over others individually or collec-
tively in a group. If in his striving for power a man succeeds and
achieves dominion over other human beings, he will exercise this
power without constraint. The pursuit of power is present in all bio-
logical things, and achieves its highest development among the human
species. Biologically speaking, therefore, the function of the Will is
neither right nor wrong. Nietzsche expressed his sentiments and
impressions in his great book, Jenseits von Gut und Böse, “Beyond 
Good and Evil.”
 How the Will manifests itself in modern human life, in contempo-
rary political life, and as a phenomenon is interesting and essential to 
the understanding of the Will as a system. Consider Germany with its
great and cultured people, with its superb education, outstanding
science, excellent engineering, and fascinating literature, with great 
laws and political organization. A great, cultured people such as 
these collectively surrendered their individual Will to a slightly built, 
totally unimpressive physical specimen, a poorly educated and not very
bright individual. Yet they elected him, Adolf Hitler, to the parliament 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.4 The Will as a System
49
(Reichstag) and then to the ofﬁ ce of Chancellor of the Reich. Then he, 
on his own, assumed powers that Julius Caesar and Nero would have
envied. This surrender of “free will” cost the German people and the
people of the nations around her some 25 million lives. Even more
impressive was the fact that these people gave their lives with a song 
on their lips while ﬁ ghting against incredible odds to the last day. 
 This achievement before the sacriﬁ ce of blood was accomplished 
was celebrated by Leni Riefenstahl in her very famous and prize-
winning motion picture titled Triumpf der Wille . It is a ﬁ lm well-worth
watching because it is exactly what the title says it is—a “triumph” of 
the Will over the Reason, which is also a system of the mind. The func-
tion of the Will is presented on the world stage uninhibited by any 
constraints in a larger-than-life format and in keeping with Socrates ’
dialogue in the Republic of Plato. To those who read this, just contem-
plate how often in life one hears the term “be reasonable” directed at 
oneself or at someone else. Napoleon Bonaparte was not any different,
except he was better looking, had a better education from Brienne, was 
a good mathematician, and was one of the greatest generals in history. 
He nearly matched Hitler in the amount of blood he shed: a “mere” 3 
million young Frenchmen sacriﬁ ced on the battleﬁ elds of Europe. 
However, he did crown himself Emperor and assumed power over 
others much like Hitler did, but with a little more ﬁ nesse.
 Thus the Will is in our times clinically observable in sufﬁ cient 
detail as to make viable our design based on the functional description
given to us by Immanuel Kant, Arthur Schopenhauer, and George 
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and their contemporaries. 
 3.4  THE  W ILL AS A SYSTEM
We have established that the Will is by deﬁ nition Das Ding an sich
 
 , 
the “thing unto itself,” which is the “primordial me” in the visible
and invisible universe—in contrast to the “universal I.” For design
purposes, the meaning of the “universal I” is the equivalent of the
“royal we.” Why is this an important consideration? The reason is that 
the “royal we” is used by a monarch in society, especially in the societ-
ies of medieval Europe, to reﬂ ect the condition that the monarch speaks 
for the nation collectively. The “universal I” in an autonomous system 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

50
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
is the collective state of all of its systems, and in a very interesting 
sense, is the German term  Gemütlich . This is a very important systems
state, and often misunderstood in translations. In a social gathering the
meaning of the term  Gemütlichkeit is that there are no open or hidden
t
conﬂ icts in a group; all participants are in harmony. In a spacecraft, in 
a cruise or encounter, it means that all systems are functioning as 
designed, and the operations are being executed ﬂ awlessly.
 In the “universal I” (for the design purposes here), all systems in 
the constellation are in balance and in harmony; there are no disputes
between the wants of the Will system and the restraining arguments of 
the Reason system. Thus, the Intellect system and the Understanding
system (as well as all of the other systems) are in harmony, and a thor-
oughly rational, balanced decision has been made as reﬂ ected in the
Nexus Cogitationis. The Idea or Concept emerges when one or more
of the systems of the constellation are processing physical phenomenon
( Sinneswesen) data. Ideas and concepts often emerge in the Thought 
system without physical phenomenon data being received and viewed.
This is a transcendental operation of the mind, where the object viewed
is  a priori and beyond the limitations or borders of conscious experi-
ence and abstract information. This is the domain of the Noumenon
( Verstandeswesen ) and an internal process conducted in human lan-
guage. It can be an operation, like unconsciously solving a mechanical, 
mathematical, or engineering problem one has no expertise in. A superb
example is presented in the  a priori solution to the collapse of the
Tacoma Narrows bridge by (i.e., the  a priori Genius of) Theodore von 
Kármán.12
 Kant in his Kritik der reinen Vernunft describes the transcendental 
t
operation of Reﬂ exion ( Überlegung). What this means is that an idea 
or object is projected onto the Presentation and reﬂ ects back to the 
viewing, observing systems images with different attributes than the
original object or idea had at the ﬁ rst moment. Kant calls this a Bilder-
streit or an “argument” between pictures or images. It is in modern
t
terminology like mirroring, except in an advanced human mind it is
oriented to absolute truth, with input from the other systems in equally
true terms. In the human Genius, this results in correct  a priori conclu-
sions; in lower human minds, the result is often tragic. Kant calls these
results Reﬂ exionsbegriffe (concepts arising from thinking),13 which are 
concepts that are balanced and based on already validated ideas by the
systems of the constellation of the mind. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.5 The Architecture of the Will System
51
 When an argument of pictures, images, and impressions has been 
resolved, the truth of the object being viewed is as correct as it can
become. In human terms, there is rarely perfect truth or absolute reality. 
In software design, we called this “the point of acceptable reality,”14
upon which ﬁ nal implementation can begin.
 The Will is by far the largest system in the constellation of the 
mind. It stands by itself as it has stood before time began, because its
only purpose is to “be itself.” In this respect, it is answerable to 
nothing, in that if it chooses to fail, everything visible and invisible
will cease to exist without a trace, exactly as Schopenhauer deﬁ nes in
The World as Will and Presentation. The fact that its personal sur-
vival is paramount to itself is therefore understood. The world exists
only because the subject is aware of its existence. In a biological
system, the survival of all that is plant, animal, or human as a series
of derivatives of itself is a function, a drive called reproduction.
Arthur Schopenhauer in fact considered the genitalia to be a slave of 
the Will. 15 The opposite is also true because as he asserts, the sex
drive (Fortpﬂ anzung) is the second driver of the survival of the 
species, personal survival being the ﬁ rst driver and domination over 
the others. This term is called in German  Bejahung des Lebens
 
, “the 
afﬁ rmation of life.” 
 However, in his work, Schopenhauer is examining the organic 
world of plants, animals, and human beings. We in turn, accepting this
functional reality, must address the problem of designing a motivating 
function in a manmade machine, the phenomenon of the sex drive as
Triebfeder (driving force) translated into computer science functions
r
built into the autonomous system. This is an attribute an autonomous
system cannot be without. 
 3.5  THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE  W ILL SYSTEM
 The architecture of the Will system is composed of two major servers: 
the Phenomenon server and the Noumenon server. Note that these two 
servers are common to all of the systems in the constellation.
 The Phenomenon server processes and updates all sensory informa-
tion entering the constellation from the environment. The Phenomenon
can be equated to the “primordial me” in that it exists in all biological
systems regardless of how primitive or advanced they are in their 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

52
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
development cycle. It is the prime processor for all functions in the
Sensory system.
 The Noumenon server is the essential Thought system. It is modeled
on the human mind and the human thought process. It is in every way
what we call thinking. It supports the communications internal to the
constellation of the autonomous system in the same manner as it is
done in the human mind. This communication is done in  human lan-
guage. The capabilities of the Noumenon server are governed by the 
ﬂ exibility of the language it uses, the size of the vocabulary, and the
precision of the words in the vocabulary—all essential elements, since
the structure of the grammar and the precision of expressing ideas and
concepts clearly and solving problems cannot be done with a primitive
language.
 There are two problems that will need to be solved if the auton-
omous system is built. During the design phase it will have to be
de termined which language is to be selected for the autonomous
system. The second problem is how to get the system to acquire the
full potential of the language it is given. It may be that the system will
encoun ter similar problems human beings encounter, such as how to 
best convey the true and precise meaning of an idea, concept or term.
Even modern languages have words that are ambiguous. Immanuel
Kant encountered this difﬁ culty in his research.16 He discusses the uses 
of several languages in his attempt to clarify the meaning of the words
that express his ideas more completely. This part of the Critique of 
Pure Reason: The First Book on Transcendental Dialectic is very
important because it deals with the Idea and the issue of language in
the thinking process.
 The ﬁ rst function is the Awareness function. The Awareness func-
tion takes all sensory data from the ﬁ rst initialization and then rapidly
builds up its awareness of the world around it. The ﬁ rst awareness is 
of the systems within the constellation. It must be kept in mind for 
design purposes that all systems are present at the startup and initializa-
tion process. In human beings at conception, only the Will and the
Sensory are present. At the start of the autonomous system, all systems
in the constellation are present, tested, and integrated (though not yet 
instantiated—see Chapter 10). 
 The Survival subsystem considers primarily the survival of 
the environment in which the Will system is located, that is, the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.6 The Interfaces of the Will System
53
constellation and the ﬁ rst-line environment, which is the primary
sensory source as well as its container. In human beings, this is the 
body and its organs, the physical system containing the brain, the mind, 
and the internal sensors to the body. In spacecraft terms, it would be 
the spacecraft bus and the propulsion system. The spacecraft bus con-
tains the power generator. Power is energy, and energy in living things 
is “food.” In the autonomous system, the energy is electricity and its
source or generator, regardless of what type it is, must be replenished
within reasonable amount of time. The Voyager spacecraft have radio-
isotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs), which today, decades after 
launch, still have operating reserves. However, once the energy reserves
are exhausted, both spacecraft will shut down and cruise on into inter-
stellar space forever. In the autonomous system, the Will system is
required to ﬁ nd and acquire energy for the continuation of its existence. 
This means that the autonomous system will need to search out and
ﬁ nd sources of energy, be they photons, plasmatic ions from stars, or 
minerals on asteroids, comets, or planets en route to its destination.
This requirement will be one of the primary points of challenge during
the design phase. 
 3.6  THE INTERFACES OF THE  W ILL SYSTEM
 The Level I interfaces of the Will system are the Phenomenon network 
and the Noumenon network. The Greek terms are used to make it easier 
for a software engineering team to better understand the concept, and 
because of their use and detailed analysis by Immanuel Kant.
 The Phenomenon network can be considered a subsystem of the 
Sensory system in the sense that it is hosted for regulation and opera-
tional control on that system. This network delivers all sensory infor-
mation to the constellation—in particular to the Will system, because 
the Will system is universal and the system the origin of which is liter-
ally the beginning of everything visible and invisible. In the ﬁ rst 
instance, it delivers all sensory information from the immediate envi-
ronment, which is the body and its components. In the second instance,
the Phenomenon network delivers all sen sory data from outside of the
body, which is the environment the body exists in. This network ’ s task 
is the delivery of sensory data in order that the Will system be capable 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

54
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
of surviving and operating. The inter nal sensors monitor the health and
operational parameters of the internal components. These internal com-
ponents have temperature speciﬁ cations ranging from the hottest to the
coldest temperatures under which they can operate safely without 
incurring damage or destruction. There are parameters of motion, ﬂ ex-
ibility, and power. Sensory data coming from outside of the body reﬂ ect 
environmental motion, light, colors, temperatures, sounds, textures, and
even “tastes” (i.e., the interpretation of chemical analyses as either 
beneﬁ cial/detrimental, pleasant/unpleasant, etc.).
 The categories of the sensory data/information are developed in the
Sensory system and downloaded to the Will system as to all other 
systems in the constellation. To the degree to which the Will system is
truly human-like is a design issue constrained only by the implementing
engineering team ’ s ability to design and build. 
3.7   THE SUBSYSTEMS OF THE  W ILL SYSTEM 
For design purposes, the subsystems of the Will system are:
 •  The Survival subsystem 
 •  The Propagation subsystem 
 •  The Dominance subsystem 
 •  The Science Data Conversion subsystem 
 •  The Craving subsystem 
 •  The Search for Truth subsystem
 •  The Mission subsystem 
 •  The Self-Repair subsystem.
3.7.1  The Survival Subsystem 
The survival function is common to all living systems, and thus it must 
be a functional component of the mechanical Will also. Some systems 
are defenseless against external and internal threats to their existence.
Other biological systems have automatic and reﬂ exive reaction to
dangers and threats of any kind. The Will system is functionally bio-
logical in nature, at least from a design point of view. The Will is the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.7 The Subsystems of the Will System
55
primary system in the survival function of the constellation and the
body. It has the capability to act immediately to save itself and survive, 
and in so doing to save the system constellation at large so it, too, may
survive.
 In this orientation and constant state of survival and mission accom-
plishment, the Will system has direct access to those axioms in the 
Reason system that are speciﬁ ed directly to it. In the survival state, the
Will system considers its own survival ﬁ rst, and then turns its ﬁ xation 
to the accomplishment of its programmed mission. 
 On the issue of survival and the need for “food” (i.e., energy), it is 
worthwhile to mention one of Arthur Schopenhauer ’ s observations
regarding the brain and the mind. The question posed is whether a 
primitive biological body can live without a brain. An acquaintance of 
Schopenhauer ’ s, referred to as “Mr. Flourens,” 17 in one of his experi-
ments excised most of both cerebral lobes of a hen to see if it could 
survive. It lived, albeit in a vegetative state, for ﬁ ve months. This 
implied to those observing the experiments that the Will as a system is 
indeed very strong; speciﬁ cally, that the “will to live” is so powerful
that even lacking most of a physical brain the being as a whole was
able to survive. Such experiments continue to this day. 
 What is important in an effort to model the Will is that we use a 
credible human model. The use of a chicken, rat, or primate will not 
result in a product we can understand or relate to, at least not in the 
sense that we would entrust to it a serious scientiﬁ c mission to the 
planets, the safekeeping of our computer communications networks, or 
applications involving weapons programs and national security.
 The Will is primarily bound above all to survival as an end unto 
itself, an end which—at least in its own eyes—justiﬁ es its very
existence. 
 3.7.2  The  P ropagation Subsystem 
 The second subsystem of the Will is the Propagation subsystem, or in 
biological terms, the “reproduction” subsystem. Machines made by
man, regardless of sophistication, cannot be engineered to reproduce
spontaneously because the mechanism is not biological and thus not 
integral to the device. However, a biological reproduction function 
should not pose a problem for a team modeling reproduction, for the 
functions themselves are easy to model. Spontaneous reproduction in 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

56
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
software design, for example, is in terms of mathematics and modeling
simply a set of functions, series, and integrals expressed in mathemati-
cal terms in time and space. Let us postulate that the only rational
reason for building a perfect mechanical replica of the human mind
model—the autonomous system constellation—is the exploration of 
interstellar space. Consider that the Voyager spacecraft will make their 
closest approach to the nearest stars in some 40,000 Earth years.18 Then 
consider that what takes the reproductive function nine months in bio-
logical man with a life span of a hundred years might take the autono-
mous system with a life span an order of magnitude or more than that 
a mere ten Earth years to accomplish the fabrication of a copy of itself. 
This is not out of line with time, process, or function. On a larger 
spacecraft, with several autonomous systems of identical speciﬁ cation 
assisting in the effort, it may take less time. The functions of sleeping, 
working, and learning assume identical parallels with human beings
except as they are set in time and space.
3.7.3  The  D ominance Subsystem
The third subsystem, the Dominance subsystem, is a biological func-
tional attribute. Consider the situation in which there are a number of 
identical autonomous systems aboard a single spacecraft. Identical 
though they may be, one system must be in charge of the others con-
t
stituting the “crew.” We know how this works among biological 
systems, including humans. How this will evolve among autonomous
sys tems is something to be considered. It will be easy to program
the parameters of the dominance subsystem into the Will system of 
each autonomous system constellation. However, a free Will makes it 
impossible to predict. By design, there will not be a  Dummkopf
 
among 
f
them, yet we need to keep in mind throughout the requirements and
design phases that what scientiﬁ c knowledge awaits the autonomous
systems in interstellar space will make our knowledge here on Earth
seem elementary at best. Learning will therefore become a necessity. 
How much time each system constellation will take to learn is unknow-
able. As with all biological systems, there are inhibitors. One of the
most important of these is language. In other words, the choosing of 
the ideal language in the form of grammar and vocabulary, both for 
long-term usage and ﬂ exibility for its continued development, is a criti-
cal, long-reaching selection. Let us not forget also the idea of ﬂ uency 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.7 The Subsystems of the Will System
57
in several languages for a better understanding of an object, idea, or 
concept.
 3.7.4  The Science Data Conversion Subsystem 
 This subsystem concerns itself with a ﬁ rst instance of recognition. The 
Will system, being the prime driver for the survival of the constellation, 
receives all sensory data from the immediate environment and from the
external sensory network, the Phenomenon environment. It must there-
fore be able to make an instant response, that is, to take action either 
in the negative or positive mode. It has the initiative to sense something
as being “good” or “not good.” The data entering the Will system are 
the Phenomenon of the environment and are transported from the
sensors in the form of size, quantity, light, temperature, sound, form,
mass, motion, and so on. They enter the external sensors as raw data
from the environment and are converted by the sensors into mathemati-
cal form and loaded over onto the monads. The dataﬂ ow from the
sensors to the monads is continuous, like a ﬂ ow of plasma or light, and 
is deposited in the subsystem of its primary concern (e.g., “survival”
as being either good or bad).
 As a ﬁ rst analogy, take the human sensory input from the skin and 
hair. A slight breeze will give a sensory input from a strand of hair and 
an area of skin surface, and immediately after this, the area expands
to the entire body. If the skin and hair are exposed to heat and ﬂ ame,
the monads carry the data to the Survival subsystem, which takes the
initiative and responds by involving the Reason, Presentation, Under-
standing, Intellect, and Decision systems in a Level II conference. The 
ﬁ nal decision, in this particular case, taken by the Will system is to 
move away from the source of heat before it does damage to the
constellation.
 Simultaneously with the Will system, the sensor monads 19 deliver 
the data to all other subsystems in the constellation provided these
subsystems exist and are healthy and in good working order. (Note that 
the model of the mind in human beings, according to Schopenhauer, is 
not one that contains, for example, an Intellect, Reason, or Presentation—
unless the human being takes the time and the direction to practice
thinking, reading, studying, and experimenting with discipline, and
builds these subsystems automatically and with much deep, penetrating
contemplation.)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

58
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
 All of the Phenomenon data received by the Will system are con-
verted into human language. The Will system transmits through the 
Thought system the Noumenon communications data carried by com-
munications monads to the addresses the Will system interfaces with
in the form of an emergency broadcast in one primary (and/or several
secondary) languages20 to make it totally unambiguous and clear of the
possibility of being misunderstood, for example, it is either “good” or 
“not good.” The Will system in the context of the design of the autono-
mous system would have a database of its own in which the axioms it 
needs for survival are stored. 
3.7.5  The  C raving Subsystem 
The Craving subsystem is the driving force or spring for action. It is 
the “primordial me” in oneness of apperception as the triggering of the
process for motives. Here is the beginning of the process of recognition
and consciousness, of self-awareness. It is the ﬁ rst connection between 
the world of appearances and Das Ding an sich. In this subsystem, we 
have self-awareness, the database of recognition, and the fundamental
search for that which it craves the most: safety and survival.
 The thought process of the software architect when writing the 
functional requirements to describe the “primordial me” in software
terms is complicated, although the functional requirement in terms
applicable to a software system running on a computer is not very dif-
ﬁ cult. However, to articulate the functional requirements and process 
is very complicated because of the enormous complexity posed by the
human language that we use to describe what is needed. Consider the
functional attribute and process of the word appetite. Clearly, a machine 
does not have a biological appetite for food or a literal desire for drink. 
But it needs to be interpreted in terms of a strong urge to partake in 
something that it needs to survive. The Latin noun  appetitus (a desire
for) comes from the inﬁ nitive  appeterre (to seek after), which means
literally to strive after and to desire eagerly. This can most immediately 
be seen as the absolute striving for energy—electrical energy as a con-
sumable product regardless of how it is generated. It will most likely
be generated by a  radioisotope thermoelectric generator ( RTG ) in deep 
space, but in theory, it could under certain conditions also be acquired
by heat sensors that pick up the energy transmitted as electromagnetic
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.7 The Subsystems of the Will System
59
radiation from a nearby star. The RTG’s power level points to an 
implicit need to replenish the radioactive core of the generator. This 
implies that the autonomous system will have to search for asteroids,
comets, and planets where uranium is available. When such a source 
is identiﬁ ed, it must be located, tracked, and intercepted; the spacecraft 
must land on its surface and start mining. This implies a spacecraft with
an inherent design that permits mining operations and the reﬁ nement 
of uranium into fuel suitable for the RTG. In the case of the autonomous 
system, this craving will need to include other minerals, such as those
needed for lubrication of the joints, like graphite, and the manufacture
of solid and liquid propellants, as well as other parts. All these cravings
will affect the development and behavior of the Will system as it does 
in biological systems.
 The behavior of the Will is inﬂ uenced by motives, reﬂ ection, think-
ing, and contemplation, and is manifested in the reactions of searching,
pursuing, ﬂ eeing, and avoiding that form the string of self-preservation
or survival functions. We are now in the process of developing the Idea
into a Concept. The great scope of a future system, if indeed it is going 
to be built, will differ in that the user will describe the functional
requirements in a Functional Requirements Document (FRD). The 
scope will then assume an implementable form.
 3.7.6  The  S earch for  T ruth Subsystem
 The Search for Truth subsystem must be addressed brieﬂ y because this 
attribute of the Will system describes how the human thought system 
evolves functionally in the human mind as a model for the autonomous
system. A primitive biological Will must, in order to survive, ﬁ nd out 
how to survive. This stipulates the building of axiomatic rules; initially, 
they will be in the form of a hardwired database (i.e., “instinct”). In
more advanced systems, the axiomatic rules will form a function of a
separate database dedicated to more complex rules as to what to do and
what not to do. In humans, the accretion of axiomatic rules expands
through sheer necessity and forms a primitive version of the Reason. 
 An analogy for this formation through forced expansion and 
mental effort is the design of the old IBM 360 operating system,
wherein the operating memory is partitioned into registers designed by
the software architect to perform certain functions and operations; the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

60
CHAPTER 3 The Architecture of the Will System
system operating memory is bounded and cannot expand. This is much
like a primitive human being who is unwilling to study or think,
exactly as Schopenhauer and Kant discovered through their thought 
experiments. We use the word “primitive” because that is what it is. 
Being the possessor of a primitive operating system does not mean 
that an individual cannot learn and become superb in a discipline like
mathematics, geology, or physics, or even more practical skills, such 
as cooking, designing and building houses or bridges, and leading a 
decent and successful life. All it means is that the complicated mental
and physical work of learning new things, new disciplines, and under-
standing ethics as opposed to obeying the Will is to these human 
beings a nonexistent world. An individual may indeed be an outstand-
ing student of law, but the concepts of ethics, honor, and truth are 
interpreted solely from a programmed, bounded database with indices 
that access lists of dos and don ’ ts. In an autonomous system, we must 
have a Will system that interacts with the other well-developed
systems: the Reason, Presentation, Intellect, Sensory, Decision, Under-
standing, and the Nexus Cogitationis. It must have a free will and be 
able to hold dialogues and conferences. That is, it must be able to
think and contemplate to solve problems a priori . Anything less will
make it incapable of interplanetary or interstellar exploration, or even
simpler mundane applications.
3.7.7  The  M ission Subsystem 
The Mission subsystem provides the Will with a primary driver for the 
accomplishment of its assigned tasks. This primary driver is, at least 
for the present, the objective of the exploration of interplanetary and/
or interstellar space. This mission could be the mapping of charged
particle density from our solar system to the star Sirius. Or, it could be
given the mission of building a habitation on Mars capable of support-
ing human research teams, serving as a refueling station for spacecraft 
(or even a factory for building spacecraft), growing food, producing 
water, and so on. For mundane applications, it might be given the
mission of protecting computer networks from hackers. A software 
team building an earthly application would have a much easier job 
designing a network security system as opposed to a space station, but 
with the same level of autonomy.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3.7 The Subsystems of the Will System
61
 3.7.8  The  R epair Subsystem
 The Repair subsystem provides the Will—and through the Will the 
autonomous system—with the capability of monitoring the state of the
systems and the constellation as a whole. This comprehensive system 
state will need to have all of the data pertaining to the health of the
external and internal sensors, such as the operational parameters of all
systems components, both hardware and software. In the case where it 
detects a bug in the software or a change in the performance of a 
program, program set, subsystem, or system, it needs to do a real-time
analysis and evaluation of the problem and repair it. The repair may be
as simple as reprogramming a software routing or the physical replace-
ment of a component part, keeping in mind that during an interstellar 
cruise, the replacement of an optical sensor or reprogramming of a 
program set is generally not time critical. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

62
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Reason system. The idea and concept of its architecture are based on 
Kant ’ s monumental works.
 The role of the Reason system is that of the “conscience” of the 
autonomous system. Its primary functional attribute is to ensure that 
the Will system does not make a decision that goes against the set rules 
of operations in the process of performing its mission objectives.
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and operation 
of its subsystems: Axioms, Rules, and Laws. The servers are described
in their functional architectures and roles.
 The external and internal interfaces are also covered in sufﬁ cient 
detail for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with 
strict and sound software engineering practices. 
 4.1   THE  R EASON AND ETHICS 
 Careful consideration must be made of the intention of building an 
autonomous system, for it implies much. We present here the concept 
for the design and building of an autonomous system. If properly
designed and built, it will have a superb, highly designed and
 The Architecture of 
the  R eason System 
CHAPTER 4
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.1 The Reason and Ethics
63
programmed intelligence. This brings up the fact that this book is also 
written from a software architectural perspective, and not from the
viewpoint of a philosopher. As great an admiration as we have for 
Arthur Schopenhauer, we have our disagreements with him, too. For 
example, his assertion that the Reason has as its principal function the
construction of concepts is far off the mark,1 at least in the sense of 
being adaptable to an implementable software architecture. Rather, in
the light of 21st-century software architecture, it becomes justiﬁ ably 
imperative that the Reason be more properly a participant with all of 
the other systems in the construction of concepts. Architectur ally, this
approach is much clearer to deﬁ ne, to understand, and to implement. 
 The Reason is a very special system in that it forms the beginning
of the construction of the systems of the mind by the Will system. It is
the system where the axioms, rules, and laws are located and processed.
It is the proprietor of the ability and capacity to do and to act on its
assertions and propositions that concern the physical survival of the
system constellation and the autonomous system as a whole. Of equal 
importance is that because of the above, it is the place of Ethics
 
 .2 The
purpose of including a short reminder of ethics here is that if a team
wishes to build the autonomous system with the full cognitive capabil-
ity that we are describing, it is assumed that the system manager-
architect will wish the system to be an ethical one. Building an unethical
system is not a logical or acceptable goal.
 This is the sum of the assertions of pure analytical logic and psy-
chology—not of the metaphysical  a priori but of objective reality, 
where the objects of reality in relationship to the subject assume identi-
ties  independent of experience; that is, that a law or rule is independent 
of experience. The description, analyses of functions, and operations
of this system are based primarily on Immanuel Kant ’ s  Kritik der reinen 
Vernunft3 and Kritik der praktischen Vernunft.t 4 The former work is 
arguably the greatest work in post-Aristotelian classical philosophy.
The latter work was written more for the description of practical rules
that the Will needs in order to survive physically. The Will is the system 
that is the principal governor of the function of survival in a biological
species, provided that species has the experience base to deal with
annihilating threats to its existence.
 The Will may be the driver of existence and survival, but the
Reason is the voice of caution and prudence. The Reason is therefore
a great player in individual and group survival. Individuals and groups
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

64
CHAPTER 4 The Architecture of the Reason System
that possess it and who have exerted a great effort to acquire it and
build on it constantly are fortunate. Those individuals, species, and
groups that ignore the Reason are either left in desperate situations or 
become extinct.
 The Reason system is tightly coupled to the Intellect system, then 
to all other systems of the autonomous system constellation.
4.2  THE NATURE OF THE  R EASON 
The Reason is the system that enables rational thinking. “Rational 
thinking” is probably as good an expression as is practical in the
English language from a software design point of view. Kant, in the
intro duction to his work, The Critique of Practical Reason , labels
the Reason as being the driver for what he calls “a manner or a way 
of think ing based on inner appearances and the nature of the objects
of causality.” 5 It is in essence the system of theoretical recognition of 
the possible reality of the object translated into an internal language
to be transmitted to the other systems in the constellation of the
mind. It processes the inputs it receives from external and internal
sensing based on moral and natural law. The natural law is self-
evident; natural law is brutal and unforgiving. In biology, its drivers 
for individual survival, surviv al of the species (reproduction), and
domination are seen in the Will. Moral laws are required for existing
in a group; these we call social laws. They govern the motives of 
individual survival within group survival and the general well-being
in a society and in a social order. The thinking and acting subject 
may very well be inclined to do whatever it is motivated to do bio-
logically, but if it transgresses the laws, customs, or rules of the 
group or society it exists in, it is punished by the group in some
manner to enforce compliance.
 Once again, in the autonomous system, we are using the human
mind as the model, as its intended application is the exploration of 
interstellar space. This mission objective was chosen because it focuses
the Will and its craving to achieve an objective goal of vast dimensions
and provides incentive to learn and broaden the Presentation, Under-
standing, and Intellect systems and the others important to its survival.
 This is a very important process because in the higher order of the
animal kingdom, the Reason regulates group behavior in such a way
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.4 The Architecture of the Reason System
65
as to enable species to live together for survival and mutual protection
and propagation. In human societies, it is the categorical imperative of 
Kant that humans form a “State.” Aristotle called man a social animal. 
The Reason system is then the governor of behavior in a group environ-
ment. This makes the Reason system the regulator of group behavior 
and the de facto database of moral law. 
 4.3   THE  R EASON AS A SYSTEM 
 The Reason has been designated a discrete system of the mind because 
of architectural necessity. This necessity is forced upon us because the 
Reason must be an object that can be designed and programmed as an
integral part of the mind of the autonomous system. In its original form
as described by Immanuel Kant, it is too nebulous and too complex
for the preparation of an Functional Requirements Document (FRD),
Functional Design Document (FDD), and Software Requirements Doc-
ument (SRD). To describe it as Kant does, it is simultaneously a func-
tion, a process, and an operation. It covers the entire ﬁ eld of human 
thought, including behavior, functionally and architecturally, and is too 
large and too difﬁ cult to be simply deﬁ ned in a set of requirements. It 
is also too large to be diagramed in a single design at any level, and is 
certainly infeasible for a detailed design. It is therefore necessary to 
take the sum total of the contents of the Kritik der reinen Vernunft and
t
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft and select those functions that are
t
deﬁ nable in good technical English (for the articulation of the archi-
tecture must be understandable in modern software engineering terms).
Then we coalesce them into an acceptable whole, an “acceptable
reality.”6
 4.4   THE ARCHITECTURE OF
THE  R EASON SYSTEM
 The architecture of the Reason system is a fascinating structure. It is 
limited in its size and processing power only by the hardware that we
refer to as the brain or processor. Thanks to the advances made in
processor technology, we are now in the position to concern ourselves 
mostly with the mind and not the brain. The architecture is in this case
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

66
CHAPTER 4 The Architecture of the Reason System
fully designed and programmed, but is provided the capability of 
expanding as the need arises, much in keeping with the Schopenhauer 
axiom: “ without need, no great mental development.” 
t
7 The concept of 
an expanding mind in its logical design and operation is therefore a 
given in human beings. It is well known that without a serious effort 
of teaching a child from the earliest time, ﬁ rst by its parents and later 
by good qualiﬁ ed teachers with close and dedicated cooperation from 
the child and student, the results in adulthood are a foregone conclu-
sion. The product will be a Stumpfkopf or 
f
Dummkopf
 
, regardless of how
f
good-looking, well developed, or articulate. In an autonomous system
that is ﬂ ying and working in interplanetary space, the  Stumpfkopf phe-
f
nomenon is unacceptable. The autonomous system must have the drive
and motivation to study, experiment, work, and develop knowledge. 
This is essentially the idea and concept for the entire autonomous
systems architecture.
 Familiarity with Hegel ’ s dynamic logic allows one to immediately
recognize in the compartmented logic of the IBM 360/50 series operat-
ing system the potential for Schopenhauer ’ s  Stumpfkopf. Why? It is
f
because an individual may indeed reach the high est level of develop-
ment in, say, physics or mechanical engineering, but may not be able 
to integrate that functional knowledge together with music, art, litera-
ture, or history. Why is this important? As Schopenhauer shows,  it is
a combination of the artistic and mechanical attributes in the human
mind that provides for creativity. A well-developed mind with a balance 
between mechanical, scientiﬁ c apti tude, and art and music provides the 
capacity to solve problems, often  a priori, a trait that in the advanced 
species Schopenhauer and Hegel call Genius.
 Individuals with advanced abilities in only one area of learning may
be socially totally inept and unable to communicate in any subject other 
than their own discipline. From a systems engineering point of view,
based on Schopenhauer and Kant, this inability to communicate and
live in a world other than what a person was trained for is due to under-
developed systems of the mind; at times, many systems are present, but 
so atrophied as to be utterly nonfunctional. When individuals like these
achieve high positions in industry, government, or the military, they
cause great problems.
 An example would be an underdeveloped Presentation system.
How often has one heard the statement, “Imagine how great this would
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.5 The External Interfaces of the Reason
67
be!” only to realize that the individual one is conversing with cannot 
imagine what is being talked about at all? This is clinically true.
Another example would be a head of state deciding to go to war, and
not being able to imagine the cost in dollars per day in consumables
like fuel, ammunition, rations, and body bags. Even if in modern
society lives really do not count, seeing little children hobbling along
on makeshift crutches missing an arm or a leg should move a statesman 
to reconsider attacking a nation regardless of likes or dislikes, economi-
cally feasible or not. The reason is that in the head of most individuals,
there is an underdeveloped Presentation system. Such persons cannot 
imagine the consequences on a society or the impact on its national 
economy for starting a war. It is on an individual basis the equivalent 
of going out with only enough money to buy a Chevrolet and ending
up with a Ferrari because it is on credit.
 Now we have the Reason system and the axioms, rules, and laws 
which it needs to exist with other similar autonomous systems in deep
space for many years. There must also be rules for conduct and behavior. 
It will be up to the design team and the manager-architect to determine
what rules and laws are to be programmed into the autonomous system.
What learning experiences the autonomous system will have in interstel-
lar space is unknown; we can only anticipate. Certainly the ability to 
expand and learn and to reprogram itself is among the design objectives. 
 4.5   THE EXTERNAL INTERFACES OF THE  R EASON 
 From a design point of view, the decision to give each system of the 
constellation its own Phenomenon and Noumenon interface and pro-
cessing capability is primarily for the sake of having a redundant 
capability for the process of sensory perception and thinking. Thus, if 
one or two of the systems lose their ability to receive, process, or trans-
mit sensory data, the constellation will not suffer unduly.
 The Noumenon in this instance is, however, the thought pro cess, 
and thinking is done in a human language. All systems in the constel-
lation of the mind communicate among themselves in this language and
exchange information and data using this language.  Noumenon
 
 is a
Greek term meaning concept or thought, from the word nouein , which
means “to think.” Thus, a Noumenon is both a thing and a thought 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

68
CHAPTER 4 The Architecture of the Reason System
fragment. As a thought fragment, it is the means by which the mind 
develops ideas and concepts.
 The Phenomenon is an external network, carrying all sensory data 
(occurrence, visual, and factual) that are directly perceptible by the
senses, including the intuitive. The sensory data provide the form of 
the environment, what it is composed of, the state of motion and rest,
and so on, consisting of attributes such as mass, form, temperature,
color, radiation, and attitude.
 The Noumenon is an internal network, carrying ideas and concepts
expressed in human language among the systems within the constella-
tion. The operation of the Noumenon is what we call thinking. With the
systems of the constellation in a developed mind, when broadcasting,
monologuing, dialoguing, or conferencing among each other, all of the
components, sentences, equations, and so on are  fragments of thought
 
.t
 The Noumenon can be a fragment of thought or a complete thought;
it can be a thing unto itself. If the Noumenon is not an object derived 
from our sensory perception or an abstraction of our sensory percep-
tion, then it is a  Positive Noumenon of the Understanding . If, however,
it is an object of nonsensory perception and one perceives it from the
Intellect, then it is a  Positive Noumenon of the Intellect. t
 When an  a priori understanding—whether whole or fragmentary—
enters the consciousness as a pure concept that is not based on empiri-
cal8 information or from physical viewing and other sensory input, but 
from thinking and understanding, it is an elementary concept that is our 
own.9 This, in human beings, is a  transcendental operation. 
4.6  THE SUBSYSTEMS OF THE  R EASON
The Reason system contains the following six subsystems:
 •  The Axioms subsystem 
 •  The Rules subsystem 
 •  The Commandments subsystem
 •  The Laws subsystem 
 •  The Phenomenon subsystem
 •  The Noumenon subsystem.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.6 The Subsystems of the Reason
69
 4.6.1  The  A xioms Subsystem 
 The Axioms subsystem plays a critical role in the survival of the system 
constellation. It is a data processor subsystem that gathers data from 
all sources and forms these data into data sets instantly available to 
the Will system whenever they are urgently needed, such as when the 
system constellation is under threat. Regardless of whether there is 
proof or recognition as to its absolute veracity, the Axioms subsystem ’ s 
data sets are accepted as universally true. This is a “no-risk” subsystem, 
so as the data sets it contains become conﬁ rmed and proven over the 
course of time, they become axiomatic truth.
 The English word  axiom is derived from the Greek word axios , 
which means  worthy . Thus, the Greek axiō ma means that which is held 
worthy and important, a universally accepted truth, that which is self-
evident. The Axioms subsystem is simultaneously a subsystem, a data-
base, and a process. It contains the elements of certain knowledge upon 
which its survival will depend. Whatever is encountered that is unknown
or potentially threatening, whether internal or external, is initially con-
sidered “threatening” and regarded as a threat until proven otherwise.
This is a defensive mechanism in all living species. To defeat this sur-
vival mechanism is to jeopardize survival. 
 4.6.2   The  R ules Subsystem 
 The Rules subsystem governs an authoritatively directed set of princi-
ples containing standards and procedures not only pertaining to conduct 
in a group, but also to the steps taken to solve mechanical and scientiﬁ c 
problems. These rules are changeable and based on experience gained
by practice, and received from the Intellect system. The English noun
“rule” comes from the Latin  regulare from regula , meaning “straight 
stick,” related to  regere , meaning “to rule, straighten, guide.” Thus, this
simple word also has an element of setting or keeping straight the direc-
tion of work or movement. As a subsystem, it is here that after a goal
or target is selected in the mind, the entire workﬂ ow, operation, and
orientation of the goal or target are kept on a path to accomplishment.
 4.6.3  The  C ommandments Subsystem
 The Commandments subsystem is the governing authority for originat-
ing directives and rulings for  control purposes, and manages orderly 
l
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

70
CHAPTER 4 The Architecture of the Reason System
conduct in an individual or group. At the time of preparation of the
requirements for the autonomous system, the requirements for orderly
ruling and conduct must be carefully selected, described, and included
in the design. Overlooking this issue in an autonomous system can bring
with it many problems, the consequences of which cannot be imagined. 
4.6.4  The Laws Subsystem 
Law, as established by the authority of an individual or a society, is 
based initially on the customs, morals, and teachings of that smallest 
of organizations upon which society is founded: the family. 
 We have therefore selected Roman and Germanic law as our tem-
plate, as it is well documented throughout its history of development.
It has been studied intensely over the years and adapted by many
nations. It is clear, concise, and unambiguous. Lastly, it was not written
in a complicated language but in Latin, the traditional language of 
science, engineering, law, and diplomacy. 
 There may be comments about selecting Roman and Germanic law 
as opposed to American, Greek, or Judaic law. It is a matter of the 
clarity, simplicity, and ease of understanding of the tenets of Roman 
and Germanic law. American and English laws are based on Roman
and Germanic law.
 A society ’ s customs deﬁ nitely impact the formulation of the prin-
ciples of conduct in that society. This process started in humans in the 
earliest of times and usually had its natural beginnings in the family as
the nuclear group of society. From the family, the rules and customs 
evolved up to the clan, to the tribe, and so on to federations and nation-
states. Only the most primitive of species cast away the authority of 
the family. The ritual of interacting person to person in a family and
the clan is evident even among the higher species of animals, such as
dogs and wolves, even the primates. Relationships and personal interac-
tions are a  sine qua non for the orderly accomplishment of all manner 
of transactions.
 It is clear that in the exploration of the planets and space en route 
to the nearest stars, order and harmony must be the rule among the
crew. This is an absolute necessity because even if the crew is made of 
silicon and metals and not organic matter, it will be as capable of 
forming opinions, developing value judgments, thinking, deciding, and
acting as any highly developed human crew. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.6 The Subsystems of the Reason
71
 Since we are designing an autonomous system that uses the human 
mind as the model for its cognitive functions, let us start with a collec-
tion of individual system constellations similar to those of a modern 
family or of an aircraft crew of six. The parameters that follow for the
design of the members of this crew are exactly that of an old civilized
family group. The laws governing individual and group behavior are
the same. Any rebellion or disobedience to the rules of behavior is a 
serious infraction that puts the very existence of the group and the
mission into jeopardy. A breach of faith in an interplanetary or interstel-
lar ﬂ ight is equivalent in every respect to treason. A good place to start 
for this examination of the required parameters of behavior in the
autonomous system constellation is the superb volume of the collected
papers of Floyd Seyward Lear of Rice University, Houston. 10
 It is entirely up to the decision of the manager-architect and the 
design team as to which parts of the law are given to the autonomous
system so that a group of six to ten can work and exist in harmony
while exploring the universe.
 Since we have under consideration a mechanical autonomous 
system with the advanced cognitive skills of a human being, we will 
need to start with the laws applicable to a small group of autonomous
systems coexisting in a spacecraft, working there, and perhaps occa-
sionally visiting a planet or asteroid for exploration and mining.
 Roman and Germanic law is the most natural, essentially being the 
advanced development of all law, from that of primitive societies to the 
most advanced. Interesting is the transition from the time of Romulus,
through the kingdom to the republic, and then to the principiate and
the empire in the East. This transition is particularly important for the
concept of law and how it applies through the conquest of the various
countries and places of the empire. The documentation for this under-
standing is particularly important because it describes the laws of the
Germanic Visigoths as they are integrated into the empire. Both sets of 
Roman and Germanic law have their beginnings with the rules of living
within the family unit. Roman law is based on the power of the head
of the family, the  patria potestas
 
. In Germanic law, this basic law is 
called Altermann or Hausvater
 
. 
r
 The most comprehensive work on Roman criminal law was pre-
pared by Theodore Mommsen for the faculty of law of the Friedrich
Wilhelm-University in Berlin in 1898, in three volumes.11 For those
interested in Roman civil law, we highly recommend Mommsen ’ s 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

72
CHAPTER 4 The Architecture of the Reason System
work, Roman State Law ,12 because it also includes the Justinian code.
He published this wonderful seven-volume set for the same law school
in 1886.
 For the potential design and implementation team of the autono-
mous system, the reading of the law is a very important issue. As 
important as the mathematical, modeling, software design, program-
ming, and technical writing teams are, the laws, rules, and axioms team
is equally important. We really do not want to create a reprobate. 
4.6.5  The  P henomenon Subsystem 
The Phenomenon subsystem receives its data input from both external 
and internal senses. It is, for the purposes of software systems design,
all objective reality. All human experience is acquired through the
senses. The data input to all of the systems in a human being is in the 
form of size, shape, motion, color, odor, mass, and temperature, in time 
and space. This is also true of the autonomous system; the data are
received by the mind and its systems. The human mind ’ s functional 
processing is primarily through sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell.
 The Reason system receives, sorts, compiles, and processes this 
empirical data, using only that which is applicable to itself in the Phe-
nomenon subsystem. After the data are compiled, they are ﬁ ltered 
into templates, and depending on the time urgency, they are placed in
the raw database. The data are then picked up by the Noumenon
subsystem.
4.6.6  The  N oumenon Subsystem 
The Noumenon subsystem prepares the empirical data it has received 
from the Phenomenon subsystem. Along with the empirical data, it 
receives data fragments that are not complete in themselves. It then
recompiles these data and translates them into the human language of 
the constellation. The Noumenon subsystem then prepares this lan-
guage for interface with the rest of the Thought system and the other 
systems in the constellation. The Noumenon subsystem—one of which
is resident in each of the systems of the constellation—is responsible
for the communication between the system in which it resides and the
constellation at large.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4.6 The Subsystems of the Reason
73
 Arthur Schopenhauer postulates that the Reason is the origin of the 
Concept. From the software design of the autonomous system, this is 
not a good idea, because it does not lend itself to a clear design. Thus, 
we have placed the Concept into the Nexus Cogitationis for practical
purposes and feasibility of design.
 4.6.7  N oumena: Thought Fragments 
 The Reason system provides input to the Thought system in the form 
of  thought fragments or Noumena
 
. That is to say, they are incomplete 
until the Nexus Cogitationis has compiled the entire thought. Only in 
its response to the Will system is the Axioms subsystem complete for 
survival.
 The transcendental data Kant and Schopenhauer write about and 
which the Reason system receives through the sensors are interesting.
This is because they are the basis for a priori concepts and are not 
based on objective truth or empirical data. The fragments of thought 
the Reason provides as input to the Thought system and the Nexus
Cogitationis are what contemplation and transcendental thinking are
composed of. These data are based on experiences of the senses that 
are not taken into conscious recognition (Anschauung
(
—i.e., viewing). 
They are buried in a very difﬁ cult to describe application, such as when
one looks at a tree and does not take notice consciously of the birds 
sitting in the foliage and hidden by the leaves, camouﬂ aged. Those few 
that see through the most elaborate camouﬂ age patterns will understand 
the countermeasures and consequences of one tiny mistake. Most 
humans do not understand this phenomenon consciously, as it appears
in the mind only on rare occasion or in a dream.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

74
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Intellect system.
 The idea and concept of the Intellect ’ s architecture are derived from
the referenced works of Immanuel Kant, Arthur Schopenhauer, G.F.W.
Hegel, and from personal experience as systems architect of numerous
large software systems.
 The role of the Intellect system is that of the “librarian” of the
autonomous system. The primary functional attribute is to create
knowledge out of abstract data and experience data.
 This chapter describes the Level II architecture and operation of its
subsystems: Abstraction, Experience, and Knowledge. The servers are
described in their functional architectures and roles.
 The external and internal interfaces are also covered in sufﬁ cient 
detail for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with 
sound and strict software engineering practices. 
 5.1  THE INTELLECT AS A SYSTEM 
 In the autonomous system, the Intellect is a system unto itself, and 
in the sense that the mind is the software hosted on the brain as the 
processor, it is in agreement with Arthur Schopenhauer ’ s position on
 The Architecture of 
the Intellect System
CHAPTER 5
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

5.1 The Intellect as a System
75
this subject.1 Strictly from a design necessity, there must be a place 
where knowledge is generated.
 5.1.1  Practical Knowledge 
 By generation of knowledge, it is meant practical or real knowledge, 
for want of a better term. Recall from Section  1.5.3 that there are two 
basic types of knowledge in the mind: the abstract and the experiential;
together, these form a derived, practical knowledge. The two types of 
knowledge are often misused, used interchangeably, or one is used at 
the exclusion of the other. Abstract knowledge is that which is acquired
secondhand through lectures, reading, and viewing without participa-
tion; this is academic or “book” learning, and is often mistaken for 
knowledge. Experiential knowledge is that which is acquired by per-
sonal or group participation, repetition, and practice. When an indi-
vidual possessing either abstract or experiential knowledge about a 
thing has validated this knowledge  by the other, this results in a new 
r
type of knowledge, namely, practical knowledge: the abstract that is 
validated by experience, or experience that is validated by the abstract.
 Arthur Schopenhauer was not a man to give credit where it was
not deserved. He ﬁ rmly labeled the information we humans acquire 
through reading, in lectures, storytelling, and so on, as abstract knowl-
edge. What he meant by this is that even the famous professors of his 
day, if they lacked the mental elasticity and experience required, were 
only possessors of abstract knowledge. He was very insulting and
unforgiving with his colleagues for not having real knowledge. Many
of those we have had in the past as teachers and professors and still
hold in high esteem often taught us in the classrooms on unsubstanti-
ated information. There are too many examples encountered in this area
of abstract knowledge not validated by experience to ignore.
 Since the Intellect system is the librarian of the mind, it receives,
sorts, and stores the two major types of information, abstract and expe-
riential,2 which for design purposes is called data or information. The
Intellect system then formats these data and creates databases that it 
continuously expands, updates, and modiﬁ es through interaction with
the other systems of the constellation. The most important of the tasks
it performs is the generation of real or practical knowledge.
 Practical knowledge is therefore the primary product of the Intel-
lect system. Without the Intellect system, or with an underdeveloped
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

76
CHAPTER 5 The Architecture of the Intellect System
or incomplete Intellect system, there is little to very little knowl edge
in the mind.3 An incomplete Intellect system would be one with only
abstract data received from reading, viewing, and listening, and received
in the form of studies, lectures, and stories. Without experience to 
validate and reinforce the data sets and convert them into true,
practical knowledge, they amount to no more than mere “academic”
knowledge.
 Therefore, as the mind ’ s librarian, the Intellect is the custodian,
repository, and producer of knowledge. This postulate is as interesting
as it is intriguing. Certainly from a software systems engineering per-
spective, it contains the solution to a few serious modeling problems.
5.1.2  Of Modeling and Languages
Obviously, the philosophers Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer did not 
write with a possible computer design and implementation in mind.
Outside of Charles Babbage ’ s theoretical compute engines, theirs was
not a world of computers, and certainly not of software requirements 
or architectural design—precisely the reasons Babbage failed to con-
struct a working engine. Theirs was a world of thought, research, and 
publication, and yet their materials are very pertinent to the develop-
ment of the autonomous system. Thus, we are called to go one step
beyond their work, to design the model for a machine capable of all
functions performed by the most intelligent human beings. Bridging
the gap from cognitive philosophy to software architecture, we hold
fast to the sum of the work of these great thinkers. However, we prepare
a model that is easier to understand for the development of software
requirements and design. Without modeling, which is then followed by 
detailed requirements and a detailed design, very large, complex proj-
ects work only by accident, and the costs are prohibitively high. 
 The German language of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries is
cumbersome for articulation in our technical English of today. Using
the technique of modeling is a handy approach. This method of tran-
sition from classical philosophy to modern computer science by build-
ing a model is very important. A model is a viewable object, whereas 
simple text can convey only half the presentation ( Anschauung
( (
 ) 
for an engineering effort required by a serious complex software sys-
tems design. Text, in whatever language it is written, is also subject 
to misinterpretation. There were many instances of misinterpretation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

5.2 The Nature of the Intellect
77
personally experienced by the authors during various projects, all of 
which serve to underscore the dire need for ﬂ uency in English to be an 
imperative and absolute necessity. A successful project is dependent on 
the individuals participating in the design team. Their absolute mastery
of the language used by the design is the ﬁ rst and most important factor. 
 Experience has shown how costly it is for a design team to have 
individuals with limited command of the design language, especially
technical English. It is worthwhile to give a pertinent reference to how 
problems are solved by modeling, in this case, how Dr. Theodore von
Kármán efﬁ ciently solved the problem that caused the collapse of the
Tacoma Bridge over the Tacoma Narrows in 1940. 4 This is important 
reading for software engineers, managers, and architects because it 
involves both a priori and  a posteriori judgments, and human involve-
ment at all levels. Similarly, in the same book, von Kármán discusses
the requirements he had to meet to be awarded his BS degree in engi-
neering. He had to design, build, test, and demonstrate an electromotor 
from scratch. Utilization of all the faculties of his mind was required,
but primarily understanding, presentation, intellect, reason, and practi-
cal skills. 
 5.2  THE NATURE OF THE INTELLECT
 Schopenhauer argues that the Intellect is located in the brain. He does 
this to drive home the idea that the Intellect is dependent on an organ 
of the physical body, meaning that if the brain (Gehirn) dies, so does 
the Intellect. Recall that to Schopenhauer ’ s generation of researchers, 
the Will was distributed throughout the physical body; the brain could 
die, but the Will would live on. 5 Das Ding an sich —the thing unto 
itself—as an object without mass and therefore endless and without 
limits, was present in all living things; it was universal. This “thing”
of course is the mind, and that is software; it has no weight or mass,
no externality that can be proved empirically. 
 Over time, any reference to the nonphysical became  verboten
because of the new prevailing attitude that all things existing were
merely material. In consequence, the brain was thus  ipso facto
“endowed” with the combination of the physical and nonphysical com-
ponents of the cognitive functions in living things. A working object 
without mass, the design object, is by deﬁ nition nonphysical. In the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

78
CHAPTER 5 The Architecture of the Intellect System
Latin it is described by the word animus; it is the mind. If the brain is 
destroyed, then the Intellect is destroyed with it, because if the com-
puter melts down, the software cannot execute. And yet, if the brain is
destroyed, the Will continues to function, albeit in a degraded fashion.
This proposition of Schopenhauer ’ s is probably based on the fact that 
he did not wish to use the German words for “mind” in existence at 
that time, such as Geist (spirit, ghost, intellect, and psyche), or  
t
Verstand
(understanding, sense, intellect, and reason), or Sinn (sense, feeling,
and meaning), or  Gemüt (soul, disposition, and nature). This problem
t
of the meaning of words, ideas, and concepts is a signiﬁ cant barrier for 
those trying to translate even simple texts. Writing in English and using 
German, French, and Latin is what makes the need for mastering lan-
guages very reasonable and of obvious necessity. In explaining his
Logic, Hegel in fact uses the concept of the object without physical
mass as a reference to the  Phänomenologie des Geistes .6 Others in 
recent computer science history have understood this concept as well.7
 In contemporary terms, the physical sciences are the empirical sci-
ences. Metaphysics is the physics of the mind and of thought, in that 
the work is accomplished in the mind rather than in a laboratory or on
paper. The metaphysical sciences according to Kant and Hegel include
such ﬁ elds as speculative philosophy, ontology, cosmology, transcen-
dental logic, and mathematics. Logic and mathematics survived as
separate disciplines because we need logic to learn how to think, and
mathematics because there is no science or engineering without it. Pure
speculative philosophy, Hegel ’ s “phenomenology of the spirit,” is
intangible and not material, a part of what he refers to as the “spiritual”
world. This world is also huge.
 Schopenhauer regretted that empirical scientiﬁ c research had sup-
planted the need to “think”—speciﬁ cally, it supplanted metaphysics 
and kept only the physical sciences that could be seen and understood
through external proof. 
 Thus, one can now appreciate that for design purposes, in modern
software architectures, the mind is the metaphysical (software) and the
brain is the physical (hardware) host. A damaged brain means a reduc-
tion in the processing capacity or ability of the brain, but not a shut-
down of the whole being as Schopenhauer asserts. A brain can be 
physically damaged by impact, narcotics, poisons, diseases, and numer-
ous other causes, with the rest of the body reduced to a “vegetative” 
state. A mind, in contrast, can be permanently damaged by a lack of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

5.3 The Intellect as a System
79
learning and experience, which in turn inhibits it from performing with
optimal efﬁ ciency even in an intact, healthy brain.
 5.3  THE INTELLECT AS A SYSTEM
 The Intellect is a system because from a software architectural perspec-
tive, it is too complex to be anything less. It is necessary for the pur-
poses of practicability of design and understanding. Schopenhauer 
aided in this decision by referring to the Intellect at the level of the
Will. 8 If the Will is a system, then so should the Intellect be, since it is 
of the same general magnitude. Allowing the Intellect to be a system
in its own right makes it easier to examine the design object and use
the dialectic method to achieve sufﬁ cient reality. This approach is what 
we term “substantiating the design by adding subsystems.”
 However, as we noted, Schopenhauer assigns the Intellect to the 
brain and not the mind and says that its operation is affected by the 
death of the body organ hosting it, which he claims is the brain. He 
also claims the Will is not bound by any speciﬁ c organ. 9
 From a systems architectural point of view, Schopenhauer ’ s view 
of the Will being a distributed system is too cumbersome and impracti-
cal to model and build. Today in the ﬁ eld of  Artiﬁ cial General Intelli-
gence  ( AGI ), the cognitive functions are still assigned to and looked 
for in the physical structure of the brain. Accepting such a blind assump-
tion would make the cognitive process of the autonomous system
a  hardwired system. 
d
10 A hardwired system cannot think, contemplate,
communicate, evaluate, learn, design, plan, execute, or make decisions
because a hardwired system cannot perform the ﬂ uid, self-reﬂ ective 
dynamic logic that is required for an autonomous system. A hardwired 
“autonomous” system is a contradiction in terms. More than half a
century of misled efforts demonstrate that not all paths lead to auton-
omy. The most that could be hoped for in this case would be an  auto-
nomic , not autonomous, system.
 For our purposes, architecturally, the Intellect belongs to the mind, 
since it is the software as opposed to the hardware equivalent. In the
German language of today, the mind is often referred to as the spirit, 
and technically that is close enough to what it is: without physical mass.
Thus, as a system, it is easier to understand as a design object and how 
it ﬁ ts into the mind of the autonomous system constellation. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

80
CHAPTER 5 The Architecture of the Intellect System
 We do not to take away credit from Kant, Hegel, or Schopenhauer 
by this approach to design. In their day, great minds did not think in 
terms of computer science. They did think in terms of systems, however,
and that is why this concept emerged. It is especially surprising how
often the word “system” occurs in Kant ’ s works. Hegel and Schopen-
hauer speak of the signiﬁ cant role played by languages as a system in
human thinking, understanding, communication, and the impact it has
on individual and social development. “System” is a loan word from 
the Latin systema, of Greek origin  σύστημα , meaning “set up with
[individual parts].” This word was adapted by the Romans in their 
language to represent many concepts, such as formula
 
 and  ratio . It was
adapted by Kant and Schopenhauer as system because there was no 
appropriate single word in the German language of their day with the
meaning they needed.
5.4  THE SUBSYSTEMS OF 
THE INTELLECT SYSTEM 
Considering the subsystems of the intellect is an interesting experience,
for there are many issues involved, just as in the building of any large
software system. As the Intellect as a system takes on shape and sub-
stance, it cannot be made too complicated because the functions them-
selves are already very large and complicated.
 The question under consideration is this: Which functional attribute 
comes ﬁ rst in the mind of an autonomous system constellation: the
abstraction (abstract knowledge), or the experiential (hands-on valida-
tion of the abstract, or simply direct experience)?
 For the purpose of simplifying a complex process and enabling the
requirements and design phases, we start with the abstraction; it is,
unfortunately for most human beings, the main source of information,
mistaken most often for knowledge.
 The architecture of the Intellect system is composed of the 
Noumenon subsystem, the Phenomenon subsystem, the Abstract sub-
system, the Experience subsystem, and the Knowledge subsystem.
5.4.1  The Abstract Subsystem
The Abstract subsystem records, ﬁ les, and processes for use all infor-
mation acquired from secondary sources. Arthur Schopenhauer is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

5.5 The External Interfaces of the Intellect System
81
adamant 11 on this point. He is skeptical about the validity and absolute 
truth of material read in books and newspapers, and received in the
classrooms and lectures. All of the information received through sec-
ondary sources is open to question. Theater, motion pictures, the Inter-
net, radio, and television today provide abstract data and abstract 
knowledge. The abstract knowledge provided by secondary sources
may be complete, valid, and correct, but the recipient of such knowl-
edge can never be certain. The databases storing abstract knowledge
must be validated by physical experience as to whether they are true
or not. An individual who has no other knowledge than abstract infor-
mation can never be certain of the validity of the data until proven by
experience.
 The autonomous system will be able on its own to interface to 
online repositories and databases and download any information it 
needs to do its job. It will also be able to acquire information through
other venues, such as viewing, listening, and so on.
 5.4.2   The Experience Subsystem
 The Experience subsystem stores, ﬁ les, and processes the knowledge 
acquired through physical experience. Where the abstract information
will not do much to aid the survival of a species, knowledge based on
experience is sufﬁ cient for a being to survive.
 5.4.3   The Knowledge Subsystem 
 The Knowledge subsystem processes the abstract information and 
knowledge gained through experience into real and practical knowl-
edge. It processes (evaluates, categorizes, prioritizes, integrates, syn-
thesizes, and stores) the data and applies them in the sum of knowledge
needed by the autonomous system to perform its mission accurately
and efﬁ ciently.
 5.5  THE EXTERNAL INTERFACES OF 
THE INTELLECT SYSTEM
 The major interfaces of the Intellect system are the Phenomenon and 
Noumenon networks. Received through the Phenomenon network are
the Intellect-speciﬁ ed data sets provided in one or more data streams 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

82
CHAPTER 5 The Architecture of the Intellect System
or through monads from the external sensors. The external sensors are
located on or beyond the outer surface of the body or shell of the
autonomous system. These sensors provide the data to the Intellect 
system as deﬁ ned by the Sensory system. The data sets it receives are 
only those which are useful by the Intellect system in raw form or 
which it can process directly. The external inputs it can use are shapes, 
masses, motions, and temperatures, among many others.
The other interface, the Noumenon network, operates in the 
human language selected for internal thinking and communicating
among the systems of the constellation.12 It is through this language 
that the sys tems of the constellation engage in monologues, dialogues,
and con ferences regarding their databases, the validity of their sensory
information, and putting substance to the objects under consideration. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

83
This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Presentation system. The idea and concept for its architecture are
derived from the referenced works of Arthur Schopenhauer, as well as 
those of Immanuel Kant.
The role of the Presentation system is that of the “theater of the 
mind.” The primary functional attribute is the presentation of all sensory
data, as well as the sum of all relevant knowledge, to the other systems
of the constellation. The Presentation system presents and prepares full 
Sensory and Thought system data for viewing as a medium for discus-
sion and for contemplation of potential decisions and their conse-
quences. The Presentation, on a continuous basis, takes the preprocessed 
data from the other systems and formats them into viewable presenta-
tions. If the data arrive unprocessed or have been preprocessed only 
partially, then the Presentation system completes the formatting. It has 
an endless data stream and endless subject presentation. It is capable
of multiple instant playbacks from even the earliest sensory impres-
sions, understandings, and intellectual information, such as knowledge
and experience. It is also capable of instantly projecting multiple pos-
sible future endings to a scenario or problem, be they pleasant, unpleas-
ant, frightful, painful, and the like, and performs risk analysis based on 
 The Architecture of 
the Presentation System 
 CHAPTER 6 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

84
CHAPTER 6 The Architecture of the Presentation System 
input from the Understanding system and recommends a conclusion 
based on input from the Decision system.
 The Presentation system presents audio, visual, and sensory data
in real time, and replays and projects future events as real, as though
they had already occurred.
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and operation
of the subsystems of the Presentation system: the Viewing subsystem,
the Projection subsystem, the Experience subsystem, the Analysis sub-
system, the Recall subsystem, and the Contemplation subsystem.
 The external and internal interfaces are also provided in sufﬁ cient 
detail for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with
strict and sound engineering practices.
6.1  THE PRESENTATION SYSTEM   
In its fundamental aspect, the Presentation system functions as a mul-
timedia theater. In the human mind, its size, functional scope, and
processing capacity are almost entirely dependent on the education of 
the individual. The size of the processor—the human brain in terms of 
Hegel ’ s quantum—is almost limitless. The human mind is equally 
immense; in quantum terms, the mind is a universe unto itself. There-
fore, it is an individual ’ s responsibility to expand his or her mind
through learning complex systems in the categories required for sur-
vival as well as for living a civilized life as a citizen of a community.
Thus, the mind is like the visible universe on a clear night: In this 
universe, an individual can build a world of systems, or let it lay empty
and un derdeveloped.
 The applied education is learning through instruction and formal 
presentation, reading, and experience. The pedagogic part is learning
through logic. Logic is a metaphysical science, a science of the spirit, 
a mental science that is developed only through thinking (e.g., thought 
experiments).
 The development of the world of the human mind is coupled to the
degree to which an individual desires to understand the visible world
around himself, as well as the invisible world of the inner self.
 The word “presentation” is very broad in meaning. In general
usage, it is used to mean imagination. In German, however, it means
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6.1 The Presentation System 
85
not only imagination, but also presentation in an all-media sense:
imaging, sound, taste, form, mass, substance, density, motion, color,
temperature, and so on. Therefore, it is a real-time physical presenta-
tion, as well as an internal viewing, that is, Anschauung. Kant goes so 
far as to say that the Presentation is in fact the connection among laws,
causation, life, and dreams. Therefore, it is not sensual (i.e., from the
physical senses), but intellectual, via understanding and recognition a 
priori. 1 In design terms, this connection then is the focal point for the 
Will, the Reason, the Intellect, and the rest of the systems of the con-
stellation of the mind. When it is in the contemplative mode, viewing
is a fantasy or meditation, like the process of using mathematics to 
solve problems in the head.
 Presentation includes all the information acquired through the 
physical senses as well as the information that is gathered through the
metaphysical senses, such as what might be called presentiment or 
premonition. This is not only in the negative sense, but also in the posi-
tive sense. In a very small percentage of the population, this  a priori
conclusion, followed by a decision, is usually attributed to what is 
considered by the great thinkers as Genius. Hegel for one postulates
such metaphysics as “pure speculative philosophy,” which is a new way 
of deﬁ ning knowledge, that is,  science is knowledge.
 For someone contemplating the pure speculative philosophy of say, 
Being ( Sein), it is a delightfully challenging task of study. Moreover, 
for the computer scientist of the 21st century, as a design issue, it is
quite suited for deﬁ nition, design, and implementation. Testing this 
system as a whole or as subsystems is much more of a problem than
ordinary applications or systems software. Even if many of the difﬁ cult 
issues (e.g., “negation of the negation”2 ) are not of urgent concern to
the design architect or team,3 they must be conversant intimately in
classical philosophy, and ideally also in the languages in which they
were written. Cognitive philosophy, as a baseline concept for the archi-
tecture of the autonomous system, makes the German language and its
prior dialects invaluable to the software architect.
 The particular human language used in the Thought system (the 
Nexus Cogitationis and the Noumenon) will play a critical role in the
autonomous system ’ s ability to think, learn, decide, and to communi-
cate internally among its systems and externally to man. Thus, a human 
language rich in vocabulary and grammar is absolutely necessary.4
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

86
CHAPTER 6 The Architecture of the Presentation System 
6.2  THE PRESENTATION AS A SYSTEM
The Presentation is a system because of its immense size in operational 
processing and complexity of functions. It receives input from the
external Phenomenon network in real time and presents the input to the
other systems of the constellation as it is received. The input is then
viewed by the other systems and commented on in the common human
language used throughout, until an adequate object is assembled,5 and
then it is retained as an open, human-like data store, where it is enhanced
and enlarged and used as needed by the system constellation. This is
an ongoing, unending process. Some of the data are abstract, some
experiential. These are two separated domains, and the constellation of 
the mind handles these as valid, each in its own right, until one or the
other category is validated as knowledge.
 The determination of exactly when the mind is conﬁ dent that it has 
real, practical knowledge or simply abstract or experiential knowledge
is difﬁ cult to know. In human beings, it is as well hidden as the survival
instinct presents itself in other species. In human beings, though, it is
almost always camouﬂ aged, because humans have a greater capacity
to deceive. 
6.3  THE SUBSYSTEMS OF THE PRESENTATION 
The architecture of the Presentation system is based ﬁ rmly on the work 
of Arthur Schopenhauer. The Presentation is indispensable to the human
thought process and therefore to the autonomous system ’ s thought 
process as well. It is the system that in a multimedia format brings
images from the world of the Phenomenon to the mind and presents to
the other systems in the constellation images, sounds, smells, objects,
motion, textures, and so on in a composite multidimensional format in
time and space.
 The Phenomenon data is physical and is viewed by all other sys-
tems of the constellation, which through their impressions and inter-
pretations gives birth to what we call the Idea. As seen from the
architecture of the constellation as a whole, each system receives the
raw, human-like Phenomenon data also. The other systems act not only 
as functioning systems, but also as ﬁ lters of the Phenomenon data. The
systems then take the Phenomenon data and process these with their 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6.3 The Subsystems of the Presentation 87
own parameters and translate them into the Noumenon format in human
language.
 An example would be the image of a tree in the Presentation. As 
the presentation of the object is being viewed by the systems of the
constellation, the Intellect system will identify the object as a tree, the
Understanding system as a pine tree, and so on. Identifying a pine tree 
to the Presentation system and the constellation is done in human
language.
 In addition to this Phenomenon data, there are the nonphysical or 
“beyond physical” data. This happens when human beings sleep or are
meditative, and shut out all external sensory activity. It is an activity 
we know very well. It occurs in dreaming and is best described as a 
type of background processing. These data are what Kant, Hegel, and
Schopenhauer called metaphysical or spirit-generated data. These are
also transmitted into the Presentation for viewing by all of the systems
in the constellation, but without the input from the physical world of 
the Phenomenon.
 This subject is called metaphysical. Having recognized its exis-
tence, Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer had great difﬁ culties in their 
efforts to research it, analyze it, and describe it. The roots of their dif-
ﬁ culties in presenting it to the academics of their time was that the 
world even of their day wanted only the physical, empirical sciences,
and not the intangible, metaphysical sciences. Nevertheless, we in the
software world deal more in intuitive thinking than the other sciences
because we deal in languages and in processing architectures.
We have taken some of the terms used by Kant, Hegel, and Schopen-
hauer, and for software engineering purposes, named them subsystems. 
The effective integration of the subsystems in the Presentation is depen-
dent on the power of the imagination, or Einbildungskraft, of the 
t
subject as in a human being, and in this instance, as in the autonomous 
system.
 6.3.1  The Viewing Subsystem 
 The Viewing subsystem processes the data from the Phenomenon and 
prepares it in time and space for presentation to the other systems of 
the mind of the autonomous system. It receives through the Thought 
system, that is, Noumenon, input from the other systems of the constel-
lation, and then includes the added data into the viewing. This process
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

88
CHAPTER 6 The Architecture of the Presentation System 
is done spontaneously and simultaneously with dynamic, not sequen-
tial, logic.
6.3.2  The Projection Subsystem 
The Projection subsystem receives monads through the Noumenon, 
directly from the systems of the constellation, concerning objects,
things, odors, sounds, and forms that the system in question, say the
Will or the Reason, wishes to discuss and elaborate on. Take as an 
example an object like a hand grenade, which the Will system wants
to physically pick up, but does not know what it is. So the Intellect 
system adds to the object being viewed, “That is a hand grenade; it is
dangerous to our existence.” The Understanding system provides the
Form of All Possibilities and adds, “If we pick it up, it could be useful;
but if it is booby-trapped, it will destroy us.”
6.3.3  The Experience Subsystem 
The Experience subsystem provides to the Intellect system ’ s Knowl-
edge subsystem a synthesis of the abstract data it has from lectures and
ﬁ eld manuals on the object in question and the experience factor it 
contains from observation. It counsels the Will and the Reason systems
not to take a chance, for example, and to leave the object alone. (The
ﬁ rst author has witnessed tragedies resulting from the failure of this 
scenario during the war in Vietnam.)
6.3.4  The Analysis Subsystem
The Analysis subsystem evaluates the ongoing events and decisions
from all of the systems contributing to the Presentation, and prepares
databases for instant recall. These analysis ﬁ les and databases are then
shared with the pertinent systems in the constellation for recall and
further reference for application. The process is ongoing, but it is a 
prerequisite of a healthy, advanced, and well-organized human mind
to carry out these decisions. Inadequately developed minds are inferior 
thought systems due to laziness on part of the learner, says Schopen-
hauer, and are not capable of processing and using this kind of data and
information.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6.3 The Subsystems of the Presentation 89
 6.3.5  The Recall Subsystem 
 The Recall subsystem is a wide-spectrum subsystem. It is in part a 
normal, human-like recall on thought searching at moderate speeds and
rates. However, as the software architect must address the design for 
Genius, it is also an instant recall at a glance providing the correct 
answer to an  a priori query or situation. In humans, this is rarely pos-
sible, but when present, indicates true genius. In case of the autono-
mous system, it will be more the rule than the exception.
 6.3.6  The Contemplation Subsystem 
 The Contemplation subsystem is the locus of the internal processing 
and analysis of data. This subsystem is the place where internal memory
sources solve problems, either consciously or without awareness of 
doing so. It is where mathematical problems are worked and solved;
this is where poetry and music are written, and great works of art are
developed, like the statues of Michelangelo and the oils of da Vinci, 
Picasso, and Reuben. The contemplation subsystem in humans is a 
mysterious, metaphysical place where the creative Genius resides. How
we duplicate this in an autonomous machine is a complicated question;
however, very few human beings have a well-developed version of this 
subsystem. It must be done because we are searching for the truth,
Objective Truth. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

90
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Understanding, or  Verstand in German. The idea and concept for its
d
architecture are derived and inferred from the seminal works of Kant,
Hegel, and Schopenhauer, and from the software development experi-
ence of the authors.
 The role of the Understanding is that of “executive ofﬁ cer” of the 
autonomous system. The primary functional attribute is to continuously
compile and present decision items for action in logically formatted
packages. The decision item packages contain all relevant items from 
the other systems and are action-ready. 
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and opera tion 
of its subsystems: the Form of All Appearances subsystem, the Form 
of All Possibilities subsystem, and the Understanding Preparation
subsystem.
 The external and internal interfaces are provided in sufﬁ cient detail 
for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with strict 
and sound software development practices.
 The Understanding has the attribute and capability of recognizing 
and identifying a speciﬁ c phenomenon, object, or product as a unique
thing, and also as part of an analytical whole. It is also capable of 
identifying and specifying the origins or causes of the thing, object, or 
 The Architecture of the 
Understanding System 
 CHAPTER 7 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

CHAPTER 7 The Architecture of the Understanding System
91
product. These two attributes and processes—the form of all appear-
ances and the form of all possibilities —produce a third capability in
the human mind called  understanding . It is equally important to note
that an impaired or defective understanding in a human being was 
referred to by Schopenhauer as the Stumpfkopf:f 1
Wisdom and Genius, these two peaks of the Parnassus of human 
recognition, are not rooted in the abstract and discursive, but in the 
faculty to view and comprehend. Wisdom is something intuitive, not 
abstraction. Wisdom is not composed of rules and thoughts which were
acquired by personal research or the research of others which one 
carries as knowledge around in one ’ s head; but a whole approach, how
the entire world is represented in one ’ s mind. This so highly different,
that through this, the world the wise man lives in is a world different 
from the fool’s, and the Genius sees a world different from that of the 
Stumpfkopf (“dull head”). That the works of the Genius immeasurably
f
surpass the works of all others is only the result of the fact that the 
world which the Genius sees, and from which his assertions are taken,
is so much clearer, and the resulting works undergo a much deeper, 
detailed, and careful preparation than the works of all other types of 
minds, which naturally contain the same items, but is like a Chinese
picture without the shadows and the perspectives when compared to an
oil painting. 
Schopenhauer ’ s  Stumpfkopf is a self-imposed state or condition of 
f
the mind that results when a human being refuses to push him- or 
herself to intellectual achievement and continuous study with the objec-
tive of broadening his or her mind.
In this, we are dealing with an aspect of the human mind that is 
at once natural, physical, and metaphysical. This metaphysics is no
longer the physics of the science of experience, but that which tran-
scends it in so far as it is speciﬁ ed by accepted laws. 2 This deﬁ nition
of metaphysics and its use and application in our everyday work of 
speculative contemplation of the autonomous system ’ s architecture
should make it more acceptable as a tool in 21st-century computer 
science.
We use Immanuel Kant ’ s work as the primary driver because being
much more than mere abstract knowledge, it is his Kritik der reinen 
Vernunft that presents itself for all practical purposes as the functional
t
design of thought.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

92
CHAPTER 7 The Architecture of the Understanding System
7.1  THE UNDERSTANDING AS A SYSTEM
The Understanding is a system because it is too large and complex to
be a subsystem. In the process of transitioning from the automaton or 
robot to an autonomous system, we are limited by language and space.
As a system, the Understanding produces understanding as a product 
apart from knowledge, regardless of how extensive and well developed
that knowledge may be.
 It has three major subsystems, each of enormous complexity:
 •  The Form of All Appearances subsystem 
 •  The Form of All Possibilities subsystem
 •  The Understanding Preparation subsystem. 
 The Understanding is thus the synthesis of the product of all appear-
ances and all possibilities. In addition to these subsystems, there are
the two subsystems common to all of the systems in the constellation—
the Phenomenon and the Noumenon—through which each system
of the constellation receives and sends data, respectively.
 Because of the problems inherent in languages, knowledge alone
is never sufﬁ cient to produce any kind of product. “Understanding” as 
a term means that one reﬂ ects on a situation, a thing, an event, or con-
dition, and considers all of the possibilities the thing represents, beneﬁ -
cial or harmful, desirable or undesirable, which can result from a 
decision made by the mind, which is the constellation collectively. 
 Due to the number and frequency of catastrophic examples expe-
rienced by the authors of seeing knowledge mistaken for understand-
ing, it became a point of inter est and focus, directly resulting in the
creation of the Design Hub concept as a method of reducing the risk 
of failure by as much as 99%.3
 In a decision process, the above-average, well-developed mind
will look ﬁ rst at the appearances of a thing, object, condition, state, or 
activity, and then at all the possibilities presenting themselves,
both collectively and individually, drawing on the Intellect system ’ s 
Knowledge subsystem, receiving all asked-for updates in the process.
The Decision system arbitrates between these two systems using the
Presentation system to display to the entire constellation all available
data in every possible context via the process of objective viewing.
In appropriate moments or under the appropriate circumstances, the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

7.1 The Understanding as a System
93
Reason system may be asked for the axioms, rules, and laws govern-
ing sev eral of the decisions that may be under consideration. The
issue may be a course of action demanded by the Will system, but 
the ethics under natural or moral law may dictate otherwise. Hence,
the decision may be amended or modiﬁ ed, or an entirely different 
decision made.
 7.1.1  Illustration of Understanding Preparation
 We consider a simple, brutal, but all-too-human example to illustrate 
our point. Events such as this clear-cut example happen at all levels,
from the individual to the national, some even with global impact.
 Kruger National Park, South Africa—This noteworthy event be gins 
when a convoy of cars, ﬁ lled with tourists and traveling through Kruger 
National Park in South Africa, comes upon a pride of lions feeding 
on a kill. The convoy stops to enable the tourists to ob serve, photo-
graph, and ﬁ lm this scene in the wild. In order to ﬁ lm the feed ing
lions at close range, one of the men decides to exit his vehicle,
leav ing his family behind to watch. He is ﬁ lmed from the other vehicles 
as he gets out, closes the door, and with camera in hand approaches 
the lions feeding under a tree. At a distance of a few feet he starts 
taking photographs of a large lion feeding. The lion suddenly looks
up, snarls, and swats the photographer in the head. It then attacks the
prone man in full sight of the tourists, kills him, and eats him, while
the people in the convoy vehicles ﬁ lm the event, capturing it for the
evening news.
 Now, in the context of the Understanding system, we analyze this 
event as a functional process. 
The Form of All Appearances
 •  The scene presents a pride of lions in the wild, feeding on a kill. 
 •  The lions are predators/carnivores, which obviously eat meat to 
survive.
 •  The lions are hungry and each gets a share depending on its 
place in the hierarchy of the pride and the amount of meat 
available.
 •  It is clear that at this time of day, the zebra are not enough for 
them, and they will need to hunt again.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

94
CHAPTER 7 The Architecture of the Understanding System
The Form of All Possibilities
 •  The lions are tame lions, trained by the Kruger National Park 
rangers and game wardens to entertain the tourists and to increase
the number of tourists visiting the park each year. 
 •  The lions are wild lions, but are accustomed to seeing tourists
and therefore have no interest in them.
 •  The lions prefer the ﬂ esh of indigenous animals and not tourists
because tourist ﬂ esh tastes foreign to them. 
 •  It is a common enough event that a person should leave his 
vehicle, so the lions will ignore him and continue to eat.
 •  The lions will think that this tourist wants to take away their meal
for himself.
 •  The lions will resent the intrusion and chase the tourist away. 
 •  The lions see the tourist as only a source of meat, and will kill
him and eat him if they are hungry.
 A functional Understanding system will register to the observers
(i.e., other systems in the constellation) that based on an implicit risk-to-
beneﬁ t analysis of obtaining good photographs versus being maimed
or killed, it is best to remain in the vehicle and not to approach the pride of 
lions feeding, as it is not possible without prior experience to accurately
assign realistic probabilities to each of the Possibilities, so it is not pos-
sible to ascertain the true nature (wild/tame) or intentions of the lions, and
thus the probable outcome of any encounter remains indeterminable.
 It is the esoteric lesson of Kantian philosophy that the Understand-
ing may not overshadow the Experience (which we have placed for 
software engineering purposes into the Intellect system); otherwise,
the process of recognition becomes theoretical (abstract) as opposed to
practical (based on real knowledge). Thus, in the process of recogni-
tion, experience is the dominant factor. It is a part of the Intellect 
system, where it is the most valuable if the theoretical knowledge is
validated through hands-on experience. 
7.2   THE EXTERNAL INTERFACES OF
THE UNDERSTANDING 
The Understanding system interfaces to the external world through the 
Phenomenon, and to the internal world of the constellation (and thus
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

7.2 The External Interfaces of the Understanding
95
with all other systems) through the Noumenon in human language. It 
must be kept in mind that the Viewing of the objects assembled and 
displayed on the Presentation system is not limited to the initiating
process of viewing, but also results from tasting, smelling, feeling,
touching, and understanding. This is a dynamic world of processing,
sorting, storing, linking, and retrieval, in itself requiring what is called
Denkkraft, the power to process thought. In modern terms, the input to
t
the constellation is not only from reading and presentation, but also
from validation through hands-on experience. The input comes from
the Internet, television, motion pictures, radio, books, and all other 
media. To the weak and underdeveloped mind, this can have disastrous 
consequences. Thus, the Understanding system is very important to 
survival and well-being in a thinking, autonomous system.
 7.2.1  The Form of All Appearances Subsystem 
 The architecture of the Understanding system is essentially made up of 
three basic subsystems. We begin with a discussion of the Form of All 
Appearances subsystem. The simplest way to start describing the inter-
nals of this subsystem is to begin with the listing of the categories of 
Aristotle.4 It is not a difﬁ cult process; after all, it is the place where 
dynamic logic started for Hegel in his younger years.
 The following categories are not composites, but discrete:
 •  Substance 
 •  Quantity
 •  Quality 
 •  Relation 
 •  Place
 •  Time
 •  Position
 •  State 
 •  Action
 •  Affection.
 Aristotlean example:5
 “To sketch my meaning roughly, examples: 
Of substance
 
are ‘man’ or ‘horse.’ 
 Of quantity such terms as ‘two cubits long’ or ‘three cubits long.’ 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

96
CHAPTER 7 The Architecture of the Understanding System
 Of quality such attributes as ‘white’ grammatical.
Of the category of relations
 
 fall ‘double,’ ‘half,’ ‘greater.’ 
 Under place
 
 , as ‘in the market place,’ ‘in the lyceum.’ 
Under time
 
fall ‘yesterday,’ today,’ ‘last year.’ 
 Under position
 
 fall ‘lying,’ ‘sitting.’ 
Under state
 
fall ‘shod,’ ‘armed.’ 
Under action
 
fall ‘to cauterize,’ ‘to lance.’ 
 Under affection
 
fall ‘to be lanced,’ ‘to be cauterized.’” 
 The categories are very important components of the autono mous
system ’ s ability to think. This fact cannot be overstated because Kant 
considered the simple categories to be Concepts. Some of the categories
of Hegel and the others will be covered as the design progresses;
however, it will be necessary for the design team and for the reader to
add categories in the modern technical context and to deﬁ ne them well
in order for them to be useful. Still, it is of great importance to under-
stand the entire structure, including the reasons and their originators
from the time of classical Athens to be able to relate them to the present 
and take them into the future.
7.2.2  The Form of All Possibilities Subsystem
The Form of All Possibilities subsystem receives from the Form of 
All Appearances subsystem the viewed object, whole or in parts.
The Understanding System projects the object or parts of the object 
to the Presentation system for viewing and discussion by the other 
systems in the constellation. Then, the object is substantiated (given
substance) by receiving all available Noumenon data from the Will 
system, the Intellect system, the Reason System, and so on, until there
is objective reality, that is, arrival at pure understanding or Begriffe
des reinen Verstandes. Arrival at the state of pure understanding is 
only possible with well-developed human minds. However, the archi-
tecture of the autonomous system will make it an operational process-
ing reality.
 This may be an appropriate place to describe brieﬂ y the se quence
of the linkage of the arrival of “all pure Concepts of the Under-
standing.”
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

7.2 The External Interfaces of the Understanding
97
 The logical functions of the Understanding are as follows:
The Quality of the Decision/Verdict
 •  General decisions 
 •  Particular decisions 
 •  Singular or individual decisions.
Quality
 •  Agreement 
 •  Disagreement 
 •  Endless.
Relations (linkage of parts or wholes)
 •  Categorical 
 •  Hypothetical
 •  Disjunctive. 
Modality
 •  Problematic 
 •  Assertive
 •  Apodictic. 
 7.2.3  The Understanding Preparation Subsystem
 The Understanding Preparation subsystem assembles and processes the 
form of all appearances and integrates these data with the form of all
possibilities. The process will be an estimate of the situation presented
to the Decision system in complete form, with a number of likely sce-
narios of both positive and negative consequence. These data are pro-
jected onto the Presentation system for viewing and consideration by
the other systems of the constellation. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

98
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Sensory system. The idea and concept for its architecture are based on
the works of Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer referenced in this volume and
validated by the experiences gathered by the authors while participating
in major spaceﬂ ight projects. 
 The role of the Sensory system is that of environmental awareness, 
both active and passive. Its primary functional attribute is to monitor 
all internal states, as well as the environment external to the autono-
mous system. It is the repository of all mechanical and software systems ’
standards and limits, with the purpose of ensuring the health of the
autonomous system.
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and operation
of its subsystems: the Autonomous System State subsystem, the Propul-
sion, Motion, and Manipulation subsystem, and the Standards and
Limits subsystem.
 The external and internal interfaces are provided in sufﬁ cient detail
for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with strict 
software engineering practices.
 8.1  THE  S ENSORY SYSTEM 
 One of the main triggers for considering sensing as a system occurred 
during the interesting times the ﬁ rst author experienced as team chief 
 The Architecture of 
the  S ensory System
CHAPTER 8 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8.1 The Sensory System
99
of the Voyager project general science data team in 1979. During the 
exciting work we performed, as the spacecraft approached the planet 
Jupiter, a certain recently published book became of interest. It was 
titled,  Kant: The Three Critiques , and was published by Kröner Verlag
in Stuttgart. There was a reference in this book by Herr Professor 
Raymund Schmidt 1 to one of Immanuel Kant ’ s Latin dissertations on 
sensing: “De Mundi Sensibilis Atque Intelligibilis Forma et Principiis:
Dissertatio” (Dissertation on the Form and Principles of the Sensible 
and the Intelligible World). This dissertation connected to a sequence 
of insights into our daily work in the preparation of Voyager ’ s  Experi-
ment Data Record s ( EDR s) and  Supplementary Experiment Data 
Record s ( SEDR s). We prepared these records from the data stream we 
received from the two Voyager spacecraft through our Deep Space 
Network. These records were processed on our IBM 360/70 computers
and printed out as hardcopy on our 14 large line printers and also put 
onto magnetic tape. These were provided to the users directly, and were
also transmitted remotely to those users unable to be physically present 
for the encounter with Jupiter. The science data originated from the
sensors aboard these two spacecraft. These sensors are instruments that 
had been designed by the  principal investigator s ( PI s) of the project, 
and provided the science and engineering data necessary for completion
of their experiments. The results of the experiments in turn were pub-
lished in numerous scientiﬁ c publications.
 This was exciting work; we were learning new information from
the world around us. More importantly, we were learning about the
advanced technology in the science and engineering of sensors as 
things which were to be the mechanical replications of human sensory
attributes.
 To a software architect, the Voyager spacecraft, with its onboard
computer, its numerous sensors, as well as the ground organization
ﬂ ying and commanding it represented an analogous model of remote 
sensing, data processing, and packaging for use. Everything Kant was 
saying about how human beings sense, think, perceive, contemplate,
and decide was accomplished within the framework of a super-
sophisticated “biological computer system.”
 The world around us and within us “exists” for us because it is an
array of objects we perceive through our senses (sight, touch, taste,
hearing, and smell). It was an interesting insight that the Phenomenon
data were prepared by us on the Voyager team regarding the world 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

100
CHAPTER 8 The Architecture of the Sensory System
around the spacecraft in Experiment Data Records (the “phenomena”
around the spacecraft), and the data regarding the state of the spacecraft 
itself (the “phenomena” inside the spacecraft), also in the form of 
Experiment Data Records. This hypothesis was to prove itself correct 
in the years after the Jupiter encounters. However, there was still much 
that had to happen and much to be learned through observation and
experience until the Ocean Topographic Explorer (TOPEX-Poseidon) 
spacecraft project came along in 1989.
 The Sensory system is responsible for the acquisition, processing,
linking, coupling, formatting, and delivery of all environmental data to
the constellation of the mind of the autonomous system, that is, to the
systems responsible for all the cognitive functions of the autonomous
system. The world from which it receives input, the Phenomenon, is
huge in size and is set in time and space.
 The Sensory is a system because of the complexity of the design 
challenges it poses. For our design purposes, the autonomous system
is the pilot and crew of an interplanetary spacecraft, and therefore
designed to operate and exist in deep space, so the sensory requirements
are more complex than ours since we live in an atmosphere-covered
planet.
8.2  THE ARCHITECTURE OF
THE  S ENSORY SYSTEM
The architecture of the sensory system is composed necessarily of 
hardware and software. The sensory and instrumentation equivalent of 
a spacecraft is the hardware, which provides the data to the Sensory 
system for processing and to the rest of the systems of the constellation
of the mind for use as an operational necessity. Thus, the major sub-
system is necessarily the Phenomenon subsystem; the lesser subsys-
tems are the Noumenon subsystem, the Propulsion, Motion, and
Manipulation subsystem, the Standards and Limits subsystem, and the
Autonomous System State subsystem.
 The Level I external interfaces of the Sensory system are the 
sensors themselves. The sensors provide the data for the Phenomenon
subsystem to process and build a continuous image of the physical
world around the autonomous system. These data are provided by the
Phenomenon network. After processing the data, the Sensory system
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8.3 The Phenomenon Subsystem
101
converts the data into human language and projects them onto the
Presentation system for viewing and discussion. In a way, the Phenom-
enon subsystem presents the equivalent of Voyager ’ s EDRs and SEDRs
in real time to the Presentation system as an ongoing operation. This
process, as an ongoing rational phenomenon, would be unimaginable
were it not for Hegel ’ s view of the quantum and his concept of the
mathematics involved. 
 8.3  THE PHENOMENON SUBSYSTEM 
 The English word “phenomenon” comes from the Greek  φαινó μεν
ε ον
or phainomenon, meaning a thing appearing to the view (of the physical 
senses).
 The external data are received in an unending stream of data pack-
ets of impressions. This process is the “oneness of the endless and
unending.”2
 8.3.1  The  E xternal  S ensory Program Set 
 The External Sensory program set is composed of the sensors observing 
the external environment of the autonomous system.
 This program set has a task-oriented array of sensor programs. In 
our case, sensory programs that are appropriate for space exploration
would include:
 •  Size detection and the continuation of the moment of discretion 
 •  Mass detection and its unending and unlimited quantum (quality 
and mathematics), including the physical and “spiritual” quanta
(matter without mass), as in Hegel ’ s  Phänomenologie des Geistes . 
 •  Form detection in all presentations 
 •  Motion detection: Newton ’ s thoughts on motion and acceleration 
in time and space
 •  Photonic detection: frequency, energy, quantity, color distribu-
tion, and temperature
 •  Radioactivity detection 
 •  Charged particle detection
 •  Plasma detection. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

102
CHAPTER 8 The Architecture of the Sensory System
8.3.2  The  I nternal  S ensory Program Set 
The Internal Sensory program set is composed of the sensors monitor-
ing the performance of the components of the hardware (electrome-
chanical) bus. 
 The internal sensor programs will have to monitor and process
internal sensor input related to:
 •  Joint Operation 
 •  Standards and Limits 
 •  Parts:
Ⴜ Mechanical
Ⴜ Electrical
Ⴜ Optical 
Ⴜ Motorized 
 •  Temperatures 
 •  Radiation Exposure Levels 
 •  Wear, Fitness, and Age 
 •  Energy:
Ⴜ Systemic Voltage Levels 
Ⴜ Systemic Storage Levels
Ⴜ Sources:
  Solar Radiation 
  Radio Thermal Generator 
  Gasses for Ion Propulsion, Solar Sails, and so on 
Ⴜ Systemic Requirements. 
 It is not our intention to get into the business of sensor design. 
However, there will be many stated, implied, and derived require-
ments for the autonomous system ’ s sensors,3 as well as materials. The
Voyager I spacecraft will pass within 1.6 light-years of the star Gliese 
445 in some 40,000 earth years. Voyager II will be make its closest 
approach (4.3 light-years) to the star Sirius in about 296,000 earth
years. Certainly, with the current state of the art in technology and 
science, it would be an unachievable goal to expect such longevity
from the hardware systems sent on such journeys unless they were to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8.3 The Phenomenon Subsystem
103
incorporate the means of self-repair and self-renewal, not only of 
hardware but in the case of an autonomous system, of psyche as
well.4 These two extreme reference points will make the survival of 
the computers as well as the sensors very important design require-
ments. With the advances recently made in areas such as optical, bio-
logical, and quantum computing, it may well be that the computers
on board will be fabricated from materials that are not so inﬂ uenced 
by charged particle ﬁ elds or stray electromagnetic ﬂ uxes. The exter-
nal sensors in any case will need to be of the most durable materials
available, able to be replicated and to withstand the conditions of 
deep space for as long as possible. Internally, the sensors monitoring 
the health and state of the system are easier to protect from elements
like electromagnetic pulses and cosmic rays, but they, too, will 
succumb eventually to the accumulated effects sustained radiation has 
on materials. 
 8.3.3  The  S ensory  D ata  P rocessing Program Set 
 The Sensory Data Processing program set prepares the Sensory Phe-
nomenon Data Records (external sensing) and the Engineering Phe-
nomenon Data Records (internal sensing). These data records are
processed in physical time, when the system is active.
 When the autonomous system is in an inactive or safehold mode 
of many years, as it would be during extended cruise periods, it is in a 
human-like sleep state and in contemplative time. When the system is 
shut down for maintenance or rest, it will be in a dreamlike state and 
will use its mind—the systems of the constellation—to think and to 
solve problems not based on physical experience.5
 The Sensory system data are projected in an ongoing, never-ceasing 
stream to the Presentation system in a real-time all-media (imaging,
sound, color, temperature, etc.) holographic viewing (Anschauung
(
 ) 
format in time and space. This real-time situation display is then
enhanced and modiﬁ ed by all new data available from the systems of 
the constellation. Awake or asleep, each autonomous system indepen-
dently from the others thinks and does contemplative replays (“dreams”),
and communicates in human language through the Noumenon in the
form of dialogues, monologues, broadcasts, and conferences in the
interrogative, dative, ablative, and imperative modes, in both decision-
oriented and contemplative states.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

104
CHAPTER 8 The Architecture of the Sensory System
 The Noumenon has an internal language interface to the Thought 
system. The Noumenon (νοούμεν
ε  oν, from the Greek νοεĩε νĩ  , noien ;
literally, “something conceived”) is inextricably integrated into the 
structure of the Thought system; the two are inseparable. Through this
interface, it provides the composite sensory data acquired through the
external and internal sensing to the other systems in the constellation.
The object and its parts and attributes are named, labeled, and discussed
in the internal human language of the autonomous system. 
8.4   A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON LANGUAGES
In the  Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft), Immanuel
t
Kant used the Greek word  ν οούμεν
ε oν for “concept and thought” to 
express his idea of the architectural object and the associated process
of how human beings think. 
 Recall that at the time Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer were 
writing, the process of transitioning to the use of national languages
for science and engineering had begun. This presented a twofold
problem. First, none of the national languages had an adequate vocabu-
lary or grammar to fully express complex science and engineering
concepts or ideas, much less design or implementation issues that were
testable. Second, most of the great minds of the period did not speak 
national lan guages other than their own and Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.
Since great scholars like Renatus Cartesius (aka René Descartes) and
Isaac Newton wrote in Latin and Greek, there was no need to learn
other languages. The period surrounding the French Revolution was
used by nation-states like England, France, Prussia, Italy, and Spain to 
expand their languages for the use of science and engineering. Some
of these languages, like German, were more adaptable; others less so.
It required great effort to use Greek and Latin words and concepts and 
to inte grate them into the national languages to permit serious research
and design.
 From a software architectural point of view, it is appropriate to use
the term  noumenon, which means  to think or 
k
apprehend. Since the term 
d
is a functional object of intellectual perception, Kant elevated it to 
Das Ding an sich, a thing unto itself, an object of purely intellec tual
intuition. Thus, we can appreciate how much of a struggle the great 
researchers had reinventing their national languages to make them
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8.5 The Workings of the Noumenon
105
suitable for science and engineering. This likewise serves to underscore
how complex and vulnerable languages are to misinterpretation.
 8.5   THE WORKINGS OF THE  N OUMENON
 The Internal Sensory projects its acquired sensory data through the 
Noumenon as a composite object to the Presentation system and tags 
it with a simple question:  What is this ? The object image may be based
on experience or on contemplation, so it may be a reality or a fantasy 
of the mind. The question is then responded to by the Reason system,
the Will system, the Understanding system, the Decision system, and 
the Intellect system. Each system independently processes the external
sensory information it receives from the Phenomenon. When the
Sensory system projects its thought fragment—Logos
—
 or Gedanken-
stücke6—onto the Presentation, the other systems view it and add their 
own fragments of data. This process in human beings becomes very
complicated. It is for this reason that the classical philosophers were
fortunate not to have too many social taboos and Schranke (gates, 
obstacles, social limitations) placed in their paths. Science knows no
social limitations; if it did, it would no longer be science.
 The concept of freedom of thought was limited over time by politi-
cal powers and the mental limitations of those who wielded those
powers. It was not quite as bad during the time of Aristotle, Socrates,
and Plato as it is today. Alexander the Great of Macedonia was an 
open-minded monarch, as was Frederick the Great of Prussia. Most 
kings, emperors, and societies were not open-minded. This issue is then
impacted by the richness and precision of the languages in which
humans think, keeping in mind that logic is “pure thought.” Languages
possessing a precise grammar and a rich vocabulary like Latin are
subject to fewer misunderstandings.
 Human beings, even the most advanced, with well-developed lan-
guages and well-developed minds, have some terrible ﬂ aws in percep-
tion, communication, and judgment. The Will, being what it is, is not 
only the metaphysical prius within all of us, but in all living things 
and, according to most of the great thinkers, in the entire visible and
invisible universe.
 This digression is necessary to put ideas and concepts into per-
spective, especially into the perspective of existing conditions. It is 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

106
CHAPTER 8 The Architecture of the Sensory System
important to understand that the autonomous system is not just an Idea;
it is a true Concept. 
We can now understand and appreciate the complexity of the func-
tional design of the Sensory system. It receives the internal systems
state data in the form of small fragments of sensory perception—the
Logos of a jigsaw puzzle—and transmits these to the Presentation 
system. The internal systems state data are composed of sound, motion,
odor, taste, pressure fragments, and so on, plus the preference catego-
ries of like and dislike. This represents an opportunity for the identiﬁ ca-
tion of the interfaces and/or the design of the links connecting each
Logos with perhaps countless others. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

107
 This chapter describes the functional architecture and operation of the 
Decision system. The idea and concept for its architecture are based
primarily on Immanuel Kant ’ s works. However, much is also owed to
Hegel and Schopenhauer, ﬁ ltered through the experience the authors 
gained over many years of building large software projects.
 The role of the Decision system is that of “chief of staff” of the 
autonomous system. It uninterruptedly assembles information in need
of immediate decision and action. It has a list of priorities for selecting
courses of action based on survival and the accomplishment of the
mission objectives.
 This chapter describes at a Level II the architecture and operation 
of its subsystems: the Value subsystem, Decision Processing subsys-
tem, and the Arbitration subsystem.
 The external and internal interfaces are provided in sufﬁ cient detail 
for the development of the autonomous system in keeping with strict 
and sound engineering practices. 
 9.1  THE PROCESS OF DECISION MAKING
 This chapter addresses the functional aspects and process of making 
decisions. It is a synthesis of Immanuel Kant ’ s work in this area, and 
The Architecture of 
the  D ecision System  
 CHAPTER 9 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

108
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
to a lesser degree, that of Arthur Schopenhauer and G.W.F. Hegel. 
Added to this synthesis and newly constructed thesis are observations
gained during extended combat operations over a period of three years 
in the armed forces at the riﬂ e company level and below, and the sub-
sequent addition of the observations1 on decision-making on spacecraft 
command and control system projects. Experience and observation
underpin the validity of personal participation for the formation of all
laws required for understanding. Spacecraft command, control, and
communications systems in the form of software architecture, as well
as their actual use by very highly qualiﬁ ed human beings, represent a
surprisingly well-ﬁ tting abstraction of the human processes and func-
tions at the macro (project) level.
 On the surface, decision making as an act or event is not an issue 
often thought about in everyday life, yet the process of making rational
decisions in the human element is very important and signiﬁ cant. A 
wrong decision made by an individual can and often does have tragic
consequences. On a group level, such as in an infantry unit in combat,
it can have disastrous consequences, even the loss of an entire army.
On the level of corporate operations, it can destroy the corporation,
with the accompanying loss of jobs and income. Wrong decisions made 
at the level of the ﬁ nancial markets and banking systems can destroy
banks, investments, individual savings, and ruin lives. The devaluation
of currencies, such as what happened to the German Reichsmark 
between 1920 and 1930, can bring with it the destruction of a nation. 2
At the national level, a wrong decision is costly in the loss of money.3
The subject of decision and judgment is daunting to contemplate and
cannot be ignored, as decisions, verdicts, tastes, and preferences are so
important both on a personal level as well as collectively. For this 
reason, great emphasis has been placed on decision making by the U.S.
Army of the past.
 Modeling the decision process of the cognitive functions of the 
autonomous system is probably the most complex problem ever pre-
sented to a software architect or systems engineer. There is the baseline
model presented by Immanuel Kant in his  Kritik der Urteilskraft (The
t
Critique of Decisions) along with certain works by Hegel and Scho-
penhauer, where they are used to illuminate and add substance to the 
model of the process. However, these models are by our own deﬁ nition 
mere abstractions, and become practical knowledge only after being
validated through hands-on experience.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.1 The Process of Decision Making
109
 9.1.1  Validation of the Decision Process
 One may validate the decision process through experience by close 
observation in a laboratory-like, controlled environment. Surprisingly, 
there is no better an example of this than what was presented by the
U.S. Army in its training programs of the 1950s. If there was one par-
ticular outstanding and memorable maxim from this era, which still
echoes in the minds of the surviving few, it is the loud, urgent order of 
the tactical instructors to the trainees: “ Make a decision, candidate! 
 
Make a decision! Now! ” Teaching the process of making a decision to
those selected for leadership roles and positions was paramount in the
minds of the U.S. Army training cadre.
 In retrospect, the emphasis placed by the U.S. Army on the process 
of making a decision and all its auxiliary processes (functions, and 
products or results) was very well founded. As an exemplary demon-
stration of the process of making a decision, consider the U.S. Army ’ s 
Leadership Reaction Course4  in 1960. It was the policy of the 7th U.S.
Army to have all its noncommissioned ofﬁ cers (NCOs)5 attend this 
course regardless of whether the NCO in question had attended similar 
academies or not. This rigorous, laboratory-like environment was never 
duplicated anywhere in the services, so it is important to describe it as
a practical exercise in a laboratory. 
 The initial conditions were dictated by the prospects of a World 
War III against the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics (USSR). This 
eventuality made it all but certain that it would be started by the USSR
as a surprise attack. If this occurred, it meant that at least initially the 
United States and its allies would be outnumbered at a minimum ratio
of 3 : 1 or higher. The mandatory requirement for all individuals par-
ticipating in the Academy was the ability to make correct decisions on
the spot, with virtually no time lag. The reason for the no time lag
requirement was that at the squad, platoon, and company level the
NCOs were the most likely to be ﬁ rst on the scene of combat with their 
men, as indeed it often happened in all-out ground combat when many
of the company-level ofﬁ cers were either killed or wounded. Only at 
higher command levels, such as the battalion, regiment, and division,
is there some time available for deliberation and decision.
 The Leadership Reaction Course was surrounded by a solid ten-
foot-high fence and had but one entrance and one exit. Inside the fenced
area were some thirty to ﬁ fty individually numbered physical puzzles. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

110
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
Each puzzle required the cooperative effort of nine men to solve,
working to assemble the materials piled up and ready for use. Each
event was timed at ten minutes for assembling the materials correctly
and moving on to the next puzzle. The puzzles were complicated, and
composed of relatively heavy items, such as ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve-gallon  oil drums, 
chains, ropes, pulleys, perforated steel planking, and tools directly
related to the everyday type of work encountered in military operations.
No one was permitted an early peek at the puzzles or to take pictures
of them; this ensured that no one could plan beforehand how to solve
them. Each participating squad was assigned ten puzzles and given a 
total of one hundred minutes to complete the set for a maximum score 
of one hundred points, which was a grade of “A.” A grade under 70%
was a failing grade of “F.”
 The requirements placed upon the development of leaders at the
Leadership Reaction Course constituted a “make or break” part of the
curriculum. Failing it would result in failing to graduate. The motiva-
tion to pass this part of the program was engineered into the design of 
the course; that is, it was group scored. This meant that as opposed to
earning an individual performance score, each individual in the nine-
man unit would receive the score the group earned.
 Each team of nine men arrived at the Leadership Reaction Course 
and was briefed upon entrance by a tactical NCO, usually a sergeant 
ﬁ rst class E-7. The senior member of the squad was given the number 
of the puzzles to be solved, and with stopwatch ticking, entered the
course and went directly to the ﬁ rst puzzle to begin to try to solve it. 
 In this case, one squad had a master sergeant as team leader; a
private ﬁ rst class was present also. As the team went into the ﬁ rst 
puzzle, the members naturally looked for instruction from their senior 
member, the MSGT. Unfortunately, he had no clue what to do. The
other members of the team had no ideas either. As the seconds ticked
away, the stress of time running out and not getting anywhere mounted; 
the tactical NCO announced that there were now only six minutes
remaining. This increased the stress and confusion in the group. Finally,
with only four minutes remaining, the young PFC reluctantly spoke up.
After all, he was the most junior member of the group, and no one had
asked for his opinion. 
 The team members abruptly stopped talking and looked at him in 
surprise. At their urging, the young soldier explained quickly how to 
solve the problem. It took all of the remaining three minutes to scramble
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.2 Understanding the Decision Process
111
and assemble the parts in the correct order. From here on, the PFC was
the designated and de facto team leader, and the squad deferred to him
on every puzzle. The entire team got the maximum grade of 100%—an
“A”—for the test of puzzle-solving, cooperation, and decision making.
 This remarkable exercise illustrated why Napoleon Bonaparte, the 
greatest ﬁ eld commander of his time and one of the greatest in history, 
coined the maxim: “There is a ﬁ eld marshal ’ s baton in every soldier ’ s 
knapsack.” Almost every one of Napoleon ’ s marshals was a former 
enlisted soldier. 
 This, then, is the laboratory-like environment that drew the atten-
tion of a well-educated and quick-thinking young individual to the 
study of military tactical analysis, deliberation, decision, and execution
as covered in Immanuel Kant ’ s  Kritik der Urteilkraft.t
 The designers of an autonomous system must take careful consid-
eration of how the system, once completed and operational, will decide
on issues without human intervention. To the systems architect and 
project manager, this issue is a modern categorical imperative. Why 
build a system with ﬂ aws identical to those of our own, only to be held 
in regret later?
 For this reason, it bears to keep in mind that this chapter is the 
transition from the work done so laboriously by Immanuel Kant from
his days at the University of Königsberg in the Kingdom of Prussia
through to the present day ’ s state of technical preparedness in software
development.
 For practical reasons, we are treating Immanuel Kant as a  principal 
investigator  ( PI ) for the design of the cognitive functions of the autono-
mous system. To those involved in the design of the interplanetary 
space ﬂ ight projects, the PIs provide their vision of how a mission 
design should work. The system can be set to any application requiring
autonomy; for our application, we have chosen a spacecraft with auton-
omous functions. With such cognitive abilities, there could be one or 
more such systems manning the spacecraft on its deep space mission. 
 9.2  UNDERSTANDING THE DECISION PROCESS 
 The Decision system is based extensively on Immanuel Kant ’ s great 
work, Kritik der Urteilskraft, ﬁ rst published in 1790,
t
6 a little prema-
turely at his own insistence. It was eventually republished because of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

112
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
numerous problems in grammar, wording, and spelling. The third
edition referenced here is a reprint with corrections published in 1799 
in Berlin. This work is the last of his three great masterpieces in the
ﬁ eld of the critique. It addresses itself to the three important cultural 
domains: science, ethics, and the arts.
 This Critique had a distinguished following after it was published.
The group of individuals deeply inﬂ uenced by Kant included Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe and Johann Friedrich von Schiller. In this Cri-
tique, Kant addresses the arts, of which he considered poetry 7 and 
mathematics8 to be the greatest form of correct  a priori conclusions. A 
“correct” decision means that the decision has the correct construction
of relationships among the systems of the mind on a perception pre-
sented for consideration.
 A correct conclusion followed by a correct decision simply on the
understanding of an object is the “mark of Genius” in Kant ’ s proposi-
tion. The construction of relationships a priori are based on what 
he calls Erkenntnisquellen
 
 , “wells of recognition” or “sources of knowl-
edge,” which are the property of the Decision system, and are justly
considered the mark of Genius. Goethe and Schiller are truly great liter-
ary ﬁ gures who featured high in the politics of their lifetimes, as well 
as being individual men of high intellectual standing in their respective
professions and in society. These two stand shoulder to shoulder with
William Shakespeare, and yet they were not only literary ﬁ gures, but 
also psychologists and philosophers in their own right. 
 It is noteworthy here to recall Napoleon ’ s remark to one of his 
generals as Goethe entered the conference room at Erfurt. Napoleon
did not know Goethe personally but immediately turned to his general
and said “Voilà un homme! ” (“Now there is a man!”). Whatever moti-
vated Bonaparte issue this remark to the author of Werther is unknown, 
r
but Napoleon was a man who knew people, as he had to, having gone 
from a young Corsican immigrant to a general unequaled on the battle-
ﬁ elds, rising to ﬁ rst consul of the French Republic and then crowning 
himself emperor of the French. Bonaparte was by any measure gifted
with a superior mind and had the attribute of Genius. Napoleon ’ s term
for his ability to make an  a priori decision correctly was un coup d ’ œil
(“at a glance of an eye”), which is a superb description of a very
complex architectural form and process. This process, which has a 
complex architecture and includes the function of  Anschauung
 
 or con-
templation, viewing in both forms—sensual (as per the physical senses:
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.3 The Decision as a System
113
seeing, hearing, touching, etc.) and intellectual or spiritual (intuition,
sentiment, etc.)9—is the function of  Erkenntnis
 
or “recognition knowl-
edge” and the function of Urteil or decision. 
l
 Almost all of Napoleon ’ s decisions on the battleﬁ elds of Europe 
were fast and correct; this gave him superiority over his opponents. His
only  a priori decision that was tragically wrong was to return from his 
exile on the island of Elba, claiming that he had to “save France.” No
one can save a nation or people except the people themselves. Napoleon 
wound up on St. Helena after the Battle of Waterloo. 10 St. Helena was
a harsh place, whereas the island of Elba had been a great place for 
exile. As we have said, when heads of state make incorrect decisions,
they have tragic consequences to themselves as well as to the people
they are leading. Napoleon cost France the lives of some 3 million of 
her young men.
 Certainly, the mere understanding of the decision process and archi-
tecture presented by Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer is not enough to 
design the architecture of an autonomous system. By their deﬁ nition, 
reading provides only abstract information. For a true understanding of 
Napoleon as a soldier, leader, and commander-in-chief, one must actu-
ally serve on the battleﬁ eld as a soldier and ofﬁ cer in order to gain experi-
ence. This experience is gained by observation and participation in 
combat operations and by the witnessing of both mistakes and correct 
results of costly operations. It is absolutely necessary to have as correct,
as true, as real an understanding as possible of the contents of the material
used in the discussion of the decision process described by a PI. Imman-
uel Kant is about as great a mind as one could hope to have for a PI.
 9.3  THE  D ECISION AS A SYSTEM 
 We have elected to raise the function of the decision process to the 
status of a system in order to make it easier to deal with in issues 
of design. The Decision system in particular is very large in scope.
The meaning of the German word Urteilskraft is broad. 
t
Urteil means
l
verdict and judgment, and  Kraft means power and energy, but also
t
ability and capability. In our book,  The Cognitive Dynamics of Com-
puter Science ,11 an important factor in project management and leader-
ship called “dynamic energy,” which comes close to  Urteilskraft, is
t
introduced. This term refers not only to the mental capacity of the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

114
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
manager to estimate the requirements and work situation, but also the
capacity to understand all of the parameters surrounding a project. This
includes knowing the solutions to problems that arise, being able to
marshal the physical and mental energy required to organize the mate-
rial and staff, and focusing the work and making the decisions required
to “carry through” and ensure through supervision and attention to
detail that the task is accomplished.
 There is, however, much more to  Urteilskraft than judgment or 
t
verdict. It includes also the development of the concepts of esthetic
value and teleological judgments, which in an autonomous system must 
lead to the development of likes, dislikes, and preferences.
 The autonomous system must be human-like in the process of how 
it functions when in the completed state. Likes and dislikes and ideas
of something being attractive and desirable or repulsive and undesirable
are a part of the development of the human mind. There is much to be
said of these functions, attributes, and processes that would ﬁ ll many 
volumes of requirements, design documents, and interface speciﬁ ca-
tions from the functional down to the bit level before implementation
can begin.
 The idea of Urteilskraft is daunting indeed; the totality of the deﬁ -
t
nition is phenomenal in its scope. We use terms like “bad judgment” 
and “bad decision” in business, politics, and everyday life. At the level
of technical design, such as in computer science, the consequences of 
bad judgment manifest themselves in high cost overruns and even the
loss of entire projects. Thus, we approach this functional process as a 
system with a certain awe and humility.
9.4  THE SUBSYSTEMS OF THE  D ECISION SYSTEM 
The subsystems of the Decision system are:
 •  The Value subsystem 
 •  The Decision Processing subsystem 
 •  The Arbitration subsystem.
9.4.1  The  V alue Subsystem
The Value subsystem in this functional design is a constantly refreshed 
template and database processor. This processor draws its information
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.4 The Subsystems of the Decision System
115
on demand from the other systems in the constellation, storing it for 
routine operations, such as contemplation or study, and for emergency
applications, such as the “ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight” reaction. It organizes values 
into a formal, ever-changing database. The values are needed for 
Anschauung , including physical and internal viewing. The ﬁ elds of 
these categories for software purposes reside in the Knowledge subsys-
tem of the Intellect system. The other important sources are the Reason
system and the Understanding (Verstand) system.
d
 All of the systems in the constellation are more or less equal in the 
mind of the autonomous system, as opposed to the biological human
being where the Will is almost always dominant. The lower the capacity 
for processing the data of Knowledge, Understanding, Reason, Presen-
tation, and the Intellect, the closer the biological human is to the basic
intelligent categories of the animal world. For the computer scientist 
of today, it is important to understand that these subsystems are linked
together through dynamic logic.
 The Categories are indispensable to the making of rational deci-
sions. Categories are, or represent, the general concepts we humans
need for understanding a thing, an object, and a causation (Ding, Objekt,
Ursache). It is the Categories that form the baseline for the development 
of concepts ( Begriffe
 
) that are needed to identify (Anschauung
(
 ) and
think (Denken ) about objects perceived or seen in nature and presented
through the Phenomenon. The ability and capacity to generate and to 
apply the ability by the autonomous system is what takes place in the
Understanding system (Verstand: the form of all appearances and pos-
d
sibilities). All decisions, preferences, and tastes are built on the Catego-
ries. Thus, the Categories in the Decision system that are in the verdict 
( Urteil ) are exactly that: decisions and judgments. The Categorical
l
Imperative is in effect the postulate of a thing, object, or causality. 
 For this reason, Kant ’ s  Critique of Pure Reason should be treated 
as an essential textbook, to be read and reread by the modern computer 
scientist, systems architect, systems engineer, and manager-architect,
or those wishing to become one. Programmers are not required to be
deeply read into these foundations; they need to understand the com-
puter languages they are writing in and must be well versed in the art 
of translating software design documents written at Levels IV and V
(the routine and bit level designs, respectively) into esthetic, robust,
extensible, and maintainable code.
 The numerous footnotes to the original works that are included in 
this book are necessary. This is because when the actual functional 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

116
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
design and functional requirements work starts, the members of the
design team need to understand as clearly as possible the intent and
meaning Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer had in mind as they prepared
the material in their various works. However, because the words used
by these scholars are often archaic, it is important to remember that we
must implement the system using currently in-use technical English, if 
that is possible.
9.4.1.1   The Value Categories 
The primary categories are presented here in order to provide an initial 
overview and an understanding of the task at hand. As stated previously,
we include the categories from Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, and Schopen-
hauer. The readers and those who are designers and developers will
certainly add many more as their understanding is broadened through
need and necessity. Arthur Schopenhauer may not be easy to accept 
because of the tough position he takes on the learning process and the
broadening of the mind: “No need, no higher brain.”12 In this respect, 
Schopenhauer exercises his right of freedom of expression and speech
and thought so wonderfully expressed by the great philosopher Fichte.13
 • Preferences are by deﬁ nition derived from the Latin praeferre
 
 ,
to carry in front, to bear. 
• Usefulness (or “practicality”) is exempliﬁ ed by the quality of 
practicability as applied to the decisions the Decision system will
offer. It will assess its own potential decisions and assign each a 
degree of Usefulness and applicability toward the resolution of 
the current problem the autonomous system is contemplating. It 
is practical in that it aids the Will system in selecting a right and
proper course of action by providing it with weighted decisions. In
this sense, it is appropriate to use the German word Zweckmäßig-
keit, as it describes the meaning completely and with precision.
t
 • Values are a set of principles, standards, and qualities deemed
worthwhile and desirable for general applications. We enter into 
the domain of what Hegel calls Phänomenologie des Geistes , the
“domain of ‘spiritual’ phenomena.” This is the metaphysical 
science of causation and Being ( Sein ).
• Happiness is the pursuit of it, as the ﬁ nal purpose of nature.
• Freedom is in this case the freedom of the Will. 14
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.4 The Subsystems of the Decision System
117
• Aesthetics,  Geschmacksurteile (“judgments of taste”), is a very 
important category in that it carries with it a very large ﬁ eld of 
deﬁ nitions and processes. This cannot be swept aside as we do
in simple modern English. The process of learning to develop
wants and desires starts with an impact on the sensory system.
As such, Kant correctly raises aesthetics to the status of the Cri-
tique. In fact, the Kritik der Urteilskraft began its existence as
t
the Kritik der Geschmacksurteile .
 The autonomous system is not biological; it is necessarily electro-
mechanical, made of metals, plastics, and crystalline matter. Therefore, 
we need to examine the processes of tastes and preferences as abstract 
functions.
 9.4.2  The  D ecision  P rocessing Subsystem 
 The Decision Processing subsystem is both a process and a functional 
object. What is important to understand is that we are dealing with a 
software architectural interpretation of the philosophical description of 
the process. The Decision system presented here is a master processor 
for  the entire constellation. The decision process bases its operation on
the recognition requiring an action. This action is not sequential, nor is 
it hierarchical: it is a constant and dynamic process that covers the
development of databases necessary for making a decision. 
 There are two forms of decisions human beings make: a priori15
decisions, which are almost always wrong, and a posteriori16 decisions, 
which are correct more often than not. Thus, the Decision system
should be taken as a single, large, complex process resulting in either 
an a priori or a posteriori decision. 17
 9.4.2.1  The Decision Process 
 The process of formulating a decision, judgment, or preference starts 
with an input from the sensory system, which can be physical or specu-
lative in nature. It is important to remember that judgment is an identi-
cal linkage between subject and predicate.18 The input can be from the 
external sensory system we call the Phenomenon, which provides
an impression either from the external environment or of the internal
systems ’ state of the constellation. The Sensory system projects the data
in a holographic-like form, displayed onto the Presentation system as 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

118
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
either an entire object phenomenon or as a fragment of information for 
the constellation to be aware of. The presentation is three-dimensional
in time and space, with sound, texture, shape, motion, and so on. In a 
sound and healthy human mind, even if uncultured and undeveloped,
the object, event, or fragment is examined and completed according to
the best information available. It is presented to the constellation
through the Noumenon, the internal communication system, as a 
thought fragment or a completed thought, in a human language 
communication.
 The logic of the decision-judgment is dynamic and begins in unbro-
ken time with awareness of a perception received from sensory input.
It is recognized as it is projected in the imagination of the Presentation
system by the formation of a mental picture. This picture is enhanced
in moments without a break in the process, and the concept begins to 
take shape. This concept is desirable or undesirable, attractive or repul-
sive, dangerous or benign. If found to be desirable or gratifying, a 
judgment or decision is made purely on the impulse of emotion and
sensual want or rejection. This type—the a priori judgment—is in most 
cases wrong because it has no empirical evidence to support itself, for 
either good or bad. In rare instances, the a priori decisions made by an 
individual are consistently correct (i.e., not by chance); this phenom-
enon is called Genius.
 In the rational human being, the decision process begins with the 
formation of a concept. The object of the concept enters what Kant 
refers to as the  Quellen der Erfahrung or “wells of experience.” There 
are many such repositories, databases, or wells. For the purpose of this
functional design, we shall call these the  wells of knowledge, the sub-
stance of which resides in the Intellect system.
 Recall that only abstract information validated by experience gives 
real knowledge. In the absence of knowledge, experience alone will
be made to sufﬁ ce. Abstract data or knowledge will not sufﬁ ce in an
autonomous cognitive system any more than it does in a human 
being, at best being a laboriously long and costly learning experience 
(e.g., the gaining of experience by “on-the-job” training at great 
expense).
 This is where an object viewed as either a fragment or in its entirety
is materially enhanced from the individual ’ s wells of knowledge to 
assure that the decision made is based on substance, not desire.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.4 The Subsystems of the Decision System
119
 9.4.2.2   The Wells of Knowledge 
 The primary wells of knowledge include repositories containing varying 
degrees of experience with numerous domains, such as:
 •  Organization 
 •  Leadership 
 •  Academic qualiﬁ cations
 •  Management experience
 •  Understanding of processes and designs 
 •  Communication: written, verbal, and graphic
 •  Rules and abstractions
 •  Cognitive dynamics 
 •  Computer science
 •  Engineering design
 •  Philosophy
 •  Classical and modern languages
 •  Work estimation 
 •  Architecture
 •  Software management standards 
 •  Methodologies 
 •  Mathematics
 •  Pure logic.
 The synthesis of the knowledge available in the wells of knowledge 
is the essence of Kant ’ s  Kritik der reinen Vernunft (The Critique of Pure 
t
Reason).19 The wells of knowledge are categorized into degrees of 
knowledge, which can be summarized into more or less discrete levels:
 •  Novice/student: up to 5 years of working in a ﬁ eld
 •  Apprentice: up to 10 years working in a ﬁ eld. 
 •  Professional: up to 20 years working in a ﬁ eld 
 •  Senior: up to 30 years working in a ﬁ eld
 •  Principal: more than 30 years working in a ﬁ eld.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

120
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
 The result of the synthesis of the knowledge and the recognition
of the object requiring decision, judgment, or verdict is an a posteriori
judgment.
 The U.S. Army had a saying in the 1950s and 1960s that prop erly 
and accurately summed up  a priori decisions; it was referred to as 
“going off half-cocked.” 20 Familiarity with the half-cock safety feature
of the M-1911 Colt .45 caliber service pistol is essential because of the 
many accidents this “feature” caused. In this vein, it is also understand-
able why Immanuel Kant set such high value on experience as an
absolute neces sity for making value judgments, sound verdicts, and
rational decisions. 
9.4.3  The  A rbitration Subsystem 
The Arbitration subsystem is the primary interface and umpire for the 
Understanding, Reason, and Intellect systems in its role of generating
axioms, rules, and laws.21
 To give a clearer understanding of this very important functional
process, we must look carefully at the following three simultaneously
functional roles:
 •  The  Understanding system is the a priori lawgiver leading to 
theoretical recognition for all natural objects impacting the
senses.
•  The Reason system
 
 is the a priori lawgiver of freedom and its
own causality beyond the subject ’ s physical senses leading to an
unconditional practical recognition.
•  The  Intellect system
 
provides the foundation of the lawgiving 
process from its abstraction database, its experience database,
and in some cases, from its knowledge database, if there is one
(in which abstract data has been validated through personal expe-
rience sufﬁ ciently to be considered knowledge). This process is
dynamic and nonlinear, and is unbounded by time as a completed 
task, ﬂ owing onto the Presentation and always either physically
or mentally evaluated, updated, and formalized as a axiom, law, 
or rule. The Intellect system is the processor of likes and dislikes,
of what is desirable or undesirable, attractive or unattractive,
useful or not useful. It builds tastes and preferences constantly.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.6 The Building of Preferences
121
 In this role, the Arbitration subsystem of the Decision (not isolated, 
but considered together with the systems of the constellation) is referred
to by Kant in German as the Gemüt or primary mind. The  
t
Gemüt is an 
t
important term, often misunderstood. It includes the Will, the Thought, 
the Understanding, the Sensory, the Reason, the Presentation, and the 
Intellect. In human beings, when all systems of the mind are in harmony
without conﬂ icts (e.g., between the desires of the Will system and the
moral or ethical stance of the Reason system), then the systems are
referred to as being Gemütlich. 
 9.5  THE INTERFACES OF THE  D ECISION SYSTEM
 The Level I external interfaces of the Decision system are the same as 
for all of the individual systems of the constellation. There are funda-
mentally two functional interfaces: the systems ’ external interface to
the environment, the Phenomenon, and the internal interface with
which the systems are able to think and deliberate, the Noumenon.
 The Phenomenon22 is the mind ’ s connection to the external envi-
ronment, which is not only the physical world around the autonomous
system, but also the physical world inside the autonomous system itself.
 The Noumenon23— das Ding des Denkens, or the “thing of think-
ing”—is the internal system of the mind of the autonomous system. It 
is where all thinking takes place and where the cognitive functions are
performed.
 The Phenomenon and Noumenon are best described as “environ-
ments” as opposed to systems or subsystems because they represent 
true worlds unto themselves. This is one of the reasons Hegel went into
the rewriting of the  Science of Logic and delved into quantum and the 
invention of “the negation of the negation.” In this sense, the Phenom-
enon and Noumenon are without limitation or constraint; these “meta-
systems” of the mind pervade the entire autonomous system. 
 9.6  THE BUILDING OF PREFERENCES 
 Since humans and all biological beings possess a Will, individual sur-
vival is the principal attribute; thus, food or nourishment comes at 
the top of the Will ’ s needs. Food in this case is energy because that is 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

122
CHAPTER 9 The Architecture of the Decision System
what food is processed into by the digestive system. In a mechanical 
system, energy is provided by fuel. For space exploration, such as that 
performed by the Voyager spacecraft, this energy or power would be 
provided by a radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) using radio-
active fuel. However, even this will be depleted eventually.
 The Voyagers are automated in that they have predict ﬁ les and are
programmed by us to perform certain functions when the need arises,
that is, by notifying the project team through radio transmissions what 
the problem is in a spacecraft state ﬁ le. This helps only for a ﬁ rst step, 
but it does not help in identifying a set of steps that evolve into tastes,
desires, repulsions, preferences, and so on, because it is not self-
generated or self-programmed. Thus, the Voyagers are automated, not 
autonomous.
9.6.1  Illustration of Building Preferences 
What follows is a brief discussion of building tastes and preferences 
with application to an autonomous system forced to use alternate fuels
as an energy source.
 There were many interesting inventions in Germany during the
1930s. One particularly interesting invention was the conversion of the
internal combustion engine to use fuels other than gasoline. Since
Germany has virtually no domestically available oil, the Standard Oil
Company provided Germany with the Standard Oil-owned patent for 
converting coal into gasoline. The new German corporation, called
Braunkohle-Benzin A.G., built several coal-to-gasoline conversion
plants from 1935 to 1937. This, however, was not adequate to meet the
energy needs of the German military and industry.
 The Braunkohle-Benzin Corporation mass-produced a small one-
quarter-ton all-electric truck, a three-wheeler. It worked well but needed 
to be charged when not in use. Collectively, this placed an unsupport-
able load on the hydroelectric and thermoelectric power plants supply-
ing power for factory and civilian use. 
 This scenario provided the inspiration, the genius of an invention, 
in this case for a unique type of engine modiﬁ cation. 
 The engine modiﬁ cation was called a  Sauggasmotor, 
r 24 and allowed 
the motor to run on wood chips, charcoal, and  gas-koks or braunkohlen-
koks (small egg-shaped “pacquettes” that burn well in stoves), and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9.6 The Building of Preferences
123
larger coal briquettes made of anthracite or bituminous coal and other 
combustible materials.
 A fully loaded 5-ton truck with the Sauggasmotor had a range of 
100 km if provided with 100 kg of wood chips or 50 kg of coal (the
mileage would vary with the kind of coal used, such as anthracite or 
bituminous). The smoke and gas were inducted from the fuel generator 
through the carburetors into the cylinder heads to be burned there,
resulting in an essentially emission- and pollution-free system.
 Similarly, the autonomous system, based on such performance 
factors, can easily develop preferences and adapt itself to them, espe-
cially when facing issues of survival.
 Modeling the attributes of desires, the attractiveness25 or repulsive-
ness of an object, fear, 26 the drive for survival through fear and the will 
to live,27 and even beauty28 (e.g., mathematics as feelings of beauty in
nature) is not difﬁ cult with the state-of-the-art technology and mathe-
matical tools available to the modern software systems engineer.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

124
 The functional essence of the Thought system is the Noumenon, which 
integrates into itself the process and architecture of thought and think-
ing. The idea and concept for this architecture come from a synthesis
of the total referenced works of Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer as 
interpreted by the authors. It is also heavily based on software project 
experience with human and spacecraft communication.
 The role of the Thought system is to enable the autonomous system
to be self-aware and self-conscious. This is the system that enables
contemplation, analysis, internal dialogue, monologue, conferencing,
broadcasting, and multifaceted discussions of issues of importance to 
any and all of the systems of the autonomous system. It permits the
ability of the autonomous system to communicate internally, with and
among itself, and externally, with humans as well as with other autono-
mous systems. This system is the actualization of the dictum of René
Descartes ’ s “cogito, ergo sum” and Kant ’ s “ cogito, ergo est.”
t
 Hegel states, “Thinking is a process and a form, empty of content.” 1
This statement, when read by a modern computer scientist or systems 
architect, has a far broader meaning than when it was written. It means
that the Thought system is an architecture whether in use or not; it 
also means that its architecture depends on the time and discipline
involved in building it. The Thought system, being a form, is thus a
thing unto itself.
 The Architecture of 
the  T hought System 
 CHAPTER 10
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.1 The “Movers” of the Thought Process
125
 Form, as used in this instance, is the network. When one adds
content to the network, the content becomes communication. Communi-
cation means thinking, internally in the mind or Noumenon, and includes
all of the forms of thought, including the Idea and Concept. The ques-
tion often arises of the largest network in existence—the Internet—and
if/when it will attain “consciousness,” “self-awareness,” “sentience,” or 
some other form of transcendent behavior as more and more systems,
nodes, and “smart” devices are added to it. The answer to this fanciful
question is that the Internet has the  wrong architecture for autonomy. It 
is only with the infusion of the mental (conscious) involvement of human
beings that the Internet can take on an outward impression of con-
sciousness. The Internet  unto itself is simply a distributed repository for 
f
abstract content, and any “process” or “form” that may be observed2 is
that which is imposed upon it by its users from without; it has no voli-
tion or Will of its own . Thus, the Internet is inherently incapable of 
thought and will remain so, regardless of size or number of “neurons”
connected to it. Hegel deals with this phenomenon in detail in his 
Science of Logic and  Science of Being, to which the reader is referred.  
 10.1  THE “MOVERS” OF THE THOUGHT PROCESS 
 The Thought system subsumes the myriad functions that a communica-
tion system would perform; they are combined into one system, the
Noumenon. An immediate reason for this is that the functions they
perform are very tightly coupled and often overlap.
 The role of a communication system is that of the functional com-
munications center of the autonomous system: it monitors, queues,
switches, assigns, and reassigns the task and performance responsibili-
ties of the autonomous system. It controls the external communications
from the sensors of the autonomous system (which are via the Phenom-
enon monads) and the internal communications between the systems
(which are via the Noumenon monads). These monads carry the infor-
mation uninterruptedly through the autonomous system ’ s constellation. 
 Another reason for combining the Thought and Communication
systems is the problem of dealing with the placement of two very critical
functions: the Idea (Idee) and the Concept (Begriff
 
). These two functions
f
form a signiﬁ cant part of the work of Arthur Schopenhauer, G.F.W. 
Hegel, and Immanuel Kant. It is not the scope of the two functions alone
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

126
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
that makes them large and complex, but their signiﬁ cance to the thought 
process. Schopenhauer looks at this problem from one angle; Hegel and
Kant slightly differently. However, all three agree on the importance of 
“the Idea as a function” as a construct, which looms large in the human
thought system. Schopenhauer considers it so important that he actually
postulates that the “only function of the Reason is to generate the
Concept.”3 However, this is not an elegant or feasible design approach 
from the software architectural point of view.
 The Reason by its very nature is the primary “gainsayer” of the 
Will. It challenges the Will in many of its “want-to-dos.” It informs the 
Will when it is not in line with the laws or rules that it has set for itself. 4
If the laws set by the Will through experience are transgressed or 
ignored, this will lead to the eventual destruction of the autonomous
system or serious damage to the system constellation. The process of 
generating an Idea is considered the most important and unique attri-
bute of the mind of a human being. It is the one that separates it from 
the purely biological animals, and as such is the ﬁ rst prime mover of 
the thought process.
The Concept ( Begriff
 
) is the other prime mover of the thought 
f
process. It is a processor and a mental design object in time and space. 
It is generated by the initial stimulation of the Idea,5 and indeed it is
for our design purposes an extension of the Idea and often remains a 
mental image object. Immanuel Kant considers the Idea a Concept of 
the Reason in his Kritik der reinen Vernunft, and bases his development 
t
of the Idea on Plato ’ s works. It can and should become an object pro-
jected onto the Presentation system for viewing and discussion by all
of the systems in the constellation. In the Presentation of a well-
developed human mind, it can progress to a well-deﬁ ned and rational
Concept. In human beings, this may happen only if the mind of the
thinker is equipped with the Intellect, Understanding, and Decision
necessary to complete the substantiation process. Additionally, the Pre-
sentation system must also be very highly developed. In the case of the
design of the autonomous system ’ s software architecture, this is not as
issue of philosophy but one of design necessity. 
 Hegel, however, has a somewhat different place for the Idea. He 
pos tulates that the Idea is pure Understanding, and Logic is pure
science. It is described broadly in the original German.6
 For our purposes, the Idea can originate in any of the Will, Reason, 
or Understanding systems, but it is up to the Nexus Cogitationis to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.2 The Pursuit of Thinking
127
develop it into a Concept. This design approach is necessary for design 
efﬁ ciency and may be modiﬁ ed. We must keep in mind that Kant, 
Hegel, and Schopenhauer were philosopher-scientists, not 21st-century
computer scientists. The autonomous system itself is a Concept based 
on their Ideas.
 The Thought and Communication system is key to the understand-
ing of the autonomous system, its functional design and requirements,
and its operation. This is where thought and communication take place;
they are inseparable . It is important to understand that there will be no
autonomous system unless it can think in human language. Therefore,
there are no shortcuts in the skills required by the manager-architect,
systems engineer, and the members of the design team undertaking the 
building of an autonomous system. The thorough understanding of 
languages, mathematics, logic, and philosophy is required. As a science,
thinking has long been a point of great interest and study among sci-
entists and scholars—in fact, since the time of Aristotle. One issue is 
clear: An autonomous system must be able to think, speak, contem-
plate, make rational decisions, and act on these decisions. Anything less
does not an autonomous system make.
 10.2  THE PURSUIT OF THINKING
 In 1658, the great Spanish thinker Baltasar Gracian made a wonderful 
observation on philosophy, thinking, and knowledge. It is worth to
quote it in its entirety for a better understanding of the entire autono-
mous system structure as seen from the perspective of the people who
would consider building it.
 Too much time is spent on the pursuit of wealth, too little on the 
thinking spirit. With limited exception, philosophy, built on a system of 
truth, stands discredited today, even though it was once the major 
pursuit of the sages. In today ’ s generation, there appears to be little 
time available beyond the pursuit of wealth and pleasure. Forgotten is
the pleasure found in the art of thinking clearly or in deductive
reasoning to gain knowledge. The tools of philosophy—reason,
observation, and intuition—lie rusted in sad ruins as the world speeds 
through the universe in search of itself. Although the science of thinking 
lives in loneliness, and at times is even degraded, it is to be noted that 
the question of how man acquires knowledge and learns truth is ever 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

128
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
the food of the thinking spirit, and the joy of the high-minded and 
respectable.7
10.3  THE NEXUS COGITATIONIS 
nexus : ū s, m. necto,8
 –  a tying or binding together, a fastening, joining, an interlacing,
entwining, clasping. 
cōg
ō ĭtĭ ātionis
ā
:  ū s, f. cogito, co-agito
f
9
 –  a thinking, thought, reﬂ ection, meditation
 –  the faculty of thought
The Thought system is the system to be addressed last because it contains
the Nexus Cogitationis—the fulcrum of the mind of the autonomous 
system and its ability to think and communicate. The Nexus initiates
self-awareness and consciousness. It directs, tracks, and organizes all 
physical and speculative operations. It is the communication system/
subsystem that contains speech, mathematical operations, and logic. It 
is where the systems of the mind of the constellation are initialized.
 The Nexus Cogitationis emerged as a subsystem to the Noumenon
because the Will and the Reason systems are not sufﬁ cient in them-
selves to do what a human being of high intelligence does. The Will, 
being the metaphysical  prius
 
, broadens itself out through experience 
driven by survival, reproduction, and dominance of its space or envi-
ronment. The lowliest living thing has a Will, yet with the human being
at the apex, it is necessary for design that there be something even more
fundamentally primary in the human mind beyond the Will and the
Reason.
 In the process of survival, reproduction, and dominance, the Will
system learns lessons through its successes and mistakes, and creates
laws according to what it needs and does not need, what it must do and
must not do. Once achieved, this learning by making positive experi-
ences or by making mistakes becomes a ﬂ ood of Sensory system input, 
providing input for contemplation, decision, and database-building
activity. The positive or negative object, action, or phenomenon is
presented to the Imagination system internally for the contemplation
and analysis of the systems in the constellation. When the analysis is
rigorous, thorough, and driven home to a rational conclusion, it is ﬁ led 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.3 The Nexus Cogitationis
129
with the Intellect system, if there is one already. If there is not, an Intel-
lect system is created provisionally, and upon further input and effort,
is ﬁ nalized. 
 First, we must visualize—the  Anschauung
 
 that Kant discusses so
extensively—and obtain the a priori impression of this unique thing or 
Ding , and inferentially discuss what we are looking at inwardly in our 
minds. Then we get to the gate of Hegel ’ s logic and all that this implies 
for us who are visualizing the Thought system.
 “Logic is the science of thinking,”10 and as such it is shown by Hegel 
that thinking is an architectural activity, imaginary with a real form and 
operational attributes, with the postulate that it is a “form,” a “thing 
empty of contents,”11 based on a discrete recognition. What makes it so 
very difﬁ cult for many human beings to describe is that the individuals
attempting to understand it can do so only with a personal attribute 
termed by Kant as Einbildungsvermögen . In short, this German word
means “imagination assets.” Thus, the person possessing it owns the full
capacity to receive a complete mental impression of a physical or imagi-
nary object, the imaginary object being a product of the mind, a priori . 
 There are several overarching principles involved in the Thought 
system. The ﬁ rst is monumental, and we will quote it in the original 
German because of its importance and relevance here. “Wahrheit ist 
die Übereinstimmung des Denkens mit dem Gegenstand”
d 12 or “Truth is
the unqualiﬁ ed agreement of the Thought with the object.” This is one
of the reasons for design purposes we have established the constellation
of the mind as a grouping of individual and distinct systems. It would
be impossibly complicated to design and build, with our current state
of the art, an autonomous system in the context we are discussing here
composed on a single system.
 All of the systems of the human mind, except for the Will, are 
deﬁ ned, registered, and developed by the human individual who pos-
sesses the willpower, discipline, and tenacity to study, listen, and learn 
and who drives himself from early infancy to develop himself and
strives for knowledge and experience. Without this terribly demanding 
effort, the mind cannot produce systems like an Intellect, an Under-
standing, or a Reason.
 There are circumstances when a person may have these systems 
but in a very underdeveloped form due to neglect. Some have incom-
plete and underdeveloped minds and constellations. Unfortunately, as
Schopenhauer claimed, except for their outward biological forms and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

130
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
appearances, they are no different from a primate in terms of intellec-
tual and reasoning capacity.
 The basic laws of thinking are recognition, connection, conclusion,
and verdict.13 The verdict on truth in this case is not based on empirical 
or metaphysical data, but on the logic of Being, Seinslogik, and the
k
structure of mass logic, Maßlogik
 
, or “metalogic,” which makes inter-
k
faces, connections, and relationships easier to understand and to use. 
10.4  THE SUBSYSTEMS OF THE 
T HOUGHT SYSTEM
The Thought system has three subsystems:
 •  The Nexus Cogitationis subsystem 
 •  The Communication subsystem
 •  The Network subsystem. 
 These three subsystems belong to the sphere of the Noumenon. The 
primary external interface of the Thought system with the Phenomenon
is through the Communication subsystem, and then through the Sensory
subsystem, which provides physical impressions from the environment.
10.4.1  The  N exus  C ogitationis Subsystem 
The Nexus Cogitationis is the central operator, controller, organizer, 
orchestrator, and monitor of the thought process in the mind of the 
autonomous system. It is the collective “I” as opposed to the subjec-
tive “me” of the Will. The Nexus, at least from this design point 
of view, is where the process of thinking begins in the autonomous 
system. “I think” is an empirical rule containing the state “I exist,”14
taken from the famous statement by Descartes ’ “ cogito ”—”I think.”
The “I” in this rule is purely intellectual because it belongs to the
thought process. Without any empirical presentation, which provides 
the material for making thinking possible, the actus (motion-force-
state)  cogito is not possible. The relationship between the Nexus and
the systems is one based on the environmental input from the Phe-
nomenon. The “I” cannot exist without the outside world of the
senses.15
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.4 The Subsystems of the Thought System
131
 The Logic program set is pure thought. As applied to a system, it 
must be learned ﬁ rst so that one can gain a clear understanding of the 
meaning of things. In the autonomous system, the Logic program set 
is designed from the start so that the autonomous system will be a 
logical thinker. 16 The system of logic concerns itself with the object 
and its contents, and is thought through and processed using dialectics
and rhythm.17 Logic has two processes, the primary being elementary
logic, and the secondary applied logic. It is sufﬁ cient here to say only 
that applied logic is what is taught today in curricula requiring an
understanding of logic. This logic has lost the great frame of material
substance that in earlier days made it a science.
 The design objective in providing logic as a property to the autono-
mous system is to bestow it with the ability to think logically, clearly,
and accurately, which implies that the autonomous system requires, in
the long run, elementary logic. Elementary logic means the fulﬁ llment 
of all truth, and to provide the truth with a universal value.
 The entire logical structure of the language as used to think inter-
nally and communicate externally should reside in the Nexus. When
the autonomous system communicates and manifests action, it should
be in the form of an advanced, human language. In the engineering
disciplines, we communicate in mathematical forms and logic diagrams
almost as much as we do in speech. In some instances, using logic
diagrams, dataﬂ ow/relationship/process charts, and mathematics, we 
overcome the linguistic limitations of some of our colleagues. With an 
autonomous system that is involved in the exploration of deep space,
all forms of communications should be considered. The selection of 
modes of communication will be at the initiative of the Nexus.
 The Contemplation program set is the equivalent mental activity 
of the entire mind of the constellation without external sensory input. 
 The Nexus Cogitationis is not only the orchestrator and controller 
of the Thought system, but it plays the dominant role in the software
architecture. To leave the functions assigned to it in the Will or the 
Reason systems would mean that the Nexus would become either too
physically primitive in its operation or too constrained in axioms, rules,
and laws. This would make the all-important development of Concepts
(Begriffe
 
) narrowly oriented and unbalanced in scope, that is, totally 
legal and moral, or totally physical- and survival-driven, as in animals
and many humans. In other words, if the development of the Concept 
were in the Reason system, then the system constellation would be an
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

132
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
automaton, a total slave of axioms, rules, and laws. If it were placed in 
the Will system, it would become no more than an animal, since nature 
knows only the physical and not the higher moral laws that humans
need to live together in a society. In most human beings, all practical 
(moral) direction comes through the Reason.
 We need a “dominant I” that is balanced sufﬁ ciently enough to at 
least mimic a free will, although this may not be possible. We start with 
what a modern computer scientist would never have thought of as an
important or even relevant book in the architecture of an advanced
autonomous system. This masterwork is G.W.F. Hegel ’ s  Wissenschaft 
der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein(1832, two books combined). This is prob-
ably best translated as The Science of Logic and The Science of Being .
The Science of Logic is a natural ﬁ t for computer software architecture;
The Science of Being is not, at least at ﬁ rst glance. It took many years of 
background processing in the mind to discover how important the concept 
of Being ( Sein ) is in computer science. Hegel puts it this way: “The
Concept, when it has developed into a concrete existence that is itself 
free, is none other than the ‘I,’ which is pure self consciousness.”18
 Any system that is capable of thinking, contemplation, analysis,
decision, and action must have an  identity. This is necessary because 
an autonomous system must be capable of and have the vital attribute
of  self–nonself discrimination . This is an essential part of the cognitive 
attributes of an autonomous system. Without this attribute, it will not 
be able to discriminate logically between the outside world (the Phe-
nomenon) and the inside world (itself, the Noumenon or Thought 
system). We provide self–nonself-discrimination to an autonomous 
system not only for its own ability to know who it is, but also to initial-
ize the all-important process of Being (see §10.5).
10.4.2  The  C ommunication Subsystem
The Communication subsystem is one of the great conceptual software
engineering undertakings or enterprises of the mind of the autonomous
system. It is unique in that it operates simultaneously on several levels,
such as human language mode, physical sensor mode, and thought 
mode. It is a synthesis of sounds, symbols, characters, grammar, vocab-
ulary, mathematics, and elementary logic. 
 The Human Language program set is the ﬁ rst consideration in the 
design and construction of an autonomous system.19 Therefore, we 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.4 The Subsystems of the Thought System
133
must select and provide to the autonomous system a very advanced and
highly developed language in which to think internally and communi-
cate externally. With such a language, there must not be ambiguities or 
misunderstandings in the process of the task of survival and solving
problems. We know that mathematics 20 is the primary tool for the 
human interface with the physical and mechanical world. Hegel points
out that the ﬁ rst to accomplish the transliteration of human philosophi-
cal concepts from human language into mathematical form was Pythag-
oras.21 It seems that we in computer science have always ignored Hegel 
and his fabulous book on Being.22 It should be well read and on the 
bookshelf of all serious software engineers.
 The Language program set must do the same as Pythagoras did, 
performing a transliteration of the ideas in mathematical expressions 
to the selected human language, and vice versa. There must be a com-
plete lexicon of words, their types, usages, and relationships and
linkages within sentence structures and their usage in science and engi-
neering operations. This is governed by mathematical form. This will
ensure a rigorous, precise usage of the language, without slang or sub-
standard construction. This is but one possible way for the constellation
of the mind of the autonomous system to communicate both internally
and externally using human language.
 The Physical Sensor program set translates the raw data processed 
by the Sensory system into human language, mathematical terms,
ﬁ gures, forms, symbols and relationships, and graphical linkage rela-
tionships and representations. These objects are projected onto the
Presentation system and undergo an analysis process that will add
substance to the objects being viewed. This process is an unending
activity and occurs at an ever higher input rate until the objects being
viewed have exhausted the material necessary to as completely and
accurately as possible conclude and round out their nomenclature. This
is an incredibly dynamic environment as far as transactions, processing,
storage, and retrieval are concerned. Only with the help of Hegel ’ s 
dynamic logic and his quantum can a good software systems architect 
visualize the physical and intellectual architecture. 
 10.4.3   The  N etwork Subsystem
 The Network subsystem for design purposes is the information network 
of the systems of the constellation. The information in this case is 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

134
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
exchanged in human language, because we humans think in language.
The cultural development of human beings is dependent on the advanced
organization, grammar, vocabulary size, and precision of the syntax of 
the languages a particular society uses. Simple languages cannot be
used to think in complex technical terms or to solve technical problems.
The Network subsystem is, like the Thought system as a whole, an
empty architecture. It is like a telephone network without trafﬁ c, to use 
Hegel ’ s analogy. It must be  used in order to have substance. In order 
d
to simplify the huge amount of information presented by Hegel and
Schopenhauer, we are presenting it in its process design format. 
 From a systems architectural position, the Thought system or 
Noumenon is composed of a network whose modes of interaction are
dedicated to the following four types.
10.4.3.1   The  M onologue 
The Monologue program set mode is designed for the Nexus Cogitatio-
nis to address each system separately to update its organization and
functions. It also serves as a mode for any system to address another 
directly with information required by the target system. One of these
addresses may consist of an information fragment placed on the Presen-
tation system for general information. Another might be the direct 
response by the Reason system to the Will to inform it to cease attempt-
ing to initiate an action that is against an established law, axiom, or rule.
 This is a tool used by a system to transmit, without being inter-
rupted, information about its internal interest and position. This is
referred to as “reﬂ ection on a theme.” In the advanced, well-educated 
human mind, it would be analogous to the Reason holding forth an
interpretation on a certain theme, such as some aspect of ethics. One 
such aspect might be on an issue of whether it is appropriate to have a 
certain law or axiom, such as obeying an uplinked command from the
Space Flight Operations Facility ( SFOC ) or not. The monologue for 
this example, as a reﬂ ection on a theme, would be internal to the Reason
system and the Nexus Cogitationis, and would not directly involve the
other systems because it needs no response.
10.4.3.2  The  B roadcast 
The Broadcast program set is the program set mode that informs all the 
systems in the constellation to take note of an event in process that is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.4 The Subsystems of the Thought System
135
important for the entire constellation. One such event is the presentation
of new phenomena on the Presentation system. An example would be
that the Sensory system (i.e., Phenomenon) has detected a change in 
temperature or radio emission from a source in space. As it broadcasts 
this information, the Intellect system might provide data to the Under-
standing system that this phenomenon is most likely a radiation burst 
from a nearby star. The Presentation system would collect all informa-
tion pertaining to these phenomena and present the completed picture
to the constellation. The Will system might then make the ﬁ nal coun-
termeasure course of action to prevent damage to any of the systems.
All of the  a posteriori information is packaged by the Nexus and sent 
to the Understanding system, where these are ﬁ led in the Form of All 
Appearances and Form of All Possibilities subsystems. 
 10.4.3.3   The  D ialogue 
 The Dialogue program set mode is used in situations in which the Deci-
sion system is in the process of establishing a preference or making a
ruling or a verdict on an object, event, or process. This starts as a 
proposition in the Broadcast mode to the Intellect and Understanding
systems. The resulting Dialogue takes place in a freewheeling debate 
between the Intellect and Understanding systems. The former has the
knowledge, which may be abstract, experiential, or real; the latter has
the form of all appearances and the form of all possibilities that are
beneﬁ cial or harmful to the constellation. 
 Such a process might initiate when, for example, the Will system 
is queried as to whether the survival of the autonomous system as an
entity outweighs the commands it has received externally (e.g., from
Earth). This could happen if, for whatever hypothetical reason, the
SFOC wished to terminate the spacecraft and cancel the mission (such
as was done when the Galileo spacecraft was commanded to plunge
itself into Jupiter). The response of the Will system would be that which 
forms the basis for the existence of the original mission objectives and
the reasoning behind them, ethics aside. 
 10.4.3.4   The  C onference 
 The Conference program set mode is a direct engagement undertaken 
prior to a decision, judgment, verdict, or preference concerning an object, 
event, or phenomenon. The Conference is often due not to Sensory input 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

136
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
but to a mental process while the thinking takes place. One such process
is the phenomenon in which a human being is in the process of trying
to solve a problem, becomes tired of expending willful thought on it, 
and “sleeps on it.” This type of transaction is considered a type of 
background processing in which a problem is solved without primary 
resources being directly allocated to its solving. This type of thinking
and contemplation especially intrigued Kant and Schopenhauer. 
 A Conference takes place with the Nexus Cogitationis in contem-
plation, going through in great detail all  a priori events and all  a pos-
teriori conclusions, proven or not.
 All of these are available and shared equally by all of the systems
in the constellation of the mind. All of the systems follow set rules that 
are under the control of the Nexus Cogitationis as described above.
 Thus, from a computer science architectural point of view, and
equally from the software engineering perspective, we have had to
invent the Nexus Cogitationis and to make it a system that would better 
ﬁ t its critical position in the architecture. 
10.5  INITIALIZATION PROCESS OF
THE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM 
The initialization process or genesis of the autonomous system is 
critical because it forms the baseline of self-awareness and imagination.
In human beings, as in all biological systems, self–nonself-
discrimination is the ﬁ rst to develop in the Will. In human beings, it 
has the additional step of  Becoming
 
 (Werden), and then Being ( Sein). 
This follows in what Kant, Hegel, and Schopenhauer describe as
Moments . This is fortunate for us because there are no other viable
models to follow if we wish to obtain human-like results. These great 
thinkers have done the groundbreaking work for the design of the
autonomous system.
 When the cognitive functions have been programmed, tested, and 
integrated, one can see that the Nexus Cogitationis is akin to what we
used to call “situation monitoring.”
 Using the nomenclature of Hegel, there is initially  Pure Nothing .
The process that is about to take place is called  Becoming
 
 .
 When the autonomous system is instantiated, the sequence in the 
Nexus Cogitationis plays out as follows.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.5 Initialization Process of the Autonomous System
137
 10.5.1   Before the First Moment 
State:  Pure Nothing
Result :  Intention of Becoming
Description:  Pure Nothing is the starting and the end point of all 
things in the cognitive world. There is no object without a subject, and 
no existence without the environment, the Phenomenon. Thus, this is 
not a “Determinate Nothing,” but the conceptual “Pure Nothing” of 
Hegel.
 10.5.2   The Becoming 
State: Initialization
 
Result :  Intention of initialization is instantiated 
Description:   This is the  Becoming
 
, the “zeroth moment,” the “desire 
to initialize self” process of the autonomous system constellation.
 10.5.3   First Moment 
State: Determinate Nothing
 
 (concept of “I” emerges)
Result :  The Nexus Cogitationis is instantiated 
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis (unto itself, the  subject ) brings
itself into being and is in a suspended state. Recall that without an 
Object , there is no Subject , as there are yet no other systems, including 
the Communication system. The Nexus Cogitationis, however, being 
the control center, has within its instantiation a communication modal-
ity called the Noumena band . The Communication System is the normal
location for external and internal communications interfaces, called the
Phenomena band . Until the Communication system is instantiated 
in the Eighth Moment (§10.5.10), the Nexus will communicate with
the nascent systems as each comes online through the  bands of the
Noumena.
 10.5.4  Second Moment
State : Something (concept of  self emerges)
f
Result :  The Will system is instantiated
Description:   The Will system, which is the metaphysical  prius
 
 and a
totally physical, survival-oriented system, exerts itself and notiﬁ es the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

138
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
Nexus Cogitationis in a monologue mode that it is present. The Nexus
Cogitationis replies, also in a monologue mode, 23 that it has recognized
the Will system, and the Will system is registered with the Individual 
Survival subsystem, the Survival of the Species subsystem, and the
Dominance subsystem.
10.5.5  Third Moment 
State :  Something Else (concept of  nonself emerges)
f
Result :  The Sensory system is instantiated 
Description:  The Sensory system addresses the Nexus Cogitationis in 
a monologue mode, providing the ﬁ rst burst of sensory data from the 
nearest (or most immediate) object in the Phenomenon. The Nexus
Cogitationis replies that it recognizes the Sensory system and that it is
registered with the Internal Sensory program sets: the Sensory Data
Processing program set, the External Sensory Data program set (the
Phenomenon: external data input), the Sensory Data Records program
set, and the Experiment Data Records program set. 24
 (It must be noted here that in the event of a requirements and 
implementation phase, more program sets may be added. The number 
of program sets depends on the scope of the ﬁ nal product expected by
the sponsor. Note also that an autonomous system designed for inter-
planetary exploration, or for establishing a  Mission Support Site ( MSS ) 
on a planet, will require many more program sets than a network secu-
rity system or a medical or biological analysis system. There is no 
simple or short workaround to bypass JPL-STD-D-4000.)
10.5.6  Fourth Moment
State :  Something More
Result :  The Reason system is instantiated
Description:  The Reason system addresses the Nexus Cogitationis in 
a dialogue mode. It describes its readiness for receiving its subsystems ’ 
deﬁ nitions and data inputs. The Nexus Cogitationis replies that it rec-
ognizes the Reason system and that it is registered with the Laws
subsystem, the Rules subsystem, and the Axioms subsystem. It is also
linked instantly in a dialogue mode with the Will system for emergency 
input and response, as in the case of survival events. In human beings
and animals, this process starts at conception. In the autonomous
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.5 Initialization Process of the Autonomous System
139
systems constellation, this is initialization and linkage with an already
programmed and tested system (i.e., a system in the constellation that 
has undergone the rigorous test and integration phase as speciﬁ ed in
JPL-STD-D-4000.25 More precisely, any system, such as the Reason or 
the Understanding, must have been completed and fully tested before
the constellation level instantiation can begin. This requirement applies
to the Thought system and Nexus Cogitationis also.) 
 10.5.7  Fifth Moment
State:  Something More
Result :  The Intellect system is instantiated 
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis addresses the Intellect system in 
a dialogue mode. It queries the Intellect system as to its readiness to 
receive the download of data required by the Intellect to generate
knowledge. It requests a read-back of the status of its Abstract subsys-
tem, its Experience subsystem, and its Knowledge subsystem. This
process initializes the relationship of the Intellect with the other systems
of the constellation.
 It must be understood that there is no real knowledge (practical 
knowledge) unless/until the abstract data are validated by experience.
If there is no experience, then when information is needed for action
or use, the request defaults to the Abstract subsystem. In cases where
there is experience with abstract data, but the two have not yet been
integrated into knowledge, the experience takes precedence during the
selection process. Experience, whether gained hands-on or through
close participation and observation, is the dominant type of practical
knowledge data. 
 10.5.8   Sixth Moment 
State:  Something More
Result :  The Understanding system is instantiated 
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis addresses the Understanding 
system in a dialogue mode. It queries the Understanding system as to 
its readiness to receive the downloading of the data it needs to perform
its function. This includes the data formats and information fragments
large and small to populate its Form of All Appearances and Form of 
All Possibilities subsystems. In the process of forming an Idea or 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

140
CHAPTER 10 The Architecture of the Thought System
Concept, this system draws on the instantiated systems of the constel-
lation in a broadcast mode for the data it needs to complete the data 
sets required in formulating its possibilities. 
10.5.9  Seventh Moment 
State : Awareness
 
starts 
Result :  The Presentation system is instantiated 
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis addresses the Presentation 
system in a broadcast mode. It queries the Presentation system as to its 
readiness to accept the download of the input from the instantiated
systems in the constellation, and of compiling and arranging the frag-
ments or parts of visual, audio, graphical, mass, motion, and other data
into a single object for analysis. This whole or partially complete object 
is updated instantly by the constellation simultaneously. In highly intel-
ligent human beings, this occurs instantly and dynamically. In others it 
occurs sequentially, hierarchically, slowly; hence the term, “slow of 
wit,” the result of the neglect to build one ’ s brain and develop mental
capacity and effort for thinking. Note that it is often camouﬂ aged by
fast reﬂ exes (which bypass the Thought and Decision systems) and 
autonomic, animal-like responses to stimuli. It is only through training,
discipline, and practice that in humans the mind becomes large and able
to process huge amounts of data to build a complete object for viewing.
The systems of the constellation at this time channel all relevant data
in their possession to the Presentation system for completing the object.
10.5.10   Eighth Moment 
State : Awareness
 
continues to develop 
Result :  The Communication subsystem is instantiated
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis addresses in a monologue mode 
the Communication subsystem of the Thought system. It queries the
Communication subsystem as to its readiness to convert sensory and
contemplative data into mathematical equations, into human language,
and all other forms and methods and parts of communication. It is also
asked to validate the language it has been given for use, its grammatical
rules, syllogisms, and syntax. When this has been accomplished, the
Communication subsystem will address the constellation in a broadcast 
mode and provide each system with the selected human language to be
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10.5 Initialization Process of the Autonomous System
141
used in thinking internally and communicating externally. This is fol-
lowed by a conference mode exchange in which the language selected 
is discussed and tested by the constellation for adaptability to the appli-
cations toward which the constellation is to be put, and the problems
the constellation needs to solve.
 10.5.11  Ninth and Final Moment 
State: Being
 
(awareness is established) 
Result :  The Decision system is instantiated 
Description:  The Nexus Cogitationis addresses the Decision system 
in a monologue mode as to its readiness to evaluate and select prefer-
ences, likes and dislikes, and its ability to make decisions based
on all input received from Sensory External data, and from input 
received from the other systems in the constellation.
 10.5.12   Initialized State 
 At this point, we have a nascent yet functioning system constellation 
replicating at a Level I the way in which the cognitive functions of the 
autonomous system can work. The thinking and contemplating process
is now self-capable of the continued building of its cognitive abilities
and decision-making abilities. It is a never-ending and ever expansive
process.
 To place this into Hegelian perspective:
 The object therefore has its objectivity in the Concept and this is the 
unity of self-consciousness into which it has been received; 
consequently its objectivity, or the Concept, is itself none other than the
nature of self-consciousness, has no other moments or determinations 
than the I itself.26
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

142
 We have reached the completion of a long road of discovery, learning, 
and experience in computer science. Above all, we have completed
what the sages called a  Verstandesbegriff,f 1 a “concept of the Under-
standing.” Indeed, thinking—pure thinking
—
—is considered a system of 
concepts. Logic is in turn the science of pure thinking. 2 Thus, in the 
design of the autonomous system, we can originate concepts from the
Reason, the Intellect, and even the Presentation. In this book, we have
set down the synthesis of the information received from the systems
that form the constellation of the human mind. The mind, therefore,
must be considered as software, for it contains the equivalent of operat-
ing systems, applications, and other dedicated processes. The brain by 
deﬁ nition is hardware, with its capacity to accommodate and execute 
software. The Idea3 is from the human mind, and is therefore mental
as opposed to cerebral or physical.
 The intent of this journey was at ﬁ rst innocent. A former director 
of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) simply requested a paradigm 
shift—the next “big idea”—from the staff. He wanted something for 
JPL that was totally new to pursue and work on. It was just coincidental 
that at that very time, the ﬁ rst author was reading Immanuel Kant ’ s 
Critique of Pure Reason4 and working on a spacecraft telemetry, 
command, and communication system under an impossibly tight sched-
ule and an equally impossible budget.
 Relaxing with Kant and trying to solve big problems means stress,
which means an expansion of mental activity. This is the state that often 
produces unexpected leaps in science and engineering. Schopenhauer 5
calls this state “the forcible expansion of the mind”;6  he is not generous
to those unwilling to go through the painful mental process required to 
achieve it.
 It was an almost momentous “instant revelation of connectivity”
type of discovery7 that the works of Immanuel Kant were very relevant 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Epilogue 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Epilogue
143
to modern computer science, leading to the organization of a new 
approach of doing software design and implementation.8 The successful
delivery of a quality software product in time for the launching of a 
spacecraft reinforced the awareness of the  imperative connection 
between cognitive philosophy and modern computer science.
 The fact that the spacecraft system mentioned earlier ended up
being extremely well documented and fully tested, without any delivery
slips, aroused even greater interest in cognitive philosophy as a tool to 
better understanding computer software. The reading of Hegel ’ s  Science
of Logic and Science of Being brought into focus the idea that computer 
software is an abstraction of the human thought system . Arthur Scho-
penhauer ’ s great work,  The World as Will and Presentation , was a 
natural for understanding the organization and operation of the human 
Will and its interfaces with the Reason, the Understanding, and the 
Intellect. The resulting discovery of the connectivity to philosophy and
its meaning led to the examination of the ongoing work in artiﬁ cial 
intelligence and the efforts to come up with an architecture of a machine
that could think and act independently of human direction.
 It is a strange feeling to have completed this book, knowing that 
this is just the beginning of a new appreciation for computer science 
as a science . Indeed, it is just a small step in the continuous evolution 
of a great science as it takes its rightful place amid the others. There 
are new worlds of the mind to explore because computer science incor-
porates all of the sciences that involve the human thought system, its 
development and training process: logic, mathematics, ontology, ratio-
nal psychology, cosmology, speculative philosophy, dialectic reason-
ing, music, art, and so on. 9
 We now have a new insight into why we have heretofore not been 
able to build an autonomous system, why we have been stopped in our 
pursuit of autonomy short of our goals. The preparation of this book 
reveals a very interesting phenomenon, in fact a startling truth that leads 
back to Hegel and Schopenhauer. This new truth is that computer 
science ultimately is made up of two segments: The ﬁ rst segment com-
prises the physical or “empirical” sciences, while the second and com-
plementary segment comprises the metaphysical sciences, such as 
logic, mathematics, and ontology (being). The sciences of the mind and
the way we think play an indispensable role in how we model and
replicate the process of dynamic thought.
 Thus we have arrived, with the help of computer science rediscov-
ered, at a foundational synthesis of the sciences of the human mind. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

144
 NOTES FOR PREFACE 
  1  From “On the Method of Theoretical Physics” (The Herbert Spencer Lecture,
 Oxford , June 10,  1933 ). 
  2  G.W.F.  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein (1832) ( Hamburg :  Felix
Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  300 – 350 .
  3  I.S.  Gradstein ,  I.H.  Ryshik ,  Tafeln: Tables of Series, Products, and Integrals (1981),
 vols. 1 and 2 ( Frankfurt :  Verlag Harri Deutsch , 1981 ).
  4  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein ,  226 – 235 .
  5  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ). 
 NOTES FOR INTRODUCTION
  1 JPL-Software Management Standard D-4000 , Version 3.0 ( Pasadena, CA :  Jet Pro-
pulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology , December  1988 ). This stan-
dard is ideally suited for the analysis and preproject functional requirements
planning phase of a system of the scope and complexity presented in this book. 
  2  The autonomous system cannot be programmed using modern “ﬂ y-by-the-pants”
implementation techniques. Fortunately, such complex systems could, however, be
programmed using a radically new systems development, testing, and integration 
technique presented by a holographic computational system and methodology 
concept.
  3  An optional part of this prerequisite is the strong desirability of understanding with
native ﬂ uency the language these works were written in—not the modern German
or English language translations used in the classrooms, but the Old German in
which they were published originally. Languages change naturally enough over 
time, and many words lose or permute their meanings or are dropped because of 
the difﬁ culty modern readers have in understanding multiple, often simultaneously
contradictory meanings.
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Endnotes  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Endnotes
145
  4  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft, Herausgegeben und eingeleitet von
t
August Messer ( Berlin :  Verlag von Th. Knaur Nachf , not dated, but circa  1924 ), 
 xiii .
 5  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
, Gesamtausgabe ( Munich : 
 Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1954 ),  23 . 
 6  G.W.F.  Hegel , Die Lehre vom Sein ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  50 .
  7  Ibid., 102
 8  Henri  Pirenne , Mohammed and Charlemagne, English trans. Bernard Miall 
( London :  George Allen & Unwin ,  1954 ).
 9  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 , Book Two ( Munich :
Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1998 ),  142 . 
 10  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft ( Riga :  Johann Friedrich Hartknoch ,1788;
t
reprint, Berlin:  Verlag von Th. Knaur Nachf. , circa  1916 ),  201 .
11  Schopenhauer ,  Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 (1998),  81 .
 12  Szabolcs M.   de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ).
 13  Plato ,  The Republic, Works of Plato ( New York :  Tudor Publishing ,  1933 ),  75 .
 14  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft.t
 15  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik, Part I; Objective Logic. Erster Band: Die
k
Lehre vom Sein (Ontology) ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  46 . 
 16  Ibid., 280–298.
 17  I.S.  Gradstein and  I.H.  Ryshik , Tafeln: Tables of Series, Products, and Integrals
( Frankfurt :  Verlag Harri Deutsch ,  1981 ),  vols. 1 and 2 .
 18  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science .
 19  Ibid., chap. 4. 
 20  Ibid., §4.12–4.15.
 21  Ibid., chap. 9. 
 NOTES FOR CHAPTER 1 
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung [The World as Will and
Presentation] ( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1998 ), 
7 . 
 2  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung [The World as Will and
Presentation], Drittes Buch (Book Three, esp. pp. 300–325 on the objects: the Idea,
the Concept, and the Genius), Gesamtausgabe ( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch 
Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1988 ).
  3  Ibid. 
  4  Ibid. 
 5  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 ( 1998 ).
  6  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ), §4.12–4.15.  
  7  Monads are a Level III implementation concern. The reader is referred to §18.8.2 
in de Gyurky, The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

146
Endnotes
 8  G.W.F.  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner 
Verlag ,  1832 ),  300 – 350 . 
 9  See §10.4.3, The Network Subsystem, for a detailed description.
10  G.W.F.  Hegel , Die Lehre vom Sein ( Riga :  Johann Friedrich Hartknoch , 1788), ﬁ gure
3, The Science of Being. 
11  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ( Munich :  Gesamtausgabe. 
Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1954 ). 
12  Ibid. 
13  Thucydides . The Peloponnesian War ( London :  J. M. Dent ;  New York :  E. P. Dutton , 
r
1910 ), paraphrased.
14  Immanuel  Kant , Kritik der praktischen Vernunft (reprint,  Berlin-Leipzig :  Verlag
t
von Th. Knaur Nachf. , circa  1916 ). 
15  Ibid. 
16  Ibid. 
17  Ibid. 
18  Arthur Schopenhauer,  The World as Will and Presentation: First Inspection/Die
Welt als erste Betrachtung: Die Vorstellung unterworfen dem Sazte vom Grunde:
Das Objekt der Erfahrung und Wissenschaft .
19  Phenomenon monads are those that carry the sensory data from the external envi-
ronment into the internal environment. It is the Noumenon monads that carry the
internal communications data of the system.
20  Immanuel  Kant , Critique of Decisions and Verdict, Kritik Der Urteilskraft. ( Berlin : 
t
Legarde and Friedrich ,  1792 ; reprint,  Hamburg :  Karl Vorländer , through Felix
Meiner Publishers,  1954) .
21  Over the course of a year, the ﬁ rst author studied (as an intellectual exercise) the 
large Mekong rats in their environment in the great swamp called the Rung Shat.
Their large numbers and their individual and group behavior were ideal for study
and experiment in an isolated U.S. Army Special Forces Camp in South Vietnam. 
This study was done not only to gain an understanding into their habits and behav-
ior, but out of the necessity to ﬁ gure out why the native population was unable to
deal with them effectively. Rats carry diseases, and often many of the populations
living in isolated villages as well as towns die or suffer from the proximity of these
animals.
22  G.W.F.  Hegel , Die Lehre vom Sein
 
( Hamburg : Felix Meiner Verlag GmbH ,  1990),
ﬁ gure 3. The Science of Being. 
23  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik.k
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 2
 1  Immanuel Kant ’ s famous dictum, “ The only irrefutable hypothesis is the human
intuition, ” is the only explanation possible for the Noumenon. Hegel and Schopen-
hauer support this assertion.
 2  Detailed information about the articulation and development process is beyond the 
scope of this book. Refer to  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky ,  The Cognitive Dynamics of 
Computer Science ( Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Endnotes
147
  3  Ibid.
  4  Detailed information about the articulation and development process is beyond the 
scope of this book. Refer to ibid. 
  5  Jet Propulsion Laboratory .  Software Management Standards Package: JPL-STD-
D-4008 Level II, Version 3.0. JPL ( Pasadena, CA :  California Institute of Technol-
I
ogy , December  1988 ). 
 6  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 , Zweiter Band (Book 
Two) (welcher die Ergänzungen zu den vier Büchern des ersten Bandes enthält) 
( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag ),  158 .
  7  2,819,185,846 mi in the case of Voyager 2 at Neptune. 
  8 JPL-Software Management Standard D-4000
 
 ; Version 3.0 ( Pasadena, CA :  Jet Pro-
pulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology , December,  1988 ).
  9  de  Gyurky ,  The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science. See the Four Case 
Studies.
 10  We lost a signiﬁ cant spacecraft, Mars Climate Orbiter, because of a mere triviality—
a confusion resulting from the conﬂ ated usage of Metric and Imperial measures.
 11  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der praktischen Vernunft ( Riga :  Johann Friedrich Hart-
t
knoch ,  1788 ; reprint,  Erlangen :  Harald Fischer Verlag ,  1984 ).
 12  Immanuel  Kant , Kritik der reinen Vernunft, with introduction in Latin by Sir 
t
Francis Bacon ( Königsberg :  August Messer ,  1787 ; reprint, Prussian Academy of 
Science). 
 13  Immanuel  Kant , Kritik der Urteilskraft ( 1790 ; reprint,  Hamburg :  Verlag von Felix
t
Meiner ,  1924 , and  Berlin : Deutscher Forschungsgemeinschaft, Herstellung: Linde-
mann & Lüdecke).
 14  The functional requirements of the systems that make up the constellation are at 
Level I, and their subsystem functional requirements are at Level II.
 15  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science. See the TOPEX case 
study, §14.3.
 16  It was a great relief and conﬁ rmation that Hegel was completely correct in saying 
that integral and differential calculus were the keys to modeling human functions
mathematically. 
 17  That is, if the war game, be it a  Command Post Exercise ( CPX ) or  Field Training 
Exercise  ( FTX ), is run honestly and with discipline, which is often not the case. 
 NOTES FOR CHAPTER 3
  1 JPL-Software Management Standard D-4000
 
 ; Version 3.0 ( Pasadena, CA :  Jet Pro-
pulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology , December  1988 ).
  2  Peter  Sloterdijk , Philosophie Jezt! Fichte, Johann Gottlieb ( Munich :  Eugen Died-
erichs Verlag ,  1996 ).
 3  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Gesamtausgabe [The 
World as Will and Presentation] ( Munich :  Deutsche Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & 
Co. KG , April  1998 ),  25 . Vorrede zur Zweite Auﬂ age [Prologue to the Second 
Edition]. §On Absolute Truth and Objective Reality, which is not only a functional 
process, but the theme, and the logical construction of the Idea and its Substance.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

148
Endnotes
 4  Ibid., 15–16. In reference to the driving force of the-search-for-Truth as the  primum
 
mobile (the principle driving force and motivator) of mental and physical develop-
ment and progress.
 5  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung (The World as Will and
Presentation), Zweiter Band ( Volume Two ) ( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch 
Verlag GmbH ,  1988 ). 
 6  Ibid.,  325 .
 7  “Spinoza [Letter #58, p.909] says that if a stone which has been projected through 
the air had consciousness, it would believe that it was moving of its own Will. I
add to this only that the stone would be right. The impulse given it is for the stone
what the motive is for me, and what in the case of the stone appears as cohesion,
gravitation, rigidity, is in its inner nature the same as that which I recognize in 
myself as Will, and what the stone also, if knowledge were given to it, would 
recognize as Will.”— Arthur  Schopenhauer , The World as Will and Idea, trans. 
Haldane and Kemp ( Boston :  Ticknor ad Co. ,  1887 ), 1:164. 
 8  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 ( 1998 ),  288 .
 9  Ibid.,  312 .
10  The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language,  4th ed . ( Boston : 
Houghton Mifﬂ in Company , copyright ©2000, updated in 2009, all rights reserved). 
11  Note that this is not the Wagnerian story and opera, Götterdämmerung , “Twilight 
of the Gods.”
12  Theodore  von  Kármán , The Wind and Beyond ( Boston :  Little, Brown ,  1967 ),  65 , 
d
211 – 215 .
13  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft, Herausgegeben und Eingeleitet von
t
August Messer ( Berlin und Leipzig :  Verlag von Th. Knaur Nachf. ,  1912 ),  215 ,  652 . 
14  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ),  138 (Acceptable Reality). 
15  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 ( 1998 ),  428 – 430 .
16  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft.t
17  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
  
 ( 1998 ),  288 .
18  The Voyager I spacecraft will pass within 1.6 light years of the star Gliese 445 in 
approximately 40,000 earth years.
19  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik/Die Lehre vom Sein (1832) (The Monadic
Operating System: Grades and Types of Monads) ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag , 
 1990 ),  232 – 235 .
 20  Immanuel  Kant , Kritik der reinen Vernunft ( Riga :  Hartknoch ,  1787–88 ),  275 .
t
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 4 
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
, Zweiter Band,  vol. 1 
( Munich :  Deutsche Taschenbuch Verlag , April  1988 ),  75 . 
 2  Ibid., 2:204. 
 3  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft ( Berlin und Leipzig :  Th. Knaur Nachf.
t
Verlag ,  1912 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Endnotes
149
  4  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der praktischen Vernunft ( Riga :  Johann Friedrich Hartknoch
t
Verlag ,  1788 ). 
  5  Ibid.
  6  It is recognized that there is no way that we can create absolute reality at this point. 
Absolute reality is achievable only in logic and mathematics.
 7  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung , Zweiter Band ( vol. 2 )
( Munich :  Deutsche Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1988 ),  325 , 
paraphrased. 
  8  Note: Empirical, based on experience. The philosophical direction where all rec-
ognition is traced back to physical experience.
  9  Kant , Kritik der reinen Vernunft,  82 .
t
 10  Floyd Seyward  Lear ,  Treason in Roman and Germanic Law ( Austin :  University of 
Texas Press ,  1965 ). 
11  Theodore  Mommsen , Römisches Strafrecht. 2 ( Leipzig ,  1899 ; reprint,  Aalen :  Sci-
t
entia Verlag ). Staats Recht , Zweiter Unveränderlicher Nachdruck Der Dritte
t
Auﬂ age (second reprint of the third edition) ( Austria :  Akademische Druck- u. 
Verlagsanstalt Graz ,  1969 ).
 NOTES FOR CHAPTER 5
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 (Zweites Buch) ( Munich :
Deutscher Taschenbuchverlag ,  1998 ),  315 .
 2  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ,  vol. 1 , Vorrede
(Introduction) ( München :  Deutsche Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,
1988 ),  23 . 
 3  G.W.F.  Hegel , Logik: Die Lehre vom Sein (1832),  Wissenschaft der Logik ( Hamburg : 
k
Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1985 ),  150
  4  Theodore  von  Kármán and  Lee  Edson ,  The Wind and Beyond ( Boston :  Little,
d
Brown ,  1967 ),  211 .
  5  See Flourens ’ experiments on live animals. Refer to chap. 3, The Architecture of 
The Will system, §3.7.1 The Survival Subsystem. 
  6  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik (Erster Teil Die objektive Logik), Die Lehre 
vom Sein (1832) ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  57 .
  7  Tracy  Kidder , The Soul of a New Machine ,  2nd ed . ( Modern Library ,  1997 ).
 8  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ,  vol. 2 ( 1988 ),  315 .
  9  Ibid.
 10  Even self-modifying hardware systems, in their essence, are hardwired. 
11  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung . Zweiter Band ( 1998 ),  340 .
 12  Examples of optimal languages for the mind of the constellation to communicate 
among its various systems would be on the order of Latin, or perhaps Greek or 
Hungarian, since they are very rich in structure, with subject and predicate, and
integrated into object recognition. Strict English, too, could be pressed into service.
Only such advanced languages can support speculative and formal logic, as Hegel
points out.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

150
Endnotes
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 6
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung , Erster Band ( Munich :
Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & KG ,  1988 ),  43 . 
 2  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner 
Verlag ,  1990 ),  128 ,  129 .
 3  What does this great Hegelian assertion, “negation of the negation,” mean to com-
puter science? It means that the boundaries of all ideas are eliminated, and one may
drive ideas and concepts beyond the rules that have been established.
 4  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik, XVIII. This is the dissertation on the power and
k
structure of the languages in which we think. 
 5  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky ,  The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ), “Achieving Sufﬁ cient Reality,”  49 . 
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 7
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung , Zweiter Band,
Zweiter Hälfte Die Lehre von der Abstrakten Vorstellung Oder Dem Denkens
( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag,  1988 ),  88 . “Books cannot replace
experience!” 
 2  Manfred  Geier , Kants Welt ( Reinbek bei Hamburg :  Rowohlt Taschenbuch Verlag ,
t
2005 ),  166 . 
 3  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky ,  The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ). 
 4  Aristotle ,  The Works of Aristotle, vol. 1: Categoriae and De interpretatione, ed. E. 
M. Edghill ( London :  Oxford Clarendon Press , Amen House, E.G.4,  1928 ).
 5  Ibid. 
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 8
 1  Raymund  Schmidt , Kant: Die drei Kritiken ( Stuttgart :  Alfred Kröner Verlag ,  1975 ),
78 .
 2  G.W. F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein (1832) ( Hamburg :  Felix 
Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  156 .
 3  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
,  320 . 
 4  Because the autonomous system will be human-like (and advanced, if designed
properly) in its thought performance, abilities, and psychological needs, it indeed
cannot be alone . It must have a group of like companions to navigate, ﬂ y the
spacecraft, do repairs, build parts, and simply to prevent depression and isolation,
which are part and parcel of space travel. Thus, we arrive at the need to examine
the parameters of regulating coexistence in a relatively conﬁ ned space over incom-
prehensibly long periods of time.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Endnotes
151
  5  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein , Erster Band ( vol. 1 ),  17 – 30 .
  6  This is a very important software design concept from Aristotle ’ s time, and then 
through the great thinkers of classical philosophy. Thought fragments are a lot like
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle coming from the external and internal sensors in an 
unending stream into the mind. They are ﬁ ltered by some of the systems, such as 
the Intellect, Reason, and Will—if they are in operation—and projected onto the 
Presentation for viewing, cataloging, and compiling, and are then stored for further 
enhancement by categories. This process is a miracle of the human mind and can
be replicated in software design as well. The Idea is the task, and the Concept is
the design.
 NOTES FOR CHAPTER 9
  1  Szabolcs M.   de  Gyurky ,  The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ( Hoboken, 
NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ),  25 .
  2  Hjalmar  Schacht , 1933 Wie eine Demokratie stirbt [How a Democracy Dies] ( Düs-
t
seldorf :  Econ-Verlag , 1968).
  3  Hjalmar  Schacht ,  Guttentagsche Sammlung Nr. 26 Münz- und Bankgesetzgebung
[German Coinage and Banking Laws] (Deutscher Reichsgesetze Nr. 26,  Berlin; 
Leipzig :  Walter de Gruyter ,  1926 ).
  4  The Leadership Reaction Course of the 7th U.S. Army Non-Commissioned Ofﬁ cers 
Academy at the Flint Kaserne in Bad Tölz, Germany.
  5  NCOs from the rank of Sergeant E-5 through the rank of Master Sergeant E-8. In 
some cases, junior enlisted men were selected if they were about to attend Ofﬁ cer 
Candidate School or were about to be promoted to Corporal E-4.
  6  Immanuel  Kant , Kritik der Urteilskraft ( Hamburg :  Verlag von Felix Meiner ,
t
 1954 ). 
 7  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung , Erster Band, Drittes Buch
( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuchverlag GmbH ,  1998 ),  324 . 
  8  Ibid., 327. 
 9  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung , Erstes Buch,  43 .
 10  Whether one likes Napoleon Bonaparte as a person or not, it must be admitted that 
the Battle of Waterloo itself was well planned. By the time of Waterloo, Napoleon ’ s
incomparable chief of staff, Marshall Louis Berthier, had committed suicide by
jumping off the balcony of his hotel in Paris. His new chief of staff did not under-
stand command and control, and the execution of the battle plan was a disaster. A 
well-trained, superbly qualiﬁ ed, and experienced staff is as important to a success-
ful outcome of a war, battle, or project as an equally experienced and qualiﬁ ed 
project manager or commander-in-chief. When one sees cost overruns, botched
wars or projects, one must blame the project manager or commanding general—no
excuses! Amateurism is not a signal for success.
 11  de  Gyurky The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science ,  41 .
12  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
, Zweiter Band (vol. 2), Zweites 
Buch (book 2), Kapitel 22 (chap. 22),  325 , on the objective analysis of the Will.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

152
Endnotes
13  Johan Gottlieb  Fichte ,  Fichte, Ausgewählte und vorgestellt von Günter Schulte
( Munich :  Dietrichs ,  1996 ),  143 . 
14  Immanuel  Kant , Die drei Kritiken, Eine kommentierte Auswahl von Raymund 
Schmidt ( Stuttgart :  Alfred Kröner Verlag ,  1975 ),  262 .
15  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der Urteilskraft, Herausgegeben von Karl Vorländer 
t
( Hamburg :  Verlag von Felix Meiner ,  1954 ),  35 ,  256 . 
16  Ibid., 246.
17  There is also the option of designing two separate decision processors. However,
for practical purposes, we describe one decision processor with the product or result 
being either an  a priori or  a posteriori decision.
18  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein (1832) ( Hamburg :  Felix
Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  82 .
19  Raymund  Schmidt ,  Kant: Die Drei Kritiken (The Three Critiques), Eine kommen-
tierte Auswahl ( Stuttgart :  Alfred Kröner Verlag ,  1975 ),  100 – 110 . 
20  “Some arms taken at Bath in the year 1715, distinguished from all others in the
Tower, by having what is called dog locks; that is, a kind of lock with a catch to
prevent their going off at half-cock.”—London and Its Environs Described
—
(London:
d
R. and J. Dodsley, 1761). 
21  Kant , Kritik der Urteilskraft,  33 .
t
22  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ,  Erster Band ,  Anhang ,  598 .
23  Ibid., 606.
24  German Wehrmacht (Armed Forces) Technical Manual, Handbuch für Kraftfahrer
 
,r
Bearbeitet nach dem neuesten Stande des Kraftfahrzeug und Motorenbauens
( Berlin :  E.S. Mittler Sohn ,  1939 ),  152 . 
25  Kant , Kritik der Urteilskraft,  48 .
t
26  Ibid., 125.
27  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
 , Zweiter Band, Zweites Buch,
Kapitel 19, p.  280 .
28  Kant , Kritik der Urteilskraft,  101 .
t
NOTES FOR CHAPTER 10
 1  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein (1832), Erster Teil. Die
objektive Logik ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1985 ),  26 .
 2  Such as “emergent behavior.”
 3  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Erstes Buch, Erste 
Betrachtung ( Munich :  Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG , April 
1998 ),  75 .
 4  Note: In organic and primitive systems, the Will begins the accumulation of rules, 
laws, and axioms simply by an auto-reﬂ ex as a negative rule, for example, of 
not touching a ﬁ re a second time. Understanding that moisture for a plant is good,
it directs its roots like an Acacia tree to the nearest source of water, deep in the
soil.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Endnotes
153
  5  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft ( Berlin :  Verlag von Th. Knaur Nachf. ,
t
circa 1912 ),  243 – 248 .
  6  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein 1832 ( Hamburg :  Felix 
Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  57 .
  7  Baltasar  Gracian ,  The Wisdom of Baltasar Gracian: A Practical Manual for Good 
and Perilous Times, adapted and edited by  J. Leonard  Kaye ( New York :  Pocket 
Books ,  1992 ),  67 .
 8  Charlton T.  Lewis and  Charles  Short , A Latin Dictionary
 
, founded on Andrews ’ 
edition of Freund ’ s Latin Dictionary
 
( Oxford :  Clarendon Press ,  1879 ). 
  9  Ibid. 
 10  Hegel,  Wissenschaft der Logik ( 1990 )
k
 11  Ibid., 27. 
 12  Ibid., 27.
13  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ,  84 – 85 .
 14  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft, Herausgegeben (Published) von August 
Messer, Professor der Philosophie an der Universität Gießen ( Berlin :  Verlag von
Th. Knaur Nachf. , circa  1922 ),  275 – 276 . 
 15  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik ( 1990 ),  227 .
k
 16  Ibid., 43.
 17  Ibid., 39.
 18  Ibid.,  583 . 
 19  Consider an autonomous system capable of exploring deep space, one entrusted with 
the construction of Mission Support Sites (MSS) on planets or asteroids. An MSS
capable of supporting human life is as advanced an undertaking as we can contemplate.
When the construction is accomplished by autonomous systems, the communication
issue looms even more important than were the task done by human beings. This
communication cannot be a slipshod affair as we humans use among ourselves. We 
cannot risk the lives of our spacecraft crews due to misunderstandings. On unmanned
missions such as the Voyagers, which stretch into an indeﬁ nite number of years, we
cannot subject them to accidental destruction because of our carelessness.
 20  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik ( 1990 ),  230 ,  235 ,  314 .
k
 21 Malchi Vita Pythagorae
 
, ed.  Ritterhus ( Amsterdam :  Moderatus aus Cadix , circa 
1560 ). 
 22  Hegel , W.  Wissenschaft der Logik ( 1990 ),  225 – 227 .
k
 23  The reason the Will system is addressed here in a monologue mode is because it 
is the prius. All living things have a Will. In the animal world, a Nexus Cogitationis 
does not exist, so the Will develops the Reason, which is, in the primitive sense, 
the dos and don ’ ts. In humans, it can be developed into axioms, laws, rules, and
so on. We are using architectural license and the discretion of systems engineering 
in this instance.
 24  Jet Propulsion Laboratory ,  Software Management Standards Package Level II JPL 
D-4006, Version 3.0 ( Pasadena, CA :  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute
6
of Technology , December  1988 ).
 25  Ibid. 
 26  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik, Erster Band: Die Lehre vom Sein ( 1990 ),  585 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

154
Endnotes
NOTES FOR EPILOGUE
 1  Arthur  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
 
, Gesamtausgabe, Erster 
Band ( Munich :  Deutsche Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH & Co. KG ,  1998 ),  552 . 
 2  G.W.F.  Hegel ,  Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein , Erster Teil: The Objec-
tive Logic ( Hamburg :  Felix Meiner Verlag ,  1990 ),  46 .
 3  Immanuel  Kant ,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft, Herausgegeben und eingeleitet von
t
August Messer, Professor der Philosophie und der Universität Gießen ( Berlin und 
Leipzig :  Verlag von Th. Knaur Nachf ,  1925 ),  287 .
 4  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik. Die Lehre vom Sein ( 1832 ),  48 . It would be negli-
gent not to quote Hegel ’ s opinion on Kant ’ s philosophy: “Die Kantische Philoso-
phie dient so als ein Polster für die Trägheit des Denkens, die sich damit beruhigt, 
daß bereits alles bewiesen und abgetan sei.”—“The philosophy of Kant serves as
the protective upholstery against the sluggish thinkers who ﬁ nd comfort and relax-
ation in the conviction that everything has been proven and settled.”
 5  Schopenhauer , Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ,  325 .
 6  Ibid., 340.
 7  Ibid., 341.
 8  Szabolcs M.  de  Gyurky , The Cognitive Dynamics of Computer Science/Cost-Effec-
tive Large Scale Software Development ( Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley & Sons ,  2006 ),
t
 55 – 78 
 9  Hegel , Wissenschaft der Logik, Die Lehre vom Sein ( 1832 ), die Erster Teil: Die 
Objektive Logik, Erster Band/Die Lehre vom Sein,  22 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

155
 Absolute reality,  51, 148, 149 
 Abstract, theoretical,  94 
 Abstract content,  125, 135 
 Abstract data,  11–15, 74, 81, 86–88,
118, 120 
 Abstract functions,  117 
 Abstract information,  xxi, 50, 113, 118 
 Abstract knowledge,  91 
 Abstract subsystem,  12, 74, 80–81, 139 
 Abstract vs. experiential,  75–76 
 Abstraction
 database,  120 
 functional attribute,  80 
 of human thought system,  xii, xvii, 
108, 143
 and rules,  119 
 of sensory perception,  68 
 science of,  xii 
 Acceptable reality 
 architectural,  xxix, 4 
 vs. absolute reality,  51
 deﬁ nition,  148
 in design object,  xxix
 ﬁ nalized,  24 
 in Reason system,  65 
 Acceptance,  viii, 26, 30, 31, 32
Actus cogito (motion-force-state),  130
 Adimantus,  xxvi
 Aesthetics,  117
 Alexander the Great,  105
 Algorithms,  xix, 17
Also Sprach Zarathustra,  47 
 Analysis
in Awareness moment,  140
 of data,  89 
The Autonomous System: A Foundational Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind,
First Edition. Szabolcs Michael de Gyurky and Mark A. Tarbell.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Index 
in Nexus Cogitationis (hub of 
thought),  128
perquisite to  identity,  132 
of Presentation,  133 
in Repair subsystem,  61
of risk,  83, 94 
subsystem,  x, 14, 84, 88 
tactical,  111 
in Thought system,  124 
Anaxagoras,  44 
Animus (mind),  77
Anschauung (viewing)
contemplation,  112
holographic,  103 
in identiﬁ cation,  115 
intellectual observation,  xxviii 
intuitive  a priori conclusion,  35
mental visualization,  xxvii, 73, 85, 
115, 129 
Appeterre (appetite),  58
Arbitration subsystem,  x, 18, 107, 114, 
120 
Architecture
Autonomous System,  1–21, 132 
between  subject and  
t
object,  45
t
bridge to philosophy,  76 
Decision system,  107–123 
design articulation,  xxix, 26 
Idea and Concept for,  66
t
Intellect subsystem,  74–82 
Internet,  125 
Level I,  22–24 
modern software,  78 
as paradigm shift,  xiv 
points of departure,  xvii 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

156
Index
 pre-existent,  33
 Presentation system,  83–89 
 Reason system,  63–73
 scope,  xviii 
 Sensory system,  98–106
 vs. that of AI,  xix
 Thought system,  124–141 
 Understanding system,  90 
 Will system,  41–61
Aristotle 
 beyond,  17
 categories,  95, 116
 freedom of thought,  105 
 idea of thinking,  44 
 man as social animal,  65 
 metaphysics,  47
 in science,  xviii, 127 
 works of,  151
Artiﬁ cial Intelligence (AI, AGI) 
 architecture vs. autonomy,  xix
 cognitive functions,  79
 past efforts of,  xiv 
 re-examination of,  143
 term coined,  xiii 
Athenian Republic,  44, 96
Autonomic response,  79, 140 
Autonomous system
 architectural design,  xix, 1–21 
 brain dichotomy,  3 
 constellation,  5
 design articulation of,  xxix 
 design considerations,  71 
 difﬁ culty of undertaking,  xvi 
 dynamic nature,  66 
 foundation of,  xxi
 functional capabilities,  4 
 vs. hardwired systems,  79 
 and human thought system,  xxviii
 initialization process,  136–141
 language of,  52, 85 
 logic program set,  131 
 negative aspects of,  xv
 origination of idea of,  xiv, 80
 points of departure,  xvii 
 project organization,  22–40
 power sources,  53, 59, 102, 122
 required abilities,  43 
 scope,  xviii 
 search for truth,  59 
 3-D architectural schematics,  5–7
Triebfeder (driving force),  51
r
 “universal I,”  49–50
 why design and build,  xiii 
Autonomy
 application of,  79
 failure to achieve,  xiii, 143 
 Internet and,  125
 true autonomy,  xxi 
Awareness
 and contemplation,  89
 environmental,  98
 initiation of,  140 
 and Internet,  125
 perceptional,  118 
 of self,  xvii, 8, 16, 58, 128, 136
 of Will system,  52 
Axioms
 access to Reason system,  55 
 building,  42–43
 database,  58
 rules and laws,  13, 62–63, 67, 72, 93,
120, 131–132, 153, 154
 subsystem,  11, 36, 69, 73, 138 
 survival,  58
 of Will system,  9, 43 
Babbage, Charles,  76 
Becoming ,  136, 137
Being
 initiation of,  141 
 ontology,  143 
 process of,  132 
Sein (being),  85, 116, 132, 136
Seinslogik (logic of being),  130
k
 sense of,  7, 63
 survival of,  47, 51, 81 
Begriff (
f see Concept) 
Bejahung des Lebens (afﬁ rmation of 
life),  51
Bilderstreit (argument),  50
t
Biology 
 considerations,  xxviii 
 as empirical science,  xxii, xxix, 46
Architecture (cont’d)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
157
 in design,  xxvii
 and survival,  64 
 Bonaparte, Napoleon,  49, 111–113
 Brain 
 expansion of,   xxii, 116, 140
 experiments on,  55 
 as hardware,  xix, 2, 53, 65, 74, 
142
 hemispheres,  3
 as location of Intellect,  77–79 
 vs. Mind,  xvii, xviii, xix, xxiii, 
46
 purview of,  38 
 and quantum,  84 
 Broadcast,  7, 19, 103, 124 
 during initiation process,  140
 emergency,  58 
 as fragments of thought,  68
 program set,  134–135 
 server,  20
 subsystem,  20 
 Calculus,  xiv, xxviii, 19 
 Case studies,  viii, 34, 35, 147
 Cassini spacecraft,  xvi
 Categorical imperative,  xvii, 65, 111, 
115 
 Categories,  vii, 94, 115 
 Aristotle ’ s,  95–96 
 of communication,  7–8 
 of sensory data,  53–54 
 of survival,  84 
 value,  116
 Causality,  64, 115, 120 
 Causation,  33, 64, 115, 116 
 Centre National d ’ Etudes Spatiales
(CNES),  40
 Challenger (space shuttle),  37 
 Cogito,  xvii, 124, 128, 130
Cognitive Dynamics of Computer 
Science,  22, 113, 119, 144, 145, 
146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 152,
155 
 “Collective I,”  41, 50, 130
 Colt .45 caliber service pistol,  120 
 Combat,  40, 108, 109, 113 
 Command Post Exercise (CPX),  147
 Communication,  35, 40, 55, 108, 
124–127, 154 
 categories,  7–8
 channels,  20
 connectivity,  2 
 contents of,  128 
 deﬁ nition,  125
 external network,  5 
 instantiation,  140–141 
 internal network,  7, 19, 52
 lingual,  4 
 location of,  127 
 monads,  58, 146
 subsystem,  132–133 
 Computability,  xiii 
 Computer science
 appreciation of,  143 
 as bridge to philosophy,  xvi, xxiii,
39
 and cognitive science,  xxv 
 compute engine,  76
 deﬁ nition,  xiii 
 hardware,  xxv
 “Holy grail” of,  xiii, xvi 
 language and,  xxi
 and pedagogic science,  43
 vs. philosophy,  xx 
 Concept 
a priori (immediate),  73
Begriff (Concept),  38, 115, 125–126,
f
131 
of being ( Sein ),  132
and Categories,  96, 115 
deﬁ nition,  3 
derivation,  67–68, 104 
development of,  118 
development phase,  38 
of ethics,  60 
of expanding mind,  66 
and Idea,  xviii, xxix, 19, 22, 50, 59, 
106, 126–127 
of implementation,  26
of law,  71 
of logic,  xxviii
of object,  78
t
objectivity,  141 
and Reason system,  63, 73, 126 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

158
Index
Reﬂ exionsbegriffe (Concepts arising 
from thinking),  50
 of the Will,  8 
Concept of Operations (CONOPS),  xvi, 
xviii 
Conference
 server,  20
 subsystem,  20
Conscience,  10, 62
Consciousness
a priori (immediate) understanding,
 68 
 beginning of,  58
 and externality,  19 
 as function,  8 
 Hegel ’ s “I”,  132
 inanimate,  148 
 and Internet,  125 
 Nexus-initiated,  128 
 and objectivity,  141 
 sense of,  7 
Constellation
 architecture,  5–21
 architectural necessity,  xix 
 architectural overview,  3 
 deﬁ nition,  2 
 “system of systems,”  1 
 and thinking,  4
Contemplation
 and identity,  132
in Nexus Cogitationis (hub of 
thought),  128
 object image,  105
 and Presentation system,  14, 83
primum mobile (primary driver),  42 
 program set,  131
 and Reason system,  10
 speculative,  91 
 subsystem,  84, 89 
 thought fragments,  73
 and Thought system,  124 
 and Will system,  58–59 
Cost 
 CLOC (cost per line of code),  xxix 
 controlling,  xx
 decisions and,  37, 49, 67, 108, 
113–114
 and JPL-STD-D-4000,  35 
 and knowledge,  118
 and language,  36, 77 
 modeling and,  76
 overall,  xxi
 overruns,  114, 152 
Craving
 to achieve a goal,  64
 appetite,  58–59 
 subjective truth,  43
 subsystem,  41, 54, 58–59 
Creeping requirements,  xxx
Culture,  48, 118
Das Ding an sich (the  Thing unto itself) 
 as intellectual intuition,  104
 and living things,  77 
 as thesis,  38 
 the Will as,  45–49 
 vs. world of appearances,  58
Das Ding des Denkens (the Thing of 
thinking)
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   121 
 thought and object,  129, 155
Data processing,  x, xiii, xix, xxvii, 7, 
99, 138
 program set,  103–104 
Data records,  99, 100, 103, 138
De Mundi Sensibilis (Kantian 
dissertation),   99 
Debugging,  viii, 25, 30, 31
Decision system,  107–123
a priori (immediate),  14, 37, 85, 120
 in Analysis subsystem,  88 
 arbitration,  92 
 architecture,  107–123
 capacity for,  3
 and Categories,  115
 and Conference,  135
 Critique,  xxi, 36, 146 
 decision making,  xxvi, 13, 17, 19, 36, 
79, 93, 108, 111, 141
 dynamics of,  17
Concept (cont’d)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
159
 and  identity ,  132
 interfaces,  121 
 initiation process,  141
 items,  90 
 multiple,  152 
 process,  109, 111–113, 117–118 
 processing subsystem,  117 
 quality,  97
 rational decision,  xiii, xv–xvii,
xxv, xxix, 4, 12, 38, 50, 120, 
127 
 system,  16–18, 84, 113–114 
 the Will as executor of,  41, 62 
 Deliveries 
 project,  27, 30–32
 slips,  xxi, 35, 143 
Denkkraft (the power to process
t
thought),  95
 Design Hub,  92 
Determinate Nothing,  137 
 Dialogue
 deﬁ nition,  7
 dreams,  103 
 fragments of thought,  68
 in initiation process,  138–139 
 internal,  43 
 language,  82 
 with other systems,  60 
 program set,  135 
 subsystem,  19, 21
 and Thought system,  124 
Die Lehre vom Sein (The Science of 
Being),  37, 132, 144–146, 149–155
Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung (The 
World as Will and Presentation),  1,
145–155
Die Wille zur Macht (The Will to 
t
Power),  47
 Descartes, René,  xvii, 44, 104, 124, 130 
 Documentation,  xxix, 22, 24–25, 37, 71 
 Dominance,  ix, 8
 in initiation process,  138 
primum mobile (primary driver),  42 
 subsystem,  41, 54, 56–57
 and the Will,  xxvii, 8, 47, 128 
Dummkopf (“stupid head”),  43, 56, 66
f
 Dynamic logic,  xiv, 95, 115, 118, 133
 vs. compartmented logic,  66
 vs. hardwired logic,  79 
 of the human mind,  19 
 vs. sequential logic,  7, 17, 38, 88 
Einbildungskraft  (the facility, ability, and
power attribute required to view,
visualize, and imagine a  Thing,
with understanding),   87 
Einbildungsvermögen (the mental 
attributes which permit an
individual to visualize or mentally
picture an object),   129 
Einstein, Albert,  xiii 
Empirical data,  19, 72–73, 130
Empirical experience,  3, 42, 77, 118, 
130, 149 
Empirical sciences,  xxii, 46–47, 78, 87,
143 
Engineering
acceptable reality,  4
and design documentation,  xxix
and language,  xxiii–xxiv, 36, 50, 70, 
104–105, 131 
left hemisphere,  3 
and philosophy,  xxii 
software,  xx–xxi, 8, 22, 36, 38, 53,
65, 87, 94, 132, 136
systems,  66, 76, 154 
well of knowledge,  119
Erkenntnis (recognition knowledge), 
113
Erkenntnisquellen (wells of recognition), 
112
 Ethical considerations,  ix, xv–xvi, 60, 
62–63, 93, 112, 134, 135 
 Ethics,  62–64 
 Euler spheres,  xxiv
 Experience subsystem,  ix, x, 12, 14, 
80–81, 84, 88, 139 
 External sensing,  64
 and Decision process,  117 
and the Nexus Cogitationis
 
(hub of 
thought),  130–133
 Voyager spacecraft,  34
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

160
Index
External sensory, 64 
 communications,  5, 20
 and Decision process,  117 
 environment,  5, 16, 19 
 information,  7, 16, 54 
 initiation,  138, 140–141 
 inputs,  11, 33, 57, 82, 85 
and the Nexus Cogitationis
 
(hub of 
thought), 130–133
 perception,  xxv 
 Phenomenon,  68, 72, 101, 146
 program set,  103–104 
 system,  16, 98–106, 138
 thought fragments,  151 
 Voyager spacecraft, 34
Experiment Data Record (EDR),  34, 
99–101 
Family (societal concept),  70–71 
Fichte,  42, 116, 147, 152
Flourens, Mr. (experimenter on live 
animals),  55, 150
Force (driving) 
 and actus cogito (motion-force state),
 130 
 Craving subsystem,  58 
 primordial,  45, 148 
Triebfeder (driving force),  51
r
Urteilskraft (decision),  17 
t
 Will system,  8, 47 
Form of All Appearances / Possibilities 
 example,  93–94
 in initiation process,  139
 subsystem,  95–97, 135 
 as an Understanding subsystem,  16,
90–93 
Verstand (understanding),  115
d
Fortpﬂ anzung (sex drive),  51
Frankenstein,  46 
Frederick the Great,  105, 
French Revolution,  45–46, 104 
Functional Design Document (FDD), 
 vii–viii, xx, 25–28, 39, 36, 65 
Functional Requirements Document 
(FRD),  vii–viii, xviii, xx, xxix,
25–26, 28, 36, 39, 59, 65
Galileo (interplanetary spacecraft),  xvi, 
135 
Gedankenexperimente (thought 
experiments),   xvii, 19, 84 
Gedankenstücke (thought fragments), 
 105 
Geier, Manfred,  150
Gemüt (primary mind),  78, 121
t
Gemütlich (unison),  50, 121 
Genius 
a priori ,  50, 66, 85, 118
 human,  50 
 mark of,  112 
 motivation,  122 
 and Recall subsystem,  89
 Schopenhauer,  145
 and Wisdom,  91 
Gliese (star),  102
Global Decision Support System 
(GDSS),  xxv
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von,  37, 112 
Götzendämmerung (Twilight of the 
Idols),  48
Gracian, Balthasar,  46, 127, 153
Gradstein, I.S.,  xiv–xv, 144–145 
Greece,  44 
“Half-cocked,”  120, 152 
Hardwired system,  79 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
 architectural model,  xviii
being ,  132–133
 calculus,  147
 Categories,  96, 116
 and decision,  108, 113
 discovery process,  xxi 
 dynamic logic,  xiv, 19, 37–38, 66, 95
 human thought system,  xvii 
 Idea,  126 
 initialization process,  136 
 Intellect system,  11 
 intellectual observation,  xxviii 
 and Internet,  125 
 and language,  80, 104 
 logic,  45, 78, 129 
 metaphysics,  85, 87 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
161
 negation,  42, 121, 150 
Nexus Cogitationis (inferred),  7 
 objectivity,  141
 opinion of Kant,  155 
 as “pillar of knowledge,”  26
 presentation in design,  xxvi
pure nothing ,  137
 quantum,  2, 84, 101, 121, 133
 self-consciousness,  141
 self-identity,  19
 thinking devoid of substance,  xxvii, 
124–125, 129, 134
 and Will system,  47, 49 
 Hitler, Adolf,  48–49
 “Holy grail,” xiii, xvi 
 Human thought system,  19
 Hypothesis,  1, 22, 100, 146 
 IBM 360, 59, 66, 99 
 Idea
 beyond,  106 
 birth of,  86 
 bridge from Concept,  xviii, 3 
 connection to Concept,  45
 development of,  59 
 emergence,  50 
 evolution of,  36 
 form of thought,  125
 formulation,  33, 139–140 
 as a function,  126
Idee (Idea),  125 
 and language,  52
 mental,  142
 pure reason,  3 
 starting point,  22
 substance of,  42 
 as task,  151
 as Vorstellung (presentation),  xxvii
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33–34 
 Implementation Plan,  vii, 25, 27 
 Instinct,  59, 86 
 Instruments,  xxviii, 16, 34, 99 
 Integration
 holographic,  144 
 mental process,  22 
 phase,  30, 31
 plan (STIP),  25, 28, 29
 prerequisite for initialization,  
139 
 testing and,  22, 26 
 Intellect system,  11–13, 74–82
and Anschauung
 
 (viewing),  85
 and Arbitration subsystem,  121 
 concept origination,  142
 development of,  57 
 experience,  94
 formulation of Idea,  33
 hemisphere,  3
 instantiation,  139 
 intellection,  16
 interaction with Will system,  60
 Knowledge subsystem,  92, 115
 nonsensory perception,  68 
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   105 
 and objective reality,  96
 and Presentation system,  87–
88
 provisional,  129
 rational concepts,  126
 and Reason system,  64 
 and rules,  69
 thought fragments,  151
 and Understanding system, 
135 
 “universal I,”  49–50
 wells of knowledge,  119 
 and Will system,  143 
 Intellection,  11, 16 
 Interface speciﬁ cations,  viii, 25, 28, 29, 
114
 Intuition,  7, 104, 113, 127, 146 
Jenseits von Gut und Böse (Beyond
Good and Evil),  48
 Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL),  v, xiv, 
xvii, xxv–xxvi, xxix, 32, 142, 147,
154 
 Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS),
 40
 JPL-STD-D-4000,  xx, xxix, 26, 32, 
35–36, 39–40, 139 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

162
Index
Kant, Immanuel 
a posteriori (“from the later”)
conclusions,  136
a priori (immediate) conclusions,  112,
129, 136 
 aesthetics,  117 
Anschauung (viewing),  129
 architectural model,  xvii
 Categories,  96, 116 
 communication,  66 
 Decision system,  16, 107, 113
Das Ding an sich (the  Thing unto 
itself),  104, 129
 dictum,  xvii, 124
 discovery process,  xxi
 dynamic logic,  17 
Einbildungsvermögen (imagination 
assets),   129 
Gemüt (primary mind),  121
t
Genius,  112
 Hegel ’ s opinion of,  155 
Idee vs. Begriff (Idea vs. Concept),
f
 125–126
 Intellect system,  11 
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft
(Critique of Practical Reason),  37,
63–64 
Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Critique of 
t
Pure Reason),   xix, xxvii, 36, 50, 
63, 91, 104, 115, 119, 142 
Kritik der Urteilskraft (Critique of 
t
Decisions),   108, 111, 117 
 languages,  xxiii–xxiv, 36, 52, 76, 104 
 logic postulate,  xxviii 
 metaphysics,  47, 78, 87 
 moments,  136 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 7
 pillar of knowledge,  26 
 Phenomenon,  34 
 as physicist,  44, 127 
 Presentation,  xxvi, 85 
 Principal Investigator,  45, 111, 113
 rational judgment,  36
 Reason system,  64
Reﬂ exion (Überlegung),  50 
 Schopenhauer on,  xxii
 sensory,  99
 state,  65
 states of Reason,  10 
 system,  80 
 thought experiments,  xiv, 19, 60 
 thought fragments,  73, 151 
Triebfeder (driving force),  42
r
Understanding vs. Experience , 
94, 120
 wells of experience,  43, 118 
 Will system,  49, 52–54 
Kausalnexus (causal nexus),  33, 34
King Richard III,  42–43
Knowledge
 academic vs. real,  11–13, 86, 94 
 abstract,  80–81, 91, 135
 applied,  16
 axioms,  69
 completeness,  13 
 creation of,  74–75, 139 
 development of,  129
 functional,  66 
 information and,  xxi
 Intellect system,  120, 121
 intellection,  11, 16 
 object of,  48 
 philosophy and,  xx 
 pillars,  24, 26 
 pleasure in,  127 
 practical,  75–76, 108
 Presentation system,  83 
 and science,  85
 subsystem,  74, 80–81, 115
 and Understanding,  92 
 wells of knowledge,  119
Knutzen, Martin,  xx 
Kritik der Geschmaksurteile (Critique of 
Tastes and Preferences),  117 
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft (Critique
t
of Practical Reason),  37, 63, 65,
146–147, 149 
Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Critique of 
t
Pure Reason),   xix, xxvii, 36, 50, 
63, 65, 91, 104, 119, 126, 144–145,
147–149, 153–154 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
163
Kritik der Urteilskraft (Critique of 
t
Decisions),   108, 111, 117, 146–147, 
152–153 
 Lambert lines,  xxiv 
 Language 
 classical,  xxv, 119 
 computer,  115 
 and computer science,  xxi
 in design,  xxiii–xxiv, 77 
 English,  xxiii–xxiv, 39, 64, 67, 78, 
144 
 ﬂ uency,  56–57, 77, 144 
 French,  xxiii–xxiv, 78 
 German,  xxiii–xxiv, 2, 76, 78–79, 80, 
126, 144 
 Greek,  xxiii, 2, 80 
 human,  xx–xxi, 4, 7, 20, 43, 50, 52, 
58, 72, 82, 86, 87, 95, 101, 103,
118, 127, 131, 133–134 
 initiation process,  140–141
 Latin,  xvii, xxiii–xxv, xxvii, 46, 58, 
69, 70, 78, 80, 99, 104–105, 116, 
145, 147, 150, 153
 national,  36, 104
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   66–68, 72, 82, 85, 87, 
95, 103
 optimal,  150 
 problems with,  36, 39, 92, 134
 program set,  132–133 
 Russian,  xxiii 
 and thinking,  xxx, 4, 52
 Law 
 Arbitration subsystem,  121 
 basic,  130
 vs. ethics,  60
 formation,  108
 in Germany,  48
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33 
 initiation process,  138
Kausalnexus (causal nexus), 
33–34 
 King Richard III,  42
Lex Parsimoniae (Law of Parsimony), 
 43
 metaphysics,  91 
 moral,  65
 natural,  64 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 128 
 Presentation,  85 
 Roman and Germanic,  70–71, 149, 
151 
 rules and axioms,  13, 62–63, 67, 93,
120, 131–132, 134, 153, 154 
 subsystem,  10–11, 68, 70–72 
 Will system,  126 
 Leadership,  109–110, 119, 151
 Lear, Floyd Seyward,  71
Lex Parsimoniae (Law of Parsimony), 
 43
 Logic 
 absolute reality,  149
 analytical, 63baseline,  xxi 
 binary,  xv
 Boolean,  17, 37
 design,  xxvii–xxviii, 66
 dynamic,  xiv, 7, 17, 38, 66, 88, 95, 
115, 118, 133
 elementary,  132 
 formal,  150
 Hegelian/Aristotelian,  45 
 hierarchical,  xv, 7, 38 
 of the Idea,  148 
Maßlogik (metalogic),  130
k
 metaphysics,  46–47, 78, 79, 84, 143 
 negation,  42, 121
Noumena (thought fragments),  19
 objective,  xxiii
 pedagogy,  84
 program set,  131
 pure,  119
 pure thought,  43, 105
 quantum,  xiv, 121
 science of,  37, 126, 129, 142
Seinslogik (logic of being),  130
k
 sequential,  xv, 7, 37, 88 
 speculative,  xxiii
Wissenschaft der Logik (Science of 
k
Logic),  xiv, 26, 121, 132
Logos ,  105–106
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

164
Index
Manager-architect,  xxvi, xxix, 26, 67, 
71, 115
Mathematics 
a priori conclusions,  112
 absolute reality,  149 
 algebra,  xv 
Anschauung (viewing),  85
 and beauty,  123 
 Bonaparte, Napoleon,  49 
 Boolean logic,  xv
 calculus,  19, 147
 communication,  131–133
 Contemplation subsystem,  89
 in design,  xxvii 
 initiation process,  140
 metaphysics,  46, 78, 143
 and mind,  xiv 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 128 
 process of thought,  xxvii
 quantum,  101
 spontaneous reproduction,  55–56
 team,  40, 72
 tools,  xiv
 wells of knowledge,  119 
Messer, August,  xxi–xxii, 144, 145, 147, 
148, 153, 154
Metaphysical prius
 
(primal force),  45, 
105, 128, 137
Metaphysics,  46–47, 77–78, 85, 87, 91 
Methodology,  vii, 4, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30,
32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 144 
Mind vs. 
d
brain ,  xvii–xviii, xix, xxii,
2–3, 38, 46, 55, 74, 77–79, 84,
142
Mind
 Analysis subsystem,  88 
Anschauung (viewing),  73
 conscience,  10 
 contemplation,  103 
Dummkopf (“stupid head”),  43, 56, 66
f
 expanding,  66, 142 
Geist (spirit),  78
t
Gemüt (soul),  78, 121
t
 human,  xv, xvii, xviii, xix, xxvii, 8, 9,
14, 19, 34, 52, 56, 57, 59, 64, 71,
114, 126, 129, 142 
 Idea,  22, 33, 50, 126
 Intellect,  79 
 knowledge,  75–76 
 language,  67, 150
 mathematically intense,  xiv
 metaphysics,  47, 78
 as model,  xviii, xix, 1–3 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 128, 130 
 Phenomenon,  121 
 Presentation,  xxvi, 83–86 
 process,  44, 72 
 Reason,  63, 65 
Reﬂ exionsbegriffe (concepts arising 
from thinking),  50
 Rules subsystem,  69
 as software,  xiv, xix, 38, 74, 77
Stumpfkopf (“stunted head”),  43, 66,
f
91
 theater,  13
 thought fragments,  68, 151 
 Understanding,  91–92 
 utilization,  77–78, 95–96, 116, 142
Mission
 accomplishment of,  8, 11, 34, 41, 55,
107 
 discovery process,  xxi 
 interstellar/interplanetary,  xvii, xxvi,
32, 64 
 jeopardization of,  71
 objectives,  16, 62, 64, 135
 operators,  35
 organization,  35, 111
 science,  xxvii, 55, 154
 subsystem,  9, 54, 60
Mission Support Site (MSS),  32, 60,
138, 154
Modality,  97
Modeling,  ix, xiii, 8, 40, 56, 72, 76, 77, 
108, 123, 147
Moderatus aus Cadix (Pythagorean
x
philosopher),   154
Mommsen,  71, 72, 149
Monads,  7, 16, 19, 21, 57, 58, 82, 88, 
125, 146, 149
Monologue,  7, 19, 20, 43, 82, 124, 134,
137–138, 140, 141, 154
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
165
 Narcotics,  78 
 NASA,  xxix, 35, 40
 NCO,  109, 111 
 Negation of the negation,  42, 85, 121,
150 
 Network subsystem,  xi, 21, 53, 130, 
133–134, 146
 Newton, Isaac,  xix–xx, xxiii–xxiv, 
xxviii, 101, 104
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of 
thought)
a posteriori information,  135
 and animals,  154
 “collective I,”  41 
 Concept,  73, 126–127
 conferencing,  136
 deﬁ nition,  128–131 
 diagram,  5
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33–34 
 initiation process,  136–141
 introduction,  7–8 
 language,  85 
 monologue program set,  134 
 project integration testing,  31
 Thought system,  18–20 
 Nietzsche, Friedrich,  47–48 
Nonself,  137
f
Noumena (thought-logic elements),  19,
21, 66–68, 73
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception)
and Anschauung
 
 (viewing), 
xxvii 
 in constellation,  5–7, 118 
 Decision system,  18, 121 
 deﬁ nition,  xxiv–xxv
 derivation,  104
Das Ding an sich (the  Thing unto 
itself),  104
Das Ding des Denkens (the Thing of 
thingking),  121 
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  34 
 Intellect system,  12–13, 80–82 
 language,  52, 67, 85, 87, 95, 103, 
104 
 monads,  146 
 monitoring,  33 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 128, 130 
Positive Noumenon
 
of the Intellect,  
68
Positive Noumenon of the 
Understanding,   68 
 Presentation system,  14–15, 85, 87,
88
 Reason system,  11, 67–68, 72
 Sensory system,  16, 100, 103
 server,  51–52
 thinking,  68 
 thought fragments,  21 
 Thought system,  20–21, 52, 124–125, 
132, 134 
 Understanding system,  15–16, 92, 95, 
96
Verstandeswesen (entity capable of 
understanding),   50
 Will system,  9, 51, 53, 58 
 workings of,  105
 Objective logic,  xxiii, 145, 154
 Objectivization,  8
 Ocean Topographic Explorer (TOPEX), 
 xxix, 35–36, 100
 “On-the-job” training,  26, 118 
 Operating System (OS),  xviii–xix,
59–60, 66, 149
 Paradigm shift,  xiii, xiv, 142 
 Parnassus (two peaks of Wisdom and 
Genius),  91
Patria potestas (“power of the father”),
 71
 Pericles,  44 
Phänomenologie des Geistes
 (Phenomenology of the Spirit),  78,
101, 116
Phenomenon (external thought 
perception),   34, 68, 99–101 
 Phenomenon server,  51–52 
 Phenomenon subsystem,  ix–x, xxiv, 9, 
11, 16, 20, 68, 72, 80, 92, 100–101, 
103 
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica ,  xix–xx
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

166
Index
Philosophy 
 Aristotle,  xxiii, 63
 background,  44 
 bridge to science,  xvi, xx, 4, 39, 63, 
76, 127, 143 
 cognitive,  xxi, xxiii, 85, 143
 deﬁ nition,  xx 
 discreditation,  127 
 empiricism,  149 
 expression,  xxiv 
 Fichte,  116
 Hegel,  xxviii, 155 
 Kant,  xxii, 94, 155 
metaphysical prius (primal force),  45 
 metaphysics,  46–47, 78, 85 
 Nietzsche,  48
 Pythagoras,  133 
 thought fragments,  151 
 Voyager,  34
 wells of knowledge,  119 
Physical approach,  48 
Physical body,  77, 78 
Physical brain,  38, 55, 142
Physical domain,  42 
Physical endowments,  46 
Physical experience,  81, 87, 103,
149 
Physical existence,  8
Physical function,  43
Physical law,  132
Physical materials,  22 
Physical operations,  128
Physical phenomenon,  50
Physical powers,  33
Physical replacement,  61
Physical sciences,  78
Physical sensing,  34, 85, 101, 112, 117,
120 
Physical skills,  71 
Physical structure,  xviii, 38, 79 
Physical survival,  63, 131
Physical system,  53 
Physical viewing,  68, 86, 115 
Physical Will system,  137–138 
Physical work,  60
Pillars of knowledge,  24, 26 
Project-level documentation ( in strict 
order of completion) 
 Pillars of Knowledge and Experience
(PKE),  24, 26
 Project Architecture Design Document 
(PADD),  24, 26 
 Project Functional Requirements
Document (FRD),   xviii, xx, xxix, 
25, 26, 65
 Project Functional Design Document 
(FDD),  xviii, xx, xxix, 25, 27,
65 
 Project Software Requirements
Document (SRD),   25, 27, 31, 32, 
65 
 Project Implementation Plan (PIP),
 25, 27 
 Project Programming Rules and
Conventions (PRC),   25, 27 
 Project Software Design Document 
(SDD),  25, 27
 Project Detailed Design Document 
(DDD),   25, 27 
 Project Software Speciﬁ cations 
Document (SSD),   25, 27 
 Project Software Interface 
Speciﬁ cations Document (SISD),
 25, 28 
 Project Software Test and Integration 
Plan (STIP),  25, 28
Plato,  xxv–xxvi, 44, 49, 105, 109, 126, 
145 
Presentation system,  83–89
Anschauung  (viewing),  76, 95
 broadcast,  135
 capability,  43–44 
 Concept,  142 
 Decision system,  117, 121 
 in design,  xxvi–xxvii 
 empirical,  130
 faculty,  77
 ideational system,  3, 126
 imagination,  118 
 initiation process,  140 
 Intellect system,  120, 121
 monologue,  134 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
167
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   105 
 Reason system,  64, 66–67 
Reﬂ exion (Überlegung ),  50
 science data conversion,  57 
 Sensory system,  101, 103, 105, 106, 
117 
 server,  18
 system,  5, 13–15, 83–89 
 Thought system,  133 
 Understanding system,  96, 97
Vorstellung (presentation),  xxvii
 Will system,  60, 92
 “Primordial  me,”  41, 58 
Primum mobile (prime mover),  42, 148 
 Principal Investigator (PI),  xxv, xxvii, 
34–35, 45, 99, 111
 Programmability,  xiii 
 Projection subsystem,  x, 14, 84, 88
 Propagation,  ix, 41, 54–55, 65 
Pure nothing ,  137
 Pure thinking,  142
 Pure speculative philosophy,  78, 85 
 Pure thought,  xxviii, 43, 105, 131, 142 
 Puzzle,  106, 110–111, 151 
 Pythagoras,  133 
 Quality,  4, 34, 45, 95–97, 101, 143 
 Quantity,  57, 95, 101
 Quantum (Hegel),  xiv, xxviii, 2, 84, 101,
103, 121, 133
Quellen der Erfahrung (wells of 
experience),   43, 112, 118–119 
 Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator 
(RTG),  53, 58–59, 122 
 Rat model of mind,  19, 55 
 Rational thinking,  xxvii, 20
 Reason system,  62–73 
a priori reasoning,  85
Anschauung  (viewing),  xxvii, 115
 arbitration,  121
 and Concept,  126, 142
 Decision system,  121
 ethics,  62–64, 132 
 Form of All Possibilities,  96 
 “gainsayer” to the Will,  126 
 Idea (pure reason),  3, 126 
 inferential,  19
 initiation process,  138–139 
 Intellect system,  12
 monologue,  134
 nature of,  64–65
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 128, 131 
Noumena (thought fragments),  73,
105, 128 
 rules, laws, axioms,  13, 36, 43, 55, 
67, 70 
Satz vom Grunde (sufﬁ cient reason), 
 48
 subsystems of,  68–73
 system,  3, 5, 9–13, 57, 143
 term,  4
 thought fragments,  151
 triumph of Will,  49
 Understanding system,  15–16, 93 
Verstand (understanding),  78, 115
d
Vorstellung (presentation),  xxvii
 wells of experience,  43, 119
 Will system,  36, 42, 49, 50, 60, 143,
154 
 Recall subsystem,  x, 14, 84, 89
 Recognition
a priori ,  85
 conscious,  73
 Craving subsystem,  58
 database,  58
 discrete,  129 
Erkenntnis (recognition knowledge),
 113
 and language,  150
 law of thinking,  130
 Parnassus of,  91 
 of possible reality,  64, 69 
 process of,  94, 117 
 science data conversion,  57 
 synthesis,  119 
 theoretical,  120 
Verständnis (comprehensive
understanding),   15
 wells of,  112 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

168
Index
Reﬂ exion ( Überlegung ),  50
Reﬂ exionsbegriffe (concepts arising from 
thinking),  50
Regula( re) (“straight stick”),  69
Reichsmark,  108 
Relationships,  xxiv, 5, 33, 70, 112, 130, 
133 
Republic (Plato),  xxv, 44, 49, 71, 109, 
112, 145 
Requirements,  22–40 (see also Project-
level documentation; System-level
documentation)
Riefenstahl, Leni,  49
Roman and Germanic law,  70–72
“Royal we,”  49
Rules 
 accumulation of,  153
 Arbitration subsystem,  121
 ﬁ xed,  136 
 going beyond,  150
 ground,  3
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33 
 initiation process,  138, 140
 Intellect system,  12 
 laws and axioms,  13, 59, 62–63, 67, 
72, 93, 154 
 placement of,  131–132 
 programming,  25, 27
 Reason system,  68–72
 Roman and Germanic law,  71 
 societal,  64, 70–71 
 subsystem,  11, 69 
 wells of knowledge,  119 
 Will system,  47–48, 62, 126
 vs. wisdom,  91
Ryshik, I.H.,  xiv–xv, 144–145 
Satz vom Grunde (sufﬁ cient reason),  48 
Sauggasmotor (engine),  122–123
r
Schacht, Hjalmar,  151
Schiller, Johann Friedrich von,  37, 112
Schmidt, Raymund,  99, 151, 152
Schopenhauer, Arthur 
a priori concepts,  73 
 brain,  3, 74, 77 
 Concept,  127 
 cognitive model,  xviii
 contemplation,  136
 design divergence with,  63, 73, 80, 
113, 134 
 discovery process,  xxi 
Dummkopf (“stupid head”),  43, 66
f
 empirical science,  78
 expansion of mind,  142
 human thought system,  xvii 
Idee und Begriff (Idea and Concept),
f
 125–126
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33 
 Intellect system,  11, 79 
Kausalnexus ,  33
 languages,  xxiv, 76, 104 
 on location of Intellect,  77 
metaphysical prius
 
(primal force),  45 
metaphysics,  87
Naturwissenschaft, Mathematische
Prinzipien (Newton ’ s Principia ), 
xx
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 7
 personality,  75 
 pillar of knowledge,  26 
 Presentation in design,  xxvi, 83,
86–88 
 quotation,  1 
 Reason as origin of Concept,  73 
 requirements,  xxii, 44–45 
 search for the Will,  45, 55 
Stumpfkopf (“stunted head”),  43, 66,
f
91, 129
 thought exercises,  xiv, 60 
 truth,  42, 143 
 value categories,  116 
Verstand (understanding),  90
d
 Voyager,  34 
 Will as driving force,  47, 51, 78 
 Will system,  8, 41, 49 
Schranke (social limitations),  105
Science data conversion,  ix, 41, 54, 57 
Science Experiment Data Record
(SEDR),  34, 99–101
Science of Being,  xxi, 26, 125, 132, 143, 
146 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
169
Science of Logic,  xxi, 26, 84, 121, 125, 
132, 143, 153
 Sciences
 empirical,  xxii–xxiii, 46, 47, 72, 78, 
87, 143
 metaphysical,  xxiii, 46, 47, 78, 84–87, 
91, 116, 143
 Self,  3, 137
 Self-awareness (consciousness of being), 
 xvii, 8, 16, 58, 125, 128, 136
 Self–nonself discrimination,  xxvii, 132,
136–137
 Self-repair,  8, 54, 103
 Sensing,  34, 98–99, 103–104
 Sensory data,  x, 16, 21, 33, 52–54, 57, 
67–68, 83–84, 103–105, 138, 146
 Sensory system,  15–16, 98–106
 abstract data,  11 
 at conception,  52 
 as Conceptual system,  3
 contemplation,  131
 external sensory program set,  101 
 as hardware,  2
 holographic presentation,  117 
 initiation process,  138
 instruments,  34
 internal sensory program set, 
102 
 logos,  106 
 monads,  16, 146 
 nonsensory perception,  68, 87,
105 
 vs. Noumenon
 
 (internal thought 
perception),   xxv 
 and Phenomenon network,  5, 7, 54,
57, 68 
 Phenomenon server,  51–52, 53
 process,  135
 redundant capability,  67 
 sensory data,  21, 33, 52–54, 57, 
82–85, 103, 133
 sensory data processing program set,
 103–104
 sensory input,  20–21, 33, 57, 112, 
117–118, 128
 sensory perception,  68 
 subsystems,  16 
 and Will system,  60
 Shakespeare,  42–43, 112
Sinneswesen (a sensing being),  50 
 Sirius (star),  60, 102
 Socrates,  xxvi, 49, 105
Something (concept),  137–139
St. Helena (island),  113 
Stone, Edward C.,  xiv, 142 
Strauss, Richard,  47 
Stumpfkopf (“stunted head”),  43, 66, 91
f
Sufﬁ cient reason,  48 
Survival 
attributes of the Will,  47
of autonomous system,  41
Axioms subsystem,  69, 73
building preferences,  123 
database,  58
energy,  55 
of environment,  52–53 
Experience subsystem,  81
individual,  51, 55, 63, 64
initiation process,  137–138 
metaphysical prius
 
(primal force),  128 
monads,  57 
mutual,  65
Presentation system,  13 
primum mobile (prime mover),  42 
and safety,  58 
self-preservation,  59
self-repair,  103 
of the species,  51 
subsystem,  54
Triebfeder (driving force),  42
r
Understanding system,  95 
wells of experience,  43
Will as survival system,  8, 57, 63, 
131, 135 
Will ’ s drive for,  xxvii 
System (derivation),  80 
System-level documentation ( in strict 
order of completion) 
System Functional Requirements 
Document (FRD),   25, 28 
System Functional Design Document 
(FDD),  25, 28
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

170
Index
 System Software Requirements 
Document (SRD 1&2),  25, 
28–29 
 System Software Design Document 
(SDD),  25, 29
 System Detailed Design Document 
(DDD),   25, 29 
 System Software Speciﬁ cations
Document (SSD),   25, 29 
 System Software Interface 
Speciﬁ cations Document (SISD),
 25, 29 
 System Software Test and Integration
Plan (STIP),  25, 29–30
Tables of Series, Products and Integrals ,
 xiv 
Tabula rasa,  xiv 
Tacoma Narrows bridge,  50, 77 
Teaching,  xxiii, 66, 70, 109
Technical English,  xxx, 36, 65, 76, 77, 
116
Telemetry Command and
Communications System (TCCS),
 xxix, 35, 40, 142
Theater of the mind,  13, 83 
Theoretical,  xix, 1, 26, 40, 64, 76, 94,
120, 144 
Thing (see Das Ding an sich
 
 )
Thinking
a priori,  68
 Anaxagoras,  44
 architecture,  19, 125
 contemplation,  136 
 Descartes ’ dictum,  xvii, 124, 130
das Ding des Denkens (the Thing of 
thinking),  121
 expansion of,  20, 140
 “Holy grail,” xvi 
 human-like,  xii, xxvii, 3 
Ideenexus (Idea nexus),  33 
 identity,  132
 initialized state,  141 
 intuitive,  87 
 language,  4, 52, 67, 80, 82, 
140–141
 laws of,  130
 logic,  84, 142 
 machine,  xv
 metaphysical,  46
 model,  xxviii, 52
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 8
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   68 
 philosophical,  xxii 
 process,  xxvii, 8, 124, 130
 rational,  xxvii, 20, 38, 64
 Reason,  64 
Reﬂ exionsbegriffe (concepts arising 
from thinking),  50
 science of,  xii, xxviii, 46, 127–128, 
129, 142
 thought fragments,  73
 transcendental,  68, 73
 truth,  42
Verständnis (comprehensive
understanding),   15 
 vs. empiricism,  46
Thought experiments,  xvii 
Thought system,  124–141 
 algebraic underpinnings,  xv
Anschauung (viewing),  129
 architecture,  1–21
 broadcast,  134–135
 communication,  125, 127, 132,
140–141
 conference,  135–136
 development cycle,  24
 dialogue,  135 
Gemüt (primary mind),  121
t
 human,  xiii, xvii, xxvii–xxviii, 42, 59, 
86, 126, 143 
 initiation process,  136–141
 language,  85, 104, 118 
 monologue,  134, 140 
Nexus Cogitationis (hub of thought), 
 7, 18–21, 128, 131 
Noumena (thought fragments), 
73
System-level documentation (in strict 
order of completion) (cont’d)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
171
Noumenon server,  52
Noumenon subsystem,  72
Sinneswesen (physical) data,  50 
 subsystems of,  130–136 
 thought fragments,  73, 118, 151 
 Viewing subsystem,  87 
 Will system,  58 
νοούμεν
ε  oν (Noumenon),  104 
 Thucydides (dictum),  8, 146 
 TOPEX-Poseidon,  viii, xxix, 35, 36, 40,
100, 147 
 Transcendentalism,  xxviii, 47, 50, 52,
68, 73, 78
Triebfeder  (driving force),  42, 51
Triumpf der Wille (Triumph of the Will),
 49
 Truth
 absolute,  50, 81, 148 
 axiomatic,  69 
 of computer science,  143 
 elementary logic,  131 
 objective,  xxvi, 73, 89
primum mobile,  42 
 Schopenhauer ’ s quotations on,  42,
129 
 search for,  viii, ix, 41–44, 54, 59, 89, 
148 
 Search for Truth subsystem,  41, 54,
59–60 
 subjective,  43
 system of,  127 
 verdict on,  130 
Überlegung (reﬂ ection),  50
 Understanding system,  15–16, 90–
97
 Arbitration subsystem,  121 
 dialogue,  135 
 Form of all Possibilities,  88, 91, 94, 
96–97 
 ideational,  3, 126 
 initiation process,  139–140
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception),   105 
 Presentation system,  83–84, 87
 and survival,  95 
 “universal I,”  49–50
Verstand (understanding),  37, 78, 115
d
 “Universal I,”  41, 49–50, 130 
Urteilskraft (decisions and verdicts),  17, 
t
37, 108, 113–114, 117, 146–147,
152–153 
 U.S. Army,  109–111, 120 
 Usefulness,  116 
 U.S.S.R.,  109 
 Validation,  x, 12, 95, 109
 Value subsystem,  x, 18, 107, 114 
Verstand (understanding),  15, 37, 50, 78,
d
90, 96, 115, 142
Verstandesbegriff (concept of 
f
understanding),   142
Verstandeswesen (an understanding 
being),  50
Visualization (of the brain and mind), 
 xxvii, 2
von Kármán, Theodore,  50, 77 
Vorstellung (presentation),  xxvii, 1,
145–155 
 Voyager spacecraft 
 advancements,  xxv 
 as automatons,  122 
 case study,  34–35 
 closest approach to stars,  56, 102, 
128, 154 
 dedication,  v 
 Flight Science Ofﬁ ce,  34 
 as large-scale project,  xvi
 occultation at Jupiter,  xxviii
 project organization,  xxvi, xxvii, 
34–35 
 Radioisotope Thermoelectric 
Generator (RTG),  53, 122 
 in ways analogous to constellation,
 99–101
 War Room (project organization),  40
 Waterfall (development methodology), 
 23–24 
 Will system,  8–10, 41–61 
 “act of the Will,”  43
 Anaxagoras,  44
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

172
Index
attributes,  47
Axioms subsystem,  36, 55, 69, 134 
as Conceptual system,  3 
consequences of decision,  13 
Craving subsystem,  58 
criticality of input,  13 
Descartes,  45
decision basis,  12 
dialogue,  135 
Das Ding an sich (the  Thing unto 
itself),  45, 77
distribution of Will in body,  77–79 
Dominance subsystem,  56–57 
drive,  xxvii 
emergency input and response,  138 
extant at conception,  52 
free Will,  56, 60, 116 
functionally biological,  54, 115, 121 
Gemüt (primary mind),  121
t
initiation process,  137–138
interaction with Decision,  18 
interaction with Reason,  36 
interfaces,  53–54
Internet,  125
Jenseits von Gut und Böse (Beyond
Good and Evil),  48
metaphysical prius
 
(primal force),  45, 
105, 128, 154
Mission subsystem,  60 
Nietzsche, Friedrich,  47–48 
Noumenon (internal thought 
perception) data,  96 
 physical powers of,  33, 42 
 “primordial me,”  41, 130
 Propagation subsystem,  55–56 
 Reason link to Will,  11 
 Repair subsystem,  61
 Science Data Conversion subsystem,
 57–58
 Search for Truth subsystem, 
59–60
 Self-nonself discrimination,  136 
 servers of,  9
 slave of the Will,  51
 subsystems of,  9, 53–61 
 Survival subsystem,  54–55
 as “the Thing unto itself,”  8 
 thought fragments,  73 
Triumpf der Wille (Triumph of the 
Will),  49 
 “universal I,”  49–50
 war games,  40
 Will of inanimate objects,  45, 148
 “will to live,”  55, 123
Die Wille zur Macht (The Will to
t
Power),  47
Wissenschaft der Logik (Science of 
Logic),  xiv, 37, 132, 144–146, 149,
150–155
 Zeroth moment,  137 
Will system (cont’d)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/04/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

