
The Phonetics and Phonology of
Geminate Consonants

OXFORD STUDIES IN PHONOLOGY AND PHONETICS
GENERAL EDITORS:
Andrew Nevins, University College London; Keren Rice, University of Toronto
ADVISORY EDITORS: Stuart Davis, Indiana University, Heather Goad, McGill University,
Carlos Gussenhoven, Radboud University, Haruo Kubozono, National Institute for
Japanese Language and Linguistics, Sun-Ah Jun, University of California, Los Angeles,
Maria-Rosa Lloret, Universitat de Barcelona, Douglas Pulleyblank, University of British
Columbia, Rachid Ridouane, Laboratoire de Phonétique et Phonologie, Paris, Rachel
Walker, University of Southern California
PUBLISHED

Morphological Length and Prosodically Defective Morphemes
Eva Zimmermann

The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants
Edited by Haruo Kubozono
IN PREPARATION
Phonological Speciﬁcation and Interface Interpretation
Edited by Bert Botma and Marc van Oostendorp
The Structure of Nasal-Stop Inventories
Eduardo Piñeros
Speech Timing
Implications for Theories of Phonology, Speech Production, and Speech Motor Control
Alice Turk and Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel
Phonological Templates in Development
Marilyn Vihman

The Phonetics and
Phonology of Geminate
Consonants
Edited by
HARUO KUBOZONO
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OXDP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© editorial matter and organization Haruo Kubozono 
© the chapters their several authors 
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 
Impression: 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
Madison Avenue, New York, NY , United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 
ISBN ––––
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CRYY
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Contents
Series preface
vii
Preface
viii
List of abbreviations
ix
List of contributors
x
Introduction to the phonetics and phonology of geminate consonants

Haruo Kubozono
Part I. Production and perception of geminate consonants
. Spectral continuity, amplitude changes, and perception
of length contrasts

Shigeto Kawahara and Melanie Pangilinan
. Production of geminate consonants in Russian: Implications
for typology

Olga Dmitrieva
. Word-initial geminates: From production to perception

Rachid Ridouane and Pierre A. Hallé
. Effects of duration and phonological length of the preceding/following
segments on perception of the length contrast in Japanese

Hajime Takeyasu and Mikio Giriko
. Articulatory coordination in long and short consonants: An effect
of rhythm class?

Anders Löfqvist
. The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian

Elinor Payne, Brechtje Post, Nina Gram Garmann, and
Hanne Gram Simonsen
. Second language learners’ production of geminate consonants
in Japanese

Yukari Hirata
Part II. Phonology of geminate consonants
. Bengali geminates: Processing and representation

Sandra Kotzor, Allison Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri

. Asymmetric processing of consonant duration in Swiss German

Lara Ehrenhofer, Adam C. Roberts, Sandra Kotzor, Allison
Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri
. Geminates and weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese (Trukese)

Stuart Davis
. On the weight of edge geminates

Nina Topintzi and Stuart Davis
. A prosodic account of consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords

Junko Ito, Haruo Kubozono, and Armin Mester
. The relation between Lperception and Lphonology in Japanese
loanwords: An analysis of geminates in loanwords from Italian

Shin’ichi Tanaka
. Korean speakers’ perception of Japanese geminates: Evidence for an L
grammar-driven borrowing process

Hyunsoon Kim
References

Index

vi
Contents

Series preface
Oxford Studies in Phonology and Phonetics provides a platform for original research
on sound structure in natural language within contemporary phonological theory
and related areas of inquiry such as phonetic theory, morphological theory, the
architecture of the grammar, and cognitive science. Contributors are encouraged to
present their work in the context of contemporary theoretical issues in a manner
accessible to a range of people, including phonologists, phoneticians, morphologists,
psycholinguists, and cognitive scientists. Manuscripts include a wealth of empirical
examples, where relevant, and make full use of the possibilities for digital media that
can be leveraged on a companion website with access to materials such as sound ﬁles,
videos, extended databases, and software.
This is a companion series to Oxford Surveys in Phonology and Phonetics, which
provides critical overviews of the major approaches to research topics of current
interest, a discussion of their relative value, and an assessment of what degree of
consensus exists about any one of them. The Studies series will equally seek to
combine empirical phenomena with theoretical frameworks, but its authors will
propose an original line of argumentation, often as the inception or culmination of
an ongoing original research program.
Andrew Nevins
Keren Rice

Preface
The original idea for this book sprang from three international conferences on
phonetics and phonology that I organized in Tokyo and Kyoto during the period
–: ICPP , ICPP , and rd ICPP. These conferences were organized
by ‘Phonological characteristics of the Japanese lexicon’, a research project led by me
at the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL) during
–. Since this project was focused on word accent and geminate consonants
(or sokuon in Japanese), the international conferences featured geminate consonants
as the main topic of their special sessions to which a number of specialists in the ﬁeld
were invited from all over the world. This is how the core of the current volume was
established. In fact, about two-thirds of the chapters included in this volume, many of
which discuss Japanese as the main language, are based on talks presented at these
conferences. The remaining third of the chapters in this volume were collected
individually on the basis of the recommendations by the series editors and the
authors of this volume. Most of them were then presented at GemCon , a
satellite workshop organized by Shigeto Kawahara, Rachid Ridouane, and myself
during the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS ) held in
Glasgow, Scotland, in the summer of .
Like other books of the same kind, this volume could not have been published
without the help of many people and organizations. First of all, we would like to
thank NINJAL for its generous ﬁnancial support for the above-mentioned confer-
ences and workshop as well as for the editorial work that followed the conferences.
We would also like to thank the external reviewers of individual chapters who read
each manuscript carefully and provided us with invaluable comments, more than
once in most cases: Bettina Braun, Kaori Idemaru, Bill Idsardi, Allard Jongman,
Alexei Kochetov, Seunghun Lee, Bonzena Pajak, Sam Rosenthall, Kimiko Tsukada,
Alice Turk, Wim van Dommelen, and Tim Vance.
Thirdly, Donna Erickson and John Haig helped us greatly by checking the English
of individual chapters. Sayaka Goto, Yumiko Kinjo, and Natsuya Yoshida also
deserve mention here for their service as editorial assistants. Without these people’s
help, it would have been very difﬁcult to publish this volume as it is now.
And last, but not least, we would like to thank the series editors, Keren Rice and
Andrew Nevins, and the publisher’s commissioning editor, Julia Steer, for giving us
moral support and appropriate advice at every phase of our editorial work.
Haruo Kubozono
Tokyo
April 

List of abbreviations
ANOVA
analysis of variance
CDS
child-directed speech
CL
compensatory lengthening
CSVL
Closed Syllable Vowel Lengthening
CSVS
Closed Syllable Vowel Shortening
EEG
electroencephalogram
EG
edge geminate
EOG
electrooculography
EPG
electropalatography, electropalatographic
ERP
event-related potential
FUL
Featurally Underspeciﬁed Lexicon
GT
geminate throwback
HNR
Harmonic-to-Noise Ratio
IQR
inter-quartile range
JND
just-noticeable difference
LB
Literary Bengali
NC
nasal obstruent
NIKL
National Institute of the Korean Language
NJ
native speaker of Japanese
NN
non-native speaker(s)
OT
Optimality Theory
POA
place(s) of articulation
PR
parietal region
RT
reaction time
SCB
Standard Colloquial Bengali
UEN
Urban Eastern Norwegian
VOT
Voice Onset Time

List of contributors
STUART DAVIS, Professor, Indiana University
OLGA DMITRIEVA, Assistant Professor, Purdue University
LARA EHRENHOFER, PhD Student, University of Maryland at College Park
NINA GRAM GARMANN, Associate Professor, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
Sciences
MIKIO GIRIKO, Assistant Professor, Osaka University
PIERRE A. HALLÉ, Senior Research Scientist, CNRS and Sorbonne-Nouvelle University, and
Haskins Laboratories
YUKARI HIRATA, Professor, Colgate University
JUNKO ITO, Professor, University of California at Santa Cruz
SHIGETO KAWAHARA, Associate Professor, Keio University
HYUNSOON KIM, Professor, Hongik University
SANDRA KOTZOR, Postdoctoral Researcher, University of Oxford, and Senior Lecturer, Oxford
Brookes University
HARUO KUBOZONO, Professor, National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics
ADITI LAHIRI, Professor, University of Oxford
ANDERS LÖFQVIST, Professor, Haskins Laboratories
ARMIN MESTER, Professor, University of California at Santa Cruz
MELANIE PANGILINAN, AuD Student, Montclair State University
ELINOR PAYNE, Associate Professor, University of Oxford
BRECHTJE POST, Reader, University of Cambridge
RACHID RIDOUANE, Research Scientist, CNRS and Sorbonne-Nouvelle University
ADAM C. ROBERTS, Research Fellow, Nanyang Technological University
HANNE GRAM SIMONSEN, Professor, University of Oslo
HAJIME TAKEYASU, Lecturer, Fukuoka University
SHIN’ICHI TANAKA, Associate Professor, Kobe University
NINA TOPINTZI, Assistant Professor, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
ALLISON WETTERLIN, Professor, University of Agder, and Research Associate, University of
Oxford

Introduction to the phonetics and
phonology of geminate consonants
HARUO KUBOZONO
Geminate consonants in phonetics and phonology
Geminate consonants, also known as long consonants, appear in many languages in
the world, and how they contrast with their short counterparts, or singletons (e.g. /tt/
vs. /t/), is an important topic that features in most linguistics and phonology
textbooks. However, very few such works seriously concern themselves with gemin-
ate consonants. While the issue of geminates has been taken up in many academic
articles and books in the context of syllable structure, syllable weight or quantity,
loanword phonology, and second language acquisition, there is no book that is
speciﬁcally devoted to the topic of geminate consonants.1 For example, no single
book that speciﬁcally discusses geminates per se is cited in Stuart Davis’s () nice
introductory article entitled ‘Geminates’ (The Blackwell Companion to Phonology).
Potential exceptions may be published dissertations such as Aoyama () and
Isei-Jaakkola (), but they only examine geminate consonants in one language or
compare geminate consonants in one language with those of another language from a
phonetic perspective. The current volume differs from these works in terms of the
range of languages and perspectives it covers.
As the ﬁrst volume speciﬁcally devoted to the phonetics and phonology of geminate
consonants, this book aims to bring together novel, original studies on geminate
consonants to discuss the singleton/geminate contrast from multiple perspectives
including experimental phonetics (speech perception and production), laboratory
phonology, loanword phonology, theoretical phonology, and second language acqui-
sition. Geminate consonants are found in many languages around the world including,
1 Some journals have published special issues devoted to geminate consonants in particular languages:
e.g. Kubozono () and Kubozono () for Japanese.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Haruo Kubozono . First published by Oxford University Press.

but not restricted to, Arabic, Bengali, Berber, Estonian, Finnish, Cypriot Greek, Hindi,
Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Malayalam, Pattani Malay, Persian, Saami, Swiss German,
and Turkish (see Ridouane and Kawahara and Braver for more languages).
Yet neither their phonetic manifestation nor their phonological nature is fully
understood, much less their cross-linguistic similarities and differences.
In phonetics, consonant length contrast is primarily signalled by consonant
duration (see e.g. Lehiste ; Fujisaki and Sugito ; Lahiri and Hankamer
), but it is known to involve other phonetic features too (Ridouane ;
Kawahara b). However, it is not well known how different languages employ
these other phonetic features and how much they differ in this respect. To take one
example, many languages such as Bengali (Lahiri and Hankamer ), Berber
(Ridouane ), Hindi (Ohala ), and Italian (Esposito and Di Benedetto
) shorten pregeminate vowels just as they shorten vowels in closed syllables as
against open ones (Maddieson ), but other languages such as Japanese lengthen
vowels in the same position (Port et al. ; Idemaru and Guion ; see Kawahara
b for more references). It is interesting to ﬁnd such interlanguage differences
and explore the reasons for them.
In phonology, languages are known to exhibit differences in the positions where
the geminate/singleton contrast can emerge. First of all, geminates may appear both
morpheme-internally and in the concatenation of morphemes or words. These two
types of geminates, called ‘underlying’ and ‘derived’ geminates, respectively, may
occur within a single language as in Bengali (Lahiri and Hankamer ), Berber
(Ridouane ), Italian (Payne ), Sardinian (Ladd and Scobbie ), Turkish
(Lahiri and Hankamer ), and Japanese (Kubozono et al. ; Kawahara b;
Kawagoe ), while only the second type may dominantly occur in some languages
such as Russian (Dmitrieva, Chapter in this volume).
Moreover, different languages may have different co-occurrence constraints on
geminate consonants. For example, while many languages have a contrast in both
vowel length and consonant length, they fall into two groups depending on whether
they permit geminate consonants after long vowels and diphthongs, as in Finnish
(Aoyama ; Isei-Jaakkola ), or they do not, as in Japanese (Kubozono et al.
; Kawagoe ; Ito et al., Chapter in this volume). Apart from these two
groups, some languages like Italian only have a contrast in consonant length, not in
vowel length.
Languages also display differences in the position where consonant length can
be contrastive within the word. Many languages such as Japanese and Italian employ
the contrast only in word-medial positions (Kubozono et al. ; Kawagoe ;
Tanaka, Chapter in this volume), while some languages such as Bengali and
Tashlhiyt Berber show the contrast word-initially and word-ﬁnally as well (Kotzor
et al., Chapter in this volume; Ridouane and Hallé, Chapter ; Dmitrieva, Chapter ).
This positional asymmetry may not be difﬁcult to explain in phonetic terms given the

Kubozono

fact that constriction duration—closure duration for stops and frication duration for
fricatives—is generally the primary phonetic cue to the contrast between geminates
and singletons: word-medial position provides clearer cues to the onset and offset of
the constriction duration than other word positions. However, the phonological
patterning of geminate consonants according to their word positions has not been
fully studied or reported in the literature.
As the very ﬁrst volume to be published on geminate consonants, this book will
contribute to phonetics and phonology in the following three respects. First, it
presents novel, unpublished data and analyses concerning many individual languages
in different parts of the world: Asia (Bengali, Japanese, Korean, Pattani Malay),
Africa (Tashlhiyt Berber), Micronesia (Chuukese), and Europe (Italian, Norwegian,
Russian, Swiss German). These languages are speciﬁcally discussed in the following
chapters: Arabic (Chapter ), Bengali (), Tashlhiyt Berber (, ), Chuukese (or
Trukese) (and ), Italian (and ), Japanese (, , , , –), Korean (),
Norwegian (), Pattani Malay (), Ponapean (), Russian (), and Swiss German ().
In addition to presenting data and analyses of these individual languages, many
chapters in this volume also provide cross-linguistic and/or typological perspectives
on geminate consonants.
As a second contribution to phonetics and phonology, this volume presents a
wide range of perspectives for the study of phonological contrasts in general by
introducing various experimental (acoustic, perceptual, physiological, and neurolin-
guistic) and non-experimental methodologies. Experiments reported in this volume
can be classiﬁed largely into two kinds, production and perception. Some chapters
conducted production experiments, some ran perception experiments, and others
did both. These experiments vary considerably with respect to the methodologies
and techniques used. Most production experiments involve acoustic measurements
(Chapters , , , and ), while some examine articulatory movements (and ).
Perception experiments, on the other hand, involve various tasks such as discrimin-
ation, identiﬁcation, and lexical decision (, , , , ). Some experiments used more
sophisticated techniques such as electropalatography (EPG) (Chapter ), magnetom-
eter system (), electroencephalograms (EEG) (and ), and electrooculography
(EOG) ().
Finally, this volume discusses phonological contrasts in a wider context than is
generally considered, looking also at the behaviour of geminate consonants in
speech processing, loanword phonology, and language acquisition. The processing
of geminate consonants is discussed in Chapters (geminates in Bengali) and
(geminates in Swiss German). The experimental methods introduced in these
chapters can be employed for analysis of geminate consonants in other languages.
The behaviour of geminate consonants in loanwords is analysed in Chapters 
(Japanese loanwords from English), (Japanese loanwords from Italian), and
(Korean loanwords from Japanese). The analyses presented in these chapters
Introduction


can be extended and applied to the loanword phonology of any language if either
the host or the recipient language has a contrast in consonant length. Acquisition of
geminate (or long) consonants is examined in two chapters: for ﬁrst language
acquisition and for second language acquisition. Since acquisition of vowel and
consonant lengths is an important research topic in studies of ﬁrst and second
language acquisition, the phonetic and phonological details about geminate con-
sonants across languages this volume presents will greatly contribute to the research
on language acquisition.
As is clear from the description so far, studying geminate consonants requires
interdisciplinary approaches including experimental phonetics, theoretical phon-
ology, neurolinguistics, speech processing, and language acquisition. Providing
phonetic and phonological details about geminate consonants across languages will
greatly contribute to research in these ﬁelds.
Structure of the book
This book consists of two parts, Part I (‘Production and perception of geminate
consonants’) and Part II (‘Phonology of geminate consonants’). The ﬁrst part consists
of seven chapters all discussing the phonetics of geminate consonants in one way or
another. The ﬁrst ﬁve chapters analyse how the geminate/singleton distinction is
produced and/or perceived in languages with such a contrast. The remaining two
chapters in Part I take us to the world of language acquisition, discussing how geminate
consonants are mastered in ﬁrst and second language acquisition.
The second part also consists of seven chapters, –. Two of them address
phonological issues regarding geminate consonants on the basis of experimental
evidence, followed by two chapters that discuss geminate consonants with respect
to their representation and syllable structure. The last three chapters expand our
scope by discussing the behaviour of geminate consonants in loanword phonology.
We give here a brief description of each chapter, which we hope will help the reader
understand the contents of individual chapters as well as their similarities and
differences regarding the methodologies used and the languages discussed therein.
Part I
The ﬁrst ﬁve chapters in Part I discuss the phonetic properties of geminate conson-
ants as opposed to their singleton counterparts. In Chapter , entitled ‘Spectral
continuity, amplitude changes, and perception of length contrasts’, Shigeto Kawahara
and Melanie Pangilinan address the question of why geminates in Japanese are more
likely to be observed in obstruents than in sonorants on the one hand, and on the other
why they are more preferred in nasals than in glides. They conducted several percep-
tion experiments to test their hypothesis that different types of consonants exhibit

Kubozono

different degrees of confusability between geminate and single consonants. As for the
difference between obstruent and sonorant geminates, they demonstrated that sonor-
ants are spectrally continuous with ﬂanking vowels, and that length distinctions of
consonant intervals that are spectrally continuous with surrounding segments are
difﬁcult to perceive. Concerning the difference between nasal geminates and glide
geminates, they conducted two further non-speech experiments to show that ampli-
tude changes facilitate discrimination and categorization of short/long contrasts. The
results of their perception experiments accord well with the cross-linguistic phono-
logical patterning of geminates, thus providing implications for languages other than
Japanese.
In Chapter entitled ‘Production of geminate consonants in Russian: implications
for typology’, Olga Dmitrieva is concerned with contextual and manner restrictions
whose origin is not well understood. She examines the hypothesis that geminates are
restricted to certain contexts, such as intervocalic, and certain manners of articula-
tion, such as obstruents, because the durational differences between geminates and
singletons are especially clear and pronounced in these cases. She examines duration
of geminates and singletons in Russian in naturalistic speech and in non-words to
determine the effect of contextual and manner factors. Her results show that the
amount of difference between geminates and singletons remained stable, although
the absolute duration of both geminates and singletons varied signiﬁcantly under
the effects of contextual and manner factors. Combining these results with other
cross-linguistic evidence, the author suggests that asymmetries in the extent of
geminate lengthening across contexts and manners of articulation is not a likely
cause of the observed typological patterns.
This is followed by Chapter by Rachid Ridouane and Pierre A. Hallé entitled
‘Word-initial geminates: from production to perception’. This chapter investigates
the relationship between the production and perception of word-initial gemination
in Tashlhiyt stops and fricatives. Gemination in Tashlhiyt is primarily implemented
through longer duration, even for utterance-initial voiceless stops. The authors
discovered that this timing information is sufﬁcient for native listeners to identify
geminate fricatives and voiced stops and to distinguish them from their singleton
counterparts, while native listeners’ discrimination performance is only slightly
above chance level for voiceless stops. Native speakers can thus encode a phonemic
contrast at the articulatory level and yet be unable to fully decode it at the perceptual
level. The authors also discuss implications of this ﬁnding for the general issue of
phonological representation of geminates.
The phonetics of geminate consonants is discussed in further depth in the next two
chapters but from different perspectives. In Chapter , ‘Effects of duration and
phonological length of the preceding/following segments on perception of the length
contrast in Japanese’, Hajime Takeyasu and Mikio Giriko examine the inﬂuence of
preceding vowel duration on the perception of singleton/geminate stops in Japanese.
Introduction


Through a perception experiment, they show that the identiﬁcation of consonant
length (singleton/geminate) is affected by both the physical duration and the phono-
logical length of the preceding vowel. The former can be interpreted as an assimila-
tive effect and the latter as a contrastive effect. They also found that the physical
duration and the phonological length of the following consonant affect the identiﬁ-
cation of vowel length (short/long), while the former effect is not observable when
the following consonant is perceived as geminate. The authors also conducted a
production experiment to conﬁrm that the effects of preceding vowel duration in
speech perception are parallel to the contextual variations in preceding vowel
duration in speech production.
In Chapter , entitled ‘Articulatory coordination in long and short consonants: an
effect of rhythm class?’, Anders Löfqvist discusses geminate consonants in relation to
speech rhythm. To tackle the question of whether the traditional description of
Japanese as mora-timed and Italian as syllable-timed is associated with differences in
inter articulator programming at the segmental level, he examined inter articulator
programming of lip and tongue movements in the production of single and geminate
consonants in Japanese and Italian. He used Italian and Japanese words forming
minimal pairs, with a sequence of vowel-bilabial nasal-vowel, where the duration of
the consonant was either long or short, and made recordings of lip and tongue
movements using a magnetometer system. The results show no evidence of any stable
relative timing differences between Japanese and Italian. Since these ﬁndings are also
very similar to the results of a study of American English, he concludes that rhythm
class does not appear to reliably inﬂuence the timing of lip and tongue movements.
The next two chapters expand our view of geminate consonants by discussing
geminate consonants in ﬁrst and second language acquisition. Chapter by Elinor
Payne and her colleagues, ‘The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian’,
investigates the nature and acquisition of the [VːC]/[VCː] contrast in the North
Germanic language. They report that by ;children already differentiate between
these structures in their own productions and, as with adults, do so most reliably
through proportion of vowel duration in the rhyme (V/VC), which is the only
systematic marker of the contrast. Speciﬁcally, for both adults and children, the
contrastiveness of vowel and consonant durations in themselves varies according
to consonant manner: both V and C durations are contrastive in sonorants, while
consonant duration in itself is not contrastive in voiceless stops. The authors have
also found evidence that preaspiration may be a possible secondary cue to long stops
from the earliest stages of child speech investigated. They argue that by the age of ,
increasing speed and ﬂuency in global intergestural coordination may undermine
local temporal relationships already acquired at a slower speech rate, bringing about
a transitional stage of apparent regression in development.
Chapter entitled ‘Second language learners’ production of geminate consonants
in Japanese’ by Yukari Hirata examines whether learners of Japanese at an intermediate

Kubozono

level make progress in accurately producing singleton and geminate stops after
being immersed in Japan without speciﬁc training. In her experiment, seven
learners of Japanese with two years of classroom instruction in the USA recorded
pairs of words such as [kako] and [kakːo] in a carrier sentence at three speaking
rates before and after a four-month study-abroad experience in Japan. She
analysed duration of various segments and used the singleton and geminate bound-
ary ratio of native Japanese speakers to determine learners’ production accuracy. This
experiment demonstrates that the learners did make a singleton/geminate distinc-
tion, but their production accuracy showed limited improvement. The results are
taken as suggesting continuing difﬁculty in the mastery of native-level durational
control.
Part II
While Part I is primarily concerned with the phonetics of geminate consonants,
Part II addresses various phonological issues regarding the geminate/singleton
contrast. The ﬁrst two chapters address phonological questions on the basis of
evidence from speech processing and behavioral experiments. In Chapter , ‘Bengali
geminates: processing and representation’, Sandra Kotzor, Allison Wetterlin, and
Aditi Lahiri look at geminate consonants in Bengali, a language that has a robust
medial geminate/singleton contrast across oral stops and nasals in ﬁve places of
articulation. They present a synchronic account of the phonological system involving
the consonantal length contrast, which supports an asymmetric moraic representa-
tion of geminates. On the basis of these representational assumptions, they con-
ducted behavioural and EEG experiments to investigate the processing of this
geminate/singleton contrast by Bengali native speakers. The results reveal that the
processing of the duration contrast is indeed asymmetric: a geminate mispronunci-
ation is accepted for a singleton real word, while the reverse is not the case. The authors
interpret this as evidence that the lexical representation of the duration contrast must
be asymmetric and thus privative rather than equipollent.
Using a similar experimental method, in Chapter , Lara Ehrenhofer and her
collaborators analysed asymmetric processing of consonant duration in Swiss German,
where a consonant’s durational information signals its geminate status and, in medial
position, indicates the syllable structure of the word. The authors investigated how
these two aspects of durational processing interact with each other in lexical access
using the N, an electrophysiological component which offers a ﬁne-grained
measure of the success of lexical processing. They conducted a cross-modal semantic
priming ERP study to examine the extent to which words with medial consonants
trigger lexical access as their durations are phonetically lengthened or shortened
(leading to an incorrect syllable structure). Their behavioral and ERP results revealed
a processing asymmetry: lengthening a singleton does not negatively impact lexical
Introduction


access, but shortening a geminate does. This evidence supports a role for abstract
syllable structure in lexical access in length-contrastive phonological systems, and
suggests that the observed processing asymmetry may indicate a bias towards initially
parsing acoustic input into CV syllables.
The next two chapters discuss the representation and weight of geminate conson-
ants. In Chapter entitled ‘Geminates and weight-manipulating phonology in
Chuukese (Trukese)’, Stuart Davis addresses the longstanding controversy regarding
the phonology of geminates, i.e. whether geminates are best represented as being
underlyingly moraic or as being a single consonant linked to two C-slots. He analysed
the Micronesian language Chuukese, also known as Trukese, which has played a
major role in the discussion of geminate representation. After reviewing the argu-
ments for the moraic representation of Chuukese geminates, the author develops a
comprehensive optimality-theoretic analysis of Chuukese quantity manipulating
phonology that includes an analysis of ﬁnal mora deletion, the minimal word effect,
compensatory lengthening, geminate throwback, and cases of variation.
In Chapter entitled ‘On the weight of edge geminates’, Nina Topintzi and
Stuart Davis look at edge geminates (EGs), or word-initial and word-ﬁnal geminates,
which are rarer than intervocalic geminates and potentially structurally different.
They present an initial typology of the weight properties of EGs and make observa-
tions that may predict whether an EG patterns as heavy or light. Moreover, they
explored the relationship and possible correlations between EGs and edge consonant
clusters. Their analysis showed that the geminate is more likely to pattern as moraic
if EGs are unique in a language, i.e. the language lacks edge clusters (cf. Trukese and
Pattani Malay initially and Hadhrami Arabic ﬁnally). They also found that weightless
EGs seem to co-occur with weightless clusters at the same edge. Furthermore, they
attest weight asymmetries between initial and ﬁnal geminates in the same language. On
the basis of these ﬁndings, they offer tentative thoughts as to why the typology is shaped
the way it is.
This is followed by three chapters analysing geminate consonants in loanword
phonology. The ﬁrst of these, Chapter , is ‘A prosodic account of consonant
gemination in Japanese loanwords’. In this chapter, Junko Ito, Haruo Kubozono,
and Armin Mester examine the distribution of geminate consonants in Japanese
loanwords, which differs in signiﬁcant ways from their distribution in native words.
By looking at a wide range of loanword data borrowed from English, they show that
both prosodic markedness and faithfulness to the source word play a central role.
While geminates are preserved in loanwords from Italian, gemination is a way of
preserving word-ﬁnal coda-hood in the source word in loanwords from English. The
authors demonstrate that whether or not a given consonant is geminated depends on
a host of complex segmental factors that are the result of a whole family of anti-
gemination constraints, ranked at different points within the constraint hierarchy.
They also show that signiﬁcant higher-level prosodic factors that are part of the

Kubozono

native system are at work, and explain many details of the gemination pattern that
are rooted neither in faithfulness to the source word nor in segmental features.
Loanwords in Japanese are also analysed in Chapter by Shin’ichi Tanaka.
Entitled ‘The relation between Lperception and Lphonology in Japanese loan-
words: an analysis of geminates in loanwords from Italian’, this chapter examines
how geminates in words from a donor language are borrowed by a recipient language
that already has a geminate/singleton contrast. It analyses the loanword adaptation of
Italian geminates in Japanese and its relationship to Japanese speakers’ perception of
geminates. On the basis of a corpus study and a perception experiment, the chapter
shows that both phonological and phonetic factors affect adaptation patterns.
Although Japanese speakers are essentially capable of perceiving geminates in Italian,
their adaptation of geminates in actual loanwords is affected by the class of the
consonant and the phonological environments in which it appears. The author
claims, speciﬁcally, that geminate consonants are more likely to be perceived as
geminates by native Japanese listeners the nearer they appear to the end of the source
words.
Finally, in Chapter entitled ‘Korean speakers’ perception of Japanese geminates:
evidence for an Lgrammar-driven borrowing process’, Hyunsoon Kim investigates
whether the grammar of a recipient language (L) plays a role in borrowing words of
a donor language (L). She tackled this question by exploring Korean (L) speakers’
perception of Japanese (L) geminates. She conducted an experiment involving
eighty Seoul Korean subjects who were asked to listen to Japanese words with the
voiceless geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː]. Through this experiment, she found that the
Japanese geminates were mainly perceived as either the coda fricative /s/ and an
onset fortis consonant or as an onset fortis with no coda. She takes these results as
evidence for an Lgrammar-driven borrowing process with the three intermediate
steps of Lperception, Llexicon, and Lphonology between Lacoustic output
(= Linput) and Loutput.
Conclusions
The chapters in this collection address many important issues in phonetics and
phonology. First and foremost, they address how geminate consonants are produced
and perceived in various languages and also how different languages may differ in the
phonetic realizations and perceptual mechanisms. They also demonstrate how
experimental techniques can be used for phonetic and phonological studies, and
how phonetic evidence obtained from those experiments can be used for more
theoretical arguments. Moreover, some of them also illuminate the ways length
contrasts are acquired by children (Lacquisition) and adult learners (Lacquisi-
tion). The last few chapters discuss how geminate consonants appear in loanwords
and how their complicated patterns can be formalized in theoretical phonology.
Introduction


Overall, the chapters in this collection reveal many key aspects of geminate
consonants—a truly fascinating topic in linguistic research. The research reported
in this volume can be extended in various ways, particularly by expanding the range
of languages to be analysed and by using a wider range of experimental techniques.
It is hoped that studies on geminate consonants will show a richer picture of language
as they attract more attention from a wider range of scholars throughout the world.

Kubozono

Part I
Production and perception of
geminate consonants


1
Spectral continuity, amplitude
changes, and perception of
length contrasts
SHIGETO KAWAHARA AND MELANIE PANGILINAN
.Introduction
..Synopsis
Japanese deploys a singleton/geminate contrast in obstruents and nasals, but not in
glides. Even though Japanese allows lexical nasal geminates, patterns of emphatic
gemination show that Japanese avoids creating nasal geminates. Japanese therefore
disfavours sonorant geminates in general, and glide geminates in particular. These
phonological patterns of geminates are actually found in other languages as well, such
as Ilokano (Hayes ). This chapter tests hypotheses about why speakers of these
languages show these preferences.
Concerning the distinction between obstruent geminates and sonorant geminates,
Podesva () hypothesizes that the phonological dispreference for sonorant
geminates exists because these geminates are easily confused with corresponding
singletons. This confusability problem arises because sonorants are spectrally con-
tinuous with ﬂanking vowels, and consequently their constriction durations are
difﬁcult to perceive. Two non-speech perception experiments, Experiments I and II,
conﬁrm this hypothesis by showing that length distinctions of consonant intervals that
are spectrally continuous with surrounding segments are difﬁcult to perceive.
Concerning the difference between nasal geminates and glide geminates, this
chapter builds on the ﬁnding by Kato et al. () that, given streams of sounds,
listeners use amplitude changes to demarcate segmental boundaries. Experiments III
and IV show that amplitude changes facilitate categorization and discrimination of
short/long contrasts of consonantal intervals. These results are compatible with the
fact that several languages disfavour glide geminates more than nasal geminates.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Shigeto Kawahara and Melanie Pangilinan . First published by
Oxford University Press.

Overall, the results of the four perception experiments reported here accord well with the
cross-linguistic phonological patterning of geminates. We close this chapter by discuss-
ing what the current results imply about how the phonetics/phonology interface works.
..Japanese
This chapter begins with a phonological observation concerning the cross-linguistic
patterning of geminates, discussing Japanese in some detail in section .., followed
by discussion of other languages in section ...
Japanese uses a lexical singleton/geminate (short vs. long) contrast, and this phono-
logical contrast is primarily cued by a difference in consonantal duration (Kawahara
b). This contrast is limited to (voiceless) obstruents and nasals, as shown by the
examples in () (Kawagoe ). On the other hand, Japanese does not allow lexical
singleton/geminate contrasts in glides.1
()
Lexical singleton/geminate contrasts in Japanese
kata
‘frame’
iso
‘shore’
kona
‘powder’
katta
‘bought’
isso
‘rather’
konna
‘such’
Even though Japanese allows nasal geminates, at least one phonological process
indicates that Japanese avoids creating new nasal geminates. Nasu (, ) points
out that, given reduplicated sound-symbolic, mimetic CVCV-CVCV forms, in
order to create their emphatic forms, Japanese speakers predominantly geminate
Cwhen it is a stop, as in ():
()
Emphatic forms via gemination of Cwhen Cis a stop
a. /pata-pata-μ/
!
[pattapata]
‘running’
b. /pika-pika-μ/
!
[pikkapika]
‘shining’
However, when Cis a nasal and Cis a stop, speakers prefer to target Cfor
emphatic gemination, as in (). In the experiment reported in Kawahara (), C
was ﬁxed as a stop, and Cwas varied among stops, fricatives, and nasals. When
asked to create emphatic forms of nonce mimetic words, Japanese speakers chose
C-gemination about % of the time, when Cand Cwere both stops, supporting
the preference in (). However, when Cwas a nasal and Ca stop, they chose
C-gemination only about % of the time and instead resorted to C-gemination, as
exempliﬁed in (). The shift of gemination locus in () shows that Japanese avoids
nasal geminates when possible.
1 Japanese lacks geminate [rr] as well (Kawahara a; Labrune ), and we will return to the
discussion of liquid geminates in section ...

Kawahara and Pangilinan

()
When Cis a nasal and Cis a stop, speakers prefer C-gemination
a. /kano-kano-μ/
!
[kanokkano]
(nonce word)
b. /kina-kina-μ/
!
[kinakkina]
(nonce word)
Furthermore, in loanword gemination patterns in which word-ﬁnal consonants in
the source languages are borrowed as geminates, oral stops undergo gemination,
but word-ﬁnal nasal stops do not (Katayama ). This asymmetry is shown in
() and ():
()
Gemination of oral stops in loanword adaptation
a. ‘stop’
!
[sutoppu]
b. ‘top’
!
[toppu]
c. ‘rap’
!
[rappu]
()
Nasals do not geminate in the same environment.2
a. ‘Tom’
!
[tomu]
b. ‘ham’
!
[hamu]
c. ‘lamb’
!
[ramu]
We recognize that caution is needed when using loanword adaptation patterns
in phonological argumentation (de Lacy , ) because loanword adaptation
is non-trivially affected by non-phonological—e.g. perceptual, orthographic, and
sociolinguistic—factors (e.g. Irwin ; Kang ; Peperkamp ; Peperkamp
and Dupoux ; Peperkamp et al. ; Silverman ; Takagi and Mann ;
Vendelin and Peperkamp ). Be that as it may, the asymmetry between () and ()
is at least compatible with the view that Japanese avoids nasal geminates, although
this argument is admittedly not a very strong one.
In summary, Japanese avoids glide geminates the most in that they are never used
to make lexical contrasts. Japanese allows nasal geminates to signal lexical contrasts,
but nevertheless avoids creating them in gemination process(es). The preferential
hierarchy in the phonology of Japanese is therefore: obstruent geminates > nasal
geminates > glide geminates.
..Other languages
Not only is this preferential hierarchy of geminates clearly observed in Japanese, but
the same hierarchy can be observed in other languages as well. Some languages avoid
sonorant geminates entirely, whereas others avoid glide geminates in particular, just
as in Japanese. This observation is clearly articulated in Podesva (, ).
2 Word-ﬁnal [n] in English is borrowed as a moraic coda nasal without epenthesis (and without
gemination); e.g. ‘run’ is borrowed as [raɴ]. Whether gemination fails because of the lack of epenthesis
or the markedness of [nn] is not clear (but see Peperkamp et al. ).
Perception of length contrasts


One example that instantiates the avoidance of sonorant geminates comes from
gemination blocking in Selayarese (Podesva , ). When the preﬁx /taʔ-/ is
attached to a root that begins with a voiceless obstruent, the preﬁx-ﬁnal glottal stop
assimilates to the following consonant, resulting in a geminate, as shown in ()
(Mithun and Basri : ):
()
Gemination when root-initial consonants are voiceless obstruents
a. /taʔ-pelaʔ/
!
[tappelaʔ]
‘get lost’
b. /taʔ-tuda/
!
[tattuda]
‘bump against’
c. /taʔ-kapula/
!
[takkalupa]
‘faint’
d. /taʔ-sambaŋ/
!
[tassambaŋ]
‘stumble, trip’
The gemination fails when root-initial consonants are sonorants, as in () (Mithun
and Basri : ). Since there are no glides in Selayarese, it is impossible to tell
whether glides would undergo gemination or not.3
()
Gemination blocked when root-initial consonants are sonorants
a. /taʔ-muri/
!
[taʔmuri]
‘smile’
b. /taʔ-noʔnoso/
!
[taʔnoʔnoso]
‘to be shaken’
c. /taʔ-ŋoaʔ/
!
[taʔŋoaʔ]
‘to yawn’
d. /taʔ-lesaŋ/
!
[taʔlesaŋ]
‘to be removed’
e. /taʔ-riŋriŋ/
!
[taʔriŋriŋ]
‘to be walled’
Another example comes from Ilokano (Hayes : –), which is just like
Japanese in its handling of obstruents, sonorants, and glides. Ilokano resolves hiatus
by gliding the ﬁrst vowel, and this glide formation causes compensatory gemination
of the preceding consonant. This gemination process usually applies to obstruents, as
in (). In the same environment, gemination is marginally possible for nasals as in
()—according to Hayes (: ), gemination of these consonants is optional,
possibly with lexical variation. Gemination never applies to [w, y], as in ().
()
Obstruents usually geminate after gliding of vowels
a. /lúto-én/
! [luttwén]
‘cook GOAL-FOCUS’
b. /paɡ-ʔáso-án/
! [paɡʔasswán]
‘place where dogs are raised’
c. /kina-ʔapó-án/
! [kinaʔappwán]
‘leadership qualities’
d. /báɡi-én/
! [baɡɡyén]
‘to have as one’s own’
e. /paɡ-ʔatáke-án/ ! [paɡʔatákkyán]
‘place where an attack takes place’
3 Gemination also fails when root-initial consonants are voiced stops. The dispreference for voiced-stop
geminates is well motivated phonetically: stop closure raises intraoral air pressure and therefore it is difﬁcult to
maintain a transglottal air pressure drop to sustain voicing during stop closure. This aerodynamic problem is
particularly challenging for geminates because of their long constriction (Hayes and Steriade ; Ohala ;
Westbury ). However, this aerodynamic challenge does not explain the dispreference for sonorant
geminates, because the airway is not signiﬁcantly occluded in sonorants—the intraoral air pressure should not
rise so much as to hinder the airﬂow across the glottis. See also section ..for related discussion.

Kawahara and Pangilinan

()
Nasals only sporadically geminate
a. /dámo-én/
!
[damwén], ?[dammwén]
‘to be new to something’
b. /na-ʔalino-án/
!
[naʔalinwán], ?[naʔalinnwán]
‘to become sensitive’
c. /paɡ-ʔaliŋó-án/
!
[paɡʔaliŋwán], ?[paɡʔaliŋŋwán]
‘place where boars are found’
()
Glides never geminate
a. /ʔáyo-én/
!
[ʔaywén]
‘cheer-up GOAL-FOCUS’
b. /babáwi-én/
!
[babawyén]
‘regret GOAL-FOCUS’
Finally, Icelandic (Games ) and Classical Nahuatl (Andrews ) (both cited in
Hansen and Myers ) are examples of languages that, like Japanese, lack length
contrasts in glides. See Hansen and Myers () and Kawahara et al. () for
other potentially relevant examples from other languages.
To summarize the observations in this section, we ﬁnd the following preferential
hierarchy in the phonology of several languages: obstruent geminates > nasal
geminates > glide geminates. The question is why this hierarchy holds across different
languages. The experiments reported in sections .–.attempt to address this question.
.The phonetic grounding of the dispreference for sonorant geminates
..Hypothesis
This chapter ﬁrst addresses the distinction between obstruent geminates and sonor-
ant geminates. The hypothesis being tested in the following sections is not ours:
Podesva () proposes that sonorant geminates are dispreferred because they are
perceptually confusable with corresponding singletons (see also Podesva ). The
logic goes as follows: sonorants have blurry transitions into and out of ﬂanking
vowels because they are spectrally continuous with the surrounding vowels. It is thus
hard to pin down where sonorants begin and where they end (Myers and Hansen
; Turk et al. ). As a result, their constriction durations are hard to perceive.
Since the difference in constriction duration serves as the primary cue for singleton/
geminate contrasts (see e.g. Kawahara b for a recent review), sonorant singleton/
geminate distinctions are hard to distinguish.
Figures .and .show waveforms of singleton/geminate contrasts in stops and
glides in Arabic (Kawahara ). While stops have clear boundaries with the
surrounding vowels, glides have very blurry boundaries. It is therefore difﬁcult to
know where the glides begin and where they end. For this reason, it is expected that
the constriction durations for sonorants are harder to accurately perceive than for
obstruents.
Perception of length contrasts


Besides the acoustic blurriness of the segmental boundaries of sonorants, another
factor that may work against the accurate perception of the duration of sonorants is
the fact that changes in amplitude—or changes in perceived loudness—facilitate the
detection of segmental boundaries (Kato and Tsuzaki ; Kato et al. ).
Because sonorant boundaries with spectral continuity involve smaller amplitude/
loudness changes than obstruent boundaries, sonorants have yet another disadvan-
tage in signalling their boundaries. This issue is more fully addressed in Experiments
III and IV.
As summarized here, Podesva () offers an interesting and plausible story for
perceptual grounding of the dispreference against sonorant geminates. However, no
perception experiments have been reported that directly test this hypothesis. Partly
to address this problem, Kawahara () created continua from geminates to
singletons for each type of geminate in Arabic, and presented them to Arabic
speakers for an identiﬁcation task. The results show that the identiﬁcation functions
were steeper for obstruents than for sonorants; i.e. more of the continuum was
consistently categorized for obstruents than for sonorants. However, the relationship
0.3497
0.3846
0
0
0
–0.3549
–0.3107
0
0
0
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
h
a
a
g
tt
h
a
a
g
t
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)
FIGURE .(left). Arabic [t]-[tt] pair.
FIGURE .(right). Arabic [y]-[yy] pair.
0.5642
0.8822
0
0
0
–0.8047
–0.4957
0
0
0
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
h
a
a
g
yy
h
a
a
g
y
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)

Kawahara and Pangilinan

between the steepness of identiﬁcation functions and the distinctiveness of singleton/
geminate contrasts does not seem straightforward to interpret. Moreover, the experi-
ment used speech sounds of Arabic as stimuli and Arabic listeners as participants.
Therefore, the effect of factors other than sonority—such as lexical frequencies of
each type of geminate or transitional probabilities from the preceding consonant
to each of the singletons and geminates—remained uncontrolled, and possibly
worked as confounds.4 Experiments I and II thus more directly test the relative
non-distinctiveness of singleton/geminate contrasts in sonorants. To control for
phonetic factors other than spectral continuity, the experiments used non-speech
sounds that mimicked singleton/geminate contrasts in obstruents and sonorants.
..Some caveats
A few remarks are in order before proceeding to description of the experiments. First,
on the theoretical context of the current experiments, Podesva’s (, ) general
idea is couched within the framework of Adaptive Dispersion Theory (Liljencrants
and Lindblom ; Lindblom ; see also Engstrand and Krull ; Schwartz
et al. a, b; Zygis and Padgett ). This theory claims that languages
generally prefer to use contrastive pairs that are perceptually dissimilar to each
other; using perceptually distinct sets of sounds is important in order for speakers
not to be misunderstood by listeners (Lindblom et al. ). Adaptive Dispersion
Theory further developed in recent years, as it was incorporated into generative
phonology (Flemming , ; Ito and Mester ; Padgett , ;
Ní Chiosaín and Padgett ) via Optimality Theory (OT) (Prince and Smolensky
). OT allows a formal grammatical theory to incorporate the insights of Adaptive
Dispersion Theory, since OT can directly encode phonetic naturalness into the
formulation of constraints (Hayes and Steriade ; Ito and Mester ; Kawahara
a; Kager ; Myers ).
Within the OT version of Dispersion Theory, singleton/geminate pairs of sonor-
ants are marked—or disfavoured by languages—because they are not perceptually
distinct. This dispreference can be directly expressed as a constraint that prevents a
length contrast in sonorants; sonorant geminates, but not singletons, are subse-
quently prohibited, because geminates are in general more marked than singletons.
In this theory, it is the singleton/geminate contrasts in sonorants, not the sonorant
geminates per se, that are marked; see the references cited above for formal imple-
mentations of this idea (see also Boersma ). An alternative is to encode these
4 Various lexical factors can impact the categorization of speech sounds, including the distinction
between word and non-word (Ganong ), lexical frequency differences (Connine et al. ), neigh-
borhood densities (Vitevitch and Luce ), transitional probabilities (McQueen and Pitt ), and
phonotactic restrictions (Massaro and Cohen ; Moreton ).
Perception of length contrasts


sorts of perceptual effects on phonology through diachrony (Barnes ; Blevins
a, b; Yu ).
We do not intend in this chapter to solve this debate about whether perceptibility
should be encoded synchronically or diachronically. Instead, the aim of Experiments
I and II is to test the assumption behind Podesva’s () hypothesis—the non-
distinctiveness of sonorant singleton/geminate pairs—but we do not commit our-
selves to any particular theoretical implementation of this idea.5
Second, the confusability problem between singletons and geminates may not be
the only source for the avoidance of sonorant geminates. For example, given inter-
vocalic geminate glides (e.g. [iyyi]), it is conceivable that the ﬁrst part of the geminate
can be confused as a part of a preceding (long) vowel (cf. Myers and Hansen ).
Also concerning rhotic geminates, it would be impossible to prolong the duration of a
tap or a ﬂap as they would instead have to turn into a trill in order to become a
geminate while maintaining rhoticity. However, a trill requires very precise articula-
tory coordination (Ladefoged and Maddieson ; Solé ). In short, we do not
intend to claim that low distinctiveness of singleton/geminate pairs is the only
phonetic problem for sonorant geminates.
Nor is it the case that sonorant geminates are the only kinds of geminates that are
avoided for phonetic reasons. For example, voiced obstruent geminates are known to
be avoided in many languages because it is difﬁcult to maintain voicing during
obstruents for a long stretch of time for aerodynamic reasons (Hayes and Steriade
; Ohala ; Westbury and Keating ).6 Likewise, Kirchner () argues
that fricative geminates are articulatorily challenging, and indeed there are languages
that avoid fricative geminates; in Wolof, for example, fricatives occlusivize to stops
when they undergo a gemination process (Ka ).
.Experiment I. Discrimination experiment: obstruents vs. sonorants
..Introduction
The ﬁrst experiment tests whether sonorant spectral continuity makes short/long
pair discrimination difﬁcult. The stimuli were non-speech analogues mimicking
singleton/geminate pairs of stops, fricatives, and sonorants. The experiment used
5 See, however, de Lacy and Kingston (), Hayes and Steriade (), Hura et al. (), Kawahara
(b), Martin and Peperkamp (), Moreton (), Steriade (), Wilson (), and Zsiga ()
for arguments for encoding phonetic factors in synchronic phonological systems. We will brieﬂy return to
this issue in section ...
6 It may also be the case that spectral continuity at low frequency range in voiced stops makes the
perception of duration harder for voiced stops than for voiceless stops, because spectral continuity at low
frequency range can ‘shrink’ the perception of that interval (Parker et al. ). However, this chapter sets
this hypothesis aside, because the aerodynamic challenge of voiced stops geminates is well-established.
There can be more than one phonetic problem for some phonological structure.

Kawahara and Pangilinan

non-speech stimuli so as to control for acoustic parameters other than spectral
continuity, such as preceding vowel duration, intensity of surrounding vowels, or
duration of consonant intervals themselves. In experiments using real speech, on the
other hand, it is difﬁcult to control for the duration of consonant intervals, because
the duration of glides is difﬁcult to measure due to the spectral continuity problem
discussed in section .(see also Turk et al. ). Using non-speech sounds also
avoids perceptual bias effects, such as lexical bias (Ganong ) or transitional
probability bias (McQueen and Pitt ) (see footnote for the full list).
..Method
...Stimuli
The three types of consonantal stimuli were non-speech analogues
of stops, fricatives, and sonorants. All the stimuli had a VCV structure in which the
duration of C was varied. Non-speech analogues of vowels were complexes of sine
waves (Kingston et al. ). They consisted of sine waves ranging from Hz to
kHz and separated by equal natural log intervals.7 The amplitude of each sine
wave negatively correlated with its frequency. The peak amplitude of the vowel ana-
logues was set to .Pa by Praat (Boersma ; Boersma and Weenink –).
Both vocalic intervals were ms.
Consonant intervals mimicked the acoustic properties of stops, fricatives, and
sonorants (particularly glides); i.e. silence for stops, white noise ﬁltered between
kHz and kHz for fricatives, and the same interval as the vocalic interval with
half of its peak energy for sonorants. Figure .illustrates the stimuli of the current
experiment. Figure .is shown next to Figure .to illustrate the parallel between
the non-speech stimuli and the corresponding speech forms.8 The duration of the
short consonants was set to ms and that of long consonants was set to ms.
These two values were chosen because the short/long contrasts based on these values
were neither too easy nor too difﬁcult to discriminate in pilot studies.9 For the
discrimination experiment, two VCV sequences were concatenated with ms
inter-stimulus intervals (ISI).
7 Interested readers are welcome to contact the ﬁrst author to get speech samples.
8 These two ﬁgures are placed next to each other for the sake of comparison. It is not the case that
particular acoustic parameters are extracted from Arabic speech to create the non-speech stimuli. Relat-
edly, an anonymous reviewer asked why the non-speech analogue of the ‘fricative’ intervals have lower
peak amplitude than the surrounding vowels, whereas in Arabic speech samples, the fricatives have higher
peak amplitude than the surrounding vowels. The reason is as follows: since the vocalic analogues had a
very simple spectral structure, they hit only limited portions of our auditory drums (recall that it consists of
only sine waves); i.e. they sound much quieter than natural vowels. We therefore needed to lower
the amplitude of the fricative analogues accordingly.
9 The main participants in the pilot studies were research assistants working for the Rutgers phonetics
laboratory during the time of the experiments, including the second author of this chapter. They were all
native speakers of New Jersey English. They tried out a variety of durational settings, and decided on the
values deployed in the current experiment. The same holds for Experiments III and IV.
Perception of length contrasts


...Procedure
The task was a same/different discrimination (AX discrimin-
ation) experiment. Four pairs of combinations of S(hort) and L(ong) stimuli—SS
(same), LL (same), SL (different), LS (different)—were created for each condition.
Participants went through all the stimuli once in the practice block while receiving
feedback. An experimenter stayed with the participants during the practice run so
that if the participants had remaining questions, they could be answered.
The main session presented repetitions of all the stimuli, for a total of pairs
(repetitions * same/different pairs * conditions). The participants kept receiving
0
0.3
Time (s)
vowel
vowel
sonorant
0
0.3
Time (s)
vowel
vowel
fricative
0
0.3
Time (s)
vowel
vowel
stop
h
h
s
a
a
a
y
a
g
g
h
a
a
t
g
Time (s)
Time (s)
Time (s)
0
0.7
0
0.7
0
0.7
FIGURE .(left). The stimuli. Top=stop; middle=fricative; bottom=nasal.
FIGURE .(right). Corresponding speech forms (in Arabic).

Kawahara and Pangilinan

feedback during the main session in the form of the correct answer (i.e. Same or
Different). Superlab (version .) was used to present the stimuli and feedback (Cedrus
Corporation ). The order of the stimuli was randomized. All the participants wore
high quality headphones (Sennheiser HD Pro), and registered their responses
using a Cedrus RB-response box. The experiment took place in a sound-attenuated
laboratory.
...Participants
Twenty-ﬁve native speakers of English participated in this
experiment. The participants—and also those for Experiments II, III, and IV—were
all undergraduate students at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, who were
mostly native speakers of New Jersey English. They received course credit for
participating in the experiment. (The participants of all four experiments received
extra course credit, and hence this information is not repeated below.) No participant
took part in more than one experiment reported in this chapter. English does not
have singleton/geminate contrasts, and hence their native language knowledge
should not make one particular singleton/geminate contrast easier to discriminate
than the other contrasts.
...Analysis
In the analysis, d0-values were deployed as a measure of discrim-
inability to tease apart sensitivity from bias. Using d0-values is particularly important
in this experiment because in AX-discrimination tasks, listeners are often biased to
saying ‘Same’, unless they hear a clear difference. Given the roving mode of the
experiment in which different types of pairs were presented in one session, a
differentiating mode of discrimination was assumed (Macmillan and Creelman
: –). The calculation of d0-values was done using the psyphy package
(Knoblauch ) of R (R Development Core Team –). In a few cases, hit
rates (saying ‘Same’ to same stimuli) were lower than false alarm rates (saying ‘Same’
to different stimuli). In that case, negative d0-values were replaced with zero. Two
listeners showed lower hit rates than false alarm rates in two out of three conditions,
so their data were excluded. Across three conditions, d0-values were compared using
a within-subject t-test. The alpha level was Bonferroni-adjusted according to the
number of comparisons (./=.).
..Results
Figure .illustrates the results of Experiment I. Each scatterplot compares
d0-values in two different conditions. Each point within a scatterplot represents
the pair of d0-values for each participant. Any point that is to the left of the
diagonal axis shows that the listener had a higher d0-value for the condition
represented in the y-axis; any point that is to the right of the diagonal axis
shows that the listener showed a higher d0-value for the condition that is repre-
sented in the x-axis.
Perception of length contrasts


In the stop/fricative comparisons, some listeners showed higher d0-values in the stop
condition, while others showed the opposite pattern. The stop condition and the fricative
condition thus did not differ signiﬁcantly (the averages: stop .vs. fricative .;
t() = ., n.s.). In the other two panels, most if not all listeners showed lower d0-values
in the sonorant condition than in the stop or the fricative conditions (the average for the
sonorant condition = .). Statistically, the sonorant condition was different from
the stop condition (t() = ., p < .), and the fricative condition (t() = ., p < .).
..Discussion
The result shows that sonorant spectral continuity does make the short/long pair
less discriminable. This result supports Podesva’s () hypothesis that sonorant
spectral continuity makes the duration of the consonantal intervals difﬁcult to distin-
guish, and hence makes the short/long pair harder to discriminate. This result is in turn
compatible with the observation that several languages disfavour sonorant geminates
because short/long contrasts for sonorant consonants should be hard to discriminate.
The conclusion further implies that languages generally disprefer contrasts that are hard
to perceive, in the spirit of Dispersion Theory (see section ..and also McCrary ).
Certainly the current experiment, or any experiment for that matter, cannot prove
a causality relationship between the low discriminability of a durational contrast of
spectrally continuous intervals and the fact that some languages avoid sonorant
geminates. However, the experiment does show the correlation between the two
observations. It therefore seems reasonable to speculate that the avoidance of son-
orant geminates may have its root in the discriminability problem of singleton/
geminate contrasts, in some way or another.
.Experiment II. Identiﬁcation experiment: obstruents vs. sonorants
..Introduction
Experiment I showed that it is hard to distinguish a short/long pair when the
consonant interval is spectrally continuous with surrounding intervals. Experiment
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Fricative
Sonorant
Sonorant
Stop
Stop
Fricative
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
FIGURE .Distribution of d0-values in each condition in Experiment I.

Kawahara and Pangilinan

II followed up on this result with an identiﬁcation experiment, which addressed
whether spectral continuity makes it challenging to learn the short and long categor-
ical distinction. Although a discrimination experiment has an advantage in that the
participants do not need to learn two categories, an identiﬁcation experiment
emulates the language acquisition situation more closely. During the course of
acquisition, language learners need to learn the short and long categories based on
tokens presented in isolation—parents do not usually present minimal pairs of short/
long contrasts to children.
..Method
...Procedure
The identiﬁcation experiment used the same set of stimuli as
Experiment I. Listeners learned two categories in the practice phase, and were tested
on how well they learned each category in three different conditions. Listeners were
not told that the two categories were based on durational differences; instead the
short category was labelled as A and the long category was labelled as B. This format
again emulates the actual language acquisition situation: learners are not explicitly
told that a singleton/geminate contrast is based on differences in duration.
Since a pilot experiment showed that it is difﬁcult to learn the two categories for
three types of non-speech sounds at the same time, each type of stimulus (stop,
fricative, and sonorant) was blocked into small, separate sessions, each with its own
practice phase and testing phase. Since the order of learning these three categories
might inﬂuence their performance, the order of the presentation of the three blocks
was controlled by a Latin Square design. Group went through the experiments in
the order stop, fricative, and sonorant; Group in the order fricative, sonorant, and
stop; Group in the order sonorant, stop, fricative.
The practice session consisted of three phases. The ﬁrst phase presented ﬁve
repetitions of A–B chains, followed by ﬁve repetitions of B–A chains. The second
phase presented ﬁve repetitions of A in isolation and ﬁve repetitions of B in isolation.
In the ﬁnal practice phase, the participants were tested on tokens of each with
feedback. A main session contained tokens of each of the short and long stimuli.
The order of stimuli was randomized during the main sessions. Feedback was
provided in the main session as well, because a pilot experiment without feedback
resulted in performances near chance. All other aspects of the experimental meth-
odology are the same as Experiment I.
...Participants
Eight native English speakers participated in each Latin Square
order (a total of speakers). The general nature of the participants is identical to
that of Experiment I; there is no overlap between the participants of Experiment
I and those of Experiment II.
...Analysis
As with the discrimination experiment, d0-values were used as a
measure of sensitivity. Three listeners showed a negative d0-value in one of the three
Perception of length contrasts


conditions; these values were replaced by . One listener showed negative d0-values
for two out of the three conditions, and this person’s data was therefore thrown out.
Another listener was run to compensate for the gap. In the three conditions d0-values
were compared using within-subject t-tests. Since the predictions were clear from the
results of Experiment I, the alpha-level was not adjusted.
..Results
Figure .illustrates the distribution of d0-value for each listener in Experiment II.
Starting with the leftmost panel, as was the case for Experiment I, some listeners were
better at the stop condition, while others were better at the fricative condition; therefore,
there was no signiﬁcant difference between these two conditions (the averages: stop =
.vs. fricative: .; t() = ., n.s.). On the other hand, d0-values for the sonorant
condition were generally lower than those for the stop condition (the middle panel:
t() = ., p < .) or those for the fricative condition (the right panel: t() = .,
p < .) (the average for the sonorant condition = .). In terms of the order effect,
the average d0-values increase in successive blocks (st block: .; nd block: .;
rd block: .), although this correlation did not reach signiﬁcance (p = ., n.s.)
..Discussion
The results show that the short and long categories are generally harder to learn for
the sonorant condition than the obstruent conditions. One exceptional listener who
showed a very high d0-value in the sonorant condition (.) compared to the stop
(.) or the fricative condition (.). This listener took the sonorant condition in
the third block; therefore, it may be that this listener got used to identifying non-
speech stimuli after the ﬁrst two blocks.10 All the other listeners showed a d0-value for
the sonorant condition lower than or comparable to the d0 values for the other two
conditions. These results show that a duration contrast that is spectrally continuous
Fricative
Sonorant
Sonorant
Stop
Stop
Fricative
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
FIGURE .Distribution of d0-values in each condition in Experiment II.
10 Recall, however, that the order effect did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. Therefore, this learning
effect must have been strong speciﬁcally for this participant.

Kawahara and Pangilinan

with surrounding intervals is harder to learn than contrasts that are spectrally not
continuous. The results of Experiments I and II may thus offer a phonetic explan-
ation for why some natural languages avoid sonorant geminates.
.Experiment III. Discrimination experiment: nasals vs. glides
Experiments III and IV tested the distinction between nasal geminates and glide
geminates. Experiments III and IV pursued the hypothesis that this effect of sonority
derives from the fact that amplitude changes facilitate the perception of segmental
boundaries (Kato and Tsuzaki ; Kato et al. ).11 In VCV sequences, larger
amplitude changes in both VC and CV transitions should facilitate the demarcation
of consonantal boundaries. If so, sonorants with high sonority (e.g. glides) have a
disadvantage in signalling their edges with respect to the surrounding vowels. In other
words, glides have the problem of not having large amplitude changes, in addition to
the blurriness problem identiﬁed in Experiments I and II. To test this hypothesis,
Experiments III and IV tested whether larger amplitude drops facilitate the discrim-
ination and categorization of singleton/geminate contrasts.
..Method
...Stimuli
As with Experiments I and II, Experiment III used non-speech
sounds to control factors other than amplitude drops. All the stimuli mimicked
VCV structures, as illustrated in Figures .and .. All components were made out
of pure sine waves, but with varying amplitudes. The vocalic intervals were ms in
length and were dB. The consonants were either short (ms) or long (ms)
with ms of transition on each side. In one condition, the consonant was dB (the
dB drop condition, Figure .) and in the other condition the consonant was dB
(the dB drop condition, Figure .).
...Other aspects of the experiment
The details of the procedure were similar to
those of Experiment I. The task was a same/different discrimination experiment. The
experiment had four pairs of combinations of S(hort) and L(ong) stimuli—SS, LL, SL,
LS—for each of the two conditions. The ISI was ms. Superlab was used to present
the stimuli and feedback in the form of the correct answer.
Participants ﬁrst went through allthe stimuli once inthe practice block while receiving
feedback. The order of the stimuli was randomized. The main session presented 
11 Recall from section ..that gemination of rhotics is likely to also involve, in addition to the
perceptual problem hypothesized here, articulatory difﬁculties: it is articulatorily difﬁcult to lengthen a tap
because a tap involves a short closure in the ﬁrst place, and a trill faces its own articulatory/aerodynamic
difﬁculty (Ladefoged and Maddieson ; Solé ). A clear comparison can still be made between nasals
and glides.
Perception of length contrasts


Time (s)
consonant
Times (s)
vowel
tr
tr
vowel
0.08945
–0.08945
0
0
0.4
0.4
0
consonant
Time (s)
Times (s)
vowel
tr
tr
vowel
0.08945
–0.08945
0
0
0.4
0.4
0
Time (s)
Time (s)
Vowel
vowel
consonant
tr
tr
0
0
0.08945
–0.08945
0.4
0.4
0
tr
tr
Time (s)
Time (s)
Vowel
vowel
consonant
0.08945
–0.08945
0.4
0.4
0
0
0
FIGURE .(left). The dB drop condition. Top panel = short; bottom panel = long.
FIGURE .(right). The dB drop condition. Top panel = short; bottom panel = long.

repetitions of all the stimuli, thus a total of pairs (repetitions * same/different
pairs * amplitude change conditions). The order of the stimuli was randomized in the
main session, and the participants kept receiving feedback during the main session.
Twenty-three native speakers of English participated in this experiment. To
analyze the results, d0-values were calculated as a measure of discriminability in the
same way as Experiment I.
..Results and discussion
Figure .illustrates the results of the discrimination experiment. The scatterplot
compares d0-values in the two different conditions. Each point within a scatterplot
shows a pair of d0-values for each participant. Any point that is to the right of the
diagonal axis shows that the listener had a higher d0-value in the dB drop condition.
Almost all listeners showed higher degree of sensitivity to a short/long contrast in the
dB drop condition.
The average d0-values were statistically higher for the dB drop condition than
the dB drop condition (.vs. ., t() = ., p < .). Experiment III thus
shows that larger amplitude changes facilitate the discrimination of singleton/gemin-
ate contrasts. As we interpret the results in terms of actual speech, short/long
contrasts should be less perceptible for glides than for nasals: glides involve smaller
amplitude changes from surrounding vowels, which would make the perception of
their duration—and consequently their short/long contrasts—difﬁcult to perceive.
.Experiment IV. Identiﬁcation experiment: nasals vs. glides
Experiment III shows that it is harder to distinguish a short/long pair when the
consonant intervals involve smaller amplitude changes with respect to the surrounding
vocalic intervals. Experiment IV followed up on this result with an identiﬁcation
experiment, which addressed whether smaller amplitude changes make it more chal-
lenging to learn the short and long categories.
6 dB drop
18 dB drop
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Detectability index (d′)
FIGURE .Distribution of d0-values in Experiment III.
Perception of length contrasts


..Method
Experiment IV used the same set of stimuli as Experiment III. However, in this
experiment, VCV tokens were presented in isolation, as with Experiment II. Listeners
learned two categories of the consonant interval (short or long) in the practice phase, and
were tested on how well they learned each category in the two different conditions. As in
Experiment II, the short category was labelled A and the long category was labelled B,
and participants were told nothing about durational differences between A and B.
Each type of stimuli (the dB drop condition and the dB drop condition) was
blocked into small, separate sessions, each with its own practice phase and testing phase.
The order of learning the two categories was counterbalanced across the participants.
The practice session consisted of three phases. The ﬁrst phase presented ﬁve
repetitions of A–B chains, followed by ﬁve repetitions of B–A chains. The second
phase presented ﬁve repetitions of A in isolation and ﬁve repetitions of B in isolation.
In the ﬁnal practice phase, the participants were tested on tokens of each with
feedback. The main session contained tokens of each of the short and long stimuli.
The order of stimuli was randomized during the main sessions. Feedback was
provided in the main session, as was the case with Experiment II. Twenty native
speakers of English participated in this experiment.
..Results and discussion
Figure .illustrates the distribution of d0-value for each listener in Experiment IV.
Listeners learned the contrast between short and long contrasts better in the dB
drop condition. Almost all listeners showed higher d0-values in the dB drop
condition, and the difference between the two conditions was signiﬁcant (averages:
.vs. ., t() = ., p < .). The results thus show the short and long
categories are easier to learn when there are larger amplitude drops.
6 dB drop
18 dB drop
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Detectability index (d′)
FIGURE .Distribution of d0-values in Experiment IV.

Kawahara and Pangilinan

The results of Experiments III and IV show that larger amplitude changes facilitate
both discrimination and categorization of a short/long contrast. The results accord
well with the claim that amplitude changes facilitate perceptual demarcation of
segmental boundaries (Kato and Tsuzaki ; Kato et al. ). The results also
imply that, since more sonorous consonants (e.g. glides) involve smaller amplitude
changes with respect to surrounding vowels, the singleton/geminate distinction
would be harder to perceive for more sonorous consonants.
.General discussion
..Summary
This chapter started with two phonological observations about geminates in Japanese
and other languages. To take Japanese for example: (i) no glide geminates are allowed
at all to make lexical contrasts, and (ii) nasal geminates are allowed, but nevertheless
avoided by a phonological process. The preferential hierarchy is therefore: obstruent
geminates > nasal geminates > glide geminates. Moreover, this hierarchy seems to
operate in languages that are genetically unrelated to Japanese. The question that
arises is why this hierarchy is found in different languages.
To address this question, we started with Podesva’s () hypothesis that what may
underlie the preferential hierarchy is the perceptibility of length contrasts. Speciﬁcally,
sonorants may be at a disadvantage in signalling length contrasts because their
durations are not easy to perceive precisely. We also expanded on Kato’s observation
(Kato and Tsuzaki ; Kato et al. ) that amplitude changes facilitate the
demarcation of segmental boundaries; given this observation, glides should have a
greater disadvantage in signalling their length than nasals. To address these hypoth-
eses, four experiments were conducted. The results show that spectral continuity and
lack of amplitude changes make the perception of length contrasts difﬁcult. The results
are thus compatible with the perception-driven hypothesis about the geminate pref-
erential hierarchy: glide geminates have both problems (the spectral continuity prob-
lem and small amplitude drop problem), while nasal geminates have the spectral
continuity problem.
..Implications for the phonetics–phonology interface
Taken together, the current experiments add to the growing body of literature
suggesting that phonological patterns are non-trivially affected by perceptibility of
contrasts. This thesis is not new—in modern phonetics, the principle of Adaptive
Dispersion was ﬁrst formulated by Liljencrants and Lindblom (); after the
advent of Optimality Theory, which allows the expression of phonetic grounding
directly in the formulation of constraints, this thesis has attracted renewed interest.
Now there are a plethora of cases in which languages seem to disfavour contrasts that
Perception of length contrasts


are not highly perceptible (Flemming , ; Kingston ; Liljencrants and
Lindblom ; Lindblom ; Martin and Peperkamp ; McCrary ;
Padgett , ; Schwartz et al. a, b; Zygis and Padgett ). The
current work shows that the same principle may be operative in shaping cross-
linguistic characteristics of geminates (see Engstrand and Krull in particular for
evidence for the effect of contrast dispersion in length distinctions).
Admittedly, it is not possible to prove a causality relationship between the difﬁ-
culty of perception of particular geminate types and their phonological behaviour.
However, the experimental results are compatible with what we would expect if
languages disprefer contrasts that are hard to perceive. To the extent that the thesis of
contrast dispersion is motivated elsewhere in the patterns of phonetics–phonology
interface, which we believe to be the case (see preceding paragraph), we may be able
to say that the perception problems of length contrasts do underlie the phonological
patterns of geminates. Nevertheless, the question still remains as to how direct this
relationship might be (to the extent, of course, that there is a relationship). It could be
that this relationship is very direct and synchronic (Flemming ; Padgett ),
or indirect and diachronic (Blevins a, b).
In the context of this debate, one point is worth mentioning (Kawahara et al.
). Recall from section ..that sonorant geminates are avoided in several
different ways. For example, Japanese speakers avoid creating nasal geminates
when they make emphatic forms, and seek another locus for gemination, as in ().
Therefore, phonetics may determine what is avoided in phonology, but the phonetic
problem of a phonological structure may not determine how it is resolved in
phonology. In other words, the structure [A] can be marked because [A] is confus-
able with [B], but it is not necessarily the case that [A] becomes [B]; in other words,
the phonetic problem presented by [A] is independent of how it is resolved in
phonology (Boersma ; Dinnsen ; Kawahara b; Keating ).
..Remaining questions
Finally, the current experiment opens up several opportunities for future experimen-
tation. One question, raised by an anonymous reviewer, is how much we can generalize
the current results to speakers of other languages. In particular, what would happen
with speakers of a language that uses duration to make phonemic differences (like
Japanese or Arabic)? Would Japanese speakers be particularly bad at distinguishing
length contrasts for glide analogues? Relatedly, both reviewers raised a question about
the possible impact of knowledge of a second language for the results of this experi-
ment. Would exposure to an Lwith actual length contrasts impact the behaviour of
English speakers? While addressing these questions is beyond the scope of this chapter,
the impact of a speaker’s Lor Lknowledge on the perceptibility of length contrasts
should be investigated in the future. Finally, the current stimuli did not involve a non-
speech analogue of formant transitions, which are usually present in non-homorganic

Kawahara and Pangilinan

VCV sequences in natural languages. How such formant transitions would help to
demarcate perceptual boundaries of segments should be examined in future studies.
Another remaining challenge is how to model the whole complexity of phono-
logical patterns of geminates. We (in a sense) ‘distilled’ patterns of geminates in such
a way that we focused on languages that avoid sonorant geminates (and glide
geminates in particular). However, as discussed in section .., there are languages
that avoid other types of geminates. Voiced obstruent geminates are a typical
example, and there is a well-understood aerodynamic reason for the markedness of
voiced obstruent geminates (Hayes and Steriade ; Ohala ; Westbury and
Keating ). Pharyngeal geminates are another kind of geminate that are avoided
cross-linguistically, and Hansen and Myers () argue that a perceptibility prob-
lem similar to what we discussed in this chapter may lie behind the dispreference for
pharyngeal geminates. Further research is necessary to fully understand what phon-
etic considerations underlie the phonological patterning of geminates.
Acknowledgements
Experiments I–II were reported in Kawahara et al. (). Portions of this chapter were
presented in various forums, including International Christian University, Rutgers University,
the University of California, Santa Cruz as a distinguished alumnus lecture, GemCon at Kobe
University, MAPLL at Yamagata University, and ICPP at Kyoto University. We are
grateful for comments received at these occasions, particularly those provided by Hiroaki Kato,
John Kingston, Jaye Padgett, Julien Musolino, Hiromu Sakai, and Yoshinori Sagisaka. We also
thank two anonymous reviewers and Donna Erickson for providing useful comments on a
previous version of this chapter. At the ﬁnal stage of writing, we received ﬁnancial support
from two JSPS Kakenhi grants, nos. and , whose help we would like to
acknowledge here. Any remaining errors are our responsibility.
Perception of length contrasts


2
Production of geminate consonants
in Russian
Implications for typology
OLGA DMITRIEVA
.Introduction
Geminates, or long consonants, occur in a variety of contextual positions and
consonant qualities across languages. Yet not all of the available options are exploited
with equal frequency. Context-wise, geminates demonstrate a strong preference
for being ﬂanked by vowels, making a much rarer appearance next to other conson-
ants. Word-edge (i.e. word-initial and word-ﬁnal) geminates are also less common
than intervocalic geminates. Word-initial geminates are particularly unusual
(Thurgood ; Kraehenmann ; Muller ; Blevins a; Topintzi ,
; Abramson , , , ). Some scholars also point out that gemin-
ates seem to gravitate towards stress-adjacent, particularly post-stress positions
(Thurgood ; Blevins a; Payne ). In terms of the quality of the consonant
itself, geminate obstruents are believed to be more common than geminate sonor-
ants, although a comprehensive survey is yet to be undertaken (Podesva , ;
Kawahara ).
Inquiry into the sources of these asymmetries is ongoing. Among possible sources
under consideration is the possibility that long consonants are produced differently
across contexts and consonant qualities. The differences in production could be
linked to typological patterns. Most commonly, production is thought to affect
typology indirectly, via the effect it has on the perception of consonant duration.
A greater acoustic difference between the members of the phonological contrast,
produced under certain conditions, translates into a greater perceptual distinctive-
ness, and ultimately into a higher likelihood of contrast preservation and a higher
typological frequency (Wright ; Flemming ).
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Olga Dmitrieva . First published by Oxford University Press.

With respect to geminates, acoustic and perceptual studies suggest that the primary
dimension of the contrast is the duration of articulatory constriction (e.g. Lahiri and
Hankamer ; Ham ; Ridouane ). Geminate consonants are produced with
a longer constriction duration than singleton consonants, although the actual degree
of lengthening varies from language to language (Ladefoged and Maddieson ).
Importantly, the degree of lengthening in geminate consonants can depend on context
and on consonant quality. The amount of durational difference between geminates and
singletons can be greater in some contexts and in some types of consonants than in
others, thus resulting in different contrast ‘robustness’.
This chapter examines the effects of contextual and consonant-type factors on the
absolute duration of geminate consonants and on the robustness of the duration
contrast in Russian. The goal of the study is to establish whether and to what extent
contextual factors, such as position in the word and segmental environment, inﬂu-
ence geminate duration, and whether this inﬂuence results in unequal contrast
robustness across contexts and types of geminates. To achieve this goal, duration
of Russian geminates and frequency of their degemination was measured in a
naturalistic corpus of Russian speech in Experiment I. Building on the results of
Experiment I, Experiment II examined geminates’ and singletons’ duration and the
amount of difference between the two in pseudo-Russian non-words speciﬁcally
designed to compare the contextual conditions of interest. The discussion section
sets out how the results of these investigations served as a basis for re-evaluation of
the hypothesis that differences in contrast robustness across contexts can be at the
root of typological trends in geminate distribution.
Section ..will brieﬂy review ﬁndings concerning the variability in geminate
duration under the effect of relevant conditioning factors.
..Conditioning factors and geminate duration across languages
The reason for believing that geminates can be produced differently depending on
contextual position is the abundant evidence that segment duration in general is
subject to systematic variability as a factor of context. Among the better-known types
of contextual effects on segment duration are lengthening under stress (Klatt ;
Cho and Keating ; Turk ), lengthening at the edges of prosodic domains,
such as word- and phrase-initial and ﬁnal lengthening (Nakatani et al. ;
Beckman and Edwards ; Fougeron and Keating ; Turk and White ;
Turk and Shattuck-Hufnagel ), and cluster compression, whereby each segment
becomes shorter as the number of segments in the cluster increases (Haggard ;
Klatt ). Besides, segments are known to have intrinsically different durations.
For example, voiceless obstruents are typically longer than voiced ones, and obstru-
ents in general tend to be longer than sonorants (Klatt , ; Crystal and House
). It is reasonable to expect these contextual and manner effects on duration
to interact with gemination, although the nature of this interaction and implications
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


for geminate typology are not obvious. A tempting hypothesis is that contextual
and intrinsic conditions conducive to additional lengthening should be associated
with higher typological likelihood of gemination. For example, some scholars have
proposed that phonetic lengthening of segments in stressed syllables can be phono-
logized as gemination (Taylor ; Thurgood ; Blevins a). Blevins (a:
) writes: ‘syllables are longer under stress, and the phonetic length of consonants
is reinterpreted as contrastive.’
It is probable that the same phonetic lengthening that contributes to geminate
genesis can also contribute to contrast preservation by making the stressed geminates
longer and more different from singletons than are their unstressed counterparts.
Geminate duration as factor of stress in Italian was examined in Payne (). The
results showed that geminates were indeed longer in stressed than in unstressed
syllables in Italian, although the magnitude of the lexical stress effect showed a
complex interaction with intonational prominence. The duration ratio between
geminates and singletons was also found to be higher in stressed syllables (an effect
also augmented by intonationally nuclear position). These ﬁndings suggest that the
cross-linguistic preference observed for stress-adjacent geminates may at least in part
be due to the greater contrast robustness. However, Payne and Eftychiou ()
showed that stress had little effect on word-medial geminate duration in Cypriot
Greek, where only word-initial geminates were lengthened by stress (see Tserdanelis
and Arvaniti for a different set of results). Thus, contrast robustness is not
always greater in stressed syllables across languages, which undermines the universal
typological hypothesis.
In a similar vein, we might expect longer geminates and more robust contrasts with
singletons on the edges of prosodic domains, where segment lengthening is typically
observed (Nakatani et al. ; Beckman and Edwards ; Fougeron and Keating
; Turk and White ; Turk and Shattuck-Hufnagel ). In fact, Blevins
(a) proposed that such articulatory and durational strengthening can also be
reinterpreted as phonological gemination in the course of historical change. In line
with this expectation, Pajak () reported that word-initial geminates in Moroccan
Arabic were longer than word-medial ones. Similarly, in Cypriot Greek word-initial
geminates were shown to be longer than word-ﬁnal ones (Payne and Eftychiou ).
Ridouane () showed that in Tashlhiyt Berber both word-initial and word-ﬁnal
geminates were longer than word-medial ones. However, Italian postlexical initial
geminates were shorter than medial lexical geminates (Payne ). Moreover, longer
geminates did not always lead to more robust contrasts. In Moroccan Arabic and
Italian, geminate-singleton ratios were higher in the word-medial than in the word-
initial position, but in Tashlhiyt Berber and Cypriot Greek, the ratios were higher
in the word-initial and word-ﬁnal positions than word-medially. These results
demonstrate that longer absolute durations of geminates do not necessarily mean
greater contrast robustness. The results also reveal a high degree of language-speciﬁc

Dmitrieva

variability, thus making it difﬁcult to attribute cross-linguistic prevalence of word-
medial geminates to a universally greater contrast robustness.
Adjacency to other consonants should shorten geminate duration due to the
cluster compression effect (Haggard ; Klatt ), which could conceivably
lead to reduced contrast robustness. Contrary to this expectation, Moroccan Arabic
medial pre-consonantal geminates were longer than medial intervocalic geminates
(Pajak ). Similarly, in Thurgovian Swiss German the duration of maximum
contact for word-initial postconsonantal geminates was longer than for word-initial
postvocalic geminates (Kraehenmann and Lahiri ). At the same time, geminate-
singleton duration ratios in these two studies were consistently lower for consonant-
adjacent geminates than for vowel-adjacent ones. Once again, absolute geminate
duration did not correlate well with the degree of contrast robustness. On the other
hand, the two languages examined were consistent in having a lower degree of
contrast robustness in the consonant-adjacent environment, which potentially con-
tributes to explaining the typological rarity of such contrasts.
With respect to the intrinsic consonant duration, several studies provide data that
allow comparison among different types of geminates. Voiceless obstruents, as gener-
ally longer types of segments, can be expected to result in the longest geminates with a
possibility of the greatest difference from the singletons. In contrast, shorter voiced
obstruents and sonorants may provide for less robust durational differences. For
example, Aoyama and Reid () demonstrated that in Guinaang Botok glides had
the smallest geminate-singleton duration ratio compared to other geminate conson-
ants. At the same time, three out of ﬁve non-glide sonorants in the dataset in Aoyama
and Reid () had greater duration ratios than all four (exclusively voiceless)
obstruents. Payne () demonstrated that in Italian, consonant duration was in a
roughly inverse relationship with geminate-singleton ratios, such that shorter seg-
ments, for example a coronal liquid [l], tended to lengthen proportionately more when
geminated. Similarly, Tserdanelis and Arvaniti () showed that lengthening in stop
(%) and fricative geminates (%) was of a smaller magnitude than in sonorant
geminates in Cypriot Greek (%). Pajak () compared voiced and voiceless
coronal fricatives in Moroccan Arabic and found that geminate-singleton ratios were
generally higher for voiced than voiceless fricatives. A reanalysis of Tashlhiyt Berber
data in Ridouane () also demonstrates greater lengthening in voiced than in
voiceless obstruents. Thus, the results are relatively consistent across languages: segments
with shorter durations, including sonorants and voiced obstruents, tend to lengthen
more under gemination and result in greater geminate-singleton ratios. This would
seemingly supply sonorant geminates with the advantage of greater contrast robustness
and lead to higher typological stability of such geminate types. In contrast, some scholars
have proposed that sonorant and voiced geminates are cross-linguistically dispreferred
and occur with lower frequency than obstruent geminates (Taylor ; Podesva ,
; Kawahara ), albeit for reasons not related to their duration patterns.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


Overall, the above overview suggests two conclusions. First, longer geminates do
not always lead to a greater contrast robustness. Second, the patterns of correspond-
ence between raw and proportionate length appear to be rather language-speciﬁc. In
Tashlhiyt Berber, longer initial and ﬁnal geminates are also proportionately longer
with respect to singletons than are medial geminates (Ridouane ), while in
Moroccan Arabic longer initial geminates are proportionately shorter with respect
to singletons than medial geminates. Longer stressed geminates and cluster gemin-
ates are proportionately longer with respect to singletons than unstressed and
intervocalic geminates in Italian (Payne ) and Moroccan Arabic (Pajak ),
while longer voiceless and obstruent geminates are typically proportionately shorter
with respect to singletons than sonorant and voiced geminates (Payne ;
Tserdanelis and Arvaniti ; Pajak ; Ridouane ).
However, the languages considered in these studies represent only a small per-
centage of all geminating languages. In addition, such investigations are complicated
by the fact that few languages allow geminate consonants across multiple contextual
and positional environments. If production differences and contrast robustness are
to be seriously considered as potential explanations for the typological patterns, more
languages need to be examined to identify consistent patterns, if any, in the produc-
tion of geminate consonants across languages.
The present study was conducted to examine the production of geminate
consonants in Russian. Speciﬁcally, the work aimed to determine the extent to
which the duration of geminate consonants, and the amount of durational differ-
ence between singletons and geminates, differed across contexts and consonant
types. The results of this investigation can be compared to other cross-linguistic
patterns of geminate production to detect similarities, if any, and to make infer-
ences concerning the explanatory potential of the production approach to geminate
typology.
The choice of language was motivated by the fact that Russian phonotactics allows
for comparing consonant duration across contexts and consonant types. Many
geminating languages place strict contextual restrictions on the distribution of their
geminate consonants, most of them limiting the contrast to word-medial intervocalic
environment. Geminate consonants in Russian occur in a relatively great variety of
contexts: medial intervocalic, medial preconsonantal, word-initial, and word-ﬁnal.
A variety of consonants can be geminated in Russian: voiced and voiceless stops,
fricatives, nasals, and liquids. Section ..provides a brief overview of the status and
distribution of geminate consonants in Russian.
..Russian geminates
A large proportion of Russian geminates arise due to morpheme concatenation, which
results in sequences of identical consonants on the boundaries of preﬁxes and stems, or

Dmitrieva

of stems and sufﬁxes: /vvoz/ ‘import’, /rasskaz/ ‘story’, /spinnoj/ ‘spinal’.1 Morpheme-
internal (‘true’) geminates are found as well, although mainly limited to loanwords
from western European languages: /barokko/ ‘baroque’, /stress/ ‘stress’. A small num-
ber of words contain geminates occurring at morpheme boundaries that have been
obscured historically (which are likely to be reanalysed in synchronic grammars as
morpheme-internal), notably some with word-initial geminates, such as /ssora/ ‘quar-
rel’, /ssuda/ ‘loan’. Apart from these, non-derived geminates are largely absent from the
word-initial and preconsonantal contexts. Morphologically derived geminates, on
the other hand, are not found word-ﬁnally. Gemination is also aided by the processes
of voicing and place assimilation in Russian: /pod+teretʲ/ ! /potteretʲ/ ‘to wipe out’,
/ras+ʃitʲ/ ! /raʃʃitʲ/ ‘to embroider’.
Taking the generous view that any doubly spelled consonant in Russian is poten-
tially a geminate, almost all consonants in Russian phonemic inventory can be
geminated, except for /j/. In practice, some additional consonants are virtually
never realized as geminates even in cases of double spelling, including, in particular,
/r ʧ x/. Remaining geminates have additional distributional restrictions, depending
on their morphological status. Morphologically derived geminates, while abundant
in terms of tokens, are more restricted in types. They include /t d v s z ʃ n/
intervocalically, with /n/ being especially productive. Word-initial derived geminates
are further limited to fricatives, and preconsonantal ones are mostly limited to /s/.
Thus, the greatest variety of geminate types is found among the non-derived inter-
vocalic geminates, mainly in loanwords. Overall, consonants /s n m l/ are reported to
be the most likely geminates in Russian (Kolesnikov ; Timberlake ).
With respect to the functional load and phonological status of Russian geminates,
evidence is not entirely conclusive. On the one hand, minimal pairs that rely solely
on lexical non-derived gemination (at least in spelling) are scarce and are often limited
to highly specialized professional vocabulary, e.g. /dalija/ ‘georgina’–/dallija/ ‘black-
ﬁsh’. Concatenative gemination, on the other hand, is often meaning differentiating
in common lexical items: /voz/ ‘cart’–/vvoz/ ‘import’; /spinoj/ ‘back’, instr. sing.–
/spinnoj/ ‘spinal’; /podatʲ/ ‘to give, to submit’–/poddatʲ/ ‘to increase, to augment’.
Scholars’ opinions about the status of Russian geminates differ. Some have suggested
that Russian does not have true gemination and is better described as having posi-
tional co-occurrence of identical but separate phonemes (Matusevich ; Panov
, ). Others have proposed a status of ‘facultative’ or quasi-phonemes with
restricted distribution (Ardentov ). Given Russian speakers’ awareness of gemin-
ation and the relative ease with which they produce and perceive consonant length
(Dmitrieva ), I believe it is justiﬁed to consider Russian geminates at least
1 Vowel reduction is not indicated in the transcription of Russian examples throughout the chapter.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


marginally phonemic. I will also assume for the purposes of this study that any doubly
spelled consonant in Russian is underlyingly a geminate.2
The ﬁnal important fact about Russian geminates is their proclivity for degemina-
tion, especially in casual rapid speech. Russian degemination is usually described in
categorical terms although it is possible that some degree of phonetic gradience is
present in its realization. The rates of degemination vary greatly depending on the
morphological status, contextual position, phonetic environment, and type of con-
sonant, as well as lexical properties of the word. Focusing on the contextual and
manner factors, the following tendencies have been noted (it is important to mention
that while most of the following works are prescriptive in nature, their generaliza-
tions appear to mirror closely naturally occurring pronunciation patterns). Long
pronunciation is considered normal for all concatenated geminates in general
(Avanesov ; Matusevich ) but especially for those on the boundary of preﬁxes
and stems (Panov ; Timberlake ). Long pronunciation is also noted for all
intervocalic geminates (Kolesnikov ; Panov ; Timberlake ) and after
stressed vowels in particular (Avanesov ; Kalenchuk and Kasatkina ;
Kolesnikov ; Matusevich ; Timberlake ). Some sources suggest that
long pronunciation is justiﬁed when adjacent to stressed vowels on either side, whether
before or after the consonant (Panov ). Degemination is encouraged in preconso-
nantal positions (Avanesov ; Cubberley ; Kalenchuk and Kasatkina ;
Panov , ), word-ﬁnally (Avanesov ; Cubberley ; Kalenchuk and
Kasatkina ; Panov , ), and between unstressed vowels (Sazonova ).
Similar results were obtained in a corpus study by Kasatkin and Choi (), who
conducted an impressionistic analysis of a corpus of television programmes and
university lectures and established that intervocalic geminates were less likely to
degeminate in naturalistic speech than non-intervocalic ones (initial, ﬁnal, or medial
preconsonantal). Geminates preceded or followed by stressed vowels were less likely
to degeminate than those ﬂanked by unstressed vowels. In addition, obstruent
geminates were less likely to degeminate than sonorant ones.
Thus, long pronunciation tends to be maintained for obstruents, intervocalically,
and next to stressed vowels, while degemination is common for sonorants, in
adjacency to consonants, at the end of the word, and intervocalically when not
preceded or followed by stressed vowels. Interestingly, these Russian-speciﬁc patterns
are largely in line with reported cross-linguistic preferences for intervocalic, stress-
adjacent, obstruent geminates (Thurgood ; Podesva , ; Kawahara
). Russian may represent a gradient version of the categorical constraints on
2 This is a simpliﬁcation which certainly affects the quantitative estimates of certain types of underlying
geminates, in particular word-ﬁnal and preconsonantal ones, but sidesteps some complex issues, such as
arriving at the exact criteria according to which some doubly spelled consonants are underlying geminates
and others are not.

Dmitrieva

geminate inventories and distribution operating in other languages. It is possible that
Russian geminates are in the process of sound change and will eventually stabilize in
a system characteristic to one of the typical geminating languages, e.g. where only
intervocalic obstruent geminates are allowed. In the meantime, Russian is particu-
larly suitable for investigating the underlying factors affecting geminate typology since
factors, such as the contextual ones, are currently at work changing the phonology of
Russian geminates.
.Experiment I
The goal of this experiment was to examine patterns of degemination in Russian as
related to the factors of contextual position and consonant type to verify the ﬁndings
reported in earlier studies. Degemination here is operationally deﬁned as shortening
sufﬁcient to induce the perception of a singleton. The second goal was to measure
the acoustic duration of geminate consonants and establish whether and to what
degree the duration varies under the effect of contextual position and consonant
type. Results of the experiment can help determine whether rates of degemination in
Russian are indeed governed by the same factors that shape cross-linguistic gemin-
ate typology. The results can also demonstrate the direction and extent of contextual
and consonant type effects on the duration of geminates in naturalistic data, which
will serve as a departure point for further, more controlled experimentation with
geminate duration.
..Methods
...Corpus and measurements
To examine the production of geminates across
contextual positions in Russian, a mini-corpus consisting of semi-structured
sociolinguistic-style interviews, picture descriptions, text, and wordlist readings by
eight native speakers of Russian was created. Interview questions, pictures, and
reading materials were designed to elicit words with geminate consonants. Words
with intended geminates, both concatenated and morpheme-internal, were identiﬁed
in the corpus, including all words with doubly spelled consonants and those with
gemination due to assimilation. The corpus contained ,instances of words with
geminates; % of those were extracted from the interview part of the corpus, %
from wordlist readings, % from text readings, and % from picture descriptions.
Geminates were impressionistically marked by the author for long or short
(degeminated) pronunciation for the analysis of degemination patterns. An impres-
sionistic approach was considered suitable because no established acoustic thresholds
for geminate and singleton duration in Russian were available; besides, such thresh-
olds would need to be highly speciﬁc to each consonant’s type, prosodic position, rate
of speech, lexical properties of the word, etc. The impressionistic approach is further
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


validated by the fact that in a perceptual study of consonant duration (Dmitrieva
), Russian-speaking participants had little trouble judging consonant duration
categorically.
Each geminate was annotated for a number of factors, including consonant type,
position in the word (initial, ﬁnal, medial intervocalic, medial preconsonantal), and
whether the neighbouring vowels were stressed or unstressed. The morphological
status of the geminate (morpheme-internal or concatenated) was also indicated.
Their acoustic duration was measured in Praat (Boersma and Weenink ) for
the analysis of contextual and consonant-type effects on acoustic geminate duration.
The following segmentation criteria were used. For voiceless stops, duration was
measured from the onset of the stop closure—a silent portion of the spectrogram—
until the end of aperiodic burst portion, if visible, or until the end of the stop closure
for unreleased stops. For intersonorant stops, onset of the stop closure coincided with
the offset of periodic signal of the preceding sonorant, which resumed at the offset of
the stop, facilitating segmentation. The only problematic cases of voiceless stop
segmentation involved word-ﬁnal consonants in the word /gripp/ ‘ﬂu’, which how-
ever were often strongly released, making segmentation possible. All preconsonantal
voiceless stop geminates were presonorant.
For voiced stops, duration was measured from the onset of the voiced stop
closure—a near-silent portion of the spectrogram containing only a low-amplitude
low-frequency voicing component—to the onset of the high-amplitude periodic
signal and formant structure of the following vowel. All voiced stop geminates in
the corpus were intervocalic. Release portions of stop consonants, when present, were
measured as part of the total stop duration (Turk ).
For fricative consonants, duration of the aperiodic noise portion of the spectro-
gram was measured. The majority of fricative geminates in the corpus were due to
coronal /s/—a fricative with a pronounced high-frequency component easily
detected in most phonetic environments. Moreover, most of the word-initial,
word-ﬁnal, and preconsonantal geminates in the corpus were voiceless coronal
fricatives, which facilitated their segmentation.
Boundaries of intervocalic nasals were marked by a combination of some or all of
the following properties: a drop in periodic signal intensity, emergence of antifor-
mants, a change in the shape of the waveform, and visible discontinuities in the
waveform. The predominant majority of nasal geminates in the corpus were inter-
vocalic, with the exception of two cases. One word-ﬁnal example, /gramm/ ‘gram’,
was followed by a fricative-initial word, which made segmentation possible. In
/programmnɨj/ ‘programmatic’, a nasal geminate was followed by another nasal.
Here, segmentation was attempted based on the shape of nasal waveform.
Boundaries of intervocalic lateral liquids were indicated by a combination of some
or all of the following properties: a drop in periodic signal intensity, a change in the
shape of the waveform, less visible formant structure, and change in the location of

Dmitrieva

formant frequencies. Alveolar trills were measured from the onset of the ﬁrst trill
closure (a brief near-silent interruption in the periodicity of the signal) until the offset
of the last closure, which typically coincided with the onset of the following vowel. All
lateral and rhotic targets in the corpus were intervocalic.
...Participants
Eight native speakers of Russian, three males and ﬁve females,
volunteered for the experiment. All participants at the time of recording resided in
western Siberia, more speciﬁcally the regions of Tomsk and Kemerovo—two of the
major cities in the area. Although not all participants were natives of the territory, all
of them had lived there for at least ten years by the time of participation. None were
ﬂuent in languages other than Russian. Five participants were in their early s, three
participants were in their early s. No speech or hearing disorders were reported.
...Procedure
Participants were interviewed in quiet rooms of private resi-
dences in Russia. They were asked to speak as naturally as possibly, as if speaking
to a friend during an everyday interaction. Recordings were made on a portable
digital recorder, a Marantz PMD , with a built-in microphone at a sampling rate
of .kHz. Tasks were administered in the order of increasing probability that
participants might become aware of the researcher’s objective: interview ﬁrst, fol-
lowed by picture description and text reading, with wordlist reading concluding the
session. Some participants ﬁnished the recording in one session; for others an hour-
long break was introduced between the interview and the rest of the tasks. One of the
participants contributed only interview data.
..Results
...Distribution of underlying geminates in the corpus
Among the geminates
found in the corpus, % were morphologically derived and % were morpheme-
internal. The predominant majority of geminates were intervocalic (%); precon-
sonantal geminates accounted for % of the corpus, and the rest was evenly
distributed among word-initial and word-ﬁnal geminates (about % each). Derived
preconsonantal geminates were almost exclusively limited to the coronal voiceless
fricative /s/, followed by one of the following consonants: /k t m l r/; one instance of
geminate /t/ followed by a voiced fricative /v/ was found in the word /pottverditʲ/ ‘to
conﬁrm’. Among the non-derived preconsonantal geminates, two additional com-
binations, /pp+l/ and /mm+n/, were found.
With respect to the stress location, the distribution was relatively homogeneous,
with % of geminates preceded by stressed vowels, % followed by stressed vowels,
and % not adjacent to stressed vowels. In terms of the consonant type, geminates
/s/ and /n/ were by far the most frequent (% and % respectively); /l d m/ were
next in terms of frequency (about % each). Table .summarizes the distribution of
the corpus data across different categories of geminates (token frequencies are given)
with examples of each category in ().
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


A few features of this distribution are worth noting. The only unpopulated cell
corresponds to derived word-ﬁnal geminates, which are absent in Russian. In the
non-derived category, although all cells are populated, several have a very low type
frequency. In particular, all examples of non-derived word-initial geminates came
from variants of the same word: /ssuda/ ‘loan’, where the geminate is separated by a
historically obliterated morphological boundary. All but two examples of non-
derived preconsonantal geminates came from variants of the word /applikatsia/
‘application’; the other examples were /programmnɨj/ ‘programmatic’ and /odesskij/
‘from Odessa’. The type count of non-derived word-ﬁnal geminates included only
seven examples. By far the richest category in both geminate types and tokens was
non-derived intervocalic. Only the intervocalic environment hosted geminates of all
manners of articulation: voiced and voiceless obstruents, nasals, and liquids. It is also
apparent that it is mostly fricative geminates, /s/ in particular, that are consistently
found across various contextual positions in the corpus.
()
Examples of geminate categories in Table .:
Ia. /ssɨlatʲ/ ‘to exile’; /vverx/ ‘upward’
Ib. /bessonnitsa/ ‘insomina’; /bezzabotno/ ‘light-heatedly’; /poddelka/ ‘forgery/;
/ottuda/ ‘therefrom’
Ic. /bessmɨslenno/ ‘senselessly’; /issledovanie/ ‘research’; /russkij/ ‘Russian’
IIa. Very low type frequency: All examples are versions of the word /ssuda/ ‘loan’
IIb. /agressor/ ‘aggressor’; /vanna/ ‘bathtub’; /summa/ ‘sum’; /kollega/ ‘colleague’
IIc. Very low type frequency: Most examples are versions of the word /appli-
katsia/ ‘application’
IIId. Very low type frequency: /boss/ ‘boss’; /gramm/ ‘gram’; /gripp/ ‘ﬂu’, /protsess/
‘process’; /progress/ ‘progress’; /klass/ ‘class, course’; /stress/ ‘stress’
...Acoustic duration and rates of degemination
Acoustic duration was ana-
lysed using the Linear Mixed Model analysis implemented in IBM SPSS . Post hoc
multiple pairwise comparisons were performed with a Bonferroni adjustment. The
following ﬁve ﬁxed factors were used in the model: geminate status (geminate or
singleton, based on impressionistic evaluation), contextual position (word-initial,
TABLE .. Token frequencies of different geminate categories in the corpus
Context
I. Derived (33%)
II. Non-derived (67%)
a.
#_V (3%)
/v z s ʒ/ (1.5%)
only /s/ (1.4%)
b.
V_V (77%)
/d t z s ʒ ʃ n/ (16%)
/b p d t k f s ʒ ʃ m n l r ts/ (60.6%)
c.
V_C (18%)
almost exclusively /s/ (15.5%)
/p s m/ (2.4%)
d.
V_# (3%)
/p s m/ (2.7%)

Dmitrieva

word-ﬁnal, word-medial intervocalic, word-medial preconsonantal), stress position
(after a stressed vowel, before a stressed vowel, other—not adjacent to stressed
vowels), consonant type (voiced stops, voiceless stops, voiced fricatives, voiceless
fricatives, nasals, liquids), and morphological status (morpheme-internal or concat-
enated). Thefollowingfourinteractionsweresigniﬁcantand wereincluded inthereported
model: stress position by consonant type, morphological status by geminate status, mor-
phologicalstatusbyconsonanttype,andcontextualpositionbygeminatestatus.Themodel
ﬁt was signiﬁcantly improved by including a random intercept for subject and item factors
and random slopes for subject by geminate status, contextual position, stress position, and
consonant type with variance components covariance structure. Table .reports the
results of the analysis for signiﬁcant ﬁxed effects and interactions.
The relative numbers of reduced vs. non-reduced geminates were analysed using
Mixed Logistic Regression. The random effect of item was signiﬁcant according to
the Wald statistic (p < .), and was included in the reported model. The following
ﬁxed effects were used in the model: contextual position, stress position, and con-
sonant type. Morphological status was signiﬁcant but decreased the overall accuracy
of the model, and was excluded from the reported analysis. The best model achieved
% classiﬁcation accuracy, which was % better than the by-chance accuracy rate.
Table .reports the signiﬁcant results of the Mixed Logistic Regression analysis.
The following sections discuss the signiﬁcant effects of both analyses in more detail
and report the results of the post hoc tests.
Geminate status
The geminate status factor had a signiﬁcant effect on consonant
duration in the Linear Mixed Model, indicating that consonants labelled impression-
istically as geminates were signiﬁcantly longer than those labelled as singletons. The
mean geminate duration in the corpus was ms (SD ); the mean singleton
duration was ms (SD ). Thus, geminates were on average .times longer than
singletons. Geminate status interacted with morphological status and contextual
position in the model. These interactions are addressed below.
TABLE .. Results of the Linear Mixed Model with geminate duration as the
dependent variable
Factor
df
F
p
Geminate status
, .
.
<.
Contextual position
, .
.
<.
Stress position
, .
.
<.
Consonant type
, .
.
<.
Morphological status
, .
.
<.
Stress position × consonant type
, .
.
<.
Morphological status × geminate status
, .
.
<.
Morphological status × consonant type
, .
.
<.
Contextual position × geminate status
, .
.
<.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


Contextual position
The effect of contextual position was signiﬁcant in the Linear
Mixed Model, while post hoc pairwise comparisons showed that consonants in the
word-ﬁnal position were signiﬁcantly longer than consonants in all other positions.
In addition, intervocalic consonants were signiﬁcantly longer than consonants in the
preconsonantal position. Mean durations for each category broken down by gemin-
ate status, as well as geminate-singleton duration ratios, are reported in Table ..
There was also a signiﬁcant interaction between contextual position and geminate
status in their effect on the duration of consonants, suggesting that durational
differences between full and reduced geminates were not consistent across contextual
TABLE .. Results of Mixed Logistic Regression with geminate status as the
dependent variable (reference category: singleton)
Model Term
Coefficient Std. Error
p
Exponential 
(Coefficient)
Intercept
3.464
0.687
Contextual position
(Reference value: word-
final)
Intervocalic
1.139
0.579
Word-initial
2.187
0.901
Stress position
(Reference value: other)
Preceding
1.542
0.191
Following
0.685
0.260
Consonant type 
(Reference value: liquid)
Voiced stops
3.061
0.483
Voiceless stops
1.597
0.505
Voiced fricatives
3.083
0.819
Voiceless
fricatives
1.142
0.382
Nasals
0.944
0.359
< 0.001
< 0.05
< 0.05
< 0.001
< 0.01
< 0.001
< 0.01
< 0.001
< 0.01
< 0.01
0.031
3.124
8.911
4.673
1.983
21.353
4.940
21.823
3.135
2.571
TABLE .. Mean duration (ms) of full and reduced geminate consonants in the
intervocalic, preconsonantal, word-initial, and word-ﬁnal positions
Intervocalic
Preconsonantal
Word-initial
Word-ﬁnal
Singleton
.
.
.
.
(SD .)
(SD .)
(SD .)
(SD .)
Geminate
.
.
.
.
(SD )
(SD .)
(SD )
(SD )
Ratio
.
.
.
.

Dmitrieva

positions. The geminate-singleton duration ratios showed that the difference was
greatest in the word-initial position, somewhat greater in the intervocalic than in the
preconsonantal position, and lowest in the word-ﬁnal position (despite the overall
longest raw durations word-ﬁnally).
The frequency of degemination also appears to be strongly affected by the con-
textual position of the geminate. In the Mixed Logistic Regression, contextual
position was a signiﬁcant predictor of the impressionistic geminate status. Positive
coefﬁcients for intervocalic and word-initial consonants indicate that both were more
likely to be pronounced as full geminates in comparison to word-ﬁnal consonants
(reference value). The exponentiated values show that the odds of intervocalic
geminates to be pronounced as long were about times higher than for word-ﬁnal
geminates. The odds of word-initial geminates to be pronounced as long were about
times higher than for word-ﬁnal geminates.
Table .demonstrates the relative percentages of full and reduced (degeminated)
pronunciations of underlying geminates in each position. The table shows that
degemination was most frequent in the preconsonantal and word-ﬁnal positions
(the odds of full pronunciation in the preconsonantal position were not different
from those of word-ﬁnal position). Degemination in the word-initial position was the
least likely (only % of reduced geminates).
Thus, the acoustic results showed that geminates were shortest when articulated
next to other consonants. They were also most commonly reduced to singletons in
the preconsonantal position. At the same time, acoustically the longest word-ﬁnal
geminates were also frequently reduced to singletons. In contrast, word-initial
geminates were the most successful at avoiding degemination, followed by the
intervocalic consonants.
Stress position
The effect of stress position on consonant duration was signiﬁcant
in the Linear Mixed Model, and pairwise post hoc comparisons showed that con-
sonants preceded or followed by stressed vowels were signiﬁcantly longer than
consonants not adjacent to stressed vowels. There was also a signiﬁcant interaction
between stress position and consonant type indicating that stress-related duration
changes were not consistent across consonant types. Further data exploration
showed that preceding stress had the effect of increasing duration for sonorant
consonants, while following stress appeared to have a stronger lengthening effect
TABLE .. Percentages of full and reduced geminates in the intervocalic, precon-
sonantal, word-initial, and word-ﬁnal positions
Intervocalic
Preconsonantal
Word-initial
Word-ﬁnal
Geminate
% ()
% ()
% ()
% ()
Reduced
% ()
% ()
% ()
% ()
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


for obstruent consonants. Table .lists mean consonant durations and geminate-
singleton duration ratios in the three stress conditions. The duration ratio is higher in
the ‘other’ condition, but the difference was not signiﬁcant as a stress position by
geminate status interaction.
In terms of the frequency of degemination, as Table .shows, the numbers were
approximately evenly distributed between full and reduced geminates in the preced-
ing and following stress conditions, while in the ‘other’ condition degemination was
prevalent. This difference was signiﬁcant in the Mixed Logistic Regression analysis,
where stress position was a signiﬁcant predictor of geminate status. Positive coefﬁ-
cients for the preceding and following stress conditions indicate that full pronunci-
ation was more likely than in the ‘other’ stress condition. The exponentiated values
demonstrate that the odds of long pronunciation of geminate consonants preceded
by stressed vowels were almost times higher than for consonants not adjacent to
stressed vowels. The odds of long pronunciation for consonants followed by stressed
vowels were almost two times higher than for consonants not adjacent to stressed
vowels.
Thus, both full and reduced geminates were shortest when not adjacent to stressed
vowels. Degemination also occurred more frequently in this position.
Consonant type
All consonants occurring as geminates in the corpus were sorted
into six categories: voiced stops, voiceless stops, voiced fricatives, voiceless fricatives,
nasals, and liquids. The effect of consonant type on acoustic duration was signiﬁcant
in the Linear Mixed Model. Post hoc pairwise comparisons reveal three groupings
TABLE .. Mean duration (ms) of full and reduced geminate consonants after
stressed vowels (‘Preceding stress’), before stressed vowels (‘Following stress’),
and not adjacent to stressed vowels (‘Other’)
Preceding stress
Following stress
Other
Singleton
.(SD .)
.(SD )
.(SD .)
Geminate
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
Ratio
.
.
.
TABLE .. The number of full and reduced geminates in the ‘Preceding’, ‘Follow-
ing’, and ‘Other’ stress conditions
Preceding stress
Following stress
Other
Geminate
% ()
% ()
% ()
Reduced
% ()
% ()
% ()

Dmitrieva

within which consonant types did not differ signiﬁcantly in terms of duration. The
ﬁrst grouping included liquids, nasals, and voiced fricatives; the second grouping
included voiced fricatives and voiced stops; and the third grouping included voiceless
fricatives and voiceless stops. All other differences were signiﬁcant (the difference
between voiced and voiceless stops was trending towards signiﬁcance at p = .).
Mean durations for each category broken down by geminate status are reported in
Table .. Overall, consonant duration decreases relatively homogeneously from voice-
less obstruents, though voiced obstruents, to sonorants. Voiced fricatives and nasals
stand out in terms of greater geminate-singleton duration ratios. This asymmetry,
however, was not signiﬁcant as a consonant type by geminate status interaction.
The distribution of full and reduced geminate consonants across consonant types
is presented in Table .. Liquids lead in the frequency of degemination with %
reduced geminates, voiceless obstruents, and nasals are in the middle, with –%
reduction, and voiced obstruents appear to be the most resistant to degemination,
with only about % reduction. Consonant type was a signiﬁcant predictor of
geminate status in the Mixed Logistic Regression. Positive coefﬁcients indicated
that all consonant types were more likely than liquids (reference value) to be realized
fully. In particular, the odds of voiced stops and voiced fricatives to be realized as long
were about times higher than for liquids. The odds of nasals, voiceless fricatives,
and voiceless stops to be realized fully were ., , and times higher (respectively)
than for liquids.
TABLE .. Mean duration (ms) of full and reduced consonants of different types
Vcl
stops
Vcl
fricatives
Vcd stops
Vcd
fricatives
Nasals
Liquids
Singleton
.
.
.
.
.
.
(SD .)
(SD .)
(SD )
(SD .)
(SD )
(SD .)
Geminate
.
.
.
.
.
.
(SD .)
(SD )
(SD )
(SD )
(SD .)
(SD .)
Ratio
.
.
.
.
.
.
TABLE .. The number of full and reduced geminates across consonant types
Vcl stops
Vcl fricatives
Vcd stops
Vcd fricatives
Nasals
Liquids
Geminate
% ()
% ()
.% ()
% ()
.% ()
% ()
Reduced
% ()
% ()
.% ()
% ()
.% ()
% ()
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


Thus, liquid geminates were the shortest acoustically and the most likely to be
reduced to singletons. At the same time, voiced fricatives, which did not differ
signiﬁcantly from liquids in terms of acoustic duration, were among the most resistant
to degemination.
Morphological status
The morphological status factor had a signiﬁcant effect on
consonant duration: consonants on the boundaries of morphemes were overall sig-
niﬁcantly longer than morpheme-internal consonants. At the same time, morpho-
logical status interacted with geminate status, indicating that durational differences
between full and reduced geminates were not consistent across morphological condi-
tions. As Table .shows, the geminate-singleton ratio was higher in the concaten-
ated condition due to the fact that unreduced geminates were on average longer, while
reduced geminates were shorter in the concatenated than in the morpheme-internal
condition.
The interaction between morphological status and consonant type was also sig-
niﬁcant, indicating that the effect of morphological status on consonant duration was
not consistent across consonant types.
..Discussion
The decision to consider all doubly spelled consonants as underlying geminates in
Russian could be expected to boost the numbers of Russian geminates. In fact, a high
number of morpheme-internal geminates found in the corpus could at least in part
be attributed to this methodological decision. However, despite this across-the-board
approach, many functionally sensible tendencies, comparable to the reported cross-
linguistic patterns, can be detected in the distribution of underlying geminates.
First, intervocalic geminates were by far the most common, despite the fact that
all word-initial and word-ﬁnal geminates were included without regard to the almost
exclusively reduced pronunciation in the latter case. Second, a great variety of gemin-
ated consonant types could be found only in the intervocalic condition. Word-initial,
word-ﬁnal, and preconsonantal geminates were limited almost exclusively to fricatives,
particularly the voiceless coronal fricative /s/—a consonant rich in internal cues, which
is generally considered little disadvantaged by the non-intervocalic environment
(Wright ). Across languages, /s/ is often found in phonetic contexts avoided by
TABLE .. Mean duration (ms) of full and reduced geminates as factor of
morphological status
Concatenated
Morpheme-internal
Singleton
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
Geminate
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
Ratio
.
.

Dmitrieva

other obstruents due to the risk of losing critical perceptual cues to their identity
(Kohler ; Jun ; Steriade ). Besides, the consonantal environment of the
consonant-adjacent geminates in Russian often consists of sonorant consonants, /m/,
/l/, and /r/, which, from the perceptual perspective, constitute a reasonable substitute
for vowels.
Third, Russian underlying geminates demonstrate a moderate preference to
appear after stressed vowels—a preference which has also been reported to occur
frequently across languages (Thurgood ). Finally, among the voiced stop gemin-
ates the one that is conspicuously absent is a velar stop /g/ (although double /g/ is
listed among possible geminates in Kolesnikov ). The absence of this segment
from geminate inventories across languages (and often from the voiced stop inven-
tories altogether) is explained by the relative incompatibility of voicing and velar
closure, characterized by a low oral cavity volume and lower availability of passive
and active cavity enlargement (Ohala ).
In terms of the frequency of individual consonant types as geminates, the estimates
provided by the present corpus agree with the tendencies reported in Kolesnikov
() and Timberlake (), who listed /n l s m/ as the most common geminates.
The only exception is geminate /d/, which was quite frequent in the present corpus.
The reason for this discrepancy is likely the fact that earlier estimates were based on
orthography and thus included only geminates that were spelled as two identical
graphemes. Geminate /d/ often arises due to voicing assimilation, and was included
in the current estimation. A relatively high token frequency of geminate /s/ in the
present corpus can be explained by the frequent use of words /rossija/ ‘Russia’ and
/russkij/ ‘Russian’ in the interview part of elicitation, because the topics under
discussion involved the contemporary political and economic situation in Russia.
Beyond the patterns of underlying gemination, the examination of full and
reduced realizations of geminate consonants in the recorded corpus also conﬁrmed
the dependency between frequency of degemination and contextual factors, although
the effect was not always in the direction reported in previous literature. Intervocalic
geminates were degeminated less often than preconsonantal or word-ﬁnal geminates,
in agreement with previous reports (Panov ; Kolesnikov ; Kasatkin and
Choi ; Timberlake ). However, word-initial geminates demonstrated a
surprising resistance to degemination—they reduced even less often than intervocalic
geminates. Stress was also shown to affect frequency of degemination: stress-adjacent
geminates reduced less often than those not adjacent to stressed vowels, in agreement
with earlier accounts (Panov ; Avanesov ; Kalenchuk and Kasatkina ;
Kolesnikov ; Matusevich ; Timberlake ). The effect of preceding stress
was stronger than that of the following stress. Finally, the picture was somewhat
different from expected with respect to consonant types. Previous accounts suggest
that sonorants overall degeminate more often than obstruents in Russian (Kasatkin
and Choi ). Present results also showed that sonorants, liquids, and nasals were
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


indeed subject to more frequent degemination. Somewhat surprisingly from the
typological perspective, voiced obstruents, both stops and fricatives, were the most
resistant to degemination. Ohala () argued convincingly that voicing is aero-
dynamically incompatible with gemination in stop consonants, which explained the
overall cross-linguistic rarity of voiced geminate stops (see also Jaeger ). In
Russian, however, both voiced stop geminates and voiced-fricative geminates are
quite common and, as present results show, tend to maintain their length when other
geminates lose it. While a conclusive explanation for this idiosyncrasy is yet to be
found, it is likely that morphological factors are involved. Previous literature reports
that concatenated geminates in Russian tend to reduce less often than morpheme-
internal ones (Matusevich ; Panov ; Avanesov ). Voiced obstruent
geminates in Russian may be resistant to degemination because many of them are
created via concatenation of stems with some commonly occurring afﬁxes. As a
result, most if not all of the voiced obstruent geminates are concatenated, as opposed
to other consonant types which contain both true and concatenated geminates. The
fact that word-initial geminates in Russian are limited to morphologically derived
cases (some of which are historically derived) can also explain word-initial gemin-
ates’ resistance to degemination.
Thus, Russian degemination patterns demonstrate a mix between tendencies that
could be considered ‘universal’ or at least cross-linguistically common (e.g. a ‘dislike’ of
consonant-adjacent geminates, sonorant geminates, non-stress adjacent geminates)
and idiosyncratic, typologically unusual patterns (e.g. the resistance of word-initial and
voiced obstruent geminates to degemination).
The acoustic duration results demonstrated that not only patterns of degemination
but also the duration of geminates were affected by contextual environment and
consonant type. The underlying cause for this effect is undeniably the interaction
between gemination and other factors inﬂuencing consonant length. In the stream of
speech, segments are subject to multiple durational modiﬁcations, including
prominence-related lengthening in accented syllables (Cho and Keating ; Turk
), prosodic boundary effects, such as initial and ﬁnal lengthening (Turk and
Shattuck-Hufnagel ; Beckman and Edwards ), and compression effects,
such as consonant shortening in clusters (Haggard ; Klatt ), as well as
differences inherent to each type of segment, determined by its manner and place of
articulation (Klatt , ).
As a result of the cluster compression effect, word-medial geminates were shorter
when immediately followed by other consonants than when in the intervocalic
position. Due to domain boundary lengthening, word-ﬁnal geminates were longer
than all other geminates. Word-initial geminates were also longer than word-medial
ones, although this difference did not reach signiﬁcance. Both word-initial and
word-ﬁnal consonants demonstrated particularly high standard deviations, which
indicated greater variability in the realization of lengthening in these positions,

Dmitrieva

possibly as a result of interaction with phrase-initial, phrase-ﬁnal, and accentual
lengthening. The lack of signiﬁcant difference in the case of word-initial consonants
can also be attributed to the countereffects of additional factors, which cannot be
controlled when natural or quasi-natural speech samples are used. Such factors
include the number of syllables in the word and position within the prosodic phrase.
Another uncontrolled factor which can affect segment duration is its place in
the syllabic structure. This factor is particularly relevant for geminates occurring
word-medially in clusters with other consonants, as in /russkij/ ‘Russian’. Word-
medial geminates are typically described as ambisyllabic, straddling the coda of
the preceding syllable and the onset of the following one (Hayes ). Such
syllabiﬁcation of double consonants has also been proposed for Russian (Baldwin
). In the case of preconsonantal geminates this would suggest the following
syllabiﬁcation: /rus.skij/ ‘Russian’. Moreover, evidence is available that speakers
prefer to divide words into syllables at morpheme boundaries (Derwing ;
Eddington et al. ). Since most of the preconsonantal geminates in the corpus
are heteromorphemic, the syllable boundary is likely to be placed between the two
halves of the geminate.
Syllabiﬁcation is less clear-cut in the case of degemination: some speakers may
syllabify the resulting singleton as coda (/rus.kij/), and others as part of the onset
cluster (/ru.skij/), thus confounding the duration results. However, Côté and
Kharlamov () demonstrated a strong preference for VC.CV syllabiﬁcation in
similar cases, which suggests that a relative consistency of syllabiﬁcation could be
expected in the present study as well.
According to the present results, geminates were longer when adjacent to stressed
vowels, as a result of prominence-related lengthening. In addition, in accordance
with the well-established inherent duration differences, voiceless geminates were
longer than voiced ones, and obstruent geminates were longer than sonorant ones.
Morphologically concatenated geminates were longer than morpheme-internal
geminates, contra Ridouane (), who found that lexical and derived geminates
were of the same duration in Tashlihiyt Berber.
These contextual and inherent effects on geminate duration underlie degemination
patterns in Russian and comparable typological patterns across languages. Timberlake
(: ) makes a similar statement: ‘In general, maintaining gemination requires an
environment which grants a large measure of duration to the interval of obstruents’,
and cites the intervocalic, post-stress position as particularly favorable for gemination.
The logic behind this hypothesis is that geminates with relatively short acoustic
durations are frequently misperceived as singletons by listeners who then produce
them as singletons, according to the ‘innocent misapprehension’ mechanism of sound
change proposed by Ohala (, ). This tendency may result in higher rates of
degemination in free variation systems like Russian, and may eventually lead to
categorical elimination of such geminates.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


This hypothesis predicts some patterns of degemination obtained in the present
study. For example, liquids were the shortest among four manners of articulation and
they were the most frequently degeminated ones among the four. Preconsonantal
geminates, likewise, were the shortest acoustically and among the most frequently
degeminated impressionistically. The same pattern emerged for stress effects: the
shortest geminates were those not adjacent to stressed vowels and they were the most
frequently reduced geminate types among the stress positions.
On the other hand, not all differences in acoustic duration aligned well with
expected differences in frequency of degemination. For example, word-ﬁnal conson-
ants were the longest among the four contextual positions but degeminated as readily
as preconsonantal ones. Similarly, voiceless stops were the longest in the corpus but,
in terms of propensity to degeminate, were comparable to the much shorter nasals.
This suggests that absolute acoustic duration is not a very good predictor of the
phonological behaviour of geminates. Moreover, perceptual recognition of geminates
may depend not only on their raw acoustic duration but also on the proportional
difference from the corresponding singleton. Weber’s law of psychophysical percep-
tion (discovered by Ernst Heinrich Weber, –; see e.g. Dehaene ) states
that the size of just-noticeable difference from the stimulus is proportionate to the
original stimulus value. Thus, a .increase in a liquid’s duration, while resulting in a
much shorter segment than a .increase in an obstruent’s duration, could be just as
noticeable. However, if the duration increase in geminates is not proportionate to the
singletons’ duration, perceptual recognition of geminates may be jeopardized.
Therefore, to fully evaluate the potential of a particular category of geminates to be
reliably perceived as geminates, one needs to take into account the proportional
differences between singletons and geminates. To do this, it is necessary to compare
geminates’ duration in each contextual and consonant type category to the corres-
ponding singletons’ duration. An initial estimation of this relationship can be
glimpsed from the present results. Since many of the geminates in the corpus were
degeminated, their duration can be used as an approximation of a singleton and
compared to the duration of the corresponding full geminate.
Only two interactions between geminate status and other factors were signiﬁcant
in the analysis. The interaction between geminate status and contextual position
indicated that the difference between geminates and singletons was uneven across
positions. A look at the duration ratios demonstrates that word-initial position boasts
the highest geminate-singleton duration ratio, making it potentially the most dis-
criminable of the geminate contrasts. A second interaction, between morphological
status and geminate status, is due to the fact that geminate-singleton ratio was higher
for concatenated than for morpheme-internal geminates. However, these results have
to be interpreted with caution given that the singletons in the analysis are in fact
reduced geminates. There is ample evidence that segments resulting from contrast
neutralization are often acoustically distinct from segments that are underlying—a

Dmitrieva

phenomenon known as ‘incomplete neutralization’ (e.g. Warner et al. ; Bishop
; Dmitrieva et al. ; Braver ; Röttger et al. ). Therefore, we cannot be
sure that reduced geminates are completely representative of underlying singletons in
terms of duration.
On the other hand, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd items for a balanced comparison between
underlying geminates and singletons using natural language material. Although Rus-
sian allows geminate consonants in a variety of contextual environments, words
minimally contrasting in consonant duration in all the positions of interest do not
occur naturally in the lexicon. To make these comparisons possible, Experiment II was
conducted, which employed artiﬁcially created non-words as experimental stimuli.
The non-word approach also resolved the problem of uncontrolled variables affecting
duration.
.Experiment II
In experiment II, acoustic duration of Russian geminates and singletons was measured
in a set of non-words speciﬁcally designed to contrast geminates and singletons in the
contexts of interest. The stimuli were chosen from a larger set of non-words, and were
judged by native speakers of Russian to be neither very Russian word-like nor too
foreign-sounding.3 The goal of the experiment was to examine the proportion of
lengthening under gemination as factor of contextual environment, word position,
and consonant type. The results of the experiment can help further evaluate the
hypothesis that greater durational differences between geminates and singletons in
certain contexts are responsible for the cross-linguistic prevalence of such contrasts.
..Methods
...Stimuli
To investigate the effects of consonant type and stress on the
production of consonant duration, non-word stimuli were used, contrasting
minimally in terms of stress location and consonant type. Table .lists the stimuli.
Each stimulus was recorded with a singleton and a geminate target consonant. Five
different coronal consonants were used as targets: a voiceless and a voiced stop [t, d],
a fricative [s], a nasal [n], and a lateral liquid [l]. Within the stimulus set with the
same target consonant, either a ﬁrst, a second, or a third vowel was stressed, placing
the target after the stressed vowel, before the stressed vowel, or between two
unstressed vowels.
To investigate the effect of the immediate segmental environment, eight additional
stimuli, listed in Table ., were used in which the target consonant was always a
3 Five native speakers of Russian judged non-words on the scale from to , with being a very
Russian-sounding non-word and being a very non-Russian-sounding non-word. Only non-words with
a score within standard deviation from the mean were selected for the experiment.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


voiceless coronal fricative [s] placed in the intervocalic or preconsonantal environ-
ment. Both geminate and singleton targets were used. The following consonant was a
sonorant—a liquid [l] or a nasal [m]. These stimuli were disyllabic with ﬁnal stress.
To address the effect of word-edge position, an additional eight stimuli contained
target consonants either in the word-initial or in the word-ﬁnal position. Target
consonants were coronal fricatives, geminates and singletons. These stimuli were
two-word combinations, where the edge target was followed or preceded by a vowel-
initial or a vowel-ﬁnal word. Table .lists the intervocalic, the preconsonantal, and
the word-edge stimuli. Stress was always ﬁnal.
...Participants
Production data were collected from ﬁve native speakers of
Russian (female, male) recruited on the campus of Stanford University and in the
neighbouring communities. All participants were between and years of age.
Due to the data collection location, all participants were proﬁcient in English.
...Procedure
Thestimuliwerearrangedinthreecolumnsinapseudorandomorder
on one sheet of paper, with ﬁllers added at the top and bottom of each column and within
the list: a total of tokens (stimuli × repetitions) were recorded by each participant.
Participants were asked to read through a list of stimuli several times at a pace
comfortable for them. They were encouraged to pronounce the stimuli as naturally as
possible, and to assign stress according to the notations provided. Russian spelling
often indicates stress in ambiguous cases, and Russian participants are accustomed to
the use of such notations. Participants were also asked to make sure that doubly spelled
consonants (a conventional way of representing geminates in Russian) were pro-
nounced as long. It is possible that as a result of this speciﬁc instruction participants
TABLE .. Stimuli contrasting three stress locations and ﬁve consonant types
Manner
Stress
[ˈkot/ttapu]
[ˈkod/ddapu]
[ˈkon/nnapu]
[ˈkol/llapu]
[koˈt/ttapu]
[koˈd/ddapu]
[koˈs/ssapu]
[koˈn/nnapu]
[koˈl/llapu]
[kot/ttaˈpu]
[kod/ddaˈpu]
[kos/ssaˈpu]
[kon/nnaˈpu]
[kol/llaˈpu]
[ˈkokos/ssapu]
TABLE .. Stimuli contrasting two environment conditions and two word-edge
positions
Environment
Word-edge
[iˈsj/ssjek]
[iˈs/sslek]
[pos/ss aˈvap]
[po s/ssaˈvap]
[bjiˈs/ssɨk]
[bjiˈs/ssmɨk]
[djis/ss iˈpa]
[dji sj/ssjiˈpa]

Dmitrieva

emphasized geminate consonants in their pronunciation. However, given the likeli-
hood of degemination especially in some environments, such instructions were con-
sidered necessary.
Recordings were made in a sound-attenuated booth in the Linguistics Laboratory
of Stanford University, using a Tascam US-solid-state recorder at a sampling rate
of .kHz.
...Measurements
The durations of single and geminate consonants were meas-
ured from the waveforms and the spectrograms displayed in Praat (Boersma and
Weenink ). The closure and burst were included into the measurement of the
overall stop duration. The frication portion was measured for fricatives. Nasal and
lateral constriction portions were measured for the intervocalic [n] and [l], which was
indicated by a drop in the intensity of the signal, a change in the shape of the waveform,
less visible formant structure, and presence of antiformants. Otherwise, segmentation
criteria were the same as in Experiment I.
...Analysis
To analyse the effects of segmental environment, word-edge pos-
ition, stress, and consonant type on the production of consonant duration, four
separate two-way repeated-measures ANOVAs (RM ANOVAs) were conducted. In
each one, duration of the target consonant was used as a dependent variable, and either
segmental environment, word-edge position, stress, or consonant type were used as
one of the independent variables. Consonant duration category, i.e. whether it was a
geminate or a singleton, was used as a second independent variable. A potential
interaction between one of the contextual variables and the duration category variable
are of a particular interest in the analysis, because an interaction of this type would
indicate that the proportion of lengthening in geminates depends on the contextual
environment or consonant type. Post hoc multiple pairwise comparisons were con-
ducted with a Bonferroni correction.
..Results
...Segmental environment
Results of the RM ANOVA with duration category
(geminate or singleton) and segmental environment (intervocalic or preconsonantal)
as independent variables showed that fricative duration was signiﬁcantly affected
by both duration category and segmental environment. Doubly spelled fricatives
were pronounced as signiﬁcantly longer than single ones: F(,) =., p < ..
Fricatives were also signiﬁcantly longer in the intervocalic environment than in the
preconsonantal environment: F(,) = ., p < .. There was also a near-
signiﬁcant interaction between duration category and segmental environment
(p = .) due to the fact that intervocalic geminates were lengthened more
compared to intervocalic singletons than preconsonantal geminates compared to
preconsonantal singletons. Figure .demonstrates this relationship. The follow-up
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


within-group comparisons showed that intervocalic and preconsonantal singletons did
not differ from each other in terms of duration, while there was a signiﬁcant durational
difference between intervocalic and preconsonantal geminates: F(,) = ., p < ..
Mean durations are presented in Table ..
...Word-edge position
In the analysis of the word-edge position stimuli, the
only signiﬁcant effect found was of duration category: F(,) = ., p < .. The
effect of word-edge position approached signiﬁcance (p = .). The interaction was
not signiﬁcant, although in the analysis of only geminate consonants the effect of
word-edge position was signiﬁcant—word-initial geminate fricatives were signiﬁ-
cantly longer than word-ﬁnal geminate fricatives: F(,) = ., p < .. Word-
initial and word-ﬁnal singletons did not differ from each other. Figure .illustrates
the relationship between the conditions. Table .lists the group means.
...Stress position
In the analysis of stress position, the effect of duration
category was signiﬁcant: F(,) = ., p < ., as was the effect of stress:
F(,) = ., p < .. Post hoc comparisons showed that consonants followed
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
Singleton
Geminate
Duration Category
Duration (ms)
Environment
Intervocalic /s/
Preconsonantal /s/
FIGURE .The effect of duration category and segmental environment on the duration of /s/.
(The boxes on the plot indicate interquartile range; the line in the middle is the median; the
vertical lines (whiskers) correspond to the highest/lowest value within .times the inter-quartile
range; the dots are outliers (cases with values between .and times the interquartile range).)

Dmitrieva

by stressed vowels were signiﬁcantly longer than those surrounded by unstressed
vowels (p < .), and near-signiﬁcantly longer than consonants preceded by
stressed vowels (p = .). The interaction was not signiﬁcant.
The stress factor was also signiﬁcant within each duration category analysed separ-
ately: singletons F(,) = ., p < ., and geminates F(,) = ., p < ..
Singletons followed by stressed vowels were signiﬁcantly longer than singletons
TABLE .. Mean duration of geminate and singleton /s/ in the intervocalic and
preconsonantal environment
Singleton
Geminate
Difference
Geminate/singleton ratio
Intervocalic
.(SD )
.(SD )
.
.
Preconsonantal
.(SD )
.(SD .)
.
.
550
500
600
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
Singleton
Geminate
Duration Category
Duration (ms)
Position
Word-Initial /s/
Word-Final /s/
FIGURE .The effect of duration category and word-edge position on the duration of /s/. (The
boxes on the plot indicate interquartile range; the line in the middle is the median; the vertical
lines (whiskers) correspond to the highest/lowest value within .times the inter-quartile
range; the dots are outliers (cases with values between .and times the interquartile range);
the stars are extreme outliers (cases with values more than times the IQ range).)
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


preceded by stress or singletons surrounded by unstressed vowels. For geminates, only
the difference between the following stress and no stress conditions was signiﬁcant.
Figure .illustrates the effects; Table .provides the group means.
...Consonant type
Both the duration category: F(,) = ., p < ., and
the consonant type factor: F(,) = ., p < ., were signiﬁcant in the RM
ANOVA analysis. Post hoc pairwise comparisons showed that all signiﬁcant differ-
ences were between the set of voiceless obstruents, represented by [s] and [t], and the
set of sonorants and voiced obstruents, represented by [n], [l], and [d]. There were no
signiﬁcant differences within each set, but across the sets, [s] was signiﬁcantly longer
than [l] and, marginally, [d] (p = .); [t] was signiﬁcantly longer than [d] and [l].
The effects are illustrated in Figure .; group means are listed in Table ..
When the effect of consonant type was examined within each duration category
separately, it was signiﬁcant in each case. Within singletons (F(,) = .,
p < .), all the differences across the two sets were signiﬁcant. Within geminates
(F(,) = ., p < .), only [s]–[l] and [t]–[d] differences were signiﬁcant.
Overall, the picture that arises is that durational differences between different
consonant types are reduced when consonants are geminated. Although this suggests
that the amount of lengthening is not completely proportionate to each consonant’s
singleton duration, this effect did not reach signiﬁcance as an interaction between the
consonant duration factor and the consonant type factor.
TABLE .. Mean duration of geminate and singleton /s/ in the word-initial and
word-ﬁnal position
Singleton
Geminate
Difference
Geminate/singleton ratio
Word-initial
(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
Word-ﬁnal
.(SD .)
.(SD )
.
.
TABLE .. Mean duration of geminates and singletons with preceding stress,
following stress, or between unstressed vowels
Singleton
Geminate
Difference
Geminate/singleton
ratio
Preceding stress
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
Following stress
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
No stress
.(SD .)
.(SD )
.
.

Dmitrieva

..Discussion
The analysis of non-word production by Russian speakers demonstrated effects of
contextual and inherent factors on absolute consonant duration largely comparable
to those observed in the analysis of real words in Experiment I. It was also established
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Singleton
Geminate
Duration Category
Duration (ms)
Stress
Preceding
Following
No stress
FIGURE .The effect of duration category and stress on consonant duration. (The boxes on
the plot indicate interquartile range; the line in the middle is the median; the vertical lines
(whiskers) correspond to the highest/lowest value within .times the inter-quartile range; the
dots are outliers (cases with values between .and times the interquartile range).)
TABLE .. Mean duration of geminates and singletons of different consonant
types
Singleton
Geminate
Difference
Geminate/singleton
ratio
/s/
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.

/t/
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
/d/
.(SD )
.(SD )
.
.
/n/
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
/l/
.(SD .)
.(SD .)
.
.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


that both singleton and geminate duration were affected by the contextual and
inherent factors. As in naturalistic data, both singletons and geminates were longer
in the intervocalic environment than in the preconsonantal one. Singletons and
geminates followed by stress, i.e. those in the onsets of stressed syllables, tended to
be longer than singletons and geminates in other stress conditions. Finally, sonorant
and voiced singletons and geminates were shorter than voiceless singletons and
geminates.
In each contextual position and consonant type, geminates were consistently and
statistically robustly longer than singletons, with the proportion of durational
increase ranging from .to .. This demonstrates that Russian participants experi-
enced no difﬁculty in realizing the contrast despite the phonemically marginal status
of geminates in Russian and tendencies towards degemination. On the other hand, as
in Experiment I, there was little evidence for interaction between contextual/inherent
factors and the duration category factor. Only in the analysis of intervocalic and
preconsonantal environments did the interaction approach signiﬁcance. In the inter-
vocalic environment, gemination triggered on average a .increase in singletons’
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Singleton
Geminate
Duration Category
Duration (ms)
Consonant
Type
[s]
[t]
[d]
[n]
[l]
FIGURE .The effect of duration category and consonant type on consonant duration. (The
boxes on the plot indicate interquartile range; the line in the middle is the median; the vertical
lines (whiskers) correspond to the highest/lowest value within .times the inter-quartile
range; the dots are outliers (cases with values between .and times the interquartile range);
the stars are extreme outliers (cases with values more than times the IQ range).)

Dmitrieva

duration, while the increase was somewhat smaller, ., in the preconsonantal
environment. This ﬁnding agrees with the cross-linguistic observation that intervocalic
geminates are preferred to consonant-adjacent ones. Another difference in the amount
of lengthening under gemination, albeit not a statistically signiﬁcant one, involved a
greater increase in word-initial (.) than word-ﬁnal gemination (.), which was also
observed in the naturalistic data of Experiment I.
Overall, these differences explain well some of the Russian patterns of degemination
but not the cross-linguistic patterns. The corpus analysis showed that word-initial
geminates in Russian had the lowest incidence of degemination, which could be
explained by a salient durational difference between singletons and geminates in this
position detected in both Experiment I and Experiment II. Preconsonantal geminates,
on the other hand, were among the most likely to reduce, which agrees with the
relatively small durational difference between preconsonantal singletons and gemin-
ates detected in both experiments. Across languages, however, word-initial geminates
are very rare, which is surprising given the acoustic robustness of this contrast in
Russian. This discrepancy suggests that lengthening patterns observed in Russian are
not necessarily shared by other languages. Indeed, other studies reviewed in the
introduction suggest that languages can be quite idiosyncratic in the degree of length-
ening across contexts. For example, Pajak () observed that in Moroccan Arabic
lengthening under gemination was greater word-medially than word-initially. Data
reported in Ridouane () showed that in Tashlhiyt Berber lengthening was greater
in word-ﬁnal and in word-initial positions than in word-medial positions. Such
discrepancies seriously undermine the possibility that differences in the amount of
durational lengthening in geminates as function of contextual position can explain the
common cross-linguistic tendencies in this domain.
Furthermore, the remaining (non-signiﬁcant) differences in proportions of length-
ening cannot explain either the Russian-speciﬁc or the cross-linguistic tendencies. In
Experiment I and Experiment II, the durational increase in geminates between
unstressed vowels was greater than in geminates followed by stress; nevertheless,
the former degeminated considerably more often, as was shown in Experiment I.
Sonorants and voiced stops increased more in duration under gemination than
voiceless consonants and yet in Russian, and reportedly across languages, sonorant
geminates are dispreferred.
Moreover, despite some quantitative variability in the geminate-singleton ratios, few
of the observed asymmetries were statistically signiﬁcant, indicating that the amount of
duration difference between geminates and singletons was mostly constant across
contextual and consonant types in Russian. These results suggest that a greater or
smaller degree of lengthening in geminates as function of context and consonant type is
not a likely basis for cross-linguistic patterns in the typology and phonotactics of
geminates. It is more probable that languages develop individual patterns of durational
differences in order to enhance the gemination contrast in certain contexts.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


Differences can be enhanced in contexts where the contrast is most likely to be
encountered. For example, McCrary () showed that Italian singletons were
shorter in contexts where they contrasted with geminates, enhancing the geminate-
singleton difference, than in contexts where the contrast was suspended. A similar
motivation may be behind the fact that in Russian one of the highest geminate-
singleton ratios among consonant types was detected for nasals. Geminate /n/ is
found in some highly productive Russian sufﬁxes, and is listed in Kolesnikov () as
the single most frequent double consonant in Russian (it accounts for % of all
orthographically double consonants). The high functional load of this geminate
justiﬁes acoustic enhancement of the contrast. Such a relationship between contrast
robustness and functional load was also demonstrated for Italian in Payne ().
Russian also appears to apply preferential treatment to morphologically derived
geminates, which demonstrate higher duration ratios than morpheme-internal gemin-
ates, possibly in response to their greater functional load in meaning disambiguation.
Alternatively, a contrast may be selectively enhanced in contexts where it is
perceptually disadvantaged for independent reasons; for example, in word-initial
or word-ﬁnal positions, which offer fewer perceptual cues to segmental boundaries
(Wright ). For example, in Tashlhiyt Berber—a language with a great tolerance
for consonantal clusters, which further reduces the availability of perceptual cues—
the difference between geminates and singletons is greater word-initially and word-
ﬁnally than word-medially (Ridouane ). A similar pattern was established for
word-initial geminates in Cypriot Greek (Payne and Eftychiou ). In Russian,
word-initial geminates are also characterized by a higher geminate-singleton ratio.
The reasoning above presupposes a degree of directional control over the dur-
ational robustness of the geminate-singleton contrast. This assumption raises some
interested questions with regard to contrasts that appear to be less robust, such as the
preconsonantal geminate-singleton contrast in the present data. Given that enhance-
ment is possible, something must be preventing it from occurring in such cases.
Among the options to consider is the possibility that such contrast have additional,
non-durational cues. Alternatively, their low functional load renders enhancement
not ‘cost-effective’. Finally, conﬂicting conditions may exist that make durational
enhancement difﬁcult or impossible, as in the case of aerodynamic limits on voicing
duration in voiced geminate stops. These questions are among those to be explored in
future research on the production of geminate contrasts.
A further conclusion of this study is that an explanation for a relative cross-linguistic
rarity of geminates in certain contextual positions or with certain manners of articu-
lation should be sought in domains other than asymmetries in the production of
duration. There is evidence that suggests that the psychoacoustics of duration is
sufﬁciently distinct in different contextual environments and types of consonants to
cause perceptual asymmetries, even in the absence of production differences of the type
discussed in this chapter (Dmitrieva ; Kawahara ). Moreover, production

Dmitrieva

asymmetries may arise as a response to psychoacoustic asymmetries. Future research
should address the possibility of such an interaction between inherent psychoacoustic
properties and language-speciﬁc production patterns in the typology of durational
contrasts.
The results of the study contribute to the growing body of evidence that durational
realization of the geminate-singleton contrast across contextual positions can be highly
language-speciﬁc and does not submit itself readily to ‘cross-linguistic-universals’
hypotheses. On the other hand, the distribution of the underlying geminates and
patterns of degemination in Russian addressed in Experiment I reveal several striking
similarities with prevalent cross-linguistic patterns. These include the avoidance of
word-edge and consonant-adjacent geminates, preference for stress-adjacency,
absence of voiced geminate stops with velar constriction, and restriction of the word-
initial and preconsonantal geminates to consonants with rich internal cues. These
ﬁndings suggest that a strong connection exists between phonologized categorical
patterns in some languages and gradient variable processes in others. This further
suggests that data from languages with marginal contrasts or with variably realized
contrasts can be used productively in investigations of similar types.
Among the limitations of the present study, it should be noted that participants
for Experiment II were recruited in an English-speaking community: all had con-
siderable exposure to English and were proﬁcient in English as a second language.
While consonant duration in English is not phonemic, segment duration plays an
important role in other aspects of phonology, including obstruent voicing, phrasal
boundaries, and prosodic prominence. The possibility that experience with English
as a second language has affected these participants’ production of consonant
duration in Russian cannot be discounted. In addition, the dialectal background
of participants was not controlled for: although I am not aware of any dialectal
differences affecting the realization of geminate consonants in Russian, this is
another limitation of the current study that needs to be acknowledged. Ideally,
future studies on gemination in Russian should strive to complement the present
results with data from native monolingual speakers of Russian with a homogeneous
dialectal background.
Acknowledgements
The study was funded in part by the Ric Weiland Fellowship. I am very grateful to Elinor Payne
and Alexei Kochetov for helpful comments on an earlier version of this chapter. I thank all
experiment participants for their time and interest. All mistakes are my own.
Production of geminate consonants in Russian


3
Word-initial geminates
From production to perception
RACHID RIDOUANE AND PIERRE A. HALLÉ
.Introduction
Geminates contrast with singleton consonants most commonly in intervocalic position,
less commonly word-ﬁnally, and least commonly in initial position (Thurgood ;
Davis b; Muller ; Dmitrieva ; Pajak ). Even less common among
the languages of the world is the occurrence of word-initial voiceless geminate stops
contrasting with their singleton counterparts. To our knowledge, this has been docu-
mented phonetically in four languages:1 Malay (Abramson b, , , for
Pattani Malay; Hamzah for Kelantan Malay), Cypriot Greek (Tserdanelis and
Arvaniti ; Muller ; Armosti ), Swiss German (Kraehenmann ;
Kraehenmann and Lahiri ), and Moroccan Amazigh (Berber) (Ouakrim ,
; Louali and Puech ; Ridouane , ; Ridouane and Hallé for
Tashlhiyt; and Bouarourou et al. for Tariﬁt). The singleton/geminate contrast for
voiceless stops in utterance-initial position raises a puzzling issue in both production and
perception: do speakers produce the length contrast distinguishing these segments, even
though it conveys no acoustic duration information? Are there any other acoustic cues
that would enhance the distinction between singletons and geminates in this position?
Are native listeners sensitive to these attributes, if present?
Contradictory prior results have been reported in the literature concerning voice-
less stops. In Pattani Malay (Abramson b, , ), signiﬁcant acoustic
differences were found in utterance-medial position between word-initial singleton
1 The phonological representation of word-initial geminates has been investigated as well. Leti (Hume
et al. ), Swiss German (Kraehenmann ; Ringen and Vago ), Pattani Malay (Topintzi ),
and Trukese (Davis b, and the references therein) have been the most extensively studied languages.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Rachid Ridouane and Pierre A. Hallé . First published by
Oxford University Press.

and geminate voiceless stops in terms of closure duration. In utterance-initial
position, that is, in the absence of closure duration information, listeners were still
able to accurately identify geminates vs. singletons. Their correct identiﬁcation was
based on combined secondary cues including differences in the amplitude and F
values of the ﬁrst syllable relative to the second syllable of disyllabic words. Similar
results were obtained by Hamzah () on Kelantan Malay. In Cypriot Greek,
closure duration as well as aspiration duration were found to be consistent acoustic
cues distinguishing the two series, with geminates displaying longer closure and VOT
(Tserdanelis and Arvaniti ). In utterance-initial position, Cypriot listeners also
reliably perceive the singleton/geminate contrast, mainly on the basis of VOT differ-
ences (Muller ). For Thurgovian, however, a preliminary perceptual study failed
to ﬁnd identiﬁcation performance above chance level for the voiceless stop contrast in
utterance-initial position (Kraehenmann ). However, while VOT duration is
virtually the same for the two categories, the distinction, as estimated by tongue–
palate contact, is very clear in terms of articulatory gestures, contact duration being
more than twice as long in geminates as in singleton stops (Kraehenmann and Lahiri
).
These conﬂicting results can be explained: in Pattani Malay, the singleton/gemin-
ate contrast seems to entail a difference in accentuation. Abramson () speculates
it will undergo transphonologization, switching from a segmental to an accentual
distinction. In Cypriot Greek, the contrast between singletons and geminates is also a
laryngeal contrast between unaspirated and aspirated stops, respectively (Muller
; Tserdanelis and Arvaniti ; Armosti ). Armosti, for example, reported
a % increase in the duration of aspiration for geminates compared to singletons.
In Thurgovian, minimal pairs for the corresponding distinction are quite rare, and
can be treated as homophones without affecting much comprehension. The situation
is different in Tashlhiyt, the language examined in this study: the distinction does not
correlate with accentual or laryngeal acoustic differences and is highly productive.
The purpose of this chapter is to investigate the relationship between the production
and perception of word-initial gemination in Tashlhiyt obstruents, with main focus
on voiceless stops. Gemination in this language is primarily implemented through
longer duration, even for utterance-initial voiceless stops. We show that this timing
information is sufﬁcient for native listeners to identify geminate fricatives and voiced
stops and to distinguish them from their singleton counterparts. For voiceless stops,
however, native listeners’ identiﬁcation and discrimination performance is only slightly
above chance level. This suggests that a phonemic contrast can be clearly encoded
articulatorily and at the same time cannot be perceived in the absence of clear
acoustic consequences. The argument is organized as follows. In section ., we review
how Tashlhiyt geminates are acoustically implemented and present some new electro-
palatographic (EPG) data on the articulatory correlates of the singleton/geminate
contrast in word-initial position. Section .examines the way gemination contrast is
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


perceptually recovered by Tashlhiyt native speakers. We ﬁrst review previous studies
on this topic and then present AXB discrimination data on whether and how
Tashlhiyt native speakers/listeners can perceive gemination contrast in word-initial
position. Section .summarizes the main ﬁndings and provides a general discussion
of the implications of these results on the general issue of the phonological represen-
tation of gemination.
.Word-initial geminates: production
Each consonant in Tashlhiyt has a geminate counterpart at the lexical level. Geminates
can occur in all possible word positions (Ridouane ). Items in () provide minimal
pairs attesting for the contrast in word-initial position.
()
[tut]
‘she hit’
[ttut]
‘forget him’
[gar]
‘bad’
[ggar]
‘be last’
[ﬁt]
‘give it, masc.’
[fﬁt]
‘pour it, masc.’
[sir]
‘go’
[ssir]
‘shoelace’
Morphology also makes extensive use of the word-initial singleton/geminate contrast.
As items in () show, certain verbs form their imperfective by preﬁxing a geminate
/tt/ to the basic stem, allowing for the contrast with corresponding perfective verbs
word-initially. These words frequently occur in spontaneous speech at the onset of
turn-taking within a dialogue.
()
Stem
Perf, f
Impf
[asi]
[tasi]
[ttasi]
‘to take’
[ara]
[tara]
[ttara]
‘to write’
[ini]
[tini]
[ttini]
‘to say’
Different studies have described the Tashlhiyt geminate/singleton differences
(Applegate ; Ouakrim , ; Louali and Puech ; Ridouane ,
, ). All these studies agree that duration is the most important acoustic or
articulatory parameter distinguishing singletons from geminates. Ridouane (),
based on acoustic and articulatory data, provided insights on the way gemination is
implemented, in terms of durational or non-durational information, for voiceless/
voiced stops and fricatives in three within-word positions: initial, intervocalic and
ﬁnal. We focus here on the word-initial position.
The acoustic data showed that durational differences between singletons and
geminates were robustly maintained for voiced stops and voiced or voiceless fricatives.
Characteristics other than closure duration also distinguished stop geminates from
singletons, but less consistently. Release duration was not signiﬁcantly affected by
the presence or absence of gemination as far as voiceless stops were concerned.
However, signiﬁcant differences of release duration were found between the two series

Ridouane and Hallé

of voiced stops: geminates had longer release durations than singletons (> ms).
This difference was most probably a consequence of the devoicing that might
affect geminate voiced stops. The tendency for geminate stops to devoice, due to
aerodynamic constraints, also resulted in Fdifferences between vowels following
geminates and vowels following singletons. These Fdifferences, however, were
highly speaker-dependent in the sense that only speakers with the most frequently
devoiced realizations of geminate stops exhibited Fdifferences. In addition,
geminate voiceless stops tended to have higher release amplitudes compared to
their singleton counterparts. For this acoustic correlate, however, the singleton/
geminate difference was only marginally signiﬁcant, and was quite variable across
subjects.
In addition to acoustic data, Ridouane () reported EPG data on tongue–palate
contact duration for voiceless singleton and geminate stops in utterance-initial
position. The purpose of collecting EPG data was to determine whether the duration
contrast was articulatorily maintained in this position, even though it was not
reﬂected by acoustic differences. Results showed that utterance-initial geminate
stops systematically maintained longer tongue–palate contact than their singleton
counterparts. These timing differences were larger in utterance-initial position
(ms and ms for singletons and geminates, respectively) than utterance-medial
position (ms and ms for singletons and geminates, respectively).
The EPG data analysed in Ridouane () were limited to contact duration
information for word-initial voiceless stops. We report here additional analyses,
and include data on word-initial voiced stops and voiced/voiceless fricatives. The
data were collected using the EPG system developed at Reading University
(Hardcastle et al. ). The pseudopalate of this system contained silver elec-
trodes in eight rows, with six electrodes on the ﬁrst row and eight on each of
the seven other rows. The contact between tongue and hard palate was recorded at
Hz sampling rate. Due to the coverage area of the artiﬁcial palate and the nature
of the consonant contact, only coronal stops and fricatives were examined. The word
items recorded are presented in (). Items in (a) were presented in two different
prosodic environments: (i) utterance-initially as a word spoken in isolation, and
(ii) utterance-medially within a carrier sentence in which the word preceding the
target word ended in a vowel, [inna ___ jat twalt] ‘he said ___ once’. Items in (b)
were produced utterance-medially. A male Tashlhiyt native speaker repeated each
item twelve times. In the utterance-initial context, he was asked to produce the
isolated words, starting with the mouth slightly ajar so that there was no linguopalatal
contact prior to word onset.
()
a. [tid]
‘ewe’
[ttid]
‘soap’
[tut]
‘she hit’
[ttut]
‘forget him’
[tili]
‘ewe’
[ttili]
‘have, imp’
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


b. [diʁ]
‘with us’
[ddiʁ]
‘I went’
[sir]
‘go away’
[ssir]
‘shoelace’
[zid]
‘go forward’
[zzit]
‘oil’
This electropalatographic investigation aims at examining additional possible cues to
gemination in terms of gestural conﬁguration. Speciﬁcally, we look at whether the
tongue–palate contact duration differences are accompanied by contact area differ-
ences, in line with what has been reported, for example, in Italian (Payne ) and
Cypriot Greek (Armosti ). Two measures are used to estimate the amount of
contact during the closure phase of each obstruent (excluding release phase for
stops). ‘Area’ measures the mean percentage of activated electrodes during the
closure phase at the constriction area deﬁned by the four ﬁrst rows from the front
of the palate (rows –: electrodes). ‘Max’ measures the percentage of activated
electrodes, at the same constriction area, for the frame during which maximum
contact occurred. These two measures of contact area are illustrated in Figure ..
Note that the patterns shown in Figure .correspond to snapshots at a single point
in time, and thus provide no information about tongue movement.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
66
66
66
44
44
22
22
77
77
88
88 88
88
77
77
77 77
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100 41
12
12
75
79
79
58
75
87
87
62 29 45 83
83
95
95
95
95 95
95
91
91
91
91
91
95
87
87
33
41
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Singleton /t/ (tili) 
Geminate /tt/ (ttid)
Amount of contact area for /t/
Amount of contact area for /tt/
Area (53%)
Max (63%)
Area (74%) 
Max (100%)
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.4
Constriction 
area
FIGURE .Illustrative examples of tongue–palate contact proﬁle during the production of /t/
and /tt/ (above) and representative palatograms illustrating the two measures used (constriction
area = ﬁrst rows).
2 As has been shown for Japanese (Löfqvist ), the average speed of the tongue movement during the
stop closure is slower in geminate than singleton lingual consonants, most likely to maintain the contact
between the tongue and the palate for a longer time.

Ridouane and Hallé

The pattern illustrated in Figure ., in which the contacted area for geminated
stops often reaches four rows, may be interpreted, following Payne (), as possibly
indicating a more palatalized vocal tract conﬁguration for these stops. The amount of
contact at the constriction area for utterance-initial singleton vs. geminate voiceless
stops is shown in Table .. Geminate voiceless stops are systematically produced
with a larger amount of contact than their singleton counterparts, activating %
more electrodes than singletons. These differences hold for both the ‘Area’ and ‘Max’
measures. Given that these two measures yield virtually identical results with respect
to the differences and similarities between singletons and geminates, we only report
the ‘Max’ data in the following.
Figure .shows that contact area differences between singleton and geminate
word-initial voiceless stops also hold in utterance-medial position. The tongue–
palate contact area is more important overall—especially for singletons—in
utterance-initial than in utterance-medial position, suggesting some articulatory
strengthening at the edges of prosodic domains (Fujimura ; Fougeron and
Keating ; Cho and Keating ). The absence of clear differences between
geminates depending on position is probably a consequence of their having the
potential to reach the upper bound limit of number of electrodes activated at the
constriction area.
Voiced stops, in addition to duration differences, also display contact area differ-
ences between singletons and geminates, as shown in Figure .. These differences,
however, are not as large as for voiceless stops (%, compared to % for voiceless
stops). Fricatives, on the other hand, do not display singleton vs. geminate contact
area differences, be they voiced or voiceless.
To sum up, the most systematic acoustic and articulatory correlate distinguishing
word-initial geminates from their singleton counterparts is duration. For voiceless
stops, however, the temporal differences between singletons and geminates, although
clearly realized at the articulatory level, do not translate into acoustic output cues.
The question thus arises as to whether and how the contrast is recovered in
perception by Tashlhiyt native speakers.
TABLE .. Percentage of electrode activation in the constriction area for utterance-
initial singleton vs. geminate voiceless dental stops in three minimal pairs (SDs
within parentheses)
AREA
MAX
Singleton
Geminate
Singleton
Geminate
tid vs. ttid
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.()
tili vs. tilli
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
tut vs. ttut
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
tid-ttid
diR-ddiR
sir-ssir
zid-zzit
% electrodes activated
Singleton
Geminate
FIGURE .Percentage of electrodes activated at the constriction area in singleton and
geminate obstruents in utterance-initial position. Error bars represent standard deviation
([R] in the pair diR-ddiR stands for the voiced uvular fricative [ʁ]).
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
% electrodes activated
Phrase-initial
Phrase-medial
Singleton
Geminate
FIGURE .Percentage of electrodes activated at the constriction area in singleton and
geminate voiceless stops in phrase-initial and phrase-medial positions. Error bars represent
standard deviation.

Ridouane and Hallé

.Word-initial geminates: perception
A few studies have examined the perception of gemination contrasts in Tashlhiyt
(Louali and Puech ; Ouakrim ). In intervocalic position, duration was
unsurprisingly found to be the most important cue allowing for this contrast to be
perceived. Using a AFC forced-choice identiﬁcation paradigm for the two word
pairs [aggar]-[agar] and [ittel]-[itel], Louali and Puech found that, in addition to the
clearly dominant duration cue, other parameters, such as preceding vowel duration
and stop release amplitude, might serve as secondary cues. With respect to the word-
initial singleton/geminate contrast, Ouakrim () conducted a perceptual study
examining the following minimal pair: [tutas] ‘she hit for him’ vs. [t*utas]3 ‘you
forgot for him’. His results showed that the average proportion of correct responses
to this pair of words was % (% of correct identiﬁcation for [tutas] and % for
[t*utas]), suggesting that native speakers can reliably perceive the singleton/geminate
contrast in the absence of acoustic duration differences. In addition, Ouakrim cross-
spliced the release portions (corresponding to VOT) of singleton /t/s and geminate /
tt/s. In a second manipulation, he cross-spliced the vowels following the singleton
and geminate stops, leaving the other acoustic parameters unchanged. The aim of
these manipulations was to determine whether VOT and/or the following vowel play
a signiﬁcant role in the perception of the singleton/geminate contrast for voiceless
stops in utterance-initial position. His results showed that after manipulating the two
items, the listeners also tended to cross the original meanings of the pair. After cross-
splicing the VOT, the form [tutas] was understood by % of the subjects as [t*utas],
and the form [t*utas] was understood by % as [tutas]. Virtually the same pattern
was obtained after cross-splicing vowels. Both VOT and following vowel thus bias
native listeners’ judgments and affect the identiﬁcation of the words in their original
meaning. However, neither of these two parameters alone could be considered a
reliable cue. According to Ouakrim, the perception of the contrast is determined by
the combination of both cues.
Ouakrim’s perceptual data, however, are limited (pair) and rest on a faulty
morphological analysis of the minimal pair examined. In Tashlhiyt, the form meaning
‘you forgot for him’ is /t-ttu-t = as/4 (nd masculine singular-forget-nd masculine
singular = dative rd masculine singular). That is to say the initial dental stop is a
sequence of a singleton /t/ followed by a geminate /tt/. Such sequences can be
produced in two ways in free variation: either with the release of the ﬁrst singleton
before the closure of the geminate (i.e. [t tt]) or with an uninterrupted coronal
closure which, in non-initial position, is argued to be heard as a sequence of
3 In Ouakrim’s view the contrast dealt with here is one of tenseness, not gemination. He transcribed
‘tense’ /t/ as /t*/, whereas we use double consonants to transcribe gemination.
4 Or /t-t*u-t/ to use Ouakrim’s transcription.
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


three consonants [ttt] (Dell and Elmedlaoui : –). The critical issue we wish to
address is thus far from being clearly settled: can native speakers perceive a contrast
which is implemented articulatorily but is not clearly cued acoustically?
We conducted a discrimination AXB test to determine whether and how Tashlhiyt
native speakers/listeners can perceive their voiceless stop gemination contrast in
word-initial position. We predict that native listeners can distinguish [gar] from
[ggar] because voicing murmur duration can serve as a reliable acoustic cue, and all
the more so because it may be accompanied by additional cues such as partial
devoicing, release duration, and Fperturbations. Native listeners must also be
able to discriminate [ﬁt]-[fﬁt] based on friction noise duration differences. We expect
that native listeners perform optimally, i.e. near ceiling level, on these two contrasts.
For contrasts such as [tili]-[ttili], listeners may give conﬂicting and unreliable
perceptual judgements, given the absence of robust acoustic cues to gemination, in
particular closure duration. It may be the case, however, that the duration contrast is
enhanced utterance-initially: in this position, native speakers may increase the
perceptual distance between singletons and geminates by enhancing segmental or
suprasegmental correlates. Indeed, many studies have found enhancement in pros-
odic domain beginnings for both articulatory (Fougeron and Keating ; Cho and
Jun ; Cho ; Cole et al. ) and acoustic cues (Cho , ; Cole et al.
; Georgeton and Fougeron ). To test for this possibility, we used different
prosodic contexts intended to affect differently the perceptual salience of the voice-
less stop singleton/geminate contrast.
..Method
...Participants
Twenty-three students (aged –, mean ., SD ., 
females) at the University Ibn Zohr in Agadir, Morocco, volunteered to participate
in the experiment. All were native speakers of Tashlhiyt and none reported any hearing
deﬁcit or any kind of language impairment. All of the participants reported being able
to speak Moroccan Arabic, Standard Arabic, and French, as is common for native
Tashlhiyt undergraduates. Some of the participants were able to speak English as well.
...Stimuli
A Tashlhiyt native speaker, who was unaware of the purpose of
the study, was recorded as he produced, among other items, the minimal-pair words
of the nine word-initial singleton/geminate contrasts shown in (). The productions
were recorded using a Marantz PMD solid-state recorder at a sampling rate of
.kHz, and a Shure SMA head-mounted microphone. Four tokens of each
item were retained as experimental stimuli. The minimal pairs in the four contrasts
of Set were recorded in four sentential contexts intended to manipulate the percep-
tual salience of the singleton/geminate contrast: (i) ‘embedded’, i.e. occurring phrase-
medially within a neutral carrier sentence (inna __ jat twalt, ‘he said __ once’);
(ii) ‘isolation’, i.e. in citation form in utterance-initial position (i.e. in isolation),

Ridouane and Hallé

where the word is equivalent to an entire sentence; (iii) ‘focused’, i.e. utterance-initially,
where one minimal pair word is stressed against the other (e.g. ttili as nniʁ maʃi tili: ‘I
said ttili, not tili’); and (iv) ‘unfocused’, utterance-ﬁnally, which was the unstressed
counterpart of the stressed, focused word in the sentences used in (iii). The minimal
pairs in Set and Set contrasted word-initial singleton vs. geminate voiced stops and
fricatives, respectively. These pairs allowed for the comparison of the perceptual
impact of clear acoustic closure-duration differences in voicing murmur or frication
noise against that of the minimal acoustic cues accompanying word-initial voiceless
stops. For these voiced stops and fricatives, the minimal pairs were recorded in the
‘isolated’ context only. Word stimuli were extracted from their context for presentation
in the perception experiments.
()
Stimuli used for the perceptual experiments
Set . Words contrasting voiceless stops
tut
‘she hit’
vs.
ttut
‘forget him’
tili
‘ewe’
vs.
ttili
‘have, imp’
kijji
‘you’
vs.
kkijji
‘take a road for me’
ks
‘feed on’
vs.
kks
‘take off ’
Set . Words contrasting voiced stops
bi
‘owner’
vs.
bbi
‘cut’
gar
‘bad’
vs.
ggar
‘be last’
diʁ
‘with us’
vs.
ddiʁ
‘I went’
Set . Words contrasting voiceless fricatives
ﬁt
‘give it’
vs.
fﬁt
‘pour it’
sir
‘go’
vs.
ssir
‘shoelace’
Acoustic measurements were run on the retained stimuli. As expected, the clearest
cue to gemination is durational: ms (SD ) for singleton voiced stops vs. ms
(SD .) for their geminate counterparts, and ms (SD .) for singleton
fricatives vs. ms (SD .) for their geminate counterparts. These duration
differences were all signiﬁcant at the p <.level, according to two-tailed t-tests
in which geminates and singletons were compared for each of the two types of
contrast (word-initial voiced stops: t()=.; word-initial fricatives: t()=.).
They were accompanied by subtler differences, some of which reached signiﬁcance
on two-tailed t-tests. For instance, in the voiced-stop onset series, both the
mean intensity and Fof the voicing murmur were higher in singleton than
in geminate consonants (F: > Hz, t() = ., p<.; energy: > dB,
t() = ., p<.). Geminate and singleton word-initial fricatives did not differ in
terms of mean energy (.vs. .dB, |t|<) and there was a marginal trend for
geminate fricatives to have a lower mean Harmonic-to-Noise ratio (HNR) than
singleton fricatives (.<.dB), t() = ., p = .. Intensity and HNR were
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


computed with the Intensity and Harmonicity functions implemented in Praat
(Boersma and Weenink ), using a ms analysis time step and the default settings
for the other parameters.
Since closure duration for voiceless stops cannot be measured from the acoustic
signal, the measurements for these stops are limited to the stop release and to the
following vowel. We ran a series of by-item analyses of variance instead of simple
t-tests since we had to take an additional factor into account: sentence context.
Context (‘embedded’, ‘isolated’, ‘unfocused’, ‘focused’) and Gemination (singleton
vs. geminate) were both between-item factors, and Item was the random variable (for
each of the four voiceless stop contrasts, repetitions of the geminate and of the
singleton consonant item). Stop release intensity as well as vowel intensity were
greater for geminates than singletons. This difference, indexed by the Gemination
factor, was signiﬁcant for all sentence contexts at least at the p<.level, except the
‘embedded’ context, for which release intensity was only marginally larger for
geminate than singleton stops, F(,) =., p = .. We also computed the stop
release intensity relative to the following vowel, which might reveal different intensity
proﬁles for geminates and singletons. We ran a similar analysis of variance on the
relevant data, i.e. on the speech tokens containing a vowel, discarding the [ks]
and [kks] tokens. On this measure (release intensity minus vowel intensity) as the
dependent variable, Gemination was signiﬁcant for all four contexts, at least at the
p<.level, with a greater relative intensity for geminate than singleton stops (by
.dBs in average). These differences are illustrated in Figure .(left). Gemination
did not interact signiﬁcantly with Context, F(,)<. As for the four tokens of [ks]
and [kks], the same pattern obtained for the release intensity relative to the following
/s/, with a rather large .dB differential in average between [kk] and [k]. An analysis
restricted to the [ks] and [kks] tokens showed that this difference was signiﬁcant
overall, F(,) = ., p<.; it was also signiﬁcant for the ‘focused’ and
‘unfocused’ contexts but only marginal in the ‘embedded’ (F(,) = ., p = .)
embedded
focused
isolated
unfocused
embedded
focused
isolated
unfocused
Production Context
Production Context
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
48.4
38.5
48.0
36.8
46.9
39.2
41.0
36.4
VOT (ms)
–10
–14
–13.3
–11.6
–18
relative release intensity (dB)
–15.9
–12.4
–15.9
–13.1
–13.7
–11.4
singleton
geminate
singleton
geminate
FIGURE .(Left) Stop release intensity relative to vowel intensity, and (right) stop release
duration in the four sentence contexts, for singleton/geminate voiceless stops.

Ridouane and Hallé

and ‘isolated’ (F(,) =., p= .) contexts. (But note that the statistical power of
these comparisons was weak, due the small number of tokens.)
The only other measure on which geminate and singleton items differed signiﬁ-
cantly overall was stop release duration (i.e. VOT), with longer VOTs (by .ms on
average) for singleton than for geminate voiceless stops, F(,) = ., p<.. Yet
this difference was signiﬁcant only in the ‘focused’ context (> ms), F(,)=.,
p<., marginal in the ‘embedded’ context (vs. ms), F(,) = ., p= .,
and non-signiﬁcant in the other two contexts (see also Figure .(right)). No
signiﬁcant singleton/geminate differences were found for vowel duration (or /s/
duration for [ks]-[kks]), vowel mean F, vowel HNR, or release HNR.
...Procedure
The four sentential-context versions of the four contrasts in Set 
were split in two subsets: one comprised the ‘focused’ and ‘unfocused’ stimuli
contrasts, the other comprised the ‘isolated’ and ‘embedded’ stimuli contrasts. One
group of subjects received the former subset and another group of subjects
received the latter subset. The motivation for this restriction to two sentence contexts
for the voiceless stops per subject group was, mainly, to limit the experimental
session to a reasonable duration and avoid an overwhelming majority of difﬁcult
trials (as a pilot study showed that the voiceless stop contrasts indeed were difﬁcult).
Each subject of either group was thus presented with contrasts: for Set (word
pairs * sentential contexts), and for Sets and , respectively (these latter
contrasts were recorded in the ‘isolated’ context only). Each contrast was presented
four times in each of the four possible AXB combinations (AAB, ABB, BBA, and
BAA) so that the four different tokens of each item appeared equiprobably in each
position within the AXB triplets. Each subject was thus tested on (× × ) test
trials, which were presented in blocks of trials. The test trials were preceded by
training trials on the ﬁve following contrasts, none of which appeared as a test
trial: daʁ-taʁ, dar-tar, kijji-gijji, jutid-juttid, and tid-ttid. (Only the latter was a word-
initial singleton/geminate voiceless stop contrast.)
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room and received the speech
stimuli through professional-quality covering headphones. On each AXB trial, par-
ticipants were presented with three stimuli and had to indicate whether the second
stimulus X matched better the ﬁrst or the third stimulus, by pressing the response
key labelled ‘’ or ‘’. The inter-stimulus (offset to onset), inter-trial, and inter-block
intervals were set to s, s, and s, respectively. Response times were measured
from the onset of the X stimulus as in, for example, Hallé and Best (). Note
that this choice has no biasing consequence on the RT data since RTs measured
from the B or A stimulus would simply be shifted by about ,ms in one
direction or the other relative to the RTs we measured. The raw RT data were
cleaned up by discarding RT values longer than .s (more than s after B’s onset)
or shorter than .s (before B’s onset). About .% of the RT data were discarded in
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


this way. The discrimination experiment was run using the DMDX software (Forster
and Forster ).
..Results
Figure .shows the correct discrimination rate and correct discrimination response
time (RT) data for the three types of word-initial consonants, averaged across all
sentence contexts for the voiceless stop contrasts. Figure .shows the sole voiceless
stop data (correct discrimination and RT) according to the sentence context in which
stimuli were produced. Participants encountered substantial difﬁculty with the
voiceless stops, whereas, as predicted, they performed near ceiling level for voiced
stops (.%) and fricatives (.%). In the latter contrasts, the large differences
either in voicing murmur or in friction noise duration presumably were sufﬁciently
reliable cues for correct discrimination. In contrast, the voiceless-stop contrasts were
discriminated by our native Tashlhiyt listeners quite poorly, although above chance
level (.%, p<.on a t-test comparison with the % chance level). The
accuracy data were corroborated by the RT data, with longer RTs for voiceless
stops than voiced stop or fricative contrasts by some ms.
The sentence context in which the voiceless-stop stimuli were produced substan-
tially affected accuracy, as well as (though to a lesser extent) RTs. The best perform-
ance was obtained for the ‘focused’ and the ‘isolated’contexts, suggesting that
additional acoustic cues to underlying articulation are used in these two contexts,
which both occurred in utterance-initial position. The acoustic measurements we
reported in section ...indeed suggest rather subtle differences enhancing the
singleton/geminate contrasts in these contexts compared to the others.
To substantiate these observations, we ran two kinds of analyses on the accuracy
and RT data. In the ﬁrst, more important one, we compared the three types of
contrasts (Figure .). In the second one, we focused on the voiceless-stop contrasts
and compared the four types of sentence contexts (Figure .). We begin with the
ﬁrst analysis across contrast types.
100
90
80
70
60
50
% correct discrimination
Response Times (ms)
voiceless stop
voiced stop
fricative
voiceless stop
voiced stop
fricative
Consonant Type
Consonant Type
61.7
96.9
95.2
2337
2136
2184
2400
2300
2200
2100
FIGURE .(Left) Correct discrimination rate and (right) RT for word-initial singleton/
geminate contrasts for the three onset consonant types. Error bars represent standard errors.

Ridouane and Hallé

Because we used two groups of subjects, one group receiving the voiceless-stop
contrasts from two sentence contexts and the other group receiving the voiceless-stop
contrasts from the two other sentence contexts, both groups otherwise receiving the
same voiced-stop and fricative contrasts, it was not possible to conduct a straight-
forward by-subject analysis of variance in either kind of analysis. For the analysis
bearing on the three contrast types, we opted for a conservative simpliﬁcation of the
data, whereby only the ‘isolated’ context in one subject group and the ‘focused’
contexts in the other group were retained. This solution made the comparison
between the voiceless stop contrasts and the two other contrast types more stringent
because the retained contexts induced the best performances on voiceless-stop
contrasts, hence minimizing the putative difference with the two other contrast
types. On the relevant subjects analyses of variance (with Fvalues), Contrast type
(voiceless stop, voiced stop, or fricative) was a within-subject factor, and Group
(‘focused’ vs. ‘isolated’ group) was a between-subject factor; Subject was the random
factor, and accuracy rate or RT (for correct responses) the dependent variables. For
accuracy rate, Group was far from signiﬁcance, F(,) < , showing that both
groups behaved very similarly; Contrast type was highly signiﬁcant, F(,)
= ., p<., indicating large differences across contrast types. This was
largely due to the much poorer performance on voiceless-stop than either voiced-
stop or fricative contrasts (voiced stops: F(,) = ., p<.; fricatives: F(,)
= ., p<.). The difference between voiced-stop and fricative contrasts (.vs.
.%) was only marginally signiﬁcant, F(,) = ., p= .. These differences
were paralleled by the RT data in which Contrast type was highly signiﬁcant,
F(,) = ., p<.; RTs were signiﬁcantly longer on voiceless-stop than either
voiced-stop or fricative contrasts (voiced stops: F(,) =., p<.; frica-
tives: F(,) =., p<.). The subjects also responded faster to the voiced-
stop than to the fricative contrasts (,vs. ,ms), F(,)= ., p<..
These by-subject analyses were corroborated by by-item analyses (with Fvalues).
In these analyses, there were no (subjects’) Group factor, and Contrast type was a
53.9
62.2
63.2
67.9
Response Times (ms)
% correct discrimination
2500
2400
2300
2200
embedded unfocused
isolation
embedded unfocused
isolation
focused
Sentence Context
Sentence Context
80
70
60
50
40
30
focused
2371
2357
2329
2346
FIGURE .(Left) Correct discrimination rate and (right) RT for word-initial voiceless stops in
the four sentence contexts.
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


between-item factor. In order to make the comparison between voiceless-stop and
other contrast types as stringent as possible, we only retained the voiceless-stop data
for the ‘focused’ context, for which the performance was highest. Contrast type
(three levels as in the subjects analysis) was a between-item factor, with *items
(contrasts: ks-kks, tut-ttut, kijji-kkijji, tili-ttili; trials per contrast) for the voice-
less stop, *(contrasts: bi-bbi, diʁ-diʁʁ, gar-ggar) for the voiced stop, and *
(contrasts: ﬁt-fﬁt, sir-ssir) for the fricative contrasts. Contrast type was highly
signiﬁcant, F(,) = ., p<., due to the much poorer performance on
voiceless-stop than either voiced-stop or fricative contrasts (voiced stops: F(,)
= ., p<.; fricatives: F(,) =., p<.). The advantage for
voiced-stop over fricative contrasts was found signiﬁcant, F(,) =., p<..
Here again, the RT data yielded parallel results: Contrast type was highly signiﬁcant,
F(,) = ., p<.; RTs were signiﬁcantly longer on voiceless-stop than either
voiced-stop or fricative contrasts (voiced stops: F(,) =., p<.; frica-
tives: F(,) = ., p<.). Voiced-stop and fricative contrasts did not signiﬁ-
cantly differ, F(,) = ., p = ..
In the second series of analyses, we focused on the performance of Tashlhiyt
Berber listeners on the sole voiceless stops, comparing the four sentence contexts.
Here again, the experimental design precludes a classic by-subject analysis of vari-
ance with Context as a between- or within-subject factor for the reason explained
above. Only pairwise comparisons between two Contexts could be performed
(within-subjects: ‘focused’ vs. ‘unfocused’ and ‘isolated’ vs. ‘embedded’; between-
subjects: all the other Context pairs). However, an items analysis can be performed
with Context (the four sentence contexts for the voiceless stop contrasts) and
Contrast (ks-kks, tut-ttut, kijji-kkijji, and tili-ttili) as two between-item factors. (For
each Context×Contrast combination, there were items, i.e. trials.). Context was
signiﬁcant, F(,) = ., p<.; this was mainly due to the lower performance
on the ‘embedded’ than the other Contexts, all ps<.. Performance was higher
for the ‘focused’ than the other three contexts pooled, F(,) = ., p<., but
did not differ signiﬁcantly from the ‘unfocused’ and ‘isolated’ contexts. These
patterns—lowest performance for ‘embedded’ and highest performance on ‘focused’
contexts—were supported by the pairwise comparisons run on the subjects data (e.g.
performance was lower on the ‘embedded’ than the numerically second worse
‘unfocused’ context, F(,) =., p<.). Contrast was signiﬁcant, F(,)
= ., p<., but did not interact with Context, F(,) =., p = .. This was
due to the better performance on ks-kks than on the other contrasts (pairwise
comparisons: all ps<.; comparison with the three other contrasts pooled:
F(,) = ., p<.). Note that this ﬁts well with the larger difference in relative
intensity with ks-kks (~.dB) than the other three contrasts (~.dB). As for the
RT data, the differences were less consistent. Numerically, the ‘embedded’ context
yielded the slowest and the ‘isolated’ context the fastest responses. The ‘embedded’ vs.

Ridouane and Hallé

‘isolated’ difference was the only signiﬁcant one, F(,) =., p<.. To sum up
the data within the voiceless stop contrasts, the ‘focused’ and, to a lesser extent, the
‘isolated’ context induced a somewhat better performance than the other contexts.
More consistently, the ‘embedded’ context yielded the poorest performance.
Our results suggest that listeners may use enhancing acoustic cues (i.e. mainly
release intensity relative to following vowel or fricative intensity) to better discrim-
inate the voiceless stop singleton/geminate contrast in utterance-initial position.
These cues, however, only help a little, as can be seen in Figures .and .. The
performance of Tashlhiyt native listeners on the voiceless-stop contrasts is still quite
poor even in the most favourable ‘focused’ context, compared to their near-ceiling
performance on voiced stops and fricatives, typical of native listening performance.
.Summary and general discussion
This study has investigated the relationship between the production and perception of
word-initial singleton/geminate contrast in Tashlhiyt obstruents, with a special focus
on voiceless stops. Previous studies on the acoustics and articulation of Tashlhiyt
geminate obstruents have shown that this contrast is mainly implemented through
longer durations for geminates than for their singleton counterparts (Applegate ;
Ouakrim , ; Louali and Puech ; Ridouane , , ). This holds
even for voiceless stops in utterance-initial position (Ridouane ). In addition to
this primary correlate, gemination can also be implemented with additional acoustic
cues. Geminate voiced stops, probably due to their longer duration, tend to have the
ﬁnal part of their closure partly or completely devoiced and exhibit differences with
singletons in terms of release duration and Fperturbation. Voiceless stops show
speaker-speciﬁc release amplitude differences between singletons and geminates.
Our current study provided additional articulatory and acoustic data. EPG data on
gestural conﬁguration showed that timing differences between singletons and gemin-
ates may be accompanied by spatial differences reﬂected by the amount of tongue–
palate contact. These spatial differences were observed for stops but not for fricatives.
Within stops, they were larger for voiceless than for voiced stops. Such difference
between voiced and voiceless stops might be aerodynamically motivated. Voicing
within geminate stops is difﬁcult to maintain, and even more difﬁcult in word-initial
position. To maintain voicing, the stop must be associated with a relatively large oral
cavity, which delays the equalization of transglottal air pressure that causes voicing
cessation (Ohala ). This aerodynamic constraint is not at play for geminated
voiceless stops. Their larger tongue–palate contact area could possibly be the auto-
matic consequence of longer contact duration. On this view, Tashlhiyt geminate
stops might not differ from their singleton counterparts in terms of underlying
gestural target, but simply have more time to reach this target. Consistent with this
account, there is little spatial difference in tongue–palate contact between singleton
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


and geminate fricatives, as the width of the airﬂow opening narrows down to two
columns in the ﬁrst row for both types of fricatives (although the passage tends to be
one electrode narrower for geminates in the second column). And indeed, duration
differences in tongue–palate contact for fricatives could not yield important spatial
differences, since there was less manoeuvring room in the articulation of these
segments: dental fricatives cannot be produced with a different tongue–palate contact
area without risking confusion with the alveopalatal fricatives. In other words,
speakers control tongue-tip location more strictly when producing /s/ so that /ʃ/ is
not produced instead.
The acoustic analysis run on the voiced-stop and fricative stimuli used in the
perception experiment conﬁrmed that duration was the clearest cue to gemination.
Duration was accompanied by subtler differences, both for voiced stops (a slightly
signiﬁcant lower mean energy and Fof the voicing murmur for geminates) and for
fricatives (a marginal trend for geminates to have a lower HNR). Voiceless stops, for
which the main acoustic cue—duration—is missing, did not pattern much differ-
ently. The only measures on which singleton and geminate items showed some
statistical differences were relative intensity of the release and VOT. Yet relative
intensity for prevocalic geminates was only .dBs greater, not reaching the JND
(just-noticeable difference) value of dB (Toole and Olive ), and VOT was less
than ms shorter in geminates only in the ‘focused’ context.
These results raise the question of how native speakers exploit these articulatory
and acoustic cues to perceive the gemination contrast, and how segment type and
sentential context affect their success at exploiting these cues. We conducted a
discrimination AXB test to address these questions. We focused more speciﬁcally
on how native listeners performed on voiceless stops, given the absence of acoustic
cues to the articulatory duration difference between singletons and geminates.
Results showed that Tashlhiyt listeners consistently performed near ceiling level
(more than % correct discrimination) on fricatives and voiced stops, as expected
for native listening. Duration differences in frication noise and voicing murmur thus
presumably were salient enough to allow native listeners to accurately distinguish [bi]
from [bbi] or [ﬁt] from [fﬁt], leaving little room for performance differences between
voiced stops and fricatives. For voiceless stops, however, native listeners were far
from reaching a comparable level of discrimination performance (less than %
correct discrimination). In the absence of acoustic cues to articulatory duration, the
available information (in the stop release) is clearly not sufﬁcient to elicit the level of
performance usually observed for native contrasts. Native listeners’ poor performance
on these items shows that speech contrasts cannot be accurately perceived in the
absence of clear acoustic cues in the speech signal, even if they are clearly implemented
in their articulation at the temporal and spatial levels.
Tashlhiyt listeners’ performance was affected by the context in which the word-
initial voiceless words were produced. The highest performance was obtained for the

Ridouane and Hallé

‘focused’ and the lowest for the ‘embedded’ condition. The two other conditions—
‘isolated’ and ‘unfocused’—led to slightly poorer performance than in the ‘focused’
condition. This variation of performance suggests that the available acoustic cues—
relative release intensity and, perhaps to a lesser degree, VOT differences—can be
used as secondary cues by native speakers/listeners to perceive the gemination
contrast when acoustic duration cues are absent. However, even though secondary
acoustic cues were enhanced in some strongly marked prosodic contexts, native
listeners were still unable to accurately perceive the contrast: their best performance
level (.% correct discrimination in the ‘focused’ condition) was still far from
ceiling level, and remained lower than their level of performance on the fricative and
voiced stop contrasts.
As suggested by Blevins (a), such poor perception performance on a contrast
is diagnostic either of its ongoing neutralization or of the strengthening of the
accompanying cues leading to a phonological reinterpretation. Here, geminate voice-
less stops could be on the way to being reinterpreted as tense consonants. The
scarcity of acoustic cues to word-initial voiceless gemination may not lead to
neutralization. The contrast is alive word-initially—exploited both by the lexicon
and the morphology—presumably because it is not limited to voiceless stops and
involves other obstruents, in which the closure/duration contrast is clearly audible.
It seems likely that the contrast is also maintained for its analogy with the clearly
identiﬁable geminated versions of the same voiceless stops when occurring in non-
utterance-initial position. Interestingly, native speakers/listeners are not unaware of
the increased difﬁculty with word-initial contrasts such as /t/-/tt/. A phonological
pun known in Agadir, and probably also in other parts of the Tashlhiyt area, plays
speciﬁcally on the perceptual ambiguity in (), suggesting that speakers/listeners have
a tacit knowledge of the physical pressures that shape lexical forms. The pun is
auditory and the joke depends on whether or not the word-initial dental stop is
produced/heard as a singleton (a) or geminate (b) stop.
()
a. [iqqdr a tili] ‘Probably, oh ewe’ (‘ewe’ is used here in the sense of ‘coward’)
b. [iqqdr a ttili] ‘It could be’
The production and perception results of this study bear on the issue of the
phonological representation of gemination in Tashlhiyt. There is an ongoing debate
on whether this contrast is one of length or tenseness. This debate, which is also
found in the analysis of different unrelated languages (e.g. Ham , Kraehenmann
on High Alemannic and Swiss German; Han , Kim , and references
therein, on the geminate vs. tense analysis of the Korean lenis/fortis contrast), has
been the source of much controversy in Berber phonology since the s (Saib ;
Guerssel ; Ouakrim ; Galand ; Dell and Elmedlaoui ; Ridouane
). Following a commonly accepted view (see Kenstowicz for a survey),
Tashlhiyt geminate consonants have been phonologically represented as single
Word-initial geminates: From production to perception


melodic units associated with two prosodic positions or X-slots (where X = timing
unit), as shown in () (Dell and Elmedlaoui ; Ridouane ).
()
X
X   X 
[αF]
[αF]
The distinction between a single-linked segment and its double-linked counterpart is
understood as signalling primarily a phonetic distinction of temporal structure
between singletons and geminates, all melodic features being the same. This repre-
sentation has been challenged by some authors who consider that both /tt/ and /t/ are
simple segments that differ in one distinctive feature (Ouakrim ; Galand ).
In their view, the feature involved in this contrast is [tense], used in the sense of
greater articulatory energy: /tt/ is [+tense] and /t/ is [–tense]. A [+tense] represen-
tation of gemination predicts good perception performance, even in the absence of
duration differences. A two-X-slot representation, on the other hand, predicts that
the contrast cannot be reliably perceived in the absence of duration information. Our
production and perception data thus clearly support a two-X-slot representation.
This structural representation is reﬂected by the observed articulatory differences in
consonant closure duration. In the absence of acoustic cues to closure duration, the
contrast can no longer be accurately perceived. We showed that the absence of
acoustic cues to duration could be compensated for by secondary acoustic cues
such as higher stop release relative intensity for geminate than for singleton voiceless
stops. This correlate, which might be interpreted as associated with tense articulation,
indeed enhances the perceptual distance between singletons and geminates, but is not
yet salient enough for native listeners to accurately perceive the contrast at the
expected native listening level.

Ridouane and Hallé

4
Effects of duration and phonological
length of the preceding/following
segments on perception of the length
contrast in Japanese
HAJIME TAKEYASU AND MIKIO GIRIKO
.Introduction
Japanese has a phonological length contrast for both vowels (long vs. short) and
consonants (singleton vs. geminate), which is conveyed primarily by vowel duration
and by consonant constriction, respectively (Fujisaki et al. ; Fujisaki and Sugito
; Warner and Arai ). The phonological length contrast in Japanese is also
signalled by several secondary cues, including the duration of the vowel in the
preceding and/or following syllable (Toda ; Takeyasu and Giriko ), the F
contour of the vowel (Kinoshita et al. ; Takiguchi et al. ), and speaking rate
(Hirata and Lambacher ) for vowel length, and the duration of the preceding
vowel (e.g. Fujisaki and Sugito ; Watanabe and Hirato ), the phonological
length of the preceding vowel (Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko ; Kawagoe and
Takemura ), the duration of the following vowel (Fujisaki and Sugito ; Ofuka
et al. ; Idemaru and Guion-Anderson ), presence or absence of a consonant
(and its manner of articulation) in the preceding syllable (Sonu ), the Fcontour
of the preceding vowel (Kubozono et al. ), and speaking rate (Amano et al. ;
Amano and Hirata ) for consonant length. Previous studies on acoustic correlates
of the consonant length contrast also suggest that voice quality (H–H) and/or
intensity changes between the preceding and following vowels are possible perceptual
cues to the singleton/geminate distinction in Japanese (Idemaru and Guion ).
Among these factors, this chapter deals with the effects of the physical duration and
phonological length of the preceding vowel on the perception of consonant length and
the effects of the duration/length of the following consonant on the perception of
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Hajime Takeyasu and Mikio Giriko . First published by
Oxford University Press.

vowel length. We are especially interested in the direction of these effects: assimilative
(i.e. longer elements in the context are more likely to elicit ‘long’ perception of the
target) or contrastive (i.e. longer elements in the context are less likely to elicit ‘long’
perception of the target).
..Studies on temporal relationship between vowels and the following consonants
Cross-linguistically, vowels are phonetically shorter in a closed syllable than in an
open syllable (Closed Syllable Vowel Shortening (CSVS); Maddieson ), and this
contextual variation is also functional in speech perception as a contrastive effect
such that more ‘geminate’ responses are elicited when the vowel preceding the
consonant (in other words, the vowel in a closed syllable) has shorter duration
(van Dommelen a; Kingston et al. ; see Kawahara b for more refer-
ences). This type of parallelism between speech production and perception is also
observed in many other phonemic contrasts, such as the distinction between voice-
less and voiced obstruents (Denes ; Derr and Massaro ; Port and Dalby
), and the place of articulation of stops (Mann ) and fricatives (Mann and
Repp ).
Contrary to this widely attested ﬁnding, however, vowels are produced with longer
duration before geminates than before singletons in Japanese (Han ; Kawahara
a; Hirata ), and correspondingly an assimilative effect of preceding vowel
duration (i.e. longer preceding vowels elicit more geminate responses) is found in
speech perception (Ofuka et al. ; Sonu ; Takeyasu , ). For example,
Ofuka et al. () conducted an experiment in which native speakers of Japanese
were presented with four-syllable stimuli and were asked to decide whether they
heard /u.ta.ta.ne/ (singleton stop) or /u.tat.ta.ne/ (geminate stop). Ofuka et al. found
that longer duration of the preceding vowel shifted the singleton/geminate perceptual
boundary toward shorter closure durations. That is, listeners were more likely to judge
the stimuli as ‘geminate’ when the preceding vowel duration was longer. This type of
assimilative effect has also been found to hold with two- and three-syllable words
(Sonu ; Takeyasu ).
In light of the link between speech production and perception, assimilative effects
of preceding vowel duration on singleton/geminate judgements are compatible with
the fact that, in production, vowels are longer before geminates than before single-
tons in Japanese (Han ; Kawahara a; Hirata ; Idemaru and Guion
). However, the effects of preceding vowel duration have also been reported to be
contrastive (Fujisaki and Sugito ; Watanabe and Hirato ; Toda ;
Amano et al. ; Idemaru and Guion-Anderson ). In a perceptual experiment
reported by Toda (), for example, longer duration of vowels preceding obstru-
ents elicited fewer ‘geminate’ responses, resulting in a shift in the perceptual bound-
ary between singleton and geminate toward longer constriction durations. Table .,

Takeyasu and Giriko

TABLE .. Previous studies on the effects of the preceding vowel duration on the perception of geminates in Japanese (adapted
from Takeyasu with minor alterationsa)
Original word
Presentation of stimuli
Size of manipulation of
the preceding vowel
duration
Result (assimilative
or contrastiveb)
Remarks
Fujisaki and Sugito
()
/i(Qc)se/
/i(Q)ta/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
with and without
carrier sentence
ms
(.times)
Contrastive
Durations of segments other
than the obstruent and its
preceding vowel are also
manipulated
Watanabe and
Hirato ()
/a(Q)pa/
/a(Q)ta/
/a(Q)ka/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
Without carrier
sentence (?)
Durations of the
preceding vowels are
manipulated by selecting
tokens with different
speaking rates
Contrastive
Toda ()
/ka(Q)te–/d
/ri˺(Q)ka/
/i(Q)so–/
Method of limits
–ms
(times)
Contrastive
The effect of the preceding
vowel was found only in the /
ri˺(Q)ka/-series.
Ofuka et al. ()
/uta(Q)tane–/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
ms
(.times)
Assimilative
with carrier sentence
Amano et al. () /bi˺(Q)pa/
/gu˺(Q)ku/
/ku˺(Q)ku/
/ku˺(Q)to/
/ta˺(Q)pi/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
without carrier sentence
More than ms
(more than times)
Contrastive
The preceding vowel
durations were manipulated
in order to change the
perceived speaking rate.
Sonu ()
/a(Q)ka/
/sa(Q)ka/
/ra(Q)ka/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
with carrier sentence
Approximately ms
Assimilative
(continued)

TABLE .. Continued
Original word
Presentation of stimuli
Size of manipulation of
the preceding vowel
duration
Result (assimilative
or contrastiveb)
Remarks
Takeyasu ()
/pa˺ba(Q)su/
/pa˺ba(Q)ʃu/
Four-alternative forced
choice;
with and without
carrier sentence
ms
(.times)
Assimilative
Idemaru and
Guion-Anderson
()
/se˺(Q)ta/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
without carrier sentence
ms (Preceding vowel
durations ranging from
ms to ms)
Contrastive
The preceding vowel
durations include the frication
duration of /s/. The following
vowel durations were also
manipulated to range from
ms to ms.
Takeyasu ()
/ka(Q)ta–/
/ka˺(Q)ta/
/ki˺(Q)ta/
Two-alternative forced
choice;
without carrier sentence
ms
(.–.times)
Assimilative
a The last rows (Idemaru and Guion-Anderson ; Takeyasu ) were added by the current authors.
b Assimilative: longer durations of the preceding vowel elicit more ‘geminate’ responses (shift in the perceptual boundary between singleton and geminate stops toward
shorter closure durations); Contrastive: longer durations of the preceding vowel elicit fewer ‘geminate’ responses (shift in the perceptual boundary toward longer closure
durations)
c The symbol /Q/ stands for sokuon, the ﬁrst half of obstruent geminates.
d The symbol – represents no accentual fall within the word (i.e. the word is unaccented) while the symbol ˺ indicates the position of accentual fall.

adapted from Takeyasu () with minor alteration, summarizes the results of
previous studies on the perception of consonant length in Japanese in which duration
of a preceding vowel was manipulated.
..Confounding factors and interpretations
As already discussed, it has been shown that duration of the preceding vowel affects
the perception of phonological length of a following obstruent, but the direction of
the effect remains controversial. There seem to be several underlying factors, includ-
ing speaking rate and phonological length of the preceding vowel.
There is evidence of link between speech perception and production (Mann
; Mann et al. ), and the perception of geminates in Japanese is affected by
several factors including speaking rate (Amano et al. ; Amano and Hirata
) and phonological length of the preceding vowel (Kubozono, Takeyasu, and
Giriko ; Kawagoe and Takemura ), which is (at least in part) signalled by
the preceding vowel duration. Thus, Takeyasu () pointed out the possibility
that the two types of effects (assimilative and contrastive) result from different
mechanisms mediated by the preceding vowel duration. Since the size of the
durational lengthening of vowel before geminates in Japanese in speech production
is relatively small (Han ), and since most of the assimilative effects of preced-
ing vowel duration were obtained from experiments in which the size of the
durational manipulation of the preceding vowel was relatively small, Takeyasu
() argued that the assimilative effects of preceding vowel duration come
from a link between speech production and perception (Liberman and Mattingly
). Takeyasu () also pointed out the possibility that the contrastive effects
of preceding vowel duration might arise when the durational manipulation is large
enough to change the perceived speaking rate. Since a substantially longer duration
of the preceding vowel is evidence of a slower speaking rate, longer closure
durations can be accepted as corresponding to the singleton category, resulting
in a contrastive effect of preceding vowel duration. In fact, in some of the previous
studies that reported a contrastive effect of preceding vowel duration, this duration
was manipulated in order to examine the effects of speaking rate on the perception
of geminates (Fujisaki and Sugito ; Watanabe and Hirato ; Amano et al.
). If speaking rate is responsible for the attested contrastive effects in the
perception of consonant length in Japanese, the slower the speaking rate becomes
(i.e. the longer duration of the preceding vowel becomes), the larger the contrastive
effect should be.
Another possibility, which we focus on in this chapter, is that contrastive effects
occur when the duration of the preceding vowel increases substantially because the
preceding vowel is perceived as phonologically long. This hypothesis is based on
evidence from research on loanword adaption in Japanese. Kubozono, Takeyasu, and
Effects of duration and phonological length


Giriko () had native speakers of Japanese listen to stimuli1 and judge the
phonological length of the vowel and coda stop in the ﬁrst syllable of one- and
two-syllable words by choosing among four options, short V+singleton C, long V
+singleton C, short V+geminate C, and long V+geminate C, presented in Japanese
orthography. They reported that the proportions of ‘geminate’ responses were on
average % higher when the preceding vowel was judged to be a ‘short’ vowel than
when the preceding vowel was judged to be a ‘long’ vowel. Kawagoe and Takemura
() conducted a similar experiment using three series of English-like words
(CVC, CCVC, and CCVC (the ﬁrst consonant of CCVC removed)) uttered by a
male native speaker of American English in the carrier sentence ‘I say _ now.’
Listeners were asked to judge the phonological length of the vowel and coda stop.
Their results suggest that geminates are more likely to be perceived after short vowels
(.%) than after long vowels (.%), replicating the ﬁnding of Kubozono,
Takeyasu, and Giriko ().
There are two possible accounts for the effects of the perceived length of the
preceding vowel on the perception of geminates in Japanese. The ﬁrst is that the
decrease in the rate of geminate responses following a vowel perceived as phonologically
long is due to a phonological constraint that prevents phonologically long vowels from
co-occurring with geminates in the same syllable, as Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko
() and Kawagoe and Takemura () claim. The hypothesis is that the contrastive
effects of preceding vowel duration found in earlier studies is caused not by a phonetic
factor (duration of the preceding vowel) but by a phonological factor (perceived
phonological length of the preceding vowel), and that this phonological factor is
independent of the phonetic factors which are expected to cause assimilative effects.
The second possible account assumes that the effects of perceived length reported in
Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko () and Kawagoe and Takemura () actually
stem from a durational factor, not a phonological one. Since natural tokens were
presented as stimuli in these experiments, the durations of the stimuli and speaking rate
were not fully controlled. Therefore, it is possible that when listeners heard a stimulus that
had a long vowel duration, not only was the vowel judged to be a long vowel, but also the
speaking rate was perceived as slow. If so, listeners would more often hear singletons after
long vowels simply because the perceived speaking rate was slow. If this second hypothesis
is correct, the effect of the perceived length of the preceding vowel should disappear when
the durations of the preceding vowels and/or speaking rate are controlled.2
1 Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko () used three series of stimuli: a CVC-series, a CVCCVC-series,
and a CVCCVC-series. The CVC- and CVCCVC-series were natural tokens of one- or two-syllable
English-like nonsense words uttered without carrier sentences by a male native speaker of American
English, and the stimuli in the CVCCVC-series were one-syllable nonsense words created by deleting the
second syllable of the stimuli in the CVCCVC-series.
2 Another (third) hypothesis is that the effect of preceding vowel duration changes its direction
(assimilative/contrastive) with changes in vowel duration or some other factors (e.g. the magnitudes of

Takeyasu and Giriko

In sum, the effects of the preceding vowel’s duration/length have yet to be fully
explored. Most of the previous studies used a two-alternative forced choice (singleton
or geminate) design, which makes it impossible to determine whether listeners
perceived the phonological length of the preceding vowel as short or long. In
addition, the previous studies targeted only phonologically short vowels for dur-
ational manipulation. Therefore, it is unclear whether the effects of preceding vowel
duration, if any, also hold when the preceding vowel is phonologically long. Also, in
those experiments that reported effects of such phonological length, variation in
vowel duration in the stimulus sets was insufﬁcient to separate the effects of per-
ceived length from other possible factors, including preceding vowel duration.
Manipulating the duration of a preceding vowel could result in changing not only
the physical duration of the vowel itself but also the phonological length of the vowel
and/or the speaking rate, which are reported to affect judgements of geminacy. Since
previous studies on the contextual effects of preceding vowel duration differed from
each other in experimental design and did not take into account these confounding
factors, we cannot decide whether or not longer duration of a preceding vowel lowers
the perceptual boundary between singletons and geminates.
A more convincing test of the effect of preceding vowel duration/length in
Japanese requires an experiment in which native speakers of Japanese respond to a
set of stimulus continua with a sufﬁcient range of vowel and consonant durations
while controlling other confounding factors, and judge not only the phonological
length of consonants but also that of preceding vowels.
..Effects of the duration/length of the following consonant
on the perception of vowel length
Another contextual effect we discuss in the present study is in a sense the mirror-
image of preceding vowel duration/length. A number of studies have drawn
attention to forward effects of the preceding vowel duration on the perception of
consonant length in Japanese, but to date, as far as we know, no study has focused
on backward effects of the following consonants on the perception of preceding
vowel length. In light of experimental evidence that the perception of a target
phoneme is inﬂuenced by later-occurring information (Miller and Liberman ;
Elman ; Mann and Repp ; Mann et al. ; Ofuka et al. ; Wade and
Holt ; Takeyasu and Giriko ), it is worth exploring the effects of the
following consonant’s duration/length.
the duration ratios between the target and context, see Kawahara b). This hypothesis predicts that the
change in the direction of the effect is independent of perceived speaking rate and/or phonological length
of the vowel. The results of our experiment do not support this third hypothesis.
Effects of duration and phonological length


..Aims of the current study
In the study presented here, through perception and production experiments, we
examine whether both the duration and the length of each of the two segments in a
vowel+stop sequence have an impact on the perception of the phonological length of
the other segment.3 More speciﬁcally, the present study aims to clarify whether the
physical duration and phonological length of the preceding vowel independently
affect the perception of the phonological length of the following stop. It also attempts
to determine whether the effects of preceding vowel duration are assimilative or
contrastive. We then investigate whether the effects found in speech perception
correspond to the contextual durational variation of vowels and stops in speech
production in Japanese.
The structure of this chapter is as follows. Section .reports results of a percep-
tion experiment in which the durations of the vowel and stop closure in a two-
syllable word are simultaneously manipulated so that the stimuli consist of four
distinct categories: CV.CV ((phonologically) short vowel and singleton stop), CVV.
CV (long vowel and singleton stop), CVC.CV (short vowel and geminate stop), and
CVVC.CV (long vowel and geminate stop). Both forward and backward effects are
observed between the vowel in the ﬁrst syllable and the following stop, and the effects
of the durations of the vowel and stop are assimilative (i.e. the longer the duration of
the preceding vowel, the more geminate responses, and the longer the duration of the
following stop, the more long vowel responses). On the other hand, the effects of
the phonological length of the vowel and stop are contrastive (i.e. avoidance of a
phonologically long vowel and a geminate stop in the same syllable). Section .
presents the results of a production experiment and shows that the durational effects
observed in the perception experiment are in parallel to contextual variations in the
durations of the vowel and stop. Section .considers several other issues related to
the present study, and points out remaining problems.
.Experiment 1. Perception of vowel and consonant length in Japanese
Experiment was designed to investigate whether or not the effects of preceding
vowel duration are assimilative, and whether there are effects of a preceding vowel’s
phonological length, as perceived by listeners, on singleton/geminate judgements. By
having listeners choose from four options (CVCV, CVVCV, CVCCV, CVVCCV), we
attempted to ensure that a change in the duration of vowel or consonant would be
interpreted as a change in its phonological length. To further minimize the inﬂuence
of speaking rate, the stimuli were presented in a carrier sentence.
3 Throughout this chapter, by ‘stop duration’ we mean ‘closure duration of the stop’ unless otherwise
stated.

Takeyasu and Giriko

..Participants
Ten native speakers of Tokyo Japanese (females; ages –; mean = .)
participated in this experiment.
..Stimuli and procedure
Stimuli were created from a token of an unaccented nonsense word /papo/, uttered
by a female native speaker of Shizuoka Japanese in the carrier sentence ‘Kare-wa _ to
itta (He said _).’ First, the Fof the vowels in the ﬁrst and second syllable of the target
word was manipulated and held constant at Hz using the PSOLA manipulation
option in Praat (Boersma and Weenink ). Then, the duration of the ﬁrst vowel
was extended by copying pitch pulses of the vowel at zero-crossings to create a
continuum ranging from ms to ms in eight ms steps. Next, the duration of
the Cclosure (/papo/) of each step of the continuum was edited by embedding a
silent interval to range from ms to ms in eight ms steps, as summarized
Table ..
An experimental block was created from the resulting stimuli (Vdurations
× Cdurations). The stimuli were presented in the original carrier sentence via
headphones in random order. The block was presented ﬁve times to elicit a total of
responses (stimuli × blocks) from each participant. Listeners participated
individually and were asked to indicate whether they heard CVCV (/papo/), CVVCV
(/paRpo/), CVCCV (/paQpo/), or CVVCCV (/paRQpo/)4 by clicking one of four
buttons on the computer screen. Eight practice trials with four endpoint stimuli
(CVCV: V=ms, C= ms); CVVCV: V=ms, C=ms; CVCCV:
V=ms, C=ms; CVVCCV: V=ms, C=ms) preceded the ﬁrst
block of the experiment.
TABLE .. Stimulus durations
C(= /p/)
V(= /a/)
C(= /p/)
V(= /o/)
Closure: ms
VOT: ms
–ms
(in ms steps, items)
Closure: –ms
ms
(in ms steps, items)
VOT: ms
4 The symbol /R/ stands for the second half of long vowels, while the symbol /Q/ indicates the ﬁrst half
of obstruent geminates. For example, /paRpo/, /paQpo/, and /paRQpo/ are phonetically realized as [pa:po],
[pappo], [pa:ppo], respectively. This kind of -alternative forced-choice method with a superheavy syllable
word as one of the choices has been used by some other researchers (Takagi and Mann ; Kubozono,
Takeyasu, and Giriko ; Kawagoe and Takemura ), and Japanese listeners have been reported to
select superheavy syllable words with considerable frequency.
Effects of duration and phonological length


..Results
In order to examine whether the duration of the preceding vowel affects listeners’
judgements of the phonological length of the following stop, and whether the
duration of the following stop has an effect on the perception of the phonological
length of the preceding vowel, the data were separately analysed in terms of Clength
and Vlength. Listeners responses are classiﬁed as follows: ‘Singleton’ for ‘CVCV’
and CVVCV’; ‘Geminate’ for ‘CVCCV’ and ‘CVVCCV’; ‘Short V’ for ‘CVCV’ and
‘CVCCV’; and ‘Long V’ for ‘CVVCV’ and ‘CVVCCV’.
...Singleton/geminate stop perception
The perceptual boundaries for the
singleton/geminate distinction of Cat each Vduration were estimated by ﬁtting
probit functions to the identiﬁcation data, as shown in Figure .. In order to
examine whether perceived length of Vas well as Vduration inﬂuences the
singleton/geminate judgement of C, the identiﬁcation data shown in Figure .
were further divided into two subgroups according to the perceived length of V
(phonologically short/long), and the perceptual boundaries for Cat each V
duration in each subgroup were then estimated by ﬁtting probit functions, as
displayed in Figure .. Notice that some of the perceptual boundary values are not
shown in the ﬁgure because for some categories the number of responses was not
sufﬁcient to reliably estimate category boundaries, or responses are completely biased
toward only one of the two categories5 (see Table .for more details).
Figure .shows that changes in Vduration substantially affect the perception of
Clength, but the direction of the effect seems to be inconsistent. However, when the
perceived length of Vis taken into account (Figure .), Vduration clearly
manifests an assimilative effect: the perceptual boundary values in each subgroup
decrease as Vduration increases. It is also apparent that perceived length of V
exhibits a strong contrastive effect, contrary to Vduration.
A series of stepwise logistic regression analyses, with listeners’ response (Single (),
Geminate ()) as the dependent variable, duration of Cclosure and Vduration as
continuous independent variables, and perceived length of V(SHORT (), LONG ()) as
a nominal independent variable, revealed that the main effects of all the independent
variablesaresigniﬁcant (CClosure Duration:B = ., W2 = ., df = , p< .;
VDuration: B = ., W2 = ., df = , p < .; Perceived VLength:
B= –., W2 = .df = , p < .). An increase in the closure duration of
Cleads to more ‘Geminate’ responses, replicating previous studies. As for effects related
to V, longer Vduration increases ‘Geminate’ responses, while the proportion of
‘Geminate’ responses decreases when Vis perceived as phonologically long.
Adding interaction terms between variables did not substantially improve model
ﬁt, so they were not included in the model. Comparing goodness-of-ﬁt statistics
5 This is a condition in which perceptual boundary values cannot be calculated.

Takeyasu and Giriko

160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
184
V1 Duration (ms)
50% Perceptual Boundary for
Consonant Length
FIGURE .CClosure durations at % perceptual boundary of Clength for each V
duration (perceived length of Vnot controlled).
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
184
V1 Duration (ms)
50% Perceptual Boundary for
Consonant Length
Perceived V1 Length
NOT Controlled
Perceived V1 Length =
LONG
Perceived V1 Length =
SHORT
FIGURE .Cclosure durations at % perceptual boundary of Clength for each Vduration.
(The identiﬁcation data in Fig. .were divided into two subgroups according to the perceived
length of V(phonologically short/long), and for each subgroup, the perceptual boundaries for
Cat each Vduration were estimated by ﬁtting probit functions. The perceptual boundary
values shown in Fig. .are superimposed as a grey line.)
Effects of duration and phonological length


TABLE .. Percentages of ‘Geminate’ responses and perceptual boundary values
for C
(a) when perceived length of Vis ‘SHORT’
Perceived length of V1 = SHORT
C2 duration (ms)
Total
C2 duration at
50%  perceptual
boundary for
C2 length (ms)
56
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
V1 Duration 
(ms)
72
Single
50
50
47
8
0
0
0
0
155
97.7
Geminate
0
0
3
42
50
50
50
50
245
Total
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
400
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
6
84
100
100
100
100
61
88
Single
50
50
30
1
0
0
0
0
131
89.9
Geminate
0
0
20
49
50
49
50
50
268
Total
50
50
50
50
50
49
50
50
399
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
40
98
100
100
100
100
67
104
Single
50
44
6
0
0
0
0
0
100
82.5
Geminate
0
0
39
48
50
49
50
50
286
Total
50
44
45
48
50
49
50
50
386
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
87
100
100
100
100
100
74
120
Single
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
78.6
Geminate
0
0
9
37
48
49
48
49
240
Total
13
1
9
37
48
49
48
49
254
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
100
100
100
100
100
100
94
136
Single
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
3
14
18
16
25
76
Total
0
0
0
3
14
18
16
25
76
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
100
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
100
100
100
100
100
152
Single
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
100
100
100
168
Single
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
184
Single
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses

(b) when perceived length of Vis ‘LONG’
Perceived length of V1 = LONG
C2 duration (ms)
Total
C2 duration at
50% perceptual
boundary for
C2 length (ms)
56
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
V1 
duration 
(ms)
72
Singleton
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 % of 
‘Geminate’
responses
88
Singleton
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
104
Singleton
0
6
4
2
0
1
0
0
13
N.D.
Geminate
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
0
6
4
2
0
1
0
0
13
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
0
0
0
120
Singleton
35
48
41
12
1
0
0
0
137
147.2
Geminate
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
4
Total
36
48
41
12
1
1
1
1
141
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
3
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
3
136
Singleton
49
50
50
47
30
10
1
0
237
131.3
Geminate
1
0
0
0
4
21
29
24
79
Total
50
50
50
47
34
31
30
24
316
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
2
0
0
0
12
68
97
100
25
152
Singleton
49
50
50
50
24
6
2
2
233
123.2
Geminate
1
0
0
0
25
43
47
47
163
Total
50
50
50
50
49
49
49
49
396
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
2
0
0
0
51
88
96
96
41
168
Singleton
50
48
50
48
13
1
0
0
210
115.1
Geminate
0
2
0
0
37
49
50
50
188
Total
50
50
50
48
50
50
50
50
398
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
4
0
0
74
98
100
100
47
184
Singleton
50
50
50
49
13
1
1
0
214
117.5
Geminate
0
0
0
0
37
49
49
50
185
Total
50
50
50
49
50
50
50
50
399
% of 
"Geminate" 
responses
0
0
0
0
74
98
98
100
46
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Effects of duration and phonological length


among several models revealed that both the main effects of Vduration and
perceived length of V(and of course, Cclosure duration) are necessary to yield
sufﬁcient model ﬁt (Nagelkerke’s R2 = .). Deviance statistics (D) or –log
likelihood ratios suggest that the effect size of the perceived length of Vis
larger than that of Vduration (VDuration: D = .; Perceived VLength:
D = .).
...Short/Long vowel perception
The perceptual boundaries for the phono-
logical short versus long distinction of Vat each Cduration were estimated by
ﬁtting probit functions to the identiﬁcation data, as shown in Figure .. The
identiﬁcation data were further divided into two subgroups according to the per-
ceived length of C(singleton/geminate) to examine the effect of perceived length of
C, as well as that of Cduration, on the short/long judgement of V. The perceptual
boundaries for Vat each Cduration in each subgroup were then estimated by
ﬁtting probit functions, as displayed in Figure .. Some of the perceptual boundary
values are not shown in the ﬁgure for the reasons noted in the previous section (see
Table .for more details).
The ﬁgures show an overall tendency similar to that described in the previous
section. The direction of the effect of Cduration on the perceived length of V
seems to be inconsistent when perceived Clength is not controlled (Figure ., and
a grey line in Figure .), but Cduration exhibits an assimilative effect when the
perceived length of Cis taken into account (Figure .). Also, the perceived length
of Cseems to have strong contrastive effect, contrary to Cduration.
A series of stepwise logistic regression analyses were conducted, with listeners’
response (Short (), Long ()) as the dependent variable, Vduration and duration of
Cclosure as continuous independent variables, and perceived length of C
(SINGLETON (), GEMINATE ()) as a nominal independent variable.
Since the interaction between CDuration and Perceived CLength was found to
be signiﬁcant (B = –., W2 = ., df = , p < .), the data were further
divided into two groups according to the perceived length of C(‘Singleton’ or
‘Geminate’) and were analysed separately.
When the perceived length of Cwas ‘Singleton,’ the main effects of Vduration and
Cduration were signiﬁcant (VDuration: B = ., W2 = ., df = , p < .;
CDuration: B = ., W2 = ., df = , p < .), which means that an increase
in Vduration leads to more ‘Long’ responses, and that an increase in Cduration leads
to more ‘Long’ responses. In contrast, when the perceived length of Cwas ‘Geminate,’
only the main effect of Vduration was signiﬁcant (VDuration: B= ., W2 =
., df = , p < .; CDuration: B = ., W2 = ., df = , p = .(n.s.)).
That is, Cduration has an effect on the perception of Vlength only when the
perceived Clength is ‘Singleton’.

Takeyasu and Giriko

160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
56
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
C2 Duration (ms)
50% Perceptual Boundary for Vowel
Length
FIGURE .Vduration at % perceptual boundary of Vlength for each Cduration
(perceived length of Cnot controlled).
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
56
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
C2 Duration (ms)
50% Perceptual Boundary for Vowel
Length
Perceived C2 Length
NOT Controlled
Perceived C2 Length =
GEMINATE
Perceived C2 Length =
SINGLETON
FIGURE .Vduration at % perceptual boundary of Vlength for each Cduration. (The
identiﬁcation data in Fig. .were divided into two subgroups according to the perceived
length of C(singleton/geminate), and for each subgroup, the perceptual boundaries for Vat
each Cduration were estimated by ﬁtting probit functions. The perceptual boundary values
shown in Fig. .are superimposed as a grey line.)
Effects of duration and phonological length


TABLE .. Percentages of ‘Long’ responses and perceptual boundary values for V
(a) when perceived length of Cis ‘SINGLETON’
Perceived length of C2 =
SINGLETON
V1 Duration (ms)
Total
V1 duration at
50% perceptual
boundary for
V1 length (ms)
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
184
C2 
duration 
(ms)
56
Short
50
50
50
13
0
0
0
0
163
116.5
Long
0
0
0
35
49
49
50
50
233
Total
50
50
50
48
49
49
50
50
396
% 
of ‘Long’
responses
0
0
0
73
100
100
100
100
59
72
Short
50
50
44
1
0
0
0
0
145
110.2
Long
0
0
6
48
50
50
48
50
252
Total
50
50
50
49
50
50
48
50
397
%
of ‘Long’
responses
0
0
12
98
100
100
100
100
6
88
Short
47
30
6
0
0
0
0
0
83
104.7
Long
0
0
4
41
50
50
50
50
245
Total
47
30
10
41
50
50
50
50
328
% 
of ‘Long’
responses
0
0
40
100
100
100
100
100
75
104
Short
8
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
95.8
Long
0
0
2
12
47
50
48
49
208
Total
8
1
2
12
47
50
48
49
217
%
of ‘Long’
responses
0
0
00
100
100
100
100
100
96
120
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
1
30
24
13
13
81
Total
0
0
0
1
30
24
13
13
81
%
of ‘Long’
responses
100
100
100
100
100
100
136
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
1
1
0
10
6
1
1
20
Total
0
1
1
0
10
6
1
1
20
%
of ‘Long’
responses
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
152
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
1
4
Total
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
1
4
%
of ‘Long’
responses
100
100
100
100
168
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
Total
0
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
% 
of ‘Long’
responses
100
100

Takeyasu and Giriko

(b) when perceived length of Cis ‘GEMINATE’
Perceived length of C2 = 
GEMINATE
V1 Duration (ms)
Total
V1 duration at
50% perceptual
boundary for
V1 Length (ms)
72
88
104
120
136
152
168
184
C2 
Duration 
(ms)
56
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
3
Total
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
3
%
of ‘Long’
responses
100
100
100
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
100
72
Short
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
%
of ‘Long’ 
responses
100
100
88
Short
3
20
39
9
0
0
0
0
71
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
3
20
39
9
0
0
0
0
71
% 
of ‘Long’
responses
0
0
0
0
0
104
Short
42
49
48
37
3
0
0
0
179
N.D.
Long
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
42
49
48
37
3
0
0
0
179
%
of ‘Long’
Responses
0
0
0
0
0
0
120
Short
50
50
50
48
14
0
0
0
212
139.9
Long
0
0
0
0
4
25
37
37
103
Total
50
50
50
48
18
25
37
37
315
%
of ‘Long’
Responses
0
0
0
0
22
100
100
100
33
136
Short
50
49
49
49
18
0
0
0
215
135.1
Long
0
0
0
1
21
43
49
49
163
Total
50
49
49
50
39
43
49
49
378
%
of ‘Long’ 
Responses
0
0
0
2
54
100
100
100
43
152
Short
50
50
50
48
16
1
0
0
215
134.0
Long
0
0
0
1
29
47
50
49
176
Total
50
50
50
49
45
48
50
49
391
%
of ‘Long’
Responses
0
0
0
2
64
98
100
100
45
168
Short
50
50
50
49
25
1
0
0
225
136.3
Long
0
0
0
1
24
47
50
50
172
Total
50
50
50
50
49
48
50
50
397
%
of ‘Long’
Responses
0
0
0
2
49
98
100
100
43
Effects of duration and phonological length


Comparing goodness-of-ﬁt statistics among several models revealed that both the
effects of Cduration and perceived Clength, as well as VDuration, are necessary
to yield sufﬁcient model ﬁt (Nagelkerke’s R2=.). Deviance statistics (D) suggest
that effect size of perceived Clength is larger than that of Cduration (CDuration:
D=.; Perceived VLength=.).
..Discussion
...Singleton/geminate stop perception
The current experiment replicated and
extended the ﬁndings of previous studies. First, duration of the preceding vowel has an
assimilative effect on the perceived length of the following stop. The results of our
experiment suggest that this is true even when the preceding vowel is phonologically
long. Thus, within a given category of preceding vowel length, a longer preceding vowel
duration inﬂuences geminate perception. Second, the perceived phonological length of
the preceding vowel contrastively affects the perception of phonological length of the
following stop. That is, listeners are likely to perceive a geminate when they perceive
the preceding vowel as phonologically long.
Earlier, we pointed out the possibility that rather than phonological length,
speaking rate (mediated by the duration of the preceding vowel) actually accounts
for the effects of the phonological length of the preceding vowel that were found by
Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko () and Kawagoe and Takemura (). If this
scenario were true, in our experiment perceived vowel length would not affect
listeners’ judgements of geminates, and an increase in the duration of the preceding
vowel would cause a perceptual shift in the singleton/geminate boundary toward
longer stop closure, which is not the case. Instead, our experiment clearly demon-
strated that the effects of the perceived length of the preceding vowel do exist even
when speaking rate is controlled for and are independent of the effects of preceding
vowel duration. As Kubozono, Takeyasu, and Giriko () and Kawagoe and
Takemura () suggest, phonological constraints in Japanese that restrict super-
heavy syllables are deemed to underlie the effects of the perceived length of the
preceding vowel. This interpretation is quite reasonable because speech perception is
well known to be affected by phonological constraints (Massaro and Cohen ; Pitt
; Dupoux et al. ; Dupoux et al. ; Dupoux et al. ).
We also mentioned that there is a controversy about whether the effects of
preceding vowel duration on the perception of following stop length are assimilative
or contrastive. We also pointed out that assimilative effects of preceding vowel
duration have been found in experiments in which the size of the manipulation
(extension) of preceding vowel durations is relatively small, whereas contrastive
effects have been found when the size of durational lengthening is relatively large.
Our results indicate that the effects of preceding vowel duration are assimilative,
but since the effects are weaker than those of the perceived length of the preceding vowel,

Takeyasu and Giriko

which most previous studies did not take into account, the effects of preceding
vowel duration could appear to be contrastive as the duration of the preceding
vowel increases (i.e. the likelihood of ‘Long’ vowel responses increases).6
Some researchers, including Ofuka et al. () and Takeyasu (), suggest that
the effects of the preceding vowel duration are in parallel with the durational distri-
bution in speech production in Japanese that vowels are longer before geminates than
before singletons (Han ; Kawahara a). Given that there is such a link between
speech production and perception, the fact that effects of the preceding vowel duration
are assimilative and observable regardless of the perceived length of the vowel itself
leads to a hypothesis that phonologically long vowels in Japanese are also longer before
geminates than before singletons in the same way as phonologically short vowels are.
Since in previous studies only durations of short vowels are discussed, this question has
yet to be answered. We test this hypothesis in Experiment .
...Short/long vowel perception
Experiment showed that both closure dur-
ation and perceived length of the following stop affect the perception of preceding
vowel length. Longer closure duration of the following stop increases ‘Long’
responses for the preceding vowel, suggesting that the effects of closure duration
are assimilative. However, the effects of the closure duration of the following stop are
not active when the stop is perceived as ‘Geminate’, and this is not parallel to the
effects of preceding vowel duration on the perception of following stop length. If
speech perception parallels speech production, stop closure is expected to be longer
after phonologically long vowels than after short vowels. Moreover, since the effects
of following stop duration on the identiﬁcation of preceding vowel length can be
observed only when the stop is perceived as ‘Singleton’, it is predicted that in speech
production the difference in closure duration of the following stop associated with
preceding vowel length is observable only when the stop is singleton. This hypothesis
will be tested in Experiment .
Contrary to the effects of closure duration, the effects of the perceived length of the
following stop are contrastive: ‘Long’ vowel responses decrease when the following
stop is perceived as ‘Geminate’. Again, we believe that this perceptual avoidance of
superheavy syllables is based on phonological constraints in Japanese. (See Table ..)
.Experiment 2: Production experiment
Research on durations of singleton/geminate consonants has been limited to the
context in which the preceding vowel is phonologically short. This is probably
6 We do not exclude the possibility that the contrastive effects of preceding vowel duration can (at least
in part) be attributed to speaking rate, especially in those experiments that use two-alternative forced
choice. Listeners could show contrastive effects both when they associate the extended duration of the
preceding vowel with phonological length and when they perceive it as evidence of a slower speaking rate.
Effects of duration and phonological length


because superheavy syllables are restricted in Japanese.7 The current experiment
aims to clarify whether speech perception parallels speech production with
regards to the relationship between phonological length of a segment and the
duration of its contextual segment. Speciﬁcally, by using two-syllable words with
four different syllable structures (CVCV, CVVCV, CVCCV, CVVCCV), this
experiment examines () whether vowels are longer before geminates than before
singletons even when the target vowel is phonologically long, and () whether
stops are longer after long vowels than after short vowels only when the target
stop is a singleton.
Note that while Experiment showed that there are contrastive effects of the
preceding vowels or the following consonants in speech perception, contrastive
effects in speech production are expected to be absent. Earlier, we mentioned that
a relatively large size of durational lengthening is necessary for the contrastive effects
in perception to occur. However, previous studies on acoustic correlates of the
phonological length contrast in Japanese demonstrated that vowels are longer before
geminates than before singletons, but effect sizes are not large (about ms or less,
according to Idemaru and Guion ). This is natural, because a large size of
durational lengthening of vowels and/or consonants simply causes misperception
of the intended word. Therefore, although the present study focuses on a link
TABLE .. Contextual variation in duration of Vand Cin speech production
(predicted from Experiment )
Assimilative
(longer V1 duration 
increases ‘Geminate’
responses)
Speech perception (results of Experiment 1)
Speech production (prediction)
Effects of the 
V1 duration
When V1 is 
‘Short’
When V1 is 
phonologically short
V1 is longer before 
geminates than before 
singletons
When V1 is 
‘Long’
When V1 is 
phonologically long
Effects of C2 
closure 
duration 
When C2 is 
‘singleton’
Assimilative
(longer C2 closure 
duration increases 
‘Long’ responses)
When C2 is singleton
C2 is longer after long 
vowels than after short 
vowels
When C2 is 
‘geminate’
Not observed
When C2 is geminate
C2 duration is not affected 
by preceding vowel length
→
→
→
→
7 According to Kawagoe and Takemura (), superheavy syllables in Japanese are limited to ()
loanword nouns (/gu.raun.do/ ‘ground’) and compounds (/ron.donk.ko/ ‘Londoners’) and () morpho-
logically complex native words such as /toot.ta/ (the past tense form of /too.ru/ ‘pass’). That is, except for
loanword nouns, superheavy syllables in Japanese occur across the morpheme boundary.

Takeyasu and Giriko

between speech production and perception, we do not deal with the contrastive
effects in Experiment .
..Participants
Three native speakers of Tokyo Japanese (females and male; ages , , and ,
respectively) participated in this experiment. The experiment was conducted in
Tokyo in April .
..Procedure
Two-syllable words of the form ‘pV(V)(C)Co’ (V=a, e, o; C = p, t, k) were used in the
present experiment. A total of words (vowel qualities (/a/, /e/, /o/) × vowel
lengths (short, long) × places of articulation (/p/, /t/, /k/) × consonant lengths
(singleton, geminate)) were written in katakana orthography and were arranged in
random order on a list. The list included mostly nonsense words except for a few
lexical words (e.g. /paRto/ (part), /paQto/ (quickly)). Four different lists were created
so that each word appeared a total of four times. The three participants ﬁrst read as
practice four real words in Japanese (/paRto/, /paRQto/, /kaRto/, and /kaRQto/).
They then read the four lists of words at their normal speaking rate, and their
utterances were recorded. After they ﬁnished reading the lists, we asked them to
read four of the test words six times each. (Therefore, these four words were
produced a total of ten times each.) These four words have the same syllable structure
as the stimuli in Experiment : /papo/, /paRpo/, /paQpo/, and /paRQpo/. Tokens
from the practice phase were not used for the subsequent analyses.
For each token, the durations of the following portions were measured: VOT of C
(pV(V)(C)Co), V(pV(V)(C)Co), closure of C(pV(V)(C)Co), VOT of C, and V
(pV(V)(C)Co). In making acoustic measurements, we followed the segmentation
criteria adopted by Peterson and Lehiste (). VOTs of Cand Cwere measured
from the onset of the release burst of Cand Cto the onset of the voicing of Vand
V. The durations of Vand Vwere measured from the endpoints of Cand Cto
the endpoints of Vand V, respectively, with the latter determined by the abrupt
cessation of all formants. The closure durations of Cwere measured between the
endpoint of Vand the onset of the release burst of C.
..Analyses and predictions
In order to determine whether or not Vduration systematically varies depending on
the phonological length of C, and whether Cclosure duration varies depending
on the phonological length of V, a series of ANOVAs were conducted separately for
Vduration and Cclosure duration. The independent variables were Vlength
((phonologically) short vowel, long vowel), Clength (singleton, geminate), V
quality (/a/, /e/, /o/), and Cplace (/p/, /t/, /k/).
Effects of duration and phonological length


If there is a link between speech perception and speech production, the predic-
tions, as discussed in the previous section (Table .), are that vowels are longer
before geminates than before singletons even when the vowel is phonologically long,
and that stops are longer after long vowels than after short vowels only when the stop
is singleton.
..Results
For less than % of the tokens, segmental durations could not be measured because
the speakers failed to read the listed word correctly (e.g. /peRpo/ was mistakenly
produced as /peRko/). These tokens were excluded from our analyses.
Table .summarizes the mean durations of CVOT, V, Cclosure, CVOT,
and V.
...V1 duration
A repeated measures ANOVA revealed that all of the four
main effects were signiﬁcant (VLength: F (, )=., p < .; CLength:
F (, )=., p < .; VQuality: F (, )=., p < .; CPlace:
F (, )=., p < .). No interactions between independent variables were
signiﬁcant. Multiple comparisons with Bonferroni corrections were conducted for
the main effects of VQuality and CPlace.
Mean Vduration was signiﬁcantly longer () when Vwas phonologically long
(.ms, averaged over other independent variables) than when short (.ms),
() when Cwas geminate (.ms) than when singleton (.ms), () when V
quality was /a/ (.ms) than when /e/ (.ms), which in turn was longer than
when Vquality was /o/ (.ms), and () when Cplace was /k/ (.ms) than
when /p/ (.ms). Mean Cduration for /t/ (.ms) was not signiﬁcantly
different from those of either /k/ or /p/.
Mean Vdurations are shown in Table .for each minimal pair involving
Clength (e.g. /papo/ vs. /paQpo/; /paRpo/ vs. /paRQpo/) for each speaker to
check within- and between-subject consistency. In almost all (out of ) cases,
mean Vdurations were longer before geminates, suggesting that speakers consist-
ently make Vlonger before geminates than before singletons, even when Vis
phonologically long.
TABLE .. Mean duration and SD for Vand C(in ms, averaged over speakers)
V
C
CVOT
V
Cclosure
CVOT
V
Short
Singleton
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Short
Geminate
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Long
Singleton
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Long
Geminate
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)

Takeyasu and Giriko

Since the interaction between Vlength and Clength was not signiﬁcant, and
since speakers’ internal consistency was high, we can conclude that vowels are longer
before geminates than before singletons, regardless of the vowel length.
...C2 closure duration
A repeated measures ANOVA revealed that all the
main effects except for vowel quality were signiﬁcant (VLength: F (, )
=., p < .; CLength: F (, )=., p < .; V Quality: F (,
)=., p=.(n.s.); CPlace: F (, )=., p < .). Since the
interaction between VLength and CLength was signiﬁcant (F (, )=.,
p < .), we examined simple effects for each level of CLength.
When Cwas singleton, the effects of VLength and CPlace were signiﬁcant (V
Length: F (, )=., p < .; V Quality: F (, )=., p=.(n.s.);
CPlace: F (, )=., p < .). Mean Cclosure duration was signiﬁcantly
longer when Vwas a long vowel (.ms) than when Vwas a short vowel (.ms).
The mean duration of Cclosure was .ms for /p/, .ms for /t/, and .ms
for /k/. Multiple comparisons with Bonferroni corrections revealed that the difference
in mean Cclosure durations was signiﬁcant for /p/ vs. /k/, but not for /t/ vs. /p/ or /t/
vs. /k/.
TABLE .. Mean durations and SDs of V(in ms) (unexpected results appear in
bold type)
Speaker 
Speaker 
Speaker 
CVCV
CVQCV
CVCV
CVQCV
CVCV
CVQCV
papo vs. paQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
pepo vs. peQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
popo vs. poQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
pato vs. paQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
peto vs. peQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
poto vs. poQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
pako vs. paQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
peko vs. peQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
poko vs. poQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRpo vs. paRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRpo vs. peRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRpo vs. poRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRto vs. paRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRto vs. peRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRto vs. poRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRko vs. paRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRko vs. peRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRko vs. poRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
Effects of duration and phonological length


When Cwas geminate, only the effect of CPlace was signiﬁcant (VLength:
F (, )=., p=.(n.s.); V Quality: F (, )=., p=.(n.s.); C
Place: F (, )=., p < .). The mean Cclosure duration was .ms for
/Qp/, .ms for /Qt/, and .ms for /Qk/. Again, the difference in mean
Cclosure durations was signiﬁcant only for labial (/Qp/) vs. velar (/Qk/).
Mean Cclosure durations are shown in Table .for each minimal pair involving
Vlength for each speaker (e.g. /papo/ vs. /paRpo/; /paQpo/ vs. /paRQpo/) to check
within- and between-subject consistency. In almost all (out of ) cases where C
was singleton, mean Cclosure durations were greater after long vowels than after
short ones. However, in cases where Cwas geminate, there was a substantial decrease
in the number of pairs in which mean Cclosure durations were greater after long
vowels than after short ones (out of ), and there appears to be a considerable
degree of between-subject variability, suggesting that speakers consistently make C
closure longer after long vowels than after short ones only when Cis a singleton.
In sum, from the results of the current experiment we can conclude that stop
closures are longer after long vowels than after short ones, only when the stop is a
singleton.
TABLE .. Mean durations and SDs of Cclosure (in ms) (unexpected results
appear in bold type)
Speaker 
Speaker 
Speaker 
CVCV
CVRCV
CVCV
CVRCV
CVCV
CVRCV
papo vs. paRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
pepo vs. peRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
popo vs. poRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
pato vs. paRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
peto vs. peRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
poto vs. poRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
pako vs. paRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
peko vs. peRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
poko vs. poRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQpo vs. paRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQpo vs. peRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQpo vs. poRQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQto vs. paRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQto vs. peRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQto vs. poRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQko vs. paRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQko vs. peRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQko vs. poRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()

Takeyasu and Giriko

..Discussion
Experiment was designed to test whether speech perception (as reﬂected in the
results of Experiment ) parallels speech production. Overall, our hypotheses were
supported for the assimilative effects: () vowels are longer before geminates than
before singletons even when the target vowel is phonologically long, and () stops
have longer closure after long vowels than after short vowels only when the target
stop is a singleton. Thus, in light of durational assimilation, our experiments pro-
vided evidence of parallelism between speech production and perception with respect
to the length contrasts of vowels and consonants in Japanese.8
A majority of languages exhibit Closed Syllable Vowel Shortening (CSVS;
Maddieson ). Japanese, on the other hand, is known to be a language in which
vowels are phonetically longer in a closed syllable (Han ; Kawahara a), and
the results of our experiments conﬁrmed this tendency by showing assimilative
effects of preceding vowel duration.
It is highly unlikely that physiological constraints underlie closed syllable vowel
lengthening (hereafter, CSVL) in Japanese, since most languages show CSVS, not
CSVL. Instead, we would like to point out a possibility that CSVL helps temporal
units in Japanese to be more isochronous. If this hypothesis is correct, then an increase
in the number of moras in a word should correlate more strongly with an increase in
target segment durations when CSVL occurs than when CSVS occurs.
To test this hypothesis, we linearly transformed the data in Experiment by
adding constants (mean differences between each category of Vand Clength in
Table .) to each corresponding segment of each token, so that the data look
essentially as if they had come from a CSVS language. First, we calculated differences
of mean Vdurations between () CVCV–CVCCV and () CVVCV–CVVCCV to
estimate effect sizes of the phonological status of Con Vdurations. We also
calculated differences of mean Cdurations between () CVCV–CVVCV and ()
CVCCV–CVVCVV to estimate sizes of the phonological length of Von C
durations. We then added/subtracted these estimates to/from Vand Cdurations
of each token according to the following rule: V–(), C–() for CVCV; V+(),
C–() for CVCCV; V–(), C+() for CVVCV; V+(), C+() for
CVVCCV. The results of this linear transformation are summarized in Table ..
We then calculated durations of two temporal units: Vduration+Cclosure (VC),
which is considered to be a perceptually salient temporal marker (Kato ), and
duration of the whole word, which is affected by the number of moras in a word
(Sugito ). We also calculated Pearson product-moment correlation coefﬁcients
(r) both between () the number of moras of the word and VC duration and () the
8 It should be noted that not all aspects of speech production and perception are isomorphic: Contrastive
effects were observed in speech perception (Experiment ) but not in speech production (Experiment ).
Effects of duration and phonological length


number of moras in the word and duration of the whole word, for both the original
data from Experiment (Table .) and the linearly transformed data (Table .).9
These tables show that durations of VC and the whole word increase as the
number of moras increases. For example, for the original data (Table .), these
durations seem to increase by about ms per mora. A similar relationship between
durations and the number of moras is found in the linearly transformed data
(Table .), but the correlation coefﬁcients are greater in the original data, which
suggests that isochronous production of VC and/or words is more likely to be
achieved when CSVL occurs than when CSVS occurs. Thus, the results of our
analyses suggest that Japanese, unlike other languages, exhibits CSVL because it
helps temporal units in Japanese, such as VC, to be more isochronous. Since the
analyses presented here are exploratory, further studies are necessary to conﬁrm the
hypothesis.
TABLE .. Mean duration and SD of Vand C(ms)a
VLength
CLength
Original (CSVL)
Virtual CSVS
V
Cclosure
V
Cclosure
Short
Singleton
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Short
Geminate
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Long
Singleton
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
Long
Geminate
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
.
(.)
a Virtual CSVS data were obtained by linearly transforming the original data, as discussed in section ...
TABLE .. Correlation coefﬁcients for the original data (CSVL)
Original
Correlation Coefﬁcient (r)
V
Length
C
Length
Number of
moras in
the word
V+ C
closure
Word
Number of
mora vs.
V+ C
closure
Number of
mora vs.
Word
Short
Singleton

.(.) .(.)
r = .
r = .
Short
Geminate

.(.) .(.)
Long
Singleton

.(.) .(.)
Long
Geminate

.(.) .(.)
9 Other temporal units, such as CVand CV, are not discussed here because they showed weaker
correlations with the number of moras (correlation coefﬁcients less than .).

Takeyasu and Giriko

.General discussion
The present study examined contextual effects on the perception and production of
segment length in two-syllable words in Japanese, including superheavy syllables.
Although superheavy syllables are not common in the language, the study of their
perception and production has signiﬁcant implications. In the rest of this chapter, we
will discuss several other issues related to the present study and some remaining
problems.
..Perceptual cues for singletons/geminate
The results of our two experiments extend the ﬁndings of previous studies in several
important ways. First, regarding the effects of preceding vowel duration on the
perception of geminates (Ofuka et al. ), Experiment clearly demonstrated
that longer preceding vowel duration increases ‘Geminate’ responses, not only
when the target vowel is phonologically short but also when it is phonologically
long. Second, our experiment disentangled some confounding factors related to the
perception of geminate consonants in Japanese, and showed that both the duration
and the phonological length (or perceived length) of a preceding vowel have effects.
As a consequence, we succeeded in identifying the direction of the effects: the effects
of preceding vowel duration are assimilative, while those of perceived vowel length
are contrastive. Third, we found that the perception of vowel length is affected by
later-occurring information, namely, the closure duration and phonological length of
the following stop. Fourth, our experiments provided evidence of parallelism
between speech production and perception with respect to the assimilative effects
on length contrasts of consonants and vowels in Japanese.
TABLE .. Correlation coefﬁcients for the linearly transformed data (Virtual
CSVS)a
Virtual CSVS
Correlation Coefﬁcient (r)
V
Length
C
Length
Number of
moras in
the word
V+ C
closure
Word
Number of
mora vs.
V+ C
closure
Number of
mora vs.
Word
Short
Singleton

.(.) .(.)
r = .
r = .
Short
Geminate

.(.) .(.)
Long
Singleton

.(.) .(.)
Long
Geminate

.(.) .(.)
a Virtual CSVS data were obtained by linearly transforming the original data, as discussed in section ...
Effects of duration and phonological length


As pointed out in section ., the perception of a geminate is affected not only by
the physical duration of the preceding vowel but also by its perceived (phono-
logical) length, the effect of the former being assimilative and the effect of the latter
being contrastive. Since vowel duration is the primary cue for the vowel length
contrast (Fujisaki and Sugito ), the perceived length of the preceding vowel
should be determined mainly by duration of the vowel. That is, although the effects
of perceived length are based on phonological constraints, the effects both of
duration and of length are associated with the duration of the vowel. Since the
two effects are in opposite directions (assimilative vs. contrastive), perceptual
outcomes are dependent on listeners’ interpretations of the vowel duration.
Listeners’ interpretations of vowel duration are closely related to the design of the
experiment. In our experiment (Experiment ), we presented listeners with four
choices and had them judge the phonological length of the preceding vowel as well as
that of the following stop. If only two choices had been available, asking listeners to
judge just the phonological length of the stop, we would have obtained considerably
different results with respect to the effects of preceding vowel duration. Also, whether
or not the stimuli are presented in a carrier sentence is probably an important factor.
Without carrier sentences, listeners would tend to interpret a change in preceding
vowel duration as a change in speaking rate rather than in vowel length, and the
results would presumably be different.10 Future studies on the perception of gemin-
ates in Japanese should take these aspects of experimental design into account, and
should be designed to control several confounding factors.
Some comments on the limitations of our study are in order. In our perception
experiment, only unaccented two-syllable words were used as stimuli, and only two
variables were acoustically manipulated: vowel duration and stop closure duration.
However, the perception of vowel length and consonant length in Japanese is affected
by non-durational factors, including the Fcontour of the vowel (Kinoshita et al.
; Takiguchi et al. ; Kubozono et al. ) and the presence or absence of a
consonant (and its manner of articulation) in the preceding syllable (Sonu ). The
number of syllables in the target word might also inﬂuence listeners’ judgements.
Thus, further experiments in which accented words and three- and four-syllable
words are used as stimuli are necessary to test the generalizability of the results of the
present study.
10 Since speaking rate has a contrastive effect (Amano et al. ; Amano and Hirata ), it might
cancel out the assimilative effect of preceding vowel duration. Also, speaking rate is expected to have a
continuous effect such that ‘Geminate’ responses decrease as preceding vowel duration increases, whereas
the effect of perceived vowel length is binary, depending on whether the vowel is perceived as phonolo-
gically long or short. This difference would have an impact on estimated values of the perceptual boundary
between singletons and geminates.

Takeyasu and Giriko

In addition, interactions between speaking rate and other factors should be closely
investigated. Although in our experiments only a normal speaking rate was used,
there is a possibility that the relative weight (or importance) of the perceptual cues
varies depending on speaking rate. For example, Hirata () reported that the
effect size of stop length (singleton or geminate) on the durations of a preceding and
following vowel changes as speaking rate changes from slow to fast in speech
production. If speech production parallels speech perception, the size of the effects
found in our experiments might change if we introduce speaking rate as an additional
variable.
With respect to a link between speech production and perception, it should be
noted that not all aspects of speech production and perception are isomorphic. While
an array of studies have provided evidence for such a link (e.g. Denes ; Derr and
Massaro ; Mann ), differences between speech production and perception
have also been pointed out (Gruenenfelder and Pisoni ; Miller et al. ; Kabak
and Idsardi ). The current study emphasized a link between speech production
and perception, based on analyses of assimilative effects found in a vowel and
consonant sequence. However, such a link was not tested for contrastive effects:
strong contrastive effects of the perceived length of vowels/consonants were found in
speech perception (Experiment ), but not in speech production (Experiment ).
Thus, the results of this study should be interpreted with care.
..Assimilative effects in Japanese
A majority of languages exhibit CSVS (Maddieson ), i.e. vowels are generally
phonetically and phonologically shorter in a closed syllable than in an open syllable
(Lass ; Arnason ; Kingston et al. ; van Dommelen a; see
Maddieson and Kawahara b for more references). This means that super-
heavy syllables tend to be avoided, both phonetically and phonologically.
Japanese, on the other hand, is known to be a language in which vowels are
phonetically longer in a closed syllable (Han ; Kawahara a), and the results
of our experiments conﬁrmed this tendency by showing assimilative effects of
preceding vowel duration. On this point, Japanese seems to be an exceptional
language. However, the results of our perception experiments also suggest that
Japanese has contrastive effects of perceived vowel length, which are relatively
stronger than the assimilative ones. Moreover, there is much evidence from studies
in Japanese phonology that Japanese has a strong tendency to avoid superheavy
syllables, i.e. the co-occurrence of a phonologically long vowel and long consonant in
the same syllable (Kubozono , ). Therefore, on the whole, Japanese is a
language which is reluctant to produce superheavy syllables.
Why, then, does Japanese allow the durations of vowels and following obstruents
to correlate positively, increasing the risk of perception of superheavy syllables? To
Effects of duration and phonological length


answer this question, we proposed and tested a hypothesis that CSVL helps temporal
units in Japanese to be more isochronous. Our analyses suggests that durations of VC
and the whole word constantly increase as the number of moras increases, and their
correlations are stronger for the original data (CSVL) than than the transformed data
(CSVS). A line of studies on acoustic covariants of phonological length contrast in
Japanese have found that relational timing units, such as C/preceding V and C/Word,
have more categorizing power than absolute duration in a single segment (Hirata
, ; Hirata and Whiton ; Idemaru and Guion ; Idemaru and Guion-
Anderson ). Although the current study alone cannot validate our hypothesis,
the results of our experiments are likely to support the recent ﬁndings that temporal
units wider than a single segment play an important role in discussing phonological
length contrast in Japanese.
.Conclusions
This study assessed the inﬂuence of physical duration and phonological length of
the preceding vowel on the perception of singleton and geminate stops in Japan-
ese. Through a perception experiment in which the duration and phonological
length of the vowel preceding the stop in a two-syllable word (CV(V)(C).CV) were
taken into account, and the speaking rate of the carrier sentence was ﬁxed at a
normal rate, we presented evidence that the identiﬁcation of consonant length
(singleton/geminate) is affected both by the physical duration and by the phono-
logical length of the preceding vowel, the former effect being assimilative and the
latter being contrastive. Also, we pointed out that the perception of vowel length is
affected by the physical duration of the following stop closure and by the phono-
logical length (singleton/geminate) of the following stop. A production experiment
demonstrated that the effects of the durations of the preceding vowel and the
following stop closure found in the perception experiment are parallel with
contextual variations in duration of the preceding vowel and the following stop
closure in speech production.

Takeyasu and Giriko

.Appendix. Results of acoustical analyses (Experiment 2): mean
durations and SDs of each segment (in ms)
/karewa/
(Carrier
phrase)
C(=p)
closure
C(=p)
VOT
V
C
closure
C
VOT
V
/toiQta/
(Carrier
phrase)
Speaker 
papo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
paRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQpo
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
()
pepo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
popo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
pato
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peRQto
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
()
poto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRQto
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
()
pako
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
paRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQko
()
()
()
() () () ()
()
peko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQko
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQko
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
(continued)
Effects of duration and phonological length


Continued
/karewa/
(Carrier
phrase)
C(=p)
closure
C(=p)
VOT
V
C
closure
C
VOT
V
/toiQta/
(Carrier
phrase)
Speaker 
papo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
paRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
pepo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
popo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
pato
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQto
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
peto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQto
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
peRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQto
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQto
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
pako
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
paQko
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
paRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
peRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
Speaker 
papo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()

Takeyasu and Giriko

Acknowledgements
This is a radically revised version of a paper presented at the Onotomo Forum held at Kobe
University on December . We would like to thank the audience of this forum, especially
Kimi Akita and Shigeto Kawahara, for their insightful comments. We are also grateful to the
two anonymous reviewers of this chapter for their questions and comments. All errors that
remain are our own. The work reported in this chapter was supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Numbers , to the ﬁrst author, and the NINJAL collaborative
research project ‘Phonological characteristics of the Japanese lexicon’.
paRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
pepo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQpo
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
popo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQpo
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRpo
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQpo
()
()
()
() () () ()
()
pato
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
peto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQto
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poQto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRto
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQto
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
pako
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
paQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
paRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
paRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
peko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peQko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
peRQko
()
()
()
() () ()
()
()
poko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poQko
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
poRko
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
()
poRQko
()
()
()
()
() ()
()
()
Effects of duration and phonological length


5
Articulatory coordination in long
and short consonants
An effect of rhythm class?
ANDERS LÖFQVIST
.Introduction
This chapter examines interarticulator programming of lip and tongue movements in
the production of single and geminate consonants in Japanese and Italian. A speciﬁc
issue to be addressed is whether the traditional description of Japanese as mora-timed
and Italian as syllable-timed is associated with differences in interarticulator program-
ming at the segmental level. The division of languages into different rhythm classes is
longstanding, but it has been notoriously difﬁcult to pin down any acoustic or
articulatory differences that support the division (see Arvaniti for a review).
Ramus et al. () and Grabe and Ling () examined this issue by calculating
durational metrics in languages classiﬁed as representing different rhythm classes.
Ramus et al. () calculated the proportion of vocalic intervals and their standard
deviation, and also the standard deviations of consonantal intervals. Overall, their
results showed that English and Japanese occurred at the extremes, with Italian (and
other languages) falling in between. That is, English had the smallest proportion of
vocalic intervals and Japanese the largest. Grabe and Ling () calculated a
pairwise variability index based on the differences between pairs of consecutive
vocalic or consonantal intervals. They found a split between stress-timed and
syllable-timed languages, with Japanese patterning with the syllable-timed languages
(their sample did not include Italian). Interestingly, when they applied the metrics of
Ramus et al. () to their data, Japanese was classiﬁed as stress-timed; of note is
that their study only included one speaker per language.
Further studies of rhythm class measures have revealed a number of factors that
inﬂuence them beyond these measures themselves. Among these are speaker, type of
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Anders Löfqvist . First published by Oxford University Press.

linguistic material, and human labeller or machine labelling (e.g. Wiget et al. ;
Loukina et al. ; Arvaniti ; Turk and Shattuck-Hufnagel ). For example,
Loukina et al. () found very large variability within a language, so no single
rhythm measure, nor a combination of rhythm measures, was optimal for classifying
all languages; they argued instead that a combination of three measures was necessary
for classiﬁcation.
Loukina et al. () examined several factors inﬂuencing rhythm measures in ﬁve
languages (not including Japanese and Italian). Of interest for the present study, they
included ‘text phonological measures’ related to segmental properties of the linguistic
material, e.g. vowel height, diphthongs, sonority, and voicing. A total of ten text
phonological measures all classiﬁed the ﬁve languages above chance. The most
successful ones were vowel height, sonority, and voicing (proportion of voiced
segments). Overall, however, these phonetic factors explained about % of linguistic
variation across languages. In addition, characteristics of individual speakers could
explain about % of the variation in a rhythm measure.
Rhythm classes have been deﬁned by durational patterns, but the results just
reviewed suggest that segmental aspects of speech can have an effect. There is also
one study that speciﬁcally addressed articulatory differences in Japanese and Italian
consonants, Smith (, ). Smith examined articulatory movements recorded
by the (now defunct) x-ray microbeam system in Madison, Wisconsin. Small lead
pellets were attached to the articulatory structures of interest and tracked by an x-ray
beam. Her linguistic material consisted of words with two vowels ﬂanking a bilabial
nasal consonant; the nasal consonant was either long or short. The words used
included /mapi/ and mipa/; three to eight repetitions were recorded. Her subjects
included three native speakers of Japanese and Italian. One ﬁnding of hers, which
motivated the present analyses, was a difference in the timing of the tongue move-
ment between the two vowels: in Japanese, the tongue movement ended later after the
intervocalic consonant when the consonant was long, but in Italian there was no
difference. We should note, however, that the onset and offset of the tongue move-
ment was only measured in the vertical dimension of the movement based on a
velocity criterion.
Smith interpreted this difference in terms of the timing of vowel and consonant
gestures. In the case of Japanese, the vowel and consonant gestures are ‘mutually
coordinated’. However,inItalian, thevowelsareproduced continuouslyandconsonants
superimposed on them, following Öhman (). Thus the tongue movement between
the two vowels is inﬂuenced by the duration of the consonant in Japanese but not in
Italian. Smith goes on to suggest that the ﬁrst timing pattern is characteristic of mora-
timed languages, while the second one occurs for stress- or syllable-timed languages.
However, Löfqvist () examined timing patterns between lip and tongue
movements in Japanese long and short consonants, but did not ﬁnd that the
consonant length had any systematic inﬂuence on the offset of the vowel-related
Articulatory coordination


tongue movement. The purpose of the present study was thus to examine the same issue
as Smith in Japanese and Italian, but using measurements of tongue movements that
take into account both the vertical and the horizontal dimensions of the movements.
.Methods
..Speakers
Three native speakers of Italian, two females and one male, served as subjects, with ﬁve
native speakers of Japanese, three males and two females. They reported no speech,
language, or hearing problems. They were naive as to the purpose of the study. Before
participating in the recording, they read and signed a consent form. (The experimental
protocol was approved by the IRB at the Yale University School of Medicine.)
..Linguistic material
The linguistic material consisted of Italian and Japanese words forming minimal pairs,
with a sequence of vowel-bilabial nasal-vowel, where the only difference between the
pairs was the duration of the consonant, which was either long or short. All words were
designed to require a substantial amount of tongue movement from the ﬁrst to the
second vowel. Due to lexical differences, the vowel contexts differed.
The following Italian words were used: /camino/, /cammino/ (‘ﬁreplace’/‘way’ ), /
saremo/, /saremmo/ (‘we will be’/‘we would be’). Note that there is a difference in
stress placement in the words /camino, cammino/ in that the vowel preceding the
nasal is stressed in the ﬁrst word but the vowel following the nasal is stressed in the
second word. The following Japanese words were used: /kami, kammi/(‘god’/‘sweet’),
/kamee, kammee/ (‘participation’/‘impression’/, /kema, kemma/ (‘Kema, place’/‘polish’);
they all had stress on the ﬁrst vowel.
The linguistic material was organized into randomized lists and presented to the
subjects in Italian and Japanese writing, with the words occurring in a short frame
sentence. Fifty repetitions of each word were recorded.
..Movement recording
The movement recording, signal processing, and measurements have been described
previously in Löfqvist and Gracco () and Löfqvist (), and will thus only
be brieﬂy summarized here. The movements of the lips, the tongue, and jaw were
recorded using a three-transmitter magnetometer system (Perkell et al. ).
Receivers were placed on the vermilion border of the upper and lower lip, on three
positions of the tongue, referred to as tip, blade, and body, and on the lower incisors
at the gum line. All data were subsequently corrected for head movements and rotated
to bring the occlusal plane into coincidence with the x-axis. This rotation was per-
formed to obtain a uniform coordinate system for all subjects (cf. Westbury ).

Löfqvist

The articulatory movement signals were sampled at Hz after low-pass ﬁltering
at Hz. The resolution for all signals was bits. The movement signals were low-
pass ﬁltered with a cutoff at Hz. A measure of lip aperture was obtained by
calculating the vertical distance between the upper and lower lip receivers. To obtain
instantaneous velocity of the lip aperture and tongue receivers, the ﬁrst derivative of
the position signals was calculated. For the lip-aperture signal, acceleration was also
calculated from its velocity. For each tongue receiver, speed was calculated; the speed
signal is based on both the vertical and horizonal dimensions of the movement. The
acceleration and velocity signals were smoothed using the same window. The acoustic
signal was pre-emphasized, low-pass ﬁltered at .kHz, and sampled at kHz.
The onset and release of the oral closure for the nasal consonant were identiﬁed in
waveform and spectrogram displays of the acoustic signal. They were both identiﬁed
by a change in the amplitude and the spectral properties.
To deﬁne the onset of the closing movement of the lips for the nasal consonant, a
minimum in the lip-aperture acceleration signal just before oral closure was used,
following Löfqvist and Gracco () (see Figure .(a)). Tongue-movement onsets
and offsets between the ﬁrst and second vowels were deﬁned in the tongue-body
speed signal as minima during, or close to, the ﬁrst and second vowels (see
Figure .(b)); we should note that the tongue speed is never zero in speech.
Since the focus of this work is on timing relationships between lip and tongue
movements, three temporal measurements were made. The ﬁrst one consisted of the
interval between tongue-movement onset and oral closure; it provides information
about the tongue movement relative to consonant closure. The second one was the
interval between tongue-movement onset and lip-closing movement onset; it exam-
ines the timing between tongue- and lip-movement onsets. The third one was the
interval between tongue-movement offset and oral release; it is useful for examining
the tongue-movement offset relative to consonant release. The kinematic signals are
expressed in a maxilla-based coordinate system. Thus, the tongue-body movement
includes the contribution of the jaw, which is appropriate when we are interested in
the tongue as the end effector.
.Results
As expected, there was a robust difference in closure duration for the labial nasal. The
ratio between the long and short consonant varied between .and .for Japanese
and .and .for Italian. The following analyses will focus on the timing between
lip and tongue movements.
..Onset of tongue body movement relative to onset of oral closure
Figure .(a) summarizes the duration of the interval between tongue movement
onset and oral closure for the consonant in the Japanese speakers. Of note here is
Articulatory coordination


that, with the exception of only one case, /kammee/ for subject , the tongue
movement onset always occurs before the closure. Overall there is no clear pattern
for the long and short consonants. For /kami, kammi/, only subjects and showed a
reliable difference (, t = ., p < ., and , t = ., p < .) but they were not
in the same direction. The corresponding t values for the other subjects were .,
., and .for , , and , respectively, all n.s. Also for the pair /kamee, kammee/,
the results were inconsistent. Subjects , , and had signiﬁcant differences
(t = ., ., and ., with p < .in all cases), but only speakers and 
showed this interval to be longer for the long than for the short consonant. Speaker 
produced the long consonant with a tongue movement that started after the closure.
The other two speakers, and , showed no difference (t = .and –., n.s.). In
contrast, four of the speakers produced the consonants in /kema, kemma/ with an
earlier start of the tongue movement for the short consonant (t =., ., .,
and .for , , , and , respectively, with p < .in all cases). Speaker 
showed the opposite pattern (t = ., p < .).
200 ms
200 ms
5 cm/s
Lip aperture velocity
Audio
200 cm/s2
Lip aperture acceleration
0.2 cm
Lip aperture
Subject 1
“Karewa kami to itta”
Open
Closed
Onset
Closure
(a)
(b)
0
0
Audio
0.2 cm
Tongue body vertical position
Subject1
“Karewa kami to itta”
Forward
Backward
a
a
i
i
Onset
Offset
Closure
Tongue body horizontal position
Tongue body speed
20 cm/s
1 cm
FIGURE .(a) Audio and lip-aperture signals for the word /kami/, indicating the point in the
acceleration signal used for deﬁning the onset of the lip closing movement. (b) Audio and
tongue-body signals for the word /kami/. Arrows indicate the points in the speed signals used
to indentify movement onset and offset. The baseline in the bottom panel represents zero
speed. The shaded area in (a) and (b) represents the oral closure for the nasal consonant.

Löfqvist

As shown in Figure .(b), in Italian, the interval between the onset of the tongue-
body movement and the oral closure showed different patterns for the two word
pairs for subject , who started the tongue-body movement after the closure for
/camino, cammino/. The same was true for subject in the word /cammino/.
However, in the words /saremo, saremmo/ all three subjects have the tongue-
movement onset occur before the oral closure. Moreover, the tongue-movement
onset always occurred earlier in the short than in the long consonant; this was true
(b)
/kami, kammi/
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40 ms
Subject
(a)
Oral closure
Before
After
Short
Long
–50
0
50
ms
Subject
Subject
/kamee, kammee/
 Oral closure
Before
After
–120 –100 –80 –60 –40 –20
0
20 ms
Subject /kema, kemma/
 Oral closure
Before
After
Interval between the onset of the tongue body movement
from the first to the second vowel and the oral closure
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
Short
Long
Subject
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
1
2
3
ms
/saremo, saremmo/
Oral closure
Before
After
ms
Interval between the onset of the tongue body movement
from the preceding to the following vowel and the oral closure
–50
–25
0
25
50
1
2
3
20
/camino, cammino/
FIGURE .(a) Japanese: interval between the onset of the tongue-body movement from the
ﬁrst to the second vowel and the oral closure (mean and standard deviation). (b) Italian:
interval between the offset of the tongue-body movement from the ﬁrst to the second vowel
and the oral release (mean and standard deviation).
Articulatory coordination


for both word pairs and for all subjects. With the exception of the words /saremo,
saremmo/ for subject , the difference between the long and short consonants was
signiﬁcant, for /camino, cammino/ t() = –., t() = –., t() = –., for
subjects , , and , respectively, with p < .in all cases; the corresponding results
for /saremo, saremmo/ were t() = –., and t() = –., for subjects and ,
with p < .in both cases.
..Onset of tongue-body movement relative to onset of lip movement for closure
The results for this interval are shown in Figure .(a) for Japanese. The overall
results suggest that the lips lead, but there is no clear difference between the long and
short consonants. For /kami, kammi/, speakers , , and showed a signiﬁcant
difference between the long and short consonants (t = .–., ., and –., for
, , and , respectively, with p < .). However, the difference went in opposite
directions for and , compared to . For the remaining two speakers, and , there
was no difference (t = .and –., n.s.). For /kame, kammee/ only speakers and
had a reliable difference in this interval between the long and short consonants
(t = –.and ., p < .) and here the lips lead with a longer time for the long
than for the short consonants. For the other speakers, , , and , no difference was
found (t = –., –., and –., n.s.). Four of the subjects, , , , and , showed a
longer lead of the lip movement in /kemma/ than in /kema/ (t = –., ., –.,
and –., for , , , and respectively, with p < .in all cases). Note that for the
short consonant /kema/, these four subjects started the tongue movement before the
lip movement. Subject showed a different pattern, with the tongue movement
leading the lip movement, with a signiﬁcant longer tongue movement lead for the
long consonant (t = ., p < .).
Figure .(b) presents the results for the interval between onset of the tongue-body
movement between the two vowels and the onset of the lip movement for closure for
the Italian speakers.The overall pattern is that the lips lead, with the only exception
being the word /saremo/ of subject . Also, this interval was always shorter in the short
than in the long consonant. That is, the lips started earlier relative to the tongue
movement in the short than in the long consonants. The differences in timing between
the long and short consonants were signiﬁcant for /camino, cammino/, t() = –.,
t() = –., and t() = –., for subjects , , and , respectively, with p < .in
all cases. For the words /saremo, saremmo/ only subjects and showed signiﬁcant
differences, t() = –., and t() = –., for subjects and , with p < ..
..Offset of tongue body movement relative to oral release
As shown in Figure .(a), the onset of the tongue movement from the ﬁrst to the
second vowel almost always started before the oral closure for the consonants in
Japanese. Its offset tended to occur after the oral release (see Figure .(a)). The

Löfqvist

pattern was, however, quite variable, as shown by the standard deviations. Only
speakers and showed a signiﬁcant difference between the long and short con-
sonants in /kami, kammi/, with the tongue-movement offset occurring later for the
short consonant (t = .and ., p < .). The reamaining three subjects had no
difference (t = ., ., and ., for speakers , , and , respectively). A similar
pattern with a later offset for the short than for the long consonants in /kamee,
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
5
4
3
2
1
(a)
(b)
/kami, kammi/
ms
Subject
Tongue leads
Lips lead
Interval between the onset of the tongue body movement from
the first to the second vowel and the onset of lip movement for
closure
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Short
Long
Subject    /kamee, kammee/
Lips lead
–50
0
50
100
Subject   /kema, kemma/
Tongue leads
Lips lead
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
1
2
3
/camino, cammino/
Short
Long
Subject
ms
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
1
2
3
ms
Subject    /saremo, saremmo/
Tongue leads
Lips lead
Interval between the onset of the tongue body movement from the
preceding to the following vowel and the onset of lip movement
for closure
ms
ms
FIGURE .(a) Japanese: interval between the onset of the tongue-body movement from the ﬁrst
to the second vowel and the onset of the lip movement towards closure (mean and standard
deviation). (b) Italian: interval between the onset of the tongue-body movement from the ﬁrst to
the second vowel and the oral closure (mean and standard deviation).
Articulatory coordination


–50
0
50
100
/kami, kammi/
ms
Subject
 Oral release
Before
After
Interval between the offset of the tongue body movement
from the first to the second vowel and the oral release
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140
Short
Long
ms
Subject
Subject
/kamee, kammee/
Oral release
Before
After
–40 –20
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 ms
Subject /kema, kemma/
 Oral release
Before
After
5
4
3
2
1
(a)
(b)
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1
2
3
/camino, cammino/
Short
Long
Subject
ms
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1
2
3
ms
/saremo, saremmo/
Oral release
After
Interval between the offset of the tongue body movement
from the preceding to the following vowel and the oral release 
FIGURE .(a) Japanese: interval between the offset of the tongue-body movement from the
ﬁrst to the second vowel and the oral release (mean and standard deviation). (b) Italian:
interval between the offset of the tongue-body movement from the ﬁrst to the second vowel
and the oral release (mean and standard deviation).

Löfqvist

kammee/ was found for speakers , , and , but the difference was only signiﬁcant
for and (t = ., and ., p < .), and not for (t = ..). The remaining two
speakers, and , showed no difference (t = .and –., n.s.). Finally, for the pair
/kema, kemma/, only subjects and showed a reliably later offset in the short than
in the long consonant (t = ., and ., p < .). The other subjects showed no
difference (t = ., ., and –., n.s., for , , and , respectively).
The interval between the offset of the tongue-body movement from the preceding
to the following vowel and the release of the oral closure is presented in Figure .(b)
for Italian. For both words and all three subjects, the offset occurred after the release
of the oral closure, but the pattern was not consistent across speakers or words. Only
subject showed a signiﬁcant difference between the long and short consonants in
the words /saremo, saremmo/, t() = ., p < ..
.Discussion
The purpose of the present study was to examine interarticulator programming of lip
and tongue movements in Japanese and Italian long and short consonants. The
speciﬁc question addressed was whether there is any difference between the two
languages that might be related to their being described as belonging to different
rhythm classes—mora timing for Japanese and syllable timing for Italian. An articu-
latory study by Smith (, ) suggested such a difference in the offset of the
tongue movement between the two vowels, which differed between long and short
consonants in Japanese but not in Italian.
The present results do not really support such a conclusion, since both Japanese
and Italian speakers show no effect of consonant length on the offset timing. Note
that the tongue movements in the present study were analysed in both the vertical
and horizontal dimension and not in only the vertical one, as done by Smith. This
methodological difference might explain the discrepancies.
Looking at the interval between the consonant release and the offset of the tongue
body movement in Figure ., we see that for all the Italian subjects the movement
ends after the release. There was only one signiﬁcant difference between the long and
short consonants, however. For the Japanese subjects in Figure ., the pattern is very
similar except for two subjects where the tongue movement ends just before the
release. However, only some subjects showed a statistically signiﬁcant difference
between the long and short consonants; in these cases, the offset occurred later
with respect to the release for the short consonant, which is contrary to what
Smith (, ) reports. It is obvious in Figure .that there is substantial
variability both within and across subjects, as shown by the error bars for the
standard deviation.
The tongue movement generally started before the oral closure for the consonant
(Figure .), but there was no consistent difference between the long and short
Articulatory coordination


consonants. Looking at the relative timing between lip and tongue movements in
Figure ., we see that the lips lead except for the Japanese words /kema, kemma/,
where the tongue movement was leading the lip movement for the short consonants,
except for one subject. Overall, there is a substantial variability within and across
subjects. Given the large variability in these timing measures, it is not surprising that
there are few statistically reliable differences.
The present results do not show any reliable differences in interarticulator timing
between long and short consonants in Japanese and Italian. Also, the tongue-
movement trajectory between the two vowels appears to be close to a straight line
in both languages (Löfqvist ), suggesting that the movement is governed by a
principle of least effort.
As argued in Löfqvist (), the tongue-movement trajectory must change
depending on the length of the consonant. Using the same trajectory for long and
short consonants would result in three possible patterns of coordination in the long
consonant, as shown in the second row of panels in Figure .. The tongue move-
ment could start at the onset of the consonant (a), so the offset of the movement
would occur well before consonant release. Alternatively, the tongue movement
could end after the release of the consonant (b), so that the onset of the movement
a
i
Closure duration: 65 ms
“kami”
Tongue body movement from first to second vowel
a
i
“kammi”
1a
Closure duration: 119 ms 
1b
i
a
“kammi”
i
a
“kammi”
1c
a
i
“kammi”
Closure duration: 119 ms 
2
FIGURE .Alternative strategies for producing the same tongue-movement trajectory during a
short and long intervocalic consonant. See text for more detailed information.

Löfqvist

would occur well after consonant onset. The timing of the tongue movement could
be changed relative to both consonant onset and offset (c); in this case, both the
onset and offset of the movement would occur during the consonant. None of these
three possibilities was observed for the Japanese data presented by Löfqvist ().
By examining how the kinematic properties of the tongue movement differ between
long and short consonants, different coordination strategies can be revealed. The
duration of the tongue movement is mostly longer during a long consonant. Its
magnitude tends to be longer in long consonants. Its average speed is always lower in
long consonants in Japanese, but tends to be higher in Italian long consonants. It thus
appears that speakers can adjust the speed of the movement to maintain a similar
coordination under changes in movement duration and magnitude—making it faster
or slower. It is not, however, possible to argue that there is any consistent difference
between speakers of Japanese and Italian in this respect, at least not on the basis of
the current results.
The onset and offset of the tongue movement were deﬁned as minima in the speed
signal but, as suggested by the large variability in some of the temporal intervals in
Figures .–., these points need not be under tight temporal or spatial control.
Tongue positions for vowels do not have point targets, but rather regions, that are
inﬂuenced by phonetic context and speaking rate (e.g. Gay ; Guenther ).
The present results can also be compared with similar measures of interarticulator
programing of lip and tongue movements in American English, a language usually
considered to be stress-timed. They are generally in agreement with those for
American English reported by Löfqvist and Gracco (). As in their study, the
onset of the tongue movement very rarely starts after the oral closure.
As shown by Löfqvist and Gracco (), more than % of the tongue movement
trajectory between the two vowels can occur during the labial consonant in sequences
like the ones analysed in the present study. At the same time, the tongue movement
between the two vowels tends to start before the oral closure for the consonant and
end after the release of the consonant. Presumably, there is an acoustic and percep-
tual basis for this. The consonant induces formant transitions in the vowels before
and after the consonant, and such transitions are important for the perception of
speech. The relative onset and offset times of the tongue movement examined here
will result in formant transitions, but they would be absent, or much less salient, if the
whole tongue trajectory was hidden by the intervocalic consonant.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Mariko Yanagawa for help in running the experiments. This work was
supported by Grant No. DC-from the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health.
Articulatory coordination


6
The acquisition of long consonants
in Norwegian
ELINOR PAYNE, BRECHTJE POST, NINA GRAM
GARMANN, AND HANNE GRAM SIMONSEN
.Introduction
..Geminate acquisition
As noted in Khattab and Al-Tamimi (), research to date on the acquisition of
geminates, or long consonants,1 is surprisingly limited, given both the contribution it
can make towards our understanding of geminates and the insight it can provide into
the relationship between phonetic and phonological acquisition more generally.
Notable studies exist only for a handful of languages, principally Finnish, Japanese,
and Lebanese Arabic (e.g. Vihman and Velleman ; Kunnari et al. ; Aoyama
; Vihman and Kunnari ; Sato et al. ; Khattab and Al-Tamimi ).
Nevertheless, the cross-linguistic comparisons available show how language-speciﬁc
properties in the salience, use, and distribution of geminates inﬂuence the pathway of
their acquisition, further highlighting the heterogeneous nature and behaviour of
geminates as a phenomenon.
Research indicates that the perceptual ability to discriminate between geminates
and non-geminates is not acquired until late into the ﬁrst year. Using a habituation
and dis-habituation task, Sato et al. () report that, in a study using both natural
and manipulated speech stimuli, Japanese-ambient babies failed to discriminate
between /pata/ and /patta/ at months but could discriminate at .months, and
only then in response to natural speech stimuli, further suggesting that the perceptual
1 As the phonological status of long consonants in Norwegian is debated, we will use the term ‘long
consonant’ when referring to Norwegian, but make explicit comparison with geminate consonants in other
languages, and so use the term ‘geminate’ for those.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Elinor Payne, Brechtje Post, Nina Gram Garmann, and Hanne Gram Simonsen .
First published by Oxford University Press.

discrimination is aided by supplementary cues in natural speech and not just
differences in consonant duration.
With respect to production, non-contrastive long consonants appear very early on
in child speech—contra their frequent characterization as phonologically ‘marked’
(and therefore subject to late acquisition); child speech is characteristically produced
at a slow rate, resulting from immature articulatory control, and so vowels and
consonants are globally longer than in adult speech. As their motor skills develop,
children speed up, and thus their individual vowels and consonants become shorter.
The challenge then for children acquiring languages with length contrasts is to be
able to reduce duration differentially, in order to mark the contrast (Khattab and
Al-Tamimi ). Hence it is not the production of geminates per se that is especially
difﬁcult but obtaining sufﬁcient and appropriate durational contrast, reducing
and/or lengthening where needed. The development of these motor abilities is
intrinsically tied to the development of the lexicon (Vihman and Kunnari ;
Khattab and Al-Tamimi ); at the initial stages of word acquisition, children’s
vocabulary is very small and contains very few instances of geminates, but as
vocabulary size increases, children become increasingly aware of (because increas-
ingly exposed to) the systematic contrast, and this aids the ﬁne-tuning of their own
motor abilities.
Increased exposure to geminates, as a phenomenon, results in differential learning
also cross-linguistically. Kunnari et al. () report that Finnish children acquire the
geminate contrast in production more rapidly than Japanese children, and argue that
this is due to differences in the input (the geminate contrast being more frequent and
the durational distinction greater in Finnish). Finnish children begin to distinguish
between long and short consonants in their own productions already by the end of
the one-word period, i.e. around the end of their ﬁrst year (Kunnari et al. ). By the
-word stage (between and years), they are reported to be correctly producing
about % of geminates (Saaristo-Helin et al. ), but acquisition is still not com-
pletely in place even at age (Hurme and Sonninen ; Aoyama ). Comparing
quantity distinctions in Finnish and Japanese, Aoyama () reports that Finnish
children distinguished /n/ and /n:/ at years whereas Japanese children did not, and
attributes this difference to frequency effects. The question of frequency effects
becomes complex, however, when we consider possible differences between adult-
directed and child-directed speech: it has been reported for Japanese that geminates are
more frequent in the latter than the former, and may be more frequent than in the CDS
of other languages (Tsuji et al. ).
Acquiring a language with contrastive quantity has been shown to have a broader
effect on the acquisition process. The presence and particularities of the geminate
contrast exert an inﬂuence on early phonological templates in general (Vihman and
Croft ). So, in Finnish, which has a very salient medial geminate structure, early
words are found to be mostly bisyllabic with a geminate structure, with frequent
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


omissions of initial consonants (Kunnari ; Savinainen-Makkonen ), and
sharply different from early word structures of children acquiring languages, such as
French and English, that have no phonological quantity contrast (cf. Vihman and
Velleman ). These inﬂuences on word templates have been found elsewhere,
with a similar pattern to that found in Finnish observed for Italian (Vihman and
Croft ). In Lebanese Arabic, Khattab and Al-Tamimi () have found that
individual preferences in early productions and the frequency or prominence of
particular structures in the adult phonology play a major role in shaping the
phonological structure of words in the second year of life. For example, the presence
of a word-ﬁnal geminate contrast in Arabic is proposed as a reason why coda
consonants are more seldom omitted in early stages of Arabic acquisition than, for
example, in English or Spanish, where coda consonants are more prone to being
deleted. Similar patterns have also been found for a child acquiring Hindi (Nair
), where deletion of onsets is present in many disyllabic Hindi words with medial
clusters or geminates.
Khattab and Al-Tamimi () also investigate the acquisition pathway of con-
sonant quantity itself, for Lebanese Arabic, and report that the production of
geminates develops in a non-uniform trajectory over time, following a U-shaped
curve. They ﬁnd quantity (or phonological length) to be present as a suprasegmental
feature in early productions (between and years), but also ﬁnd evidence for
overrepresentation of consonant gemination early on (i.e. contrastive consonant
length where the adult target does not have it), with children shifting length from
the preceding vowel to the consonant (see also Khattab and Al-Tamimi ).
In other words, children may have accurate forms in their production at an early
stage of development and then pass through a period of apparent ‘regression’ before
‘real’ acquisition of adult-like structures.
Khattab and Al-Tamimi () also note the possibility, as yet uninvestigated, that
children might initially latch onto any available secondary cues to geminates and
potentially use one of those instead of the primary, durational cues in their own
productions. Al-Tamimi and Khattab () report, for adult speech at least, that the
contrast for gemination in Arabic is temporal, but highlight [+ tense] (fortis) as a
secondary feature. Acoustic cues other than consonant duration (e.g. spectral prop-
erties, interaction with vowel timing, adjacent vowel aperture, fpeak timing, burst
amplitude, coordination with laryngeal gestures leading to differences in voice onset
and offset time) have also been found in other languages, at least for adult speech,
and are typically seen as secondary consequences of consonant length that may serve
to enhance perceptual boundaries (e.g. Abramson ; Esposito and di Benedetto
; Local and Simpson ; Arvaniti and Tserdanelis ; Payne ; Ridouane
; Idemaru and Guion ). These cues are typically relatively subtle in adult
speech, and determining their presence or otherwise in child speech would require
further investigation.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

..Long consonants in Norwegian
Given the critical role of language-speciﬁc properties, it is of particular interest to
investigate the acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian, in part because the
durational contrast in consonants is more subtle—at least when taken by itself—than
in languages, such as Finnish and Hungarian (see Aoyama ; Ham ), where
consonant length is not correlated with vowel length and is thus the main or only
carrier of a particular contrast. This is also true of the durational contrast of vowels in
Norwegian, which is smaller in magnitude than in other Germanic languages that
have a vowel quantity distinction. As Riad (: ) points out, ‘the more complex
the system (in terms of number of quantitative contrasts), the smaller the durational
differences between long and short segment, whether vowel or consonant.’ The
complexity of a contrast that involves differences in both consonant and vowel
duration may, when viewed holistically, be thought to create a less subtle/more
perceptually salient contrast, even if the subtlety of individual component parts of
the contrast is greater, and their salience smaller.
Long consonants commonly occur in Norwegian: with a handful of exceptions,
any consonant that can occur word-medially or word-ﬁnally can theoretically be long
(there are no restrictions on place, manner, or voice), though they may only occur in
the coda of a stressed syllable, and only after a short vowel. The exceptions are: the
apical nasal and ﬂap / ɳ, ɽ / which can only be short, the apical tap / ɾ / which is
realized as a trill when long, and the velar nasal / ŋ / which can only be long. Long
vowels also only occur in the coda of stressed syllables. Thus, for stressed syllables,
vowel and following consonant duration are in complementary distribution, and
there arise many minimal pairs of the kinds shown in ():
()
a.
[1haːt] hat (‘hatred’) / [1hatː] hatt (‘hat’)
[1roːd] råd (‘advice’) / [1rodː] rådd (‘advised, given counsel’)2
[1ʋiːs] vis (‘manner’) / [1ʋisː] viss (‘certain’)
[1reːn] ren (‘clean’) / [1renː] renn (‘ski competition’)
b.
[2ˈheːte] hete (‘heat’) / [2ˈhetːe] hette (‘hood’)
[2ˈkuːbe] kube (‘cube’) / [2ˈkubːe] kubbe (‘log’)
[2ˈklaːse] klase (bunch of fruit or ﬂowers) / [2ˈklasːe] klasse (‘class’)
[2ˈmuːre] mure (‘to make a wall’) / [2ˈmurːe] murre (‘ache’)
Within formal generative phonology, vowel and consonant duration are together
said to be ultimately dependent on syllable weight, which itself is in a relationship of
mutual dependency with stress (the so-called ‘Stress-to-Weight’ condition) (Rice
; Kristoffersen ; see also Riad , , for accounts of quantity in closely
2 Legalistic use of past tense of rå, ‘to decide (over)’.
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


related Swedish). Within a moraic framework, vowel length is traditionally repre-
sented as a contrast between mono- and bimoraic nuclei. In line with accounts of
Swedish, Kristoffersen () proposed distinguishing long and short consonants in
Norwegian as moraic and non-moraic. In Norwegian, stressed syllables must be
‘heavy’ (bimoraic), which in terms of phonetic implementation means their rhymes
must minimally consist of (in open syllables) a long (bimoraic) vowel, or (in closed
syllables) of either a long vowel (bimoraic) and short consonant (non-moraic), or a
short vowel (monomoraic) plus a long consonant (monomoraic).
Since vowel and consonant length are complementary, and the one can be
predicted from the other, the question of whether it is vowel length or consonant
length that is phonologically marked has been the focus of much discussion with
regard to the phonology of Norwegian and related languages like Swedish and
Icelandic which also exhibit ‘Stress-to-Weight’ (cf. Elert ; Fretheim ; Jahr
and Lorentz ). Some (e.g. Linell ; Schaefﬂer ) have argued that the
contrast is on the vowel because the durational difference is greater there (see Fintoft
for experimental data on this), and therefore more perceptually salient (Behne
et al. a, b). Others (including Eliasson ; Riad , ) argue for
underlying consonant quantity, with certain consonants marked as moraic and vowel
length derived in the phonology as lengthening under stress. Riad (, ) bases
this argument on an analysis showing that consonant quantity straightforwardly
predicts the quantitative complementarity of segments in stressed syllables, whereas
vowel quantity fails to (since long vowels may also occur in open stressed syllables).
An alternative approach is to assume neither vowel nor consonant length to be
primary. Kristoffersen (: ) argues that since both vowel and consonant
quantity are dependent on stress, they must both be assigned after stress assignment
and therefore both be absent from underlying representations. On this account, the
underlying segmental structures of hat and hatt, and of hete and hette, are deemed to
be identical. It is only the generalization that stressed syllables are prosodically heavy,
and therefore to be phonetically ‘expanded’ in some way (by either vowel or
consonant lengthening) that is prespeciﬁed phonologically, not which type of expan-
sion. Kristoffersen goes on to state that ‘the language user must . . . just know which
expansion type is appropriate for a given lexical item, just as she or he has to know
which gender a given noun belongs to. . . . [E]xpansion type can be seen as a property
that must be assigned to each lexical item as a kind of class-membership index’
(: ). Rice’s () OT analysis differs in that it rejects the need for under-
speciﬁed representations of e.g. hete and hette, and the need for any additional
phonological process of ‘expansion’, since both possible (well-formed) outputs are
generated by the constraint ranking. He argues that the role of the phonological
component of the grammar is to assess whether a structure is well-formed, and not
whether it can actually be found in the lexicon, and thus it is not the job of the
phonology to account for why one has a long vowel and the other a long consonant.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

Ultimately, Kristoffersen’s and Rice’s analyses both assert that there is no phono-
logical contrast of quantity in modern Norwegian (unlike Old Norse, in which long
vowels and consonants could contrast independently of each other in stressed syllables
and thus had to be encoded as such in the lexicon). By removing the need for quantity
itself to be expressed either, respectively, in underlying representations or through
constraint ranking, Kristoffersen and Rice claim to sidestep what they regard to be the
synchronically irresolvable issue as to whether consonant or vowel length is more
primitive. Kristoffersen argues that the precise placement of quantity is synchronically
arbitrary, and therefore, ‘like many other traces of diachronic, fossilized processes, the
results must . . . therefore be marked as unpredictable in the lexicon’ (: ).
Both Kristoffersen and Rice seek to place the difference between VCː and VːC
instantiations outside phonology, but this only becomes a necessity for particular
conceptions of the phonology, and is thus arguably an artefact of these conceptions.
Kristoffersen draws an analogy with gender distinctions, which account for phono-
logical substance in the lexicon but are not in themselves phonological. This is not,
however, convincing since, unlike gender classes, there is no reason for words with
VːC rhymes to be distinguished from words with VCː rhymes other than the fact that
they have different rhymes, hence the reasoning is circular. This is tantamount to
saying that a pair such as [1haːt] / [1hatː] have different rhyme instantiations because
they belong to different classes, and belong to different classes because they have
different rhymes. Rice limits phonology to constraints on the input, on which there
are no limits; the lexicon is formed subsequent to the phonology: ‘The job of the
phonology is to delimit the set of grammatically well-formed words; the task of
lexical formation is an independent enterprise which must be based on the output of
the phonological component’ (Rice : ). Separate tableaux are proposed to
explain both VːC and VCː outputs as well-formed, but there is no need to explain
which tableau is relevant for any given word because in OT this is the task of the
(post-phonology) lexicon. This is tantamount to saying that a pair such as [1haːt]
/ [1hatː] are not phonologically contrasted.
The controversies over these competing accounts arguably arise from the assump-
tion that the contrast being made is located on a particular segment. If the contrast is
one of relative quantity that has to be marked on a particular segment, then it
becomes necessary to argue for either consonant or vowel length to be primary. If
we view the contrast being made on the rhyme as a single unit, the complementarity
of vowel and consonant length can be expressed without having to privilege one over
the other. In some respects, as Kristoffersen himself acknowledges (: ), his
approach (and that of Rice) (i.e. of making syllable weight primary and treating
both vowel lengthening and consonant gemination as merely two alternative ways
of making weight) bears some resemblance to the early ‘prosodeme’ analyses of
Norwegian vowel and consonant duration (Borgstrøm ; Vogt ). Both
prosodemic treatments and Kristoffersen’s and Rice’s later analyses focus on the
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


vowel + consonant as a single unit which can have one of two possible instantiations
(VːC or VCː), and the underlying rationale for both would motivate the use of V/VC
as the most appropriate measure of the contrast (as has been proposed for Icelandic).
As we have seen, where Kristoffersen and Rice’s accounts differ from the prosodeme
account is in their claim that this VːC/VCː alternation is not, fundamentally, phono-
logical, and as we have argued, this claim results from particular conceptual approaches
to phonology as much as anything else.
With regard to the appeal of ‘concrete’ evidence of magnitude of durational
differences (i.e. vowel differences greater than consonant differences), Eliasson
() points out that since quantity complementarity is always there, the ratio of
vowel to consonant duration could be what is most relevant for perception. Further-
more, our phonetic knowledge of Norwegian durational differences is based largely
on Fintoft’s () study, which examined only sonorants and fricatives and used
(phonotactically possible) nonce monosyllabic and bisyllabic words rather than real
words. Table .reproduces Fintoft’s calculations of the ratio of long consonants to
short consonants in word-medial and word-ﬁnal position, and the ratio of long
vowels to short vowels.3 From Fintoft’s mean durational values, we also calculated
mean % of ‘vocalicness’ in the rhyme (Table .).
From Table .we see not only that durational contrasts are greater in vowels than
in consonants, but also that consonant contrasts are particularly small word-ﬁnally
(even though consonants are reported by Fintoft to be shorter in this position).
Regarding the measure of ‘vocalicness’ in the rhyme (V/VC), Table .shows that
long vowels take up to nearly % word-medially, and over % word-ﬁnally. This
compares with a much-reduced percentage for short vowels, which take up to only
.% of the rhyme word-medially, and as little as .% word-ﬁnally.
We also see from both measures that there is an interaction with [voice] in
obstruents. As Fintoft reports, voiceless fricatives are longer than their voiced
counterparts4 (also true for Swedish, see Elert ), and he concludes from this
TABLE .. Long:short consonants and vowels (from Fintoft )
l
n
f
v
Medial Cː/C
.
.
.
.
Final Cː/C
.
.
.
.
Vː/V
.
.
.
.
3 Fintoft reports that there is no inﬂuence of consonant length on V.
4 Or what Fintoft reports as voiced fricatives. This is problematic since Norwegian does not have voiced
fricatives. The nearest voiced equivalent to /f/ is the voiced labiodental approximant /ʋ/. Since the
productions were nonce words, it is hard to determine whether productions were actually approximants
or (non-native) fricatives.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

that variations in consonant duration signal phonological voicing, while variations in
vowel duration signal consonant length. However, preceding vowel duration also
varies as a function of consonant voice (in a way similar to English pre-fortis clipping),
with vowels preceding voiceless obstruents shorter (as shown also in Ringen and van
Dommelen , speciﬁcally for stops, for the Trøndelag variety). This complementary
relationship interacts with the complementary vowel/consonant length relationship:
for example, vocalicness in the nonce word [aːf], which has a long vowel, is actually
lower (.%) than in the nonce word [avː] (.%), which has a short vowel. Thus, we
would propose that the temporal relations between vowel and consonant are of
importance for both quantity and voice, and that they interact.
..Rationale for study
Whether relative ‘length’ (or ‘quantity’) is to be interpreted as contrastive in itself or
the expression of syllable weight and a marker of stress, in learning to speak
Norwegian, infants have to acquire knowledge of consonant (and vowel) length
and also of the right instantiation for a particular lexical item. They also have to
acquire the phonetic timing and coordination skills for producing the appropriate
VC temporal relationship and integrate this with other meaningful temporal rela-
tionships, such as that signalling consonant [voice]. Given that there is no consensus
over whether it is consonant or vowel length (or neither) that is phonologically
primary in Norwegian, we will use the more neutral terms ‘long consonant’ and
‘consonant lengthening’, rather than ‘geminate’ and ‘gemination’, throughout this
chapter, but where relevant we will make explicit contrast with studies on geminate
consonants in other languages.
As discussed, we know, for other languages at least, that children start to produce
the geminate (long/short) contrast by the multi-word stage, albeit imperfectly and
sometimes inaccurately, and that as their vocabulary increases their production of
geminates (long consonants) becomes more accurate, and the phonetic detail of the
contrast begins to move towards that of adult speech as their motor skills mature.
Since consonant lengthening in Norwegian is intrinsically tied to VC timing, and the
coordination between vowel and consonant is more crucial, our chief interest was to
TABLE .. Mean % of vocalicness in the rhyme (calculated from Fintoft )
l
n
f
v
Vː/VːC medial
.
.
.
.
Vː/VːC ﬁnal
.
.
.
.
V/VCː medial
.
.
.
.
V/VCː ﬁnal
.
.
.
.
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


establish how children acquire and produce this particular relationship, and thus
signal the contrast, in an adult-like way. We therefore moved the investigative lens to
a slightly later developmental trajectory than previous studies, namely from ;, ;,
and ;years. Our investigation asked:
(i) Is there evidence of a differentiation between CVːC and CVCː structures,
and between CVːCV and CVCːV structures in the speech of children
acquiring Norwegian?
(ii) If so, by what means is this made (duration of vowel, duration of consonant,
proportional duration, other cues)?
(iii) How are these affected by place and manner5 in the consonant?
(iv) How does it differ from adult speech? (as compared with adult-directed
speech data collected in the same study)?
(v) How does it vary over the developmental trajectory investigated?
.Method
..Participants
We recorded nine children interacting with their mothers (child speech material),
and made separate recordings of the mothers (aged –years, of which three were
analysed for this study) interacting with an adult interviewer (adult speech material).
The child participants fell into three age groups: ;, , and ( months)—with
three children per age group.6 Recordings were made in the participants’ homes in or
around Oslo, using a Zoom Handy Recorder Hwith built-in microphones.
..Materials and elicitation
The materials and procedure were designed to elicit semi-spontaneous productions
of words containing the target phonological structures from both the children
and their mothers. The target structures were monosyllabic and bisyllabic words
containing VːC and VCː in the rhyme (of the stressed syllable, in bisyllabic words),
for a range of consonant types chosen to vary for place and manner: /p, t, k, n, l/.
Though Fintoft’s study () reported vowel duration not to be systematically
inﬂuenced by place of articulation of the following consonant, his study did not
examine stops, so the decision was made to include place as a parameter for stops.
5 The consonants examined also vary for voice, though as a result of manner differences (since
sonorants are voiced, and only voiceless stops were analysed in the present study).
6 Since the study deals with the speech of three different groups of child data at different ages, rather
than following the development of the same children over the developmental period, we cannot know with
any certainty the extent to which data for each age group are affected by individual characteristics, as
opposed to general characteristics of that age, and therefore must apply caution to inferring a more
generalized developmental trajectory.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

The need for the words to be familiar to the youngest children participating in the
study, and to be imageable for the purposes of elicitation, placed limitations on the
words that could be selected and meant that certain paradigms were incomplete (see
Appendix for a list of the target words). Vowel quality was controlled as far as possible,
with vowels mostly being open (front or back), but with some exceptions. Given the
constraints on word selection, the word-initial consonant could not, however, be
controlled. However, in any case, Fintoft () reports that there was little discernible
difference in vowel duration variation between / i a u / in his study,7 and that the onset
consonant had no discernible inﬂuence over the temporal characteristics of the rhyme
in Norwegian.
The target words were incorporated into (i) a series of sentences,8 (ii) a short
illustrated story shown on Powerpoint slides (e.g. Figure ., left), and (iii) a naming
game, also shown on Powerpoint slides (e.g. Figure ., right). The mothers were ﬁrst
asked to read the sentences to the experimenter (producing the adult-directed speech
analysed in this study) while their child played nearby. The mothers were then asked
to read the story to their child while the latter followed the images and animations on
the slides. This part, as well as producing child-directed speech for a separate study,
served to engage the child’s attention and interest for the naming game. The mother
and her child then played the naming game (producing the child speech part of the
study), which consisted of a series of slides each with an illustration (depicting target
words and ﬁllers), and the mother prompting her child to produce each word in
response to e.g. Hva er dette? (‘What’s this?’).
1
2
Her ser du en gutt. Han heter Pippo.
Pippo er veldig glad i å telle til to.
Dette er en...
GUTT
FIGURE .(Left) Example story slide: Here is a boy. His name is Pippo. Pippo loves counting to
two. (Right) Example naming game slide: This is a . . . (boy).
7 Somewhat surprisingly, as we would expect low vowels to be longer than high vowels, all other things
being equal.
8 E.g. Abdullah hadde et dagtilbud for dagbarn, der de hadde bøtte, spade, ﬂagg, og ball (‘Abdullah had a
day care centre for children where they had a bucket, a spade, a ﬂag, and a ball’); Kan jeg få adgang til en
strand hvor jeg kan ta et bad? ‘Can I get access to a beach where I can take a swim?’
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


In the sentences and in the story (both eliciting adult productions), the target
words always appeared in a rhythmically stressed position, typically at the end of a
phrase or intermediate phrase. In the naming game (eliciting the child productions),
images of the target words appeared in isolation and were typically also produced in
isolation, though were sometimes produced in a carrier phrase such as det er en bok
(‘it’s a book’).
..Analysis
...Segmentation and measurement
Only the target words were extracted for
analysis. The key component parts (segmental and subsegmental) within each target
word were identiﬁed from the waveform and spectrogram using Praat, and their
durations measured. The segmentation and labelling were carried out by a research
assistant (a native speaker of Norwegian), and measurements extracted by the ﬁrst
author, who also scrutinized a subset of tokens for which segmentation was problematic
(see below).
The key components of interest were (i) the preceding vowel (V, which for
monosyllables was also the only vowel) and (ii) the consonant itself.9 The decision
was made not to take measurements of the (word-initial) onset consonant since it
was not always possible to locate its starting point, notably when this was a voiceless
stop preceded by a pause. Since the main object of analysis is the timing relationship
within the rhyme, and since it has been shown that onset consonants do not inﬂuence
the temporal characteristics of the rhyme (Fintoft ), this was not deemed to be of
importance to this study. Segmentation was performed with reference to standard
criteria (see e.g. Peterson and Lehiste ).
The placement of a boundary between Vand the consonant (V-C), in canonical
cases, was guided primarily by the presence of a sudden drop in amplitude and the
offset of vocalic formant structure, particularly F. Marking the onset of consonants
was ﬁne-tuned with the aid of various cues, according to consonant manner. In the
case of a sonorant, the sudden drop in amplitude was accompanied by the continu-
ation of voicing and, in the case of a nasal consonant, also by the presence of nasal
formant structure. In the case of stop consonants, the drop in amplitude was even
more marked, and accompanied by the disappearance of a clear formant structure
and, as these were voiceless stops, by a sudden or gradual cessation of periodicity,
resulting in an absence of acoustic energy.
The placement of a boundary at the end of the consonant in question was guided
by the phonetic context in which it appeared. Where a vowel followed, this was
identiﬁed as being accompanied by a sudden increase in amplitude and ﬁne-tuned
with the aid of other cues speciﬁc to consonant manner. In the case of voiceless stops,
9 For stops this was composed of closure + release/aspiration.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

the transition from C to V was identiﬁed also observing the cessation of aperiodicity
(of the release and any post-release aspiration) and commencement of periodicity
and a clear formant structure (of the vowel). In the case of sonorants, the transition
from C to V, while the most important cue was an increase in amplitude as a result of
the vocal tract opening, the transition from sonorant to vocalic portions was also
aided by discontinuities in formant structure (in terms of both frequency and
intensity). Where silence followed (i.e. when the consonant was pre-pausal or
phrase-ﬁnal), the placement of the boundary was guided by cessation of voicing
(for sonorants) and by the end of the release (marked by a transient in the waveform
and spectrogram) or the end of ‘signiﬁcant’ aspiration following the release. By
‘signiﬁcant’ we mean of relatively high intensity, in order to distinguish it from any
post-utterance out-breath and/or background noise. All ﬁnal stops in the dataset
were released, reﬂecting a particular phonetic property of Norwegian and contrasting
with e.g. English, where stops are frequently unreleased.
...Periods of preaspiration
In many cases involving stop consonants, however,
in both child and adult speech, determining the boundary between Vand C was
complicated by the presence of a transitional period of low-amplitude frication
between the offset of modal voicing (associated with the vowel) and the onset of
closure (associated with the consonant) (see Figures .a and b). We identiﬁed this as
a period of preaspiration, based on comparison with studies of stops in Swedish and
other varieties of Norwegian (van Dommelen b, ; Helgason ; Helgason
and Ringen ; Ringen and van Dommelen ). We treated this period of
preaspiration as a separate component for the purposes of segmentation so that we
could analyse its possible contribution to signalling the contrasts at issue and
measured it from the onset of aperiodicity in the mid-range of the spectrum
(indicating the onset of vocal-fold spreading) or irregular periodicity overlaid with
friction (indicating breathy voice) to the offset of aperiodicity (indicating the stop
occlusion), following Helgason and Ringen () for Swedish.
The interval in question could be either voiceless, voiced, or a combination of the
two. Figure .(a) shows an example of pre-closure breathiness in the word drikke
(for an adult speaker). During the identiﬁed interval there is voicing (as shown by the
somewhat irregular periodicity in the waveform), but the amplitude is much reduced
when compared with the preceding vowel. At the same time, frication can be clearly
identiﬁed in the spectrogram, strongly suggesting non-modal voicing (breathy voice),
and also ruling out an interpretation as (reduced amplitude) voicing during the
closure. Figure .(b) shows an example of pre-closure breathiness (as evidenced
by fricated non-modal voicing) followed by (voiceless) preaspiration (as identiﬁed as
a voiceless period of friction right before the closure) in the word bøtte (again, for an
adult speaker). On occasion, evidence of preaspiration before the plosive was alter-
natively interpretable as preaffrication (i.e. frication made in the oral cavity), but
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


since it was not always possible from the data to distinguish between the two, all
ambiguous cases (which were few in number) were counted as preaspiration.10
Where the two types—breathy voice and voiceless preaspiration—have been
explicitly acknowledged in the literature, the approach of combining the two has
typically been adopted (e.g. van Dommelen b, ; Helgason ; Stevens and
Hajek ; Helgason and Ringen ; Stevens ; Ringen and van Dommelen
bøtte
b
œ
tː
e
br
pre
clo
rel
0.109539
0.066356
0.280481
FIGURE .(b) Spectrogram and waveform showing pre-closure breathiness (‘br’) followed by
voiceless preaspiration (‘pre’) in the word bøtte.
drikke
d
r
i
kː
e
br
clo
rel
0.163572
0.194139
0.027
FIGURE .(a) Spectrogram and waveform showing pre-closure breathiness (‘br’) in the word
drikke.
10 In any case, since it was subsequently judged that these periods of preaspiration were to be
interpreted as afﬁliated to the consonant (see section ...), for the purposes of calculating VC temporal
relations, whether these ambiguous cases were counted as preaffrication or preaspiration turned out to be
immaterial.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

) and the case been made that, even if strictly speaking the two are phonetically
different and should—or at least can—be distinguished, the breathy voiced transition
belongs perceptually to the period of preaspiration and therefore can be treated as a
single interval in most cases (Ní Chasaide ). However, the issue is not a simple
one; for example, as Hejná () shows, there are grounds for treating the two
differently, e.g. their differing sensitivity to a number of conditioning factors and a
possible differing role in certain sound changes. For the purposes of this study,
however, we treated periods of both voiceless and voiced glottal friction as a single
phonetic interval, and henceforth refer to this simply as ‘preaspiration’.
We then manually extracted the durations in ms of:
(i) V;
(ii) period of preaspiration (before stops);
(iii) total duration of the consonant C.
and also calculated the total duration of the rhyme (VC) and the ratio V/VC.
...Statistical analysis
The overall objective of the statistical analysis was to test
the signiﬁcance of variation in vowel and consonant durations (and combinations
thereof, in the rhyme) over the developmental trajectory and compared with adult
speech, for structures containing target long vowels and short consonants, and those
containing target short vowels and long consonants. This would tell us if and how
children mark the rhyme contrast, how it changes over age, and how it differs from
adult speech. Given that there are multiple dependent variables of interest (V, C,
and V/VC), we ﬁrst ran a series of MANOVAs separately on sonorant monosyllables,
sonorant bisyllables, voiceless stop monosyllables, and voiceless stop bisyllables, with
AGE (levels: ;years; years; years; and adult) and LONG (levels: VCː and
VːC structures) as independent variables. The test statistic Wilks’ Lambda (λ)—the
most commonly reported multivariate test for main effects—was selected for assess-
ing signiﬁcance. λ represents the ratio of error variance to total variance for the
combined dependent variables, and thus demonstrates the amount of variance
accounted for in the dependent variables by the independent variables. Signiﬁcant
MANOVA test results (using the test statistic Wilks’ Lambda) were followed up with
separate ANOVAs on each of the dependent variables to evaluate the signiﬁcance of
the effects on these individually.
.Results
..Sonorants
We ran a MANOVA with AGE and LONG as independent variables and the three
dependent variables of interest (V, C, and V/VC) on all VCː (n = ) and VːC (n = )
monosyllabic tokens where C was a sonorant (lateral or nasal), and a separate
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


MANOVA on all VCː (n = ) and VːC (n = ) bisyllabic tokens where C was a
sonorant (lateral or nasal).
For monosyllables, there was a signiﬁcant multivariate effect for the combined
dependent variables with respect to the independent variable AGE (Wilks’ Lambda,
λ = ., F(,) = ., p < .) and LONG (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = .,
F(,) = ., p < .). AGE was a main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .) and
on C (F(,) = .), p < .), but not on V/VC. In other words, the duration of
both vowels and consonants vary signiﬁcantly over the ages investigated, but the
relationship between them, as expressed by V/VC, does not. LONG was a main
effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), on C (F(,) = .), p < .), and V/VC
(F(,) = .), p < .), showing that the contrast is made both through
differences in raw durations and on the proportion of vowel duration in the
rhyme. There is no interaction of AGE*LONG for any measure.
For bisyllables, there was a signiﬁcant multivariate effect for the combined
dependent variables with respect to AGE (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = .,
p < .) and LONG (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = ., p <.). AGE was a
main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), on C (F(,) = .), p < .), and on V/VC
(F(,) = .), p < .). LONG was a main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), on
C (F(,) = .), p < .), and on V/VC (F(,) = .), p < .). In other words,
both raw durations and the relationship between them vary signiﬁcantly over the
different age groups, and in the extent to which they mark the difference between
VːC and VCː. There was a signiﬁcant interaction between AGE and LONG for V
(F(,) = .), p < .) and V/VC (F(,) = .), p < .), but not for C.
...V1
In monosyllables and bisyllables, vowel duration varies with age (AGE
was a main effect on V). As Figure .shows, this variation is in terms of the
duration of both short and long vowels decreasing with age towards the adult target.
This is to be expected as children’s phonetic mastery develops and they execute
tighter control and faster speech rate. There is one exception to this trend: long
vowels in bisyllables are shorter at age than in the adult target, suggesting that in
their attempts to shorten and control global timing, the children end up overshooting
and producing vowels that are too short for the given context. Within each condition
(each rhyme type for each word type, i.e. each block of bars), we can see that the
greatest age-related shortening of vowels occurs for long vowels before short con-
sonants in bisyllables (Figure ., ‘Bisyllables’, left-hand side),11 while the smallest
age-related shortening of vowels occurs for short vowels before long consonants
(Figure ., ‘Bisyllables’, right-hand side). Thus for bisyllables at least, age-related
shortening is greater in ‘long’ vowels, and also greater in bisyllables than in monosyllables.
11 In all boxplots, the vertical lines (whiskers) denote the highest and lowest cases within .of the IQR
(interquartile range).

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

In monosyllables, both ‘long’ and ‘short’ vowels undergo substantial age-related
shortening.
Vowel duration also varies signiﬁcantly between VːC and VCː structures (LONG
was a main effect on V) i.e. as a result of phonological quantity (or the varied
expression thereof). In monosyllables, this is true for all ages, except years.
Figure .(‘Monosyllables’) shows longer vowel durations VːC (on the left of the
graph) than for VCː (on the right of the graph), except for -year-olds. Interestingly,
at age , the duration of long vowels (VːC) in monosyllables is very near to the adult
target, but since the duration of short vowels (VCː) in monosyllables is still overly
long, there is no contrast. In bisyllables, there was an interaction of AGE*LONG on
V, and on examination of Figure .(‘Bisyllables’) we can identify the source of this
interaction. As with monosyllables, vowel durations for VːC (on the left side of the
graph)are longerthanthosefor VCː(ontherightside), and thedifferences areeven more
marked than in monosyllables, with the difference extremely pronounced for age ;. As
has been noted, there is a more dramatic reduction in vowel duration over the child
development trajectory for bisyllables, which means that though there is a particularly
marked contrast in vowel duration between VːC and VCː at an early age, by age this has
dramatically reduced, undermining the contrast, as with monosyllables, here too.
...C
Consonant duration varies with age (AGE was a main effect on C), and
as Figure .shows, the trend is for the duration of both short (left side of graphs)
and long (right side of graphs) consonants to decrease with age, towards the adult
target. Where this differs, it is for -year-olds, whose long consonants in bisyllabic
words are shorter than those produced by adults, indicating an overshooting of
general reduction processes.
Rhyme type
0
100
200
300
400
500
V1
VːC
VCː
Monosyllables
0
100
200
300
400
500
V1
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
Bisyllables
Age
2
4
6
Adult
FIGURE .Mean duration in ms of Vin VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing
sonorants, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


Consonant duration also varies signiﬁcantly between VːC and VCː structures
(LONG was a main effect on C) i.e. as a result of phonological quantity, and this
is true for all ages, including adults (there was no interaction of AGE*LONG).
As Figure .shows, this variation is in terms of the duration of consonants in VːC
structures (left side of graphs) always being shorter than their counterpart conson-
ants in VCː structures (right side of graphs). Contrary to distinctions in vowel
duration, the difference is notably greater in monosyllables than in bisyllables.
...Long:short comparisons
If we compare the (mean duration) ratios of long:
short sonorants with those of long:short Vin both monosyllables and bisyllables
(Table .), we see that durational contrasts in C are fairly stable across ages, ranging
(robustly) from .to in monosyllables, and (less robustly) from .to .in
bisyllables. Durational contrasts in Vvary more widely with age (with age ;closer
to the adult target, resulting in a U-shaped curve) and with position in the word
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
TotalC
Rhyme type
Rhyme type
500
400
300
200
100
0
TotalC
500
400
300
200
100
0
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Age
2
4
6
Adult
FIGURE .Mean duration in ms of C in VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing
sonorants, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).
TABLE .. Long:short ratios for vowel and sonorant
durations across ages, for monosyllables and bisyllables
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Age
V
C
V
C
;
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.



.
.
Adult
.
.
.
.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

(in monosyllables, the proportional contrast ranges (less robustly) from to .,
while in bisyllables it ranges (more robustly) from .to .). Furthermore, conson-
ant duration contrasts are greater than vowel duration contrasts, for all ages, in
monosyllables. In bisyllables, this is reversed, with vowel duration contrasts greater,
particularly at age ;years and for adult speech.
...V/VC
As reported in the statistical analysis, LONG was a main effect for
V/VC, and this can be seen in Figure .from the systematically lower values for
V/VC (rhymes are less vocalic) in VCː structures, in both monosyllables and bisyl-
lables (though the difference is particularly marked in bisyllables). AGE, however,
was only a main effect in bisyllables. Figure .(‘Monosyllables’) shows how V/VC
does not vary for age in monosyllables, except for the high value of V/VC in VCː
structures in -year-olds. In bisyllables there was an interaction of AGE*LONG, and
Figure .(‘Bisyllables’) shows V/VC values falling slightly with age in VːC struc-
tures, and rising with age (in child speech only) in VCː structures. Note how in both
monosyllables and bisyllables the difference in vocalicness between VːC and VCː
structures is much smaller at age . Looking again at the raw durations, we can
attribute this to the following patterns. In monosyllables, at age , Vis both too
short in VːC and too long in VCː structures (resulting in no long:short vowel
difference at all at this age). In bisyllables, Vis also on the short side in VːC,
while C is far too short in VCː (much shorter than in the adult target).
For sonorants, while V/VC is a cue to rhyme type at all ages (albeit less robustly so
for -year-olds), the part played by the individual components of the rhyme has been
shown to vary. In monosyllables, it is variation in consonant duration that more
markedly distinguishes the two rhyme types, except at age ;, when the role is fairly
evenly shared between variation in vowel and consonant. This is evident also from
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
Rhyme type
Age
2
4
6
Adult
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
V/VC
V/VC
.0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
.0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
FIGURE .Mean values of V/VC in VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing sonor-
ants, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


Figure .(left), which shows the mean durations of vowels and consonants in both
rhyme types across ages, for monosyllables. In bisyllables, however, (as shown in
Figure ., right), the rhyme contrast is achieved more robustly through variation in
vowel duration.
Figure .also shows how rhymes are much shorter in duration in the speech of
-year-olds, so as to be either comparable (monosyllables) or even shorter (bisylla-
bles) than in adult speech. This suggests that by years there is considerable
precision in motor control over individual segments (albeit at the expense of appro-
priate intersegmental temporal coordination). Interestingly, children at all three ages
are closer to adult rhyme durations in bisyllables than in monosyllables.
..Voiceless stops
...Preaspiration
The presence of preaspiration before some of the voiceless
stops presented an additional consideration regarding the componential breakdown
of the rhyme and calculation of ‘vocalicness’, namely whether this period of the signal
was to be afﬁliated to the vowel or the consonant. We made the decision to include
periods of preaspiration in the duration of the consonant, based on two types of
evidence: (i) its distribution; (ii) the extent to which afﬁliation either way would
enhance the contrast between rhyme structures.
First, examination of the distribution of preaspiration revealed that it was almost
exclusively associated with long consonants, in both adult and child speech (with
sporadic cases of preaspiration before short consonants only in the speech of -year-
olds). Figure .gives the mean duration and range of preaspiration for VːC and VCː
structures in monosyllables and bisyllables, for all ages.
If we leave out occurrences before short consonants, and examine the distribution
by place of articulation (Table .), we see that preaspiration is especially associated
with alveolars and velars. Table .gives the mean duration in ms of preaspiration in
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
2;6
2;6
4
4
6
6
Adult Adult
C
V
0
100
200
300
400
500
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
2;6
2;6
4
4
6
6
Adult Adult
C
V
FIGURE .Mean durations in ms of V and C, where C = voiceless stop, for VːC and VCː
rhymes, in monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel), across ages.

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

VC before /tː/ in monosyllables and bisyllables, for each age, and adults. Comparing
adult and child speech, preaspiration is less systematic in child speech, but (as we can
also see from Figure .of longer duration, which is perhaps to be expected, given
their lower rate of speech.
Given the association with long consonants, we might reasonably assume periods of
preaspiration should be afﬁliated to the consonant, since being afﬁliated to the vowel
would undermine the distinctiveness of the short vowel + long consonant rhyme
variant (by increasing vowel duration and decreasing consonant duration). Rather
than simply assume this, we tested it statistically by running a MANOVA for each
scenario (one with preaspiration afﬁliated to the vowel and another with preaspiration
afﬁliated to the consonant), to see if the rhyme structure difference were signiﬁcant in
both cases and, if so, which had the larger effect size. The two sets of MANOVAs were
run on all VCː (n = ) and VːC (n = ) monosyllabic tokens containing a voiceless
obstruent, and a separate MANOVA on all VCː (n = ) and VːC (n = ) bisyllabic
tokens containing a voiceless obstruent, with V, C and V/VC as the dependent
variables, and LONG as the independent variable. In scenario () preaspiration was
included as part of V, while in scenario () it was included as part of C. For both
monosyllables and bisyllables, there was a signiﬁcant multivariate effect for the
combined dependent variables with respect to the independent variable LONG for
both scenarios;12 however, the effect sizes for scenario ()—with preaspiration included
Rhyme type
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Preasp
Preasp
0
0
20
40
60
50
80
100
100
120
140
160
150
Age
2
4
6
Adult
FIGURE .Mean duration in ms of preaspiration VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures contain-
ing voiceless stops, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).
12 Scenario () (preaspiration as part of V): monosyllables (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = .,
p < .); bisyllables (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = ., p <.). Scenario () (preaspiration as
part of C): monosyllables (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = ., p < .); bisyllables (Wilks’ Lambda,
λ = ., F(,) = ., p <.).
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


in the consonant—were greater.13 We conclude from this that the contrast between VːC
and VCː is more robust when preaspiration is counted as part of the consonant. Given
that even when it is added to Vduration there is still a contrast (although effect sizes
are smaller), the presence of preaspiration is unlikely to be a primary cue to rhyme
structure. However, its high-frequency occurrence with long consonants could provide
a secondary qualitative percept—a possibility that merits empirical investigation—and
for the purposes of calculating degree of vocalicness in the rhyme, we afﬁliate pre-
aspiration to the consonant.
...Temporal analysis
Given the ﬁndings about preaspiration, we selected the
following measures to examine further:
(i) V1;
(ii) Total C (including preaspiration);
(iii) V/VC.
We ran a MANOVA, with AGE, LONG, and PLACE as independent variables,
and the three dependent variables of interest (V, C, and V/VC) on all VCː (n = )
and VːC (n = ) monosyllabic tokens where C was a voiceless obstruent, and a
separate MANOVA on all VCː (n = ) and VːC (n = ) bisyllabic tokens where
C was a voiceless obstruent).
For monosyllables, there was a signiﬁcant multivariate effect for the combined
dependent variables with respect to the independent variables AGE (Wilks’ Lambda,
λ = ., F(,) = ., p < .) and LONG (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) =
., p < .), but not with respect to PLACE. AGE was a main effect on V
(F(,) = .), p < .) and on C (F(,) = .), p < .), but not on V/VC. In
other words, the duration of vowels and consonants vary signiﬁcantly over the different
speaker ages, but the relationship between them, as expressed by V/VC, does not.
LONG was a main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .) and V/VC (F(,) = .),
p < .), but only marginally on C (F(,) = .), p < .). There was an
interaction of AGE*LONG for V/VC (F(,) = .), p < .).
For bisyllables, there was a signiﬁcant multivariate effect for the combined
dependent variables with respect to AGE (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = .,
p < .) and LONG (Wilks’ Lambda, λ = ., F(,) = ., p < .), but not with
respect to PLACE. AGE was a main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), but not
on C or V/VC. LONG was a main effect on both V(F(,) = .), p < .) and on
V/VC (F(,) = .), p < .), but not on C. There was no signiﬁcant interaction
between AGE and LONG.
13 Cohen’s d-effect size: scenario () monosyllables d = .; bisyllables d = .; scenario () mono-
syllables d = .; bisyllables d = ..

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

V
In monosyllables and bisyllables, vowel duration varies with age (AGE was a
main effect on V). As Figure .shows, this variation is in terms of the duration of
both short and long vowels decreasing with age, towards the adult target. The one
exception consists of long vowels in bisyllables, which are shorter at age than in the
TABLE .. Percentage of stops preceded by a period of
aspiration or breathy voice
Adult %
Child %
/pː/


/tː/


/kː/


Overall


TABLE .. Mean duration of preaspiration in the rhyme
(VC) for voiceless alveolar long stops
Age
Monosyllables (ms)
Bisyllables (ms)
;








Adults


Age
2
4
6
Adult
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
V1
V1
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
500
FIGURE .Mean duration in ms of Vin VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing
voiceless stops, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


adult target, suggesting that in their attempts to shorten and control global timing,
children end up overshooting and producing vowels that are too short. This is the
same pattern as we see for sonorants.
Vowel duration also varies signiﬁcantly between VːC and VCː structures (LONG
was a main effect on V) i.e. as a result of phonological quantity. This is true for all
ages except age , for bisyllables (where children overly shorten their long vowels, as
we have seen), and again is the same pattern as we see for sonorants.
C
In monosyllables, consonant duration varies with age (AGE was a main effect on
C), and as Figure .shows, the duration of both short (left side of graphs) and long
(right side of graphs) consonants decreases with age, towards the adult target. There
is also a weak trend for it to vary between VːC and VCː structures (marginal
signiﬁcance of LONG), with consonants longer in VCː structures (right of graph) at
age , and also marginally at ;, suggesting that children at this stage may be using
both vowel and consonant duration to mark the difference in rhyme structure.
In contrast, in bisyllables, consonant duration does not vary signiﬁcantly with age or
between VːC and VCː structures, although mean durations of consonants in VCː
rhymes are longer than in VːC rhymes at and years. The very small range of values
for consonants in VːC rhymes in bisyllables for -year-olds is noteworthy: productions
varied only by a few milliseconds, suggesting a very high degree of control of segmental
duration (though evidently somewhat at the expense of adult-like temporal relations
in the VC rhyme). This reﬂects a general tendency for both V and C to be short
and have less variation in bisyllables in the -year-olds’ speech. Also, some adults
and -year-olds at least in some instances produce considerably longer consonants
TotalC
TotalC
500
600
400
300
200
100
0
500
600
400
300
200
100
0
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Age
2
4
6
Adult
FIGURE .Mean duration in ms of C in VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing
voiceless stops, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

for VCː rhymes (Figure ., ‘Bisyllables’) than for VːC rhymes (Figure ., ‘Monosyl-
lables’). The wider range of values for the adult speech appears to stem from differences
in place of articulation, with productions of /tː/ being considerably longer than those
for /pː/ and /kː/—a difference not replicated elsewhere and therefore somewhat
anomalous. Nevertheless, these trends are weak and inconsistent, especially when
compared with the trends for vowel duration as discussed immediately above and
when compared with sonorants as discussed in section ..., suggesting that any
durational role for voiceless stops in the rhyme contrast is at best weaker and less
consistent than in sonorants.
Long:short comparisons
If we compare the ratios of long:short voiceless stops with
those of long:short Vin both monosyllables and bisyllables (Table .), we see that
proportional differences are more robust in V than in C across all ages, except in
bisyllables for - and -year-olds. At this age, in bisyllables consonants appear to play
a more important role, especially at age , when vowel differences are negligible.
At years proportional differences in consonants also play a role in monosyllables. In
contrast, at age ;and in adult speech, for both monosyllables and bisyllables, and at
age for monosyllables, there is no contrast in mean consonant duration. Hence we
see a U-shaped development, with voiceless plosive duration initially not playing a
role in signalling rhyme structure, then acquiring such a role, before being lost again
in adult speech.
In contrast, proportional vowel differences are large and the key characteristic of
rhyme structure differences in monosyllables, albeit with some reduction at years.
For bisyllables, proportional vowel differences are robust at an early age, and then
again in adult speech, but are greatly diminished around age , again denoting a
U-shaped development in rhyme temporal relations.
V/VC
As reported in the statistical analysis, degree of ‘vocalicness’, as measured by
V/VC, varies signiﬁcantly between VːC and VCː structures in both monosyllables
and bisyllables (LONG was a main effect for V/VC); this can be seen in Figure .
from the systematically lower values for V/VC in VCː structures. V/VC does not vary
TABLE .. Long:short ratios for vowel and voiceless stop durations
across ages, for monosyllables and bisyllables
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Age
V
C
V
C
;

.



.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
Adult
.

.
.
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


signiﬁcantly with AGE, however, which means that the proportional contrast is
robust for all speaker ages. Nevertheless, we see a trend for V/VC to be lower for
VːC structures and, for monosyllables, higher for VCː structures, reducing the
robustness of this contrast in the speech of -year-olds.
For voiceless stops, while V/VC is a robust cue to rhyme type at all ages (albeit
reduced slightly for the years group), the part played by the individual components
of the rhyme has been shown to vary. As we have seen, the contrast is largely due to
signiﬁcant variance particularly in vowel duration, and much less to variation in
consonants, especially for adults and at age ;. This is evident also from Figure .,
which also shows more variation in consonants at ages and , when previous adult-
like coordination of the temporal relations in the rhyme appears to go ‘off track’,
possibly as a result of speech rate increasing.
VːC
VCː
VːC
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
2;6
2;6
4
4
6
6
Adult Adult
VCː
6 Adult Adult
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
VCː
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
VCː
VːC
2;6
2;6
4
4
6
C
V
C
V
FIGURE .Mean durations in ms of V and C, where C = voiceless stop, for VːC and VCː
rhymes, in monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel), across ages.
Monosyllables
Bisyllables
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
Rhyme type
VːC
VCː
V/VC
V/VC
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.0
Age
2
4
6
Adult
FIGURE .Mean values of V/VC in VːC (left) and VCː (right) structures containing voiceless
stops, across ages, for monosyllables (left panel) and bisyllables (right panel).

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

.Discussion
..Temporal cues
...Sonorants
For both monosyllables and bisyllables, children (like adults)
were shown to differentiate between CVːC and CVCː structures in a statistically
signiﬁcant way throughout the developmental arc investigated. The results of the
univariate analyses revealed that, for monosyllables, they differentiate consistently
along all the measures investigated (V, C, and V/VC), except at age , when Vis
not differentiated. For bisyllables, children consistently differentiate along all meas-
ures, except -year-olds for C, which then undermines the robustness of the V/VC
contrast in their speech. Raw durations of Vand C were shown to decrease
signiﬁcantly with age, but for monosyllables V/VC did not vary signiﬁcantly with
age, strongly indicating that, at least for monosyllables, the VC relationship is
acquired early on and remains fairly robust throughout development. How the
appropriate VC relationship is achieved varies also as a function of word length,
with vowel-duration differences playing a larger role in bisyllables, and consonant-
duration differences playing a larger role in monosyllables. Processes of global timing
reduction, as phonetic skills develop, lead to some distortions in the mapping onto
phonological structure. At age children have reduced their long vowels in mono-
syllables to be close in duration to the adult target; however, their short vowels are
still too long, and this results in no contrast in Vduration (long:short = ).
Nevertheless, they maintain a difference in V/VC (albeit smaller than in both adult
speech and at younger ages) through durational contrasts in the consonants.
For bisyllables, however, the mapping distortions at age are greater and affect V/
VC to a larger extent. There was a signiﬁcant interaction of AGE*LONG for V/VC,
and closer inspection revealed that V/VC was both too low in VːC structures, and too
high in VCː structures at age . This results from both long vowels and long
consonants being too short (undershooting durations observed in adult speech).
It would appear that the temporal relationship in VC poses a greater challenge in
development for bisyllabic words than for monosyllabic words.
In summary, children are able to produce vowels and consonants of contrasting
durations at the early age (;), and also produce a clear distinction along the
measure of V/VC. Increasing phonetic mastery results in shorter vowels and con-
sonant durations as children develop, and some of the individual contrasts are
undermined, as vowels or consonants are either insufﬁciently reduced or the child
overshoots reduction processes and vowels or consonants end up too short for a
speciﬁc context. This is particularly apparent at the age of years, when several
individual categories of duration are at or closer to the adult target, suggesting a
higher degree of articulatory control over timing in a global sense, but often at the
expense of speciﬁc timing relationships that had already been acquired, albeit in
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


slower speech. Thus, knowledge of phonological structures is acquired early on and
expressed utilizing the means already available to the child by age ;. However, the
period of phonetic ‘catch-up’ exhibited in the subsequent developmental trajectory
results in a ﬁne-tuning of the phonetic exponent that affects the phonological-
phonetic mapping. This in turn results in the child passing through a period in
which the signalling of structure is undermined (from the perspective of the adult
speech target). We thus observe a U-shaped development in outputs. This is par-
ticularly evident in bisyllabic words which, being longer, appear to pose a greater
challenge for the developing child in mastering details of timing and coordination.
...Voiceless stops
The picture for voiceless stops is somewhat different, with
evidence of a more subtle contrast, suggesting that manner of articulation, possibly
along with competition for temporal relationships as a cue for phonological voice,
conditions the expression of vowel/consonant quantity in adult speech, and also
acquisition. As with sonorants, the durations of vowels and consonants decrease as
the child develops towards the adult target, but, again as with sonorants, for both
monosyllables and bisyllables, children (like adults) were shown to differentiate
between CVːC and CVCː structures in a statistically signiﬁcant way throughout
the developmental arc investigated. However, the measures along which they do so
are different from those observed for sonorants. For monosyllables and bisyllables,
quantity distinctions are expressed via the measures Vand V/VC across the early
stages of the developmental arc and in adult speech. However, at age there is no
contrast in Vin bisyllables, and the V/VC contrast is much reduced in both
monosyllables and bisyllables. Only the younger children (ages ;and ) also use
C, and only for monosyllables, and neither children nor adults appear to differentiate
consonant duration for VːC and VCː structures for bisyllables. This is interesting
from a cross-linguistic perspective because it goes against the general pattern across
geminating languages for voiceless stops to be more commonly geminated than
sonorants,14 though this is by no means without exception.15 It is also interesting
within Norwegian, since it is quite different from the patterns observed for sonorants,
and means that for voiceless stops the differences in V/VC are obtained almost
entirely through variation in Valone. V/VC as a differentiating measure holds
across all ages, proving itself to be a robust measure in both monosyllables and
bisyllables, though as with sonorants it is much reduced at age . There is some
evidence of undershoot of long vowels and overshoot of short vowels in -year-olds.
Thus, while there are broad similarities with sonorants (the contrast being made at
all ages, in one form or another and to a lesser or greater degree, and with mapping
14 We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
15 For example, in Italian, the most commonly lexical geminates are /tː/ and /lː/ (see Bortolini and
Zampolli ).

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

distortions particularly evident at age ), there is a fundamental difference in that, for
voiceless plosives, consonant duration appears to play little or no role in differenti-
ating VːC and VCː structures. Any early signs of a contrast on consonants being
made in monosyllables have disappeared by the age of .
..Determining the location and nature of the contrast
We may conjecture as to why the contrast between VːC and VCː is made differently
according to consonant type. Stop consonants are complex articulations: sequen-
tially they consist of multiple phases (minimally usually the closure and release
phases, and also possible periods of aspiration preceding and/or following); and
concurrently they consist of a complex coordination of oral and laryngeal gestures.
There is no apparent reason, however, why this complexity should constitute an
obstacle to systematic duration variation; indeed, long (geminate) stops, especially
voiceless ones, are fairly common among those languages that have geminates.
Nevertheless, there is cross-linguistic evidence that the geminate:singleton contrast
is typically greater in sonorants than in obstruents (e.g. Payne : for Italian),
for while geminate obstruents may be relatively long, so are their singleton coun-
terparts. Hence, where there is another available cue, such as vowel duration, this
may be preferred.
Stops (and obstruents more generally) are also phonologically more complex than
sonorants in that they bear a contrast for phonological [voice]. Variation in the
temporal relationship between an obstruent and its preceding vowel is an important
cue to obstruent [voice] in many Germanic languages. All other things being equal,
voiceless obstruents are longer than their voiced equivalents, and the vowels preced-
ing them are shorter (also known as ‘pre-fortis clipping’), and this has been found to
be true also for Norwegian (Fintoft ; van Dommelen and Ringen ; Ringen
and van Dommelen ). A full paradigm of voiced stops could not be included
in this study because of the paucity of words containing voiced stops (short or long)
that are known to children at ;. Nevertheless, an incomplete paradigm was
included, and produced consistently by the adult speakers, and with varying consist-
ency by the children: alveolar series = bad/kladd, spade/padde; velar series = dag/
ﬂagg, tygge). In a univariate analysis pooling voiceless and voiced stops, VOICE was
found to be a main effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), on C (F(,) = .),
p < .) and on V/VC (F(,) = .), p < .) for monosyllables, and a main
effect on V(F(,) = .), p < .), on C (F(,) = .), p < .) and on V/VC
(F(,) = .), p < .) for bisyllables. There were no interactions of
VOICE*LONG. For both VːC and VCː structures, as expected, vowels were longer
before voiced stops than before voiceless stops, and voiced stops were shorter than
voiceless stops. The complementarity of shorter vowel + longer voiceless consonant
and longer vowel + shorter voiced consonant did not, however, result in uniform
V/VC values, since these were signiﬁcantly lower for voiceless stops (reﬂecting the
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


main effect of VOICE on V/VC). In other words, the longer duration of the voiceless
stop does not fully compensate for the shorter preceding vowel.
Thus, for stops there would appear to be a complex interaction of timing relations
signaling both voice and ‘length’ contrasts, resulting in a greater number of durational
contrasts and competing demands on timing. The smaller magnitude of the ‘length’
contrast observed for plosives is in keeping with Riad’s () observation that more
complex systems have smaller durational differences. In the case of Norwegian, the
system is particularly complex since both vowel and consonant duration vary system-
atically with both voice and ‘length’ contrasts, and so it is perhaps not surprising that
contrasts for stops are durationally more subtle than for sonorants. One might
similarly expect more subtle contrasts in vowel duration, by extension, though curiously
this is not the case.
Competing demands for timing relations mean that the measure of V/VC for a
long vowel + fortis stop, as in lek (‘play’), is very similar to that of a short vowel +
lenis stop, as in legg (‘foot’). The availability of other, non-temporal cues can
potentially help disambiguate perceptually. Although not investigated in this study,
it was observed that intervocalic and prepausal lenis ([+ voice]) stops were predom-
inantly fully voiced (as reported also by Ringen and van Dommelen , for
Trøndelag Norwegian; by Helgason and Ringen , for Swedish) and unlike e.g.
English and German. Also as reported for Swedish, we observed a tendency for
speakers to produce an epenthetic vocoid after the release of a prepausal voiced stop.
This was relatively sporadic in the adult productions (around % of relevant tokens
exhibited this), but more frequent in the children’s productions (around %), and
with a greater occurrence after ‘long’ voiced stops (i.e. more frequent after ‘ﬂagg’
(‘ﬂag’) than after ‘dag’ (‘day’)), contrary to ﬁndings in Swedish (Helgason and Ringen
), where there is a greater tendency towards devoicing in longer stops (only adult
speech observed in the Swedish study). Given the complexity of the system, a fuller
understanding of long consonants in acquisition, and of the acquisition of temporal
relations more generally, needs to take into account the cueing of phonological
[voice] by both temporal and non-temporal cues. One such cue that is worthy of
further investigation is the presence of preaspiration.
..Preaspiration
Our data revealed the presence of preaspiration in many of the tokens of both
adult and child speakers, before voiceless long stops. Preaspiration is a relatively
uncommon feature among the world’s languages, but is comparatively common
among languages spoken in northwestern Europe, including several North Germanic
languages (most prominently Icelandic and Faeroese, but also some dialects of
Swedish, Norwegian, and (Tyneside) English), Celtic languages (Scottish Gaelic and
Welsh), and most Sami languages (Wolter ; Ní Chasaide ; Pind , ,
; Gobl and Ní Chasaide ; Fant et al. ; Jónsson ; Ladefoged and

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

Maddieson ; Moxness ; Docherty and Foulkes ; van Dommelen b;
Helgason ; Schaefﬂer et al. ; Tronnier ; Wretling et al. ; van
Dommelen and Ringen ; Ringen and van Dommelen ; Hejná ;
Tengesdal ). The details of its distribution vary across languages and dialectal
varieties. In Faeroese and Icelandic, postvocalic voiceless geminate stops and affricates
are preaspirated, and in some dialects of Faeroese, non-geminate voiceless stops may
also be preaspirated. Preaspiration of fortis stops (geminate/long and non-geminate/
short) is found in both southern and northern varieties of Swedish and, while it is not
an obligatory feature, Helgason () reports that there are speakers who preaspirate
regularly and consistently.
In Norwegian, preaspiration is reported only for a few dialects in west and mid-
Norway, e.g. Jaeren, Northern Gudbrandsdal and—more variably—Trøndelag) and
is typically either associated with reﬂexes of Old Norse voiceless geminates or at least
more marked before voiceless geminates/long consonants than before non-geminates/
short consonants (see Moxness ; van Dommelen b, ; Helgason ;
Ringen and van Dommelen ). Helgason (:) reports that known preaspira-
tion in Norwegian is limited to a few dialects, but also raises the possibility that
occurrence of preaspiration has been underestimated across the world more gener-
ally, especially when it is not obligatory.16 To our knowledge, it has not hitherto been
reported for Urban Eastern Norwegian (UEN), and yet our data would appear to
suggest that it is indeed present, at least for some speakers, and present also at early
stages of speech acquisition. Furthermore, unlike the variable preaspiration found in
Swedish and reported for other varieties of Norwegian, which is found before fortis
stops (whether long or short) (van Dommelen b; Helgason and Ringen ;
Ringen and van Dommelen ), it would appear to be primarily associated with
voiceless long stops. In other words, while preaspiration is an (optional) cue to
[+ fortis] in varieties of Swedish and other varieties of Norwegian, in UEN it appears
to be patterning more as an (optional) cue to long consonants, or to VCː rhyme
structure more generally. Furthermore, additional analysis of the (incomplete set of)
voiced stops that were recorded revealed a tendency (albeit lesser) towards non-
modal laryngeal activity before voiced long stops, at least in adult speech, that could
be categorized with the preaspiration before voiceless stops. The preaspiration
observed before voiced long stops was more markedly breathy-voiced, as one
might expect, since Norwegian [+voice] stops are generally phonetically voiced.
The data for the voiced-stop series are too patchy to provide anything but a
suggestion in this direction, and a more thorough investigation of a larger sample
of speech data is needed to conﬁrm this phenomenon for UEN. What we may be
observing is a different use of available phonetic exponency cues for a similarly
16 An anonymous reviewer concurs that the occurrence of preaspiration has been underestimated and
under-reported, citing unexpected instances also in American English in his/her own data.
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


complex system of contrasts in obstruents in UEN on the one hand and the relevant
varieties of Swedish and other varieties of Norwegian on the other.
Preaspiration, for those speakers who produce it, is clearly associated in UEN with
long (typically voiceless) consonants, and however subtle its presence may be (so
subtle as to have eluded recognition), it is present also in the very youngest speakers,
who must be aware of it during the acquisition process. Just what role it may have in
the signalling of long consonants in UEN is worthy of further investigation. From a
temporal point of view, it appears to make a not very noticeable difference to the
contrasting of consonant length, and even less difference to contrasting vowel length.
Vowel and consonant duration are either sufﬁciently robust in themselves to signal
the contrast or not sufﬁcient even with the added duration of preaspiration. Similarly,
for Trøndelag Norwegian, van Dommelen (b: ) ﬁnds no signiﬁcant correl-
ation of preaspiration duration with either vowel or consonant duration. He does,
however, ﬁnd a highly signiﬁcant correlation with the duration of the whole rhyme,
which he interprets as evidence that the preaspiration is to be seen as separate from
both the vowel and the consonant. As he explains, ‘This kind of relationship can be
expected for a correlation between the duration of an independent segment and the
duration of that segment plus one or more adjacent segments.’
However we choose to align preaspiration, if at all, its presence may be a func-
tional, secondary cue (secondary to temporal cues) in the VCː instantiation of
syllable weight. We have observed how stop consonants, unlike sonorants, vary
very little, if at all, between VːC and VCː structures, and so the resulting VːC/VCː
contrast is relatively impoverished (relying mostly on differences in vowel duration).
The availability of a secondary cue of preaspiration would enrich the percept, and
thus make the contrast more robust. The VC sequence therefore contains several
potential features available for marking phonological structure, whether this struc-
ture is quantity instantiations or voice.
.Conclusion
This study set out to investigate whether, and if so how, very young children
acquiring Norwegian differentiate in their productions between CVːC and CVCː
structures and between CVːCV and CVCːV structures, and from this to gain also a
better understanding of the status of long consonants in Norwegian and of the
acquisition of geminates more generally. Our study shows that children already
mark the contrast at the earliest age investigated (;) and do so by a variety of the
means available to them. The single most robust measure across consonant type and
age (also for adult speech) is the proportion of vocalicness in the rhyme, as measured
by V/VC. This value is remarkably on target for children even at ;, even if actual
durations of vowels and consonants are far longer at this age. This measure remains
fairly stable over the developmental arc investigated, although is notably somewhat

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

undermined at age , when some of the individual contrasts are undermined, as
vowels or consonants are either insufﬁciently reduced or the child overshoots
reduction processes and vowels or consonants end up producing a sound too
short for a speciﬁc context. We explain this U-shaped development as resulting
from increased phonetic mastery with respect to ﬂuency in connected speech, as
the child masters intergestural coordination sufﬁciently well to produce an increas-
ingly rapid execution of segmental sequences, but at the expense of the more tightly
controlled temporal relations of more localized sequences that she had already
mastered at an earlier age. The transition from ﬁrst productions of multi-word
utterances to more ﬂuent connected speech is a key factor in the extent to which
phonetic ability enables or obstructs the mapping of speciﬁc structures dependent
on timing, and reveals how the interaction and integration of phonetic and
phonological knowledge in acquisition are complex and progress in a non-linear
fashion.
Child production also mirrors patterns in adult speech with respect to marking
of the contrast for different consonant types. While place of articulation has no
effect on how the contrast is made, manner of articulation does. For sonorants, the
contrast is made not only with differences in the relative timing of VC, but also in
the duration of the vowel and consonant individually. There is also an effect of word
length, with the contrast marked more clearly by consonant-duration differences
in monosyllables, and more clearly by vowel-duration differences in bisyllables. In
voiceless stops, however, the only robust measures are relative timing of VC and
variation in vowel duration, with any early signs of contrast through consonant
duration disappearing by age . The contrast between VːC and VCː structures is also
more subtle in voiceless stops than in sonorants, quite probably as a result of there
being greater competition for temporal cues in stops and an interaction of VC
timing cues to both phonological voice and ‘length’.
Our study also revealed evidence for preaspiration as a marker of long consonants,
at least for the voiceless series. This feature has not been previously reported for
UEN, and its association speciﬁcally with long stops—as opposed to fortis stops as in
dialects of Swedish that also have non-obligatory preaspiration—is distinctive and
worthy of further study. Given the more subtle temporal cues to the VːC vs. VCː
contrast in stops, it is plausible that preaspiration provides a secondary cue to long
consonants for at least some speakers, and merits perceptual investigation. Our
investigation revealed that children also exhibit this association, with a slightly
lower percentage of stops preaspirated than adults, but with longer periods of
aspiration. Our understanding of the VːC / VCː contrast in Norwegian, and its
acquisition, requires a fuller understanding of the tradeoff with non-temporal cues to
both ‘length’ and voicing, including but not limited to preaspiration. The relative
phonological and phonetic complexity of certain consonants (e.g. stops over sonor-
ants) also needs to be taken into account.
The acquisition of long consonants in Norwegian


The varied use of different measures in the signalling of speciﬁc structure in the
VC sequence points to neither vowel nor consonant duration per se being the sole, or
even primary, locus of contrast in UEN. Instead, we propose that the rhyme as a
whole is the locus of temporal and non-temporal properties signalling both length
and voice. This is supported by the relatively stable measure of V/VC over different
consonant types and word lengths, and by the early acquisition of this measure in
child speech, even while children are still learning to ﬁne-tune their phonetic skills.
This interpretation is more compatible with formal accounts that emphasize above
all the particular properties of stressed syllables and the two alternative instantiations
available for these, rather than determining whether consonant or vowel length is
primary. Nevertheless, speakers have to know which instantiation is ‘correct’, and
therefore this knowledge must in some way be lexically encoded.
.Appendix. Target words
Words in brackets indicate words only produced by adults.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by a British Academy Small Research Grant SG‘The
acquisition of consonant timing: a study in cross-linguistic micro-variation’ (PI Elinor
Payne), by funding from the University of Oslo’s Centre for MultiLingualism in Society Across
the Lifespan (MultiLing) awarded to Hanne Gram Simonsen, and by funding from the Faculty
of Education and International Studies at Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
Sciences awarded to Nina Gram Garmann. We thank also Elisabeth Holm, Eirik Tengesdal,
and Ane Theimann for their assistance in recording and segmenting the data, and two
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. We also wish to thank our late friend and
colleague Inger Moen, who contributed much to discussions about this work, and who has
since sadly passed away. We dedicate this chapter to her.
CVːC
CVCː
CVːCV
CVCːV
/ p /
rap
kopp
(slipe)
(gruppe)
/ t /
fot
gutt, natt, katt, (slutt)
pute
bøtte
/ k /
bok, tak
smokk, krakk
–
(trekke, drikke)
/ l /
bil, sol, (tvil)
ball
skole
kylling
/ n /
stein
strand, vann, brann
mane, svane
(tvinne)

Payne, Post, Garmann, and Simonsen

7
Second language learners’ production
of geminate consonants in Japanese
YUKARI HIRATA
.Introduction
This study examined non-native speakers’ (NNs) production of Japanese consonant
length distinctions before and after a four-month study abroad programme in Japan.
Previous acoustic analyses of Japanese learners’ production show inconsistent results
with regard to the patterns of their production problems and development, and there
is no known consistent pattern for learners’ development of durational control on
consonant length distinctions over several years. Findings are limited even when we
restrict ourselves to examining a group of learners who are native speakers of English,
which is the focus of the present study. Speciﬁcally, this study focuses on intermediate
learners of Japanese who had been studying Japanese for two years in their home
country and who had their ﬁrst exposure to an immersion setting in Japan for four
months. This particular group not only ﬁlls a gap in extant literature in second
language (L) acquisition but also provides insight into the general belief that learners’
production ability can be expected to improve notably during language immersion.
One of the earliest studies that examined Japanese learners’ production of single-
ton and geminate consonant contrasts was Han (), who examined four native
speakers of American English who were ﬂuent, advanced learners of Japanese and
who had lived in Japan for more than a year. She found that, in contrast to native
speakers of Japanese (NJs), who produced singleton and geminate stop closures in
the ratio of .:., these advanced Japanese learners’ ratio was .:., far short of the
distinction made by NJs. Han () pointed out that NNs do not reach the native-
speaker level in production of the stop-length distinction even after living in Japan
for a year or more.
Toda () tested four native speakers of Australian English with –months of
previous experience with Japanese language study, and found that these learners did
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Yukari Hirata . First published by Oxford University Press.

not improve their production of the consonant length distinction after a year of
language study. The crucial duration units upon which Toda based this text were the
ratio of word-medial obstruents (stops [t k] and fricative [s]) to the preceding vowels
(C/V), the ratio of geminate to singleton stop closure (G/S), and the ratio of three-
mora to two-mora word duration. For example, NJs’ C/Vratios were .for [ɾika]
and .for [ɾikːa], but NNs’ ratios were less separated, e.g. .and .for one
speaker. After a year of Japanese study, however, this learner’s ratios became .and
., showing an over-exaggeration. Toda’s conclusion was that NNs have difﬁculty
producing this consonant-length distinction as accurately as NJs.
More recently, Masuda and Hayes-Harb () examined singleton and geminate
obstruents produced by native speakers of American English. In their study, ratios
of word-medial obstruents (stop [t] and fricative [s]) to the preceding vowels (C/V)
were ﬁrst examined with NJs (singletons: .; geminates: .) as a point of
comparison. NNs with no Japanese language experience showed the ratios of .
(singletons) vs. .(geminates). These values were both smaller than those of NJs,
and the difference in ratios between singletons and geminates shown by NNs was
smaller than that of NJs. However, late-beginning learners with one year of Japanese
language study reached values (.vs. .) closer to those of NJs.
In summary, the previous studies show that, although learners do make some
distinction in their own way, their mean durational values are different from the NJs’
range. The only evidence of production improvement comes from Masuda and
Hayes-Harb (), but it is still not clear whether the changes in the values clearly
meet the threshold of accurate and authentic production. The results of Toda ()
and Masuda and Hayes-Harb () imply that there might be some improvement
from the very beginning to the end of a year of studying Japanese, but the results of
Han () suggest that even advanced learners who have lived in Japan for more
than a year still have problems with this singleton/geminate consonant distinction.
Thus, the question still remains as to whether learners truly move towards authentic
and accurate production over an extended period of time.
Two issues remain in obtaining a complete picture of learners’ production devel-
opment on the singleton/geminate consonant distinction. The ﬁrst concerns the
units that were measured and used to characterize NNs’ production. The units that
the previous studies typically analysed for consonant length contrasts were stop-
closure duration, the durational ratio of geminates to singleton closures (G/S), and
the ratio of closure to the preceding vowel (C/V). These units associated with
closure duration have indeed been considered to be the major acoustic correlates of
NJs’ stop-length distinction (Han , ; Homma ), but another important
unit needs to be taken into account, namely, word duration. Several studies point out
that NJs’ word duration is an important indication of the number of moras that a
word contains (Port et al. ; Han ; Toda ; Hirata and Whiton ) and
is thus an important criterion for the singleton and geminate stop distinction in

Hirata

disyllables. Durational ratios of disyllabic words including singletons and geminates
in the studies discussed were :.–., corresponding to the number of moras in
those words, i.e. :. Given this well-formed word duration, it is possible that, even if
NNs’ C/Vratio is accurate as a geminate stop, NJs might not perceive it as intended
if the following vowel is too long so as to disrupt the expected word duration (Hirata
; Ofuka et al. ; Idemaru and Guion-Anderson ). However, previous
studies, except for Toda (), do not provide data on word duration. The present
acoustic analysis, therefore, included word duration and the ratio of the contrasting
stop closure to the word (C/W), which was crucial in quantifying NJs’ stop-length
distinction in Hirata and Whiton ().1
Furthermore, it has been a problem of measured units that simple comparisons of
NJs’ and NNs’ ratios cannot provide a deﬁnitive criterion for success and accuracy of
singleton and geminate consonant distinction. For example, when the means of NJs
and NNs are compared, it is not clear how close the NNs’ means have to be to the
NJs’ in order to characterize the NNs’ production as accurate and authentic. First of
all, even NJs’ production ratios vary across different contexts and speakers. Second,
the crucial criterion should not be so much means as the boundary ratio that
distinguishes the two phonemic categories of singletons and geminates (which
would eventually require NJs’ perception of examined word pairs in particular
contexts). In order to address this issue, the present study adopted a useful measure
from Hirata and Whiton (): they found that NJs’ C/W boundary ratio of .
maximally classiﬁed the produced singleton and geminate tokens with .% accur-
acy. In other words, when a given disyllable has a C/W ratio smaller than ., it
would most likely include a singleton, whereas a token with a C/W ratio greater than
.would most likely include a geminate. This optimal C/W boundary ratio yielded
by NJs was applied to the present learners’ data, and the number of accurately
classiﬁed tokens was calculated out of the entire data set. The present study also
incorporated a similar method of determining the classiﬁcation accuracy of NNs’
data using NJs’ C/Vboundary ratio.
As for the second issue, previous studies typically examined NNs’ production at
one (usually a ‘normal’ or ‘comfortable’) speaking rate. NJs’ durational patterns of
singleton and geminate consonants along with their neighbouring segments and
words are well organized and predictable even when they speak at varied rates
(Hirata and Whiton ). However, very few studies have investigated whether
this is the case for NNs when they speak at varied speaking rates. It is possible that
1 A series of more recent studies have shown that in production and perception of - and -mora words,
e.g [kata] and [katːa] portions of [kataku] ‘domestic property’ vs. [katːaku] ‘smooth and shiny’, it is the
two- or three-mora units of (C)V.(C).CV that the closure duration of the contrasting stops most stably
relates to (Amano and Hirata , ; Hirata and Amano ). Thus, the term ‘word’ is a bit
misleading here if we are concerned with words of varied length. However, the term is used here for
convenience, since this chapter is only concerned with disyllabic words.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


NNs’ durational structure may be as stable and well organized as NJs at their most
comfortable speaking rate, but that it may break down at faster speaking rates. It is
also possible that participants’ ability to speak at the fastest rate possible might be an
indicator of their speech ﬂuency (as suggested by some evidence showing correl-
ations between production ﬂuency and speaking rate, e.g. de Jong et al. ). If this
were the case, NNs’ overall sentence duration would be shorter after their Japan
immersion. While effects of speaking rate on NNs’ perception of Japanese length
contrasts have been investigated (Hirata et al. ; Tajima et al. ), little is
known about its effects on production. The present study, therefore, elicited NNs’
production at different speaking rates, and examined the durational accuracy with
speaking rate variability.
In summary, our understanding of NNs’ singleton and geminate production is still
incomplete; particularly lacking are data for intermediate learners of Japanese who
have studied Japanese for two or three years. It is important to note that ‘beginning,
intermediate, and advanced’ levels of Llearning are a vague, rudimentary measure,
especially given reported individual differences observed among Llearners
(Krashen ; Baker and Troﬁmovich ). While we acknowledge the difﬁculty
associated with precisely deﬁning ﬂuency and/or proﬁciency levels of learners, we
begin our investigation with a coarse categorization based on the limited available
data: those in their ﬁrst year of studying Japanese in a formal setting are categorized
as beginning, those in their second and third years as intermediate, and those in their
fourth or longer years as advanced learners. This study examined intermediate-level
participants who had studied Japanese in formal classroom settings for two years in a
small private university in the United States and who had lived in Japan for four
months as they continued their formal Japanese study. Their production was
recorded and analysed acoustically before and after their study in Japan. At this
stage, learners have covered basic grammar and everyday vocabulary in the class-
room, but they are still effortful, and not always successful, in their oral communi-
cation with NJs in natural settings. Because of the accumulation of basic knowledge
up to that point, it is generally believed and anecdotally acknowledged by students
and instructors of Japanese that their speaking ability improves most notably in the
ﬁrst several months of language immersion. However, few empirical studies have
been conducted to closely monitor actual measurable progress in their pronunciation
at this stage of learning. Therefore, this study examined the possible changes in their
durational control of the stop-length distinction during this period.
The ﬁrst question addressed in this study was to what extent the ability to produce
stop length distinction improves over four months abroad in Japan. Are they able to
approach native-speaker level in four months? This question was examined with the
following measures: sentence duration, word duration, contrasting stop closure
duration, and G/S, C/V, and C/W ratios. These measures were compared between
pre-Japan and post-Japan not only in terms of their means but also in terms of C/V

Hirata

and C/W classiﬁcation accuracy as described earlier. As with many previous studies
in Lacquisition (Krashen ; Baker and Troﬁmovich ), Llearners’ devel-
opment is normally characterized by large individual variations. Thus, this study also
examines the above measures separately for each individual, and delineates the range
of improvement observed among the Llearners. The second question examined was
how the present participants’ results compare with those of previous studies, espe-
cially regarding the different learning stages, i.e. beginning learners (Toda ;
Masuda and Hayes-Harb ) and advanced learners (Han ).
.Method
..Participants
Participants were seven students (ages: –; male and female) at a private
university in North America, who were monolingual native speakers of American
English and had taken two years of Japanese language classes, totalling hours. All
of these intermediate Japanese learners participated in a study abroad programme in
Kyoto,2 Japan, directed by the university, for four months of the fall semester
(September–December). They were recruited to participate in recording sessions
before and after they went to Kyoto.
During their stay in Kyoto, each of them lived with a Japanese host family for three
months, and travelled with a programme director all over Japan for the rest of the
time. During their three months in Kyoto, they took a Japanese-language class at a
private Japanese-language school, totaling about hours. There was, however, no
speciﬁc instruction and practice on pronunciation of vowel and consonant length
contrasts. Their class focus was mostly on listening and speaking to increase ﬂuency,
and reading and writing with an emphasis on grammar.
..Stimuli and procedure
The target words examined in this study were a consonant length pair in standard
Japanese: [kako] ‘past’ (moras) with singleton stops and [kakːo] ‘parenthesis’
(moras) with an intervocalic geminate stop. These words are matched in their
pitch accent, both having an accent on the ﬁrst mora. The recording, however,
included two other pairs of words contrasting in vowel length: [ɾika] ‘science’
(moras) vs. [ɾikaː] ‘liquor’ (moras), and [koko] ‘here’ (moras) vs. [koːkoː]
2 The Kyoto dialect distinguishes phonemically between singleton and geminate obstruents, just like
standard Japanese and other dialects of Japan. Acoustically and phonetically, production of this consonant
distinction has been consistent across speakers from different regions of Japan included in the author’s data
(e.g. speakers from Saga, Niigata, and Fukushima prefectures, as well as Tokyo metropolitan areas in Hirata
and Whiton ; Hirata and Amano ). However, we will need to conﬁrm with empirical data
whether the Kyoto dialect has a speciﬁc, distinct characteristic with regard to this consonant distinction.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


‘high school’ (moras). The purpose of including these pairs was to compare the
durational control of consonant length vs. vowel length pairs at a later date. The
identical stimuli were recorded before and after their four-month study abroad in
Japan.
The words were all randomized, written on a handout with a carrier sentence Soko
wa ___ to yomimasu (‘It is read as __ there’) in Japanese orthography. Participants
were asked to read the list at three speaking rates as speciﬁed in the handout, each
repeated three times. The deﬁnition of the speaking rates was that given in Hirata and
Whiton () to enable comparisons with native Japanese speakers. A normal rate
was deﬁned as a ‘relaxed and comfortable tempo’, a slow rate as ‘the slowest tempo
possible that the speaker could produce while refraining from adding obvious breaks
between words’, and a fast rate as ‘the fastest tempo possible without making an
excessive amount of errors’ (p. ). These written deﬁnitions were given to the
participants, and they were asked to ﬁrst practise speaking at various rates and then
to determine the actual normal, slow, and fast rates on their own. No audio model
was given during recording sessions.
The recordings were made in Computerized Speech Lab (Model B) with
Shure SMmicrophone, with a ,Hz sampling rate.
..Measurement and analyses
Praat (Boersma and Weenink ) was used to label segmental boundaries of the
following duration intervals for the [kako] and [kakːo] pair: the intervocalic stop
closure, the ﬁrst and second vowels, the word, and the sentence. The contrasting
intervocalic stop closure was measured from the end of the ﬁrst vowel where all
formants ceased to the onset of the next stop burst (Figure .). The word was
measured from the onset of the burst of the word-initial stop [k] to the end of the
second vowel. The closure of the initial stop was not included as part of the word,
because speakers sometimes but not consistently inserted a short pause at the end of
the preceding carrier phrase Soko wa, so that it was not possible to consistently
identify the closure of the word-initial [k] (Figure .). There were a total of 
produced tokens (words × rates × repetitions × times × speakers). Only one
token was omitted from analyses because this participant (Speaker ) spoke it too fast
(with the word duration of ms), and no intervocalic stop closure was identiﬁable
either auditorily or visually. Speaker ’s other utterances did not indicate that she
spoke all other tokens too quickly, however.
Following Hirata and Whiton (), the critical durational measures that were
useful in characterizing the singleton and geminate stop distinction by NJs were
duration of: () the sentence, () the stop closure, () the word, and the () C/V, ()
C/W, and () G/S ratios. The sentence duration was measured to examine the overall
speaking rates. For each of ()–(), an analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted

Hirata

with Quantity (singleton, geminate), Time (pre-Japan, post-Japan), and Rate (slow,
normal, fast) as within-subject factors. For (), an ANOVA was conducted with Time
(pre-Japan, post-Japan) and Rate (slow, normal, fast) as within-subject factors. Post
hoc pairwise comparisons were made with Bonferroni correction.
Furthermore, accuracy of classiﬁcation for the C/Vand C/W ratios of singleton
and geminate tokens was computed, based on NJs’ optimal boundaries. In Hirata and
Whiton (), the boundary C/Vratio of .optimally classiﬁed NJs’ production
with % accuracy, and the boundary C/W ratio of .classiﬁed NJs’ production
with the higher accuracy of %. These boundaries were applied to the present
learners’ data, and the misclassiﬁed tokens were counted to obtain their classiﬁcation
accuracy.
.Results
Results below are discussed in relation to NJs’ duration data in Hirata and Whiton
().
..Sentence duration
A × × repeated-measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted with
sentence duration as a dependent variable. Time (pre-Japan, post-Japan), Rate (slow,
normal, fast), and Quantity (singleton, geminate) were within-subject factors. The
purpose of this analysis was threefold. First, it determined whether the participants
were able to speak with three distinct speaking rates as instructed. If they were
0.213407
0.3051
0.434470
0.434470
Visible part 0.706455 seconds
Total duration 1.983129 seconds
1.140925 0.842204
sentences
(1/3)
words
(3)
segments
(7)
0
–0.4821
0 Hz
4941 Hz
1
2
3
S
w
vot1
vot2
v1
v2
clo
FIGURE .An example of measured word [kakːo] within a carrier sentence. ‘w’ = word; ‘clo’ =
stop closure; ‘v’ = the ﬁrst vowel; ‘v’ = the second vowel; ‘vot’ and ‘vot’ = voice onset time
of the ﬁrst and the second [k]. This screen shot shows the waveform and spectrogram of [wa
kakːo to] in the entire sentence Soko wa kakːo to yomimasu.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


successful in doing so, we would expect a signiﬁcant main effect of Rate. Results
showed that this was indeed the case [F(,) = ., p < .]. The sentence
duration was signiﬁcantly longer for the slow (.sec) than the normal (.sec),
and longer for the normal than the fast rate (.sec) [p < .]. This indicates that
the participants had the ability to speak at three distinct speaking rates.
Second, the analysis examined whether their speaking rate generally increased as
they became more ﬂuent in speaking Japanese (cf. de Jong et al. ) after their four-
month stay in Japan. One possibility was that slow, normal, and fast speaking rates
would all increase, but another possibility was that their ‘normal’ or ‘the slowest
possible’ rate may not change, but ‘the fastest possible rate’ might. If one of these
possibilities obtained, we would expect a signiﬁcant main effect of Time or a signiﬁcant
interaction of Time and Rate (e.g. their fast sentences might become shortened over
time due to their increased ﬂuency, while the other rates might stay the same). The
ANOVA results showed that neither the main effect of Time [F(,) = ., p = .]
nor the Time × Rate interaction [F(,) = ., p = .] was signiﬁcant, indicating
that their overall speaking rate did not change over time.
Third, the analysis examined whether sentence duration reﬂects the quantity
distinctions, i.e. whether the sentence duration was longer for [kakːo] than for
[kako], which was the case for NJs. There was a signiﬁcant main effect of Quantity
[F(,) = ., p = .], and the mean sentence duration was signiﬁcantly longer
for those including geminates (.sec) than singletons (.sec). There was also a
signiﬁcant interaction of Rate and Quantity [F(,) = ., p = .]: the
differences between the singleton and the geminate sentences were greater for slower
rates (differences of ms for the slow, ms for the normal, and ms for the fast
rate). This pattern of interaction was the same as that of the NJs in Hirata and
Whiton (): ms for the slow (.vs. .sec), ms for the normal
(.vs. .sec), and ms for the fast rate (.vs. .sec).
..Stop closure duration
A × × ANOVA was conducted with stop closure duration as a dependent
variable. Time (pre-Japan, post-Japan), Rate (slow, normal, fast), and Quantity
(singleton, geminate) were within-subject factors. If the participants make a distinc-
tion between singletons and geminates, we would expect a signiﬁcant main effect of
Quantity. However, there is also a possibility that this distinction is not signiﬁcant at
pre-Japan but becomes enhanced after their study in Japan. If this were the case, we
would expect a signiﬁcant Time × Quantity interaction.
Figure .shows the mean duration of stop closure at each rate separately for pre-
Japan and post-Japan. A visual inspection of the ﬁgure suggests that the participants
did make a distinction between singletons and geminates both times. Indeed, the
ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant main effect of Quantity [F(,) = ., p = .]:

Hirata

the mean duration for the geminate stop closure was ms, signiﬁcantly longer than
the mean singleton duration of ms. As shown in the next section, however, this
difference was not as large as that made by NJs (Han ; Hirata and Whiton ).
The ANOVA also showed a signiﬁcant main effect of Rate [F(,) = .,
p < .] (slow ms > normal ms > fast ms), and there was a signiﬁcant
interaction of Rate and Quantity [F(,) = ., p = .]. This interaction
revealed that the difference between singletons and geminates was greater for slower
rates, which was shown in steeper lines for slower rates in Figure .. This pattern is
also observed in the NJ data.
Of central interest was the participants’ improvement as measured by Time ×
Quantity interaction, but the ANOVA showed that this interaction was not signiﬁ-
cant [F(,) = ., p = .], indicating that the distinction between singletons
and geminates did not change over time. This suggests that the [kako]/[kakːo] pair
showed no statistically signiﬁcant improvement from pre- to post-Japan.
No other signiﬁcant main effects or interactions were found in the ANOVA.
..G/S ratio
A × ANOVA was conducted with the ratio of geminate to singleton stop closure
duration as a dependent variable. Time (pre-Japan, post-Japan) and Rate (slow,
normal, fast) were within-subject factors. If the participants make a larger distinction
between singletons and geminates at post-Japan, we would expect a signiﬁcant main
effect of Time.
The mean geminate/singleton ratio was .at pre-Japan and .at post-Japan,
which indicates that the participants produced the geminate stop closure roughly
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Closure duration (ms)
pre fast
pre normal
pre slow
post fast
post normal
post slow
Singleton
Geminate
FIGURE .Mean closure duration of singleton and geminate stops at three rates of speech at
pre-Japan and post-Japan.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


twice as long as the singleton closure. This contrasts with NJ data, where the ratio is
greater than (.–.when speaking rates vary from fast to slow in Han ;
Hirata and Whiton ). The ANOVA showed that the main effect of Time was not
signiﬁcant [F(,) = ., p = .], indicating that the ratio change from .at
pre-Japan to .at post-Japan was not signiﬁcant. The ANOVA showed no other
signiﬁcant effects or interactions.
..C/V1 ratio: ANOVA
A × × ANOVA was conducted with the C/Vratio as a dependent variable.
Time, Rate, and Quantity were within-subject factors. Given the results of stop-
closure duration in .., we predicted that the participants would make a distinction
between the C/Vratios of the singletons and geminates (showing a signiﬁcant main
effect of Quantity), but also that this ratio would not become greater at post-Japan
(thus expecting no signiﬁcant interaction of Time × Quantity).
As predicted, there was a signiﬁcant main effect of quantity [F(,) = .,
p = .]: the mean ratios were signiﬁcantly smaller for singletons (.) than for
geminates (.). As a point of comparison, NJs’ C/Vratios were .for singletons
and .for geminates in Hirata and Whiton (), and .for singletons and .
for geminates in Masuda and Hayes-Harb (). This comparison suggests that the
learners’ geminate C/Vratio was not large enough to match that of NJs.
Also as predicted, the ANOVA showed no signiﬁcant Time × Quantity interaction
[F(,) = ., p = .]. Thus, the C/Vratio did not change from pre- to post-Japan.
Finally, the ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant main effect of Rate [F(,) = .,
p = .], indicating that the mean ratios were different at different speaking rates.
When geminate and singleton C/Vratios were combined, the mean ratio for the
slow rate was ., signiﬁcantly greater than that for the fast, .. However, the
ratio for the normal rate (.) did not differ from either the slow or the fast rate.
This pattern of results was identical to NJ data.
..C/V1 ratio: classiﬁcation accuracy
In NJ speech, Hirata and Whiton () found that the C/Vboundary ratio of .
maximally classiﬁed the produced tokens into singletons and geminates with %
accuracy, regardless of variation in the speaking rate. In other words, when a given
disyllable has a C/Vratio smaller than ., it would most likely include a singleton,
whereas the tokens with C/Vratios greater than .would most likely include a
geminate. In the present study, this optimal boundary yielded by NJs was applied to
the present NN data, and the number of accurately classiﬁed tokens out of the entire
data set was counted. The learners’ classiﬁcation accuracy based on the NJs’ optimal
boundary of .was found to be .% for pre-Japan and .% for post-Japan, an .
percentage point improvement (Table .). When examined separately, the singleton
accuracy improved more notably (.percentage points) than the geminate accuracy

Hirata

(.percentage point improvement). Figure .shows the C/Vratios of all of the
participants’ individual tokens plotted against their word duration (which reﬂects
speaking rate). A visual inspection of the ﬁgure highlights the result that singleton and
geminate tokens overlap on the y-axis of C/Vratio values for both pre- and post-Japan.
TABLE .. Classiﬁcation accuracy of all of the produced tokens based on native
Japanese criteria (C/Vratio of .and C/W ratio of .)
Time
Classification
accuracy (%)
Percentage point 
Improvement
(Post–Pre)
C/V1 ratio
Singletons
Pre
69.8
14.1
Post
83.9
Geminates
Pre
76.2
3.2
Post
79.4
Total
Pre
73.0
8.6
Post
81.6
C/W ratio
Singletons
Pre
96.8
0
Post
96.8
Geminates
Pre
49.2
3.2
Post
52.4
Total
Pre
73.0
1.4
Post
74.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
250
500
750
1000
C/V1 ratio
Word duration (ms)
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
250
500
750
1000
C/V1 ratio
Word duration (ms)
Pre-Japan
Post-Japan
FIGURE .Distribution of C/Vratio. Unﬁlled triangles represent tokens of singleton
words and ﬁlled squares represent tokens of geminate words across all three rates for all
speakers at each of pre-Japan and post-Japan. The dashed line in each panel represents native
Japanese speakers’ optimal boundary of .found in Hirata and Whiton ().
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


..Word duration
Figure .shows duration of a two-mora word [kako] plotted against a three-mora
word [kakːo], in which each data point represents the average of the three repetitions of
the same word pair [kako]–[kakːo] at each rate for each speaker. The broken lines
represent NJs’ regression line (y = .x + .) obtained in Hirata and Whiton
(), which roughly corresponds to :for [kako] vs. [kakːo], corresponding to the
number of moras in each word. The regression lines of the learners (pre: y = .x +
.; post: y = .x + .), shown in solid lines, are similar to, but do not
completely match, the NJs’ regression line. This was either because the duration of
[kako] was too long or because that of [kakːo] was too short across all rates. From a
visual inspection, this pattern does not seem to improve from pre-Japan to post-Japan.
A Time × Rate × Quantity ANOVA was conducted with word duration as a
dependent variable. Given the results of stop closure duration and C/Vratio in the
previous sections, we expected a signiﬁcant main effect of Quantity, but the differ-
ence may not be large enough to match the NJs’ difference. The word duration was
also predicted not to indicate the singleton vs. geminate distinction becoming larger
at post-Japan compared to pre-Japan, and thus no signiﬁcant Time × Quantity
interaction was expected.
The ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant main effect of Quantity [F(,) = .,
p = .]: the mean geminate word was ms, signiﬁcantly longer than ms
of the mean singleton word. The mean ratio of the singleton word vs. the geminate
word for NJs was :.across all rates, roughly corresponding to the number of
moras (moras vs. moras, respectively) (Han ; Hirata and Whiton ).
However, the present learners’ mean ratio was :., indicating that their word
duration distinction was not as large as the NJs’.
0
0
200
200
400
400
600
600
800
800
1000
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
200
400
600
800
1000 1200
Three-mora word duration (ms)
Two-mora word duration (ms)
Two-mora word duration (ms)
Three-mora word duration (ms)
Pre-Japan
Post-Japan
FIGURE .Duration of -mora word [kako] vs. -mora word [kakːo]. Each point represents
the mean duration of [kako] and [kakːo] across repetitions at each rate by each speaker. The
solid lines represent the learners’ regression lines (pre-Japan: y = .x + .; post-Japan:
y = .x + .). The broken line in each panel represents native Japanese speakers’
regression line (y = .x + .) (Hirata and Whiton ).

Hirata

The ANOVA also showed a signiﬁcant main effect of Rate [F(,) = ., p <
.] (slow ms > normal ms > fast ms), and there was a signiﬁcant
interaction of Rate and Quantity [F(,) = ., p = .]. This interaction
revealed that the difference between singleton and geminate words was greater for
slower rates. This effect of speaking rate and its interaction with the quantity
distinction are the same as those of the NJs in Hirata and Whiton ().
The participants’ improvement, if any, would show as a Time × Quantity inter-
action. The ANOVA showed that this interaction was not signiﬁcant [F(,) = .,
p = .], indicating that the distinction between singletons and geminates did not
get larger over time. This suggests that the word duration showed no statistically
signiﬁcant improvement from pre- to post-Japan.
No other signiﬁcant main effects or interactions were found in this ANOVA.
..C/W ratio: ANOVA
A × × ANOVA was conducted with C/W ratio as a dependent variable and with
Time, Rate, and Quantity as within-subject factors. Given the results of previous
sections, we predicted that the participants would make a distinction between the
C/W ratios of the singletons and geminates (showing a signiﬁcant main effect of
Quantity), but that this ratio would neither be as large as the NJ model nor become
greater at post-Japan (and thus expecting no signiﬁcant interaction of Time ×
Quantity.
As predicted, there was a signiﬁcant main effect of quantity [F(,) = .,
p = .]: the C/W ratios were greater for geminates (.) than for singletons
(.). This result indicates that the participants were, on average, making distinc-
tions between singletons and geminates. Note that NJs’ mean C/W ratios were .
for geminates and .for singleton in Hirata and Whiton (). It appears that the
present NNs’ ratios were smaller than the NJs’ for geminates, in particular, while
their singleton ratios were similar to those of the NJs.
As predicted, the interaction of Time and Quantity was not signiﬁcant [F(,) = .,
p = .], indicating that the difference between the singleton and geminate C/W ratios
did not increase over time.
As in the case of NJs’ data, there was a signiﬁcant main effect of Rate [F(,) = .,
p = .; slow ., normal ., and fast .], but individual comparisons did not
indicate any signiﬁcant difference between any of these three rates.
No other main effect or interactions were signiﬁcant in this ANOVA.
..C/W ratio: classiﬁcation accuracy
The learners’ classiﬁcation accuracy based on the NJs’ optimal boundary of .was
found to be .% for pre-Japan and .% for post-Japan, with only .percentage
points improvement (Table .). When examined separately, the singleton accuracy
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


was already very high (.%) at pre-Japan and stayed accurate at post-Japan. The
geminate accuracy started low (.%) and only improved by .percentage points at
post-Japan. Figure .shows C/W ratios of all of the learners’ individual tokens
plotted against their word duration. It shows that the singleton and geminate tokens
show a large overlap at pre-Japan, and this pattern did not change at post-Japan. It also
shows that the misclassiﬁcation was mostly on geminate tokens (the ﬁlled squares
plotted under the .optimal boundary) instead of singleton tokens (i.e. unﬁlled
triangles plotted above the optimal boundary are almost nonexistent).
..Individual speaker performances
As a ﬁnal analysis, individual speakers’ performances were plotted separately in
order to observe how the statistical results described above were reﬂected in individ-
ual speakers, and to qualitatively examine the somewhat conﬂicting results on C/V
and C/W ratios. As seen in sections ..and .., classiﬁcation accuracy of the
learners’ production improved by .percentage points on C/Vratio but by only .
percentage points on C/W ratio.
Table .summarizes the classiﬁcation accuracy of individual speakers on both
C/Vand C/W ratios. For the C/Vratio, ﬁve out of seven learners showed
improvement, and the amount varied between .and .percentage points. For
the C/W ratio, in contrast, only three out of seven learners showed improvement
(ranging between .and .percentage points), but the other four learners were
worse at post-Japan than they had been at pre-Japan. Among the seven, three
speakers (, , and ), improved in their production accuracy on both C/Vand
C/W ratios. Figure .plots C/Vratio values of individual utterances for each
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
250
500
750
1000
C/W ratio
Word duration (ms)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
250
500
750
1000
C/W ratio
Word duration (ms)
Pre-Japan
Post-Japan
FIGURE .Distribution of C/W ratio. Unﬁlled triangles represent tokens of singleton words
and ﬁlled squares represent tokens of geminate words across all three rates for all speakers.
The dashed line in each panel represents native Japanese speakers’ optimal boundary of .
found in Hirata and Whiton ().

Hirata

speaker. Speaker made the greatest improvement for both C/Vand C/W ratios, as
is clearly seen in Figure .: four tokens of geminates had C/Vratio values of .or
smaller at pre-Japan, but they all had appropriate values above the criterion at post-
Japan. As a result, his classiﬁcation accuracy became %. Speakers and showed
a moderate amount of improvement, and this is shown in Figure .as well. Speaker
showed a similar pattern of improvement to Speaker , but to a lesser degree. For
Speaker , ﬁve of her singletons had incorrect values at pre-Japan, but incorrect
tokens were reduced to two singletons at post-Japan.
Speakers and improved only on the C/Vratio, but their accuracy on C/W
ratios became worse at post-Japan (Table .). Speakers and remained unchanged
showing neither improvement nor deterioration at post-Japan on C/Vand C/W
ratios.
In summary, there was a great variation among speakers with regard to their
durational accuracy on those two measures.
.Discussion and conclusions
This study examined various durational units associated with stop-length distinction
by intermediate learners of Japanese, and compared them with those of NJs in
previous literature. The learners did make a durational distinction between singleton
TABLE .. Classiﬁcation accuracy (%) by individual learners based on native
Japanese criteria (C/Vratio of .and C/W ratio of .) (learners' positive
improvement is highlighted in boldface)
Speaker
Pre-Japan
Post-Japan
Improvement (Post–Pre)
C/Vratio

.
.


.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.

.

.
.
–.

.
.
.
C/W ratio

.
.
–.

.
.
.

.
.
–.

.
.
–.

.
.
.

.
.
–.

.
.
.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Word duration (ms)
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
Speaker 4
C/V1 ratio
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Word duration (ms)
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
Speaker 3 
C/V1 ratio
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Word duration (ms)
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
Speaker 2 
C/V1 ratio
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Word duration (ms)
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
Speaker 1
C/V1 ratio
FIGURE .C/Vratios of individual speakers. Unﬁlled triangles represent tokens of single-
ton words and ﬁlled squares represent tokens of geminate words across all three rates for
each speaker at each of pre-Japan and post-Japan. The dashed line represents native Japanese
speakers’ optimal boundary of .found in Hirata and Whiton ().

Hirata

and geminate stop closures, with the geminates approximately twice as long as the
singletons. However, the G/S ratio (.–.) was small, compared to the NJs’ G/S
ratio of .–.(Han ; Hirata and Whiton ). The learners’ results
replicate previous studies such as Han (), and are consistent with Toda (),
who pointed out that this comes from the way native English speakers produce
English geminates across words, such as cat tail (as in native English speakers’
English data provided by Han ). The result of the closure over the preceding
vowel ratio was also consistent with previous studies of beginning learners in that the
ratio values for the singletons and geminates were not as separated as those of native
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Word duration (ms)
Speaker 5
Speaker 6
Speaker 7
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
C/V1 ratio
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Word duration (ms)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
0
1
2
3
4
5
C/V1 ratio
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Word duration (ms)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Word duration (ms)
Pre
Post
0
1
2
3
4
5
C/V1 ratio
FIGURE .Continued
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


speakers. This study also examined other durational units associated with disyllabic
words: word duration and the ratio of the stop closure to the word. The results of
these values further conﬁrmed the earlier conclusion that the singleton/geminate
distinction was small compared to native speaker values.
To determine whether the learners made signiﬁcant progress in their durational
control, all of the identical measures above were compared before and after the
learners’ immersion in Japan. None of the ANOVA results indicated a signiﬁcant
change, and differences between singleton and geminate values did not increase after
the immersion in Japan. One unique aspect of this study was examination of learners’
accuracy in producing singleton and geminate stops as measured by the boundary
criterion of native Japanese speakers. Examination of classiﬁcation accuracy based on
the native speakers’ C/W boundary ratio indicated improvement by only .percent-
age points from .% to .%. Examination of C/Vratio classiﬁcation accuracy
gave a somewhat different picture: .percentage points improvement in accuracy
from .% to .%.
With regard to the factor of speaking rate, one hypothesis was that sentence
duration would get shorter at post-Japan as a sign of increased ﬂuency, especially
at the fast rate, the deﬁnition of which was ‘to speak as fast as possible without
making excessive mistakes’. Our results did not support this. It was not the
case that the learners were able to speak faster when they were asked to speak at
the fastest rate possible. It was also not the case that the stop-length distinction
was made with ratios closer to those of native speakers at a particular rate.
Regardless of speaking rates, the learners’ production performance did not reach
that of native speakers.
The ﬁrst question addressed in this study was to what extent the ability to produce
consonant-length distinction improves over four months abroad in Japan. Summar-
izing all of the measures and statistical results, the conclusion, based on the group
data as a whole, is that intermediate learners of Japanese do not improve their
durational control of the consonant-length distinction after a four-month immersion
in Japan. Their distinction as measured in this study was not large enough, and it did
not signiﬁcantly increase in any of the measures: sentence, word, or contrasting stop-
closure duration, or the G/S, C/V, and C/W ratios, except for the overall C/V
ratio’s classiﬁcation accuracy having improved. This conclusion is interesting
because it is generally believed by learners and instructors that language immersion
has positive effects on language learning. Unlike general spontaneous speaking
ﬂuency, which may involve instant access to vocabulary and grammar, the ability to
accurately and authentically produce differences of consonant length contrasts within
a word may not be something that learners can automatically learn by language
immersion. It would be interesting in the future to make a direct comparison among
the development of morphological, syntactic, semantic skills, as compared to the
pronunciation of phonemic contrasts in the present study.

Hirata

A slightly different conclusion might emerge if we pay attention to individual
learner data. Speciﬁcally on the C/Vand C/W ratios, three out of seven learners did
make some improvement (Table .). On the C/W ratio, there were more learners
who decreased in their accuracy scores than those who increased, but on the C/V
ratio, ﬁve out of seven increased in their accuracy. As noted in the introduction,
overall word duration plays an important durational role in native Japanese speaker
data. It is possible that the learners may have made a small local improvement, but
have not yet reached the level where signiﬁcant improvement is clearly visible in
terms of precision of durational control.
What may be the reason for, or the source of, the limited improvement in the
production of singleton and geminate stop distinction found in this study? Is this
limitation due to the fact that the immersion was comparatively late in their language
learning, coming after two years of formal language instruction in their home
country, or is it due to the length of the immersion not being long enough?
Unfortunately, the present study does not provide answers to these questions, but
they need to be addressed in future research.
The second question addressed in this study was how the present participants’
results compare with those of previous studies, especially regarding the different
learning stages, i.e. beginning learners (Toda ; Masuda and Hayes-Harb )
and advanced learners (Han ). Taking all of these studies together, there is an
accumulation of evidence for a conclusion that learners of Japanese have sustained
difﬁculty at all levels in making precise and authentic consonant-length distinction in
their production. Beginning learners examined in Toda () and Masuda and
Hayes-Harb () showed some changes, but their ratios either were over-
exaggerated or did not reach the native values, and advanced learners in Han
() also did not show clear distinction. The present intermediate learners ﬁll
the gap between beginning and advanced, and even after a four-month immersion in
Japan, they did not show improvement as a whole. This difﬁculty may be attributed
to the fact that learners automatically use the strategy that is used in producing
English geminates across words (Han ; Toda ), thus producing [kakːo] as
two words, [kak] and [ko]. Indeed, Han’s () data showed that the geminate/
singleton ratio was about . This phenomenon may be a case of Flege’s ()
‘equivalence classiﬁcation’. As infants learn their ﬁrst language, they move from
physical, sensory responses to abstract, categorical perception of meaningful words,
or equivalence classiﬁcation, and they use the earlier sensory system less and less.
While this developmental change has the advantage of being able to extract essential
linguistic messages from highly variable speech acoustics, it has disadvantages for
adult Llearners. The way adult learners tend to go about learning to perceive an L
is more with the latter response—abstract, categorical perception—which Flege
() claims is the direct reason why they cannot perceive Lspeech sounds as
they are. According to Flege (), this process of equivalence classiﬁcation prevents
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese


Llearners from acquiring authentic Lspeech sounds. Note that the overall
production accuracy calculated in the present study suggests that they can produce
minimal pairs at far above a chance level. Therefore, the learners can ‘get by’ with
their inaccurate pronunciation in many cases when communicating with native
speakers, and thus their practical motivation and perceived urgency to improve
their realization of this distinction to the authentic native level may not be high.
This may be one of the reasons why the strategy of substituting English geminates
continues to be used and why this problem persists.
The only measure that showed an improvement was the result of C/Vratio
classiﬁcation accuracy, and there was actually a large individual variation in terms
of the learners’ progress during the period studied. A future study including native
Japanese speakers’ perception of learner production should provide insight as to
whether both the C/Vratio and the C/W ratio must be accurate in order for their
production to be perceived accurately by native Japanese listeners. It may also
conﬁrm whether native Japanese listeners’ identiﬁcation of some of the individual
learners’ production does improve from pre-Japan to post-Japan. It would also be
interesting to test how native speakers evaluate the ‘accentedness’ of these words and
sentences, and whether this accentedness score would or would not improve with
immersion.
The present conclusion is based on only one word pair, and this investigation
needs to be expanded in future studies to examine various other word pairs with
other stops [p, t] and with other obstruents. In terms of Llearners’ perception, stop-
length distinction is known to be easier than fricative length distinction such as [niʃi]
‘west’ and [niʃːi] ‘diary’ (e.g. Hardison and Motohashi ). Given this ﬁnding, we
would predict that learners also do not improve their production of fricative and
affricate consonant length pairs, and thus the present conclusion is predicted to hold
for other consonant pairs. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to examine the degree
of learners’ production difﬁculty with different consonant-length pairs and their
development over time.
Another interesting direction for future research is to compare the present results
with learners’ production of vowel length contrasts. These two types of contrasts
share the same mechanism of durational control for native speakers of Japanese
(Fujisaki et al. ), but results in previous studies are mixed as to whether the
consonant and the vowel length contrasts pose equal difﬁculty for Llearners. One
study suggests learners seem to improve both equally (Enomoto ), but another
suggests that vowel length contrasts may be easier for native English learners to
produce (e.g. for perception: Toda ). A preliminary analysis of the present
intermediate learners’ production of vowel-length distinction accords with the latter
ﬁnding. The classiﬁcation accuracy for the learners’ production of vowel-length
distinction improved signiﬁcantly from pre-Japan to post-Japan. This preliminary
result suggests that the lack of signiﬁcance in the present stop-length results may not

Hirata

be due to a lack of statistical power from the small number of participants or the
limited set of stimuli, though this preliminary analysis needs to be expanded to a full
analysis in the near future.
It will also be interesting to examine production and perception of extremely
advanced learners of Japanese. Since some data show that learners’ perception
eventually improves over time (e.g. Enomoto ), their production is also likely
to improve at some advanced stage. However, there is currently no data showing
advanced learners’ production matching that of native speakers. It is necessary,
therefore, to clearly pinpoint where the highest possible level lies and what the
limitations may be, as well as what factors account for the ultimate success or failure
of learners in acquiring consonant- and vowel-length distinction. Llearners’ data
typically exhibit large individual variations (e.g. Toda , for beginning learners),
which is also to be expected for most advanced learners as well, but it is an important
goal of Lspeech acquisition research to determine the precise factors that account
for those variations.
Lproduction of geminates in Japanese



Part II
Phonology of geminate consonants


8
Bengali geminates
Processing and representation
SANDRA KOTZOR, ALLISON WETTERLIN,
AND ADITI LAHIRI
.Why geminates?
Although geminates are attested in many language families, the notion of a singleton/
geminate contrast independent of vowel length is often still considered unusual and
exotic in a European context, and geminates are assumed to be ‘marked’ in the
Prague School sense. This is probably due to the fact that the best-studied European
languages within the Indo-European language family have eliminated the contrast
between singletons and geminates. For example, standard varieties of English, French,
and German have no such contrast, while in Old English, Latin, and Old High German
geminates contrasted with singletons at all places of articulation, and gemination as a
process was a natural phenomenon (cf. Lahiri and references therein). One
consequence of this view has been a lack of focused research on geminates in early
generativephonologyaswellasphonetics,althoughthetraditionalphilologicalliterature
contains plenty of material on ‘consonant doubling’ and ‘long consonants’. From the
mid-s, generative phonology did begin to take an interest in geminates for three
reasons. First, withinautosegmentalphonology withnon-linear representations, gemin-
ates playedanimportant role,since they were onthe one hand single articulations but on
the other hand behaved phonotactically as two consonants (Kenstowicz and Pyle ;
Hayes ; McCarthy ; Schein and Steriade ). Second, controversy regarding
the speciﬁc nature of the skeleton (e.g. mora vs. X-slot) led for obvious reasons to
extensive discussion of the appropriate representation for geminates (Mohanan and
Mohanan ; Hayes ; Lahiri and Jongman ; Selkirk ). Third, the rules
entailed by geminates and issues of geminate weight gave rise to lengthy discussion of
theirproperrepresentation(cf.discussionofopensyllablelengtheninginMinkova;
Schein and Steriade ; Hayes ; Lahiri and Dresher ).
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Sandra Kotzor, Allison Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri . First published 
by Oxford University Press.

The phonetics literature began to take an interest in geminates earlier. In the
middle of the th century, Lisker () determined that the duration of closure was
the predominant cue for geminates in Swedish, Italian, Telegu, and Marathi. Lahiri
and her colleagues (Lahiri and Hankamer ; Hankamer et al. ; Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson ) found that closure duration was not only the main cue in
Turkish and Bengali geminates in monomorphemic words, but also the predominant
cue for heteromorphemic geminates in Bengali (both concatenated and assimilated).
Indeed, duration of closure proved to be the most important cue distinguishing gemin-
ates from singletons in perception in a variety of languages including Turkish, Bengali,
Marathi (Lisker ), and Arabic (Obrecht ). Even in English, it was established
that a very long duration of closure was perceived as a double consonant (Pickett and
Decker ; Repp ). In recent years, interest on geminates has increased consid-
erably. Research programmes initiated by Ridouane (on Berber, Ridouane ) and
Kubozono (on Japanese, e.g. Kubozono et al. ) have led to detailed analyses
of geminate consonants in these languages. Kraehenmann and colleagues have also
examined Swiss German geminates including initial geminates (Kraehenmann and
Lahiri ; Kraehenmann ; see also Chapter in this volume), the latter being of
great interest since initial voiceless geminate stops clearly cannot have closure duration
as a primary cue (cf. Abramson a, , for Pattani Malay, and Hume for Leti;
Hume et al. ). Ridouane () provides us with a comprehensive list of acoustic
parameters distinguishing geminates from singletons in several languages.
Research on the processing of geminates, however, has been negligible. It was
brieﬂy touched upon in Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (), again suggesting that the
duration of closure was the crucial cue. In this chapter, we take the processing of
geminates seriously with a detailed investigation of the singleton/geminate contrast
in Bengali. We describe a series of behavioural and neurolinguistic experiments
arguing that the representation of geminates governs their processing. We argue
that the human processing system overall prefers asymmetry, since it is easier to
choose between asymmetric representations rather than symmetric representations.
Typologically, languages display a large number of asymmetric contrasts and struc-
tures. For instance, across languages sufﬁxation is more common than preﬁxation;
languages will have more oral phonemes than nasal counterparts; verb-ﬁnal lan-
guages are more frequent than verb-initial languages; prenominal adjectives are
preferred to postnominal adjectives; and the list goes on. In terms of representation,
duration is one of the most complicated phenomena we have to contend with. When
is something short, if there is nothing long to compare it to? We will argue that
consonantal length indicating a geminate is represented positively, while the duration
of a singleton need not be represented as such: this asymmetry in representation will
govern the processing of geminates and singletons. We ﬁrst turn to a phonological
account of Bengali geminates and then turn to the experimental investigation of their
processing and representation.

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

..An inventory of Bengali geminates
Bengali is a typical Indo-Aryan language with its full array of consonants.1 Stops and
affricates contrast at ﬁve places of articulation, accompanied by contrasts in both
voicing and aspiration and a productive singleton/geminate distinction. The oral
stops are distributed over four places of articulation—bilabial, dental, retroﬂex, and
velar—while affricates are all palatoalveolar. The inventory of obstruents and sonor-
ants is given in Table ..
The consonants in parentheses are predictable variants. The plosives, produced as
voiced or voiceless and with or without aspiration, give us a total of twenty‑ﬁve
obstruents. Although all stops and affricates have a four-way contrast in voicing and
aspiration, and occur in all positions of a word (initial, medial, and ﬁnal), the retroﬂex
consonants are more restricted in their distribution. Voiced retroﬂex obstruents do not
occur word-ﬁnally and the retroﬂex voiced aspirate is blocked word-medially. In medial
position unaspirated /ɖ/ can occur only as a geminate, and the retroﬂex /ɻ/ is the
allophonic variant of medial singleton /ɖ/, as in [bɔɻo] ‘big’, but [bɔɖːo] ‘substantial’.
All obstruents except /ɖh, gh, ph/ can occur as geminate consonants in intervocalic
position. This does not mean that aspirated sounds in general are prohibited from
gemination since there are occurrences of aspirated geminates (cf. Table .b). The
TABLE .. The consonants of Bengali
Bilabial
Dental
Retroflex
Palato-
alveolar
Velar
Glottal
Stops
Voiceless
p, ph
pː, phː
kː, khː
bː, bhː
dː, dhː
ɖː
tʃ, tʃ h
ʃ, ʃː
dʒ, dʒh
dʒː, dʒhː
ŋ, ŋː
tʃː, tʃ hː
ʈ, ʈh
ɖ, ɖh
ʈː, ʈhː
k, kh
gː, ghː
g, gh
Voiced
b, bh
d, dh
Affricates
Voiceless
Voiced
Fricatives
h
Nasals
m, mː
n, nː
Liquids
l, r
lː
(ɻ)
(s)
tː, thː
t, th
̪
̪
̪
̪
̪
1 All references to Bengali in this chapter refer to Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB; cf. Chatterji ).
Bengali geminates


articulation for these geminates is a complete closure followed by an aspirated
release. Examples of monomorphemic words with geminates are given in Table ..
Bengali has three nasal phonemes—dental, labial, and velar (Table .). Although
the writing system provides a palatal as well as a retroﬂex nasal, these have merged with
the dental in Standard Colloquial Bengali. As in many other Indo-European languages,
the velar nasal /ŋ/ only occurs medially and ﬁnally and cannot be a geminate.
The Bengali consonant inventory only contains one real fricative /ʃ/, and it occurs in all
word positions as a singleton and as a geminate. The dental sibilant [s̪] is a productive
sound,butitsuseiscontextually determined.Itoccursword initiallyinconsonantclusters,
TABLE .(a). Voiceless and voiced obstruent geminates
i) -pː-
vi) -bː-
iii) -ʈː-
viii) -ɖː-
iv) -tʃ-
tʃɔtʃːori
v) -kː-
medial
apːajon
‘entertainment'
‘notice’
‘eight’
‘dry
dish’
vegetable ‘sentence’
gloss
ix) -dʒː-
x) -gː-
medial
nobːoi
bɔɖːo
ɔgːæn
gloss
‘ninety’
‘recent’
‘very’
‘bedding’
‘faint’
ii) -tː-
vii) -dː-
ʃodːo
ʃodʒːα
pαtːα
αʈːα
bαkːo
̪
̪
̪
̪
TABLE .(b). Voiceless and voiced aspirated obstruent geminates
medial
gloss
‘medicine’
‘difficult’
‘child’
‘suffering’
medial
gloss
‘customary’
‘middle’
‘prosperity’
‘patience’
xi) -phː-
xvi) -bhː-
xiii) -ʈhː-
xiv) -tʃh-
xv) -khː-
xii) -thː-
xvii) -dhː-
kɔʈhːor
pothːo
bαtʃhːα
dkhːo
xviii) -ɖhː-
xix) -dʒhː-
xx) -ghː-
obhːeʃ
modhːom
aɖhːo
ʃodʒhːo
̪
̪
̪
̪
̪
TABLE .. Geminate and singleton medial nasal consonants
xxi) -m/mː-
xxii) -n/nː-
xxiii) -ŋ/ŋː-
medial
kumir
kona
ɑŋul
gloss
‘crocodile’
‘corner’
‘ﬁnger’
geminate
gramːo
ʃunːo
gloss
‘rustic’
‘zero’

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

either in tatsama words (words from Sanskrit) or in assimilated loans from English:
[s̪pɔrd̪ha] ‘deﬁance’, [s̪kuːl] ‘school’. Word medially, it also appears as an assimilated
variantof /ʃ/ when followed by other dentalstops; [aʃ‑i], [aʃ‑b‑o], [as̪‑t̪‑o] ‘come‑PRES.PERS,
come‑FUT-PERS, come‑HABPAST-PERS’. The sonorants /r/ and /l/ also occur in all word
positions,butonly/l/occursasageminate(seeTable .forexamplesfor/ʃlr/).Recallthat
/ɻ/ (often pronounced as [r]) is the allophonic variant of the single /ɖ/.
..Gemination as a productive process in Bengali
As can be seen above, a wide range of Bengali consonants show a geminate/singleton
contrast. In addition, there are several phonological rules which lead to gemination.
We will discuss the most common of these whereby a sequence of /r/ and coronal
consonants gives rise to a geminate.
()
/r/-CORONAL germination
/r/  C1
C1 C1
|
=>
\ /
[coronal]
[coronal]
The results of this assimilation process are particularly observable in those verbs
which make use of the productive simple and habitual past tense sufﬁxes /l/ and /t/
and the progressive sufﬁx /tʃhː/ (Lahiri ).
()
Examples of /r/ assimilation
a. [ʃord̪i] > [ʃod̪ːi]
cold (illness)
b. [mar - t - o] > [matːo]
beat‑PAST HABITUAL-P
c. [tʃu͂r - l - o] > [tʃu͂lːo]
throw‑SIMPLE PAST-P
d. [por - tʃh - e] > [potʃhːe]
study‑PRESENT PROGRESSIVE-P
This assimilation is not obligatory and is bounded by the phonological phrase. Thus
it will not apply across phrases and is blocked, for example, when focus marking
forces a phonological phrase break.
TABLE .. /ʃ l r/ in word medial positions: examples of
monomorphemic words
xxiv) -ʃ- /-ʃː-
xxv) -l- /-lː-
xxvi) -r-
medial
mɔʃa
kalo
ʃoru
gloss
‘mosquito’
‘black’
‘narrow’
geminate
biʃːɔe
palːa
gloss
‘wonder’
‘shutters’
Bengali geminates


()
Examples of /r/ assimilation blocked by phonological phrasing
a. or-a
gatʃh-er
tɔlae
da͂ra-b-e
> gatʃhetːɔlae
PERS PRON-PL tree-GEN
below-LOC stand-FUT-P
‘They will stand underneath the tree (no focus).’
b. or-a
gatʃh-er]φ
tɔlae
da͂ra-b-e
> no assimilation
PERS PRON-PL tree-GEN]φ below-LOC stand-FUT-P
‘They will stand underneath that tree (not any other place).’
Apart from assimilations, morphological concatenation also allows for geminates
to be formed freely. The only constraint applies to /r/ which does not allow
gemination.
()
Morphological concatenation
a. pat̪-t̪-o > [pat̪ːo]
lay-HABITUAL PAST-P
b. bagh-ghɔr > [baghːɔr]
tiger room
c. khel-l-o > [khelːo]
play.SIMPLE PAST-P
Thus, gemination constitutes a fundamental phonological contrast in the language.
As a result of language change, while Literary Bengali (LB) is still used in writing,
in the development from LB to SCB, there have been regular processes of vowel
syncope leading to consonant gemination. For example, the form [kha-i-tʃh-i]
‘eat-PRES-PRGORESSOVE-P’, lost the medial vowel. However, the mora was retained
and the progressive marker [tʃh] linked to the preceding which lead to a geminate:
[kha-tʃːi]. A proper representation of the compensatory lengthening in moraic terms
is shown in () (cf. Lahiri ):
()
σ 
σ 
σ
σ 
σ 
σ
σ
σ
μ μ
μ
μ   μ      μ
μ
μ
μ
kha
kha
kha
- i -tʃhi
tʃh
tʃhː
i
- ø -
- i
This process is familiar in the compensatory lengthening literature, where the loss of
a vowel leaves a mora free for the following consonant to spread thereby making the
initial syllable heavy.
..Acoustic and perceptual correlates of Bengali geminates
As mentioned in the introduction, the duration of closure is the primary cue to
distinguish geminates from non-geminates. Neither VOT nor the duration of the
preceding vowel, though variable, have been found to differ signiﬁcantly (Lahiri and
Hankamer ; see Figure .for examples).

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

A comparison of concatenated heteromorphemic geminates ([pat̪ːo], (i)) and
geminates derived via /r/ assimilation ([mat̪ːo], (i)) with monomorphemic gemin-
ates ([pat̪ːa]) indicated that acoustically there were no signiﬁcant differences across
these three types (Lahiri and Hankamer ). No difference was detected in the
duration of closure. Thus, Bengali speakers, at least those from Calcutta, use gemin-
ation productively and quite easily neutralize the underlying lexical contrast. It is up
to the listener to disentangle whether the consonants were originally singletons (e.g.
concatenated with an identical following consonant or preceded by an /r/ leading to
doubling) or true underlying geminates.
.Representation of consonantal duration
..Geminates: one segment or two?
Before turning to the issue of how geminates are processed, we need to ask the
question whether geminate consonants are seen as one single unit or a sequence of
two identical segments. In phonological theory, the representation of quantity differs
according to which theoretical framework is being applied. Two of the most preva-
lent approaches are autosegmental theory (Goldsmith ) and moraic theory
(Hyman ; Hayes ), the former distinguishing length contrasts with timing
units and the latter with weight units. Autosegmental theory proposes that quality
and quantity are stored on two different tiers of representation. The distinctive
phonological features which make up the sounds of a word (e.g. labial, nasal) are
found on the melodic tier, while the timing units for geminates (two slots) and
singletons (one slot) are on the skeletal tier which in turn is linked to the syllable level
(Hayes ; see Figure .a). Moraic theory also assumes quantity and quality to be
on separate levels. However, instead of skeletal representations, it assumes that all
   d
h
a            m                a
*d
h
a
m  :
a
98 ms
90 ms
80 ms
226 ms
   gr
a                        m
:                          o 
209 ms
132 ms
137 ms
93 ms
*gr
  a
m                   o
FIGURE .Examples of a geminate ([gramːo] ‘rural, rustic’) and singleton ([d̪hɑmɑ] ‘basket’)
with corresponding mispronunciations (*[gramo] and *[d̪hɑmːɑ]).
Bengali geminates


sonorant segments which can be syllable nuclei are represented as moras (μ). All
other segments are represented as root nodes dominating other features. Moras,
however, are also units of weight: long vowels have two moras while short vowels
have one mora. Where consonants are concerned, a long consonant has one mora
because a medial geminate is attached to syllables where the mora is attached to the
coda of the ﬁrst syllable, making it bimoraic (see Figure .b). Each theory has its
advantages and disadvantages. However, for our purposes it sufﬁces to mention the
main discrepancy between the theories, which concern the characteristics of the units
involved: moraic theory invokes weight (vs. for singletons and geminates respect-
ively.) while autosegmental theory invokes timing slots (vs. ).
This difference between singletons and geminates in terms of timing units and/or
weight units should be evident in the processing of those words, since both are
considered important cues in speech segmentation in certain languages.
Both representations indicate that medial geminate consonants are dually linked,
and thus do not permit them to be broken up by processes such as epenthesis. And
indeed, phonological analysis of Bengali consonants shows that underlying real
geminates are not separable into two segments. Concatenated geminates could,
however, consist of two independent segments. Previous research has indicated
that concatenated geminates may allow epenthesis while assimilated geminates
leading to dual linking do not (e.g. Schein and Steriade ). Bengali has no
particular phonological rules which favour one or the other type of analysis.
..Processing and geminate representation
What is crucially different between the two approaches outlined is that the autoseg-
mental X-slot representation assumes that both singleton and geminate consonants are
associated with abstract timing units, where a singleton has one (X) and a geminate has
two (XX). In contrast, in a moraic representation, the longer duration of the geminate
a
b
X-Slot Representation
Moraic Representation
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
X X X X
X X XX X
μ
μ
μ μ
μ
[
[
k
a
n
a
[
[
k
a
n
a
[
[
k
a
n : a
[
[
k
a
n : a
SINGLETON
   ‘blind’
SINGLETON
   ‘blind’
GEMINATE
   ‘tears’
GEMINATE
   ‘tears’
FIGURE .X-slot representations (a) and moraic representations (b) of geminate and single-
ton words including syllable structures.

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

is indicated by a mora while there is no abstract unit for a singleton, i.e. it is under-
speciﬁed. Moraic theory thus leads to an asymmetric representation. For example, a
singleton /p/ is linked to one X slot while a geminate /pː/ is linked to two. With the
moraic representation, a singleton /p/ only contains all its featural information while a
geminate /pː/ contains the same information plus a moraic timing unit.
Our research on features has suggested that feature representation may also be
asymmetric where underspeciﬁed features are not represented. The FUL model
(Featurally Underspeciﬁed Lexicon; Lahiri and Reetz , ) allows, for example,
for CORONAL underspeciﬁcation where CORONAL is extracted from the signal but is not
represented. The point we would like to make here is that we have shown elsewhere
that underspeciﬁed representation results in asymmetric processing (cf. Roberts et al.
), and if the moraic theory were to be the correct representation for geminates,
we would expect a similar asymmetric pattern to those observed in cases of under-
speciﬁed featural contrasts. The asymmetry would arise because when the listener
extracts singleton durational information, this will mismatch with the speciﬁed
moraic representation for the geminate. However, if the listener hears a geminate
and a mora is thus extracted from the signal, this does not mismatch with the
underspeciﬁed representation of a singleton.
None of the current processing models such as TRACE (McClelland and Elman
), the Cohort Model (Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson , ) or FUL (Lahiri and
Reetz , ) make any direct claims as to what role quantity plays in processing
and which of the approaches discussed would be most suitable from a processing
perspective. We thus designed a series of experiments to investigate how durational
information may be represented in the lexicon and whether duration, despite being
rather different from featural information, shows similarities in its processing patterns.
.Experimental evidence for the representation and processing
of Bengali geminates
Five separate studies will be discussed here, including two older studies by Hankamer
et al. () and Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson () which will be used as a starting
point for the investigation of geminate representations as they provide evidence that
there may be a processing asymmetry similar to those found for underspeciﬁed
features (cf. Roberts et al. ). We will then introduce ﬁndings from a series of
behavioural experiments before discussing the results of an Nstudy.
..Two early studies
Hankamer et al. () conducted a word identiﬁcation task in Turkish and Bengali
with stimuli which were manipulated in two different ways: word-medial singletons
were lengthened in ms increments until they were of geminate duration, while
Bengali geminates


word-medial geminates were shortened until they reached singleton duration. The
aim of the study was to investigate whether the identiﬁcation curves would differ
between the shortened and lengthened stimuli, which would indicate that other cues
are used by listeners to discriminate geminates from singletons in these languages.
Their results do indeed show a difference at the crossover point between the
singleton and geminate curves, but the difference was small. The displacements
found were less than ms on the time axis, and the regions of signiﬁcant difference
between the identiﬁcation curves were conﬁned entirely to the middle of the time
continuum in which no naturally occurring stimuli are found. Hankamer et al. found
that the secondary effects varied considerably across individual word pairs and did
not result in a systematic pattern of correspondence with other acoustic factors. They
thus concluded that these secondary effects do not have any effect on the perception
of the geminate/singleton contrast, and state that the single relevant cue is that of the
closure duration of the consonant (Hankamer et al. : ).
Following on from this research, Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (: ) examined
duration contrasts in Bengali using a gating paradigm, and on the basis of their
results suggest that the interpretation of consonant duration in the speech signal does
not depend on the lexical status of a feature (such as nasality) but ‘on the listener’s
assessment of the segment slots and therefore of the prosodic structure’. They use
disyllabic minimal pairs with medial sonorants (e.g. [kana] ‘blind’ vs. [kanːa] ‘tears’),
which were presented in fragments (i.e. ‘gates’) of incrementally increasing duration.
Listeners were required to respond by writing down the full word they thought would
represent the correct continuation of the fragment. They were not constrained in
their responses. Two fragments were crucial: the ﬁrst (gate ), which included the
entire closure duration of the medial consonant but not the release, and the second
(gate ), which included the release (approximately ms).
The results show that the entire closure duration (average geminate duration: ms;
averagesingleton duration:ms),although acoustically clearlydistinct, isnot sufﬁcient
to distinguish between geminates and singletons. When hearing the complete closure
duration of [panːa], only% of the listeners’ responses contained geminates. Even with
the addition of the release (gate ), the stimuli remained ambiguous and geminate
responses accounted for only about % of the total. The authors conclude that a
geminate cannot be interpreted correctly until both the structural and featural informa-
tion is available, since geminate and singleton medial consonants result in different
syllable structures (cf. section ..). The asymmetry found by Lahiri and Marslen-
Wilsonshowsthatsingletonsareoftenproposed inplaceofgeminatesevenwhenthefull
closure duration, which is considerably longer than that of a singleton, is available to the
listener. This shows a disproportionately large degree of acceptance of the singleton
when the fragment in question was taken from a geminate.
The results of this gating study show an asymmetry, since geminates were not
proposed incorrectly for singleton fragments to the same degree, and provide a useful

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

starting point for more recent investigations, since they indicate a potential process-
ing asymmetry which may be based on an asymmetrical representation similar to
those of, for example, place of articulation.
..Recognition of words containing singletons vs. geminates
...Behavioural studies
As we have seen, the geminate/singleton contrast is
robust in Bengali and gemination is a productive process. Consequently, geminate
consonants are not as much of a rarity as one may be led to believe. The question we
asked was whether, despite the stability of geminates, Bengali listeners showed a
preference for one type (singletons or geminates) over the other. The main task, a
lexical decision task with priming, was based on mispronunciations where the choice
of words was such that no minimal pair existed. That is, the singleton words had no
geminate counterparts and vice versa (Kotzor et al. ). For instance, a word like
[ghenːa] ‘disgust’ has no corresponding minimal pair *[ghena], and [d̪hɑma] ‘basket’
has no competing word *[d̪hɑmːa] (see Figure .). Given the preference for a
singleton in the gating studies discussed, we wondered whether listeners would
tolerate one type of mispronunciation over another when presented with an entire
word. That is, would there be an asymmetry in the acceptance of *[ghena] instead of
[ghenːa] vs. *[d̪hɑmːa] instead of [d̪hɑma]? Or to reformulate the question, would
lengthening be preferred to shortening? Mispronunciations and misperceptions are
not unusual in normal speech and listeners are used to compensating for them. In an
experimental setting, however, it was of interest to determine whether listeners would
tolerate variability and if so, whether any asymmetry would be found.
Recall that in Figure .we saw two conﬂicting representations for geminates; an
X-slot representation suggests that a singleton is attached to a single X while a
geminate is associated with XX. In Figure .(b) the moraic representation permits
only the geminate to have an abstract timing/weight unit, viz. a mora. The singleton
is represented only with its features on the melodic tier. If mispronunciations lead to
lexical access, we would argue that since a singleton is not speciﬁed as such in the
moraic representation, doubling the consonant would not lead to a mismatch with
the representation since there is nothing for the incoming signal to mismatch with.
If, on the other hand, a geminate is shortened, the perceived sound, which lacks
the speciﬁcation for duration (the mora), would mismatch with the moraic repre-
sentation. In contrast, were we to assume an X-slot representation, we should see
a symmetrical mismatch since the single X in words like [d̪hɑma] would mismatch
with the two XX in *[d̪hɑmːa] in the same way the XX in [ghenːa] would mismatch with
the single X in *[ghena]. To test these contrasting hypotheses we used a cross-modal
lexical decision task with semantic priming (Table .).
Lexical decision with semantic priming allows us to probe lexical access indirectly
(Meyer and Schvaneveldt ; Moss et al. ; Forster and references therein).
Bengali geminates


The general design of the task is as follows (exempliﬁed using English). A visual
target BEER is preceded by two types of auditory primes, a semantically related word
such as wine and an unrelated prime such as mouse. The prediction is that partici-
pants are signiﬁcantly faster in deciding that BEER is a real word in English if they have
heard wine rather than mouse. This task relies on spreading activation, which means
that when the word wine is heard, the lexical item is activated along with all those in
its semantic ﬁeld which includes beer. Consequently, if BEER is presented, the listener
is faster in recognizing it as a word, since the word is already preactivated. In
contrast, the semantic ﬁeld of mouse does not include beer and therefore hearing
mouse does not preactivate BEER and the listener is slower in responding to it. If the
difference in latencies after related and unrelated primes is signiﬁcant, we argue that
there has been semantic priming.
We chose this task rather than a direct lexical decision task (where subjects made a
decision on real words and mispronunciations) because we did not want to draw
attention to the mispronunciations. Consequently, our test primes were real words
(singletons and geminates) and their corresponding mispronunciations with appro-
priate control items. The targets were semantically related to the respective word
primes. The description of the task and an overview of our predictions are given in
Table .. To obtain a measure of the priming, reaction times to the test primes were
subtracted from the reaction times to the controls.
We assumed that mispronunciations were tolerated if they had activated their
corresponding real word along with its semantic ﬁeld and had therefore led to
semantic priming. That is, if *[d̪ɑmɑ] resulted in faster responses to [dʒhuri]
compared to the control, we could assume that listeners accepted the incorrect
length. In terms of latencies, this means that the reaction times to control items
TABLE .. Design and predictions of lexical decision task
Priming
(control test)
RT
Target
Prime
test
Singleton word
dhɑmɑ ‘basket’
̪
dʒhuri
hamper
Fast
Yes
Mispronunciation
*dhɑmːɑ
̪
Fast
Yes
control
Word
dʒɔlɑ ‘bog’
Slow
Mispronunciation
*dʒɔlːa
Slow
test
Geminate word
gramːo ‘rural, rustic’
mɑʈh
ﬁeld
Fast
Yes
Mispronunciation
*gramo
No
Slow
control
Word
ghenːɑ ‘disgust’
Slow
Mispronunciation
*ghenɑ
Slow

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

would be signiﬁcantly slower than the reaction times to the test primes. If on the
other hand a mispronunciation was not accepted, it would not activate its corres-
ponding real word and the latencies would not differ signiﬁcantly from those of the
control items.
In total, test primes were chosen (each of singletons and geminates) with
appropriate controls and semantically related targets. Since there are no accepted
frequency norms for Bengali, we conducted separate familiarity rating questionnaires
to ensure that the words were similar in usage and frequency (cf. Balota et al. ).
Semantic relatedness was also tested in a similar manner and words were chosen
accordingly. In order to conduct the experiment with real native speakers in a native
setting, our experiments were run in Calcutta at Gokhale Memorial Girls’ College.
The students (aged –; mean average age .) heard the auditory primes via
headphones and targets were presented immediately after the offset prime (ISI: ms)
on a projector. We had the facility to run participants at a given time. There were
button boxes in front of each participant and they pressed ‘yes’ with their dominant
hand. A total of participants, all native speakers of Bengali, took part, and the
results are reported in Figures .and ..
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
̪
Test
Control
**
**
dhama
̪
*dhamːa
FIGURE .Reaction time results for singleton real words and geminate mispronunciations.
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
gram:o
*gramo
Test
Control
**
ns
FIGURE .Reaction time results for geminate real words and singleton mispronunciations.
Bengali geminates


The ﬁgures show clearly that both singleton and geminate test words (e.g.
[d̪hɑmɑ], [grɑmːo]) prime their semantically related targets, since participants
responded signiﬁcantly faster to targets after the test words compared to the respect-
ive controls. The mispronunciation primes, however, show a difference. The length-
ened version of the singleton word, *[d̪hɑmːɑ], does prime the target [dʒhuri], and
there was no signiﬁcant difference in response latencies between the singleton real
word and the mispronounced prime. This means that on perceiving *[d̪hɑmːɑ]
participants were able to ignore the variation and activate the real word [d̪hɑmɑ]
and its semantic ﬁeld, and were thus equally fast to judge the target [dʒhuri] as a real
word. The mispronounced versions of words with real geminates, however, did not
trigger semantic priming; *[grɑmo], the shortened version of the geminate [grɑmːo],
failed to activate the real word target and its semantic ﬁeld. The reaction times of the
control prime and *[grɑmo] were not signiﬁcantly different.
These results suggest that the representational asymmetry as assumed by moraic
representation governs the processing of the singleton/geminate contrast in Bengali.
A shortened word mismatches with the speciﬁed geminate representation since it
does not contain a mora in its representation, while a lengthened singleton is
accepted since it does not mismatch the underspeciﬁed representation.
...Neurolinguistic evidence: an N400 study
To further corroborate our ﬁndings
we used the same semantic priming paradigm with neurolinguistic methodology.
There is a well-established literature initiated by Kutas’ (Kutas and Hillyard )
seminal research using EEG which ﬁnds that semantic anomalies trigger an event-
related potential (ERP) known as the N. When a listener ﬁnds the meaning of a
word in a particular syntactic context to be semantically viable, we ﬁnd a lower
negative peak in the EEG waveform at ms. When perceiving a semantically
anomalous word, the Npeak is higher. Thus, the word mouse triggers a higher
Nin the sentence The cat kissed the mouse than in The cat killed the mouse.
A similar logic applies in our singleton/geminate experiments. When a semantically
related word precedes the target, we expect a lower Nsince the target is already
preactivated while the control words would trigger a higher N. Thus, [dʒhuri]
‘hamper’ would trigger a higher Nwhen preceded by [dʒɔlɑ] ‘bog’ than when the
semantically related [d̪hɑmɑ] ‘basket’ precedes it. Our focus was, once again, on the
EEG waveforms associated with the mispronunciations. If mispronounced *[d̪hɑmːɑ]
succeeds in activating the real word which in turn would activate the semantically
related word, we expect a lower Ncompared to a non-word control. This would
correspond with our reaction-time results. We would furthermore expect the reverse
for the mispronunciation of the geminate words, e.g. *[grɑmo] derived from [grɑmːo].
Here, we expect *[grɑmo] not to activate [mɑʈh] ‘ﬁeld’ and therefore to result in a much
higher N. Theoretically, it should trigger an Nof similar magnitude to that of
the corresponding mispronounced control prime.

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

The EEG studies were also run in Calcutta (Roberts et al. ) and students
from Gokhale Memorial Girls’ College participated in the experiments. Experiments
were run individually in a quiet, darkened room and the data was collected using a
BioSemi ActiveTwo ampliﬁer with active electrodes which were online referenced
to the mastoids. EOG activity was monitored by four facial electrodes. The inter-
stimulus interval was increased to ms to avoid data being corrupted by residual
brain activity induced by the auditory stimulus. The EEG data was ﬁltered with a
.Hz High-pass and a Hz Low-pass ﬁlter, and pre-experimental eye movement
data was used to apply an EOG correction algorithm.
Figure .shows that the Npeak for the singleton mispronunciations is
almost the same as that of the real words. There is no signiﬁcant difference of
Nmagnitude between the two conditions. In contrast, the geminate mispro-
nunciations show a signiﬁcantly larger Nthan the real word, and are almost
identical to the control in terms of the size of the Neffect. Clearly, even in a
study which directly accesses the neural responses, the asymmetry observed in the
behavioural data is evident. Mispronounced lengthened singletons are tolerated,
while shortened geminates are rejected and treated as completely unrelated to the
target word. The experiments also provide evidence in support of a moraic account
of geminate consonants in Bengali where the contrast is of a privative nature (µ vs. Ø
in the representation).
.Discussion
We raised the question whether there is a difference between the processing of
singletons and geminates in a language where gemination and geminates are not
uncommon. The predominant acoustic cue distinguishing these singletons and
geminates is the duration of closure. The actual length of the closure duration varies
across consonants and indeed across speakers, but on average geminates are roughly
Singleton Words
Singleton Nonwords
Geminate Nonwords
Geminate Words
N400
N400
1s
3μ V
3μ V
–3μ V
–3μ V
1s
PR
PR
FIGURE .Nresults (difference waveforms) for singleton real words and geminate
mispronunciations for the parietal region of interest (PR).
Bengali geminates


twice as long as singletons in Bengali (cf. Lahiri and Hankamer ). Given that the
duration of closure is variable, how do listeners process this variability? To examine
this, we used a lexical decision paradigm with semantic priming involving mispro-
nunciations. One could argue that mispronunciations are not what listeners are
normally faced with. They are, however, faced with enough variability to allow us
to enquire whether lengthening a singleton would have the same effect in perception
as shortening a geminate. We argued that asymmetries are not unusual in linguistic
structure, or, indeed, in processing. Earlier research shows that processing of certain
feature contrasts is also asymmetric, and has explained this in terms of their under-
speciﬁed representations (cf. Cornell et al. ; Roberts et al. and references
therein). Furthermore, theoretical models provide conﬂicting accounts of the repre-
sentations of geminates in the literature, where the moraic representation suggests
that the geminate/singleton contrast is privative, µ vs. Ø, while in the autosegmental
X-slot representation it is binary (XX vs. X). If the processing of geminates and
singletons were to be asymmetric, this would provide support for a moraic repre-
sentation of consonant duration.
In a series of experiments we showed that the Bengali listener allows certain types
of mispronunciations while others are not tolerated. The lengthening of consonants
is permissible, even when the ultimate result is a non-word. Such a non-word
nevertheless activates the real word and subsequently activates its semantic ﬁeld.
Thus in lexical decision tasks with semantic priming, we ﬁnd that a mispronounced
lengthened singleton results in the semantic priming of a target related to the real
word, while a mispronounced shortened geminate does not facilitate a target related
to the real-word geminate. Neurolinguistic experiments provide further evidence for
this processing asymmetry. That is, a mispronounced shortened geminate triggered a
much higher N(similar to the control) as compared to a mispronounced length-
ened singleton which showed an Nresponse which was not signiﬁcantly different
from that to the real word. We argued that an asymmetry in representation is the
cause of the processing asymmetry which is evident in both the behavioural and the
neurolinguistic data. Such an asymmetry has also been found in a study on Swiss
German geminates (see Chapter in this volume).
Our experiments were conducted in a language which permits only medial gemin-
ates and where gemination is a frequent process and degemination is unknown. One
could argue that this is why a mispronounced singleton was better accepted than a
mispronounced shortened geminate. However, degemination occurs largely in lan-
guages which allow morpheme-ﬁnal and word-ﬁnal geminates such as Old English.
For example, in Old English, genitive cynnes was pronounced with a full geminate,
while the nominative singular cynn ‘kin’ was often degeminated. Similarly, a conson-
antal sufﬁx added to a morpheme ending in a geminate would result in degemination:
cyssan ‘to kiss’, cyste ‘kissed’; fellan ‘to fell’, felde ‘felled’. Bengali does not allow
morpheme-ﬁnal geminates and thus degemination is not a plausible phenomenon.

Kotzor, Wetterlin, and Lahiri

Clearly similar experiments are required in other languages to further probe the
nature of the processing and representation of consonantal length. In this volume, we
have an excellent array of chapters concerned with the phonetics and phonology
of geminates in a variety of languages. Psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic experi-
mentation unfortunately takes time. However, it would be fascinating to employ
such techniques in languages other than Bengali and Swiss German in order to
better understand the nature of geminates and to be able to determine their
representational properties and whether there is language-speciﬁc variation in
the representation of duration.
Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this chapter was presented in the satellite workshop on ‘Geminate
consonants across the world’ at ICPhS , and we thank the participants of the workshop,
in particular Haruo Kubozono and Rachid Ridouane, for their valuable comments. We also
owe thanks to Adam Roberts and Henning Reetz for their support with data acquisition and
analysis, as well as to Dr Leena Sengupta, Oindrila Bhattacharya, and Narmada Paul and all the
students at Gokhale Memorial Girls’ College in Calcutta without whom this research would
not have been possible. The project under which this work was undertaken is funded by an
ERC Advanced Investigator’s Grant (PI Lahiri; FP-IST-).
Bengali geminates


9
Asymmetric processing of consonant
duration in Swiss German
LARA EHRENHOFER, ADAM C. ROBERTS, SANDRA
KOTZOR, ALLISON WETTERLIN, AND ADITI LAHIRI
.Introduction
Understanding spoken language relies on extracting information from a highly
variable acoustic signal and mapping that information onto abstract representations
of phonological categories. Most investigations of this process have concentrated on
feature-based phoneme contrasts (e.g. the spectral information that cues place of
articulation, or the durational information that cues voice and voicelessness in stop
series) and their representation in the mental lexicon. Radical underspeciﬁcation
models of the mental lexicon, such as the Featurally Underspeciﬁed Lexicon (FUL)
(Lahiri and Reetz , ), provide a maximally efﬁcient way to represent and
recognize segments by storing only unpredictable (marked) feature information. But
for phonemic distinctions like the geminate/singleton contrast, the problem of
recognition shifts: the segment’s phonetic duration is mapped onto a syllable structure1
as well as onto a phoneme. To what extent is this structural distinction represented
in the mental lexicon? If it is, is that representation underspeciﬁed, as feature repre-
sentations appear to be? Geminates are therefore a keystone for experimental work at
the interface of phonetics and phonology, as the single phonetic cue of duration is
implicated in both melodic and structural levels of representation within the mental
lexicon.
We investigate geminate representation through the lens of how durational infor-
mation is exploited in lexical access. Prior work on Bengali (Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson
; Roberts et al. ; Kotzor et al. ; Kotzor et al., Chapter in this volume)
1 This is most obviously true of medial geminates, which are the main focus of our discussion, but
arguably also applies to initial and ﬁnal geminates when they are embedded within an utterance, as they
resyllabify with syllables from adjacent words (Kraehenmann ).
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Lara Ehrenhofer, Adam C. Roberts, Sandra Kotzor, Allison Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri
. First published by Oxford University Press.

showed that consonant duration is processed asymmetrically, suggesting that the
representation of the geminate/singleton contrast is indeed structurally under-
speciﬁed. However, Bengali only allows geminates in medial position, so speakers
may be unable to dissociate phonetic duration from a heterosyllabic structure for
phonotactic reasons, possibly inﬂuencing these asymmetric results. Swiss German
differs crucially from Bengali in allowing geminates word-initially and ﬁnally as
well as medially. Its speakers therefore have the ability to evaluate a consonant’s
phonetic duration and represent it phonologically in all positions independently
of heterosyllabicity, ruling out the potential role of phonotactics in processing.
We detail the phonetic and phonological characteristics of geminates cross-
linguistically, and more speciﬁcally in Swiss German, in section .. Section .
discusses prior work on geminate representation in the mental lexicon, and lays
out our research questions.
Our experiment, described in section ., follows the logic of Roberts et al. ()
and Kotzor et al. (Chapter ). It contrasts phoneme recognition at the melodic and at
the timing level by presenting listeners with auditory primes whose medial consonant
duration has been altered, such that words with medial singletons are presented with
geminate duration and vice versa. We investigate this manipulation’s impact on
lexical access through the N, an electrophysiological component which indexes
lexical access (Lau et al. ), and ﬁnd a processing asymmetry. In section ., we
lay out two alternative explanations for our results: a representational account based
on a structural speciﬁcation for geminates in the mental lexicon, and a processing
account, which suggests that the asymmetry we observe is due to a parsing mechan-
ism (the ‘CV template’) which initially assigns consonants in the acoustic signal to
syllable onsets.
.Why geminates are special
Duration is a gradable property of the speech signal and gives rise to clear categorical
perception effects in phoneme identiﬁcation. For instance, the phonetic duration of
voice onset time (VOT) distinguishes between phonologically voiced and voiceless
stops in English (Lisker et al. ; Reetz and Jongman ). This is no different for
the speciﬁc case of geminate duration: presenting participants with stimuli with
graded closure durations in languages as diverse as Japanese (Amano and Hirata
), Turkish and Bengali (Hankamer et al. ), and Arabic (Obrecht )
shows that cross-linguistically, consonant duration is the primary cue to geminate
or singleton identity. What sets geminate duration apart from duration purely at the
melodic level (as in English VOT) is the fact that it simultaneously cues a structural
distinction in syllabiﬁcation. Processing phonetic duration in a length-contrastive
system therefore requires the listener to mediate between melodic and structural
levels of representation. Furthermore, the precise nature of these representations is
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


under considerable debate (see section .). In this section, we review phonetic
studies of geminates in various languages, then go on to outline some important
phonetic and phonological features of geminates in Swiss German and in other
languages. Since our primary interest is in how duration in the acoustic signal is
mapped onto underlyingly long and short consonant categories (rather than how
listeners deal with durational variation arising from morphological or prosodic
factors), our discussion here focuses on lexical geminates.
..Phonetic characteristics of geminates
In both perception and production studies, a great deal of research has focused on
attempts to ﬁnd secondary correlates (beyond duration) to the geminate/singleton
distinction. Robust secondary correlates would tip the scales in favour of a geminate
representation focused on melodic features, but such evidence has (with the possible
exception of Pattani Malay, see below) been relatively unstable. In one perception study
(Lahiri and Hankamer ), Turkish displayed a statistically signiﬁcant difference in
VOT across geminates and singletons. Nevertheless, cross-spliced stimuli (in which
geminate stops were presented with a singleton VOT and singletons with geminate
VOT) were still reliably perceived as containing geminate consonants, and a follow-up
study with gated stimuli (Hankamer et al. ) conﬁrmed that geminate recognition
was primarily dependent on consonant duration rather than secondary cues like VOT.
Existing production studies, on the other hand, suggest that languages differ
according to whether or not they have secondary acoustic characteristics that cor-
relate robustly with the geminate/singleton distinction. Ridouane () revealed a
number of potential candidates (e.g. variation in fundamental frequency, variation in
release duration) for secondary correlates to the distinction in word-initial, medial,
and ﬁnal geminates in Tashlhiyt Berber, but none of these were robustly present in all
speakers and all consonant types, suggesting that these acoustic differences are a
result of phonology-external factors (e.g. aerodynamics, Ohala ). However, in
Malayalam, Fvalues in vowels preceding singleton sonorants are systematically
lower than in vowels preceding geminates (Local and Simpson ). Extending to
articulation, Payne (, ) ﬁnds statistically robust acoustic and electropalato-
graphic (EPG) evidence of a stronger palatal articulation for geminate than singleton
sonorants in Italian lexical geminates. In Malayalam and Italian, it may be the case
that listeners are able to exploit robustly available supplementary acoustic cues to
support the identiﬁcation of geminates vs. singletons. However, as neither of these
studies included a perceptual task, it is impossible to tell to which extent duration can
be overridden by other cues to the geminate/singleton contrast. In some languages,
geminate duration may be accompanied by secondary acoustic characteristics, but
these do not seem to be robust cues that listeners can reliably exploit to make the
geminate/singleton distinction. This is also true for Swiss German.

Ehrenhofer et al.

..Geminates in Swiss German
Swiss German belongs to the High Alemannic branch of German and is spoken by
about .million people in Switzerland (census; Lewis et al. ), where it
exists in a diglossic situation alongside Standard German, which is used for written
communication and in formal situations (Ferguson ). Mutual intelligibility
between Standard and Swiss German is low (Lewis et al. ), and numerous differ-
ences in their phonological systems (Kraehenmann ) and syntax (Schieber ;
Glaser and Frey ) suggest that Swiss German is a language of its own, rather than a
dialect of Standard German. There are some differences between the phonetics and
phonological systems of different regional accents (e.g. discrepancies in vowel length
between Grison and Thurgovian Swiss German, Kraehenmann ), leading scholars
to refer more speciﬁcally to e.g. ‘Bernese Swiss German’ (Ham ) or ‘Thurgovian
Swiss German’ (Kraehenmann ). However, the gemination facts we address in the
present work hold across all dialects of Swiss German.
Many scholars (e.g. Brunner ; Enstrom and Spörri-Bütler ; Fulop )
have attempted to explain the Swiss German singleton/geminate contrast as a
difference in fortis/lenis (tense/lax) articulation. This stems from a long tradition
of attempting to bring the phonological system of Swiss German into line with an
account of High German dialects (including modern-day Standard German) in which
a phonological voicing distinction in stop series is realized phonetically as aspiration
([ spread glottis], Iverson and Salmons ). This underlying distinction in High
German has been analysed by many authors (perhaps most notably by Kohler )
as a realization of [ fortis]; but for Swiss German, this account of consonantal length
contrasts breaks down under inquiry from phonetic, phonological, and historical
points of view (see Ehrenhofer for a detailed discussion).
As numerous phonetic studies of Swiss German consonants have conﬁrmed,
aspiration does not differ signiﬁcantly between the purported fortis and lenis con-
sonants of Swiss German (Enstrom and Spörri-Bütler ; Fulop ; Willi );
if there is voicing, it is not consistent across speakers or consonants (Brunner ).
Figures .and .show sample waveforms of the minimal pair [vɑpə] ‘honeycomb’
~ [vɑpːə] ‘coat of arms.’
In-depth phonetic studies of Thurgovian Swiss German (Kraehenmann , )
show signiﬁcant differences in duration between underlyingly long vs. short conson-
ants, although the duration ratios differ depending on manner of articulation and
position within the word: the difference in consonant duration is most pronounced
word-medially, and across all manners of articulation, stops have the greatest ratio of
singleton to geminate consonant duration (see Table .for a summary of the phonetic
data in Kraehenmann , ).
Initial stops in Swiss German provide further evidence that duration is the primary
cue to the geminate/singleton distinction in this language. The geminate/singleton
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


distinction in stops is realized phonetically as a difference in the length of the silence
before the burst, measured from the end of the preceding vowel or consonant
segment. In some languages, secondary cues to consonant identity are available:
speakers of Pattani Malay can exploit formant transitions into, and amplitude of,
117 ms
129 ms
83 ms
186 ms
v
α
p
ә
FIGURE .Sample waveform of [vɑpə] ‘honeycomb’.
97 ms
112 ms
283 ms
189 ms
v
α
pː
ә
FIGURE .Sample waveform of [vɑpːə] ‘coat of arms’.
TABLE .. Mean geminate and singleton consonant durations in Swiss German in
milliseconds
Initial
Medial
Final
Overall
Singleton stop
67.8
1:1.26
1:2.4
70.1
1:1.65
67.3
1:1.77
Geminate stop
86.3
116.1
119.2
Singleton fricative
1:1.79
122.1
1:1.3
104.0
1:1.3
Geminate fricative
158.2
135.8
Singleton sonorant
1:1.76
102.3
1:1.23
61.5
1:1.85
Geminate sonorant
64.0
155.2
94.0
169.0
63.4
111.4
126.3
113.5
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio
Ratio

Ehrenhofer et al.

the following vowel (Abramson b, , ) to make this distinction, while
speakers of Kelantan Malay use VOT as a cue to a consonant’s geminate or singleton
status (Hamzah et al. ). Speakers of Swiss German maintain the phonological
distinction between utterance-initial voiceless singletons and geminates in produc-
tion (Kraehenmann and Lahiri ), but are unable to make this distinction in
perception (Kraehenmann , ), suggesting that no reliable secondary cues to
consonant identity are available to speakers.
Swiss German’s phonological length contrast, realized primarily as a difference in
duration, pervades the entire synchronic consonant system2 (see Table ., based on
Kraehenmann ). There are just two serious restrictions on geminate distribution:
the only geminates found word-initially are stops (e.g. [tɑŋk] ‘thanks’ vs. [tːɑŋk]
‘tank’), and geminate sonorants can only appear following a short vowel ([ɡɛlːə]
‘loudmouth’, [ɡɛːlə] ‘yellow.masc.acc’, but a word of the form *[ɡɛːlːə] is phonotacti-
cally illegal). Otherwise, consonant length is distinctive following every nucleus type:
long or short vowels, e.g. [vɑpːə] ‘coat of arms’, [vɑpə] ‘honeycomb’, [huːpːə] ‘to honk’,
[huːpə] ‘cap’; branching or non-branching nucleus, e.g. [ɑltː] ‘old’. Phonetically long
consonants also arise as a result of morphological concatenation at word boundaries
(‘fake’ geminates, Kraehenmann ), but these lie beyond the scope of this chapter.
Swiss German, unlike Italian (Payne ) and Cypriot Greek (Payne and Eftychiou
), does not have geminates resulting from prosodic factors.
.Geminates in the mental lexicon
General issues with the representation of geminates are set out in detail in Kotzor
et al. (Chapter ). We reiterate here that geminate duration cannot be considered a
TABLE .. The consonant inventory of Swiss German
Bilabial
Labiodental
Coronal
Palato-alveolar
Velar
Glottal
Nasal
mː   m
nː   n
ŋː
Plosive
pː    p
tː    t
kː    k
Fricative
fː    f
sː    s
ʃː     ʃ
xː    x
h
Affricate
pf͡
ts͡
tʃ͡
kx͡
(r)
(r)
Trill
lː     l
Lateral
Note: The realization of /r/ differs between dialects and speakers, and is even subject to free variation (see
Fleischer and Schmid’s () narrow transcription of Swiss German).
2 There are a few exceptions: affricates and /ŋ/, which are considered to be underlyingly bisegmental,
only appear as phonetically long; and /r/, which only appears as phonetically short (Kraehenmann ).
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


melodic feature. If it were, long and short consonants would be represented by two
separate phonemes [C] vs. [Cː] differentiated by the feature [ long], analogous to
the distinction of oral from nasal vowels through a feature [ nasal] (cf. e.g.
Chomsky and Halle ). However, the geminate/singleton distinction differs
fundamentally in that it represents in the lexicon the amount of phonetic duration,
rather than its presence or absence. Featural phonological distinctions may be
phonetically realized through differences in duration—VOT in English is one such
example—but crucially, this graded phonetic cue maps onto an underlying distinc-
tion that is represented as a presence or absence of voicing ([ voice]). Furthermore,
consonants which are distinguished by the presence or absence of a feature tend to be
affected differently (Schein and Steriade ), whereas geminates and singletons are
always affected identically, suggesting that they share all melodic information and
differ on some other dimension.
Instead, the geminate/singleton must be encoded as a structural distinction. There
is controversy over whether geminates are represented using a binary (one vs. two
units of representation) or privative system (zero vs. one unit), and what form this
representation takes (e.g. moras vs. some other structural speciﬁcation). Here we
primarily address the question of a binary (speciﬁed) vs. privative (underspeciﬁed)
representation, as experimental methods do not currently allow us to distinguish
between moraic and other theoretical accounts of geminate representation.
To our knowledge, consonant duration is not explicitly accounted for in any model
of the mental lexicon. Given experimental evidence favouring radically underspeci-
ﬁed phonological representation in the mental lexicon, we focus here on three central
questions: what underspeciﬁed representations look like, how existing experimental
work supports an underspeciﬁed representation for the geminate/singleton in
Bengali, and why this may or may not apply to geminates in Swiss German. Our
aim is to leverage the examples of Bengali and Swiss German to foster debate on the
precise nature of the speciﬁcation, how this could impact models of the mental
lexicon, and the division of labour between phonological representation and pro-
cessing in speech recognition.
Early and inﬂuential models of lexical access, such as TRACE (McClelland and
Elman ), assumed featurally fully speciﬁed representations. In this model,
recovery from a distorted signal (e.g. through mispronunciation or phonological
assimilation) is mediated by top-down inﬂuence from currently active word candi-
dates, as well as activation or inhibition from phoneme to feature units in adjacent
segments. As Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson () point out, this predicts that all
deviations from a target feature should be equally easy to recover from, but beginning
with Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (), experimental results have shown that phon-
eme perception often proceeds asymmetrically. To account for this type of processing
asymmetry, Lahiri and Reetz () elaborated the Featurally Underspeciﬁed Lexicon
(FUL), which assumes privative features with radical underspeciﬁcation. If the acoustic

Ehrenhofer et al.

input matches a speciﬁed feature in the mental lexicon (MATCH), processing is facili-
tated. If the acoustic input cannot be mapped onto a speciﬁed feature (e.g. because
the information is missing or contradicts the speciﬁcation; MISMATCH), processing
is inhibited. If a feature is underspeciﬁed, any acoustic input can map onto it
(NO-MISMATCH), again resulting in facilitated processing. The predictions of this
model have been borne out repeatedly. Friedrich et al. () and Friedrich et al.
() conducted a cross-modal semantic priming study in German, which is under-
speciﬁed for [CORONAL], using audio primes whose medial, ﬁnal, or initial consonant
differed in place of articulation from the lexical representation. Behavioural and
neurophysiological evidence showed that participants were able to map a labial
acoustic signal onto an underlyingly coronal segment, but not the other way round
(*Horbe primes targets that are semantically related to Horde ‘horde’, i.e. there is a no-
mismatch response, but *Prode does not prime targets that are semantically related to
Probe ‘sample’, i.e. a mismatch response is provoked). Lahiri and Reetz () applied
essentially the same methodology to German vowels, but derived the variation in vowel
quality through sufﬁxes which triggered umlaut in the vowel, rather than creating non-
words, and again reported a processing asymmetry best explained by FUL.
Taken together, these studies suggest that processing acoustic input relies on
extracting melodic information and mapping it onto an underspeciﬁed phonological
representation in the mental lexicon. But to what extent does underspeciﬁed repre-
sentation carry over to the processing of acoustic information that is represented not
in terms of melodic but in terms of structural information? Experimental work on
geminate duration, which is not a feature (Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson ;
Kraehenmann ), helps answer this question.
Two major studies provide support for an underspeciﬁed representation of gemin-
ates in Bengali. In a forced-choice identiﬁcation task, Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson
() presented participants with gated fragments of a geminate/singleton minimal
pair (e.g. kana ‘blind’ vs. kanna ‘tears’). Stimuli cut off at the third gate contained the
full duration of the medial sonorant, yet even given the full duration of the medial
geminate or singleton sonorant, listeners overwhelmingly classiﬁed stimuli as cor-
responding to a word with a medial singleton. Recognition of duration as belonging
to a geminate only rose above chance level at the following gate, which also included
the consonant release and the ﬁrst two glottal pulses of the vowel. This asymmetric
processing proﬁle for Bengali geminate duration suggests that the geminate/singleton
contrast is underspeciﬁed at the structural level, since geminate recognition depends
on the availability of a cue to syllable structure (in the form of information about an
upcoming vowel). Roberts et al. () replicated this processing asymmetry for
Bengali geminates by demonstrating that speakers presented with non-word stimuli
with a phonetically long medial consonant were able to access lexical forms with
underlying singletons, but were not able to map a non-word with a phonetically short
medial consonant onto an underlying geminate. On the basis of this neurolinguistic
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


and behavioural evidence for asymmetric duration processing, Kotzor et al.
(Chapter ) argue that duration in Bengali is privative (Ø vs. µ): singletons are
unspeciﬁed for length, but geminates are speciﬁed for mora possession.
Our further experimental investigations in Swiss German add to the debate on
geminate representation in two ways. Firstly, Swiss German geminates have been
analysed as non-moraic because they are present initially, yet do not contribute to
syllable weight (Kraehenmann ). If we nonetheless observe a processing asymmetry,
this spurs discussion on alternative non-moraic structural units that geminates
might be speciﬁed for. Secondly, Bengali phonotactics only licenses a phonological
contrast in duration in word-medial position, possibly contributing to the observed
processing asymmetry. Recall that stimuli in the crucial conditions of Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson’s () task were truncated at the end of the medial consonant,
forming CVC sequences with variation in the duration of the ﬁnal consonant. Since
Bengali does not allow syllables with a ﬁnal geminate, speakers may not have the
representational capacity to encode durational variation in coda consonants. If so,
there is a chance that the ﬁnding that Bengali speakers are strongly biased towards
perceiving consonants as singletons (and therefore suggesting an underspeciﬁed
representation of geminates) may be an artefact of the phonotactic limitations of
Bengali. Since Swiss German allows geminates in all positions within the word, it
provides a unique test of questions about the processing and representation of
geminate duration. If the processing asymmetry observed in Bengali geminates is
an artefact of phonotactics, rather than representation, Swiss German speakers
should evaluate durational information symmetrically. If, however, Swiss Germans
display the same asymmetry in processing as Bengali speakers, this would suggest
that geminate representation is asymmetric cross-linguistically, ruling out the possi-
bility of phonotactics as a reason for the Bengali asymmetry, and that the geminate/
singleton contrast may be underspeciﬁed at a structural level.
.Asymmetric processing of consonant duration in Swiss German
Our experiment examines how speakers of Swiss German extract duration informa-
tion from an acoustic signal and integrate this information in lexical access, and
explores the implications of our ﬁndings for models of the mental lexicon.
The design follows techniques pioneered in, amongst many others, Lahiri and Reetz
(, ); Friedrich, Eulitz, and Lahiri (); Friedrich, Lahiri, and Eulitz ();
and Roberts et al. () . We exploit the robust and widespread ﬁnding that processing
is facilitated for words that are presented simultaneously with or after (Meyer and
Schvanefeldt ; Bentin et al. ) semantically related words, i.e. the prime dog
facilitates the processing of the target wolf, but the prime nail does not. Facilitated
processing is reﬂected behaviourally in shorter reaction times (Neely ) and neuro-
physiologically in a decrease in the amplitude of a negative-going electrophysiological

Ehrenhofer et al.

component known as the N. First observed in the context of sentence processing
(in semantically anomalous sentences like ‘He likes his coffee with cream and socks’,
Kutas and Hillyard , ), the Nis now understood to index lexical access,
semantic integration, and prediction or expectedness (Kutas and Federmeier ;
Lau et al. ). The advantage of using electrophysiological measures like event-
related potentials (ERPs) alongside behavioural measures is that it provides precise,
millisecond-by-millisecond insights into processing as it unfolds, whereas a response
time indicates the overall outcome of the decision subjects make as a result of that
processing.
We manipulated the consonant duration of aurally presented primes, and meas-
ured reaction times and ERPs to semantically related and unrelated targets for an
indication of the success of lexical access. In the crucial conditions of our experiment,
Swiss German speakers heard non-word primes based on words whose medial
geminate or singleton had been manipulated to display the opposite duration:
words containing medial singletons were presented with medial geminate duration
(e.g. [ʃtʊpə] ‘living room’ was presented as *[ʃtʊpːə], which is not a word in Swiss
German), and vice versa (e.g. [sʊpːə] ‘soup’ was presented as the non-word *[sʊpə]).
Participants then responded to semantically related visual targets (for these
examples, Kammer ‘chamber’ and Bouillon ‘broth’, respectively). Where recognition
is facilitated, this indicates that the acoustic input has been successfully mapped onto
the underlying representation. Where recognition is inhibited, this suggests that the
manipulation of medial consonant duration led to a failure in this mapping.
We see three possible outcomes to our experiment. Priming may be equally
reduced in responses to targets paired with both singleton-to-geminate and
geminate-to-singleton non-words (i.e. lexical access to the prime is hindered, result-
ing in a reduced facilitation of access to the target). This would suggest a symmetric
representation, i.e. that Swiss German listeners immediately evaluate durational
information and map it to a binary opposition that matches the two phonetic
durations (so a phonetically short duration could only be mapped onto a singleton
representation and a phonetically long duration onto a geminate representation).
If phonetic duration does not match the underlying speciﬁcation, lexical access
(reﬂected in priming) would fail. This result would lend support to the hypothesis
that the asymmetric geminate processing found in gated Bengali stimuli (Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson ) is an artefact of phonotactics rather than representation.
Alternatively, we may ﬁnd priming across the board (regardless of manipulation).
Studies using primes with melodic deviations from real words (e.g. *domato or
*somato for tomato, Bölte and Coenen ) have found a cline in the tolerance
for deviation that the degree of priming reﬂects, and it is possible (though in our
opinion unlikely) that durational variation in Swiss German might be tolerated
better than in Bengali. The third possible outcome is that Swiss German will show
the same processing asymmetry as Bengali, with a reduced priming effect in response
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


to geminate-to-singleton non-words, but not singleton-to-geminate non-words
(i.e. show a privative contrast). This would indicate that although Swiss German
encodes durational information in all positions within the word, speakers are biased
towards interpreting consonants as singletons, suggesting that the representation of
the geminate/singleton contrast in Swiss German, as in Bengali, is underspeciﬁed at
the structural level.
..Experiment design and materials
Our experimental design follows that of Roberts et al. () (also discussed in
Chapter ). Audio primes and visual targets were paired in a blocked design (real
word vs. non-word; based on a singleton or based on a geminate; related (test) or
unrelated (control) to the target). Examples are shown in Table .(excluding
ﬁller items, which were paired with a pseudoword target). Participants were told to
ignore the audio prime and judge the visual target as a word or pseudoword via
button press.
All primes were monomorphemic, disyllabic nouns containing a medial singleton
or geminate consonant, and were stressed on the ﬁrst syllable. We matched the
distribution of medial consonants among the two sets of test conditions (so the
medial consonant was [p] for ten singleton test primes and [pː] for ten geminate test
primes, etc.) in order to avoid any possible effects of consonant type across geminate
or singleton status in participants’ responses to test items. No prime was part of a
minimal pair differing only in consonant duration (i.e. shortening a medial geminate,
or lengthening a medial singleton, always resulted in a non-word). In test and control
items, the medial consonant did not appear in a cluster, although syllabic sonorants
TABLE .. Test and control conditions
Condition
Prime (aural)
Target (visual)
Test (related)
singleton
Singleton word
[ʃtʊpə]
living room
KAMMER
chamber
Singleton-to-geminate
nonword
*[ʃtʊpːə]
Control
(unrelated)
singleton
Singleton word
[ʃvefəl]
sulphur
Singleton-to-geminate
nonword
*[ʃvefːə]
Test (related)
geminate
Geminate word
[sʊpːə]
soup
BOUILLON
broth
Geminate-to-singleton
nonword
*[sʊpə]
Control
(unrelated)
geminate
Geminate word
[mɛsːɪŋ]
brass
Geminate-to-singleton
nonword
*[mɛsɪŋ]

Ehrenhofer et al.

were permitted to occur as the second, unstressed syllable (e.g. Sattel [sɑt:l̩] ‘saddle’).
All primes were selected such that manipulating medial consonant duration
(described below) would result in a phonotactically acceptable word of Swiss
German.
Word frequency was matched as closely as possible within each of the consonant
type groups using the CELEX corpus (Baayen et al. ) for Standard German
(as no searchable corpus of Swiss German exists). Where necessary, these rough
frequency estimates were supplemented by the ﬁrst author’s native-speaker intu-
itions (native speakers’ intuitions have been found to be an accurate reﬂection of
actual frequency, Segui et al. ). Control primes’ medial consonant differed from
their test primes in place of articulation, manner of articulation, or both, and were
selected to match the frequency of the test prime as closely as possible.
We recorded a female native speaker of Zurich Swiss German reading real-word
primes (e.g. [sʊpːə] ‘soup’ or [ʃtʊpə] ‘living room’) and preliminary versions of their
non-word counterparts (e.g. *[sʊpə] or *[ʃtʊpːə]). Recordings were made using
an Olympus LS-digital recorder and Shure SMmicrophone, attached to micro-
phone pre-ampliﬁer model ART Studio V; amplitudes were normalized using Praat
(Boersma and Weeninck ). Our speaker occasionally produced voicing in
singleton stops, but this is not a systematic cue to phoneme identity (Brunner
; Kraehenmann , ). To ensure that duration was the primary cue to
consonant status in these primes, we manipulated stimuli in a modiﬁed cross-splicing
procedure. The full closure duration (excluding VOT for stops) of a preliminary non-
word geminate (*[ʃtʊpːə]) was cross-spliced into the preliminary word singleton
([ʃtʊpə]) to yield a singleton-to-geminate non-word prime. To recreate a singleton
real word prime (without occasional voicing), the duration of the medial consonant
in the singleton-to-geminate non-word prime was shortened to match the duration
of the preliminary recording. To create a geminate-to-singleton non-word prime,
the closure duration of the medial consonant in the preliminary geminate word
recording ([sʊpːə]) was shortened to match the duration of the medial consonant
in the preliminary non-word singleton (*[sʊpə]). Finally, we also manipulated
word-geminate primes in order to avoid the factor of acoustic manipulation as a
confound in responses. Word-geminate primes were created by removing two
to three non-consecutive glottal pulses of the original word-geminate recording’s
medial consonant duration. T-tests were performed to ensure singleton and geminate
durations were distinct, comparing real-word geminates to singletons, and singleton-
to-geminate non-words to geminate-to-singleton non-words. Highly signiﬁcant
effects were found for both tests: for real words, t() = ., p < .; for
non-words, t() = ., p < ..
Since targets were visually presented, and there is no orthographic convention
for Swiss German, targets in this experiment were Standard German nouns. As far as
possible, word targets were matched for frequency, number of letters, and number
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


of syllables. Semantic relatedness was judged by native speakers of Swiss German
(aged –, average ., SD: .) via a web-based questionnaire. On a scale of (not
at all related) to (extremely related), the overall rating for test pairs was .(with
none rated below .), and all controls were rated either or (average rating: .).
The :ratio of semantically related to unrelated trials was maintained in the
ﬁller trials, where half of the target non-words were generated on the basis of words
semantically related to the ﬁller prime. All were phonetically and orthographically
plausible words of Standard German.
..Participants
Twenty-two subjects (all right-handed, as determined by the Edinburgh Handedness
Test, Oldﬁeld ; average age: .years, standard deviation: .years) were paid
for their participation. All were native speakers of Swiss German from birth and were
living in or visiting Oxford, England, at the time of testing. Dialectal variation could
not be controlled for, but all variants of Swiss German display the robust singleton/
geminate distinction (Kraehenmann ) tested in this experiment.
..Procedure
Each target appeared with each of its four possible primes (test-word, test-non-word,
control-word, control-non-word), making a total of experimental trials. These
were evenly split over four pseudo-randomized test blocks of trials each, such
that each target appeared exactly once in each block. Every participant saw all four
experimental blocks in a randomized counterbalanced order. Each trial began with
a white ﬁxation cross which appeared in the middle of a black screen for ms.
ms later, the auditory prime was played. After an inter-stimulus interval of
ms, the target was displayed for ms. Participants were given up to ,ms to
respond; the next trial began ms after their response. Reaction times were
recorded from the onset of the target displayed on screen.
..Behavioural and ERP data collection
Subjects were tested individually inside a soundproof, electromagnetically shielded
booth. EEG recordings were made using a Biosemi ActiveTwo ampliﬁer from
sintered Ag/AgCl pin electrodes set up in a /montage, online referenced to
the mastoids. Electrooculography (EOG) recordings were made using four facial
electrodes (IO, IO, LO, LO). All electrode offsets (comparable to impedance
when using an active-electrode system) were kept below mV; signals were
digitised at Hz.
All blocks were presented to subjects using Presentation software on a -inch
monitor about cm in front of the participant. Visual targets were displayed in
‘Times’ font, points. Each test block was approximately minutes long. Speed

Ehrenhofer et al.

and accuracy of response were equally stressed. Participants completed a -trial
practice block before the start of recording, repeated until they felt comfortable with
the procedure.
..ERP data processing
EEG data were processed using Brain Electrical Source Analysis (BESA; MEGIS
Software GmbH, Gräfelﬁng, Germany). Continuous EEG data recordings were ﬁltered
at a .Hz high-pass and a Hz low-pass ﬁlter. Data from a pre-experimental eye
movement task were processed to extract characteristic scalp topographies from eye
artefacts, which were applied to the experimental recordings using an EOG correction
algorithm (Ille et al. ). To reduce the inﬂuence of non-EEG noise, a semi-
automatic procedure was applied to reject trials which exceeded an amplitude of
µV or a gradient of µV.
..Results
In both analyses, due to coding issues, data from the same block were excluded for
of participants. Two participants were excluded: one fell asleep, one turned out
to be an early Llearner of Swiss German (rather than a native speaker from birth).
Only signiﬁcant results are reported in the text below.
...Behavioural data
Reaction times (RTs) were excluded from further analysis
if they were incorrect or missed, and if they fell beyond two standard deviations of the
mean RT for each subject for each condition. In addition to the data omissions above,
data from twelve test items had to be excluded across all participants due to coding
issues which affected the recording of behavioural responses only.
The statistical model applied, using the statistical software JMP (JMP®, Version .
SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, –), was a linear mixed-effects model with
restricted maximum likelihood (REML; see Newman et al. for a similar analysis);
dependent variable: reaction time, independent variables: prime type (semantically
related test vs. unrelated control items), prime status (e.g. real word [ʃtʊpə] vs. non-word
*[ʃtʊpːə]) and length category (‘short’: singleton real words and singleton-to-geminate
non-words; ‘long’: geminate real words and geminate-to-singleton non-words). Partici-
pants were listed as a random factor.
A summary of RT results across conditions is given in Table .. Overall, responses
to targets following real words were faster than following non-words, but they did
not signiﬁcantly differ (F(,) = ., p = .). The effect of prime type (test vs.
control) was highly signiﬁcant (F(,) = ., p < .***). A pairwise com-
parison established that RT to semantically related primes differed signiﬁcantly from
semantically unrelated control primes (rightmost row, Table .), conﬁrming the
overall success of lexical access.
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


Effects on response accuracy were analysed using a logit Generalized Linear
Model (treating response accuracy as a binomial distribution) for the ﬁxed effects
of prime type, word status, and length category. In the analysis of response accuracy,
there were signiﬁcant effects of prime type, χ2 = ., p = .and length, χ2 = .,
p < ., and an interaction of prime type and word status, χ2 = ., p = ..
Difference-of-differences planned comparisons were performed on the non-
signiﬁcant three-way interaction, comparing the difference between control and
test items between words and non-words for both long and short durations. These
showed a signiﬁcant priming difference in the ‘long’ category (geminate real word
and geminate-to-singleton non-word), χ2 = ., p = ., but not in the ‘short’
category (singleton real word and singleton-to-geminate non-word), χ2 = ., p = ..
Participants were thus signiﬁcantly more prone to response errors following
geminate-to-singleton than following singleton-to-geminate manipulated primes,
suggesting that geminate-to-singleton manipulation had a greater disruptive effect
on lexical access than singleton-to-geminate manipulation.
...ERP data
EEG epochs were averaged from target stimulus onset for all
correct responses to word targets within a pre-stimulus baseline period of ms
and a window of ms from target onset. Neffects are particularly robust in
TABLE .. Summary of RT results
Condition
Example
of prime
Example
of target
Mean RT in
ms (standard
error)
Priming
effect in
ms
sig.
Singleton
word
Test (related) [ʃtʊpə]
living room
KAMMER
chamber
681 (20.83)
17
p =.004 **
Control
(unrelated)
[ʃvefəl]
sulphur
698 (20.84)
Singleton-
to-geminate
prime
Test (related) *[ʃtʊpːə]
682 (20.83)
26
p <.0001 ***
Control
(unrelated)
*[ʃvefːəl]
708 (20.85)
Geminate
word
Test (related) [sʊpːə]
soup
BOUILLON
broth
669 (20.82)
29
p <.0001 ***
Control
(unrelated)
[mesːɪŋ]
brass
698 (20.83)
Geminate-
to-singleton
prime
Test (related) *[sʊpə]
679 (20.82)
20
p =.001 **
Control
(unrelated)
*[mesɪŋ]
700 (20.82)

Ehrenhofer et al.

the centro-parietal region (Kutas and Hillyard ; Domalski et al. ). There-
fore, the region of interest (ROI) selected for further analysis was a group of
nine electrodes clustered around and including Pz: CP, CPz, CP; P, Pz, P;
PO, POz, PO. In the control conditions, the Npeak was observed most clearly
around ms after target onset. For further analysis we selected a ms window
centred around ms after target onset (see Proverbio et al. ; Filik and
Leuthold ).
The ﬁgures which follow show grand average ERPs for test vs. control within
each of the experimental categories averaged across electrodes selected for the ROI:
singletonrealwords(Figure .a),geminaterealwords(Figure .b),singleton-to-geminate
non-words (Figure .c), and geminate-to-singleton non-words (Figure .d). The
–ms time window selected for later ERP amplitude analysis is highlighted in
each ﬁgure.
As in the analysis of behavioural results, Namplitudes were analysed with a
linear mixed-effects model with restricted maximum likelihood (REML); dependent
variable: mean ERP amplitude in microvolts (extracted for the time window
–ms after target onset), independent variables: prime type (semantically related
test vs. unrelated control items), prime status (e.g. real word [ʃtʊpə] vs. non-word
*[ʃtʊpːə]) and length category (‘short’: singleton real words and singleton-to-geminate
non-words; ‘long’: geminate real words and geminate-to-singleton non-words). Parti-
cipants were listed as a random factor.
An overview of the ERP results is provided in Table .. The effect of test vs.
control items was highly signiﬁcant (F(,) = .; p < .***). Differences
in Ns to targets following real word and non-word primes were not signiﬁcant
(F(,) = .; p = .). The linear mixed effects model also revealed a
signiﬁcant three-way interaction (F(,) = .; p = .*) between test/control
primes by real word/non-word primes by categories. A pairwise comparison
established that Nresponses differed signiﬁcantly between semantically
related test and unrelated control items in all conditions, i.e. priming was suc-
cessful where primes and targets were semantically related, in spite of the duration
manipulations.
However, the magnitude of the priming effect differed between non-word prime
types. A difference of differences contrast test (reported in Table .) compared
the difference between the Ns of singleton real word vs. singleton-to-geminate
non-word with the difference between Ns of geminate real word vs. geminate-
to-singleton non-words. This test established that while there was no signiﬁcant
difference between the Namplitudes of singleton real word vs. singleton-to-
geminate non-words, there was a signiﬁcant difference between geminate real word
vs. geminate-to-singleton non-words. Shortening geminates into singletons therefore
had a stronger adverse effect on lexical access than lengthening singletons into
geminates.
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


+10 μV
–10 μV
1000
ms
control singleton prime (word)
test singleton prime (word)
(a)
1000
ms
control geminate prime (word)
test geminate prime (word)
+10 μV
–10 μV
(b)
1000
ms
control singleton-to-geminate prime
test singleton-to-geminate prime
+10 μV
–10 μV
(c)
1000
ms
control geminate-to-singleton prime
test geminate-to-singleton prime
+10 μV
–10 μV
(d)
FIGURE .(a) Averaged ERP responses to singleton real words. (b) Averaged ERP responses to geminate real words. (c) Averaged ERP responses to
singleton-to-geminate non-words. (d) Averaged ERP responses to geminate-to-singleton non-words.

TABLE .Summary of ERP results
Example
of prime
Condition
Example of
target
Mean ERP amplitude
in μV (SE)
Priming effect in
μV (SE)
Sig.
Singleton word
Test (related)
[ʃtʊpə]
living room
kammer
chamber
–0.97 (0.228)
p  < .001***
p  < .001***
p  < .001***
p = .021*
Control
(unrelated)
[ʃvefəl]
sulphur
Singleton-to-geminate
prime
Test (related)
*[ʃtʊpːə]
–1.33 (0.228)
Control
(unrelated)
*[ʃvefːəl]
Geminate word
Test (related)
[sʊpːə]
soup
bouillon
broth
–1.23 (0.228)
Control
(unrelated)
[mesːɪŋ]
brass
Geminate-to-
singleton prime
Test (related)
*[sʊpə]
6.35 (0.721)
5.38 (0.721)
6.49 (0.721)
5.17 (0.721)
6.37 (0.721)
5.13 (0.721)
6.43 (0.721)
–0.53 (0.228)
Control
(unrelated)
*[mesɪŋ]

.Discussion
This study targeted the interaction of processing at the level of melody and timing in
geminate recognition, with the overall aim of elucidating how consonant duration in
the acoustic signal is mapped onto underlying phoneme representations, and what
this implies for the representation of geminates in the mental lexicon. We aimed to
test whether Swiss German, which (unlike Bengali) has the representational capacity
to encode variation in duration in all positions within the word, would nonetheless
display an asymmetry in processing geminate duration. Our results conﬁrm this
hypothesis, suggesting that the Swiss German geminate/singleton contrast is under-
speciﬁed in the mental lexicon. Our results also conﬁrm that the asymmetry observed
in Bengali is due to a geminate representation which includes the structural level, not
a lack of representational capacity for encoding the geminate/singleton contrast other
than in word-medial position.
We concentrate our discussion on two main experimental effects. First, the
analyses of Namplitude and reaction times revealed a reduction of the priming
effect in response to geminate-to-singleton non-words, but not singleton-to-
geminate non-words. In accounting for these results, we explore representation-
based and processing-based sources for the effects we observe. We suggest that this
processing asymmetry is evidence of a structurally underspeciﬁed representation
of the geminate/singleton contrast, and discuss what form the structural speciﬁ-
cation might take. We also speculate about a processing-based alternative: that
this asymmetry reﬂects a non-linear speech parsing process (‘CV template pars-
ing’) by which speakers preferentially interpret consonants in the acoustic signal
as onsets.
Secondly, although manipulating consonant duration reduced priming, it did not,
overall, cause lexical access to fail (unlike in similar experiments in Bengali, Roberts
et al. ; Kotzor et al. ). We suggest that this is due to a combination of
neighbourhood cohort effects and Swiss German participants’ facility in switching
between native and non-native (Standard German) phonologies. Repetition effects
may also be a factor.
TABLE .. Difference-of-difference test for ERP amplitudes
Test vs.control in geminate real words vs.
geminate-to-singleton non-words
t(1413) = –2.19
p= .029*
Test vs. control in singleton real words vs.
singleton-to-geminate non-words
t(1413) = 1.11
p= .267 n.s.

Ehrenhofer et al.

..Representational account: a structurally underspeciﬁed geminate/singleton
contrast
Although listeners are successful overall in recovering from variation in duration,
processing of Swiss German geminate duration nonetheless displays the telltale
asymmetry that suggests an underspeciﬁed mental representation. Thus only acous-
tic information that meets the criteria for geminate recognition can be mapped onto
an underlying geminate, whereas consonant information of any duration can be
mapped onto an underlying singleton. However, it is unclear what form this under-
speciﬁed representation should take.
Existing accounts of underspeciﬁcation operate at the melodic level: for instance, if
German stops are speciﬁed for [LABIAL], consonants in the input can only be mapped
onto an underlyingly [LABIAL] consonant if the parser can extract acoustic evidence to
satisfy the requirements of that [LABIAL] feature (Lahiri and Reetz , ).
In theory, geminates could be represented as speciﬁed at the melodic level, e.g.
through a privative feature [LONG]. This option can be excluded on external logical
and empirical grounds. First, geminate duration is not a feature, for a host of
theoretical reasons (Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson ; Kraehenmann ; see also
section .). Secondly, if the representation of the geminate/singleton contrast were a
feature [LONG] ~ Ø, we would expect very different experimental results in Lahiri and
Marslen-Wilson (): listeners should have been able to map long consonant
duration onto an underlying geminate as soon as they had enough evidence in the
signal to conﬁrm that [LONG] was present. Yet even when given the consonant’s full
closure duration, they interpreted the consonant as a singleton. However, evidence of
syllable structure (in the form of sonorant release and two glottal pulses of a
following vowel) allowed participants to identify geminates above chance, suggesting
that geminates are speciﬁed at a structural, not melodic, level in Bengali.
Given the results of our processing experiment, some kind of asymmetric speci-
ﬁcation is clearly also required for Swiss German geminates. At its most fundamental,
the speciﬁcation must be structural, rather than featural. There are three candidates
for such a structural unit: a CV-skeleton (McCarthy ; Clements and Keyser ),
an X-skeleton in which the difference between consonants and vowels is neutralized
(Levin ), and a moraic representation which doubles up as a weight-bearing unit.
All three options assume (and indeed this is universal) that a geminate is intrinsically
heterosyllabic. If it happens to be found at the edge of a word, the geminate will
associate with the coda; if it is word-initial, it is structurally indistinguishable and
acoustically neturalized, but its presence is felt in articulation (Kraehenmann and
Lahiri ). Note that the representation of the geminate/singleton contrast within
both the CV- and X-skeleton theories is binary (singletons are linked to one timing
slot, X, whereas geminates are doubly linked, XX) rather than privative, making both
of these representations impossible to reconcile with our results in processing. Since
our results point to an asymmetric representation, the only real candidate is the mora,
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


as Kotzor et al. (Chapter ) also propose for Bengali. However, at this present
juncture, given Kraehenmann’s () account that Swiss German geminates do
not necessarily add to weight (see also Mohanan and Mohanan for Malay-
alam, and Lahiri and Koreman for Dutch), we would like to remain agnostic
about the precise nature of the representation. What is clear, however, is that
whatever is encoded in the lexicon to mark the geminate/singleton contrast has
to reﬂect the fact that there is an asymmetry and that medial geminates have to
be heterosyllabic.
Adapting this structural speciﬁcation to a FUL-style model, only phonetically long
consonant duration satisﬁes the requirement of this structural unit so as to be
mapped onto an underlying geminate ([MATCH] response). A phonetically short
consonant will therefore fail to be mapped onto an underlying geminate ([MISMATCH]),
whereas a phonetically long consonant can be mapped onto an underlying singleton
that is structurally underspeciﬁed ([NO-MISMATCH]). The predictions of this model
exactly match our results. Geminate perception in Swiss German as well as Bengali
therefore conﬁrms that the radical underspeciﬁcation account of the mental lexicon
can and should be extended beyond featural information into the structural level
of representation.
If geminates have an underlying structural speciﬁcation that causes them to be
syllabiﬁed into two syllables, and if only a phonetically long duration can be mapped
onto a geminate with this underlying structural speciﬁcation, this predicts that
geminate recognition will encounter difﬁculties everywhere except in medial pos-
ition. In running speech, word-initial and ﬁnal geminates resyllabify with the coda of
a preceding and the onset of a following syllable, respectively, and therefore usually
appear as heterosyllabic, so recognition should not be hampered here. While the
syllabiﬁcation and representation of utterance-initial and ﬁnal geminates is contro-
versial (Kraehenmann ), it is safe to assume that they cannot be heterosyllabic.
Interestingly, Swiss German speakers conﬁrm the prediction that geminate percep-
tion will suffer at syllable edges: they are unable to distinguish geminates from
singletons utterance-initially (Kraehenmann ; Kraehenmann and Lahiri ).
To our knowledge, the perception of utterance-ﬁnal geminates has not been inves-
tigated, but if geminates indeed bear a structural speciﬁcation which requires them to
be syllabiﬁed across two syllables, this would predict difﬁculty in the perception of
utterance-ﬁnal geminates. Cross-linguistically, ﬁnal geminates are rare and initial
geminates even more so (Kraehenmann ); difﬁculty in recognition may be a part
of why edge geminates are typologically marked.
..Processing account: a CV template in parsing
An alternative approach is to explore the possible role of parsing processes in yielding
the asymmetric results we observe. We speculatively propose a mechanism at the

Ehrenhofer et al.

syllable level of speech recognition: the CV template. In a ﬁrst pass of processing,
incoming acoustic information is roughly chunked left to right into consonants and
vowels on the basis of melodic information only and, as far as possible, slotted into a
simple CV syllable template.3 In this way, all consonants, regardless of duration, are
initially interpreted as the onset of a CV syllable, and lexical access to a word
containing a medial singleton can proceed. In geminate recognition, the initial
parse into CV syllables must be revised in a second pass that includes evaluation of
durational information, such that the melodic information extracted from the signal
can ultimately be mapped onto two syllables. ERP measures may reﬂect the effects of
such a second pass (such as a processing latency, which is likely to be erased by long-
distance processing measures like reaction times), but given the design and statistical
power of our experiment, we were not able to draw any conclusions about this, and
leave it to future research to clarify.
If the CV template operates in speech recognition, there must be some mechanism
that applies asymmetrically in prompting the second pass for geminate recognition.
It cannot be phonetic consonant duration itself: if so, Swiss German listeners would
have integrated the duration of singleton-to-geminate consonants, but contrary to
this prediction, priming was reduced in this experimental condition. It is possible
that melodic information is, by and large, sufﬁcient to activate a cohort of candidates,
including one word candidate containing a geminate which prompts evaluation of
consonant duration, resyllabiﬁcation (if phonetic duration is indeed long), and ultim-
ately, lexical access. This account is troublesome for geminate/singleton minimal pairs,
however, since the melodic information for the two words is identical, and the word
containing a singleton would always be activated more. Identiﬁcation of minimal pairs
with initial geminates or singletons is indeed problematic (Kraehenmann ;
Kraehenmann and Lahiri ), but no such issues are reported for medial gemin-
ate/singleton minimal pairs. How a geminate would prompt evaluation of consonant
duration needs further discussion: for instance, this might rely on a representational
factor, e.g. a structural speciﬁcation on the geminate, such that parsing and represen-
tation might complement each other in giving rise to the phenomena of geminate
processing.
The CV template could explain why Swiss German speakers have difﬁculty
perceiving utterance-initial geminates (Kraehenmann and Lahiri ): if there is
no preceding syllable to resyllabify a consonant with, yet geminate recognition relies
on a second pass of resyllabiﬁcation, recognition of a segment as a geminate would
fail. On the other hand, ignoring duration except where required might confer an
advantage in processing a variable speech signal. Cross-linguistically, prosodic
3 This cannot apply when the acoustic input contains a sequence of consonants. We tentatively suggest
that the ﬁrst might form the head of a defective template which is then syllabiﬁed with another template
according to language-speciﬁc phonotactic rules.
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


factors like speech rate (Pickett et al. ; Hirata and Whiton ) and stress
(Payne ; Payne and Eftychiou ) can lengthen absolute consonant duration.
If duration were always evaluated (instead of, as we propose, only being evaluated
when triggered by top-down information, whatever its nature), this could introduce a
potential for misanalysis into speech processing. However, if parsing is guided by a
CV template augmented by a geminate representation which causes durational
information to be evaluated, prosodically lengthened consonants would never be
confused with underlying geminates. Where postlexical assimilation processes result
in concatenated geminates, two underlying segments are realized as a single phon-
etically long consonant. How this would be mapped onto two underlying segments
within the framework of a CV template is problematic, but non-lexical geminates are
beyond the scope of this chapter, and we leave this to be explored in future work.
Whether the phenomena of geminate processing are due to geminates’ represen-
tation in the mental lexicon or are a product of parsing routines (which, as we
discuss, are not mutually exclusive possibilities), it seems clear that models of lexical
access must incorporate a structural level of processing (beyond the melodic level).
Existing models, such as TRACE (McClelland and Elman ) or SHORTLIST
(Norris ), rely on melodic information alone in word recognition. Yet access to
structural information is required to explain the asymmetry in geminate processing
found in Swiss German and in Bengali (Roberts et al. ; Kotzor et al. ; Kotzor
et al., Chapter ). If the CV template is available in languages with a geminate/
singleton contrast, it may also be operating behind the scenes in languages with no
such contrast. For instance, even in English, it seems that some syllable-level phe-
nomena, e.g. stress, can disrupt the otherwise more left-to-right parse of segments as
a sequence (Cutler and Norris ).
Overall, although a CV template that guides word recognition could explain the
syllable-level effects we observed, further research is required to determine what
asymmetric mechanism triggers evaluation of durational information: whether the
geminate/singleton contrast is structurally underspeciﬁed in the mental lexicon, a CV
template guides word recognition, or a combination of both.
..Swiss German speakers integrate durational variation
Our results show a reduced priming effect in response to the geminate-to-singleton
related condition; but nonetheless there was still a signiﬁcant effect of relatedness in
the geminate-to-singleton related vs. unrelated conditions, such that lexical access
was hindered but not disrupted. That is, Swiss German speakers tolerate variation in
consonant duration, though less when a geminate is shortened than when a singleton
is lengthened. This may be due to the availability of acoustic information beyond the
medial consonant’s duration, and the use of non-Swiss German phonological systems
to ignore conﬂicting durational information.

Ehrenhofer et al.

Lexical recognition can take place before the entirety of the information present
in the acoustic signal has been evaluated (see Marslen-Wilson and Zwitserlood ).
In this experiment, listeners had access to all of the acoustic information after the
medial consonant, as well as that consonant’s melodic information, helping to narrow
down the set of possible candidates. Since none of the primes used in this experiment
belonged to minimal pairs differing only in duration, a neighbourhood cohort would
have been sufﬁcient to select the appropriate word candidate, even without access
to the relevant structural information that would have identiﬁed the consonant as
a geminate or singleton. If, indeed, duration evaluation is only initiated through a
structural speciﬁcation or a second pass in syllable parsing, consonant duration would
be ignored in most of the primes participants heard. Why this is possible in Swiss
German but not in Bengali (Chapter ) may be a result of Swiss Germans’ high degree
of multilingualism and close contact with non-native phonologies.
As multilinguals, our participants routinely access the phonologies of English and
Standard German, which do not contrast their consonant series on the basis of
phonological quantity, meaning that consonant duration is never exploited when
participants process second-language input. Bear in mind that participants were
responding to visual targets in Standard German (since Swiss German has no written
standard, see section ..), which may have encouraged them to access the phono-
logical system of Standard German. Past research has shown that Swiss German
speakers are highly skilled in exploiting non-native contrasts: Pohl () demon-
strates that Swiss German participants can exploit Standard German’s phonemic
durational variation in VOT to correctly categorize stops, even though VOT is not a
distinctive feature in the phonological system of Swiss German. On the other hand,
Standard German speakers presented with stimuli with constant VOT but variable
consonant duration displayed only a tendency to map geminate and singleton stops
onto the correct Standard German stop categories. Swiss German speakers’ extensive
experience with the phonology of Standard German may therefore have allowed
them to ignore durational variation in the present study’s stimuli.
As one thoughtful reviewer pointed out, our results are likely to have been strongly
affected by repetition effects. We had to balance the demands of statistical power
with an extremely sparse participant population, and therefore, each participant saw
each word target four times, combined once with each prime condition (test, control,
real word, and non-word). Repeating targets tends to reduce priming effects overall
(Grill-Spector et al. ), reﬂected in the symmetric response seen in the RT data. The
fact that the non-word primes asymmetrically reduced priming in the geminate-to-
singleton condition despite repetition of targets suggests that the processing asymmetry
is quite robust in ERPs in Swiss German—though perhaps, for the reasons discussed
above, somewhat more fragile than in Bengali. A repetition of the behavioural portion
of this experiment using a traditional Latin square design and more participants is
required to conﬁrm our asymmetric result.
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


..Open questions
Finally, we brieﬂy note an avenue for further research. Our focus on the structural
(rather than melodic) level of representation for geminates is driven by theoretical
concerns that rule out representing length as a feature, but also by the experimental
results of Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson (), in which participants only identiﬁed
geminate consonants above chance when, in addition to the full closure duration,
they also heard the release and the ﬁrst two glottal pulses of the following vowel. The
authors interpreted this as evidence that structural information is required before a
consonant can be identiﬁed as heterosyllabic and therefore, a geminate. We note,
however, that in the case of medial geminates, consonant duration and heterosyllabi-
city are confounded. Future exploration must therefore determine to what extent
geminate recognition is indeed crucially dependent on the availability of syllable-
level information. This could be achieved by investigating the perception of contrastive
vowel duration (e.g. in Japanese) or the perception of ﬁnal consonant duration in Swiss
German geminates and singletons. In both cases, whether the segment is long or short,
there is no difference in syllabiﬁcation, i.e. duration is decoupled from structural
information.
.Conclusion
Geminate consonants offer a unique window into the phonetics–phonology interface
in speech recognition: a single acoustic cue, consonant duration, determines both the
phoneme’s identity and the word’s syllable structure. The present study investigated
geminate representation through the lens of these interacting factors in the process-
ing of medial geminates in Swiss German. ERP and behavioural measures of the
success of lexical access to primes with manipulated medial consonant duration
revealed a signiﬁcant processing asymmetry. Listeners were able to map a too-long
consonant onto an underlying singleton, but not a too-short consonant onto an
underlying geminate, suggesting that consonant duration is not evaluated unless
required by top-down information. We argue that a FUL-style conception of the
mental lexicon (Lahiri and Reetz , ) must include a structural level of
underspeciﬁcation, such that singletons are underspeciﬁed in the mental lexicon
while geminates are speciﬁed with a structural unit that asymmetrically triggers the
evaluation of phonetic consonant duration in the signal. The processing asymmetry
may alternatively be explained as the result of a speech parsing routine, the CV
template, which assigns all consonant information in the signal to a syllable onset in
the ﬁrst pass of processing, only evaluating consonant duration and reanalysing
syllable structure when prompted by top-down information. More research is
required to identify whether geminates are processed asymmetrically because of the
constraints of representation, processing, or both, as well as to further pinpoint the
role of the syllable in lexical access.

Ehrenhofer et al.

Acknowledgements
This chapter is based on the ﬁrst author’s MPhil thesis (Oxford, ). Earlier versions were
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistics Association of Great Britain in Oxford
and at the satellite workshop on geminate consonants across the world at ICPhS . We are
indebted to our friends and colleagues, Naomi Feldman, Bill Idsardi, Haruo Kubozono,
Andrew Nevins, Colin Phillips, Henning Reetz, and Philip Roberts, for invaluable discussion
on early incarnations of this work. We are also grateful for the thoughtful comments we
received from Pierre Hallé and one anonymous reviewer. Finally, we thank Ann Ehrenhofer-
Murray for lending her voice to this experiment, and our participants for their patience. This
work was supported by a Fulbright Postgraduate Student Award, a University of Maryland
Flagship Fellowship, a Sloane Robinson Graduate Award, and a Lincoln College, Oxford,
research grant to Lara Ehrenhofer; and European Research Council grant FP-IST-
(PI: Aditi Lahiri).
Asymmetric processing in Swiss German


10
Geminates and weight-manipulating
phonology in Chuukese (Trukese)
STUART DAVIS
.Introduction
Researchers have long been divided as to whether or not they view geminate
consonants as being underlyingly moraic.1 Hayes () posits that geminate
consonants differ from singletons in that geminates are underlyingly moraic. While
Hayes did not provide speciﬁc argumentation for this position, Davis, in a series of
papers (, a, b, ) presents speciﬁc argumentation for the underlying
moraicity of geminates. On the other hand, Ringen and Vago () maintain a two-
C-slot theory of geminates that harks back to Clements and Keyser (), while
Curtis () develops a composite view of the representation of geminates. Along
these lines, Davis () suggests a further reﬁned composite representation of
geminates that still maintains an underlying moraic representation.
One language that has played a major role in the discussion of geminate repre-
sentation is the Micronesian language Chuukese, also known as Trukese (Dyen ,
; Goodenough and Sugita ; Muller ). This is because, as noted by
Churchyard () and Hart (), Chuukese presents a particularly strong case
for the moraicity of geminate consonants. Even Ringen and Vago (), who are
strong proponents of the two-C-slot theory, concede the moraic nature of Chuukese
geminates. While certain aspects of the phonology of Chuukese geminates have been
highlighted in the literature, such as its minimal word constraint that treats words of
the shape GV (where G = geminate) as bimoraic, a full detailed optimality-theoretic
1 This chapter builds on and expands the author’s previous work on Chuukese, especially Davis and
Torretta (), Davis (b), and Davis (). The focus of the sections on Chuukese in the
latter two articles was on representational issues especially involving word-initial geminates. The aim
of the present chapter is to focus on the role of geminates in the quantity-manipulating phonology of
the language.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Stuart Davis . First published by Oxford University Press.

analysis showing how geminates interact with the overall phonology of quantity in
Chuukese has not been previously published, though Davis and Torretta () give
a partial analysis. This chapter will develop a comprehensive optimality-theoretic
analysis of Chuukese quantity manipulating phonology, focusing on the role of
geminate consonants rather than on the details of representational issues, such as
those involving initial geminates, which has been discussed in Topintzi () and
Davis (). Section .will review the Chuukese data that clearly support the
moraicity of geminate consonants. This section will largely go over previous work
such as Davis (b) that show the role of a minimal word constraint as well as ﬁnal
vowel deletion and long vowel shortening in providing evidence for the moraicity of
geminate consonants. Expanding on Davis and Torretta (), section .pre-
sents an optimality-theoretic analysis of two quantity alternations that interact with
one another but do not directly involve geminates: ﬁnal mora deletion and com-
pensatory (vowel) lengthening. Section .then examines quantity alternations
involving geminates, with a focus on the phenomena of what has been referred to as
‘geminate throwback’ (Churchyard ), the term being modelled on ‘aspiration
throwback’ in Sanskrit (see e.g. Borowsky and Mester ). This process occurs
in words that have the underlying shape /CVGV/. In such words the ﬁnal short
vowel deletes, and, since Chuukese words cannot end in a geminate, the geminate
becomes a singleton; but then gemination shows up on the word-initial conson-
ant, giving the impression that the gemination is ‘thrown back’ to the beginning of
the word. As an example, underlying /ﬁtta/ ‘package’ surfaces as [fﬁt] with initial
gemination. Section .then analyses apparent exceptions to geminate throw-
back and the issue of lexical variation with respect to it. Section .concludes
the chapter.
.The moraicity of geminate consonants in Chuukese: data
This section has two goals. The ﬁrst is to provide the data showing various quantity
alternations in Chuukese nouns that will be analysed in the subsequent sections of
the chapter; the second goal is to present the data in a way that makes clear the
moraic nature of geminate consonants. Chuukese phonology shows a variety of
quantity alternations that include the deletion of word-ﬁnal short vowels, the short-
ening of word-ﬁnal long vowels, compensatory lengthening, and geminate throw-
back. These processes interact with one another, and in addition they can be
constrained by a minimal word constraint that holds for Chuukese nouns that
requires them to be minimally bimoraic. We will illustrate these different processes
and their interaction. As pointed out by previous researchers (e.g. Churchyard ;
Hart ; Davis b), these data provide compelling evidence for the underlying
moraicity of geminate consonants.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


First, consider the Chuukese nominal data in () and ().2 In examining the data it
is important to keep in mind certain points about Chuukese phonology. Chuukese
has both long vowels and geminate consonants. A word cannot end in a geminate
consonant, but it can end in a singleton consonant. There are no onset clusters or
coda clusters (with some exceptions in loanwords). Word-internally, the only coda
consonant permitted is one that is the ﬁrst part of a geminate. Given the difference in
the phonotactics between a word-internal coda and a word-ﬁnal consonant, one can
consider a word-ﬁnal consonant to be non-moraic or extraprosodic, as in Kennedy
(). The data in () show a process in the language whereby an underlying word-
ﬁnal short vowel deletes, and () shows a process that shortens an underlying
word-ﬁnal long vowel. In the data in () and () and () and (), the underlying
representation of unsufﬁxed nouns are presented in the leftmost column and then
their output forms are given. The rightmost column displays a sufﬁxal form of the
noun, which provides evidence for the underlying nature of the ﬁnal vowel. The data
in () and () can be captured by the generalization that a word-ﬁnal mora deletes.3
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
st pers. poss.
a. /omosu/
[omos]
turban shell
omosu-y
b. /məkɨre/
[məkɨr]
head
məkɨre-y
c. /piseki/
[pisek]
goods
piseki-y
d. /sæfeye/
[sæfey]
medicine
sæfeye-y
e. /səkɨri/
[səkɨr]
back
səkɨri-y
()
a. /pečee/
[peče]
foot
pečee-y
b. /tikkaa/
[tikka]
coconut oil
tikkaa-y
c. /etiruu/
[etiru]
coconut matting
etiruu-y
d. /čuučuu/
[čuuču]
urine
čuučuu-y
The process of ﬁnal mora deletion illustrated in () and () is pervasive throughout
the language.
2 As a note on the Chuukese transcription used in the chapter, we represent the vowels using familiar
IPA symbols. Much of the previous work uses Chuukese orthographic symbols. The transcription
symbols [æ], [ə], [ɔ] and [ɨ] are indicated by á, é, ó, and ú, respectively, in Chuukese orthography.
3 The data in this chapter are drawn from a variety of sources on Chuukese that include Dyen (,
); Goodenough and Sugita (); Churchyard (, ); Hart (); and Muller (, ).
In this chapter we discuss only Chuukese nouns. This is because nouns, unlike other parts of speech, must
surface as minimally bimoraic. That is, a noun cannot have the shape CV, but there are monomoraic verb
forms that surface as CV. Further, researchers such as Goodenough and Sugita () have noted that
Chuukese verbal morphology employs initial gemination to mark a stative or adjectival meaning, termed
‘denotative’ by Kennedy (), who provides an optimality-theoretic analysis (see also de Lacy and
Kingston : ). The case of initial gemination in Trukese nouns by means of geminate throwback
that we focus on in this chapter is a phonological phenomenon that is distinct from gemination in verbal
morphology.

Davis

Chuukese has a minimal word constraint that applies to nouns, requiring that they
surface with at least two moras. Because of this constraint, the words in () fail to
undergo ﬁnal mora deletion. If they were to undergo mora deletion, the output would
consist of a monomoraic form. This is shown in the right-hand column of ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
*Output
a. /maa/
[maa]
behaviour
*ma
b. /təə/
[təə]
islet
*tə
c. /oo/
[oo]
omen
*o
d. /soo/
[soo]
precipitate
*so
e. /nɨɨ/
[nɨɨ]
unripe coconut
*nɨ
Now consider the words in () and (). These words all have an initial geminate
consonant. The phonetics of Chuukese geminate consonants, including initial
geminates, was studied in Muller (b, ). She found that the primary correlate
of gemination is length. However, for the difference between word-initial singleton
and geminate stops, for which length was difﬁcult to measure when in phrase-initial
position, there were other differences distinguishing the initial geminate from the
singleton, in that the geminate stop possessed a larger pitch perturbation and a larger
jump in amplitude at the release.
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
/n/ relational sufﬁx
a. /ttoo/
[tto]
clam sp.
[ttoo-n]
b. /kkææ/
[kkæ]
taro sp.
[kkææ-n]
c. /ččaa/
[čča]
blood
[ččaa-n]
d. /ssɔɔ/
[ssɔ]
thwart of a canoe
[ssɔɔ-n]
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
/n/ relational sufﬁx
a. /ffəne/
[ffən]
advice
[ffəne-n]
b. /nnətɨ/
[nnət]
shrub sp.
[nnətɨ-n]
c. /ttoŋa/
[ttoŋ]
love
[ttoŋa-n]
The data in () should be compared with that in (). They are similar in that they are
monosyllabic forms that end in an underlying long vowel. As mentioned, the data in
() fail to undergo ﬁnal mora deletion since the resulting output would be mono-
moraic. By contrast, the forms in () with an initial geminate followed by a long
vowel still undergo ﬁnal mora deletion. This can be understood given the assumption
that the geminate is underlyingly moraic. The output in () would still have two
moras, one contributed by the short vowel and one contributed by the geminate.
Moreover, the data in () are comparable to the data in (). Final mora deletion in
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


these words readily occurs, since the output would contain two moras. In (), this is
transparently so since the surface forms have two vowels; in () the output would
also have two moras, one contributed by the vowel and one contributed by the
geminate consonant. (As mentioned, a word-ﬁnal consonant can be considered
non-moraic or extraprosodic.) Thus the difference between the lack of ﬁnal mora
deletion in () and its application in () offers strong evidence that geminates in
Chuukese are underlyingly moraic. With this as background, we will consider
formally the interaction of several processes that affect quantity: compensatory
lengthening and ﬁnal mora deletion in section .and geminate throwback in
section .. In doing this, we will develop an optimality-theoretic analysis of the
Chuukese alternations. Optimality Theory neatly captures the interaction of these
processes, since they can be characterized as entailing a strict domination of
constraints. Section .will discuss some apparent exceptions and variation with
respect to geminate throwback.
.Final mora deletion and compensatory lengthening
In this section we offer a detailed optimality-theoretic analysis of Chuukese ﬁnal
mora deletion and compensatory lengthening (henceforth CL). As shown in
section ., ﬁnal mora deletion entails the deletion of an underlying ﬁnal short
vowel and the shortening of a ﬁnal long vowel. Final mora deletion is pervasive in
Chuukese phonology. On the other hand, the compensatory lengthening process is
much more limited: it is triggered by the deletion of a ﬁnal short vowel in words
having the underling shape /(C)VCV/. We will develop an optimality-theoretic
analysis of the data using evaluation tableaux within correspondence theory
(McCarthy and Prince ), showing speciﬁc ranking arguments as the analysis
is developed.
We begin our analysis by reconsidering the data presented in (), repeated in (),
which demonstrate word-ﬁnal short vowel (mora) deletion without any other
changes occurring. On the other hand, there are cases where the deletion of a
word-ﬁnal vowel triggers the lengthening of the preceding vowel, thus instantiating
CL. Data illustrating the CL process are provided in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
st pers. poss.
a. /omosu/
[omos]
turban shell
omosu-y
b. /məkɨre/
[məkɨr]
head
məkɨre-y
c. /piseki/
[pisek]
goods
piseki-y
d. /sæfeye/
[sæfey]
medicine
sæfeye-y
e. /səkɨri/
[səkɨr]
back
səkɨri-y

Davis

()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
/n/ relational sufﬁx
a. /tipe/
[tiip]
emotions
[tipe-n]
b. /čɨkɨ/
[čɨɨk]
basket
[čɨkɨ-n]
c. /pəkɨ/
[pəək]
chip
[pəkɨ-n]
d. /ača/
[aač]
handle, stem
[ača-n]
e. /wutu/
[wuut]
interior
[wutu-n]
The comparison between () and () is striking. The deletion of the ﬁnal vowel in (),
but not in (), results in the compensatory lengthening of the preceding vowel.
Several questions arise from the comparison of the data in () and () from an
optimality-theoretic perspective. First, what constraint is responsible for the deletion
of the ﬁnal short vowel in () and ()? Is this constraint also responsible for the word-
ﬁnal vowel shortening shown by the data in () and ()? Moreover, why does CL
occur in () but not in ()? To answer these questions we must consider the relevant
constraints. We suggest that the constraint involved in the deletion of the word-ﬁnal
mora in (), (), (), (), and () is the constraint Free-µ, given in ().
()
Free-µ: Assign a constraint violation to any word-ﬁnal mora in the input that is
parsed as word-ﬁnal in the output.4
The constraint in () is similar to the constraint Free-V posited by Prince and
Smolensky (: ), which they make use of in order to account for the deletion
of ﬁnal vowels in nominal forms in Lardil.5 Free-µ can be considered as an expanded
version of the Free-V constraint but with applicability to any word-ﬁnal mora, not
4 We follow McCarthy () in formulating optimality-theoretic constraints with wording that
speciﬁcally mentions the assignment of a constraint violation. We are aware that some linguists may
object to this type of formulation since the constraints, which are general constraints, are expressed with a
conception that is speciﬁc to Optimality Theory.
5 The speciﬁc wording of Prince and Smolensky’s () constraint Free-V is: ‘Word-ﬁnal vowels must
not be parsed’ (p. ). The wording of this constraint makes it vague as to whether it is a faithfulness
constraint or a markedness constraint. It is interesting that Prince and Smolensky (: ) categorize
the constraint as ‘unclassiﬁed input sensitive’. The Free-µ constraint in () is explicitly input-sensitive.
Following the comments of an anonymous reviewer, one can view both the Free-µ constraint and the Free-
V constraint of Prince and Smolensky as a type of anti-faithfulness constraint after Alderete () (and
see also Piggott ). Anti-faithfulness constraints are controversial. Normally, if relevant, they can be
used to account for certain types of morphological phenomena such as exchange rules, where e.g. a singular
stem with a short vowel might have a long vowel in the plural, but a singular form with a long vowel would
have a short vowel in the plural, as attested in some Nilo-Saharan languages (though see Zimmermann
for a recent analysis on morphological quantity alternations that eschews anti-faithfulness con-
straints). We thus see our use of Free-µ as very similar to the Free-V constraint of Prince and Smolensky.
While the current wording of Free-V and Free-µ may reﬂect an anti-faithfulness constraint, it may be that
the use of these constraints could be considered shorthand for the interaction of violable general
markedness constraints such as ‘Assign a constraint violation to any word that ends in a vowel’ and
‘Assign a constraint violation to any word that ends in a moraic element’ with other constraints. We leave
this matter for future research, but will continue to reference Free-µ as expressed in ().
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


just those on a short vowel. The effects of the constraint Free-µ are pervasive
throughout the phonology of Chuukese. This is not only evidenced by the data
above, but is consistent with the observation that Chuukese does not allow for
word-ﬁnal geminates. Hypothetical input forms with a word-ﬁnal geminate would
surface as a singleton (i.e. non-moraic) as an effect of the Free-µ constraint. This issue
will be discussed further in section ..
Another consequence of the high-ranked nature of the Free-µ constraint is the
observation found in Chuukese sources such as Goodenough and Sugita () that
virtually no inﬂectional sufﬁxes in the language end in a vowel in word-ﬁnal position.
When sufﬁxes do surface with a word-ﬁnal vowel, they can have alternates with a
long vowel that surface in non-ﬁnal position. As an example, the second person
plural object sufﬁx surfaces as [-kemi] when in word-ﬁnal position but as [-kemii-]
when another sufﬁx follows it. Further, many other sufﬁxes show an alternation
between a consonant-ﬁnal form when in word-ﬁnal position and a vowel-ﬁnal form
when another sufﬁx follows. Thus, the ﬁrst person inclusive object marker is [-kič]
when in word-ﬁnal position but [-kiče-] when another sufﬁx follows. The alterna-
tions exempliﬁed by these sufﬁxes and their pervasiveness reﬂect the inﬂuence of the
constraint Free-µ in Chuukese.
As for the data in () displaying CL, they reﬂect the satisfaction of two
constraints. First, when CL occurs the faithfulness constraint Max-µ given in ()
is satisﬁed.
()
Max-µ: Assign a constraint violation to any mora in the input that lacks a
correspondent in the output (cf. Rosenthall ).
To see how the data in () satisfy Max-µ, consider the form in (a), /tipe/, realized as
[tiip]. Both its underlying moraic structure and surface moraic structure are shown in
(a) and (b), respectively.
()
a.
b.
μi μj
|
|
/t i p e/
μi μj
\ /
[t  i  p]
The moras are subscripted in order to make clear the sponsoring segment. The
comparison between the input and output moraic structure in () shows that the
mora (µj) on the underlying ﬁnal vowel in (a) is realized on the ﬁrst vowel in (b),
thus respecting Max-µ. As a consequence, the initial vowel surfaces as long displaying
CL. The other constraint that is respected by the CL case illustrated in () is the
constraint MinimalWord, given in ().
()
MinimalWord (MinWd): Assign a constraint violation to any prosodic word
that is not minimally bimoraic.

Davis

This constraint stems from work on prosodic morphology starting with McCarthy
and Prince (). It requires words to be bimoraic.6 If CL did not occur in (), or
for any of the data in (), then MinWd would be violated since the resulting form, e.g.
[tip] for (a), would be monomoraic. Consequently, CL occurs in () satisfying both
MinWd and Max-µ.
Given the discussion on CL above, the lack of CL displayed by the data in ()/(),
repeated in () is interesting. (The rightmost column shows the non-occurring form
with CL.)
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
*CL
a. /omosu/
[omos]
turban shell
omoos
b. /məkɨre/
[məkɨr]
head
məkɨɨr
c. /piseki/
[pisek]
goods
piseek
d. /sæfeye/
[sæfey]
medicine
sæfeey
e. /səkɨri/
[səkɨr]
back
səkɨɨr
Clearly, the output forms in (), unlike those in (), violate Max-µ since there is one
less mora in the output than in the input. The output does not violate MinWd since
the output does consist of two moras, given that there is a vowel in each of the two
syllables of the output form. Since Max-µ is violated in (), then there must be some
higher-ranked constraint that compels its violation. We suggest that the constraint
that compels its violation is Weight-Identity given in (). The constraint requires
that corresponding segments have identical weight. The constraint is a faithfulness
constraint and has been used by Kager (), who terms it Weight-Ident-IO, and by
Rosenthall (), who more precisely refers to it as Ident-IO(µ).
()
Weight-Identity (Wt-Id): Assign a constraint violation to any segment in the
input that does not have identical weight on the corresponding segment in
the output.
On this view, the possible output forms with CL in the rightmost column in () are
eliminated because the second vowel of these output forms is long (i.e. bimoraic)
while the corresponding input vowel is short (i.e. monomoraic). The fact that the
output forms in () all have a short second vowel provides an argument for the
ranking of Wt-Id over Max-µ shown in ().
6 As noted by an anonymous reviewer, the minimal word constraint in () can be captured in a more
principled way by the LexPrWd constraint of Prince and Smolensky (: ), which requires a member
of a morphological category (such as nouns) to be a prosodic word. The consequence of this is that when
the constraint is active, words consisting of a degenerate (i.e. monomoraic) foot would be disallowed.
Despite this, we will continue to refer to the constraint as MinWd. The constraint is undominated in
Chuukese nouns. It is not, however, undominated in verbal forms. We leave the matter of the prosodic
difference between nouns and verbs to future research.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
Wt-Id >> Max-µ
The tableau in () shows how this ranking selects the winning candidate for (a).
()
/omosu/ – [omos] ‘turban shell’ (a)
Wt-Id
Max-μ
*
|
| |
/omosu/
μi μj μk
*!
|
|
a. omos
[omos]
μi μj
☞
μi μj μk
|
b. omos
[omoos]
The winning candidate in (a) respects Wt-Id but violates Max-µ. It violates Max-µ,
since the third mora of the underlying form (µk) has no output correspondent. The
losing candidate with CL in (b) violates Wt-Id but respects Max-µ. It violates
Wt-Id since the short second vowel in the input corresponds to the long (bimoraic)
second vowel of the output. The constraints have to be ranked as shown, since the
reverse ranking would wrongly result in (b) as the winner.7 The tableau in ()
thus provides a ranking argument for ().
In our discussion of the forms in (), one candidate that we have not yet discussed
is the faithful one. If we consider the example in (a), the faithful candidate would
be [omosu]. This candidate differs from the winning candidate [omos] in that it
violates the constraint in (), Free-µ. The faithful candidate does not violate the
constraint Max-µ, which is violated by the winning candidate. Thus, in order for
[omos] to be the winning candidate, the constraints Free-µ and Max-µ must be
ranked as in (). This is shown by the tableau in ().
()
Free-µ >> Max-µ
()
/omosu/ – [omos] ‘turban shell’ (a)
Free-μ
Max-μ
*
*!
|
|
μi μj
☞
a. omos
[omos]
|
| |
b. omosu
[omosu]
μi μj μk
/omosu/
|
| |
μi μj μk
7 One might think that (a) actually violates Wt-Id because of the deletion of the last vowel. However, the
constraint on weight identity is only of relevance when there are two corresponding segments. Given that there is
no surfacing segment that corresponds to the last input vowel in (a), Wt-Id is irrelevant for this vowel.

Davis

Clearly, the reverse ranking would wrongly result in (b) being the winning
candidate. Since (a) is the actual winner, the tableau in () constitutes an
argument for the ranking in ().
While the data in () motivate the ranking of Wt-Id over Max-µ as well as Free-µ
over Max-µ, they do not provide any evidence regarding the relative ranking between
Wt-Id and Free-µ. However, crucial evidence regarding their ranking comes from the
data in (), repeated in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
a. /pečee/
[peče]
foot
b. /tikkaa/
[tikka]
coconut oil
c. /etiruu/
[etiru]
coconut matting
d. /čuučuu/
[čuuču]
urine
The data in () end in an underlying long vowel yet surface with the corresponding
vowel as short. This means that Free-µ is respected at the expense of a violation of
Wt-Id. This establishes the ranking in (), as shown by the tableau in (),
illustrating the form in (a)
()
Free-µ >> Wt-Id
()
/pečee/ – [peče] ‘foot’ (a)
Free-μ
Wt-Id
*!
☞
*
|
|
b. peč  e
[peče]
μi μj
|
/pe   če/
μi μjμk
| 
a. pe č e
[pečee]
μi μjμk
Candidate (a) respects Wt-Id but violates Free-µ, since a word-ﬁnal mora in the
input is parsed in word-ﬁnal position in the output. Candidate (b) respects Free-µ
but violates Wt-Id because the underlying ﬁnal long vowel is realized as short. Since
(b) is the winner, then the ranking between the two constraints must be as shown
in (). An interesting candidate not shown in () is that in ().
()
|
pe  če [peeče]
μi 
μj
μk
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


This candidate technically respects Free-µ, since the word-ﬁnal underlying mora (µk)
does not surface in word-ﬁnal position. It also respects low-ranking Max-µ, which
the winning candidate in (b) violates. However () does not surface because it
has two violations of Wt-Id. This is shown in the more comprehensive evaluation
tableau in ().
()
/pečee/ – [peče] ‘foot’ (a)
|
/peče/
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μ
*!
*
*
**!
| |
b.  peče
[peče]
μi μj
μi μjμk
☞
| 
a. pe č e
[pečee]
μi μj μk
|
c. pe če
[peeče]
μi 
μj
μk
The candidate in () shown in (c) in the tableau respects both Free-µ and Max-µ,
but it is eliminated because it crucially has two violations of Wt-Id. The ﬁrst vowel in
(c) is long on the surface but underlyingly short; the second vowel of (c) is short
on the surface but underlyingly long. These two violations of Wt-Id is what elimin-
ates it in comparison to the winning candidate in (b) that only has one violation of
Wt-Id. The tableau in () then provides another argument for the ranking in () of
Wt-Id over Max-µ. The reverse ranking of these two constraints in () would
wrongly predict that (c) should be the winner.8
To summarize, the tableaux presented establish the following constraint ranking in
(), expressed more succinctly in ().
()
Free-µ >> Wt-Id ()
Wt-Id >> Max-µ (), ()
8 An anonymous reviewer asks about the possible candidate [peeč] for the input /peeče/ ‘foot’ in　
Tableau (). This candidate, like the winning candidate, avoids a violation of Free-µ and has only one
violation of each of Wt-Id and Max-µ. The issue is what constraint eliminates [peeč]. Similarly, if one
considers the data item in (c) /etiruu/–[etiru] ‘coconut matting’, what eliminates the candidate [etiir]?
We suggest that the constraint that eliminates such candidates as [peeč] and [etiir] is an undominated
constraint that militates against the segmental deletion of long vowels. We leave the speciﬁcs of this matter
for future research.

Davis

()
Free-µ >> Wt-Id >> Max-µ
The ranking of Free-µ over Max-µ is established both by the tableau in () and by
the transitivity relation of (). With this as background, let us now consider the the
constraint interaction of forms displaying CL.
The forms in () repeated in () witness CL. The rightmost column shows what
the output would be if CL did not apply.
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
No CL
a. /tipe/
[tiip]
emotions
*[tip]
b. /čɨkɨ/
[čɨɨk]
basket
*[čɨk]
c. /pəkɨ/
[pəək]
chip
*[pək]
d. /ača/
[aač]
handle, stem
*[ač]
e. /wutu/
[wuut]
interior
*[wut]
CL occurs in (), but as seen from the data in () and the tableau in (), CL does
not normally occur when a ﬁnal vowel deletes. The reason why CL occurs in () is to
avoid an output that would be monomoraic such as that in the right-hand column of
() (given that a ﬁnal consonant is non-moraic, as mentioned earlier). The data in
() thus provide evidence that the constraint MinWd in () is high ranked. Clearly,
MinWd has to be higher ranked than Wt-Id, as is depicted by the tableau in () for
the word [tiip] in (a).
()
/tipe/–[tiip] ‘emotions’ (a)
μi μj
|
|
/t i p e /
Free-μ,
MinWd
Wt-Id
μi μj
|
|
a. t i p e
[tipe]
*! (Free-μ)
μi
|
b. ti p
[tip]
*! (MinWd)
*
μi μj
☞
c.
[tiip]
t i p
The tableau in () establishes the ranking of MinWd over Wt-Id. This is shown
in ().
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
MinWd >> Wt-Id
If the constraints had the reverse ranking then (b) would be the winner, as seen by
the tableau in (). (☛indicates an unintended winner.)
()
/tipe/  —   [tiip]     'emotions'  (25a)
μi
μj
|
|
/t i p e/
Free-μ
Wt-Id
MinWd
μi
μj
|  |
a. t i p e
[tipe]
*!
μi
☛
|
b. t i p
[tip]
*
*!
μi
c. t i p
[tiip]
μj
While the tableaux in () and () establish the ranking of MinWd over Wt-Id,
they do not inform us about the ranking between MinWd and Free-µ. Crucial data
that shed light on the ranking between MinWd and Free-µ come from () and are
repeated in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
*Output
a. /maa/
[maa]
behaviour
*ma
b. /təə/
[təə]
islet
*tə
c. /oo/
[oo]
omen
*o
d. /soo/
[soo]
precipitate
*so
e. /nɨɨ/
[nɨɨ]
unripe coconut
*nɨ
The data in () show that the constraint Free-µ is not satisﬁed when the resulting
output would be monomoraic. That is, if the ﬁnal mora were to delete the result
would be the errant monomoraic output shown in the rightmost column of (). This
suggests that MinWd outranks Free-µ as in (). The tableau in (), which shows
the evaluation of candidates for (a), motivates this ranking.
()
MinWd >> Free-µ

Davis

()
/maa/–[maa] ‘behaviour’ (a)9
/maa/
MinWd
Free-μ
☞
a.  maa
*
b.  ma
*!
Thus, if we add the constraint MinWd to the ranking in () we obtain the ranking
shown in (), where there is a strict dominance of constraints.
()
MinWd >> Free-µ >> Wt-Id >> Max-µ
In section .we presented data like that in () and () to argue that geminate
consonants are underlyingly moraic. Given the geminate nature of moraic conson-
ants, the constraint ranking established in () readily accounts for the loss of the
ﬁnal mora shown in () and () without CL. First, consider the data in (), which we
repeat in (). A tableau showing the possible output candidates from /ffəne/ ‘advice’
in (a) is shown in (). (We show the geminate with two consonants for clarity, but
it should be understood as one consonantal articulation linked to a mora.)
()
Underlying
Output
Gloss
representation
form
a. /ffəne/
[ffən]
advice
b. /nnətɨ/
[nnət]
shrub sp.
c. /ttoŋa/
[ttoŋ]
love
()
/ffəne/–[ffən] ‘advice’ (a)
μi μj μk
| | |
/ffəne/
MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μ
μiμjμk  
| | |
a. ffəne
[ffəne]
*!
*!
μi μj 
☞
| |
c. ff  ən
[ffən]
*
μiμjμk  
| 
b. ff  ən
[ffəən]
9 A possible candidate that we do not seriously consider is [maµjµi] from /maµiµj/. We assume that such a
form is ruled out by an undominated constraint that requires moraic linearity within a single segment. See
footnote for further discussion.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


The faithful candidate in (a) is eliminated because it violates the high-ranked
constraint Free-µ. The candidate in (b) with CL is eliminated because of its
violation of Wt-Id: the long vowel in the output corresponds with a short vowel in
the input. The winning candidate in (c) only violates low ranked Max-µ. It does
not violate MinWd, since the geminate consonant is moraic.
The constraint ranking in () also accounts for the data in (), which we repeat
in (). A tableau showing the faithful candidate and the winning candidate from the
input /ttoo/ ‘clam sp.’ in (a) is shown in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
a. /ttoo/
[tto]
clam sp.
b. /kkææ/
[kkæ]
taro sp.
c. /ččaa/
[čča]
blood
d. /ssɔɔ/
[ssɔ]
thwart of a canoe
()
/ttoo/–[tto] ‘clam sp.’ (a)
MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μ
*!
μi μj
☞
|  |
b. tt o
[tto]
*
*
μi μj μk
|
/tt o/
μi μj μk
|  
a. tt o
[ttoo]
The faithful candidate in (a) respects all relevant constraints except Free-µ. The
candidate in (b) violates both Wt-Id and Max-µ. It violates Wt-Id since the short
vowel in its output corresponds to a long vowel in the input. And it violates Max-µ
because the ﬁnal underlying mora (µk) fails to surface. Despite violating more constraints
than its competitor, (b) is nonetheless the winning candidate, since it violates only
constraints ranked lower than Free-µ. Thuswesee that the constraint ranking established
in () readily accounts for the data with initial geminate consonants in () and ().
In this section we have provided an optimality-theoretic analysis of the Chuukese
quantity alternations displayed in the data in ()–(). These involved the interaction
of ﬁnal mora deletion, compensatory vowel lengthening, and the minimal word
constraint. The constraint ranking as established in () presents a classic case of
strict dominance. This is most apparent in a tableau like (), where one violation of

Davis

a dominated higher-ranked constraint eliminates a losing candidate even though the
winning candidate violates two lower-ranked constraints. In section ., we con-
sider the interaction of the constraint ranking with Chuukese words in which the
consonant before the ﬁnal vowel is a geminate, which can result in the phenomenon
of ‘geminate throwback’. In section .we consider apparent exceptions and
variation.
.Geminate throwback
So far in our analysis of Chuukese we have considered cases where ﬁnal vowel
deletion results in CL (as in ()) and cases where it does not (as in () and ()).
We have also analysed cases of ﬁnal long vowel shortening (() and ()) and cases
where it is blocked (). With respect to geminate consonants, until now we have
only considered data where geminate consonants are underlyingly in initial position.
Chuukese, though, also allows geminate consonants to occur word-medially but
never in word-ﬁnal position. This leads to a very interesting situation with under-
lying forms in which a geminate consonant precedes a word-ﬁnal vowel. Consider
the data in () from Churchyard (), Muller (), and Davis and Torretta
() and references cited therein.
()
Underlying
Output
representation form
Gloss
Relational /n/ or nd pers. poss. /mw/
a. /pekki/
[ppek]
gun
pekki-n
b. /sakka/
[ssak]
coconut shell sakka-n
c. /kunnu/
[kkun]
turning
kunnu-mw
d. /ﬁtta/
[fﬁt]
package
ﬁtta-mw
e. /čočča/
[ččoč]
armful
čočča-mw
f. /makke/
[mmak] writing
makke-n
g. /mɨnnɨ/
[mmɨn] upper back
mɨnnɨ-n
In these forms, the ﬁnal short vowel deletes in order to satisfy the constraint Free-µ.
One might then expect the output of () to contain a word-ﬁnal geminate such as
[kunn] for (c), but because Chuukese has an undominated constraint against
word-ﬁnal geminates as stated in (), no output can surface with a word-ﬁnal
geminate.
()
No Word-ﬁnal Geminates (*Gem#): Assign a constraint violation to any
prosodic word that ends in a geminate consonant.
Although we choose to phrase the constraint as militating against word-ﬁnal gemin-
ates for clarity of exposition, it could be phrased more generally as a constraint
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


against word-ﬁnal moraic consonants. Such a constraint would not only disallow a
word-ﬁnal geminate, but would account for the non-weight bearing nature of ﬁnal
consonants in Chuukese. Given the undominated constraint in () along with the
constraint ranking already established in (), let us consider the evaluation of output
candidates for /kunnu/ ‘turning’ in (c). This is shown by the tableau in (). (The
ﬁrst two constraints in the tableau are both high-ranked and not critically ranked
with respect to one another.)
()
/kunnu/–[kkunn] ‘turning’ (c)
*Gem#, MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μ
*!
μi μj
| |
b. ku nn
[kunn]
*! (*Gem#)
*
*! (MinWd)
*
**
**
*
**
*
***!
☞
| |
e. kk u n
[kkun]
μjμi
|
c. kun
[kun]
μi
| | |
a.  ku nnu
[kunnu]
μi μi μk
| | |
/ku nnu/
μi μjμk
|   
f. kk   un
[kkuun]
μi μk
μj
☛
d. ku n
[kuun]
μi  μk
The constraints and their ranking that we have motivated so far do not determine a
unique winner for the input /kunnu/. Both candidates (d) and (e) are selected.
The ﬁrst candidate in (a) is faithful to the input but it is eliminated because of its
violation of Free-µ. Both (b) and (c) violate undominated constraints. (b)

Davis

violates the constraint against word-ﬁnal geminates while (c) being monomoraic
violates the minimal word constraint. The interesting candidates are the last three,
which respect the higher-ranked constraints. These candidates are similar in that
they all display the loss of the ﬁnal vowel and the degemination (or demoraiﬁcation)
of the last consonant. (d) makes up for the loss of the ﬁnal vowel by the
compensatory lengthening of the preceding vowel, similar to (). (e) makes up
for the degemination of the last consonant by geminating the initial consonant. This
is what Churchyard () terms ‘geminate throwback’ (henceforth, GT). The
candidate in (f) makes up for both the loss of the ﬁnal vowel and degemination
of the last consonant by displaying CL and GT. (d) has two violations of Wt-Id
and one violation of Max-µ. It has two violations of Wt-Id because the surface long
vowel corresponds to a short vowel in the input, while the singleton ﬁnal consonant
corresponds to a geminate (moraic) consonant in the input. With respect to Max-µ,
as shown by the moraic subscripts, we contend that in (d), the one violation of
Max-µ is from the underlying mora µj of the geminate consonant. That is, candidate
(d) violates Max-µ because the mora from the underlying geminate (µj) does not
have an output correspondent. This means that the additional mora on the output
vowel in (d) originates from the deleted ﬁnal vowel. The candidate in (e) also
has two violations of Wt-Id and one violation of Max-µ. It has two violations of Wt-
Id because the ﬁnal non-geminate (non-moraic) consonant in the output corres-
ponds to an underlying (moraic) geminate consonant, while the initial geminate
(moraic) consonant of the output corresponds to a singleton consonant in the
input. Additionally, (e) violates Max-µ because the mora of the ﬁnal vowel of
the input does not have an output correspondent. The implication of this is that the
mora that surfaces on the initial geminate (µj) originates from the medial geminate
of the input. The candidate in (f) completely respects Max-µ. However, it is
eliminated because it has three violations of higher-ranking Wt-Id. The violations of
Wt-Id are incurred by the initial geminate of the output, which is underlyingly
short, the long vowel of the output, which is short in the input, and the ﬁnal single
consonant, which is a geminate underlyingly. While the constraints in the tableau
in () properly eliminate (a), (b), (c), and (f), it does not decide between
candidates (d) and (e).
In comparing (d) and (e), we notice that given the moraic subscripts shown,
(d) displays the realization of the vocalic moras but not the consonantal ones while
(e) achieves the realization of the consonantal mora but not all the vocalic ones.
This suggests that the constraint Max-µ can be divided into the two speciﬁc con-
straints Max-µv and Max-µc, given in () and (), respectively. (See Morén for
constraints distinguishing between consonantal moras and vocalic moras.)
()
Max-µv: Assign a constraint violation for every vocalic mora in the input that
does not have a correspondent in the output.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
Max-µc: Assign a constraint violation for every consonantal mora in the input
that does not have a correspondent in the output.
As shown in the short tableau in (), (d) respects Max-µv but violates Max-µc;
(e) respects Max-µc but violates Max-µv. Since (e) is the actual winner then Max-µc
outranks Max-µv as shown in ().
()
/kunnu/–[kkun] ‘turning’ (c)
Max-μc
Max-μv
*!
*
| |
|
/ku nnu/
μi μj μk
| 
|
39e. kk
u n
[kkun]
μi
μj
☞
39d.
k u n
[kuun]
μi μk
()
Max-µc >> Max-µv
It is the ranking in () that results in the geminate throwback effect. The
consonantal mora needs to be realized, but it cannot be realized on a ﬁnal
consonant, thus it surfaces on the only other alternative, the initial consonant.10
Although we posit the ranking in (), previous researchers such as Churchyard
(), Hart (), and Muller () have noted that there does exist vari-
ation in some lexical items between GT and CL. We will return to this issue in
section ..
An important point that emerges from the analysis is that an input consonantal
mora is realized on a consonant, while an input vocalic mora is realized on a vowel.
10 An anonymous reviewer suggests the need for discussion regarding a constraint, Linearity-µ, given
that the winning candidate in () ([kkun]) seems to violate this constraint in that the consonantal mora
precedes the vocalic mora in the actual output, but follows it in the input. This seems to suggest a low-
ranking moraic linearity constraint. According to the reviewer, this could present a problem for the
possible candidate [maµjµi] from /maµiµj/ ‘behaviour’ discussed in footnote , where it was assumed to be
ruled out by an undominated constraint that requires moraic linearity within a single segment. We
would maintain that the active undominated constraint on moraic linearity in Chuukese requires moraic
linearity among consonantal moras and moraic linearity among vocalic moras. Given this, the winning
candidate in () does not violate a constraint on linearity of consonantal moras, and the hypothetical
candidate [maµjµi] from /maµiµj/ ‘behaviour’ does indeed violate a constraint on the linearity of vocalic
moras.

Davis

This is clear for the winning candidate in the tableau in (), where the consonantal
mora in the output has a correspondent in the input that is on a consonant, whereas
the vocalic mora of the output has a correspondent in the input that is on a vowel.
That is, input–output corresponding moras must match in being realized on seg-
ments that have the same value for the feature [consonantal]. To account for this we
suggest that there is an identity constraint, Ident-µ[αcons], which requires a mora
that is linked to an [α consonantal] element in the input be linked to an
[α consonantal] in the output. That is, if the underlying mora is linked to a
[+consonantal] element in the input, then it must be linked to a [+consonantal]
element in the output and if it is linked to a [–consonantal] element in the input it
must be linked to a[–consonantal] element in the output.
()
Ident-µ[αcons]: Assign a constraint violation to any mora linked to an [αcon-
sonantal] element in the input that is not linked to an [αconsonantal] element
in the output.
Evidence for the role of this constraint comes from the data considered earlier in
() with the relevant forms repeated below in (). In (), though, we consider a
different type of wrong output from () in the rightmost column.
()
Underlying
Output
Gloss
*Output
representation
form
a. /maa/
[maa]
behavior
*mma
b. /təə/
[təə]
islet
*ttə
c. /soo/
[soo]
precipitate
*sso
d. /nɨɨ/
[nɨɨ]
unripe coconut
*nnɨ
If the constraint Ident-µ[αcons] is not highly ranked, then the actual candidate
selected by the Chuukese constraint ranking would be one like that in the rightmost
column of (). This is seen in tableau ().
()
/maa/–[maa] ‘behaviour’ (a)
Free-μ
Max-μv
*!
☛
| 
|
b. mma 
[mma]
μi
μj
/m a/
μi μj
a. m a 
[maa]
μi μj
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


The candidate with the initial geminate in (b) seems ideal. It avoids a violation of
Free-µ while at the same time respecting Max-µv, since both vocalic moras in the
input have output correspondents. Consequently, there must be some constraint
that rules out (b) that is higher-ranked than Free-µ. We suggest that this other
constraint is Ident-µ[αcons] in () and that it is undominated. The tableau in
() shows how Ident-µ[αcons] determines the winning candidate for data like
that in ().
()
/maa/–[maa] ‘behaviour’ (a)
Ident-μ[αcons]
Free-μ
*
*!
| |
b. mma
[mma]
μi 
μj
/m a/
μi μj
☞
a. m a
[maa]
μi μj
Candidate (b) violates Ident-µ[αcons], since an input vocalic mora has an output
correspondent mora that is realized on a consonantal element.
The effect of the Ident-µ[αcons] constraint is shown not only by data like that in
() but also in the case of CL shown by the data in () and the tableau in (). If we
consider a form like that in (a), /tipe/ ‘emotions’, an output that is not considered
in the tableau in () is [ttip]. This form is just as good as the winning candidate,
[tiip]. This is shown by the tableau in ().
()
/tipe/–[tiip] ‘emotions’ (a)
Min-Wd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μv
*
*
|  |
/t i p e/
μi μj
☛
| |
a. tt i p
[ttip]
μi 
μj
☞
b. t i p
[tiip]
μi μj

Davis

Clearly, a constraint is needed to rule out the output in (a) with an initial
geminate. We suggest that the relevant constraint is the high-ranked Ident-µ
[αcons] constraint stated in (). Candidate (a) would violate this constraint,
since the initial consonantal mora in the output has a vocalic mora correspondent
in the input. (b) does not violate this constraint, since both vocalic moras in
the input have an output correspondent that is vocalic. Thus (b) is the winning
candidate.
In our analysis of CL it was noted that CL only occurred if the result of
ﬁnal vowel deletion would be monomoraic. Thus, the deletion of the ﬁnal vowel
of /tipe/ ‘emotions’ resulted in [tiip] with CL, while the deletion of the ﬁnal
vowel of /omosu/ ‘turban shell’ resulted in [omos] with no CL. Similarly, cases
of GT only occur if the potential output would be less than two moras long.
This can be seen by the comparison of the data in () with that in () repeated
in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
a. /tikitti/
[tikit]
freshwater eel
b. /tirapwpwe/
[tirapw]
drum
c. /roonaakke/
[roonaak]
row lock
d. /pwayippe/
[pwayip]
pipe
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
a. /kunnu/
[kkun]
turning
b. /ﬁtta/
[fﬁt]
package
d. /čočča /
[ččoč]
armful
In (), one might expect an output with GT as in (). However, in () the last
consonant degeminates without GT. This is because the output without GT is still at
least two moras. The lack of GT in () is actually predicted by the constraint
hierarchy already established. The data in () are similar to the polysyllabic forms
in () in that when the ﬁnal vowel deletes (and when the ﬁnal consonant degemi-
nates) the output still meets the bimoraic minimal word requirement. Consequently,
as in (), the loss of the ﬁnal moraic segments in () need not be compensated for.
The tableau in () shows how the constraint hierarchy already established picks out
the correct output for the form in (a).
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
/tikitt/–[tikit] ‘fresh water eel’ (a)
μi μj μc μk
| |
|
|
/ti ki
tt i/
*Gem#, MinWd,
Ident-μ[αcons] 
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μc
Max-μv
μi μjμc μk
|
| | |
a. ti ki tt   i
[tikitti]
*!
μi μj μc
|
| |
b.   ti k i  tt 
[tikitt]
*! (*Gem#)
*
μi μj
☞
|
|
c.    ti ki t
[tikit]
*
*
*
μi μj μk
| 
d.  ti k i t
[tikiit]
**!
*
| | |
e.   ti kk i t 
[tikkit]
**!
*
μiμcμjμk
| |
f.  ti kk i t
[tikkiit]
**!*
μi μc μj
The tableau in () with the constraint ranking previously established correctly
selects [tikit] in (c) as the winning candidate. (c) is the winning candidate,
since it does not violate higher-ranked constraints such as Free-µ or *Gem#, which
are violated by (a) and (b) respectively. Moreover, in comparison with the
candidates in (d), (e), and (f), the winning candidate (c) minimizes viola-
tions of the weight identity constraint. (c) only has one violation of this constraint.
The violation is incurred by the word-ﬁnal single consonant, which is underlying
moraic. The other candidates have at least two violations of Wt-Id. (d) has an
additional violation of Wt-Id because the surface long vowel that it possesses is
underlyingly short. The additional violation of Wt-Id in (e) comes from the surface
geminate consonant which is underlyingly a singleton. (f) is an interesting candi-
date, since it completely avoids any violation of the Max-µ constraints; however, its
multiple violations of higher-ranked Wt-Id eliminates it. Thus, the constraint rank-
ing already established correctly accounts for the lack of GT in (). In the next
section we address apparent exceptions and variation to the analysis presented so far.

Davis

.Apparent exceptions and lexical variation
In sections .and .we established an optimality-theoretic analysis that
accounts for the various quantity alternation processes in Chuukese that includes
ﬁnal mora deletion, compensatory lengthening, and geminate throwback. The ana-
lysis entails a ranking of constraints in a strict dominance relation reﬂecting classic
Correspondence Theory (e.g. McCarthy and Prince ; Kager ). In this
section we examine two apparent exceptions to geminate throwback and the issue
of lexical variation.
Given the analysis in section .with the ranking of Max-µc over Max-µv as
shown by the tableau in (), the expectation emerging from this ranking is that GT
should apply instead of CL in forms where both a vowel deletes and a consonant
degeminates, as in (). Contrary to this expectation, there are a number of excep-
tional cases. In this section, we show that such cases either involve constraints not
previously presented or are handled by the constraint ranking already established.
Further, we will consider cases of variation between GT and CL, and maintain that
the variation found in the data can be accounted for in a constrained manner within
Optimality Theory.
First, consider the vowel-initial forms in ().
()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
a. /eppi/
[eep]
yam
b. /ičči/
[iič]
a start
c. /opwpwu/
[oopw]
pompano sp.
d. /ɔtto/
[ɔɔt]
inner bud
Here, CL occurs instead of GT. The reason is quite clear, though. GT cannot occur,
since there is no initial consonant for the consonantal mora to be realized on. For GT
to occur, an initial consonant would have to be inserted. For example, (a) could be
realized as [ttep] with an inserted initial consonant. But phonological insertion, in
general, seems rare in Chuukese, be it segmental insertion or mora insertion.11 This
11 Churchyard () observes an interesting case of initial geminate consonant insertion that is part of
the formation of the intransitive or denotative form of the verb. (See also de Lacy and Kingston : .)
According to Kennedy (), certain verbs derive the denotative by the gemination of the initial
consonant while other verbs express the denotative by sufﬁxal reduplication. Churchyard () points
out that there are cases of vowel-initial verbs that form the intransitive (denotative) by inserting an initial
/k/ and geminating it. Thus, the denotative of /amaat/ is [kkamaat]. We suggest that the properties of
morphologically triggered gemination may be different from phonologically triggered gemination in that
the former is more tightly restricted in where it can surface (left edge of the word if the morphemic mora is
preﬁxal and right edge if it is sufﬁxal). This difference between morphological and phonological gemin-
ation in Chuukese is consistent with the theory of quantity-manipulating morphology developed in
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


suggests that the constraint DEP (cf. McCarthy and Prince ), which militates
against insertion, is high-ranked in Chuukese. Such a constraint would rule out [ttep]
as a possible output for (a). This is shown by the evaluation tableau in (). (As a
mnemonic, we will henceforth indicate the underlying consonantal mora by µc. Also,
to keep down the size of the tableau we do not consider forms where Ident-µ[αcons]
is violated.)
()
/eppi/–[eep] ‘yam’ (a)
| | |
| | |
/e pp i/
DEP, *Gem#, MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μc Max-μv
a. e pp i
[eppi]
*!
| |
b.  e  pp 
[epp]
*! (*Gem#)
*
|
c.   ep
[ep]
*!  (MinWd)
*
*
*
☞
d.     e p
[eep]
**
*
|
|
e. tt ep
[ttep]
*! (DEP)
*
*
|  
f. tt e p
[tteep]
*! (DEP)
**
μi μc μj
μi 
μc
μj
μi μc
μi 
μi 
μi 
μi 
μc
μc
μj
μj
Thus, the occurrence of CL instead of GT in () is accounted for by the high-ranked
DEP constraint. If DEP were the lowest-ranking of the constraints shown, [ttep]
in (e) would be the winner. DEP, however, eliminates (e) and thus candidate
(d) correctly emerges as the winner.
Zimmermann (), but the speciﬁc details of the Chuukese case and its relation to phonologically
induced gemination is in need of further study.

Davis

Another interesting set of data where GT unexpectedly does not occur relates to
words like those in () where the initial consonant is a glide. These words display CL
instead. Sample data are provided in ().12
()
Underlying
Output
Gloss
representation
form
a. /wutta/
[wuut]
meeting house
b. /wɨnna/
[wɨɨn]
pillow
c. /wučča/
[wuuč]
bottom of a paddle canoe
d. /wasse/
[waas]
watch (clock)
One would expect that the data in () would surface with an initial geminate glide
showing GT, such as *[wwut] for (a), rather than the actual output forms with
CL given the constraint ranking of Max-µc over Max-µv which has already been
established. The data in (), though, reﬂect an overriding constraint. As noted by
Dyen (: ) glides in Trukese never surface as geminate. This suggests the need
for an undominated constraint in Trukese that disallows geminate glides. We state
this in ()
()
No Geminate Glides (*GG): Assign a constraint violation for every geminate
glide that surfaces in a prosodic word.
This constraint is understandable given the view of glides as being like ultra-short
vowels as in Catford (). As Catford notes, elongated glides can become imper-
ceptible from their corresponding vowel counterparts. Given the undominated
constraint in () for Chuukese, the constraint ranking that we have established
will correctly select the output forms with CL for the forms in () as most harmonic.
This is shown in the tableau in () for [wuut] in (a). (We do not show the
constraint DEP in () given its irrelevance.)
12 It is unclear from sources, such as Goodenough and Sugita (), whether there is a phonemic
word-initial /y/ in Trukese. In Goodenough and Sugita’s dictionary, no content words are indicated as
beginning with [y]. They note that in some dialects, words that they list as beginning with a vowel are
pronounced with an initial [y]. Given the unclear phonemic status of initial /y/, we do not provide data
displaying an initial [y]. Nonetheless, it is clear that [y] like [w] does not undergo gemination as explicitly
stated in e.g. Dyen (: ).
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
/wutta/–[wuut] ‘meeting place’ (a)
*GG, *Gem#, MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μc Max-μv
*!
*! (*Gem#)
*
*! (MinWd)
*
*
*
**
*
*! (*GG)
**
*
| |
|
/wu tt a/
μi μc μj
|
c. wu t
[wut]
μi 
|
|
b. wu tt
[wutt]
μi μc
| |
|
a. wu tt
a
[wutta]
μi μc μj
|
|
e. ww u t
[wwut]
μc μj
d. w u t
[wuut]
☞
μi μj
Since *GG eliminates the candidate displaying GT in (e), the best alternative is
[wuut], displaying CL in (d).13 Unlike the polysyllabic examples in () or (), the
surfacing candidate in () must display CL or else MinWd would be violated, as
shown by candidate (c). Thus, with the addition of *GG, the data in () are
readily accounted for. () summarizes the constraint ranking for Chuukese adding
the other high-ranked constraints to ().
()
*GG, DEP, *Gem#, Ident-µ[αcons], MinWd >> Free-µ >> Wt-Id >>
Max-µc >> Max-µv
Given the constraint ranking in (), an unexpected set of forms is displayed in
(). The nouns in () exhibit forms with CL where GT is expected given the
ranking of Max-µc over Max-µv.
13 Notice that in candidate (d) the consonantal mora has deleted, while in (e) the vocalic mora has
deleted. In this way, both candidates respect the high-ranked Ident-µ[αcons] constraint.

Davis

()
Underlying
Output
representation
form
Gloss
*Form
a. /nonne/
[noon]
hibiscus cord
*[nnon]
b. /tappa/
[taap]
green coconut
*[ttap]
c. /kupwpwa/
[kuupw]
ﬂower pod
*[kkupw]
d. /sissi/
[siis]
spider lily
*[ssis]
What the data in () reﬂect, especially in comparison with the data in () and the
analysis developed in ()–(), is a certain indeterminacy in the constraint hier-
archy in () but only with respect to the ranking of the two lowest-ranked (relevant)
constraints. Speciﬁcally, the forms in () suggest that Max-µv outranks Max-µc,
contrary to what was motivated by the data in (), which we believe is the majority
pattern in the language. In order to account for this, we suggest that there may be some
ﬂexibility in the exact ranking of the two lowest (active) constraints, and that it is this
ﬂexibility that accounts for the variation between CL and GT displayed by the data in
(). Speciﬁcally, some lexical items like those in () are lexically marked for the
ranking of Max-µv over Max-µc. This suggested analysis involving lexical marking of
constraint ranking is somewhat similar to Pater’s () analysis of English secondary
stress, where variant constraint rankings may be indexed to speciﬁc lexical items. What
is rather crucial in our view is that the lexical ranking of constraints involves adjacent
low-ranked constraints. In this way, we restrict which constraints in a hierarchy may
display lexically speciﬁc ranking. The data items in () would be lexically indicated for
the ranking of Max-µv over Max-µc, as shown by the tableau in ().14
14 Hart () mentions a handful of lexical items that display free variation between forms with CL
and GT. This is shown by the forms in (i).
(i)
Underlying representation <cf e.g. ()>
Output form
Gloss
a. /kɨnna/
[kkɨn]/[kɨɨn]
high tide
b. /tupwpw/
[ttupw]/[tuupw]
shrub (sp.)
c. /mwɨččɨ/
[mwmwɨč]/[mwɨɨč]
end, ﬁnish
It is possible that these reﬂect dialectal variants. If they are indeed in free variation, then this would reﬂect
that the adjacent constraints Max-µv and Max-µc would be freely ranked with respect to one another for
these forms. This then may suggest an analysis where the ranking between Max-µv and Max-µc would be
lexically speciﬁc: Max-µv over Max-µc for the data in (); Max-µc over Max-µv for the data in (), and
freely ranked for (i) assuming that there is free variation. A different and intriguing analysis for the
difference between the data in () and () is offered in Muller (). She suggests that the CL process
that occurs in () is the norm. For the lexical items in (), Muller posits that these forms have an
underlying initial geminate in addition to their medial geminate. That is, these words have the underlying
structure /GVGV/ (where G = geminate). Since Chuukese words cannot surface with two geminates, the
surface form of such /GVGV/ words would just be [GVC] after ﬁnal vowel deletion. There is no geminate
throwback on her account. While we ﬁnd Muller’s suggestion intriguing, it leads to a host of complications
involving degemination under sufﬁxation since an analysis would involve nonlocal degemination when a
sufﬁx is added. Also, it is clear from a diachronic perspective that initial gemination is an innovation of
Chuukese and a few other closely related languages. It is not historically present. Further, instances of free
variation as in (i) are more suggestive of a free ranking of constraints than a case of multiple representa-
tions of the same form, which would need to be posited under Muller’s () proposal.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


()
/nonne/–[noon] *[nnon] ‘hibiscus cord’ (a)
*GG, *Gem#, MinWd
Free-μ
Wt-Id
Max-μv Max-μc
**
*!
**
*
| |
a.   nnon
[nnon]
μi 
μc
|
|
|
/no nn e/
μi μc μj
 n o n
[noon] 
b.
☞
μi μj
One could pursue this as a hypothesis for the analysis of lexically conditioned
variation in Optimality Theory in general. That is, a lexically speciﬁc ranking that
differs from a dominant pattern only involves low-ranked constraints. This way,
variation like that in Chuukese can be seen as being very minor, and does not interact
with higher ranked or undominated constraints. We contend that the handling of the
variation between CL and GT is a strong point of the optimality-theoretic analysis,
and the variability of the ranking of the two lowest (active) constraints serves as a
hypothesis to examine cases of other similar types of variation.
.Conclusion
In this chapter we have offered a detailed optimality-theoretic analysis of the
quantity-manipulating phonological processes in Chuukese, with a focus on gemin-
ate consonants. We provided evidence for the moraic nature of Chuukese geminate
consonants in section .and then in the subsequent sections developed an
optimality-theoretic analysis of the quantity-manipulating phonology and showing
the interaction with geminate consonants. An important aspect of the analysis is the
detailed analysis involving correspondence constraints over moras, which follows up
on work like that of Rosenthall () and Morén (). We would contend that the
Chuukese data and analysis provides a strong case for the notion of strict domination
of constraints in phonology. Nonetheless, there are various issues that emerge from
the analysis that we leave undiscussed here.
One issue that has already engendered a fair amount of discussion is the precise
nature of the moraic representation of the Chuukese initial geminate consonants.
Topintzi () suggests that the mora of an initial geminate consonant falls within
the onset of the syllable, while Davis (b) suggests that the mora node is actually
outside the initial syllable (linked to the word), though the speciﬁc phoneme (or root
node) of the initial segment is part of the syllable. We do not see the detailed

Davis

optimality-theoretic analysis of the Chuukese data as having a bearing on this
question. A second issue is the lexical variation illustrated by the data in ().
There have been different proposals for handling various types of variation within
Optimality Theory. We do not discuss this. We see the variation shown by the
difference between the data in () with that in () as being minor and suggestive
that two very low-ranked constraints that are active may be subject to variation in
their ranking. We would expect higher-ranked constraints to be less subject to such
variation. A third matter in need of further study is the relation in Chuukese between
the role of geminates in phonology and their role in morphology, where gemination
can occur as part of a morphological process. Kennedy’s () discussion of
Chuukese focuses on the role of geminates in the verbal morphology developing an
optimality-theoretic analysis. While the moraic view of geminate consonants is
crucial for his analysis, the type of phenomena and considerations are quite different
from the quantity-manipulating phonology discussed in this chapter that is not
morphologically induced. Future work may want to examine similarity and differ-
ences between these, especially in light of work like that of Zimmermann () that
can be understood as making different predictions between morphologically induced
and phonologically induced gemination.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. I also wish to thank all
the students and colleagues over the years with whom I have discussed the Chuukese data. All
errors of fact and interpretation are my responsibility.
Weight-manipulating phonology in Chuukese


11
On the weight of edge geminates
NINA TOPINTZI AND STUART DAVIS
.Introduction
Initial and ﬁnal geminates, collectively referred to as edge geminates (EGs), differ
from intervocalic geminates in various ways. A predominant difference relates to their
structural representations. While intervocalic geminates are typically heterosyllabic, EGs
are tautosyllabic—at least superﬁcially—either within an onset (word-initial geminate) or
a coda (word-ﬁnal geminate).
Three aspects of the typology of geminates have received so far the most attention: (i)
the typology of geminate positioning, (ii) the typology of geminate consonant preference,
and (iii) the typology of geminate weight. With regard to positioning (Thurgood ;
Pajak ; Kraehenmann ; Dmitrieva ), the general ﬁnding is that intervocalic
is the preferred location for geminates, with edge geminates being rarer. For the latter in
particular, the consensus is that word-ﬁnal geminates are more common than word-
initial geminates (Thurgood ). In an experimental study with Russian, English, and
Italianspeakers, however,Dmitrieva()found thatword-initialgeminatesweremore
perceptuallydistinctthanword-ﬁnalgeminates.Interestingly,word-ﬁnalgeminatesseem
topresupposemedialgeminates,butnosuchcorrelationexistsbetweeninitialandmedial
geminates (Dmitrieva , citing Taylor and Muller ).1 Languages like Pattani
Malay (section ..) and Leti (section ..) famously possess initial geminates in the
absence of geminates elsewhere. The same holds for Ngada, Yapese, and Nyaheun
(Kraehenmann ). In other languages, e.g. Trukese (Davis, Chapter in this vol-
ume), both initial and medial geminates are attested, while ﬁnal ones are banned.
Findings on the typology of geminate consonant type preference are often
contradictory (Thurgood ; Morén ; Kawahara ; Kraehenmann ).
1 By ‘medial geminates’, we refer to word-medial intervocalic geminates spanning syllable boundaries.
It is beyond the scope of the present work to discuss other interesting, but much rarer, types of medial
geminates, especially of the potential EG type, as in Fenno-Swedish [venn.da] ‘to turn’ (Kiparsky ) or
Marshallese [ji.b.b.uŋ] ‘morning’ (Topintzi ).
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Nina Topintzi and Stuart Davis . First published by Oxford University Press.

For example, Kawahara () points to the avoidance of geminate sonorants in
many languages, while Morén () maintains that there are no universal prefer-
ences (i.e. implicational universals) regarding geminate consonant type. In terms of
frequency of occurrence, Ladefoged and Maddieson () observe that geminate
nasals and geminate voiceless stops are the most frequently occurring typologically.
In word-initial position geminate stops are the most frequently occurring
(Kraehenmann : , using Muller’s () data).
The typology of geminate weight, discussed in detail in Davis () (who assumes
moraictheory;Hayes)revealsthree majorpatterns.(a) Languagesinwhichgeminates
pattern like other coda consonants with respect to syllable weight in either both being
moraic (Latin, Lake Miwok) or non-moraic (Selkup, Tübatulabal). This is what Tranel
()hascalledthePrincipleofEqualWeightforCodas.Thetwootherpatternshavebeen
discovered in later work and rebut this principle. (b) Languages in which geminates always
pattern as moraic, even when other codas may not, as in Koya, Seto, San’ani Arabic, or
Cahuilla (Davis, and references cited therein). (c) Languages in which geminates
are not weight-bearing even when other coda consonants are moraic. The best example
of this type to date is illustrated by Ngalakgan (Baker ). Crucially, in that language
moraic elements must have their own place features, a fact that excludes geminates.
Evidently, the focal point for the typological work on geminates has been inter-
vocalic geminates and occasionally to a lesser degree edge geminates. The weight
typology of EGs, however, has not been sufﬁciently explored (but see Muller 
and Ham for some general work on initial and ﬁnal geminates, respectively).
This is an endeavour we are currently undertaking. In addition, we consider any
potential relationship between EGs and edge clusters, a task that becomes all the
more meaningful, given proposals that have treated geminates as two C-slots on
the consonantal tier (Ringen and Vago ), and for that reason, comparable to
CC-clusters. Driven by such proposals, we will in particular compare the weight
behaviour of EGs to that of edge clusters, since in the moraic theory of weight (Hayes
)—which here and elsewhere we have adopted (e.g. Davis b, ; Topintzi
, )—geminates are deﬁned through their possession of underlying weight.
Thus, while strictly speaking clusters (as a reviewer correctly points out) have no
special status in moraic theory, examination of their weight properties in relation to
the corresponding properties of geminates offers a more encompassing account that
simultaneously takes into consideration various, often competing, components in the
analysis of geminates.
The questions we seek to answer are summarized as follows.
()
Typology of edge geminates
(a) With respect to weight, do EGs pattern as moraic (heavy) or not?
(b) What is the relationship between EGs and edge clusters? Languages with
initial geminates may or may not have initial consonant clusters. Similarly,
languages with ﬁnal geminates may or may not have ﬁnal clusters.
On the weight of edge geminates


(i) In languages that have EGs and edge clusters, do the geminates and clusters
pattern the same way with respect to weight, or can geminates be special?
(ii) In languages that have EGs but no corresponding edge clusters, are the edge
geminates more or less likely to be moraic (heavy)?
(iii) In languages that have both initial and ﬁnal geminates, how do the EGs
pattern with respect to weight?
In the remainder of the chapter, we discuss the weight typology of ﬁnal (section .)
and initial (section .) geminates in conjunction to clusters, and exemplify with
several languages and data. Notice that while our survey contains (what we think is) a
representative sample of languages, not all languages with EGs reported in the
literature are included (see e.g. Muller or Dmitrieva for a list of relevant
languages). We believe that other languages displaying EGs merely exemplify one of
the patterns discussed. Nonetheless, our ﬁndings should be taken as preliminary.
In section ., we summarize the results of the typology and offer two implicational
universals that can be succinctly stated as follows (‘edge’ refers to the same edge,
either right or left edge, respectively): (I) if edge clusters do not exist, then edge
geminates are moraic; (II) if edge geminates are non-moraic, then edge clusters are
non-moraic. We then discuss further implications and present some preliminary
thoughts as to how we can understand the generalizations we have uncovered more
formally. Finally, in section ., we offer brief concluding remarks.
.Final geminates
We begin our discussion of ﬁnal geminates with an instantiation chart that summarizes
the weight status of the geminate (heavy vs. light), whether it can co-occur with a cluster
and, if so, what type of cluster in terms of weight. We then examine each pattern brieﬂy.
()
Instantiation chart: ﬁnal geminates
Final
geminates
Final clusters
None
Moraic
Non-moraic
Moraic
(I) Baghdadi Arabic,
Hadhrami Arabic
(II) Swiss German,
Cairene Arabic,
Ponapean, Wolof
(III) Amharic, San’ani
Arabic
Non-moraic
(IV) –
(V) –
(VI) Hungarian,
Tashlhiyt Berber
The ﬁrst three patterns refer to languages with moraic geminates. Pattern I comprises
languages with ﬁnal moraic geminates but lacking ﬁnal consonant clusters. Pattern II
includes languages that have both ﬁnal moraic geminates and ﬁnal consonant

Topintzi and Davis

clusters that pattern as moraic. Pattern III, where there is a co-occurrence of moraic
ﬁnal geminates and non-moraic ﬁnal clusters, does not seem to be well attested,
though Amharic and San’ani Arabic are possible examples. For ﬁnal non-moraic
geminates the situation seems much more restricted, with only one pattern arising,
that of geminates and clusters that are both non-moraic.
..Combinations of moraic ﬁnal geminates and clusters
...Pattern I: languages with moraic ﬁnal geminates and no ﬁnal clusters
Pat-
tern I is illustrated by some Arabic dialects such as Hadhrami Arabic (Bamakhramah
) and Baghdadi Arabic (Blanc ; Youssef ). The moraicity of geminates
is evinced through quantity-sensitive stress and the bimoraic word minimum.
Consonant clusters are avoided in ﬁnal position and repaired through vowel epen-
thesis. Word-ﬁnal geminates, on the other hand, remain intact. Relevant data from
the Hadhrami dialect as spoken in the town of Ghayl Bawazir near the south coast of
Yemen illustrate (Bamakhramah , p.c. to second author).
()
Hadhrami Arabic: stress facts and ﬁnal epenthesis in clusters vs. lack thereof in
geminates
a. /gird/
[gírid]
‘monkey’
(cf. [gírd-i] ‘my monkey’)
b. /bint/
[bínit]
‘girl’
(cf. [bínt-i] ‘my girl’)
c. [rább]
‘Lord’
d. [Ɂaxáff]
‘lighter/lightest’
The data item in (d) is indicative of the moraicity of the ﬁnal geminate, since a ﬁnal
CVC syllable would not typically be stressed. A similar effect is reported for the
Muslim and Christian varieties of Baghdadi Arabic (Blanc ).
()
Baghdadi Arabic: stress facts and ﬁnal epenthesis in clusters vs. lack thereof in
geminates
a. /ward/ [wáred]
‘ﬂowers’
b. /sabt/ [sábet]
‘Saturday’
c. [sádd]
‘he shut’
d. [yendázz]
‘he will be sent’
...Pattern II: languages with moraic ﬁnal geminates and moraic ﬁnal clusters
In Pattern II, ﬁnal geminates co-occur with ﬁnal clusters, both of which carry weight.
A handful of languages illustrate this pattern. In Swiss German (Kraehenmann :
) monosyllabic words must be bimoraic. To fulﬁl this requirement, /CVC/ words
undergo vowel lengthening and become [CVːC], as opposed to /CVCC/ words,
which surface unchanged. This happens whether a ﬁnal cluster or a geminate is
involved.
Contrary to Hadhrami and Baghdadi Arabic discussed in the previous section, in
Cairene Arabic (e.g. Davis and Ragheb ), word-ﬁnal consonant clusters exist and
pattern alongside word-ﬁnal geminates in being moraic, as a wide range of phenomena
demonstrate. Single ﬁnal consonants, however, lack weight.
On the weight of edge geminates


()
Cairene Arabic: stress
a. Final clusters and ﬁnal geminates
[maf.hímʃ]
‘he didn’t understand’
[ka.tábt] ‘I wrote’
[ʔa.xáff]
‘lightest’
[ʔa.máll] ‘most boring
b. CVC syllables
[mak.táb.na]
‘our ofﬁce’
[ká.tab] ‘he wrote’
[mu.hán.dis]
‘engineer’
As (a) illustrates, ﬁnal clusters and geminates always attract stress on the syllables
that host them, whereas CVC syllables (b) do so in penultimate but not in ﬁnal
position (compare [ka.tábt] with [ká.tab]). This can easily be accounted for if ﬁnal
CVCs are treated as light monomoraic, but CVCC and CVG as bimoraic, thus heavy.
This idea is further corroborated by the word-minimality data. Cairene bans mono-
moraic CVC content words, but admits CVCC or CVG words due to their
bimoraicity.
()
Cairene Arabic: minimal word
[ʔult] ‘I said’
[ʔism] ‘name’
[nuSS] ‘half’
A similar effect is highlighted by the adaptation of monosyllabic loanwords from
English. When these contain a ﬁnal consonant cluster, then they are imported
unchanged (a). Loanwords of the CVC type in the source language, though, are
often modiﬁed and borrowed with a ﬁnal geminate (b). Such adaptation is not
applicable in longer loanwords; cf. [bi.lás.tik] for ‘plastic’.
()
Cairene Arabic: loanword adaptation
a. CVCC loanwords
b. CVC loanwords
English
Cairene
English
Cairene
ﬁlm
ﬁlm
(seven) up
ʔabb
bank
bank
book (purse)
bukk
Ponapean (Goodman ; Kennedy ) has both ﬁnal clusters and geminates,
albeit of speciﬁc varieties, namely homorganic nasal obstruent (NC) clusters and
sonorant geminates. Their shared behaviour as weighted elements is highlighted by
the fact that long vowels are admitted before word-ﬁnal singletons (a), but not
before geminates and NC clusters (Goodman : –), suggesting that maximally
bimoraic syllables are permitted (b).
()
Ponapean: syllable weight maximum
a. CVːC
[koos] ‘bent, bumped’
[kuul] ‘to suck on, as sugar cane’
b. CVCC or CVG [mall] ‘clearing in the forest’ *[maall]
[romwmw] ‘calm’
*[roomwmw]
[mwanč] ‘late’
*[mwaanč]

Topintzi and Davis

Wolof (Bell ) demonstrates a pattern similar to Ponapean, the difference being
that the only ﬁnal clusters allowed are of the nasal + voiceless obstruent type. Bell
considers both nasal + voiceless obstruent sequences and geminates to be under-
lyingly moraic in Wolof. As in Ponapean, long vowels in Wolof never occur before
ﬁnal geminates nor before nasal + voiceless obstruent clusters (at least in monosyl-
labic words), though long vowels can occur before a single consonant. This can be
understood as an avoidance of trimoraic syllables. Also, neither geminates nor nasal
+ voiceless obstruent sequences can occur word-initially, which is consistent with
their common patterning. Bell () distinguishes nasal + voiceless obstruent
sequences from prenasalized consonants, which always have a voiced release in
Wolof. The prenasalized consonant can occur at the beginning of a word and,
when in word-ﬁnal position, can be preceded by a long vowel. It has to be noted,
though, that stress assignment is indifferent to the presence of a geminate or a cluster.
While stress normally falls on the initial syllable, it shifts to the second syllable if that
contains a long vowel and is preceded by a syllable with a short vowel. As Bell argues,
in Wolof, stress is only sensitive to vocalic moras.2
...Pattern III: languages with moraic ﬁnal geminates and non-moraic ﬁnal
clusters
Unlike the previous pattern, this one is not as robustly attested. Nonethe-
less, possible exempliﬁcations are to be found in Amharic and San’ani Arabic. While
Amharic stress is described as not being that prominent, Sande and Hedding ()
present evidence for stress (shown in bold) being assigned by trochaic footing from
the left edge of the word, with no stress on the ﬁnal syllable (a). In words with
geminates, though, stress is attracted to the syllable that hosts the geminate as part of
the coda. This holds for all geminates, including those found word-ﬁnally (b). The
stress-attracting effect, however, does not arise when the syllable ends in a consonant
cluster (c). Hannah Sande generalizes this to syllable-ﬁnal clusters at the end of the
word, but has not provided a speciﬁc example (p.c. to ﬁrst author, November
). Consequently, Sande and Hedding () analyse geminates as weight-
bearing in contrast to ﬁnal consonant clusters.
()
Amharic: stress
a. (mät’.fat)
‘to vanish’
(do.ro)
‘chicken’
(mät.räf)räf
‘to overﬂow’ (k’o.ﬁ)ja
‘hat’
(mäʃ.k’ä)(da.däm) ‘to race’
(as.da)(ka.käl)ku ‘I arranged (my schedule)’
2 This presupposes a distinction between vocalic and consonantal moras, an idea made explicit in Davis
and Torretta (). The idea is tacitly shared by Topintzi () in the discussion of Pirahã weight-
sensitive stress, where it is proposed that the weight of nuclei matters more than overall weight. More
generally, Gordon () discusses several cases where different weight criteria may be applicable for
different phenomena. E.g. in Lhasa Tibetan both stress and tone are weight-sensitive. For stress purposes,
only (C)VV syllables count as heavy, whereas for tone both (C)VV and (C)VC syllables with sonorant
codas do.
On the weight of edge geminates


b. mä(ʧäm.mär)
‘to add an ingredient to something’
tä(gag.ga)(räʧ.ʧä)(wal.lɨʧ)
‘she will bake them’
(bäl)(laʧ.ʧɨhw)
‘y’all ate’
sej.(toʧʧ)
‘women’
as(däk.kam)wä(tall)
‘he made her tired’
c. (k’ulf)
‘key’
but
k’ulf(toʧʧ)
*(k’ulf)(toʧʧ)
Another language in which ﬁnal geminates are distinguished from ﬁnal clusters in
being inherently moraic is San’ani Arabic, as described by Watson (). As in other
dialects of Arabic, in San’ani, when words end in a geminate consonant stress always
falls on the ﬁnal syllable, e.g. [ʔa.hámm] ‘important (comparative)’. With respect to
words ending in a ﬁnal consonant cluster, stress only falls on a ﬁnal syllable if the
word does not otherwise have heavy syllables. Compare [da.rást] ‘I/you (m.s.)
studied’ having ﬁnal stress with [dáw.wart] ‘I/you (m.s) looked for’ and [sáː.fart] ‘I/
you (m.s.) travelled’, where the ﬁnal cluster does not act as heavy. Normally, if a word
has two heavy syllables, the rightmost one attracts the stress. This is why a word like
[dáw.wart] ‘I/you (m.s) looked for’ is revealing. We thus consider San’ani Arabic as
an example where ﬁnal geminates are always moraic but ﬁnal clusters need not be.
..Combinations of non-moraic ﬁnal geminates and clusters (Patterns IV–VI)
While we ﬁnd languages in which the moraicity of ﬁnal geminates are robustly attested
regardless of the patterning of ﬁnal clusters, our preliminary survey reveals fewer
patterns of non-weight-bearing ﬁnal geminates. In particular, we discovered no
instances of languages that lack ﬁnal clusters but have ﬁnal geminates that are non-
moraic, i.e. weightless. Moreover, we found no languages where ﬁnal clusters act as
moraic without the ﬁnal geminates exhibiting the same behaviour. Although we found
no such language in our survey, in the light of Ngalakgan (Baker )—where, recall
from section ., medial geminates are weightless although other coda consonants are
moraic—such a pattern cannot beeliminated. Consequently,given our typologicalchart
in (), we found no languages that instantiate Patterns IV and V. Obviously, further
research is needed to determine whether these gaps are systematic or accidental.
With respect to Pattern VI—languages with non-moraic ﬁnal geminates and non-
moraic ﬁnal clusters—Hungarian is a reasonable candidate given the analysis of
Ringen and Vago () (also Siptár and Törkenczy ). Evidence comes from
the observation that neither ﬁnal geminates nor ﬁnal clusters attract stress. Further,
ﬁnal geminates and ﬁnal consonant clusters pattern together in that both trigger
epenthesis when a sufﬁx initial coronal consonant is added. The epenthesis process
would be more difﬁcult to capture if geminates were assumed to be moraic. Conse-
quently, there does not seem to be concrete language-internal evidence that requires
such consonants to be moraic, and we thus deem Hungarian ﬁt for this pattern.
An even more complicated case is that of Tashlhiyt Berber, which possesses edge
geminates and edge clusters in both initial and ﬁnal position. This Berber language

Topintzi and Davis

has been the subject of a series of studies by Dell and Elmedlaoui (, , )
and more recently by Ridouane (, ) and Ridouane et al. (). Tashlhiyt is
known for the occurrence of words containing only obstruents, as shown in (a,b)
and where obstruents can be syllabic. Given that words can begin and end in a
geminate and that even an obstruent can be syllabic, the question arises as to how the
edge geminates pattern with respect to edge clusters in Tashlhiyt. The answer to this
question is not simple. We suggest here that Tashlhiyt falls into the pattern where neither
the edge cluster nor the EG is inherently moraic. That is, with respect to ﬁnal clusters it is
like Pattern VI and with respect to initial clusters it is like Pattern XII (cf. ()).
This is consistent with Ridouane (), who argues against a moraic analysis of
Berber geminates. In Tashlhiyt words containing a string of obstruents, one (or more) of
the obstruents is pronounced as syllabic. There is an algorithm for assigning syllabic
status to such a consonant. The algorithm isfairly well understood both in the rule-based
approach of Dell and Elmedlaoui () and in the constraint-based analysis of Prince
and Smolensky (/). What has not been formally addressed is how geminate
consonants (especially obstruents) interact with the syllabiﬁcation algorithm. Consider
the data in () drawn from Dell and Elmedlaoui (, ), Ridouane (, ),
Ridouane et al. (), and Ridouane (p.c. to second author, December ).
()
Tashlhiyt Berber (.indicates syllable boundary; caps indicate a syllabic consonant)
a. tF.sχt
‘you cancelled’
b. tF.tKt
‘you suffered a sprain’
c. tQs.sF
‘it shrunk’
d. tK.kSt
‘you took off ’
e. ta.zN.kwTt
‘female gazelle’
f. ttsX.xan
‘dip (in sauce)’
g. a.lS
‘repeat’
h. ass
‘day’
i. G.li
‘guide’
j. ttu
‘forget’
The data in (a,b) demonstrate that in words with strings of obstruents, certain
obstruents are made syllabic depending on their location in the string in accordance
with the analysis in Dell and Elmedlaoui () or Prince and Smolensky (/
). The syllabic obstruent can be a fricative or a stop. (c,d) show that in words
with a string of obstruents that include a geminate in medial position, the geminate
can either surface as nonsyllabic (c) or as syllabic (d), depending on the nature of
the consonant sequence. Note that in (d) the ﬁrst part of the geminate surfaces as
syllabic. When an obstruent becomes syllabic it acquires a mora since it is in the peak
position of the syllable; otherwise, an obstruent is not moraic, not even a geminate
one, as Ridouane () has maintained for Tashlhiyt.
The data items in (e,f) show the behaviour of an edge obstruent geminate when
it is adjacent to another obstruent. As seen in (e), the ﬁnal edge geminate can
On the weight of edge geminates


become syllabic, but an initial geminate (f) resists becoming syllabic. The remain-
ing data (g–j) demonstrate the behaviour of an edge geminate or cluster when next
to a vowel. In this situation, the geminate—unlike the cluster—does not seem to be
syllabic (Rachid Ridouane, p.c.). More speciﬁcally, when the vowel is followed by a
CC-cluster word-ﬁnally, the second consonant becomes syllabic (g), but if it is
followed by a word-ﬁnal geminate (h), then the geminate remains non-syllabic.
Similarly, at the left edge of the word, if two consonants precede the vowel, the ﬁrst
one becomes syllabic as in (i), but an initial geminate in the same context does not
become syllabic (j). Initial geminates then resist becoming syllabic in general but
ﬁnal geminates can become syllabic if preceded by an obstruent (as seen in (e)).
In relating the Berber pattern to our proposed typology, we would tentatively put
Berber with the language patterns where neither geminates nor edge clusters act as
inherently moraic. Geminates in medial and ﬁnal position can become syllabic in a way
similar to other consonants, but the geminate is somewhat more resistant to becoming
syllabic. Initial geminates never seem to become syllabic, while ﬁnal geminates do not
become syllabic when immediately following a vowel. We do not see these differences
between the syllabiﬁcation of the EG with that of an edge consonant cluster as
reﬂecting on their possible moraicity; rather, we would maintain that the algorithm
or constraint ranking that determines the syllabicity of consonants needs to take into
consideration the resistance of the geminate to become syllabic. Thus, there may be a
high-ranked constraint that prevents geminate consonants from becoming moraic.
That said, we leave for future research whether there is independent evidence for the
possible moraicity of geminates or edge clusters in Berber.
.Initial geminates
Turning now to initial geminates, we provide a similar instantiation chart to that in
() for ﬁnal geminates, and consider the combinations arising between initial gemin-
ates and initial clusters.
()
Instantiation chart: initial geminates
Initial
geminates
Initial clusters
None
Moraic
Non-moraic
Moraic
(VII) Pat. Malay, Trukese,
Woleaian, Tedumuni
Okinawan, Luganda
(VIII) Cypriot
Greek,
Ponapean
(IX) Shuri Okinawan
Non-moraic
(X) –
(XI) –
(XII) Leti, Swiss
German, Baghdadi
Arabic, Tashlhiyt
Berber

Topintzi and Davis

..Combinations of moraic initial geminates and clusters
...Pattern VII: languages with moraic initial geminates and no initial clusters
Pattern VII comprises languages with moraic initial geminates but no initial con-
sonant clusters. This pattern is well attested. In particular, two of the four languages
discussed here (Pattani Malay and Trukese) have received increased attention in
recent years.
Pattani Malay (Yupho ; Hajek and Goedemans ; Topintzi , )
only allows geminates in initial position (). At the same time, no consonant clusters
are allowed in that position. The moraicity of geminates is highlighted by both
compensatory lengthening and stress.
()
Pattani Malay: initial geminates vs. singletons (Abramson , )
Singletons
Geminates
tido
‘to sleep’
tːido
‘put to sleep’
labɔ
‘to proﬁt’
lːabɔ
‘cause to be late’
ɣatɔ
‘comprehensive’
ɣːatɔ
‘to spread out’
sɛpaʔ
‘to kick’
sːɛpaʔ
‘to be kicked’
Initial geminates may also arise as a product of a process whereby the initial
syllable reduces and leads to a free variant where the (original) second onset
geminates, as in buwi ~ wːi ‘give’, sɨdadu ~ dːadu ‘police’, pɨmatɔ ~ mːatɔ
‘jewellery’ (Yupho : ). The same effect appears in words with a /Cɨ-/
derivational or verbal preﬁx followed by the stem (). This phenomenon can be
understood in terms of compensatory lengthening; in [bɨdiɣi], for example, the
mora of the ﬁrst syllable bɨ is preserved after the deletion of its segmental material
and emerges through gemination of the following onset consonant, i.e. dː. Effect-
ively, the total number of moras between the two variants remains the same, i.e.
[bɨμdiμɣiμ] ~ [dːμiμɣiμ].
()
Pattani Malay: geminates in preﬁxed forms (Yupho )
Unpreﬁxed form
Preﬁxed form
Geminate variant
ɟalɛ ‘road, path’
bɨɟalɛ
~
ɟːalɛ
‘to walk’
buwɔh ‘fruit’
bɨbuwɔh
~
bːuwɔh
‘to bear fruit’
diɣi ‘self ’
bɨdiɣi
~
dːiɣi
‘to stand’
kaɟi ‘no gloss’
mɨŋaɟi
~
ŋːaɟi
‘to study’
Turning to the stress data, primary stress normally is assigned to the last syllable,
with all preceding syllables receiving secondary stress (.i.a), unless they contain the
weak schwa-like vowel [ɨ] which remains stressless (.i.b). In words with geminates
though, primary stress is word-initial, whereas secondary stress is assigned to any
syllables following that (.ii.a). Most interestingly, this occurs even if the ﬁrst vowel
is the weak ɨ, as in (.ii.b).
On the weight of edge geminates


()
Pattani Malay: Stress and the effect of geminates (Yupho : –)
(i) Words lacking geminates
a.
ɟàlɛ́
‘road path’
dàlɛ́
‘in, deep’
mà̰kɛ̀nɛ̰́
‘food’
b.
bɨlàkɛ́
‘back’
kɨdá
‘shop’
(ii) Words with initial geminates
a.
mːátɔ̀
‘jewellery’
ɟːálɛ̀
‘to walk’
b.
kːı-́dà
‘to the shop’
A straightforward analysis of these facts, as put forward in Topintzi (), takes
Pattani stress to be partly quantity- and partly quality-driven, with the quantity
requirements being prioritized. When all syllables are light, primary stress is aligned
to the right edge and secondary stress reveals the quality effect, i.e. all full vowels receive
stress, save the weak ɨ. When the ﬁrst—the only possibility in Pattani—syllable is heavy,
though, due to the presence of a geminate, primary stress appears in that position
overriding the quality demands that otherwise require ɨ to be stressless.
Trukese or Chuukese also displays initial geminates and lacks initial clusters. That
geminates are weightful can be concluded through the examination of the word-
minimality facts as well as through a complex pattern of compensatory lengthening
dubbed ‘geminate throwback’ (Davis and Torretta ; Davis b; Muller a).
Since Trukese is discussed at length in Davis (Chapter ), we presently only mention
the word-minimality facts and point the interested reader to that chapter for further
information.
()
Trukese: word minimality
Form
Gloss
a. CVː words
maː
‘behaviour’
oː
‘omen’
téː3
‘islet’
núː
‘unripe coconut’
b. GV words
tːo
‘clam sp.’
kːa
‘taro sp.’
čːa
‘blood’
Trukese permits minimal words with a single long vowel (CVː) or with a short vowel
preceded by a geminate (GV), but no CV or CVC words. This distinction can easily
3 é=[ʌ], ú=[ɨ] (Davis and Torretta : , fn. ).

Topintzi and Davis

be explained if Trukese sets a bimoraic word minimum and treats CVː and GV words
as bimoraic, but CV and CVC ones as monomoraic.
Woleaian, a language closely related to Trukese, also exempliﬁes Pattern
VII. Kennedy () observes that there is a morphological process that marks the
denotative form of many verbs by geminating the initial consonant, resulting in a
word-initial geminate. Kennedy speciﬁcally argues that this geminate is moraic
because of a high-ranked constraint in the language that aligns foot structure with
morphological structure (see Kennedy : ch. for details).
Tedumuni Okinawan also displays initial moraic geminates as evinced by pitch
accent patterns and word minimality (Shinohara and Fujimoto ), while it lacks
clusters (Shigeko Shinohara, p.c. to ﬁrst author, September ). In Tedumuni a
pitch fall—marked here with ’—is normally located on the second mora of the word; if
the word consists of light syllables, that will be the second syllable, as in [a.mi’] ‘rain’ or
[ka.ta’.na] ‘knife’, but if the ﬁrst syllable is heavy, then it appears at the end of that
syllable, as in [suu’.ru] ‘head’. In words with initial geminates, we get e.g. [ssu’.ru]
‘medicine’, a clear indication that geminates must be moraic and render the syllables
they are contained in heavy. As for word minimality, the facts are comparable to other
cases already examined: CV words lengthen to CVː, but GV words do not.
A ﬁnal language that we will brieﬂy mention that has initial moraic geminates but
otherwise lacks initial consonant clusters is Luganda (though the language has
prenasalized consonants word-initially which Muller considers as single non-
moraic segments). Muller argues in detail that Luganda initial geminates pattern as
moraic with respect to allomorphy selection and tone spreading. Concerning allo-
morphy selection, she observes that the present perfect sufﬁx of verb stems that have
/l/ as a ﬁnal consonant is [-ze] if the stem is two moras, but it is [-dde] if the stem
contains more than two moras. Verb stems with two vowels (i.e. two vocalic moras)
and an initial geminate take the sufﬁx [-dde], thus patterning as trimoraic. With
respect to tone spreading, Luganda has a phrasal tone-spreading process whereby an
intonational high tone appears on all but the ﬁrst mora of the ﬁnal word of a
phonological phrase if that word does not have a lexical high tone. Normally, the
initial vowel of a word does not surface with the intonational high tone; however, if
the word begins with a geminate consonant, the initial vowel does surface with a high
tone. As Muller () argues, this strongly suggests that the initial geminate is
adding a mora to the word.
...Pattern VIII: languages with moraic initial geminates and moraic initial
clusters
Cypriot Greek and Ponapean are used here to illustrate Pattern VIII,
where initial geminates and clusters arise and where both are moraic.
Cypriot is a language with initial (as well as medial) geminates and a variety of
initial clusters. Geminates are aspirated (in the case of stops) and longer than
singletons, e.g. [pέfti] ‘Thursday’ vs. [phːɛ́fti] ‘s/he falls’ or [kafɛ́] ‘brown’ vs.
On the weight of edge geminates


[khːafɛ́] ‘café’. The analysis of geminates is still a matter of debate; in much research
(Malikouti-Drachman , ; Muller , ; Arvaniti ), geminates are
represented as single root nodes associated to X-slots or C-slots and are considered
weightless. On the other hand, Christodoulou () assumes a moraic representa-
tion, while Coutsougera ()—unlike previous work—proposes that Cypriot
geminates are tautosyllabic. These two ideas are combined in Armosti (), who
conducted ﬁve experiments on Cypriot (one acoustic, one articulatory, and three
perceptual) and ends up proposing that Cypriot geminates are better understood as
moraic onsets (cf. Topintzi ). Moreover, he shows that geminates pattern like
(most) clusters with respect to certain processes.
Armosti’s arguments in favour of the moraicity of geminates are both phonetic
and phonological. Phonetically speaking, Armosti (: §....) ﬁnds that
Cypriot geminates both word-initially and word-medially behave exactly in the
way predicted by Ham (), who claims that geminates should exhibit more
durational stability across different places of articulation (POA) than singletons.
Ham’s explanation of that makes crucial reference to the mora as an inherent
property of a geminate. This mora is realized by means of some minimum duration
in geminates and overrides any durational effects due to POA. In singletons, how-
ever, there is no such mora to start with, and hence durational effects caused by POA
are free to surface. As Armosti (: ) puts it: ‘In that respect, durational stability
across POAs can be used as a diagnostic for geminate moraicity.’4 Following this line
of thought and given that Cypriot geminates fulﬁl the phonetic criterion of moraicity,
they consequently render heavy the syllable that hosts them.
With regard to phonology, Armosti (: ) acknowledges that the major
objection expressed in the literature against a moraic account of Cypriot geminates
is that they do not actively participate in phenomena that commonly employ syllable
weight, e.g. word minimality or stress. But, as he correctly points out, this does not
necessarily imply that the language does not distinguish between heavy and light
syllables; such distinction might be identiﬁed on a phonetic level, as argued for
extensively in his thesis.
Nonetheless, Armosti argues that two processes, that of /n/-deletion and of
/i/-epenthesis, can be viewed as sensitive to syllable weight. More concretely, in the
4 Besides POA effects, Armosti ﬁnds a number of other measurements of absolute and relative timing
that serve as acoustic cues for the geminate/singleton contrast, including longer duration of closure and
longer aspiration for stops in geminates (absolute timing), as well as V:HVratio (relative timing). The
latter refers to the ratio of the following vowel to the aspiration-plus-vowel sequence. ‘If Voccupies %
to % of the HVsequence, then it is preceded by a singleton, whereas if it occupies % to %, it is
preceded by a geminate’ (Armosti : ). Relative timing is considered a reliable acoustic cue in various
languages for the distinction between geminates and singletons (cf. Armosti : §....) and is so in
Cypriot, but with a twist. In other languages, e.g. Italian, it is typically the preceding vowel that matters,
whereas in Cypriot it is the vowel that follows. This phonetic result seems compatible with the idea that
geminates in Cypriot are to be analysed as moraic onsets.

Topintzi and Davis

article tin ‘the-SG.ACC.FEM’ and the particle en ‘not’, the ﬁnal nasal may delete or an
epenthetic vowel [i] may be inserted right after it, depending on the environment.
Both processes are triggered by following geminates and clusters, but not singletons.5
In this context, singletons cause nasal place assimilation instead. This could be
reformulated in terms of syllable weight (Armosti : ); the nasal deletes if
followed by a heavy syllable, i.e. one with a moraic onset coming from a geminate or
an onset cluster. In the same environment, but under different morphophonological
conditions, /i/-insertion is preferred instead.
()
Cypriot Greek: Geminates and clusters vs. singletons in phonological pro-
cesses (Armosti : )
Onset
UR
/n/-
assimilation
/n/-
deletion
/i/-
epenthesis
Gloss
Singletons /ɛn ˈpɛzːɔ/
[ˈɛˈmbɛzːɔ]
n.a.
n.a.
‘I don’t play’
Clusters
/ɛn ˈpsinːɔ/
n.a.
[ˈɛˈpsinːɔ]
[ˈɛniˈpsinːo]
‘I don’t bake’
Geminates /ɛn ˈpːɛftɔ/
n.a.
[ˈɛˈphːɛftɔ]
[ˈɛniˈphːɛftɔ] ‘I don’t fall’
While it is true that these processes group together geminates and clusters to the
exclusion of singletons, they do not unequivocally speak for weight; thus one may
wish to challenge the decision to classify Cypriot as a Type VIII language. A cursory
comment made elsewhere in Armosti (: ) leads us, however, to suspect that
our Pattern VIII classiﬁcation of Cypriot is on the right track. He mentions that /s/ +
stop clusters can be replaced by geminate aspirated stops in the case of nickname
formation. Thus the feminine names [ðɛspiˈnu] and [xɾistɐˈlːu] become [phːiˈnu] and
[tɐˈlːu], respectively. That the cluster is replaced by a moraic geminate and not a
singleton is potentially indicative of the fact that it is moraic itself.
If we nonetheless still treat the moraicity of clusters in Cypriot with scepticism,
then the question remains: should we classify Cypriot as Pattern VIII?6 In fact, some
readers might raise comparable concerns for a few of the other languages already
examined, e.g. Hungarian or Tashlihyt Berber. Typically in those cases, we ﬁnd clear
evidence that geminates and clusters pattern together segmentally, but have little or
unclear evidence regarding their weight behaviour. So the question is: are we justiﬁed
in grouping those languages the way we do?
5 Clusters composed of stop + sonorant and the cluster [pc] behave like singletons in that respect.
Armosti considers those non-moraic (Armosti, p.c. to ﬁrst author, Nov. ).
6 We thank an anonymous reviewer and Donca Steriade (p.c. to ﬁrst author) for raising this issue and
for inspiring the ensuing discussion.
On the weight of edge geminates


We think, provisionally, yes; while the suggested classiﬁcations are not unambigu-
ous, they are (i) fully compatible with the other facts of the language and (ii) the most
parsimonious classiﬁcations in the current typology. Taking Cypriot as an example,
we classiﬁed both initial geminates and clusters as moraic (Pattern VIII)—although
moraicity evidence exists only for the former—on the grounds that they exhibit
common segmental behaviour. Such an assumption does not create conﬂicts with
other facts of the language, while it is the most coherent of all. What are the
alternatives? If it is indisputable that initial geminates are moraic, then we are left
with Patterns VII and IX. Obviously Cypriot could not be type VII (moraic geminates
and no clusters), since it evidently possesses clusters; IX (moraic geminates and non-
moraic clusters) would be conceivable, but it would generate the question: ‘If
geminates and clusters are prosodically different, why are they segmentally compar-
able?’, which in turn would create an unnecessary internal inconsistency. Given the
lack of positive evidence in support of such an inconsistency, we opt for the more
parsimonious classiﬁcation, here Pattern VIII. Comparable reasoning applies to
Hungarian or Berber.
Another language that exempliﬁes Pattern VIII is Ponapean, which also possesses
ﬁnal geminates (Goodman ; Kennedy ). Word-initially we ﬁnd nasal
geminates (a) as well as nasal + stop clusters where the nasal is syllabic (b).
()
Ponapean: initial geminates and NC clusters
a. [m̩met]
‘full’
[ŋ̩ŋet]
‘to pant’
b. [m̩pek]
‘to look for lice’
Kennedy () justiﬁes the moraicity of these initial sequences through reduplica-
tion. The durative reduplicant appears as either monomoraic or bimoraic. In mono-
syllabic stems, the reduplicant appears bimoraic if the stem is monomoraic, but it
shows up monomoraic if the stem is bimoraic. This is what Kennedy (: and
references therein) dubs ‘Quantitative Complementarity’. In the examples in (), the
reduplicant is underlined.
()
Ponapean: durative for monosyllables
Stem
Reduplicated form
Gloss
i.
pa
[paapa]
‘weave’
dod
[dondod]
‘frequent’
tep
[tepitep]
‘begin’
ii. duup
[duduup]
‘divide’
miik
[mimiik]
‘suck’
pei
[pepei]
‘ﬁght’
Bimoraicity in the reduplicant (i) is ensured through a single heavy syllable of the
type [CVV] or [CVC] or two light [CV.CV]s. Note that independent evidence is

Topintzi and Davis

available that ﬁnal singleton codas are not moraic, whereas medial ones are. In
polysyllabic stems, facts are quite complex, but for our purposes it is sufﬁcient to
observe that LL polysyllabic stems of the type [CV.CV(C)] receive a bimoraic
reduplicant as shown in ().
()
Ponapean: bimoraic CVC or CV.CV. reduplicant for LL bimoraic stems
Stem
Reduplicated Form
Gloss
dune
[dundune]
‘attach in a sequence’
dilip
[dindilip]
‘mend thatch’
siped
[sipisiped]
‘shake out’
In stems that begin with a geminate (.i) or a CC-cluster (.ii), the reduplicant is
similarly bimoraic, e.g. [mmi] or [mpi], both with an epenthetic vowel /i/. This might
seem surprising; a stem like [mmed] is presumably comparable to [miik] (.ii), i.e. a
bimoraic monosyllable. But had that been the case, then we would expect a mono-
moraic reduplicant, e.g. *[mimmed]. A solution would be to consider both nasals in
geminates and NC clusters syllabic, hence [m̩.med] and [m̩.pek]. That would render
these strings bisyllabic LL and thus subject to the reduplication pattern of ().7
()
Ponapean: bimoraic GV or CCV reduplicant (Kennedy : )
Stem
Reduplicated form
Gloss
i.
mmed
[mmimmed]
‘full’
ŋŋet
[ŋŋiŋŋet]
‘to pant’
ii. mpek
[mpimpek]
‘to look for lice’
nda
[ndinda]
‘to say’
...Pattern IX: languages with moraic initial geminates and non-moraic initial
clusters
Shuri Okinawan (Shimoji ) displays Pattern IX in the chart in ()
whereby initial geminates are moraic but other initial clusters are not. The language
allows for initial geminates and a limited set of initial clusters all beginning with a
glottal stop. It also imposes a bimoraic word minimum that is satisﬁed by CCV words
that begin with a geminate, but not with clusters.
()
Shuri Okinawan: word inimum
GV words:
[ccu] ‘person’
[kkwa] ‘child’
CCV words:
*[ʔwa]
but [ʔwaa] ‘pig’
7 A reasonable alternative that, however, proves wrong is to hypothesize that geminates (and NC
clusters) are non-moraic. That would then render the stem [mmed] truly monosyllabic and monomoraic
along the lines of (i) and consequently require a bimoraic reduplicant. But such a demand can no longer
be satisﬁed by the reduplicant [mmi], since the geminate is weightless. We would thus expect a reduplicant
like *[mmii] or *[mmim], none of which arise.
On the weight of edge geminates


..Combinations of non-moraic initial geminates and clusters
Comparable to the situation with ﬁnal geminates (section ..), initial moraic
geminates are also robustly attested regardless of the occurrence and patterning of
initial clusters. Likewise, our preliminary survey ﬁnds fewer patterns involving
non-moraic initial geminates. More speciﬁcally, we detected neither Pattern X nor
XI of the chart in (), i.e. neither the combination of non-moraic initial geminates
and no initial clusters nor the combination of non-moraic initial geminates and
moraic initial clusters. As in the case of ﬁnal geminates, future research should be
able to establish whether these gaps are systematic or accidental.
Contrary to Patterns X and XI, the remaining Pattern XII, which refers to
languages with non-moraic initial geminates and non-moraic initial clusters, seems
well attested. Languages such as Leti (Hume et al. ) and Swiss German
(Kraehenmann ; Ringen and Vago ) ﬁt the proﬁle for this pattern. While
both support a bimoraic minimal word constraint, no CCV words are allowed in
either language regardless of whether the CC is a cluster or a geminate.
An additional possible candidate is Tashlhiyt Berber (see section ..for more
details regarding the behaviour of both ﬁnal and initial geminates), while even more
probable is the case for the Arabic dialects that allow for initial consonant clusters
with very few restrictions, including initial geminates. This includes Baghdadi Arabic
(Blanc ; Youssef ) and Hadhrami Arabic (Bamakhramah ), but the
possible weight properties of these initial sequences have not been systematically
discussed in the literature on Arabic phonology. Nonetheless, if we consider
Baghdadi Arabic, we observe that a word-initial syllable that begins with a
geminate does not attract stress to that syllable. This is signiﬁcant given that the
stress rule is quantity-sensitive and, as indicated in section ..., a word-ﬁnal
geminate always attracts stress to the ﬁnal syllable. Also, the word-initial geminate
in Baghdadi Arabic seems to pattern as non-moraic with respect to the bimoraic
minimal word condition, since, as far as we are aware, the language lacks words
consisting solely of an initial geminate followed by a short vowel. The patterning
of initial geminates in Arabic dialects that have them is a ripe area for future
research.
.Discussion: asymmetries and gaps in the typology of edge geminates
The tables in () repeat our ﬁndings regarding the emergence of ﬁnal and initial
geminates, as well as their coexistence, if applicable, with clusters. The names of the
languages illustrating each pattern are also included.

Topintzi and Davis

()
(i) Instantiation chart: ﬁnal geminates (cf. ())
Final
geminates
Final clusters
None
Moraic
Non-moraic
Moraic
(I) Baghdadi Arabic,
Hadhrami Arabic
(II) Swiss German,
Cairene Arabic,
Ponapean, Wolof
(III) Amharic,
San’ani Arabic
Non-moraic
(IV) –
(V) –
(VI) Hungarian,
Tashlhiyt Berber
(ii) Instantiation chart: initial geminates (cf. ())
Initial
geminates
Initial clusters
None
Moraic
Non-moraic
Moraic
(VII) Pattani Malay,
Trukese, Woleaian,
Tedumuni Okinawan,
Luganda
(VIII) Cypriot
Greek,
Ponapean
(IX) Shuri Okinawan
Non-moraic
(X) –
(XI) –
(XII) Leti, Swiss German,
Baghdadi Arabic,
Tashlhiyt Berber
The state of affairs is better summarized in (), where the focus is placed on the typological
gaps found. Moraicity or lack thereof is signalled through μ and ¬μ, respectively.
()
Summary of EGs and edge clusters
The ﬁrst thing one may notice is that the picture at both edges of the word is highly
comparable. In fact, the patterns arising are identical: non-moraic EGs only occur
in languages in which clusters at the same edge exist and moreover pattern as
Final geminates
Final clusters
None
μ
¬μ
Gμ #
(I) YES
(II) YES
(III) YES
G¬μ #
(IV) NO
(V) NO
(VI) YES
Initial geminates
Initial clusters
None
μ
¬μ
# Gμ
(VII) YES (VIII) YES (IX) YES
# G¬μ
(X) NO
(XI) NO
(XII) YES
On the weight of edge geminates


non-moraic too. Consequently, the distribution of non-moraic geminates is overall
much more restricted than the corresponding distribution of moraic geminates.
Given the chart in (), we can identify two interesting generalizations. In par-
ticular, as the dark-shaded cells reveal, there seem to be no languages possessing a
non-moraic EG while lacking a consonant cluster on that edge. Second, there seem to
be no languages possessing a non-moraic EG while having a moraic cluster on that
edge (light-shaded cells). At this point, we cannot tell if these gaps in the typology are
accidental or not. While we believe that at least most of them are not accidental—for
reasons to be mentioned next—this is an issue that has to be resolved through future
documentation of additional languages with edge geminates. For the time being, we
tentatively state the generalizations by means of implicational universals.
()
Implicational Universal 
If a language has an edge geminate but no consonant clusters on that edge,
then the edge geminate patterns as moraic (or ‘If edge clusters do not exist,
then EGs are moraic’).
()
Implicational Universal 
If a language has an edge geminate that patterns as non-moraic and allows for
consonant clusters on that edge, then that cluster must pattern as non-moraic
too (or ‘If EGs are non-moraic, then edge clusters too are non-moraic’).
If indeed the observed generalizations reﬂect true universals, a reasonable question to
ask is whether these can be somehow explained. A partial answer may possibly lie in
the nature of geminates. The following discussion is largely based on medial gemin-
ates and singleton codas; since these are attested in several languages, they have been
extensively explored, but also a comparison of their properties has been conducted.
According to many theorists (e.g. Hayes ; Ham ; Davis , ;
Topintzi ), geminates are inherently moraic, i.e. weightful. As discussed in
section ., we ﬁnd languages where both geminate and singleton codas are weightful
(Latin, Lake Miwok), or where both are weightless (Selkup, Malayalam and Tübatulabal
in Tranel ). While the latter set of languages may at ﬁrst glance contest the
underlying weight of geminates, Davis (, : ) has argued that these data
too can be reanalysed in a manner compatible with the inherent moraicity of geminates.
Moreover, Davis has offered a strong argument against Tranel’s Principle of Equal
Weight for Codas (Tranel ; and section .here) and in favour of the moraic
analysis of geminates. In several papers (Davis and references therein), he has
shown that languages with moraic geminates and non-moraic singletons exist, i.e.
cases where the weight of codas is non-uniform. These include West Swedish, Koya,
Seto, Fula, and Cahuilla. The opposite pattern, where geminates are non-moraic but
singleton codas are moraic, is clearly unattested, with one possible exception, that of
Ngalakgan (sections ., ..). In Ngalakgan, however, the place of articulation of
consonants is instrumental (geminates and codas in homorganic clusters are non-

Topintzi and Davis

moraic; codas in heterorganic clusters are moraic) and could perhaps help us
understand the language’s unlikely pattern. At present, we consider Ngalakgan a
deviation that does not disturb the general pattern.
This state of affairs ﬁnds analogues in the case of EGs and clusters. Patterns II and
VIII, with uniform moraicity, are analogous to Latin; patterns VI and XII, with
uniform non-moraicity, are analogous to Malayalam. Interestingly, patterns III
(Amharic) and IX (Shuri Okinawan) are comparable to data from languages such as
Cahuilla, since moraicity is non-uniform. Geminates are moraic, but clusters are not.
Two attested patterns remain: I and VII, i.e. languages with moraic EGs but no
clusters whatsoever. These can be best accounted for by making reference to edges
and assuming the representational account of Topintzi (, ). In that work,
initial and ﬁnal moraic geminates look like singleton onsets and codas, respectively,
but differ in bearing a mora that the real singletons lack. Since moraic edge geminates
are largely representationally identical to singletons, it follows that they can coexist in
the absence of clusters. The latter would require a different representation, e.g.
double linking to an onset or coda.
() i. Word-final distinction between singletons and geminates
ii. Word-initial distinction between singletons and geminates
a. singleton CVC]
b. geminate CVCːμ]
σ
μ
V   C]
σ
μ
V  Cː]
μ
a. singleton CV
b. geminate CːμV 
σ
[C
V
μ
σ
μ
[Cː 
V
μ
This leaves us with the alleged gaps of languages with weightless geminates and no
clusters (IV, X), as well as languages with weightless geminates and weightful clusters
(V, XI). If one adopts a moraic analysis for all geminates, then weightless geminates
can be derived under the assumption that ‘geminates may be underlyingly moraic,
[but] do not [have to] surface as moraic’ (Davis : ). In practice this means
that weightless geminates could start life as moraic but end up weightless on the
surface due to, for example, a constraint that bans consonant moraicity. If that is the
case, though, all consonants, including those in clusters, should be equally affected,
effectively enforcing weightlessness for all consonants in geminates or clusters.
In turn, this would suggest a neutralization of contrast between singletons and
On the weight of edge geminates


geminates and would consistently produce the structures in (.i.a) and (.ii.a). As a
result, we would generate a language with weightless singletons (or geminates
neutralizing to singletons) and weightless clusters. Such languages obviously occur,
but are irrelevant to the typology of geminates.
What this suggests is that we may wish to maintain the structures in () for
moraic edge geminates, but suggest that weightless geminates are to be represented
differently. For example, they might involve double-linking to two root nodes
(Selkirk ) or to two timing slots (Tranel ) under the onset or coda nodes.
Empirical evidence from some of the languages that display weightless geminates is
in fact supportive of this position. For example, in Baghdadi Arabic the weightless
initial geminates are all heteromorphemic, brought about through morpheme con-
catenation or vowel deletion over a morpheme boundary. This contrasts with ﬁnal
moraic geminates in Arabic, which are almost always tautomorphemic. In Leti, no
phonological restrictions are placed on what the two consonants can be at the
beginning of a word. Any cluster or (apparently) a geminate is possible. Davis
(b: –) analyses this fact by means of an optional adjoined C-slot at the
beginning of a word before the single onset that can be ﬁlled by anything (or not at
all if the word begins with a single consonant). It remains to be seen whether all cases
of weightless initial EGs are similar to either the Baghdadi Arabic or the Leti case, and
whether a comparable analysis is available for ﬁnal non-moraic geminates, whose
behaviour as explained in section ..is much less understood.
Assuming such a representation of weightless geminates, and in particular one that
brings them closer to clusters, we can better comprehend the gaps we ﬁnd in our
typology. If a language has weightless geminates it should necessarily also exhibit
(weightless) clusters (cf. attested patterns VI and XII), leaving no space to describe a
language with weightless geminates and no clusters (Patterns IV and X), since these
two present comparable structure, nor a language with moraic clusters and weightless
geminates (Patterns V and XI), since (as before) weight assignment should equally
apply to all consonants.
This solution is also in line with a potential restatement of the proposed implica-
tional universals, as suggested to us by an anonymous reviewer. The two universals
are merged here into a single universal, stating: ‘If a language has non-moraic edge
geminates then it must have consonant clusters at that edge and the clusters must be
non-moraic.’ Its advantage is that it captures Patterns VI and XII, as well as all four
gaps in one go. At the same time, it makes no prediction for the correlation between
moraic geminates and clusters. This might be a good thing, as it parallels the
behaviour of medial geminates and singletons: recall that moraic medial geminates
may combine with both moraic singleton codas (Latin) or non-moraic ones (Cahuilla),
unlike non-moraic medial geminates, which, with the exception of Ngalakgan, only
coexist with non-moraic coda singletons (Malayalam). The ﬁnding that a language
must have clusters if weightless geminates are present may in turn suggest that

Topintzi and Davis

weightless geminates are essentially clusters themselves, and consequently, as indi-
cated above, receive a different representation from the ‘real’ moraic geminates.
Although we acknowledge the appeal of this restatement of facts, at present we
refrain from fully endorsing it for two main reasons. First, its adoption would require
us to expressly accept the split representation of geminates. While we think that the
present work may in fact prove signiﬁcant in resolving the debate on geminate
representation—demonstrating that in fact both the weight-based (Hayes ;
Topintzi ; Davis ) and length-based (Ringen and Vago ) accounts have
been right all along, but for different types of geminates—it is evident that our
typological survey is still rather limited. It is thus preliminary to commit ourselves
on this matter. Second, the alleged parallel between EGs and edge clusters and medial
geminates and medial clusters is not exactly a parallel, simply because at edges,
clusters—and possibly geminates—are arguably tautosyllabic, whereas medially they
are necessarily heterosyllabic (so that Cis found in a coda singleton), indicating that
the position within the word may be a more important parameter to consider.
We close this section by noting that besides the asymmetries arising in the
typology of EGs across languages, we also ﬁnd asymmetries within the same lan-
guage. In particular, some languages present both initial and ﬁnal geminates, but
their behaviour is not necessarily uniform. In Swiss German and Baghdadi Arabic,
ﬁnal geminates are moraic while initial geminates are not. On the other hand, EGs of
Ponapean (and probably Puluwat; Elbert ) seem to be consistently moraic. Given
the rarity of languages that demonstrate geminates at both word edges, it is impos-
sible to determine whether the lack of moraic initial geminates and non-moraic ﬁnal
geminates is random or systematic. For Dmitrieva, though (: ), this gap is not
coincidental. She ascribes it to the fact that onset and coda moraicity cannot be
simultaneously available to the language. While this largely seems to be empirically
supported, EGs in Ponapean contest this view.8 Moreover, without any further
elaboration, it still does not follow why a language should not combine initial
weightful geminates with ﬁnal weightless ones.
.Conclusion
In this chapter we have explored the typology of edge geminates. Although much
rarer than medial geminates, many languages nevertheless employ them. In our
survey, we have considered languages with weightful or weightless geminates,
weightful or weightless clusters, as well as languages that lack clusters altogether.
We have then investigated the co-occurrence possibilities between these categories,
8 Note that Dmitrieva (: ) accepts initial geminates in Ponapean, but appears unsure about ﬁnal
ones. Another possible counterexample is Karo (Topintzi ), a language that lacks geminates. In that
analysis, Karo voiceless and sonorant onsets bear weight and so do sonorant codas.
On the weight of edge geminates


and have found that most combinations are allowed; however, certain gaps in the
typology emerge. While a larger database of languages would need to be consulted
before we reach any safe conclusion,9 certain implicational universals can be enun-
ciated at this point.
According to the ﬁrst implicational universal (), if a language has an edge
geminate, but no consonant clusters on that edge, then the EG patterns as moraic.
The second universal () states that if a language has an EG that patterns as non-
moraic and allows for consonant clusters on that edge, then that cluster must pattern
as non-moraic too. We have also observed that a few languages demonstrate gemin-
ates at both edges of the word, but their behaviour does not have to be uniform in
terms of weight, i.e. weightful geminates at one edge may co-occur with weightful
geminates at the other edge, but do not have to.
As mentioned, certain asymmetries that arise in the typology of geminates can
be understood through already available theoretical machinery. A fuller survey,
however, besides examining more languages (ideally newly documented ones),
would also need to consider additional parameters. For example, does it matter
whether the EG is derived or underlyingly present? How do partial geminates (i.e.
nasal + homorganic clusters) behave? Do they pattern like EGs or can they exhibit
distinct behaviour? Future research should seek to answer these questions too and
examine the implications, if any, for the typology of edge geminates.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and interesting ways to
restate the universals we propose here, as well as to the audience of the MIT Linguistics
Colloquium, and especially Donca Steriade, for useful feedback. All remaining errors are
our own.
9 The somewhat restricted database is partly due to the inherently limited number of languages that
possess edge geminates. In some cases the situation is additionally hindered by lack of or insufﬁcient
information relevant to EGs and/or clusters. Some languages are reported to also possess EGs, but have not
been included in this survey (cf. section .), e.g. Estonian ﬁnal geminates (Dmitrieva ) or Circassian
initial geminates (Muller ). We believe this omission does not disturb the main ﬁndings outlined
earlier. Inclusion of those languages, however, as well as documentation of new languages with EGs, would
be likely to beneﬁt and enrich the present typology.

Topintzi and Davis

12
A prosodic account of consonant
gemination in Japanese loanwords
JUNKO ITO, HARUO KUBOZONO, AND ARMIN MESTER
.Introduction
The distribution of geminate consonants in Japanese loanwords is notoriously
complex. On the one hand, there are intrinsic factors. Some consonants, in particular
obstruents (called sokuon when geminated), are more prone to gemination than
sonorants. Segmental features lead to further distinctions: voiceless obstruents
geminate more easily than voiced obstruents (a), and some types of fricatives
geminate more easily than others (b) (dots indicate syllable boundaries, with initial
and ﬁnal syllable boundaries usually not marked, and an accent mark after a vowel
indicates that it is accented).
()
Segmental factors
a. Voicing type: voiceless vs. voiced obstruents
Gemination
No gemination
cap
kya0p.pu
cab
kya0.bu
lock
ro0k.ku
log
ro0.gu
b. Fricative type: [ʃ] vs. [s], [x] vs. [f]
Gemination
No gemination
bush
bu0ʃ.ʃu
bus
ba0.su
Bach
ba0h.ha
puff
pa0.fu
On the other hand, one and the same consonant is more likely to geminate in some
phonological contexts than in others ().
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Junko Ito, Haruo Kubozono, and Armin Mester . First published by
Oxford University Press.

()
Positional factors
Gemination
No gemination
p
cap
kya0p.pu
captain
kya0.pu.ten
p
apple
a0p.pu.ru
chapel
t͡ʃa0.pe.ru
p
happy
ha0p.pii
happiness ha0.pi.ne.su
t
market
ma0a.ket.to
marketing ma0a.ke.tin.gu
k
pack
pa0k.ku
park
pa0a.ku
k
tax
ta0k.ku.su
tact
ta0.ku.to
g
frog
fu.ro0g.gu
log
ro0.gu
s
listen
ri0s.sun
listener
ri0.su.naa
s
message me0s.see.d͡ʒi
mess
me0.su
This chapter discusses how the distribution of geminates as opposed to singletons (e.g.
/pp/, /dd/, /mm/ vs. /p/, /d/, /m/) is determined in loanword adaptations in Japanese, a
language whose native system employs consonant length contrastively. We propose an
output-oriented analysis to account for both new and previously established generaliza-
tions in the framework of Optimality Theory (OT; Prince and Smolensky ) and
demonstrate that consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords is caused by two different
factors, one of them involving prosodic faithfulness, the other prosodic markedness.
Analyses that champion only one of these, as we will show, remain incomplete.
First, prosodic faithfulness to the source word is involved when gemination is a way
of preserving word-ﬁnal codahood, or moraicity, in the English source words (see Lovins
) (there is a signiﬁcant literature in recent decades; we will return to details later).
The second factor is prosodic markedness. Signiﬁcant higher-level prosodic factors
that are part of the native system are also at work and result in gemination. For
example, we will see the workings of the INITIALFOOT constraint, obliging prosodic
words to start out with a bimoraic foot, not with an unfooted syllable.
The chapter is organized as follows. We will ﬁrst sketch the basic structure of
modern Tokyo Japanese, with a main focus on geminate consonants in its native
phonology (section .). We will then present our basic claim and analysis about
consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords (section .). We demonstrate in this
section how our prosodic analysis is different from previous analyses based solely on
input–output correspondences. Sections .and .are the core part of this
chapter, in which our output-oriented analysis is illustrated for each and every
basic fact regarding gemination and non-gemination. Segmental conditions on
gemination are discussed in section ., and prosodic conditions in section ..
Previous studies on consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords are also critically
discussed throughout the chapter. The ﬁnal section gives a summary of our analysis
and future agenda.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

.Basic structures of native Japanese phonology
..Segmental length
As is well known, consonant length as well as vowel length is distinctive in Japanese
phonology (Shibatani ; Kawagoe ; Kawahara b). Thus, there are many
minimal pairs including those in () that contrast a single consonant (singleton) with
a geminated consonant (geminate). Geminates appear only word-medially.
()
Singleton and geminate segmental minimal pairs
Singleton
Geminate
ki.ta
‘north’
ki0t.ta
‘cut (past)’
ʃu.t͡ʃoo
‘assertion’
ʃut.t͡ʃoo
‘business trip’
sa.ki
‘point, edge’
sa0k.ki
‘a short time ago’
ka0.ʃa
‘freight car’
kaʃ.ʃa
‘pulley’
ka.sen
‘underline’
kas.sen
‘battle’
Phonetic studies have shown that, other things being equal, consonant length is
signalled primarily by consonant duration (Fujisaki and Sugito ; Han ).
Thus, the closure duration of [t] is much longer in /ki0tta/ ‘cut (past)’ than in /kita/
‘north’. Geminate fricatives have a much longer frication duration than singletons:
e.g. [s] is considerably longer in /kassen/ ‘battle’ than in /kasen/ ‘underline’.
While consonant length is contrastive in Japanese, not all consonants have a
geminate counterpart. First, no voiced obstruent (b, d, g) can be geminated in the
native (Yamato and Sino-Japanese) phonology.1 This is illustrated, for example, by
the fact that in the course of history /tada/ ‘only’ turned into /tatta/, not /tadda/, when
geminated for emphasis. It follows from this and other facts that the native phon-
ology of Japanese is subject to the constraint in (), which has a well-known
aerodynamic basis (Kawahara b: –) and cross-linguistic support. The pres-
ence of voiced obstruent geminates always implies the presence of voiceless obstruent
geminates: No language bans just voiceless obstruent geminates while allowing
voiced obstruent geminates (Maddieson ).
()
NOGEMINATEVOICEDOBSTRUENT (NOGEMVOIOBS): Voiced obstruent geminates
are prohibited.
We will return to the details later, when we show that further differentiation between
segment types might be warranted for Japanese. Second, voiceless fricatives fall into two
types: those that can be geminated ([s] and [ʃ]) as shown in (), and those that cannot ([h]).
1 Nasals have geminated counterparts (/kammuri/ ‘crown’, /kannon/ ‘goddess of mercy’) where the
coda portion is considered a moraic nasal. Glides following moraic nasals are best understood as geminate
glides with an initial nasalized portion (fuNwari ! fuw̃wari ‘ﬂoating’ boNyari ! boỹyari ‘unfocused’; see
Mester and Ito : ; Vance : ).
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
ka.sen ‘underline’ vs. kas.sen ‘battle’
ka.ʃa ‘freight car’ vs. kaʃ.ʃa ‘pulley’
Note that /h/ can be geminated in several independent contexts in the native phonology
but, when geminated, alternates with [pp] rather than [hh], for historical reasons.2 This is
true irrespective of the following vowel, which determines the phonetic quality of /h/ ([ç],
[ɸ], or [h]) in Yamato and Sino-Japanese words. Some examples are given in (), and we
return to the more recent loanwords such as /bah.ha/ ‘Bach’ in section ...
()
a. ha ‘leaf ’
~ hap.pa ‘leaf ’
b. ni.hon ‘Japan’
~ nip.pon ‘Japan’
c. a.ho ‘fool’
~ ap.po ‘fool (colloquial)’
d. /it/ ‘one’ + hu [ɸu] ‘husband’
! ip.pu ‘one husband’
e. /it/ ‘one’ + hi [çi] ‘day’
! ip.pi ‘ﬁrst day of the month’
..Syllable structure constraints
As in many languages, only a single consonant can ﬁll the onset and coda position in a
well-formed Japanese syllable. We state this unviolated constraint as NOCOMPLEX in ()
(after Prince and Smolensky ), combining NOCOMPLEXONSET and NOCOMPLEXCODA.
()
NOCOMPLEXSYLLABLEMARGINS (NOCOMPLEX): No more than a single consonant
can ﬁll the onset or the coda position in a syllable.
NOCOMPLEX is responsible for triggering epenthesis in the adaptation of many loanwords
(such as plan ! puran). Besides this complexity restriction, there is another condition on
the type of allowed codas (see Ito and Mester : –and work cited there).
()
CODACONDITION (CODACOND): The coda can only be the ﬁrst part of a geminate
or a moraic nasal.3
The effects of CODACOND can be seen in the verbal inﬂectional paradigm, where it is
responsible for both gemination (/kir-ta/ ‘cut-past’ ! kitta) and place assimilation
(/kam-ta/ ‘chew-past’ ! kanda).
Finally, there is an important size restriction on the syllable, which can be gleaned
from the fact that geminate consonants cannot occur after a long vowel or diphthong.
Thus, in the native phonology, toki, tokki, and tooki are all legal forms, but *tookki
is not ().
2 Modern Japanese /h/ derives from old Japanese /p/ (Frellesvig ). In the native vocabulary of
Japanese, /h/ has three allophones: [ç] and [ɸ] appear before /i/ and /u/, respectively, while [h] appears
before other vowels; [pp] occurs in reduplication (a), in emphatic forms (b,c), and in compound-medial
positions via regressive place assimilation (d,e).
3 In ﬁnal position, the moraic nasal realized as a dorso-uvular [ɴ] with weak constriction; elsewhere it
assimilates to the place of articulation of the following segment, with details depending on the type of
segment involved (see Vance : –).

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

()
Singleton
Geminate
Short V___
to.ki
‘time’
tok.ki
‘projection’
Long V___
too.ki
‘pottery’
*took.ki
Kubozono () attributes this distributional restriction to a constraint on the
optimal size of the syllable, which permits light (monomoraic) and heavy (bimoraic)
syllables, but not superheavy (trimoraic) ones. In Japanese, as in other languages,
long vowels and diphthongs count as two moras, while the moraic nasal as well as the
ﬁrst half of geminate consonants counts as one mora.
()
NOSUPERHEAVYSYLLABLES (NOSUPERHEAVY): Trimoraic syllables (σμμμ) are banned.
The same constraint accounts for the seemingly peculiar loanword adaptation process
known as ‘pre-nasal vowel shortening’ (Lovins ). This process, illustrated in (),
shortens long vowels and diphthongs before a moraic nasal, thus creating bimoraic
syllables out of a string that would otherwise result in trimoraic syllables (see
Kubozono , for more evidence for the trimoraic syllable ban in Japanese).
()
Pre-nasal vowel shortening4
Source
Loan
foundation
fan.dee.ʃon
*faun.dee.ʃon
stainless
su.ten.re.su
*su.tein.re.su
Cambridge
ken.bu.rid.d͡ʒi
*kein.bu.rid.d͡ʒi
corned beef
kon.bii.fu
*koon.bii.fu
..Prosodic form
Native phonology exhibits a striking tendency to favour Heavy-Light (HL) and
Heavy-Heavy (HH) sequences, and to disfavour Light-Heavy (LH) sequences in
word-ﬁnal position. This tendency is observed in various independent phenomena
in Japanese, one of which is the zūzya-go formation discussed in depth by Ito et al.
(). Zūzya-go (ZG) is a jazz musicians’ secret language involving metathesis: e.g.
/ma.nee.d͡ʒaa/ ! /d͡ʒaa.ma.ne/ ‘manager’. The input to this process can be any word
with any prosodic structure, but its output is severely constrained in prosodic terms.
This is illustrated with monosyllabic and disyllabic input forms in ().
4 As a reviewer correctly points out, there are sporadic exceptions to trimoraic shortening involving the
/aw/ diphthong such as /raun.d͡ʒi/ ‘lounge’ and /maundo/ ‘mound’ from English.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
ZG formations
Input form
Word
ZG output form
ZG word
L
me
HL
ee.me
eye
H
kii
HL
ii.ki
key
LL
me.ʃi
HL
ʃii.me
rice
LH
go.han
HL
han.go
meal, rice
HL
tan.go
HL
gon.ta
tango
HH
too.kyoo
ron.don
HH
kyoo.too
don.ron
Tokyo
London
In these examples, the input forms vary from a monomoraic monosyllable (L) to a
disyllabic word consisting of two heavy syllables (HH). This variability in the input
contrasts with uniformity in the output, where only HL or HH structures are
permitted. For example, the input me (L) gives rise to ee.me (HL). More striking is
the fact that both HL and LH inputs yield HL outputs: go.han and tan.go turn into
han.go and gon.ta, respectively.5 All in all, ZG formation exhibits a strong tendency
towards HL and HH outputs and against LH outputs.
ZG is not isolated in exhibiting such a tendency. Baby words display a remarkable
preference for HL and HH rather than LH and other prosodic forms (Kubozono
). In (), inputs and outputs represent adult and baby forms, respectively.
()
Baby words
a. LL ! HL
ba.ba
! baa.ba, *ba.baa
‘grandma’
d͡ʒi.d͡ʒi
! d͡ʒii.d͡ʒi, *d͡ʒi.d͡ʒii
‘grandpa’
ku.t͡su
! kuk.ku
‘shoes’
da.ku
! dak.ko
‘to hold up’
ne.ru
! nen.ne
‘to sleep’
o.bu.u
! on.bu
‘to carry a baby piggyback’
b. LL ! HH
ha.u
! hai.hai
‘to crawl’
bu.bu
! buu.buu
‘car, pig’
The interesting asymmetry between HL and LH in the output is also observed in the
process of loanword truncation. Crucially, HL forms are perfectly acceptable in the
output, whereas LH forms are strictly prohibited (Ito ; Kubozono ).
()
Loanword truncations
a. HLX ! HL
roo.tee.ʃon
! roo.te
rotation
pan.fu.ret.to
! pan.fu
pamphlet
ʃin.po.d͡ʒi.u.mu
! ʃin.po
symposium
b. LHX! LL
ro.kee.ʃon
! ro.ke, *ro.kee
location
de.mon.su.to.ree.ʃon
! de.mo, *de.mon
demonstration
5 This output neutralization in prosodic structure results here from a special method of reversal that HL
inputs undergo, by which input mora strings are entirely reversed: /ta-n-go/ ! /go-n-ta/, */go.tan/.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

There are several other independent processes that display a bias towards HL and
HH, and against LH outputs in Japanese (see Kubozono for more evidence).
Rather than a prosodic form constraint directly banning LH sequences in word-
ﬁnal position (adopted in Kubozono et al. ), our proposal here is that the real
generalization can be found at a prosodic level higher than the syllable, namely, the
foot level. Given the standard assumption that Japanese has bimoraic foot structure
(see Poser for evidence), sequences of syllables are maximally parsed as either
(LL) or (H), with leftover light syllables remaining unparsed. Thus, the relevant
forms in question are parsed as in (), where (f ) and [ω ] demarcate feet and
prosodic words, respectively.
()
a.
[ω (f H ) (f H ) ]
b.
[ω (f H) L ]
c. *[ω L (f H) ]
Viewed in terms of footing, we see immediately what the problem is with (c): it
violates the constraint INITIALFOOT, which requires prosodic words to begin with a
foot left-aligned with the prosodic word (Ito and Mester : ).
()
INITIALFOOT (INITFT):6 A prosodic word begins with a foot.
This constraint is violated by prosodic words with an initial unfooted syllable, and
can be understood as an instance of a more general STRONGSTART requirement
(Selkirk : ).
It is satisﬁed in (a,b) but violated in (c), causing the HL~*LH asymmetry in
the patterns discussed above in ()–(). As we will see, INITIALFOOT, together with
other constraints, is also responsible for consonant gemination in loanwords.
..Accent structure
In the light of more recent work, (Tokyo) Japanese also exhibits a certain bias with
respect to accent structure. It permits two major accent patterns: accented and
unaccented (McCawley ; Kubozono ). Putting aside the unaccented pattern,
there is a striking tendency to put the accent on the third or fourth mora from the end
of the word if it is a noun (Martin : ). Seen conversely, accents on the
penultimate or ﬁnal mora of a word are avoided.
In the Yamato and Sino-Japanese lexicon, words with an accent on the antepen-
ultimate mora, such as i0not͡ʃi ‘life’, overwhelm those with an accent on the penulti-
mate or ﬁnal mora, such as koko0ro ‘heart’ or otoko0 ‘man’ (Kubozono ;
Kubozono et al. ). This is true of loanwords, as well, as shown by typical
examples as in (), where the accent is on the antepenultimate mora irrespective
of its location in the source words.
6 We present this and other related constraints in lieu of the cover constraint ‘Prosodic Form’ in our
earlier analysis (Kubozono et al. ).
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
source:
banána
potáto
cámera
currículum
Galápagos
loan:
ba0.na.na
po0.te.to
ka0.me.ra
ka.ri.kyu0.ra.mu
ga.ra.pa0.go.su
In accordance with classical metrical theory, antepenultimate accent can be under-
stood as the result of a bimoraic trochaic foot placed at the end of the word modulo
NONFINALITY, i.e. with an extrametrical ﬁnal syllable separating it from the end of the
word (e.g. [(ba0.na)na]. The relevant constraint is given in (), where ‘head foot’
denotes the foot carrying the antepenultimate accent.
()
NONFINALITY: The head foot (Ft0) is not ﬁnal in a prosodic word.
This constraint is clearly violable in Japanese, since many bimoraic native nouns
such as ne0ko ‘cat’ have accent on the penultimate mora, and this penultimate
pattern is by far the most common in bimoraic SJ nouns (e.g. e0ki ‘station’, to0syo
‘book’), as well as in bimoraic loanwords (e.g. ba0su, ‘bus’, pi0ru, ‘pill’, kya0bu ‘cab’).
In fact, we will see in section ..that it is convenient to have, besides the general
NONFINALITY constraint (), a separate version for non-minimal words larger than
a single foot.
In this context, it is worth considering the peculiar behavior of /ru/, /su/, and /fu/
(=[ɸu]) in Japanese phonology. In loanword adaptations, word-ﬁnal /CVru/, /CVsu/,
and /CVfu/ sequences behave in many ways as if they were a single heavy syllable.
One possibility, pursued in earlier work (Kubozono et al. ), is that the ﬁnal
(usually epenthetic) vowel hui is indeed extraprosodic here, so these sequences count
as heavy syllables: .CVr.hui, .CVs.hui, and .CVf.hui. The accentuation pattern of
words consisting of four moras shows that word-ﬁnal LL sequences of the form
CVru, CVsu, and CVfu pattern with word-ﬁnal H. While loanwords generally show a
remarkable bias towards the accented (vs. unaccented) pattern in Tokyo Japanese
(Sibata ; Kubozono ), they tend to be unaccented if they are four moras
long and end in a sequence of two light syllables (see also Ito and Mester ). Thus
LL-ﬁnal (a.me)(ri.ka) and (mon)(ba.sa) (place names) are unaccented, whereas
H-ﬁnal (ro0n)(don) ‘London’, (sa0i)(daa) ‘cider’, and (bu0.ru)(zon) ‘blouson’ are
accented. However, LL-ﬁnal cases with ru/su/fu are accented and behave as if they
were H-ﬁnal: (ko0n)(do.ru) ‘condor’, (i0n)(da.su) ‘the Indus River’, and (mo0.ro)(zo.
fu) ‘Morozoff ’ (Kubozono ; Giriko ). Here again, if ﬁnal /u/ after /rsf/ is
extraprosodic, these words are indeed H-ﬁnal: (ko0n)(dor.)<u>, (i0n)(das.)<u>,
(mo0.ro)(zof.)<u>, and their accented status would be expected. In this line of
analysis, monosyllabic loanwords like bell, bus, and rough ending in /ru, su, fu/ in
Japanese would be parsed as bimoraic feet consisting of a single H syllable (ber.)<u>,
(bas.)<u>, (raf.)<u>, rather than as the otherwise straightforward (LL) feet (be.ru),
(ba.su), (ra.fu). The extraprosodicity analysis might then also account for why
gemination does not occur in these examples, since the geminating candidate
would conceivably violate NOSUPERHEAVYSYLLABLE (*(bass.)<u>).

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

Although this unifying explanation is quite attractive, it is best implemented
within an analysis with abstract stages of the derivation. In our output-based analysis
couched in classical parallel OT (vs. Stratal OT, as in Kiparsky’s analysis of
Ancient Greek accent), there are several unresolved problems, in both analysis and
description.
Descriptively, the generalization that such ﬁnal /u/s are treated as extraprosodic
appears to be limited in scope, holding only for words of exactly two or four moras
(e.g. be0ru, ko0ndoru). For words of other lengths, the expected antepenultimate
accent arises, as following from bimoraic footing and NONFINALITY, as in (pa0ru)su
‘pulse’, (pi0ru)su ‘Pilsener’, kuri(su0ma)su ‘Christmas’, asupa(ra0ga)su ‘asparagus’,
(go0ru)fu ‘golf’, (d͡ʒi0ra)fu ‘giraffe’, pori(gu0ra)fu ‘polygraph’, oʃiro(gu0ra)fu, (pa0zu)
ru ‘puzzle’, (ke0to)ru ‘kettle’, or tore(a0do)ru ‘toreadór’. If the ﬁnal /u/ were extra-
prosodic here, we would incorrectly expect a penultimate mora accent in *pa(ru0s.)
<u> and *pi(ru0s.)<u>: NONFINALITY is not violated, due to the presence of the
extraprosodic ﬁnal /u/, so the predictions are different from ba0ree ‘ballet’ and pu0rin
‘pudding’, where *bare0e and *puri0n violate NONFINALITY. In μ-words such as
asupara0gasu ‘asparagus’ (or even longer words), extraprosodic ﬁnal /u/ wrongly
predicts either *asu(pa0ra)gas.<u> with pre-antepenultimate accent or *asupara
(ga0s.)<u> with penult accent, not the correct asupa(ra0ga)su with antepenult accent.
Even among μ-words of the forms /LLLL/ and /HLL/ ending in /‑ru/, which clearly
go against the general trend for LL-ﬁnal μ-words in being accented, there is also a
signiﬁcant number of unaccented words which have no accented variant (according
to the NHK accent dictionary), such as kaasoru ‘cursor’, t͡ʃanneru ‘channel’, or
teeburu ‘table’.
Analytically, the parsing of /CVrV/ as CVr.V violates the universal ONSET con-
straint, whereby /VCV/ is required to be parsed as V.CV, with the medial C as an
onset. This might arguably be circumvented by the ﬁnal V being extraprosodic, but
another more serious problem is the resulting surface syllable structure .CVr., .CVs.,
and .CVf., violating CODACOND (), which restricts codas to moraic nasals or the ﬁrst
parts of geminates. Since /r,s,f/ are singleton coda consonants, this would be the only
instance in the entire Japanese phonology where the otherwise unviolated CODACOND
would be violated in surface representations. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to
pursue the ramiﬁcations which such CODACOND violations in output forms would
entail, and we leave this interesting issue for future investigation.
.Gemination vs. non-gemination
Most previous studies assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that consonant gemin-
ation in Japanese loanwords is triggered exclusively by a force to preserve the coda
status of the consonant—or equivalently, the closed character of the syllable—in the
source words (see e.g. Kunihiro ; Ohye ; Ohso ; Lovins ; Kawagoe
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


; Tsuchida ; Katayama , ; Kitahara ; Shirai ; Kawagoe and
Arai ). For example, the English word hit is supposed to undergo coda gemin-
ation together with vowel epenthesis, hit ! [hitto], despite the fact that the
ungeminated form, [hito] ‘man’, is perfectly well-formed in the language. The crucial
difference between the two output candidates, [hitto] and [hito], is that the coda
consonant in the input is preserved as a coda in the former but not in the latter.
In this chapter we question the idea that this kind of prosodic faithfulness between
source word and loanword output is the sole factor responsible for gemination. In
addition, we claim, many cases of gemination in loanwords are instead due to output-
oriented optimization, driven by the imperative to achieve a better prosodic struc-
ture. There is of course no contradiction between these two factors, which jointly
account for the intricate gemination patterns found in the data. Our analysis starts by
tackling the mystery that consonant gemination is a highly productive process in
Japanese loanwords, while it creates a structure that is marked cross-linguistically.
That geminate consonants are more marked than their single counterparts can be
seen from the fact that all languages have single consonants but only some of them
permit geminate consonants (Maddieson ). Geminates are thus marked in the
classical sense that the existence of geminates implies the existence of singletons, but
not vice versa. This is stated as a general markedness constraint against geminate
consonants.7
()
NOGEMINATE (NOGEM): Geminate consonants are disallowed.
Theproductivity ofgeminationinJapaneseloanword phonology,ontheother hand,can
beillustratedbythefactthat itoccursinalmostall monosyllabicEnglishwordsendingin
a voiceless obstruent, such as toppu ‘top’, hitto ‘hit’, and bukku ‘book’. The ﬁrst question
that faces us is why gemination occurs so productively in loanword phonology.
As mentioned above, it cannot be attributed to a phonotactic constraint of the
recipient language. The ungeminated output form [hito], for example, is perfectly
well-formed in the language, where it means ‘man’. Similarly, there is nothing
inherently wrong with the form [buku].
Previous analyses have assumed, in one way or another, that consonant gemin-
ation in loanwords only occurs to preserve the coda consonant in the source words as
a coda in the output. We state here the constraint explicitly as in (), and illustrate in
tableau () the OT interaction with some of the constraints already discussed.
7 We have already seen the more speciﬁc NOGEM-VOIOBS constraint () at work in the native
phonology. We will see later that in addition to (), more speciﬁc constraints are needed that refer to
speciﬁc types of consonants, reﬂecting fundamental differences in geminability. Cf. also Kawahara’s ()
universal markedness hierarchy on geminates, where geminate markedness correlates with sonorancy:
*GG (glide) >> *LL (lateral) >> *NN (nasal) >> *OO (obstruent). A reviewer points out that a language
like Ponapean, with geminate sonorants but without geminate obstruents, might be a counterexample to
the proposed universal hierarchy.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

()
FAITHCODA: A consonant that is a coda in the source word is a coda in the output.
We will see in section ..that a more speciﬁc version that focuses on the word-
ﬁnal position is actually at play in the grammar of Japanese.
()
CODACOND
FAITHCODA
NOGEM
hit
☞
[(hi0t)to]
*
[(hi0to)]
*!
[(hi0t)]
*!
In [(hi0t)to], the coda t in the source word hit is faithfully preserved as a coda in the
output(as theﬁrsthalfofageminate),whileinthe ungeminated[(hi0to)]thesourcecoda
t is unfaithfully parsed as an onset. The fully faithful candidate [(hit)] does not violate
FAITHCODA, but without a ﬁnal epenthetic vowel, it has a fatal CODACOND violation.8
Another case of non-gemination that straightforwardly follows from the con-
straints already discussed is the fact that gemination does not occur after a tense
(long) vowel or diphthong. This is because gemination here creates violations of the
constraint against superheavy syllables in (), which is high-ranking in Japanese.
()
NOSUPERHEAVY CODACOND FAITHCODA NOGEM
a. mitt
☞(mit)to
*
/mɪt/
(mito)
*!
(mit)
*!
b. meat ☞(mii)to
*
/mi:t/
(miit)to *!
*
(miit)
*!
*
In (b), the winner mii.to violates FAITHCODA, but the alternative candidate miit.to
violates the even higher-ranking NOSUPERHEAVY.
In what follows, we demonstrate that the seemingly complex gemination and non-
gemination patterns, including those presented in the introduction, can be accounted
for by the interaction of several violable optimality-theoretic constraints, as improve-
ments of both markedness and faithfulness.
8 Instead of appealing to FAITHCODA, we might also consider the alternative possibility that the
constraint already discussed in connection with the general antepenultimate accent, namely, NONFINAL-
ITY(Ft0) () is responsible for the gemination. Substituting NONFINALITY(Ft0) for FAITHCODA in the tableau
(), we see that the winner [(hi0t)to] has the head foot (accented and bimoraic) in non-ﬁnal position, while
in the ungeminated [(hi0to)], the head foot does not have a buffer ﬁnal syllable. As we will see later, besides
the fact that the general NONFINALITY constraint () is ranked too low to fulﬁl this function, there are cases
of gemination that do not involve the head foot and need an account based on faithfulness.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


.Segmental conditions on gemination
In this section, we present the main generalizations regarding which segments are
more prone to gemination, and the constraints responsible for the difference. The
factors involved concern the major phonological type distinctions in voicing (..),
sonorancy (..), place (..), and manner (..). In order to not be side-
tracked by non-segmental factors, we consider only source words that are monosyl-
labic CVC, with simple (including null) onset and simple coda. Since Japanese does
not allow complex onsets or codas, other monosyllabic inputs like CCVC (drop),
CVCC (duct), or CCVCC (tract) emerge with multiple epenthetic vowels, affecting
the overall prosodic proﬁle. As we will see in section ., this in turn means that
some prosodic structure constraints enter the picture. For CVC inputs, however,
high-ranking CODACOND will mean that the two relevant outputs are disyllabic, either
the geminating CVC.CV or the non-geminating CV.CV. The former fulﬁls FAITH-
CODA but violates NOGEM, the latter violates FAITHCODA but fulﬁls NOGEM. Which of
these is the preferred outcome is determined by the segmental type of the input coda
consonant (henceforth marked as C).
..Voicing
The major generalization that has been noted in all previous work is that voiceless
stops are more prone to gemination than voiced ones. This is unsurprising, given that
the native phonology of Japanese allows gemination of voiceless obstruents /p, t, k/,
but not gemination of voiced obstruents /b, d, g/. As we saw in (), sa.ki ‘point, edge’
turns into sakki ‘a short time ago’ as the physical notion expands to a temporal one,
but tada ‘just’ underwent consonant devoicing as well when geminated for emphasis
in tatta, *tadda. This constraint on voiced geminates () (repeated from ()) is also
active in loanword phonology, where voiced stops are much less likely to undergo
gemination than their voiceless counterparts.
()
NOGEMINATE-VOICEDOBSTRUENT (NOGEM-VOIOBS): Voiced obstruent gemin-
ates are prohibited.
Given FAITHCODA (), gemination is expected whenever the source word contains a
coda, but previous work has shown that gemination is found most regularly only with
voiceless codas.
()
a. Voiceless stop gemination:
kyap.pu ‘cap’
bak.ku
‘back’
b. Voiced stop non-gemination:
kya.bu
‘cab’
ba.gu
‘(computer) bug’
We hadalreadyestablishedthatthegeneralNOGEM()isrankedbelowFAITHCODA ()
(see tableau ()), but the contrast in () shows that the more speciﬁc NOGEM-VOIOBS

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

() is ranked above FAITHCODA. The OT tableau with FAITHCODA sandwiched between
the two NOGEM-constraints shows the correct winning candidates being chosen.9
()
Voicing difference
NOGEM-VOIOBS
FAITHCODA
NOGEM
Voiceless C: rack
☞
(rak)ku
*
(ra0ku)
*!
Voiced C: ru g
☞
(ragu)
*
(rag)gu
*!
*
..Sonorancy
Sonorant consonants (nasals, liquids, and glides) also behave like voiced obstruents
in not geminating in this CVC-situation ().
()
Sonorant coda inputs: no gemination
a. ha0mu
*ham.mu
ham
b. e0nu10
*en.nu
the letter N
c. be0ru
*ber.ru
bell
We formulate the relevant constraint in (), and illustrate the point in ().
()
NOGEMINATE-SONORANT (NOGEM-SON): Sonorant geminates are prohibited.
()
NOGEM-SON
FAITHCODA
NOGEM
Sonorant C: ham
☞
(ha0.mu)
*
(ha0m.)mu
*!
*
Since sonorant consonants are also voiced, one might consider combining NOGEM-
VOIOBS and NOGEM-SON into one constraint, NOGEM-VOI. Although such a merged
constraint would be unproblematic for the simple CVC cases analysed so far, there are
good reasons to keep the voiced obstruent and the sonorant versions separate. First, the
two constraints, NOGEM-VOIOBS and NOGEM-SON, must be separate in the native phon-
ology,wherevoicedobstruentsandapproximants(therhotic/r/andtheglides/w/and/y/)
are not geminated, but nasals regularly are. We ﬁnd native items like tomma ‘silly’ (see
also footnote for other examples of geminated sonorants in the native vocabulary), but
the name Tom is ungeminated to0mu, and not *to0mmu. Second, as we will see in section
9 While voiceless ﬁnal obstruent virtually always geminate in CVC words, voiced obstruents mostly do
not, but the details depend on place of articulation, and there are some instances of gemination: heddo
‘head’, baggu ‘bag’ vs. bagu ‘bug’, nobbu~nobu ‘knob’. We return to this point in section ...
10 Coda /n/ usually appears as moraic nasal, e.g. paN ‘bread’, but can also appear with the epenthetic
vowel as in CNN ʃii enu enu. Crucially, it does not geminate (*ennu), except in borrowings from French
such as kannu ‘Cannes’ or ʒannu ‘Jeanne’, where the ﬁnal nasal is released.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


., voiced obstruents do geminate under certain prosodic conditions (dora0ggu ‘drug’,
*do0ragu, while sonorants do not (do0ramu ‘drum’, *dora0mmu). The cross-linguistic
facts point in the same direction: Taylor () showed in a typological survey that the
presence of a sonorant geminate in a language generally implies the presence of at least
one obstruent geminate, but not vice versa, and Kawahara et al. () provide several
arguments supporting the distinction betweenvoiced obstruents geminates and sonorant
geminates. In addition, there are processes turning sonorant geminates into obstruent
geminates, but no processesgoing in the other direction. Examplesare the occlusivization
of geminate approximants in Berber and Luganda. Finally, there are processes degemi-
nating only the most sonorant types of geminates: for example, in Sanskrit glides and
rhotics were degeminated, but not lateral, nasal, and obstruent geminates.
..Place of articulation
A closer survey of the gemination pattern reveals that place of articulation affects the
geminability of C. Kawagoe () (see also references cited there) notes that coda
stops in the input are almost invariably geminated if they are voiceless (except in
consonant clusters such as ask ! asuku and tact ! takuto). As () shows, this holds
for all places of articulation, labial, coronal, and dorsal, in fulﬁlment of FAITHCODA. But
among voiced stops, only the coronals geminate on a regular basis (e.g. paddo ‘pad’).
()
Labial
Coronal
Dorsal
Voiceless stop: /pp/  map.pu  ‘map’ /tt/   mat.to ‘mat’  /kk/ mak.ku‘mac’
Voiced stop:
/b/    pa.bu  ‘pub’
/dd/  pad.do ‘pad’
/g/
ma.gu‘mug’
Our own survey data show the distribution in ().
()
CVD
CVG
CVB
bad
Final /dgb/:
rag
cab
12%
88%
71%
29%
95%
5%
N=123
% Singleton
% Geminate
e.g.
Among the voiced obstruent stops, the gemination constraints therefore need to
distinguish between places of articulation, e.g. NOGEM-B >> NOGEM-G >> NOGEM-D.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

For our purposes, it is sufﬁcient to distinguish consonants with peripheral (labial and
dorsal) places of articulation from consonants with central (coronal) place, with the
resulting constraint ranking in (). An illustrative tableau appears in ().
()
NOGEMVOIOBS[BG] >> FAITHCODA >> NOGEMVOIOBS[D]
()
NOGEM-VOIOBS[BG]
FAITHCODA
NOGEM-VOIOBS[D]
pub ☞
pa.bu
*
pab.bu
*!
pad ☞
pad.do
*
pa.do
*!
mug ☞
ma.gu
*
mag.gu
*!
It is of some interest that the preference scale that emerges in ()—DD > GG > BB,
where > stands for ‘less marked than’—is at variance with the articulation-based scale
BB > DD > GG, which reﬂects the aerodynamics of voicing and is well supported by
typological data (see Hayes and Steriade : –, who even use this case as a textbook
example of a markedness ranking with a clear phonetic basis). Questions of detail aside,
the smaller the cavity behind the constriction, the more difﬁcult it is to maintain voicing
in a geminate stop (Ohala and Riordan ). However, in the Japanese loanword data,
two of three articulatory preference relations are reversed. There might be no incom-
patibilityhere, since the scale that isatwork intheloanword data isperhapsnot basedon
aerodynamic difﬁculty, but on duration. It stands in full agreement with the different
duration ratios determined by Homma () for geminate vs. singleton stops at the
three places of articulation: DD:D = ., GG:G = ., BB:B = ..11
..Manner of articulation
Finally, among the segments involving frication (), we ﬁnd non-gemination for the
segments in the highlighted box, the anterior fricatives—[sonorant,+continuant,
+anterior],12 i.e. f [ɸ], s, and z, even though we expect gemination given our
constraints (voicelessness and/or coronality).
11 It is still true, though, that even .is a ratio that should guarantee a robust contrast. Another factor
that might play a role is the fact that the epenthetic vowel inserted after /t,d/ in Japanese is not the default
/u/, but /o/ (in order to avoid the otherwise unavoidable allophonic change of /t,d/ to [ts, (d)z] before /u/):
ta0kuto ‘tact’, not *ta0kutsu. As epenthetic segments /u/ and /o/ are not fully equal—e.g. the so-called
‘perceptual illusion’ effects associated with /u/ for Japanese listeners (Dupoux et al. ) do not hold of /o/
(Monahan et al. ), i.e. in some sense /o/ is perceived more as a ‘normal’ vowel than /u/. One could
therefore speculate that gemination of /d/ before /o/ (he0ddo ‘head’ rather than he0do) might serve to
highlight the epenthetic character of /o/ here.
12 I.e. as deﬁned in Chomsky and Halle (: ): ‘sounds produced with an obstruction that is
located in front of the palate-alveolar region of the mouth’.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
[+continuant]
[–continuant]
[+anterior] f [ɸ]
ta.fu    ‘tough’
tts
ttʃ
nat.tsu ‘nuts’
s
ba.su    ‘bus’  
ddz
gud.dzu ‘goods’  
z
ba.zu    ‘buzz’
[−anterior] ʃʃ
raʃ.ʃu    ‘rush’
tat.tʃi  ‘touch’
hh
mah.ha   ‘Mach’
goh.ho    ‘Gough’
ddʒ
bad.dʒi  ‘badge’
We subsume the voiced fricative /z/ under the constraint banning gemination of
voiced stops (), which we now restate in ().
()
NOGEM-VOIOBS[BGZ]: Gemination of voiced obstruents (peripheral or continu-
ant) is prohibited.
The complication in the statement of () stems from the fact that /d/ needs to be
excluded. This is perhaps an artiﬁce—the ultimate analysis might involve a general
constraint against geminating voiced obstruents, as in () above, interacting with a
constraint exempting /d/ from this ban, as discussed at the end of the previous
section. The remaining segments in (), the voiceless anterior fricatives, require a
gemination constraint () of their own. An illustrative tableau appears in ().
()
NOGEM-VOICELESSANTERIORFRICATIVE/_]WD (NOGEM-ANTFRIC/_]WD): Gemin-
ation of voiceless anterior fricatives (/s/, /f/) that are ﬁnal in the source word
is prohibited.13
()
NOGEM-ANTFRIC/_]Wd
FAITHCODA NOGEM
tough
☞
ta.fu
*
taf.fu
*!
bus
☞
ba.su
*
bas.su
*!
rush
☞
raʃ.ʃu
*
ra.ʃu
*!
Mach
☞
mah.ha
*
ma.ha
*!
The NOGEM-ANTFRIC/_]Wd constraint () is different from the other NOGEM con-
straints in that it is positionally restricted to word-ﬁnal position (e.g. re0su ‘less’, ba0su
‘bus’, ha0pinesu ‘happiness’, o0fu ‘off ’, ta0fu ‘tough’, gu0rafu ‘graph’, ka0adifu ‘Car-
diff ’). Medially, /s/ and /f/ occur geminated in certain prosodically motivated
13 In Kubozono et al. (), this case was analysed as extraprosodicity of the ﬁnal epenthetic vowel; see
section ...

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

conﬁgurations (e.g. ri0ssun ‘listen’, e0ssee, ‘essay’, ha0ssuru ‘hustle’, massa0ad͡ʒi ‘massage’,
ba0ffaa ‘buffer’, ʃa0ffuru ‘shufﬂe’) to be discussed in section .. This is also the reason
for not including /z/ in (): the avoidance of gemination in this case is not limited
to word-ﬁnal position but holds across the word (e.g. pa0zuru ‘puzzle’ and no0zuru
‘nozzle’, not *pa0zzuru, *no0zzuru), requiring a more general constraint, as in ().
Recent work has raised the possibility that () is grounded in perceptual
facts. Matsui (: ) presents experimental evidence showing that word-ﬁnal
[anterior] /ʃu/ and [+ anterior] /su/ are perceived in different ways by Japanese
listeners. In the case of the (geminating) /ʃu/, a formant transition is observed
between /ʃ/ and /u/, serving as a perceptual cue to gemination by marking the end
of frication. In the case of the (non-geminating) /su/, no such formant transition is
observed.
Summarizing so far, the ﬁve different gemination constraints are ranked with
respect to FAITHCODA in the way depicted in (). In the following sections, we show
that more speciﬁc versions of FAITHCODA () and NONFINALITY () are needed, and
that INITIALFOOT () plays a crucial role in explaining cases of gemination different
from those seen so far. Since NOGEM-VOIOBS-D and the general NOGEM are both
ranked at the bottom of the hierarchy, we will henceforth regard the case of /d/ as
being adequately included in the general constraint.
()
NoGem-VoiObs-bgz
NoGem-Son
NoGem-AntFric-fs/_]Wd
FaithCoda
{NoGem-VoiObs-d, NoGem}
.Prosodic conditions on gemination
..Prosodic faithfulness I: word-ﬁnal vs. word-internal codas
In the preceding section, we considered only monosyllabic CVC inputs, in order to
focus on the difference in geminability between segment types (voicing, place, and
manner). We found gemination of C with /p, t, t͡s, t͡ʃ, k/ (voiceless stops), /ʃ, h/ (non-
anterior fricatives), and /d, d͡z, d͡ʒ/ (voiced coronal stops). No gemination in
C position was found with /b, g, z/ (peripheral voiced stops and voiced fricative),
/s, f/ (voiceless anterior fricatives), and /m, n, r/ (sonorants). For CVC-inputs, there
is only one coda, which is also the word-ﬁnal coda.
In polysyllabic words, we ﬁnd a fundamental distinction between two different
kinds of coda positions: word-ﬁnal codas are geminated, but not word-internal
codas. This is illustrated in (), where we ﬁnd word-ﬁnal codas geminated whatever
the length of the word, but word-internal codas ungeminated.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
Word-ﬁnal coda: geminated
Word-internal coda: ungeminated
p
kya0p.pu
cap
kya.pu.ten
captain
a0p.pu
up
o.pu.ʃon
option
go.ʃi0p.pu
gossip
kya.pu.ʃon
caption
k
do0k.ku
dock
do0.ku.taa
doctor
pik.ku
pick
pi0.ku.nik.ku
picnic
kuraʃi0k.ku
classic
se0.ku.ʃon
section
t
a0t.to
at, @
a0.to.ra.su
atlas
ba.ge0t.to
baguette
ba.to.raa
butler
ma0a.ket.to
market
ri0.to.ma.su
litmus
d
kyu0u.pid.do
cupid
ﬁ.do.raa
ﬁddler
wa0n.ted.do
wanted
me0.do.ree
medley
ba0d.do
bad
ba.do.mi0n.ton
badminton
ʃ
haʃ.ʃu
hash
a0.ʃu.ree
Ashley
h[ç]
dii.to.rih.hi
Dietrich
ri.hi.taa
Richter
t͡s
nat.t͡su
nuts
na.t͡su.me.gu
nutmeg
This means that the FAITHCODA constraint () appealed to so far is too sweeping,
and what we saw at work in section .was in fact a more restricted version of
prosodic faithfulness targeting only word-ﬁnal codas, as in ().
()
FAITHCODA/_]WD: If a consonant in the input source word is a coda in word-
ﬁnal position, its correspondent in the loan output is also a coda.
Tableau () shows that, different from FAITHCODA/_]WD, the general FAITHCODA
constraint ranks below general NOGEM and cannot command its violation.
()
FAITHCODA/_]WD
NOGEM
FAITHCODA
dock
☞
dok.ku
*
do.ku
*!
*
doctor
☞
do.ku.taa
*
dok.ku.taa
*!
cupid
☞
kyuu.pid.do
*
kyuu.pi.do.
*!
*
butler
☞
.ba.to.raa.
*
.bat.to.raa
*!
This prosodic faithfulness analysis singling out the word-ﬁnal coda received further
support in work by Kubozono et al. (), who not only replicate the ﬁnal/medial
coda contrast in () with nonce words, but show in addition that what Japanese
listeners are sensitive to is not position per se, but phonetic differences in the English

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

source words relating to duration and pitch that are associated with word-ﬁnal vs.
word-medial position. One way of interpreting this is to take the constraint in () to
be sensitive to signiﬁcant phonetic detail.
..Prosodic markedness I: NONFINALITY
We had seen in section .that three types of consonants do not geminate word-
ﬁnally for CVC inputs: /b,g,z/ (NOGEM-VOIOBS[BGZ]), /r,m,n/ (NOGEM-SON), and /s,f/
(NOGEM-ANTFRIC[SF]). It comes as a surprise, then, that word-ﬁnal /b,g,z/ (a–c)
usually do geminate when the source syllable is CCVC, with a complex onset. /d/ also
geminates (bureddo ‘bread’, etc.) here, which comes as no surprise since it also
geminates in CVC, just like /p,t,k,ʃ,h/ (suto0ppu ‘stop’, fura0tto ‘ﬂat’, buro0kku
‘block’, fureʃʃu ‘fresh’, buro0hho ‘Bloch’ (name of German philosopher)).
()
a.
ra0gu
rug
dora0ggu
drug
ra0gu
lag
fura0ggu
ﬂag
ro0gu
log
furo0ggu
frog
ta0gu
tag
suna0ggu
snag
b. no0bu
knob
suno0bbu
snob
ta0bu
tab
suta0bbu
stab
ra0bu
rub
gura0bbu
grab
ri0bu
rib
kuri0bbu
crib
c.
ri0zu
Liz
furi0zzu
frizz
The pattern here is not exceptionless—there are cases of non-gemination of /b,g/ in
CCVC, such as su0ragu ‘slag’ and ku0rabu ‘club’—but the majority pattern to be
captured is clearly gemination, as in suno0bbu ‘snob’ and furo0ggu ‘frog’ (see () for
summary statistics). Even for /b/, the most gemination-averse (only % gemination
in CVC), we ﬁnd .% gemination in CCVC.
()
CVD
CVG
CVB
CCVD
CCVG
CCVB
bad
rag
cab
N=185
e.g. glad
brag
grab
% Singleton
% Geminate
e.g.
100%
0%
76%
24%
37.5%
62.5%
12%
88%
71%
29%
95%
5%
Final /dgb/:
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


One of the reasons, we claim, is that the avoidance of a word-ﬁnal head foot is much
stronger in non-minimal words than in strictly minimal words (i.e. consisting of
exactly one foot). We acknowledge this by stating a separate and higher-ranking
constraint NONFINALITYXFT0 for non-minimal words.14
()
NONFINALITY-XFT0 (NONFIN-XFT0): The head foot (Ft0) is not ﬁnal in a non-minimal
prosodic word.
The general NONFINALITY constraint given earlier in () covering all words, including
minimal ones, ranks rather low, subordinate even to the general NOGEM constraint,
and plays little role in the analysis. Effects of NONFINALITY-XFT0 are shown in ().
()
(po0te)to
*po(te0to)
potato
(te0re)bi
*te(re0bi)
television
Tableau () shows the crucial interaction (epenthetic vowels are marked by capit-
alization): NONFIN-XFT0 dominates NOGEM-VOIOBS and commands its violation in
fu(ro0g)gu (c), which is superior to *fu(ro0gu) (e). The minimal word (ro0gu),
however, violates only bottom-ranked general NONFIN, hence no violation of NOGEM-
VOIOBS is called for, and ro0gu (a) emerges as the winner. FAITHCODA/_]WD, also ranked
below NOGEM-VOIOBS, is also unable to demand gemination.
()
*
*
b.
(ro9g)gU
*!
*
*
*
d.
fU(ro9gU)
*!
*
*
NonFin-XFt9
NoGem
NonFin
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NoGem-VoiObs
log
a.
(ro9gU)
☞
frog
c.
fU(ro9g)gU
☞
A second difference between CVC-inputs and CCVC-inputs is that the latter receive
an epenthetic vowel between the ﬁrst two consonants (frog ! furo0ggu). An alter-
native output (fU0ro)gU (see (j)) shows retraction of the head foot, and hence the
accent, to the antepenult with its epenthetic /u/. However, this option runs foul of
HEADDEP () (after Alderete ), also outranking NOGEM-VOIOBS.
()
HEADDEP: Segments in a prosodic head in the output have correspondents in
the input.
14 It is conceivable that the effects of NONFIN-XFT0 can be obtained by the combined action of general
NONFIN together with other constraints, but we leave this issue for future exploration.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

The constraint is violated when an epenthetic vowel carries the accent. Word-ﬁnal
codas /r,m,n/ (subject to NOGEM-SON), and /s,f/ (subject to NOGEM-ANTFRIC) con-
tinue to be singletons in comparable forms ().15
()
NOGEM-SON
ra0mu
rum
do0ramu
drum
su0ramu
slum, slam
pi0ru
pill
su0riru
thrill
gu0riru
grill
NOGEM-ANTFRIC
ra0fu
rough
gu0rafu
graph
ku0rifu
cliff
ba0su
bus
pu0rasu
plus
bu0rasu
brass
These non-geminating cases show that HEADDEP ranks below the two high-ranking
NOGEM constraints but above NOGEM-VOIOBS, as in ().
()
lamb
a.
(ra9mU)
b.
(ra9m)mU
gram
c.
(gU9ra)mU
d.
gU(ra9m)mU
e.
gU(ra9mU)
plus
f.
(pU9ra)sU
g.
pU(ra9s)sU
h.
pU(ra9sU)
frog
i.
fU(ro9g)gU
j.
(fU9ro)gU
k.
fU(ro9gU)
*
NoGem-VoiObs
*
*
*!
HeadDep
*!
*!
NoGem-Son
*
*
*
*
NoGem
*
*
*
*
*
*
FaithCoda/_]Wd
*
*!
*!
*!
NonFin-XFt9
*!
NoGem-AntFriC/_]Wd
☞
☞
☞
☞
Taking fu(ro0g)gu (i) as an example, it is better to violate NOGEM-VOIOBS than to
violate HEADDEP, but gu0ramu (c) shows that for NOGEM-SON, the opposite holds.16
15 The frequent word suta0ffu ‘staff, stuff ’ is an isolated exception.
16 Another candidate which fulﬁls HEADDEP is the unaccented (gura)mu. It loses to (gu0ra)mu because
WORDACCENT, which demands an accent, dominates HEADDEP. A different outcome results with an input
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


Turning next to complex word-ﬁnal codas, we ﬁnd no gemination, neither of the
ﬁrst nor of the second consonant.
()
/lt/
ka0ruto
cult
/sk/
ma0suku
mask
/lt͡s/17
he0rut͡su
Hertz (G)
/sp/
wa0supu
wasp
/lp/
he0rupu
help
/st/
kya0suto
Cast
/lb/
barubu
bulb
/kt/
da0kuto
Duct
/lk/
mi0ruku
milk
/pt/
a0puto
Apt
Such CVCC inputs have (LL)L output proﬁles (CVCU)CU, with two epenthetic vowels
(after each coda C).18 It is revealing to compare the adaptation of inputs with complex
codas such as bulb, with that of inputs with complex onsets such as snob (d).
()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
bulb
a.
(ba9rU)bU
*
b.
ba(rU9b)bU
*!
*
*
c.
ba(rU9bU)
*!
*
*
snob
d.
sU(no9b)bU
*
*
e.
(sU9no)bU
*!
*
f.
sU(no9bU)
*!
*
☞
☞
The crucial difference here is the location of the epenthetic vowel, which is avoided as
bearer of the antepenultimate mora accent, a HEADDEP effect (). In the complex
coda case, the penultimate and the ﬁnal mora have epenthetic vowels, so the accent can
fall on the antepenult without violating HEADDEP or NONFIN, resulting in (ba0rU)bU)
(a). But in the complex onset case, the antepenultimate and the ﬁnal mora are
epenthetic, so a parallel assignment of accent in *(sU0no)bU) (d) violates HEADDEP,
like skull, which turns into su̥(ka0ru). Here a constraint barring accent on voiceless vowels prevents
*(su̥0ka)ru, and high-ranking NOGEM-SON, which dominates NONFIN, prefers su̥(ka0ru) to *su̥(ka0r)ru.
NOGEM-ANTFRIC also dominates NONFIN, resulting in spiff (up) ! su̥(pi0fu), but this ranking seems to be
variable, like some of the rankings in our analysis, and su̥(pi0f)fu is also found.
17 /t͡s/ is interpreted as the allophone [t͡s] of /t/ occurring before /u/. German coda /r/ is rendered as /ɾ/,
not as vowel length, as in Berlin ! beruri0n and Merkel ! me0rukeru.
18 Coda clusters of the form /rC/ and /NC/ make heavy syllables: /r/ becomes vocalic (e.g. ba0aku ‘bark’),
and nasals become moraic nasal codas (e.g. ba0nku ‘bank’ or ra0mpu ‘lamp’). Both result in the prosodic
proﬁle [(H0)L]. There is one other type of coda cluster, /ks, ps/, which behaves as if the ﬁnal /s/ is syllabic.
We take these cases up in section ...

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

and accenting the non-epenthetic penultimate vowel, as in *sU(no0bU) (f), violates
NONFIN. This leaves sU(no0b)bU (e), where gemination has the effect of moving the
accent foot away from the end of the word. This geminating candidate also fulﬁls prosodic
faithfulness (to the word-ﬁnal coda), but the corresponding constraint FAITHCODA/_]WD is
ranked too low to be able to overcome the objections of NOGEM-VOIOBS by itself.
Finally, we compare duct and pocket, where the vowel between /k/ and /t/ is
epenthetic in the former but underlying in the latter. As background, we ﬁrst discuss
a third example without any epenthesis, potato. Here the faithful candidate (po0te)to
(a) violates none of the constraints under discussion and is not defeatable by some
candidate with gemination, in particular not by *pote0tto (c), which shows pointless
gemination of a consonant which is an onset in the input, not a word-ﬁnal coda.
()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
potato
a.
(po9te)to
b.
(po9t)(teto)
*!
c.
po(te9t)to
*!
d.
po(te9to)
*!
duct
e.
(da9kU)tO
*
f.
(da9k)(kUtO)
*
*!
g.
da(kU9t)tO
*!
*
h.
da(kU9tO)
*!
*
*
pocket
i.
po(ke9t)tO
*
j.
(po9k)(ketO)
*!
*
k.
(po9ke)tO
*!
l.
po(ke9tO)
*!
*
*
☞
☞
☞
For the input duct, the winning candidate (da0kU)tO (e) violates FAITHCODA/_]WD,
but its main competitor, da(kU0t)tO (g), with a faithfully geminated word-ﬁnal
coda, suffers from a fatal HEADDEP violation. The outcome is different when the
second and third consonant are separated by an underlying vowel, as in pocket: here
the candidate faithfully geminating the word-ﬁnal consonant, poke0tto (i), has an
underlying vowel in its accented penultimate syllable, which does not violate HEAD-
DEP and avoids a violation of NONFIN-XFT.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


..Prosodic markedness II: INITIALFOOT
So far, we have only looked at word-ﬁnal gemination, triggered by both faithfulness
(FAITHCODA/_)WD) and markedness (NONFIN-XFT0). In this section we turn to word-
internal gemination, which comes in several varieties. On the one hand, there are
cases of gemination which can only be attributed to orthography,19 being triggered by
doubled consonants, such as hi0ttaito ‘Hittite’, kappado0kia ‘Cappadocia’, or buryu0s-
seru ‘Brussels’. Orthographic gemination can also affect consonants which otherwise
avoid gemination, such as the sonorants in d͡ʒire0mma ‘dilemma’, kaperri0ini ‘capel-
lini’, or berri0ini ‘Bellini’.20 There are also cases of gemination which are morpheme-
ﬁnal and not word-ﬁnal, such as kya0ppu+resu ‘cap+less’, attatt͡ʃi+me0nto ‘attach-
ment’, or kurokku+wa0izu ‘clockwise’ (Lovins : ). These can be understood as
being due to analogy with their bases, where the consonants in question are in fact
word-ﬁnal, and can be captured by means of Output–Output constraints. What
demands our attention here is a third kind of word-internal gemination, which has
a deﬁnite prosodic base: word-internal gemination can be triggered by another
prosodic markedness constraint, INITIALFOOT. In section ..we saw various effects
of the INITIALFOOT constraint () in reversing language games, baby talk, and
loanword truncations.
()
(=()) INITIALFOOT (INITFT): A prosodic word begins with a foot.
INITIALFOOT is violated by word-initial LH sequences because the initial L is proso-
dically trapped and remains unfooted, since the following H is footed on its own as a
bimoraic foot [L(H)…]. This is the constraint responsible for word-internal gemin-
ation in cases such as ku0kkii, *ku0kii ‘cookie’ or ha0ppii, *ha0pii ‘happy’, illustrated
ﬁrst with a simple minimal tableau below.
()
INITIALFOOT NOGEM
cookie
☞a.
(ku0k)(kii)
*
b.
ku0(kii)
*!
Gemination creates the initially footed (H)(H) structure, while non-gemination leads
to an LH output that violates INITIALFOOT. This is a case of prosodic markedness at
work rather than prosodic faithfulness (FAITHCODA), since there are no codas in the
source words cookie and happy. Gemination in words with medial intervocalic
voiceless obstruents like cookie is the majority pattern that needs to be captured by
19 See Smith () for other cases of orthographic inﬂuence on loanwords.
20 The last two are loans from Italian, where faithfulness to geminates in the source word enters as an
additional factor (Tanaka ). Morimoto () has shown that even in this vocabulary the prosodic
structure of Japanese plays a decisive role in determining gemination and non-gemination.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

our analysis. As Kawagoe (: ) points out, there is also a minority pattern
represented by words like puppy!pa0pii. This variation can be captured by assuming
that this group of words is marked for a variant ranking with NOGEM >>
INITIALFOOT.
Further conﬁrmation of the effect of INITIALFOOT can be found in the contrasts
between derivationally related words in (), where the initial trapping effect,
and hence gemination, is found only in one case. Gemination in happy-type words
can in general not be attributed to spelling, since double consonants in orthography
often do not geminate (e.g. happiness) and orthographic singletons (e.g. cookie) do
geminate.
()
Geminated
Not geminated
happy (ha0p)(pii)
*ha0(pii)
happiness
(ha0pi)(nesu)
*(ha0p)pi(nesu)
happen (ha0p)(pun)
*ha0(pun)
happening
(hapu)(ni0n)gu *(hap)pu(ni0n)gu
listen
(ri0s)(sun)
*ri0(sun)
listener
(ri0su)(naa)
*(ri0s)su(naa)
A tableau for contrasts of this type appears in () (we henceforth do not mark
epenthetic vowels with capitalization, since they are easily identiﬁable, and not the
focus of discussion).
()
INITIALFOOT
NOGEM
happen
☞a.
(ha0p)(pun)
*
b.
ha0(pun)
*!
happening
☞c.
(ha0pu)(nin)gu
d.
(ha0p)pu(nin)gu
*!
The geminated (d) fulﬁls INITIALFOOT with its initial H (ha0p), but so does
the ungeminated (c), where the initial syllable forms a bimoraic foot with
the next syllable (ha0pu), and is the winner because it does not have a NOGEM
violation.
We return here to an observation brieﬂy made in section ... The constraint
NOGEM-ANTFRIC/_]WD () against geminate /s/ and /f/ only holds strictly in
word-ﬁnal position. Candidate (re0su) (a) wins because (re0s)su (b), which
observes coda faithfulness, violates NOGEM-ANTFRIC/_]WD. But once removed
from the end of the word, /s/ is free to geminate to fulﬁl INITIALFOOT, as in (re0s)
(sun) (c). A parallel case with /f/ is pa0fu ‘puff ’ vs. ba0ffaa ‘buffer’. When the end
of the word is not involved and neither word-ﬁnal coda faithfulness nor the ban
against word-ﬁnal geminate /s,f/ is at play, the gemination patterns are regulated by
the prosodic markedness constraint INITIALFOOT, as shown by the contrast between
ri0ssun (e) and ri0sunaa (h).
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
NoGem
InitialFoot
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NoGem-AntFric/_]Wd
less
a.
(re9su) 
*
b.
(re9s)su
*!
*
lesson
c.
(re9s)(sun)
*
d.
re9(sun)
*!
listen
e.
(ri9s)(sun)
*
f.
ri9(sun)
*!
listener
g.
(ri9su)(naa) 
h.
(ri9s)su(na9a)
*!
☞
☞
☞
☞
The length of the word by itself is not the responsible factor for gemination, and we
ﬁnd gemination in longer LH-initial words, as in ().
()
massage
*ma(saa)d͡ʒi
(mas)(saa)d͡ʒi
passenger
*pa(sen)(d͡ʒaa)
(pas)(sen)(d͡ʒaa)
Buckingham
*ba(kin)(gamu)
(bak)(kin)(gamu)
cf.
pessimist
(peʃi)(mi0su)to
*(peʃ)ʃi(mi0su)to
Consonants obeying the higher-ranked NOGEM constraints (NOGEM-VOIOBS,
NOGEM-SON) do not geminate in this [L(H)] conﬁguration, as expected ().
()
cover
ka0baa
*ka0bbaa
cf.
copper
ko0ppaa
*ko0paa
cubby
ka0bii
*ka0bbii
happy
ha0ppii
*ha0pii
buggy
ba0gii
*ba0ggii
lucky
ra0kkii
*ra0kii
bazaar
ba0zaa
*ba0zzaa
essay
e0ssee
*e0see
bunny
ba0nii
*ba0nnii
kitchen
ki0tt͡ʃin
*ki0t͡ʃin
berry
be0rii
*be0rrii
fashion
fa0ʃʃon
*fa0son
What comes as a surprise is the fact that the otherwise very gemination-prone /t, d/
remain single in this intervocalic conﬁguration ().
()
kitty
ki0tii
*ki0ttii
cf.
kit
ki0tto
city
ʃi0tii
*ʃi0ttii
butter
ba0taa
*ba0ttaa
bitter
bi0taa
*bi0ttaa

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

buddy
ba0dii
*ba0ddii
cf.
bad
ba0ddo
body
bo0dii
*bo0ddii
Note, however, that this is exactly the context where /t, d/ are ﬂapped (or tapped) in
American (also Australian and New Zealand) English. Flaps are extra short segments,
very close to the pronunciation of /ɾ/ in Japanese, which also does not geminate
(apart from some emphasized or emotional words such as hirroi ‘very big’, as Donna
Erickson points out, as well as some loanwords from Italian, see earlier in this
section). We take the failure of /t,d/ to geminate in () to be a faithfulness effect
preserving the extra shortness of the consonant in the input.21
()
FAITHFLAP-LENGTH: Flaps in the source word correspond to singletons in the output.
Tableau () shows the interaction between FAITHFLAP and INITIALFOOT.
()
FAITHFLAP INITIALFOOT
city
☞a.
ʃi0(tii)
*
b.
(ʃi0t)(tii)
*!
body
☞c.
bo0(dii)
*
d.
(bo0d)(dii) *!
A summary tableau with all constraints discussed so far appears in ().
()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
InitialFoot
NoGem-AntFric/_]Wd
FaithFlap
bus
a.
(ba9su)
*
b.
(ba9s)su
*!
*
essay
c.
(e9s)(see)
*
d. e9(see)
*!
lucky
e.
(ra9k)(kii)
*
f.
ra9(kii)
*!
☞
☞
☞
21 A reviewer suggests that since word-medial ﬂaps as in ‘city’ and ‘body’ are non-geminating in
Japanese loanwords, word-ﬁnal /t/ and /d/ geminate (as in [kyatto] ‘cat’ and [heddo] ‘head) so as to
avoid being interpreted as ﬂaps (see also discussion in footnote ).
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
buggy
g.
ba9(gii)
*
h. (ba9g)(gii)
*!
*
bunny
i.
ba9(nii)
*
j.
(ba9n)(nii)
*!
*
city
k.
∫i9(tii)
*
l.
(∫i9t)(tii)
*!
*
kit
n. (ki9t)to 
*
m. (ki9to)
*!
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
InitialFoot
NoGem-AntFric/_]Wd
FaithFlap
☞
☞
☞
☞
The derivation bus ! (ba0su) (a) vs. essay ! (e0s)(see) (c) shows that NOGEM-
ANTFRIC prevents prosodic faithfulness from commanding gemination of word-ﬁnal
/s/, but has nothing to say about the gemination of word-medial /s/ to fulﬁl INITIAL-
FOOT. lucky ! (ra0k)(kii). (e) shows that INITIALFOOT dominates the general
antigemination constraint NOGEM, but since it is itself dominated by the more
speciﬁc NOGEM-VOIOBS and NOGEM-SON, we ﬁnd no gemination, and an initially
trapped syllable, in buggy ! ba0(gii) (g) and bunny ! ba0(nii) (i). In city !
ʃi0(tii) (k), FAITHFLAP prevents turning the ﬂapped /t/ of the American English
source word into a geminate to fulﬁl INITIALFOOT, but in kit ! (ki0t)to (m) prosodic
faithfulness demands gemination of the word-ﬁnal stop to preserve its coda status,
violating bottom-ranked NOGEM.
Even when they fulﬁl the segmental conditions on geminability, not all initially
trapped L syllables become H by gemination, due to other higher-ranking con-
straints. An example appears in tableau ().

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

()
NoGem
OCP-Gem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
InitialFoot
HeadDep
gossip
a.
go(∫i9p)pu
*
*
b.
(go9∫i)pu
*!
c.
(go9∫)(∫ipu)
*!
*
d.
(go∫)(∫i9p)pu *!
**
black
e.
bu(ra9k)ku
*
*
f.
(bu9ra)ku
*!
*
☞
☞
Here candidate (goʃ)(ʃi0p)pu (d), which fulﬁls both FAITHCODA/_]WD and INITI-
ALFOOT by geminating both /p/ and /ʃ/, loses against go(ʃi0p)pu (a), which
does not geminate /ʃ/ and violates INITIALFOOT. This is due to the force of dominant
OCP-GEM, which prohibits geminates in successive syllables (see Tsuchida
: –and Ito and Mester : –for the motivation for this kind
of constraint).
()
OCP-GEMINATE (OCP-GEM): Geminates in successive syllables are prohibited.
Candidates (b,c) manage to fulﬁl INITIALFOOT without violating OCP-GEM, but are
out because they violate FAITHCODA/_]WD, which dominates INITIALFOOT. The winner,
bu(ra0k)ku (e), with an initially trapped syllable but with accent on an underlying
vowel, is preferred to (bu0ra)ku (f), which begins with a footed syllable but has the
accent on an epenthetic vowel. This is due to the dominance of HEADDEP over
INITIALFOOT. Returning to examples discussed in (), OCP-GEM dominates FAITH-
CODA/_]WD and is responsible for the selection of (da0ku)to (a) over (da0k)(kut)to
(d), which has otherwise only two violations of low-ranking NOGEM.22 It
also dominates INITIALFOOT, which explains why po(ke0t)to (e) is preferred to
(pok)(ke0t)to (h).
22 Another serious competitor is *da0(kut)to, which retracts the accent from the epenthetic vowel
(avoiding a HEADDEP violation) and also faithfully geminates the word-ﬁnal coda. It is out because of a
constraint against epenthetic vowels in closed syllables, which is never violated in Japanese and dominates
FAITHCODA/_]WD.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
NoGem
OCP-Gem
FaithCoda/_]Wd    
InitialFoot
HeadDep
duct
a.
(da9ku)to
*
b.
da(ku9t)to
*!
*
c.
(da9k)(kuto)
*
*!
d.
(da9k)(kut)to *!
**
pocket
e.
po(ke9t)to
*
*
f.
(po9ke)to
*!
g.
(po9k)(keto)
*!
*
h.
(pok)(ke9t)to *!
**
☞
☞
..Prosodic faithfulness II: PROSODICINTEGRITY
The crucial factor that leads to word-internal gemination involves a light syllable
prosodically trapped in word-initial position (INITIALFOOT violation) in the conﬁgur-
ation [L(H)…]. For bisyllabic words, this conﬁguration arises when the initial open
syllable has a short vowel, and the second syllable is heavy (with a long vowel/
diphthong, or closed by a nasal consonant).
Because of the strict syllable structure conditions in Japanese—in particular,
NOCOMPLEX () and CODACOND ()—English H-syllables often become (multiple)
L-syllables with epenthesis (cf. the oft-cited disyllabic Christmas becoming the
ﬁve-syllable kurisu0masu). Less often mentioned in the loanword literature is
the reverse situation, where certain (stressless) English L-syllables are adapted
as H-syllables in Japanese, namely, (i) stressless word-ﬁnal /i/ (orthographic -y
or -ie), (ii) rhotacized schwa (orthographic -er),23 and (iii) the syllabic nasal [n̩],
which emerge as ii, aa, and Vɴ, respectively. We have already seen these cases
in ()–() as triggers, namely as H-syllables in second position triggering
INITIALFOOT violations. We list some other proﬁles to show the generality of this
mode of adaptation.
23 Stressed versions of rhotacized vowels are also rendered as /aa/, such as sa0abisu ‘service’ and
pa0asonaru ‘personal’.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

()
.Ci.
!
(.Cii.)
.Cr̩.
! (.Caa.)
.Cn̩. ! (.CVɴ.)
Winnie
wi0nii
mother
ma0zaa
button᷂
bo0tan
Sandy
sa0ndii
father
fa0azaa
mutton᷂
ma0ton
Mickie
mi0kkii
sister
ʃi0sutaa
captain᷂kya0puten
Henry
he0nrii
brother
bura0zaa
bacon᷂
be0ekon
Barbie
ba0abii
daughter
do0otaa
token᷂
to0okun
movie
mu0ubii
toaster
to0osutaa
aspen᷂
a0supen
dixie
di0kusii
manager
mane0ejaa
mitten᷂
mi0ton
calorie
ka0rorii
boxer
bo0kusaa
passion᷂
pa0ʃʃon
accessory
akuse0sarii
computer
kompyu0utaa
bakery
be0ekarii
printer
puri0ntaa
Both syllabic /r̩/ and /n̩/ are rendered as heavy syllables (hence also as feet), the
former by vocalization and the latter by inserting a full nuclear vowel before
the coda (moraic) nasal. Other syllabic consonants in English, namely, the lateral
/l̩/ and the labial nasal /m̩/, have regular epenthesis and become /ru/ and /mu/,
as in ().
()
phantom
fa0ntomu
sample
sa0mpuru
rhythm
ri0zumu
trouble
tora0buru
prism
puri0zumu
Google
gu0uguru
Of interest is the fact that these syllabic consonants (occurring with regular epen-
thesis) appear to be footed together with their onsets in the loanword, as shown
in (b).
()
source
!
loan
footing
example
a. .Cr̩.
!
(.Caa.)
(H)
daughter [tr̩]
(do0o)(taa)
.Cn̩.
!
(.CVɴ.)
bacon [kn̩]
(be0e)(kon)
b. .Cm̩.
!
(.CV.mu.)
(LL)
phantom [tm̩]
(fa0n)(tomu)
.Cl̩.
!
(.CV.ru.)
sample [pl̩]
(sa0m)(puru)
This can be interpreted as a preservation of prosodic cohesion: Since these coherent
units cannot remain tautosyllabic in Japanese, they at least continue to occupy the
same foot: sample [pl̩] ! (sa0m)(puru).24 More formally, we are dealing with
sequences of rising sonority XY that are maximal (i.e. Y is not followed by a segment
of even higher sonority, such as the /i/ in tree). Such sequences play a central role in
24 This is an output-oriented way of capturing some of what Kubozono et al. () conceived of as
extraprosodicity (e.g. of ﬁnal /ru/—see section ..).
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


syllabiﬁcation patterns as in Berber (Dell and Elmedlaoui ; Prince and
Smolensky ), and constitute the essence of ‘core syllable formation’ in previous
theories of syllabiﬁcation (e.g. Steriade ). We state the relevant prosodic
faithfulness constraint in ().
()
PROSODICINTEGRITY: If X and Y form a maximal sequence of rising sonority in
the input, they are parsed within the same word-internal prosodic unit
(syllable or foot) in the output.
This constraint ensures that syllabic consonants and their onsets are realized as
part of a bimoraic foot, either (H) or (LL). Recall that INITIALFOOT violations arise
in the conﬁguration [L(H)], leading to gemination. Given the non-initial foot
forced by PROSODICINTEGRITY, we now also expect the same INITIALFOOT violation
in [L(LL)]. This is exactly what happens, as in (), giving an overt cue to the
correctness of this kind of prosodic parse: there would otherwise be no motivation
for gemination in cases like hustle or muscle25—*(ha0su)ru and *(ma0su)ru
have otherwise perfect prosody, their only ﬂaw seems to be that they pull /s/ and
/r/ apart.
()
NOGEM
violation
PROSODICINTEGRITY
violation
INITIALFOOT
violation
hustle [sl̩]
(ha0s)(suru)
*(ha0su)ru
*ha0(suru)
muscle [sl̩]
(ma0s)(suru)
*(ma0su)ru
*ma0(suru)
wafﬂe [ﬂ̩]
(wa0f)(furu)
*(wa0fu)ru
*wa0(furu)
apple [pl̩]
(a0p)(puru)
*(a0pu)ru
*a0(puru)
tackle [kl̩]
(ta0k)(kuru)
*(ta0ku)ru
*ta0(kuru)
Beckham [km̩]
(be0k)(kamu)
*(be0ka)mu
*be0(kamu)
passim [sm̩]
(pa0s)(simu)
*(pa0si)mu
*pa0(simu)
Without making the ﬁrst syllable heavy through gemination, the alternative can-
didates violate either PROSODICINTEGRITY or INITIALFOOT. As shown in tableau
(), the geminated version emerges as the winner, with violations of low-ranking
NOGEM.
25 Not even orthographic motivation, a very weak factor at best: see () and the surrounding discussion.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
InitialFoot
ProsIntegrity
FaithFlap
apple 
a.
(a9p)(puru)
*
[pl]
b.
(a9pu)ru
*!
c.
a9(puru)
*!
d.
a(pu9ru)
*!
*
*
Beckam
[km]
e.
(be9k)(kamu)
*
f.
(be9ka)mu
*!
g.
be9(kamu)
*!
h.
be(ka9mu)
*!
*
*
hustle
[sl]
i.
(ha9s)(suru)
*
j.
(ha9su)ru
*!
k.
ha9(suru)
*!
l.
ha(su9ru)
*!
*
*
cf. best
[st]
m. (be9su)to
*
n.
(be9s)(suto)
*
*
o.
be9(suto)
*
*!
p.
be(su9to)
*!
*
*
*
☞
☞
☞
☞
Whereas hustle with input /.sl̩./ cannot be realized as *(ha0su)ru because /s/ and /r/
are not in the same foot (a PROSODICINTEGRITY violation), there is no such footing
requirement in best, where the sequence /st/ does not form a prosodic unit. The non-
geminating (be0su)to is therefore the winner, as we have already seen in detail above
in () and ().26 Similar cases are help ! (he0ru)pu and duct ! (da0ku)to, where
the ﬁnal CC cluster need not be in the same foot.
Ranked below INITIALFOOT, PROSODICINTEGRITY does not cause gemination when the
relevant segments are governed by constraints that we already know to be ranked higher
than INITIALFOOT. Relevant examples are given in (), and an illustrative tableau in ().
()
middle
(mi0do)ru
*(mi0d)(doru)
kettle
(ke0to)ru
*(ke0t)(toru)
rhythm
(ri0zu)mu
*(ri0z)(zumu)
26 An interesting contrasting pair of a different kind is apple vs. chapel. Presumably under the inﬂuence of
orthography, the ﬁrst is interpreted as having a syllabic consonant (/æpl̩/), but the second as having an
underlying vowel (/t͡ʃæpəl/), with non-syllabic /l/. Consequently, we ﬁnd apple ! (a0p)(puru) but chapel !
(t͡ʃa0pe)ru, where the difference in vowel quality is independent evidence for the difference in interpretation.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XFt9
InitialFoot
FaithFlap
ProsIntegrity
rhythm
a.
(ri9zu)mu
*
b.
ri9(zumu)
*!
c.
ri(zu9mu)
*!
*
*
d.
(ri9z)(zumu)
*!
*
kettle
e.
(ke9to)ru
*
f.
ke9(toru)
*!
g.
ke(to9ru)
*!
*
*
h.
(ke9t)(toru)
*!
*
☞
☞
The losing non-geminating candidates (b,f) show that INITIALFOOT outranks
PROSODICINTEGRITY, and the losing geminated candidates (d,h) that NOGEM-VOIOBS
and FAITHFLAP dominate PROSODICINTEGRITY, respectively.
Finally, we ﬁnd a gemination contrast involving word-ﬁnal obstruent coda clusters
with /s/ in (). Whereas sC]Wd (b) behaves like any other CC coda in ﬁnal
position (see (d)), we ﬁnd gemination in Cs]Wd (a) analogous to the ﬁnal syllabic
CC̩ (c) discussed above.
()
a. Cs]Wd
tax
[ks]
ta0kkusu
b. sC]Wd
task
ta0suku
mix
[ks]
mi0kkusu
desk
de0suku
dachs27 [ks]
da0kkusu
best
be0suto
lapse
[ps]
ra0ppusu
wasp
wa0supu
c. CC̩]Wd
hustle
[sl̩]
ha0ssuru
d. CC]Wd
pulse
pa0rusu
apple
[pl̩]
a0ppuru
help
he0rupu
buckle [kl̩]
ba0kkuru
duct
da0kuto
Most cases here involve orthographic <x> (fax ! fa0kkusu, Max ! ma0kkusu, six !
si0kkusu, sex ! se0kkusu), but the effect here cannot be attributed solely to spelling,
since gemination is regularly found only word-ﬁnally (cf. tax ! ta0kkusu vs. taxi !
ta0kuʃii, mix ! mi0kkusu vs. mixer ! mi0kisaa), and is also found in the few cases
where the orthography does not have <x>, such as dachs ! da0kkusu.
What might be the cause of these cases of gemination? The crucial observation here is
thataword-ﬁnalclustersuchas/ks/indachs(vs./sk/indesk)formsamaximalXYclusterof
rising sonority, and hence falls under PROSODICINTEGRITY. The explanation for gemination,
27 As in dachshund, a dog breed.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

then, follows along the same lines as in () and (). Tableau (), with contrasting
examples featuring Cs]Wd vs. sC]Wd clusters, illustrates how the analysis proceeds.
()
NoGem-VoiObs
HeadDep
NoGem-Son
NoGem
FaithCoda/_]Wd
NonFin-XDt9
InitialFoot
FaithFlap
ProsIntegrity
dachs [ks]
a.
(da9k)(kusu)
*
b.
(da9ku)su
*!
*!
c.
da9(kusu)
*!
desk [sk]
d.
(de9su)ku
e.
(de9s)(suku)
pils [ls]
f.
(pi9ru)su
g.
(pi9r)(rusu)
*!
muscle [sl]
h.
(ma9s)(suru)
*
i.
(ma9su)ru
*!
☞
☞
☞
☞
Comparing the relevant forms of the ks]Wd- and sk]Wd- endings, we see a PROSODIC-
INTEGRITY violation in *(da0ku)su (b) and an INITIALFOOT violation in *da0(kusu)
(c), hence geminating (da0k)(kusu) (a) emerges as the winner. The output
(de0su)ku (d), however, violates neither PROSODICINTEGRITY nor NOGEM. For
ls]Wd- and sl]Wd-endings, the winner (pi0ru)su (f) violates PROSODICINTEGRITY
applying to Cs]Wd but is still optimal because the geminating (pi0r)(rusu) (g)
violates higher-ranking NOGEM-SON. On the other hand, the geminating winner
(ma0s)(suru) (h) preserves PROSODICINTEGRITY and violates only bottom-ranked
NOGEM.
.Summary and conclusion
As a summary of the analysis, we ﬁrst assemble all constraints that play a role and
their ranking. In (), we reproduce the overall constraint-ranking diagram pro-
duced by OTWorkplace (OTW), a software suite developed by Alan Prince, Bruce
Tesar, and Naz Merchant that, in the words of its authors, ‘uses Excel as a platform
for interactive research with the analytical tools of modern rigorous OT’.28 In order
to bring out the structure of the system, faithfulness constraints have been marked by
28 OTWorkplace_X_, version of June . The program is open-source and distributed without
charge, downloadable from https://sites.google.com/ site/otworkplace/
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


ovals, and markedness constraints by rectangles. Among the markedness constraints,
the special group of segmental anti-gemination constraints have solid borders,
whereas the others—all prosodic well-formedness constraints—have broken borders.
()
Syll
Struc
Word
Accent
NoGem-
AntFric
[SF]/_]Wd
NoGem-
Son
NoAcc
On
VclssV
DepV
/_C]syll
OCP-
Gem
Faith
Flap
DepV
NonFin-
XFt9
HeadDep
NoGem-
VoiObs
[bgz]
FaithCoda
/_]WD
Initial
Foot
Prosodic
Integrity
NoGem
The core data that support these rankings and the analysis, as summarized by OTW
in its skeletal basis, appear in (), adapted to the notations of this chapter. The
essence of OT’s ranking logic is that in each winner–loser pair for a speciﬁc input,
each constraint favouring the loser must be dominated by some constraint favouring
the winner. Being a winner in OT means beating every competitor on the highest-
ranking constraint that distinguishes the two. This is most clearly brought out in the
comparative tableau format (Prince ). In each row representing one such
competition, W in a constraint column means that the constraint in question favours
the winner, ‘L’ that it favours the loser, and no mark that it favours neither. Thus in
the ﬁrst row, ‘W’ in the ﬁrst column means that the constraint WORDACC requiring
words to have accent favours the winner, (gu0ra)su, with accent on an epenthetic
vowel, whereas the ‘L’ in the HEADDEP column means that this constraint favours the

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

unaccented winner (gura)su. The fact that (gu0ra)su is preferred to unaccented
(gura)su supports the ranking WORDACC >> HEADDEP. Another interaction brieﬂy
discussed earlier is the preference of su̥(ka0ru) ‘skull’ over (su̥0ka)ru, which supports
the dominance of the constraint militating against accent on a voiceless vowel over
the NONFINALITY constraint.29 ‘SyllStruc’ is a cover constraint combining the three
constraints NOCOMPLEX (), CODACOND (), and NOSUPERHEAVY ().
()
OTW skeletal basis
Input
Winner
Loser
WordAccent
NoGem AntFric[sf]/_]Wd
DepV/_C]syll
OCPGem
NoGem-Son
NoAccOnVclssV
SyllStruc
FaithFlap-Length
NonFin
DepV
HeadDep
NoGem-VoiObs[bgz] 
FaithCoda /_]Wd
InitialFoot
ProsodicIntegrity
NoGem
glass
(gu9ra)su
(gura)su
W
L
spiff (up) su(pi9fu)
su(pi9f)fu
W
L
L
W
duct
(da9ku)to da9(kut)to
W
L
W
W
pocket
po(ke9t)to (pok)(ke9t)to
W
L
W
skull
su(ka9r)ru
su(ka9ru)
W
L
W
skull
su(ka9ru)
(su9ka)ru
W
L
L
drug
do(ra9g)gu (dra9gu)
W
L
L
W
L
bitter
bi9(taa)
(bi9t)taa)
W
L
W
class
(ku9ra)su
ku(ra9su)
W
L
W
drug
do(ra9g)gu (do9ra)gu
W L
W
L
L
Bob
(bo9bu)
(bo9b)bu
W
L
W
carat
ka(ra9t)to (ka9ra)to
W
L
L
kettle
(ke9to)ru
ke9(toru)
W
L
apple
(a9p)puru) (a9pu)ru
W
L
In conclusion, we would like to highlight three central results of this study. First, as
already argued by Kubozono et al. (), prosodic markedness plays an essential
role in the explanation of the gemination and non-gemination patterns in Japanese
loanwords. Signiﬁcant higher-level prosodic factors that are part of the native system
are at work and result in gemination. An example is INITIALFOOT, a constraint
demanding prosodic words to start out with a bimoraic foot, not with an unfooted
29 Alternatively, one could interpret the ‘accent shift’ visible here as a switch to iambic foot structure, or
even as a strictly phonetic phenomenon.
Consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords


syllable (see Ito and Mester ). This is seen in contrasts such as (ri0s)(sun) ‘listen’
(not *ri0(sun)) vs (ri0su)(naa) ‘listener’ (not *(ri0s)su(naa)).
Secondly, prosodic faithfulness to the source word also plays a central role.
Gemination is a way of preserving word-ﬁnal codahood in the English source
words of consonants geminable in Japanese. The necessity of coda faithfulness in
addition to prosodic markedness is clear from examples like the following. The
English word market exists in two variants, the ﬁrst with rule-based antepenult
mora accent: (maa)(ke0t)to, the second with faithful accent on the ﬁrst syllable:
(ma0a)(ket)to. The gemination of /t/ in the ﬁrst variant could be explained by
NONFINALITY[XFT0], which would be violated in (maa)(ke0to), with an accented
foot in ﬁnal position. But NONFINALITY[XFT0] does not explain gemination in
(ma0a)(ket)to, which must be due to faithfulness to the coda status of /t/ in English
market. There are many such doublets: kayákku~káyakku ‘kayak’, kecháppu~
kéchappu ‘ketchup’, goshíppu~góshippu ‘gossip’, pokétto~póketto ‘pocket’, etc.
Thirdly, there is no one single constraint against geminate consonants, but rather a
whole family of such constraints, ranked at different points within the constraint
hierarchy of Japanese grammar (see ()). Their interleaving with faithfulness con-
straints and other markedness constraints explains the details of the gemination
patterns and crucially requires a system of priority-ranked constraints.
Acknowledgements
The work reported in this chapter was supported by the NINJAL collaborative research project
‘Phonological characteristics of the Japanese lexicon’ and by UC Santa Cruz Faculty Research
grants. We are grateful for helpful comments from two anonymous reviewers, and would
especially like to thank Stuart Davis for his perceptive and careful advice.

Ito, Kubozono, and Mester

13
The relation between Lperception
and Lphonology in Japanese
loanwords
An analysis of geminates in loanwords from Italian
SHIN’ICHI TANAKA
.Introduction
..General background
In recent studies, the relation between speech perception and gemination in Japanese
has attracted serious attention (e.g. Fukui ; Otaka ), especially in the
phonological analyses of loanwords from English (e.g. Kawagoe and Arai ;
Hirata ; Kubozono et al. ). However, little attention has been paid to how
Japanese speakers perceive geminate consonants in languages other than English and
how they borrow them as loanwords from those languages. Potential exceptions are
Tews (), who analysed Japanese geminate perception in nonsense words involv-
ing German [f] and [x], and Shinohara (), who looked at the adaptation patterns
of French loanwords into Japanese. With this background, this chapter examines
how geminate consonants in Italian are perceived by native speakers of Japanese and
how they are borrowed into their language.
Some languages such as Japanese and Italian have a contrast between single and
geminate consonants, while other languages including English do not. Moreover,
some languages in the former group involve a singleton/geminate contrast only in
some consonants in their consonant inventory. Speciﬁcally, voiceless obstruents are
generally more likely to display such a contrast as opposed to liquids /l/ and /r/
(Podesva ; Solé ; Hayes and Steriade ; Kawahara et al. ; see also
Kawahara and Pangilinan, Chapter in this volume, and Dmitrieva, Chapter ).
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Shin’ichi Tanaka . First published by Oxford University Press.

While both Italian and Japanese are known to have a contrast in consonant length,
there is a noticeable difference. While Italian has geminates for almost all consonants in
its consonant inventory, as we will see shortly, Japanese disfavours voiced geminate
obstruents and generally prohibits geminate liquids in native and Sino-Japanese words
(Komatsu ; Shibatani ; Vance ; Kubozono ).1 This is illustrated in ().
()
Singleton and geminate consonants in Japanese
a. Voiceless
obstruents:
ka.soo ‘fancy dress’ vs.
kas.soo ‘sliding’
ne.ko
‘cat’
vs.
nek.ko
‘root’
ka.ta
‘shoulder’
vs.
kat.ta
‘won (past tense of ‘win’)’
b. Voiced
obstruents:
ta.da
‘only’
vs.
tat.ta (*tad.da) ‘nothing more than’
cha.ba ‘tea leaf ’
vs.
(o.)chap.pa (*(o.)chab.ba) ‘tea leaf ’
c. Liquids:
da.re
‘who’
vs.
*dar.re (*dad.de, *dat.te)
ko.re
‘this’
vs.
*kor.re (*kod.de, *kot.te)
In theoretical analyses, the phonological/phonotactic markedness conditions in (b)
and (c) are formalized as *geminate voiced obstruent (*DD) (Ito and Mester )
and *geminate liquid (*RR), respectively.
In traditional Japanese phonology, the ﬁrst part of geminated obstruents and
liquids (approximants) is called sokuon, and is phonologically represented with /Q/
and denoted with a small tsu /っ/ in the orthographic system. The ﬁrst part of
geminated nasals, in contrast, is called hatsuon, which is represented with /N/
phonologically and with n /ん/ orthographically. The difference between geminated
obstruents/liquids and nasals in both phonological and orthographic systems indi-
cates that Japanese speakers recognize and treat these two types of geminates as
phonologically distinct. In the rest of this chapter, I focus on geminate obstruents and
liquids, using the term ‘geminates’ to refer to them.
..Geminate consonants in loanwords from English
One ﬁnds many phonological and perceptual analyses in the literature concerning
geminates in loanwords from English, a language that lacks geminate consonants
(Ohye ; Lovins ; Ono ; Kawagoe ; Kanai ; Katayama ;
Maruta ; Kawagoe and Arai ). In contrast, little is known about the
adaptation and perception of geminates from other languages, especially from
those languages that have a singleton/geminate contrast.
1 Other than some loanwords discussed in the present chapter, Japanese allows the occurrence of liquid
geminates in some interjections (e.g. /arre/ ‘Wow’, Tanaka ; Vance ) or emphatic expressions
(Kawahara a).

Tanaka

In loanwords from English, gemination takes place most typically when a word-
ﬁnal consonant is preceded by a lax, i.e. short, vowel. This is exempliﬁed in (), where
dots indicate syllable boundaries.2,3
()
Loanwords (from English)
a. Voiceless obstruents:
bat ! bat.to
book ! buk.ku
b. Voiced obstruents:
i. kid ! kid.do
egg ! eg.gu
ii. bed ! bed.do ~ bet.to bag ! bag.gu ~ bak.ku
iii. hug ! ha.gu (*hag.gu) gag ! gya.gu (*gyag.gu)
c. Liquids:
bell ! be.ru (*ber.ru)
tell! te.ru (*ter.ru)
It is generally believed that gemination takes place in this context to preserve the
closed syllables of the original English word (Lovins ; Kawagoe ; Katayama
; see also Ito et al., Chapter in this volume). However, it is also known that
gemination is subject to a segmental condition whereby some types of consonants are
more prone to the process than others. As shown in (a), obstruents undergo
gemination quite consistently, whereas liquids are resistant to the process as in
(c), just as they are in native words. Voiced obstruents, in contrast, display some-
what intermediate patterns: some forms permit gemination with or without the
preservation of voicing, (b.i) vs. (b.ii), while other forms do not permit gemination,
as in (b.iii) (Nishimura ).4 Japanese loanwords from English thus display
different degrees of gemination depending on the type of the consonant.
In addition, loanwords from English are also known to be subject to a ‘positional
effect’, whereby coda consonants in word-ﬁnal position are more likely to geminate
than those in word-medial positions. To take the word picnic, for example, the coda
consonant /k/ in the initial, i.e. non-ﬁnal, syllable in the source does not geminate,
whereas its counterpart in the ﬁnal position does. This positional asymmetry is shown
in () (Kubozono , ).
()
picnic /piknik/ ! pi.ku.nik.ku (*pik.ku.ni.ku, *pik.ku.nik.ku, *pi.ku.ni.ku)
Kubozono, Takeyasu, Giriko, and Hirayama () report that this positional asym-
metry can be attributed to the presence or absence of a pitch fall in the source
language, i.e. the pitch fall in the word-ﬁnal syllable in English can be a cue to
gemination for Japanese speakers. In this chapter I demonstrate that a similar
2 As opposed to lax vowels, tense vowels appear longer. In Japanese, the former is borrowed as a single
vowel with gemination (hit [hit] ! hitto), while the latter is borrowed as a long vowel without gemination
(heat [hiːt] ! hiito). The reason for the absence of a geminate in the latter case is that a superheavy
(trimoraic) syllable) would otherwise be constructed and the restrictions on syllable weight would be
violated (heat [hiːt] ! hiito, *hiit.to) (Kubozono , ).
3 It has been reported that even in new loanwords in Hungarian, there is a tendency for short vowels
followed by a consonant to induce gemination (Nádasdy ).
4 Nishimura () reports that devoicing occurs when there is another voiced obstruent with the same
stem as in (b.ii).
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


positional asymmetry is observed in loanwords from Italian, too (sections .and
.). I speciﬁcally claim that this phonological asymmetry can be attributed to the
phonetic properties related to the default stress position in the source language.
..Geminate consonants in Italian
Unlike English, Italian has a contrast in consonant length. Unlike Japanese, more-
over, it has geminates for almost all consonants in its consonant inventory, as shown
in ().
()
Singleton and geminate consonants in Italian
Singletons
Geminates
a. Voiceless obstruents
/p/:
capello
‘hair’
/pp/:
cappello
‘hat’
/t/:
fato
‘fate’
/tt/:
fatto
‘fact’
/k/:
secante
‘cut off ’
/kk/:
seccante
‘dry’
/f/:
telefono
‘telephone’
/ff/:
traffico
‘trafﬁc’
/s/:
casa
‘house’
/ss/:
cassa
‘cash register’
/ʧ/:
facendo
‘doing’
/tʧ/:
faccenda
‘matter’
b. Voiced obstruents
/b/:
Saba
‘person’s family name’ /bb/:
sabba
‘Sabbath’
/d/:
Ada
‘a person’s name’
/dd/:
Adda
‘the name of the river’
/g/:
lego
‘to tie up (st. sgl.)’
/gg/:
leggo
‘to read (st .sgl.)’
/v/:
avito
‘ancestral’
/vv/:
avvito
‘to screw (st sgl)’
/(d)z/: manzo
‘beef’
/(d)zz/:
bizzoso
‘capricious’
/(d)ʒ/: legenda
‘explanatory notes’
/(d)ʒʒ/:
leggenda
‘legend’
c. Liquids
/l/:
anelo
‘anxious’
/ll/:
anello
‘ring’
/r/:
sera
‘evening’
/rr/:
serra
‘greenhouse’
d. Nasals
/m/:
soma
‘load’
/mm/:
somma
‘sum’
/n/:
tono
‘tone’
/nn/:
tonno
‘tuna’
The phonemes /ts/, /ʃ/, /ʎ/, and /ɲ/ do not exhibit contrast in phonological length in
Italian, and generally occur as geminates despite some regional variations (Serianni
; Canepari ; Kori , ). For these reasons, these consonants as well as
nasals in (d) are excluded from our analysis.
The phonemes /f/, /v/, and /l/ do not exist in Japanese: /f/ and /v/ in Italian are
borrowed as /ɸ/ and /b/ in Japanese, respectively, while the liquid /l/ as well as /r/
is borrowed as /r/ (Ikeda et al. ). In the rest of this chapter, /ɸ/ is denoted as /f/
for the sake of notational simplicity.

Tanaka

Interestingly, loanwords from Italian into Japanese appear to be different from
those from English in that liquids are often geminated in the former, as in (). This
will be discussed in detail in sections ., ., and ..
()
farfalle
‘butterﬂy’
! fa.ru.far.re
Valpolicella
‘the name of a place’
! ba.ru.po.ri.tyer.ra
limoncello
‘limoncello’
! ri.mon.tyer.ro
Donatello
‘Donatello’
! do.na.ter.ro (〜do.na.te.ro)
Italian does not have a contrast in vowel length. It is known that both vowel and
consonant durations depend on the interactions between word stress and the
syllable structure (Marotta ; Krämer ). As for word stress, the default
stress position in Italian is the penultimate syllable (% of the time according to
Thornton et al. and % according to Borrelli ). It is known that closed
syllables including those with a geminate consonant in the penultimate position
attract stress without exception. Moreover, stressed syllables are phonetically
lengthened and are generally longer than unstressed syllables. Speciﬁcally, vowels
are lengthened in non-ﬁnal stressed open syllables, as depicted with bold letters in
() (Marotta ; Canepari , ; D’Imperio and Rosenthall ; Kori
; Krämer ).
()
a. [na.po.le.ˈtaː.no]
napoletano
‘Neapolitan’
[ˈroː.ma]
Roma
‘Rome’
[mi.la.ˈneː.ze]
milanese
‘Milanese,’
[do.ˈmaː.ni]
domani
‘tomorrow’
b. [ˈnaː.po.li]
Napoli
‘Naples’
[ˈtaː.vo.lo]
tavolo
‘table’
[ˈﬁː.ga.ro]
Figaro
‘personal name’
[ba.ˈdziː.li.ko]
basilico
‘basil’
In contrast, vowels in closed syllables are not lengthened as much, even if they are in
stressed syllables.5 Instead, it is the coda consonant including the ﬁrst part of
geminates, speciﬁcally in the penultimate syllable as in (b), that is phonetically
lengthened.
()
a. [ˈtem.po] / [*ˈteːm.po]
tempo
‘time’
[ˈpar.ko] / [*ˈpaːr.ko]
parco
‘park’
b. [ˈstel.la] / [*ˈsteːl.la]
stella
‘star’
[ˈfet.ta] / [*ˈfeːt.ta]
fetta
‘slice’
5 The reason why a vowel in a closed syllable does not undergo the lengthening is to prevent the
occurrence of a superheavy syllable, as mentioned in note .
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


Supposing that longer consonants are more likely to be perceived as geminates,
this relationship between consonant durations and stress position should be associ-
ated with gemination in loanwords. In other words, consonants tend to be longer
towards the end of the word, since lexical stress falls on the penultimate syllable in a
majority of Italian words. This allows us to assume that differences in word position
with respect to gemination may be reduced to differences in consonant durations. In
the next sections, I corroborate this assumption through a corpus study along with a
perception experiment.
This chapter is organized as follows. In section ., I will demonstrate through a
corpus study that gemination in loanwords from Italian is affected by the consonant
class and the position of the consonant in the word. Section .discusses the results
of a perception experiment employing Japanese listeners as subjects. I will report that
the adaptation patterns in loanwords can be explained by the stress–duration inter-
action in the donor language (Italian) and the phonological markedness hierarchy of
the recipient language (Japanese). Finally, section .discusses the relation between
loanwords and perception: it points out some similarities and differences between
loanwords borrowed from Italian and those from English and, moreover, conﬁrms
the effect of L(Japanese).
.Corpus study: geminates in loanwords from Italian
Using Kōjien (th edition), Daijirin (th edition), and Concise Katakana-go Jiten
(nd edition) as sources, I extracted loanwords from Italian, containing a total of
,tokens of consonants between vowels (excluding nasal consonants). These
tokens were divided into two groups depending on whether they were singletons
or geminates in Italian. I analysed how these two groups of consonants are borrowed
in Japanese. The results are shown in Table ..
As can be seen from this table, there are Italian geminates and ,
singletons. Of the Italian geminates, % are realized as geminates in Japanese,
and % as singletons. Of the ,singletons, virtually % are borrowed
TABLE .. Geminates and singletons in Italian sources
(L) and Japanese loans (L)
Italian source
Japanese loan
Total
/CC/
/C/
/CC/
(%)
(%)

/C/
(%)
,(%)
,
Total

,
,

Tanaka

as singleton in Japanese.6 This indicates that geminate consonants in the host
language (Japanese) originate mostly from geminate consonants in the source
language (Italian). This situation is different from that of loanwords from English,
which lack geminate consonants in the source language. What is truly interesting
here is that not all geminates in Italian are borrowed as geminates in Japanese (%
(/)).
Table .shows gemination rates of Italian geminates in Japanese loanwords as a
function of the consonant class. The denominator indicates the number of geminates
in Italian, while the numerator indicates the number of geminate consonants in
Japanese.
Table .shows that voiceless obstruents are most likely to geminate (%),
voiced obstruents are less likely to geminate (%), and liquids are least prone to
gemination (%). This allows us to establish the following hierarchy with respect to
the likelihood of gemination: voiceless obstruents > voiced obstruents > liquids. This
is the same hierarchy that we found in () for native and Sino-Japanese words.
In terms of the hierarchy based on the consonant types, these results also have certain
similarities with the results of loanwords from English shown in () and with those to
be discussed in the next section (Figure .). The fact that gemination rates are
similar between native/Sino-Japanese words and loanwords suggests that gemination
in loanwords is subject to the phonological markedness hierarchy that exists in the
native language, or L.
However, Table .also reveals several differences between loanwords from
Italian and those from English. First, a certain number of geminate liquids occur in
the former loanwords, but not in the latter. Second, /s/ shows contrasting results with
respect to gemination between the two groups of loanwords: gemination occurs in
TABLE .. Consonant class and gemination in loanwords from Italian
Voiceless obstruent
% (/)
Voiced obstruent
% (/)
Liquid
% (/)
pp
tt
kk
ss
ttʃ
ɸɸ
% (/ )
% (/ )
% (/ )
% (/ )
% (/ )
% (/ )
bb
dd
gg
ddz
ddʒ
vv
% (/ )
% (/ )
–
% (/ )
% (/)
–
ll
rr
% (/ )
% (/ )
6 The examples in which singletons in Italian are borrowed as geminates were /ﬁatto/ (FIAT), /rukkora/
(rucola), and /inpuressario/ (impresario). Among these, in the case of /ﬁatto/, the entry resembled the
phonological structure of English (e.g. ﬁt ! ﬁtto). In the case of rukkora, a form with an inserted long
vowel (ruukora) was also permitted.
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


only % of instances involving rightmost /s/ (i.e. /s/ in the penultimate syllable) in
loanwords from English (instances out of , according to Maruta ), whereas
gemination of /s/ in the same position occurs at a vastly higher rate of % (/) in
loanwords from Italian. This difference is exempliﬁed in ().7
()
a. from Italian:
espresso ‘express’
! e.su.pu.res.so
grissini ‘breadsticks’
! gu.ris.si.ni
b. from English:
miss
! mi.su (*mis.su)
pass
! pa.su (*pas.su)
This difference probably comes from a difference in the nature of the consonant in
the source language, i.e. whether the voiceless fricative has a singleton/geminate
contrast (Italian) or not (English). In this sense, the difference in () should be
attributed to a difference that exists in L. This suggests that Las well as Lcan
contribute to the adaptation of geminates. This will be discussed in more detail in
section ..
Let us next consider the relationship between gemination and the position of the
geminate consonant within the word. Figure .shows how gemination rates for
the three classes of consonants vary depending on their position in the source word
as measured in terms of their distance from the ﬁnal syllable: For instance, /–/ in
Figure .means that the consonant appears between the ﬁnal two syllables in the
host language, e.g. /su.pa.get.ti/(spaghetti).
For each consonant class, gemination rates in Japanese loanwords increase as the
original geminate consonant is located closer to the end of the word in Italian.
Speciﬁcally, gemination rates are consistently higher towards the end of the word,
such as in the penultimate /–/ and antepenultimate /–/ positions, e.g. (a–a), in
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
~–5
–4
–3
–2
Percentages of gemination
Syllable position from the end of the word
Total
Obs(–voi)
Obs(+voi)
Liquid
FIGURE .Syllable position and percentages of gemination in Japanese loanwords from Italian.
7 Shirai () also investigates the rate of the occurrence of [s] gemination.

Tanaka

comparison with the pre-antepenultimate /–/ and other positions, e.g. (b–b),
where underscores indicate the position in which gemination would be expected to
occur in Japanese loanwords. This indicates that the positional factor as well as the
type of consonant itself affects gemination rates.
()
Voiceless obstruents
a. –, –: ro.s.sii.ni
Rossini
su.pa.get.ti
spaghetti
b. ~ –: pi_. tʃi.kaa.to
pizzicato
a_.fu.re.su.ko
affresco
()
Voiced obstruents
a. –, –: rob.bi.a
Robbia
a.ru.ped.dʒo
arpeggio
b. ~ –: o_.bu.ri.gaa.to
obbligato
a.ra_.bi.aa.ta
arrabbiata
()
Liquids
a. –, –:
bel.lii.ni
Bellini
ba.ru.po.ri.tyer.ra
Valpolicella
to.ru.ter.ri
tortelli
b. ~ –:
a_.re.gu.ro
allegro
bu.ru.ne_.re.su.ki
Brunelleschi
a_.ra.bi.aa.ta
arrabbiata
Tables .and .give gemination rates in Japanese loanwords as a function of the
stress and the position of the syllable in the word in Italian. In particular, Table .
shows the interactions between the two factors in the case of voiceless obstruents.
TABLE .. Gemination rates in Japanese as a function of the stress and syllable
position of the geminate in Italian (all consonants)
~–5
–4 
–3
–2
Total
+ stress
–
–
100% (7/7)
74% (105/142) 75% (112/149)
– stress
28% (8/29)
37% (21/59)
55% (49/90)
–
44% (78/178)
Total
28% (8/29)
37% (21/59)
58% (56/97)
74% (105/142) 58% (190/327)
TABLE .. Gemination rates in Japanese as a function of the stress and syllable
position of the geminate in Italian (voiceless obstruents)
~–5
–4 
–3
–2
Total
+ stress
–
–
100% (7/7)
99% (96/97)
99% (103/104)
– stress
58% (8/14)
62% (21/34)
74% (35/52)
–
64% (64/100)
Total
58% (8/14)
62% (21/34)
72% (42/59)
99% (96/97)
82% (167/204)
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


The results in these tables reveal that gemination rates in Japanese loanwords
are affected by the presence or absence of word stress in Italian, i.e. whether or not
the consonant is from a stressed syllable in the source language: % vs. % for all
consonants (Table .) and % vs. % for voiceless obstruents (Table .).
A majority of geminates in the loanwords come from the default stressed syllables
in the source language (% (/), Table .), speciﬁcally in the case of voiceless
obstruents (% (/), Table .). Many geminate consonants in unstressed
syllables are also borrowed as geminates in Japanese, but they are subject to the
positional factor mentioned above.
The discussion in this section can be summarized in the following four points.
First, gemination in loanwords borrowed from Italian occurs in order to preserve
geminates in the source language. Virtually all geminate consonants in the host
language come from geminate consonants in the source language. Secondly, loan-
words from Italian hence show higher gemination rates than loanwords from
English. In particular, even liquids sometimes undergo gemination in the former
loanwords, while they do not in the latter or in native Japanese words. Thirdly,
gemination rates vary considerably depending on the type or class of the consonant:
gemination occurs very frequently in voiceless obstruents, less frequently in voiced
obstruents, and even less frequently in liquids. This is consistent with the phono-
logical markedness hierarchy in the host language (L). Lastly, all other conditions
being equal, geminates are more readily preserved the closer they appear to the end of
the word in the source language.
These observations about Japanese loanwords raise an interesting question as to
the motivation of the factors discussed in this section. For instance, is it the case that
Japanese speakers are a priori unable to perceive geminate liquids in Italian, or can
they actually perceive them but are impeded by the phonological structure of their
native language (L)?
In order to tackle this question, I conducted an experiment where I examined
how Italian geminates and singletons are actually perceived by Japanese speakers.
I then compared the results from this experiment with the observations about actual
loanwords.
.Perception of geminates and singletons in Italian words
by Japanese speakers
I selected Italian words accommodating all combinations of its fourteen conson-
ants (/p,t,k,f,s,tʃ/, /b,d,g,v, dz, (d)ʒ/ and /l,r/) with the two lengths (singleton/gemin-
ate) and three positions (penult [–], antepenult [–], and pre-antepenult [–] ) in
the word. Furthermore, the stress in all extracted words is the same as the default [–]
position in the language. Some examples are listed in (a–c). For the sake of
convenience, the position of syllables containing singletons is arranged with respect

Tanaka

to the corresponding geminates, which are denoted as the codas of the respective
preceding syllables.
()
List of Italian consonants
a. Geminates and singletons in penultimate syllables [–]
i. Voiceless obstruents
/tt/:
[ˈfat.to]
fatto
‘fact’
/t/:
[ˈfaː.to]
fato
‘fate’
/ttʃ/: [ˈlut.tʃo] luccio ‘pike’ /tʃ/: [ˈluː.tʃo] Lucio ‘a person’s name’
ii. Voiced obstruents
/bb/: [ˈsab.ba] Sabba
‘Sabbath’
/b/: [ˈsaː.ba] Saba
‘a person’s name’
/dd/: [ˈad.da]
Adda
‘name of the river’
/d/: [ˈaː.da] Ada
‘a person’s name’
iii. Liquids
/ll/:
[a.ˈnel.lo] anello ‘ring’
/l/: [a.ˈneː.lo] anelo ‘anxious’
/rr/: [ˈser.ra]
serra
‘green house’ /r/: [ˈseː.ra]
sera
‘evening’
b. Geminates and singletons in antepenultimate syllables [–]
i. Voiceless obstruents
/tt/:
[lat.ˈtiː.na]
lattina
‘steel can’
/t/:
[la.ˈtiː.na]
Latina
‘Latina’
/kk/:
[sek.ˈkan.te]
seccante
‘dry’
/k/:
[se.ˈkan.te]
secante
‘cut off’
ii. Voiced obstruents
/ddʒ/: [led.ˈdʒen.da] leggenda
‘legend’
/dʒ/: [le.ˈdʒen.da] legenda
‘notes’
/gg/:
[ag.ˈgan. tʃo]
aggancio
‘connection’
/g/:
[lu.ˈgaː.na]
Lugana
‘place’s name’
iii. Liquids
/ll/:
[mel.ˈloː.ne]
mellone
‘melon’
/l/:
[me.ˈloː.ne]
melone
‘melon’
/rr/:
[kor.ˈret.to]
corretto
‘correct’
/r/:
[ko.ˈret.to]
coretto
‘seats for choir’
c. Geminates and singletons in pre-penultimate syllables [–]
i. Voiceless obstruents
/tt/:
[trat.to.ˈriː.a]
trattoria
‘restaurant’
/t/:
[va.ti.ˈkaː.no]
vaticano
‘Vatican’
/ss/:
[pas.sed.ˈdʒaː.ta]
passeggiata
‘walk’
/s/:
[ri.so.ˈluː.to]
risoluto
‘decisive’
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


ii. Voiced obstruents
/bb/:
[ab.bo.ˈnaː.to]
abbonato
‘subscription’
/b/: [sa.bo.ˈtad.dʒo] sabotaggio
‘sabotage’
/dd/:
[mad.da.ˈleː.na]
maddalena
‘madeleine’
/d/: [tra.di.ˈmen.to] tradimento
‘betrayal’
iii. Liquids
/ll/: [al.le.ˈgriː.a]
allegria
‘cheerfulness’
/l/: [va.len.ˈtiː.no] valentino
‘Valentine’
/rr/: [fer.ra.ˈgoː.sto]
ferragosto
‘assumption’
/r/: [to.ri.ˈneː.ze]
torinese
‘Turinese’
The test words were arranged in a random order and inserted in the carrier
sentence given in (). The sentences were pronounced at natural speed by a native
speaker of standard Italian (a male speaker from Tuscany in his s), and all
sentences were recorded in a sufﬁciently quiet room, using a Roland R-HR digital
recorder (bit, .kHz) and an Audio-technica ATmicrophone, edited with
a Roland CD-u CD/SD recorder.
()
Dice
X
una volta. ‘Please say
X
once.’
Between each sentence, an interval of approximately eight seconds was inserted. The
listeners were native speakers of Japanese (all females in their s without
knowledge of Italian). They were told that they would hear Italian words and
sentences and were asked to decide, from candidate words written in Japanese,
whether the designated consonants in the word were: (i) geminate (with sokuon
(っ)), (ii) not geminate (without sokuon), or (iii) other. If they chose ‘other’, they
were asked to write down what they heard in Japanese.
This experiment yielded ,tokens: stimulus consonants (words) × 
subjects. From these I discarded tokens for which ‘other’ was chosen. This left
,tokens for subsequent analysis. Analysis showed that the Japanese subjects
perceived Italian geminates as geminates in % of cases (/), while they
perceived singletons as geminates in % of cases (/). These results clearly
show that most geminates in Italian were perceived as geminates by Japanese
listeners. These scores are considerably higher than those for gemination in actual
loanwords from Italian discussed in section .. In particular, a certain portion of
singletons in the test words were perceived as geminates, which is a result not found
in actual loanwords.8
8 In particular, in the case of voiceless obstruents in penultimate position, singletons were frequently
perceived as geminates (copia ‘copy’! kop.pya (/), casa ‘house’! kas.sa (/)). It can be inferred
that, in this sense, both the position and the consonant class were involved in this phenomenon.

Tanaka

Figures .and .show the perception of Italian geminates and singletons,
respectively, by Japanese listeners for each consonant class. Figure .analyses the
loanwords from Italian as shown in Table ., while Figure .analyses loanwords
from English, based on the data in Maruta ().
From Figure ., it can be seen that Japanese speakers were able to perceive
geminates in most cases regardless of the consonant class. At the same time, it can
be conﬁrmed that a hierarchy exists with respect to the consonant class (χ2 = .,
p < .), and that the perception rate for geminate liquids is relatively low although
more than % of them were perceived as geminates: the difference between liquids
and voiceless obstruents is statistically signiﬁcant (Z-Score = ., p <.) and so is
the difference between liquids and voiced obstruents (Z-Score = ., p <.).
271
934
935
89
136
134
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Liquid
Obs(+voi)
Obs(–voi)
Gem+
Gem–
FIGURE .Percentages of the perception of Italian geminates by Japanese speakers.
51
179
314
308
883
751
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Liquid
Obs(+voi)
Obs(–voi)
Gem+
Gem–
FIGURE .Percentages of the perception of Italian singletons by Japanese speakers.
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


Figure .shows that there are cases when Japanese speakers perceive Italian
singletons as geminates. Here, again, we observe the same hierarchy with respect to
consonant class (χ2 = ., p < .). Additionally, comparison of the four ﬁgures
demonstrates the following order from the highest gemination rates to the lowest: the
Japanese listeners’ perception of Italian geminates (Figure .), gemination in loan-
words from Italian (Figure .), gemination in loanwords from English (Figure .),
and the Japanese listeners’ perception of Italian singletons (Figure .). This suggests
that both L/Land phonetic/phonological properties affect the gemination in Japanese
loanwords. The relationship between Land Lwill be further discussed in section ..
Figures .and .show the relation between the consonant position and the
perception of gemination in Italian geminates and singletons, respectively.
10
13
167
90
10
37
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Liquid
Obs(+voi)
Obs(–voi)
Gem+
Gem–
FIGURE .Percentages of gemination in loanwords from Italian (based on Table .).
0
71
548
x
71
275
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Liquid
Obs(+voi)
Obs(-voi)
Gem +
Gem –
FIGURE .Percentages of gemination in loanwords from English (based on Maruta ).

Tanaka

Overall, even if individual consonants are considered, the perception rate for
geminates was consistently higher when they occurred towards the end of the
word, and therefore positional asymmetry can be clearly observed (in Figure .,
voiceless obstruents: χ2 = ., p < ., voiced obstruents: χ2 = ., p < .,
and liquids: χ2 = ., p < .). In particular, most geminates in penultimate [–]
position were perceived as geminates regardless of the consonant class (even liquids
are perceived correctly). This is drastically different from gemination in actual
loanwords observed in Table .and Figure ..
In addition, the positional asymmetry was more prominent in the case of liquids,
and the perception rate of geminate liquids more distant from the end of the word
was extremely low, as shown in (b).
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
–4
–3
–2
The perception rate of
gemination (%)
Syllable position from the end of the word
Total
Obs (–voi)
Obs (+voi)
Liquid
FIGURE .Syllable position and perception of Italian geminates by Japanese speakers.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
–4
–3
–2
The perception rate of
gemination (%)
Syllable position from the end of the word
Total
Obs (–voi)
Obs (+voi)
Liquid
FIGURE .Syllable position and perception of Italian singletons by Japanese speakers.
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


()
Geminate liquids
[Italian]
! + Gem.
– Gem.
a. [–] ˈser.ra
‘greenhouse’ !
serra (/)
sera (/)
[–] a.ˈnel.lo
‘ring’
!
anerro (/)
aneero (/)
b. [–] fer.ra.ˈgo.sto ‘Assumption’ !
ferragosuto (/)
feragosuto (/)
[–] al.le.ˈgri.a
‘cheerful’
!
arreguriia (/)
areguriia (/)
Finally, let us consider the relation between phonetic consonant durations and
geminate perception rates as discussed above. In Figure ., the horizontal axis
represents the duration of geminates (G) and singletons (S) in Italian, and the vertical
axis represents the perception rate of geminates for Japanese listeners. As seen in
Figure .and (b), the geminate responses for liquids in the pre-antepenultimate
position [–] in Italian are extremely low, as shown by G (LIQ-).
Figure .provides an explanation for the perception data that is consistent
with the gemination rates given in Figures .and .. First, a rather clear
correlation can be seen between the perception rate of geminates and the phonetic
duration of consonants. At the same time, the duration seems to depend on the
position of the consonant. In other words, consonants tend to be phonetically
longer towards the end of the word, which is reﬂected in the rate of perception for
geminates.
In summary, the positional effect does not seem to depend on the position of the
consonant itself, but instead can be interpreted as a reﬂection of the position-
dependent phonetic structure due to stress in Italian.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
50
100
150
200
The perception rate of gemination (%)
Mean duration of geminates (G) and singletons (S) (ms)
G(–2)
G(–3)
G(–4)
G(LIQ–4)
S(–2)
S(–3)
S(–4)
FIGURE .Duration of geminates/singletons and the perception rate of germination
(N = ,).

Tanaka

.Discussion and conclusions
The data and analysis presented in the foregoing sections bear closely on the central
issue of loanword phonology, namely, the debate as to whether loanword adaptation
is phonological (Paradis and LaCharité ; LaCharité and Paradis ; Rose and
Demuth ), phonetic (Silverman ; Peperkamp ), or a mixture of both
(Yip ; Steriade ; Kabak and Idsardi ; Kim , a). Of these three
hypotheses, the second and third are known as nativization-through-perception or
the perceptual stance model (Calabrese and Wetzels ; Durand ). The results
in the present chapter support mainly the third hypothesis, in that both phonological
knowledge in L(Japanese) and the perception of acoustic durations in L(Italian)
affect the adaptation pattern.
The ﬁrst hypothesis assumes that loanwords are essentially nativized according to
the phonological system of L. In the case of segmental adaptation, it assumes that
whether or not a certain feature of Lis preserved in loanword adaptation is
determined by the status of the feature in the native phonology of the borrowing
language (Zuraw ; Paradis and Tremblay ). For example, Zuraw ()
observes that nasal substitution in loanwords in Tagalog is a direct reﬂection of
the Llexicon. Similarly, Paradis and Tremblay () report that in Mandarin
Chinese, English voiceless stops are adapted as aspirated stops regardless of the input
aspiration, while English voiced stops are adapted as voiceless unaspirated stops,
according to the phonological system of L.
On the other hand, the second hypothesis assumes that adaptation is tightly
correlated with perception: speakers of Ldo not have access to the Lphono-
logical categories and adapt Lsounds directly by means of the ‘acoustic prox-
imity’ (Peperkamp and Dupoux ). For example, Hsieh et al. ()
demonstrate that in the adaptation of English vowel–nasal coda sequences (VN)
into Mandarin Chinese, the realization of the Mandarin nasal coda is determined
by the position of F(front/back) of the vowel in English. This shows that
the phonetic quality of the source vowel is the determinant factor in Mandarin
Chinese.
The third hypothesis is a compromise of the ﬁrst and second hypotheses. This
approach may be divided into two different views in terms of the relationship
between phonology and phonetics: (i) the view that the perception of the Lis
determined by the phonological structure of the L(Dupoux et al. ; Kim ,
a; Kang ), and (ii) the view that Linput is not adapted to adhere to L
phonological constraints, although it is faithfully perceived (Steriade ; Kabak
and Idsardi ). With respect to (i), Dupoux et al. () report that Japanese
speakers tend to perceive the sequence [ebzo] as [ebuzo] to avoid the violation of the
phonotactic constraints of L, while French speakers tend to perceive it as [ebzo]
without violating any phonotactic constraints in their native phonology. With
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


respect to (ii), Kabak and Idsardi () report that Korean speakers can perceive
English consonant clusters such as [gm] and [km] correctly although these clusters
violate phonotactic constraints in Korean, while they generally adapt them as [gʊm]
and [kʊm], respectively, in loanwords, in accordance with the phonotactic con-
straints of their native phonology.
The corpus study and the perception experiment reported in the present chapter
support the third hypothesis (both (i) and (ii)). With regard to the perception of
Italian geminates (Figure .) and the adaptation of geminates in actual loanwords
from Italian (Figure .), it is clear that Japanese speakers can perceive most Italian
geminates correctly (Figure .), suggesting that they can hear the phonetic prop-
erties of L(Figure .). However, the percentages of gemination are much lower in
actual loanwords (Figure .) than in the perception experiment (Figure .),
speciﬁcally in the case of liquids and voiced obstruents (Figures .and .).
This suggests that the phonological markedness constraints (i.e. *geminate liquid
/*RR/ >> *geminate voiced obstruent /*DD/ >> *geminate voiceless obstruent /*TT/)
are activated in adaptation, which in turn suggests that the suppression of geminate
liquids and voiced obstruents in loanwords is a reﬂection of the phonological
structure of L.
The fact that gemination rates are higher in loanwords from Italian (Figure .)
than in loanwords from English (Figure .) suggests that the structure of L, i.e.
whether or not the source language has a contrast between single and geminate
consonants, affects the adaptation pattern. Equally important is the fact that the
gemination hierarchy with respect to the consonant class is commonly found in
loanwords from both languages. This common feature should be attributed to the
phonological constraints of L.
Finally, the positional effect observed in loanwords from Italian (Figure .) and
the perception of Italian geminates (Figure .) can be reduced to the position-
dependent phonetic features relating to stress, i.e. increased consonantal duration,
which suggests that Lphonetic properties also affect the perception of geminates
(Figure .).
In conclusion, the adaptation patterns in loanwords from Italian are affected both
by the phonological knowledge of Japanese (L) and by the perception of durational
changes in Italian consonants (L).
Acknowledgements
This chapter is based on Tanaka (, ). I would like to thank the audience of the
th meeting of the Linguistic Society of Japan and GemCon , especially Haruo
Kubozono, Itsue Kawagoe, Michinao Matsui, Shigeto Kawahara, and reviewers of the book
for various valuable comments. I would also like to thank Donna Erickson, Scott Ruddel,

Tanaka

Sayaka Goto, and Haruo Kubozono for checking the earlier versions of this chapter. All
errors that remain are of course mine. The work reported here was supported by the
NINJAL collaborative research project ‘Phonological characteristics of the Japanese lexicon’,
the JSPS KAKENHI grant (grant nos. and ), and the JSPS PASINACTR
(Program for Advancing Strategic International Networks to Accelerate the Circulation of
Talented Researchers) grant.
Geminates in Japanese loanwords from Italian


14
Korean speakers’ perception of
Japanese geminates
Evidence for an Lgrammar-driven
borrowing process
HYUNSOON KIM
.Introduction
One of the interesting sound-pattern distinctions between Japanese and Korean is
that, when two obstruents do occur in intervocalic position word medially, Japanese
allows only voiceless geminate consonants /pp, tt, kk, ss/, as in (a.i), and Korean
allows not only homorganic consonants but also different sequences of consonants,
as shown in (b) (DEC is short for declarative sufﬁx throughout the text).1 When
followed by the front vowel /i/, the Japanese geminates /ss/ and /tt/ change into [ʃː]
and [tʃː], respectively, as in (a.iii).
()
Word-medial obstruents in Japanese and Korean
a. Japanese voiceless geminate consonants (Shibatani )
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
/jappari/
–
[japːari]
‘as expected’
/jatto/
–
[jatːo]
‘ﬁnally’
/jukkuri/
–
[jµkːµri]
‘slowly’
/assari/
–
[asːari]
‘simply’
/bissiri/
biʃʃiri
[biʃːiri]
‘densely’
/battiri/
battʃiri
[batʃːiri]
‘perfectly’
1 In a traditional account (e.g. Shibatani ), the ﬁrst part of Japanese voiceless geminates is
transcribed as the phoneme /Q/, which is called sokuon in Japanese. In the present chapter, however, the
geminates are transcribed as /pp, tt, kk, ss/ in lexical representations, as in (a.i), for simplicity, in line with
Tsujimura (), Kubozono (), Kawagoe (), and Kawahara (b). Since the geminates are
‘realized phonetically as a prolongation of consonantal articulation’ (Shibatani : ), they are
phonetically transcribed as [pː, tː, kː, sː, ʃː, tʃː], as in (a.iii), throughout the text.
The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants. First edition. Haruo Kubozono (ed.).
This chapter © Hyunsoon Kim . First published by Oxford University Press.

b. Korean intervocalic consonants
(i)
(ii)
/akki/
‘musical instrument’
/kaksi/
‘bride’
/appak/ ‘pressure’
/akpo/
‘musical score’
/tatta/
‘to close’ + DEC
/sokto/
‘speed’
/tʌssin/ ‘overshoes’
/mokpho/
‘Mokpho (place name)’
Japanese geminates have greater duration compared to singleton consonants. For
example, Japanese geminate plosives are generally at least twice as long as corres-
ponding singleton plosives (e.g. Beckman ; Port et al. ; Kawahara b;
Hirose and Ashby ) and can be as three times as long (e.g. Idemaru and Guion
), regardless of the place of articulation of the consonants.2 In addition, the ﬁrst
part of Japanese geminates has phonological weight as an independent mora in
Tokyo Japanese (e.g. Kubozono , , , ; Shibatani ; Tsujimura
; Kawagoe ). Thus, though the words in () are all two syllables long, the
words with the geminates /kk, tt, ss/ in (a) are three moras long with the ﬁrst syllable
having two moras and the second syllable one mora, and those with the single
plosives /k, t, s/ in (b) are two moras long with each syllable having one mora.3
The mora-timing ﬁrst part of geminates leads to the distinction in syllable weight in
Japanese phonology, i.e. heavy (bimoraic) syllables, as in (a) and light (mono-
moraic) ones (e.g. Kubozono ), as in (b) (dots /./ indicate syllable boundaries
throughout the text).
()
Japanese voiceless geminates and single consonants (Kubozono )
a. /sak.ki/
‘a short time ago’
b. /sa.ki/
‘point’
/kat.ta/
‘bought (past tense of ‘buy’)
/ka.ta/
‘type’
/tos.sa/
‘in an instant’
/to.sa/
‘Tosa (place name)’
One piece of empirical evidence for the mora timing of the ﬁrst part of Japanese
geminates comes from speech error. According to Kubozono (), a vowel can be
replaced by the ﬁrst part of a geminate in speech error. For example, in kuu.bo mid.
do.wee ‘Aircraft Carrier Midway’, the vowel [u] in kuu is replaced by the consonant
[b] that constitutes the ﬁrst part of a long consonant, as in kub.bo mid.do.wee.4
However, this kind of speech error has not been reported in Seoul Korean, which has
been regarded as standard Korean. This is mainly because the mora is rarely used as a
phonological weight unit in Seoul Korean, and thus there is no distinction of mora-based
2 See Kawahara (b) for a literature review of phonetic data on Japanese geminates.
3 See Kubozono () and Kawagoe () for an overview of the phonology of Japanese geminate
obstruents.
4 Note that voiced geminates are possible in Japanese adaptation of foreign words, e.g. su.nob.bu ‘snob’,
bed.do ‘bed’, and bag.gu ‘bag’ (Kawagoe ).
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


heavy vs. light syllables, as in ().5 Rather, the Korean syllable is essential in explaining
various phonological phenomena. As shown in (), by virtue of Coda Neutralization, the
underlying laryngeal contrast found with Korean consonants is neutralized into lenis
counterparts in coda position (a.i); in addition, the manner of articulation features
found with coronal obstruents (and /h/) are neutralized as the lenis plosive [t] in coda
position (b.i) (e.g. Kim-Renaud ; Kim and Jongman ).6 The phonological
process of Coda Neutralization is followed by Post-Obstruent Tensing whereby a lenis
consonant in onset position changes into a fortis when preceded by a lenis consonant, as
shown in (.ii) (e.g. Sohn ; Cho ). When a coda is a lenis consonant and a
following onset is aspirated, neither Coda Neutralization nor Post-Obstruent Tensing
applies, as in (d).7
()
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
a. /aph.tsul/
ap.tsul
ap.ts’ul
[ap.ts’ul]
‘front row’
/kath.ta/
kat.ta
kat.t’a
[kat.t’a]
‘to be the same’ + DEC
/sok’.ta/
sok.ta
sok.t’a
[sok.t’a]
‘to sort out’ + DEC
b. /soth/
sot
–
[sot]
‘pot’
/kots.kam/
kot.kam
kot.k’am
[kot.k’am]
‘dried persimmon’
/tʌs.sin/
tʌt.sin
tʌt.s’in
[tʌt.s’in]
‘overshoes’
/kɨ.lʌh.so/
kɨ.lʌt.so
kɨ.lʌt.s’o
[kɨ.rʌt.s’o]
‘yes, it is’
c. /ip.sul/
–
ip.s’ul
[ip.s’ul]
‘lips’
/kak.tsa/
–
kak.ts’a
[kak.ts’a]
‘each one’
d. /mok.pho/
–
–
[mok.pho]
‘Mokpho (place name)’
The different sound patterns between Japanese and Korean are well reﬂected in the
Korean adaptation of Japanese geminates. According to Kim (), the Japanese
geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] are borrowed as the sequence of the coronal lenis plosive [t]
in coda position and an onset consonant with the coronal plosive often deleted due to
its unmarkedness, as shown in (b).8 The onset consonant in Korean adaptation is
5 Seoul Korean is syllable-based, compared to Cholla and Kyungsang Korean, where the mora unit is
used. For example, Jun’s () account of Korean intonational phonology is syllable-based for Seoul
Korean and mora-based for Cholla Korean, which is spoken in the southwest part of the Korean peninsula.
Kyungsang Korean, which is spoken in the southeast part, has also been regarded having a mora as a pitch-
accent language like Japanese (e.g. Chung ; Kenstowicz and Sohn ; Kenstowicz and Park ).
In the present study, what we mean by Korean is Seoul Korean if not otherwise speciﬁed in the text.
6 See Kim, Maeda, Honda, and Hans (), Kim (a), Kim et al. (), and Kim and Park () for the
phonetic and phonological data showing two types of fricatives (i.e. the lenis /s/ and the fortis /s’/), as compared
to the three-way laryngeal contrast in stop consonants in Korean. Throughout the text, Korean affricates are
transcribed as alveolar (i.e. /ts, tsh, ts’/), following Kim (, a, b, , ).
7 When preceded by a coda consonant in intervocalic position, fortis consonants hardly exist in Korean
vocabulary.
8 It has been suggested that the lenis plosive [t] is the least marked consonant of Korean (e.g. Sohn ;
Cho ; Jun ). According to Sohn (: ), Coda Neutralization into [t] in (b.i) and the
assimilation of the coronal /t, ts, s/ to a following non-coronal consonant are due to the unmarkedness of

Kim

either a fortis or aspirated plosive for the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː] and the fortis
fricative [s’] for the geminate fricative [sː].9 While as shown in (b) the Japanese
geminates can be borrowed with a pronounced [t] in coda position, one can argue
that the lenis plosive [t] is actually stored as the lenis fricative /s/ phonologically in
the Korean lexicon, as in (a). Evidence for this comes from the Korean survey
undertaken by Kang et al. (), who show that out of a total nouns that end in
[t] when pronounced in isolation, end in a lexical /s/ (e.g. [s] appears when a
vowel-initial sufﬁx is added),10 no nouns end in lexical /t’/, nouns end in /t/, and
nouns end in /th/ when coronal-ﬁnal loans and non-standard dialectal forms are
excluded from the Sejong corpus with .million words.11 Given this lexical restric-
tion, one can make the justiﬁable claim that the coda plosive [t] is stored as the lenis
fricative /s/ in the Korean lexicon, as in (a).
()
Korean adaptation of Japanese geminates (Kim )
Japanese words
Korean adapted forms
a. In Korean lexicon
b. On the surface
[nipːoN]
nis.p’(ph)on
[ni(t).p’on]
~
[ni(t).phon]
‘Japan’
[sapːoro]
sas.p’(ph)o.lo
[sa(t).p’o.ro]
~
[sa(t).pho.ro]
‘Sapporo’
[natːoo]
nas.t’(th)o
[na(t).t’o]
~
[na(t).tho]
‘fermented soybeans’
[matːe]
mas.t’(th)ɛ
[ma(t).t’ɛ]
~
[ma(t).thɛ]
‘Please wait (a second)’
[hokːaidoo] hos.k’(kh)a.i.to [ho(t).k’a.i.do] ~
[ho(t).kha.i.do] ‘Hokkaido’
[nikːee]
nis.k’(kh)ɛ.i
[ni(t).k’ɛ.i]
~
[ni(t).khɛ.i]
‘Nikkei (newspaper)’
[isːee]
is.s’ɛ.i
[i(t).s’ɛ.i]
‘Issey (Miyake)’
[nisːaN]
nis.s’an
[ni(t).s’an]
‘Nissan’
the plosive. Compared to the non-coronal plosives which do not assimilate to the following coronals (e.g.
/tsʌp.tæ/ ! [tsʌp.t’æ] ‘entertainment’; /tsik.tsaŋ/ ! [tsik.ts’aŋ] ‘job’), the coronal consonants /t, ts, s/
before /p, k/ assimilate to the following consonant after they are neutralized into [t] (e.g. /sʌt.pul.li/ ! [sʌp.
p’ul.li] ‘hastily’; /us.ko/ ! [uk.k’o] ‘to laugh’).
9 The Korean adapted forms in () were collected from Korean speakers’ pronunciations of the
frequently used Japanese words as well as from mass media such as newspapers and magazines. As discussed
later, aspirated onset consonants in the Korean adaptation of the Japanese plosive geminates are due to the
regulations by the National Institute of Korean Language (NIKL) which have inﬂuenced mass media, and
fortis ones come from Korean speakers’ pronunciations. Note that the phonemes /l/ and /t/ are phonetically
realized as [r] and [d], respectively, in intervocalic position, as in (b).
10 We can easily ﬁnd the [s] and [t] alternation in Korean words and in loans as well. When followed by
the locative sufﬁx /-ɛ/ in Korean phonology, the word-ﬁnal fricative /s/ surfaces as [s] in onset position (e.g.
/kos+ɛ/ ! [ko.sɛ] ‘in place’). However, when no sufﬁx follows it, the word-ﬁnal fricative /s/ undergoes
Coda Neutralization and surfaces as [t] (e.g. /kos/ ! [kot] ‘place’). See Kim (a) for the same
alternation in English and French loans.
11 The lexical restriction here applies to bare roots, thus being differentiated from the Bindung-s
phenomenon (e.g. Huh ; Lee ; Sohn ) according to which the lenis fricative /s/ is inserted
between two elements of a compound. For example, the lenis fricative /s/ is inserted to the left-hand noun
in the compound [[alæ]N [i] N ] N ‘below’ ‘teeth’ as in [[alæ]N s [i] N ] N which surfaces as [a.ræn.ni] ‘lower
teeth’ after the phonological processes of N-insertion in the right-hand noun and the nasalization of the [t]
neutralized from the inserted /s/.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


In Kim (), the Korean treatment of Japanese geminates is proposed to be a case
in which L(i.e. a recipient language) grammar such as Ldistinctive features and
syllable structure constraints shapes Lspeakers’ perception of L(i.e. a donor
language) sounds in an Lgrammar-driven model of loanword adaptation ()
which is modiﬁed for interlanguage loanword adaptation from Stevens’ ()
model of speech processing.12
()
An Lgrammar-driven model of loanword adaptation (Kim , , a)
L2 acoustic output (=L1 input)
L1 output
(surface representations)
b. L1 lexical representations
(mental lexicon)
c. L1 phonology
a. L1 perception
i. extraction of acoustic parameters
and cues 
ii. L1 grammar
(mapping into features and
syllable structure)   
That is, in Lperception (a), the longer closure or constriction duration with a
slightly higher Fin Japanese geminates than in their single consonant counterparts
(e.g. Kim et al. ) is parsed for cues to the Korean laryngeal feature [+ tense], as in
(a.i), in that acoustic correlates of the feature [+ tense] are long closure/constriction
12 See also Kim (, a) for the Korean adaptation of the English affricates and fricatives and of
the voicing contrast in English and French plosives based on the model in ().

Kim

duration and high F.13 Lsyllable structure constraints also exert an inﬂuence, as in
(a.ii). Therefore, Japanese geminates are borrowed as the sequence of the unmarked
coda plosive /t/ and either an aspirated or a fortis consonant (which is [+ tense]) in
onset position in Lperception. The unmarked coda plosive /t/ is stored as the lenis
fricative /s/ in the Korean (L) lexical representations (b), as in (b); the lenis
fricative /s/ is neutralized into the plosive [t], in that Coda Neutralization applies in
Lphonology (c), as in (c). Due to its unmarkedness, the neutralized coronal
plosive is often deleted in Loutput (), as in (d), when followed by a consonant in
Korean (e.g. Sohn ; Cho ; Jun ).
()
Korean perception of Japanese voiceless geminates (Kim )
Japanese (L2)
cue
Korean (L1)
a. L1 perception:
[Cː]
/t.Ch/or  /t.C’/ 
i.
long closure/constriction
duration
[+tense]
ii.
coda and onset
consonants
the unmarked coronal
coda consonant /t/ and
an onset consonant
b. L1 lexical representations:
/s.Ch/or /s.C’/
c. L1 phonology:
[t.Ch] or [t.C’]  
d. L1 output:
[(t).Ch]  or  [(t).C’]
However, Kim’s () analysis of Japanese voiceless geminates as in () would be
made stronger if supported by empirical data. In order to examine whether the
analysis in () is empirically supported, we conducted a perception experiment
with three questions in mind. The ﬁrst question is whether the Korean laryngeal
feature [+ tense], as in (a.i), or just Korean syllable structure constraints, as in (a.ii),
affect Korean speakers’ perception of Japanese geminates in Lperception (a). If
Japanese geminates are parsed for cues to the Lfeature [+ tense], then the onset
consonant in their perception of Japanese geminates would be either aspirated or
fortis in an almost equal distribution. For instance, in a recent perception experiment
on how Japanese voiceless and voiced plosives are categorized by Korean speakers,
Kim (b, , b) found that the Japanese intervocalic single voiceless
13 See the second part of section .for a brief account of the two laryngeal features [ tense] and
[ spread glottis] proposed in Kim et al. () and Kim, Maeda, and Honda (, ). The feature
[tense] is newly modiﬁed from the traditional feature [tense] in Jakobson et al. (), Jakobson and Halle
(), and Kim (). See also Kim and Clements () for a literature review of the feature.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


plosives [t, k] were perceived as either aspirated or fortis in an almost equal
distribution, no matter whether the Japanese plosives were followed by a high-
toned or a low-toned vowel.14 The almost equal distribution of fortis and aspirated
consonants in Kim (b, , b) is best explained in that the long closure
duration of the Japanese voiceless plosives is parsed for cues to the Korean laryngeal
feature [+ tense], resulting in the Korean adaptation of the Japanese plosives as either
aspirated or fortis. On the other hand, if only Lsyllable structure constraints affect
the borrowing process, the Japanese geminates would be parsed as the unmarked
coda /t/ + onset lenis consonant in Lperception (a), and the onset lenis consonant
would change into fortis by virtue of Post-Obstruent Tensing in Lphonology (c).
The second question concerns the distribution of coda consonants in Korean
speakers’ perception of Japanese voiceless geminates. If Llexicon (b) as well as
Lphonology (c) play a role in their perception, Korean speakers’ responses would
be either the lenis fricative /s/ or no coda in that the lenis fricative /s/ is neutralized
into the coronal plosive [t] by Coda Neutralization in Lphonology (c), and
the coronal plosive is often deleted due to its unmarkedness in Loutput (d).
In addition, Korean speakers might perceive the Japanese geminates [pː] and
[kː] as the coda plosives [p] and [k], respectively, with the onset [p] and [k], because
the neutralized lenis coronal plosive [t] in Lphonology (c) often assimilates in
place to a following labial or dorsal consonant in Loutput.
The third question is whether spelling convention affects Korean speakers’ per-
ception of Japanese geminates rather than Lgrammar. In this case, Korean subjects
would perceive the Japanese geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː] as the sequence of the lenis
fricative /s/ and the aspirated plosives /ph, th, kh/ and the geminate fricative [sː] as the
sequence of the lenis fricatives /ss/ in coda and onset position. This is because we are
advised to use the lenis /s/ in coda position and aspirated consonants in onset
position for the Japanese voiceless geminate plosives, and the lenis fricatives /ss/
for the Japanese geminate fricative by the NIKL (National Institute of the Korean
Language) regulations (), as shown in ().15
14 When followed by a high-toned vowel, .% (,/,) were perceived as fortis and .%
(,/,) as aspirated, and when followed by a low-toned vowel, .% (,/,) as fortis and .%
(,/,) as aspirated.
15 In our recent survey of the Korean adaptation of the Japanese voiceless geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː, ʃː, tʃː],
we collected Japanese loans with geminates from newspapers and the internet as well as from recently
published books on Japanese culture, history, and especially tourism (see Appendix C for our references to
tourism). The total number of Japanese loans with voiceless geminates was , with the percentage of
Japanese geminates and the real number in parentheses: [pː] .% (/), [tː] .% (/), [kː]
.% (/), [sː] .% (/), [ʃː] .% (/), [tʃː] .% (/). All the Japanese loans in the
survey have the lenis fricative /s/ in coda position for the Japanese geminates, with three of them having
either the coda /s/ or no coda. As for onset consonants for the Japanese geminates, among Japanese
words with the geminates [pː, tː, kː, tʃː], (.%) are written as aspirated plosives or affricate, (.%)
as fortis, (.%) as lenis, and (.%) as either aspirated or lenis. Of Japanese words with the
geminates [sː, ʃː], (.%) are written as the lenis fricative /s/ and (.%) as fortis fricative /s’/.

Kim

()
NIKL regulations on Japanese geminates ()
a. Japanese [pː, tː, kː] is written as sCh:
sas.pho.lo
‘Sapporo’
nas.tho
‘fermented soybeans’
hos.kha.i.to
‘Hokkaido’
b. Japanese [sː] is written as ss:
nis.san
‘Nissan’
The present chapter is structured as follows. In section .and ., the methods
and results of our perception experiment are given, respectively; section .
describes the results of the experiment; in section .theoretical implications are
discussed; and section .offers a brief conclusion.
.Methods
From Japanese words with the voiceless geminates /pp, tt, kk, ss/ in our survey, we
selected sixteen Japanese words (i.e. eight frequently used and eight infrequently used
ones), as shown in ().16 The Japanese geminates in () are equally distributed, with
each geminate appearing in % of the test words. The vowel condition after the
geminates is controlled by /a/, /o/, or /e/. The vowel /i/ is not included in the test
words in (), because it yields the allophonic geminates [ʃː] and [tʃː], as in (a.iii).
()
Japanese test words in the present experiment
a. Frequently used Japanese words
b. Infrequently used Japanese words
/sapporo/
‘Sapporo’
/kappoo/
‘a Japanese
cooking style’
/nippoN/
‘Japan’
/nippori/
‘Nippori (place name)’
/nattoo/
‘fermented soybeans’
/tottori/
‘Tottori (place name)’
/rotte/
‘Lotte (gum company)’
/gettooaN/
‘(name of an) inn’
/hokkaidoo/
‘Hokkaido’
/nikkoo/
‘Nikko (place name)’
/nikkee/
‘Nikkei (newspaper)’
/dʐakkooiN/
‘(name of a) temple
(in Kyoto)’
/assari/
‘simply’
/bessoo/
‘villa, second house’
/nissaN/
‘Nissan’
/junessaN/
‘(name of a) spa
resort (in Hakone)’
The test words were put into a frame sentence /korewa __desu/ ‘This is ___’ and
randomized. A male native speaker of Tokyo Japanese in his early s recorded the
test words ﬁve times with no pause in the frame sentence, in a soundproof recording
room of the Laboratory of Phonetics and Phonology, CNRS/Sorbonne-Nouvelle
16 The frequency of the words in () is determined by how many times the words are used in our source
and whether they are frequently used or not in Korean daily life in our survey. For example, the frequently
used words in (a) were found in each source in our survey and are very familiar to Korean speakers due to
their frequent use in newspapers, magazines, and daily life.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


(University of Paris ). The recording was made at a sampling rate of .kHz and at
a quantization level of bit using an Audio-technical ATmicrophone. The
recorded data were then resampled at .kHz. The third repetitions of the
recorded test words were selected, and then the test words were separated from
the frame sentence for the present experiment.
Ten repetitions of the sixteen tokens in () were randomized at a four-second
interval. No ﬁllers were included in the experiment. A total of trials (tokens ×
repetitions) was presented to each participant with a one-minute interval in the
middle of the experiment. Eighty native speakers of Seoul Korean (male and
female) participated in the perception experiment. Therefore, the total responses for
the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] were ,( = ,(tokens × repetitions
× subjects) for each Japanese geminate × types of geminates). All of the subjects
were university students with no experience in learning Japanese and unfamiliar with
the Japanese part of the NIKL regulations in (). The average age of the Seoul subjects
was .years when our experiment was conducted at a university in Seoul, Korea.
Before the experiment, each subject was notiﬁed that Japanese words would be
given, but all participants were unaware of the purpose of our experiment. In a quiet
room, each subject was asked to listen to the prepared stimuli, using headphones
(Shure SRH) and to write them down in the Korean orthography.17 The percep-
tion experiment as well as a brief practice were run using Praat’s ExperimentMFC
facility. After the perception experiment, all the responses of the subjects were stored
in Excel for data analyses.
.Results
Our subjects’ responses for the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] were either coda +
onset consonants (.% = ,/,) or an onset with no coda (.% = ,/
,). The distribution of an onset consonant with no coda or with a coda in their
perception of the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː] and [sː] is presented in Figure .(a)
and (b), respectively. For the Japanese geminate plosives, their responses were mainly
onset fortis consonants with no coda (% = ,/,) and with a coda (.% =
,/,). In contrast, for the Japanese geminate fricative, .% (,/,)
17 There are some reasons why we have made use of the orthography method for our subjects’ identiﬁ-
cation. First, an AX discrimination task could result in bias toward responding the same when a stimulus is
difﬁcult. In an identiﬁcation task, if only parts of geminates are presented, there are no direct comparisons of
stimuli in each trial. That would force subjects to choose between alternative representations. By asking
subjects to write down the Japanese test words in Korean orthography we can reduce such disadvantages with
our subjects, focusing more on the test words, and also disguise our purposes in the experiment. Second, one
of the purposes in our perception experiment was to examine whether the frequency of Japanese words—
frequently and infrequently used words in ()—affects our subjects’ categorization of Japanese geminates.
This could not be tested without using the orthography method in the present study. See Park and de Jong
() for use of a similar orthography method in their perception experiment.

Kim

(a)
(b)
46%
(4,414/9,600)
34.3%
(3,296/9,600)
8.7%
(838/9,600)
4.6%
(437/9,600)
0.18%
(17/9,600)
5.3%
(508/9,600)
0.9%
(87/9,600)0.02%
(3/9,600)
no coda + onset fortis
coda + onset fortis
coda + onset aspirated
coda + onset lenis
coda + other consonant
no coda+ onset aspirated
no coda + onset lenis
no coda + other consonant
64.3%
(2,058/3,200)
11.8%
(377/3,200)
7.5%
(240/3,200)
16.2%
(520/3,200)
0.2%
(5/3,200)
no coda + onset fortis
coda + onset fortis
coda + onset lenis
no coda + onset lenis
no coda + other consonant
FIGURE .The distribution of an onset consonant with no coda and with a coda consonant
in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception of the Japanese geminates (a) [pː, tː, kː] and (b) [sː].
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


was perceived as the onset fortis fricative /s’/ with no coda, and .% (/,) as
the onset fortis fricative with a coda.
Our subjects’ responses as an onset fortis consonant with no coda and with a coda
for the Japanese geminate plosives and fricative are sorted out into the two groups of
Japanese words, as shown in Figure .. Their responses are signiﬁcantly different
Frequently used Japanese
words
Frequently used Japanese
words
Infrequently used Japanese
words
Infrequently used Japanese
words
no coda + onset fortis
coda + onset fortis
90.9%
(1,010/1,111)
79.2%
(1,048/1,324)
43.4%
(1,619/3,733)
70.3%
(2,795/3,977)
29.7%
(1,182/3,977)
56.6%
(2,114/3,733)
20.8%
(276/1,324)
9.1%
(101/1,111)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
(a)
(b)
Responses
Responses
no coda + onset fortis
coda + onset fortis
FIGURE .The distribution of coda + onset fortis consonants and an onset fortis consonant
with no coda in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception of the Japanese geminates (a) [pː, tː, kː] and
(b) [sː] in frequently used and infrequently used Japanese words.

Kim

between frequently and infrequently used Japanese words both for the Japanese
geminate plosives (χ2 = ., df = , p < .) and for the geminate fricative
(χ2 = ., df = , p < .).
To be more speciﬁc, there are mainly either no coda (.% = ,/,) or coda
/s/ (.% = ,/,) in responses for the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː]. When
Japanese geminates were [pː] and [kː], .% (/,) were perceived as the coda
/p/ and .% (/,) as the coda /k/. For the geminates [pː, tː, kː], the percentage
of the coda /t/ was .% (/,) (see Table .(a–c) for the distribution of coda
consonants in their perception of the ﬁrst part of the geminates [pː], [tː], and [kː],
separately).18 Table .(a–c) present their responses as no coda, coda /s/, /p/, /t/, /k/,
and other consonants for the geminate plosives [pː], [tː], and [kː], respectively, in
frequently and infrequently used Japanese words. Their responses as coda /s/ and no
coda were sorted on the basis of whether or not Japanese words are frequently used in
Figure .(a). They are signiﬁcantly different in frequently and infrequently used
Japanese words (χ2 = ., df = , p < .). Their responses as the coda /s/ are
signiﬁcantly higher in frequently used Japanese words than those in infrequently
used Japanese words (χ2 = ., df = , p < .), whereas responses as no coda
are signiﬁcant in infrequently used Japanese words (χ2 = ., df = , p < .).
As for the Japanese geminate fricative [sː], our subjects’ responses are also mostly
either no coda (% = ,/,) or the coda /s/ (.% = /,). .%
(/,) was perceived as coda /t/ and one response (/,) as another consonant
(i.e. /p/), as shown in Table .(d). Figure .(b) presents the sorting of their
responses as coda /s/ and no coda on the basis of whether or not Japanese words are
frequently used. As in the geminate plosives, their responses as coda /s/ are signiﬁcant
in frequently used Japanese words, as compared to those in infrequently used ones
(χ2 = ., df = , p < .), and those as no coda are signiﬁcantly higher in
infrequently used ones (χ2 = ., df = , p < .). However, unlike those for the
Japanese geminate plosives, their responses for the geminate fricative were mostly
no coda in considerably more than half of the cases: .% (,/,) in frequently
used Japanese words and .% (,/,) in infrequently used ones, as in
Table .(d).
The distribution of onset consonants in their responses for the Japanese geminates
[pː, tː, kː, sː] showed that .% (,/,) were perceived as fortis, .%
(,/,) as aspirated, % (,/,) as lenis, and .% (/,) as
other consonants, as in Table .. Regarding the geminate plosives, our subjects
mostly perceived them as fortis consonants (.% = ,/,). % (,/,)
18 Inter-speaker variation is not considered in our data analysis because we are speciﬁcally concerned
with our subjects’ categorization of the Japanese geminates based on their total responses. In addition, it is
not informative to the purpose of the present study due to the large amount of data from subjects which
would lead to a signiﬁcant variation in any contexts.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


TABLE .. The distribution of coda consonants in Korean speakers’ perception of the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː]
No coda
Coda /s/
Coda /t/
Coda /p/
Coda /k/
Other consonants
a.
[pː]
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
–
.% (/,)
b.
[tː]
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
.% (/,)
–
–
.% (/,)
c.
[kː]
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
.% (/,)
–
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
d.
[sː]
% (,/,)
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
–
–
% (/,)

were perceived as aspirated, .% (/,) as lenis, and .% (/,) as
other consonants (e.g. /t’, k’, m/ for the Japanese [pː], and /k’, p’, n/ for [tː])
(see Table .(a–c) for their responses as onset consonants for the geminates [pː],
[tː], and [kː], respectively). The statistical results showed that their responses as onset
fortis, aspirated, lenis, and other consonants for the geminate plosives are signiﬁ-
cantly different in frequently and infrequently used Japanese words (χ2 = .,
df = , p < .). Figure .(a) presents the distribution of fortis, aspirated, and
lenis consonants in onset position in their responses for the geminate plosives in the
two groups of Japanese words. Their responses as fortis plosives are signiﬁcant
in infrequently used Japanese words, as compared to those in frequently used ones
(χ2 = ., df = , p < .). In contrast, the proportion of responses produced
as aspirated plosives is signiﬁcantly higher in frequently used Japanese words (χ2 = .,
df = , p < .).
In the case of the Japanese geminate [sː], .% (,/,) was perceived as the
fortis fricative /s’/, .% (/,) as the lenis fricative /s/, and .% (/,) as
other consonants (e.g. /k’/) in onset position (see Table .d). Their responses as
TABLE .. The distribution of no coda, coda /s/, /p/, /t/, /k/, and other consonants
in Korean speakers’ perception of the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] in
(i) frequently used and (ii) infrequently used Japanese words
i. Frequently used
Japanese words
ii. Infrequently used
Japanese words
a.
[pː]
No coda
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/s/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/p/
% (/,)
.% (/,)
/t/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
b.
[tː]
No coda
.% (/,)
.% (,/,)
/s/
.% (,/,)
.% (/,)
/t/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
c.
[kː]
No coda
.% (/,)
.% (,/,)
/s/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/k/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/t/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
d.
[sː]
No coda
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
/s/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/t/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
% (/,)
.% (/,)
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


onset fortis, lenis, and other consonants show no signiﬁcant difference in the two
groups of Japanese words (χ2= ., df= , p = .). Figure .(b) presents the
sorting of their responses as the fortis fricative /s’/ and the lenis fricative /s/ in
frequently and infrequently used Japanese words. The statistical results showed
that there is no signiﬁcant difference in their responses as onset fortis between
frequently and infrequently used Japanese words (χ2= ., df= , p = .). The
Frequently used Japanese
words
Frequently used Japanese
words
Infrequently used Japanese
words
Infrequently used Japanese
words
no coda
coda /s/
no coda
coda /s/
90.3%
(1,443/1,598)
73.8%
(1,180/1,599)
38.2%
(1,815/4,754)
70.7%
(3,213/4,542)
29.3%
(1,329/4,542)
61.8%
(2,939/4,754)
26.2%
(419/1,599)
9.7%
(155/1,598)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
(a)
(b)
Responses
Responses
FIGURE .The distribution of the coda /s/ and no coda in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception
of the Japanese geminates (a) [pː, tː, kː] and (b) [sː] in frequently used and infrequently used
Japanese words.

Kim

same is true of their responses as the onset lenis fricative between the two groups of
Japanese words (χ2 = ., df = , p = .).
To sum up, our subjects mostly perceived the Japanese voiceless geminates either
as coda + onset consonants or as an onset consonant with no coda. In the case of the
Japanese geminate plosives, their responses were mainly an onset fortis consonant
with or without a coda, whereas their responses for the Japanese geminate fricative
were mainly the onset fortis fricative /s’/ with no coda. Their responses as an onset
fortis consonant with a coda are signiﬁcant in frequently used Japanese words, as
compared to those in infrequently used ones, and those as an onset fortis consonant
with no coda are signiﬁcant in infrequently used Japanese words, no matter whether
the Japanese geminate consonants are plosive or fricative.
In relation to the results of our perception experiment, we can recall the three
questions raised in the introduction. The ﬁrst question is whether the Korean
laryngeal feature [+ tense], as in (a.i), or just Korean syllable structure constraints,
as in (a.ii) affect Korean speakers’ perception of Japanese geminates. Given that
onset consonants are mostly fortis in our subjects’ responses (Figures ., ., and
.), the results of the present perception experiment indicate that it is the Korean
(L) syllable structure constraints, not the Lfeature [+ tense], that affect their
TABLE .. The distribution of onset lenis, fortis, aspirated, and other consonants
in Korean speakers’ perception of the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] in
(i) frequently used and (ii) infrequently used Japanese words
i. Frequently used
Japanese words
ii. Infrequently used
Japanese words
a.
[pː]
/p/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/p'/
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
/ph/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
b.
[tː]
/t/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/t'/
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
/th/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
c.
[kː]
/k/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/k'/
.% (/,)
.% (,/,)
/kh/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
d.
[sː]
/s/
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
/s'/
.% (,/,)
.% (,/,)
Other consonants
.% (/,)
.% (/,)
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


perception of the Japanese geminates in Lperception (a). Therefore, the onset
consonant in the sequence of the /s/ coda + an onset lenis consonant undergoes
Post-Obstruent Tensing in Lphonology (c). As for the second question about the
distribution of coda consonants, our subjects’ responses as either the coda fricative /s/
Frequently used Japanese words
Infrequently used Japanese words
lenis
aspirated
fortis
12.8%
(610/4,778)
4%
(191/4,778)
15.3%
(734/4,796)
6.9%
(332/4,796)
77.8%
(3,730/4,796)
83.2%
(3,977/4,778)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
(a)
Responses
Frequently used Japanese words
Infrequently used Japanese words
lenis (/s/) 
fortis (/s'/)
25%
(399/1,596)
22.5%
(360/1,599)
77.5%
(1,239/1,599)
75%
(1,197/1,596)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
(b)
Responses
FIGURE .The distribution of onset consonants in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception of the
Japanese geminates (a) [pː, tː, kː] and (b) [sː] in frequently used and infrequently used
Japanese words.

Kim

or no coda (Figure .) suggest that Llexicon (b) as well as Lphonology (c)
plays a role in their perception of Japanese geminates. Our subjects’ responses as the
coda fricative /s/ reﬂect the Korean lexical restriction in Llexicon (b), whereas
their responses as no coda suggest that the lenis fricative /s/ in Llexicon (b) is
neutralized into the coronal plosive [t] by Coda Neutralization in Lphonology (c),
and the coronal plosive is often deleted due to its unmarkedness in Loutput (d).
The third question we raised is whether spelling convention, rather than Lgram-
mar, affects Korean speakers’ perception. If this is the case, our subjects’ responses
would be like the sequence of the lenis fricative /s/ and an aspirated plosive for the
Japanese geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː], as in (a), or /ss/ for the Japanese geminate
fricative [sː], as in (b). However, as shown in Figures .and ., their responses
were either /s/ or no coda in coda position and mostly fortis consonants in onset
position. In short, our subjects’ perception of the Japanese geminates is affected by
Korean (L) grammar such as Lsyllable structure constraints, Llexical restrictions,
and Lphonology, which is discussed in detail below.
.Discussion
From the results of our perception experiment, we propose that Japanese geminates are
parsed in accordance with Korean (L) syllable structure, not the Lfeature [ tense],
in Lperception, and that Llexicon and Lphonology as well as Lperception in the
model of loanword adaptation in () also play an important role in our Seoul speakers’
perception of the Japanese voiceless geminates, as shown in ().
()
A revised Korean adaptationof a Japanese voiceless geminate in the model (5)
Japanese (L2)
cues
Korean (L1)
a. L1 perception:
[Cː]
/t.C/  
long oral closure or
constriction duration,
locus (for the place of
articulation) at the onset
of a vowel after geminates
the unmarked coronal 
coda consonant /t/ and
an onset lenis consonant
b. L1 lexicon:
/s.C/
c. L1 phonology:
i.
[tC]
ii.
[t.C’]
d.  L1 output:
[(t).C’] (or [CC’])
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


In Lperception, the long oral closure/constriction duration is parsed as a sequence
of the unmarked coronal plosive /t/ in coda position and a lenis consonant in onset
position in accordance with Korean (L) syllable structure constraints, as in (a). Our
examination of the oral closure duration of the geminates [pː, tː, kː] in the Japanese
words in () revealed that the average closure duration of the geminates is .ms,
twice as long as that of the intervocalic single plosives [t, k], which is ms
(Kim , b). In addition, the locus of the place of articulation of each geminate
plosive in the Japanese words in () is usually present at the onset of a vowel after the
geminate rather than at the offset of a vowel before the geminate. For example,
Figure .presents a wide-band spectrogram of the Japanese word /nippori/ ‘Nippori’
(place name). Given that the locus of the place of articulation of bilabial plosives
occurs near Hz for the ﬁrst formant and at around ,~ ,Hz for the second
formant (e.g. Borden et al. ), one might expect formant transition in surround-
ing vowels before or after the geminate plosive [pː]. As shown in Figure .,
a formant transition for the bilabial plosive does occur at the onset of the vowel /o/
after the geminate plosive [pː], as marked by a white line. However, such a formant
transition is hardly present at the offset of the vowel /i/ before the geminate. The ﬁrst
and second formants at the offset of the vowel /i/ are the same as in the middle of the
vowel.19 We suggest, therefore, that it is in accordance with Korean syllable structure
constraints that the long closure or constriction duration of the Japanese geminates
and the locus at the onset of a vowel after the geminates are parsed as the sequence of
5 kHz
0
n
i
pp
o
r
i
VOT
FIGURE .A wide-band spectrogram of the Japanese word Nippori (place name), with the
locus of the place of articulation of the geminate [pː] marked in a white line at the onset of the
vowel /o/.
19 As for the absence of noticable formant transition at the offset of a vowel preceding the Japanese
geminate [pː] in Figure ., we may attribute it to a much weaker gesture of the lips at the onset of the
geminate than at its offset. For example, in their EMA (Electromagnetic Articulatography) study on
Japanese singleton and geminate consonants, Fujimoto et al. () found that the tongue reaches its
peak at about half of the oral closure of the single /t/ in the non-word /etete/ and far later during the
geminate /tt/ in /ettete/ in their two Japanese male subjects.

Kim

the unmarked coronal plosive /t/ in coda position by default and a lenis consonant
with its place of articulation in onset position in Lperception, as in (a).20
In the Llexicon, the unmarked coronal coda plosive /t/ is stored as the lenis
fricative /s/ due to Korean lexical restrictions, as in (b), and it is in Lphonology
that the lenis fricative in coda position is neutralized into the coronal plosive [t], and
the lenis onset consonant which is [– tense] changes into fortis ([+ tense]) by virtue
of Coda Neutralization (i) and Post-Obstruent Tensing (ii), respectively, as in (c).
The neutralized coda plosive [t] is often deleted or assimilates to a following labial or
dorsal consonant in Loutput, as in (d). The borrowing process in () is illustrated
in () for the Korean adaptation of the Japanese words Sapporo, Tottori, Nikkei, and
Nissan with the geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː].
()
[sapːoro]
[totːori]
[nikːee]
[nisːaN]
‘Sapporo’
‘Tottori’
‘Nikkei’
‘Nissan’
a. Lperception
tp
tt
tk
ts
b. Llexicon
sp
st
sk
ss
c. Lphonology
i.
tp
tt
tk
ts
ii.
tp’
tt’
tk’
ts’
d. Loutput
[sa(t)p’oro]
[to(t)t’ori]
[ni(t)k’ɛi]
[ni(t)s’an]
(or [sapp’o.ro])
(or [nikk’ɛ.i])
Note that there are either no coda or coda /s/ in their responses for the Japanese
geminates, no matter whether the geminates are the labial [pː], dorsal [kː], or coronal
[tː]/[sː], and that there are some occurrences of the coda plosives /p/ and /k/ for the
geminates [pː] and [kː], respectively, or /t/ (Tables .and .and Figures .and
.). These variants would be expected in the model in () with the three inter-
mediate steps—Lperception, Llexicon, and Lphonology—between Lacoustic
output (=Linput) and Loutput, as in ().
In addition, given that their responses as the coda fricative /s/ for the geminates
[pː, tː, kː, sː] are signiﬁcantly higher in frequently used Japanese words, as compared
to those in infrequently used Japanese words (Figure .), we suggest that the
Korean (L) lexicon affects our subjects’ perception of the Japanese geminates
more in frequently used Japanese words than in infrequently used ones. This is
probably because the frequently used Japanese words are treated like Korean words.
The signiﬁcant deletion of the coda consonant in infrequently used Japanese words in
20 The average VOT (Voice Onset Time) after the geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː] in the Japanese words in
() is .ms, almost the same as that after the intervocalic single plosives [t, k], which is ms in Kim
(, b). Given that our subjects’ responses as onset consonants were mostly fortis for the Japanese
geminates, and that the Japanese intervocalic single plosives are perceived as either fortis or aspirated in an
almost distribution (Kim b, , b), we suggest that VOT after the geminates and the single
plosives in intervocalic position does not play a role in our Seoul subjects’ perception.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


the present study indicates that Lphonology affects their responses more when
Japanese words are infrequently used. Therefore, the coda consonant which is
neutralized into the plosive [t] in Lphonology is more likely to be deleted than in
frequently used Japanese words in Loutput.21
One might wonder whether the responses as the coda fricative /s/ result from
spelling convention. As in our third question raised in the introduction, if spelling
convention exerts inﬂuence on their perception of the Japanese geminates, it would
be hard to explain why there are no coda, coda /s/, /t/, /p/, or /k/, etc., in their
responses, no matter whether or not Japanese words are frequently used, as shown
in Table .and no matter whether the words are real or nonsense, as shown in
Appendix A(a). One might still consider an effect of the orthography for their
responses as the coda /s/, since subjects may be quite used to seeing the Japanese
words spelled out. Recall that the percentage of Japanese words with the geminate
plosive [tː] and fricative [sː] is almost the same, i.e. .% (/) and .%
(/), respectively, in our survey of the Korean adaptation of Japanese
words with voiceless geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː, ʃː, tʃː] (see footnote ). However, as
shown in Table ., their responses as coda /s/ are more than double for the
Japanese geminate plosive [tː] compared with the geminate fricative [sː]. Their
responses as coda /s/ are also more than double for the Japanese geminate plosive
[tː] in both frequently and infrequently used Japanese words (Table .). Note also
that onset consonants in their responses for the Japanese geminates were mostly
fortis, regardless of whether Japanese words are real or nonsense, as shown in
Table .and Appendix B(a). If their perception were affected by spelling conven-
tion, the onset consonants would be aspirated for the Japanese geminate plosives and
the lenis fricative /s/ for the geminate fricative, as in (). Given these observations, we
suggest that our subjects’ responses as coda /s/ for the Japanese geminates reﬂect their
real perception, i.e. Llexical representations.22
It is noteworthy that the percentage of no coda consonant is higher in their
responses for the geminate [sː] than the geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː] in both
frequently used and infrequently used Japanese words, as shown in Figure .(b).
Given that the unmarked coronal plosive [t] in coda position has only oral closure
during which there is no acoustic energy at all, we suggest that the unmarked plosive
is overridden by the high-frequency noise, i.e. stridency of the following onset fortis
21 The higher proportion of deletion of a coda consonant in infrequently used Japanese words is further
supported by our other perception experiment with not only the Japanese real words in () but also the
Japanese nonsense words /pappa, patta, pakka, passa/. As shown in Appendix A(a), our other subjects
(male and female), who were newly recruited for this additional experiment, mostly perceived the
Japanese geminates as no coda, and the percentage of their responses as coda /s/ is much lower. The same is
true of the Korean nonsense words /pappa, pakka, passa/, as in Appendix A(b). Note that the Korean word
/patta/ ‘to receive’ + DEC was not included, because it is a frequently used native word.
22 This echoes footnote in support of the idea that writing down the Korean orthographic symbol in
this task reﬂects the subjects’ real perception.

Kim

fricative, and is thus more likely to be deleted for the geminate [sː] than the geminate
plosives [pː, tː, kː].
Moreover, their responses as an onset fortis consonant are much more common
than those as other consonants, including aspirated ones, in both frequently and
infrequently used Japanese words, as shown in Figure .. The percentage of their
responses as onset fortis consonants is much higher than that in Kim (, b),
where an almost equal distribution of fortis and aspirated consonants was found in
Seoul Korean subjects’ responses for the Japanese non-geminate single voiceless
plosives [k, t] in intervocalic position. The much higher percentage of onset fortis
consonants compared to any other consonants in their responses for the Japanese
geminates leads us to suggest that this has nothing to do with the Korean (L)
laryngeal feature [tense], as proposed by Kim () in (a.i). Rather, it is by virtue of
Lsyllable structure constraints that the Japanese voiceless geminates are parsed as
the unmarked coda /t/ and as onset lenis consonants in Lperception, as in (a).
Then in Lphonology the onset lenis consonant undergoes the phonological process
of Post-Obstruent Tensing in both frequently and infrequently used Japanese words,
as in (c.ii).23
Regarding their responses as aspirated onset plosives (% = ,/,) for the
Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː] (Figure .a) in both frequently and infrequently used
Japanese words, we may attribute them to spelling convention, i.e. the effect of
orthography.24,25 The Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː] are to be written as the coda
fricative /s/ and aspirated plosives in onset position in the NIKL regulations (),
as in (a). In the same vein, their responses as the lenis fricative /s/ (.% = /
,) in onset position for the geminate fricative (Figure .b) are also attributed to
spelling convention because we are advised to use the lenis fricatives /ss/ in both coda
and onset positions for the geminate [sː] by the NIKL regulations, as in (b).
In short, our assumption of an Lgrammar-driven borrowing process with the
three intermediate steps—Lperception, Llexicon, and Lphonology—between L
acoustic output (= Linput) and Loutput in model () makes it possible to explain
why our subjects mostly perceived the Japanese geminates as either coda + onset
consonants or an onset with no coda, why they perceived the lenis fricative /s/ in coda
position, and why they perceived it more in frequently used Japanese words than
23 See Appendix B for our subjects’ responses as onset consonants for the geminates in the Japanese and
Korean nonsense words. Their responses are mostly fortis consonants, whether the nonsense words are
Japanese or Korean.
24 As for our subjects’ responses as lenis in onset position (% =/,) for the Japanese geminates
[pː, tː, kː] (Figure .a) in both frequently and infrequently used Japanese words, we suggest that they may
reﬂect Korean lexical representations. As illustrated in (b), the geminates are stored as the sequence of the
lenis /s/ in coda position and a lenis onset consonant in the Korean lexicon.
25 See Appendix B(a), where our subjects’ responses as onset consonants for the geminates [pː, tː, kː] are
sometimes aspirated plosives in Japanese nonsense words, though the percentage is much lower than that
of their responses as a fortis.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


in infrequently used ones. In addition, the ordering of Lphonology after L
lexicon can account for why their responses were mostly fortis consonant in onset
position for the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː], whether or not Japanese words
are frequently used.
.Theoretical implications
Two theoretical implications can be drawn from these results: (a) Korean speakers’
perception of Japanese geminates is better accounted for by our proposed L
grammar-driven borrowing process than by other alternatives such as the phonetic
or phonological view of loanword adaptation in the literature; (b) it also provides
empirical evidence that Korean fortis consonants are singletons, not geminates.
First, as an alternative to our proposal, one might assume that Japanese (L)
acoustic outputs [pː, tː, kː, sː] are adapted as Korean (L) fortis consonants in
onset position in the phonetic approximation view that Lspeakers will perceive
and produce the native segment which most closely approximates Linput in
articulatory and/or acoustic properties, when confronted with an Lsound (e.g.
Silverman ; Peperkamp and Dupoux ). For example, Ito et al. ()
suggested that the Korean adaptation of Japanese voiceless geminates as fortis
consonants is due to the fact that Korean fortis consonants have longer closure
duration than lenis ones. However, this cannot explain why .% (,/,) of
our subjects’ responses for the Japanese voiceless geminates [pː, tː, kː] were an
onset fortis consonant with a coda, and % (,/,) were an onset fortis
consonant with no coda, as shown in Figure .(a). It is also noteworthy to recall
that the closure duration of the Japanese geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː] is twice as
long as that of the intervocalic single plosives [k, t] in Japanese words which are
perceived as either fortis or aspirated (Kim b, , b). In addition, it is
not explained why our subjects’ responses as an onset fortis consonant with a coda
are signiﬁcantly higher in frequently used Japanese words than in infrequently used
ones, and why those with no coda are signiﬁcantly higher in infrequently used
Japanese words than in frequently used ones. Moreover, the phonetic approxima-
tion view cannot account for why the coda consonant in our subjects’ responses for
the Japanese geminate plosives is mostly the lenis fricative /s/ in frequently used
Japanese words, regardless of whether the geminates are [pː], [tː], or [kː], and why
it is signiﬁcantly deleted in infrequently used Japanese words, as compared to
frequently used ones.
Another alternative would be the phonological view that loanword adaptation is
based on phonological category mappings between the donor (L) and the recipient
(L) languages (e.g. LaCharité ; LaCharité and Paradis ; Paradis and
LaCharité ; Paradis and Tremblay ). Therefore, the Linput signal is parsed
by the phonological categories of the Land adapted into the Lon the basis of

Kim

phonological proximity. In this view, the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] should be
adapted into /pp, tt, kk, ss/ because the homorganic consonants are also allowed in
Korean, as shown in (b.i). Yet this is not the case, as is evident in our subjects’
perception of the Japanese geminates in the present study. As shown in Figure .
and Table ., their responses for the Japanese geminate plosives were mainly either
no coda or the lenis fricative /s/ in coda position, no matter whether the plosives were
labial, coronal, or dorsal. Our subjects’ responses for the Japanese geminate fricative
cannot be accounted for in the phonological view, either; % of their responses were
no coda consonant and .% were the lenis fricative /s/, as shown in Table .(d).
In addition, the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] bear the phonological weight unit of
mora in Tokyo Japanese, as in (a). However, the distribution of coda /s/ and no coda
in our subjects’ responses for the Japanese geminates (Figure .) indicates that the
phonological weight unit of mora in Japanese is not borrowed into the Korean
adaptation. Rather, it is by Korean syllable structure constraints that the Japanese
geminates are parsed as the unmarked coda plosive /t/ and an onset lenis consonant
in Lperception (a), with the coda /t/ then stored as /s/ in Llexicon (b).
Moreover, in the phonological view, our subjects’ responses as onset consonants
for the Japanese geminates should be the lenis consonants /p, t, k, s/, which are
categorically closest to the source sounds. However, their responses were mainly the
fortis /p’, t’, k’, s’/, as shown in Figure .and Table ..
Consequently, our proposal that Lspeakers’ perception is made within the
framework of Lgrammar supports the view that Lsurface forms are computed
by Lphonology (e.g. Polivanov , ; Trubetzkoy ; Hyman ;
Best ; Peperkamp ; Yip ; Kim ). However, unlike some existing
perceptual models, the present study provides empirical evidence for the three
intermediate steps—Lperception, Llexical representations, and Lphonology—
between Lacoustic output (= Linput) and Loutput in the process of loanword
adaptation, as shown in the model in ().26
Second, the singleton analysis of Korean fortis consonants (e.g. Cho and Inkelas
; Kim , , , a; Kim, Maeda, and Honda , ) provides a
better account of Korean subjects’ perception of Japanese geminates in the present
study than the geminate analysis (e.g. Han ; Silva , ; Avery and Idsardi
). Recall that our subjects mostly perceived the geminate plosives [pː, tː, kː] in
frequently used Japanese words as either the sequence of coda /s/ + onset fortis
consonants or onset fortis with no coda, as shown in Figure .. In the geminate
26 See Kim (, a) for the phonological arguments for the three intermediate steps in loanword
adaptation, and also for the role of Ldistinctive features as well as Lsyllable-structure constraints and
lexicon in the Korean adaptation of English and French voicing contrast in plosives and English fricatives
and affricates.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


account of Korean fortis consonants, the Japanese geminate plosives would be
expected to be borrowed as fortis consonants [p’, t’, k’]. Yet this cannot explain
why the Japanese geminate plosives were perceived as the sequence of the lenis
fricative /s/ in coda position and fortis plosives in onset position. In addition, if the
Korean fortis plosives were geminates due to their longer closure duration than their
lenis counterparts (e.g. Silva ; Han ), Korean aspirated plosives would be
considered as geminates too, because they are as long as their fortis counterparts or
sometimes longer than the latter in both word-initial and word-medial position (e.g.
Kim ; Kim et al. ; Kim, Maeda, and Honda ).
One might assume that when a Korean subject writes down the fortis k’ for the
Japanese geminate plosive [kː], the subject is actually perceiving [kk] with a coda
rather than [k’] with no coda. If this were the case, our subjects would write down kk
for the Japanese geminate. Yet, as shown in Tables .and ., the percentage of
our subjects’ responses as the coda /k/ for the geminates is .% (/,) and as the
onset /k/ is .% (/,) in frequently used Japanese words. The percentage as
the onset /k/ is lower in infrequently used Japanese words. The assumption also
faces difﬁculty in providing an account of why our subjects mostly wrote down either
/s/ in coda position (.% = ,/,) or no coda (.% = ,/,), as in
Table .(c), for the Japanese geminate [kː].
Rather, both fortis and aspirated consonants are proposed to be singletons, being
classiﬁed as tense ([+ tense]) and different in glottal opening with the former being
[– spread glottis] and the latter [+ spread glottis] (henceforth [s.g.]) (Kim , ,
, a; Kim, Maeda, and Honda , ). In the recent MRI studies of Kim
et al. () and Kim, Maeda, and Honda (, ), two independent and
systematic parameters are found in the production of Korean three-way phonation
contrast: (a) concomitant closure or constriction duration and glottal raising which is
correlated with the stiffness of the vocal folds; and (b) glottal opening. That is, closure
or constriction duration varies from short to long in the order lenis < aspirated, fortis
consonants, and glottal height varies from low to high in the same order. On the
other hand, the glottis opens from small to large in the order fortis, lenis < aspirated
consonants. The concomitant closure or constriction duration and glottal raising are
proposed to be the tensing of the primary articulator (i.e. the lips, the tongue blade, or
dorsum) and the vocal folds, being incorporated into the feature [tense] which is
newly modiﬁed from the traditional feature in Jakobson et al. (), Jakobson and
Halle (), and Kim ().27 The other parameter of glottal opening is incorpor-
ated into the feature [s.g.] in line with Halle and Stevens (). Thus, while fortis
27 According to Jakobson et al. (), the tension of the whole vocal tract is incorporated into the
feature [tense].

Kim

and aspirated consonants are speciﬁed as [+ tense], and lenis as [– tense], aspirated
consonants are speciﬁed as [+ s.g.] for their wider glottal opening, and fortis and lenis
as [– s.g.].28
In the singleton account of Korean consonants with the use of the features
[ tense] and [ s.g.], our subjects’ responses as fortis in onset position for
the Japanese geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] are explained by Post-Obstruent Tensing
whereby the lenis onset consonant ([– s.g., – tense]) changes into its fortis coun-
terpart ([– s.g., + tense]) in Lphonology, as in (c.ii).29 Our subjects’ responses as
the sequence of coda /s/ and an onset fortis consonant for the Japanese geminates
are also straightforwardly explained in the singleton analysis. This is because the
sequence of a coda and an onset in intervocalic position satisﬁes Korean syllable
structure constraints, whether the onset consonant is fortis, aspirated, or lenis in
Korean phonology.
.Conclusion
In the present study, we have been concerned with whether Lgrammar exerts an
inﬂuence on borrowing Lwords by exploring Seoul Korean (L) speakers’ percep-
tion of Japanese (L) voiceless geminates. In our perception experiment, eighty Seoul
Korean subjects were asked to listen to sixteen frequently and infrequently used
Japanese words with the voiceless geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː]. The results of the
experiment showed that the Japanese geminates were perceived as either the
sequence of a coda and an onset or an onset consonant with no coda. That is,
responses for the Japanese geminates were either the coda fricative /s/ or no coda,
with those as coda /s/ being signiﬁcantly more numerous in frequently used Japanese
words than in infrequently used ones, and a fortis consonant in onset position, no
matter whether Japanese words are frequently used or not.
Based on the results, we have proposed that Japanese geminates are parsed in
accordance with Korean (L) syllable structure in Lperception, and that Llexicon
28 See Kim, Maeda, and Honda () for the literature review as well as phonetic data and Kim (,
, , a) for phonological arguments in support of the singleton analysis of Korean fortis
consonants.
29 Not only Post-Obstruent Tensing but also intensiﬁed expressions provide phonological evidence for
the singleton account of Korean consonants with the use of the laryngeal features [ tense] and [s.g.]. For
example, when Koreans convey their intensiﬁed feelings, word-initial lenis consonants change into their
fortis counterparts to the exclusion of aspirated ones (Kim , , a): /pɛ.k’i.ta/ ! [p’ɛ.k’i.ta]
*phɛ.k’i.ta ‘to copy’, /taŋ.ki.ta/ ! [t’aŋ.ki.ta] *thaŋ.ki.ta ‘to pull’, /ka.si/ ! [k’a.si] *kha.si ‘thorn’. The
grouping of lenis and fortis consonants is explained by the feature [– s.g.], and the change of lenis consonants
into fortis counterparts by the feature [ tense], such that lenis consonants which are [– tense] change into
fortis which are [+ tense]. In addition to native Korean words, the sound pattern is observed in English
loans (Kim , a).
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


and Lphonology as well as Lperception in the model of loanword adaptation in
() also play an important role in our Seoul speakers’ perception of the Japanese
voiceless geminates, as shown in (). Therefore, the long oral closure/constriction
duration and locus of each Japanese voiceless geminate are parsed as the sequence of
the unmarked coronal plosive /t/ in coda position and an onset lenis consonant in L
perception, as in (a). The unmarked coronal plosive is stored as the lenis fricative /s/
in Llexicon due to Korean lexical restrictions, as in (b). It is in Lphonology (c)
that the lenis fricative is neutralized into the coronal plosive [t], and a following lenis
consonant changes into a fortis by virtue of Coda Neutralization and Post-Obstruent
Tensing, respectively. The neutralized plosive [t] is often deleted due to its
unmarkedness or assimilates in place to a following non-coronal plosive in L
output, as in (d).
To conclude, the present study provides empirical evidence for an Lgrammar-
driven borrowing process with the three intermediate steps of Lperception,
Llexicon, and Lphonology between Lacoustic output (= Linput) and L
output in the Korean (L) adaptation of the Japanese (L) voiceless geminates
[pː, tː, kː, sː], supporting the view that Lsurface forms are computed by an L
grammar (e.g. Polivanov , ; Trubetzkoy ; Hyman ; Best ;
Peperkamp ; Yip ; Kim ). Further research would be expected
for a possible application of the Lgrammar-driven borrowing process in ()
beyond Korean.

Kim

(a)
no coda
coda /s/
coda /t/
coda /p/
coda /k/
other consonants
[pː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
.% (/)
[kː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
.% (/)
.% (/)
[tː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
.% (/)
[sː]
.% (/)
% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
.% (/)
(b)
no coda
coda /s/
coda /t/
coda /p/
coda /k/
other consonants
[pː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
% (/)
.% (/)
—
.% (/)
[kː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
.% (/)
.% (/)
[sː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
% (/)
.Appendices
..Appendix A. The distribution of no coda, coda /s/, /t/, /p/, and /k/ in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception of the geminates [pː, tː, kː,
sː] in (a) Japanese and (b) Korean nonsense words

..Appendix B. The distribution of onset lenis, fortis, aspirated, and other
consonants in Seoul Korean speakers’ perception of the geminates [pː, tː, kː, sː] in (a)
Japanese and (b) Korean nonsense words
..Appendix C. References to tourism in our survey of Korean adaptation
of Japanese geminates
Cho, Kyung-ca. . Sometimes Kyoto. Seoul: Terra.
Choi, Young-Min. . Enjoy Tokyo. Seoul: Nexusbook.
Ki, Kyung-Suk & Hyunjin Ko. . Kyusju paykpae culkiki [How to enjoy Kyushu one
hundred times]. Seoul: RH Korea.
Ki, Kyung-Suk & Hyunjin Ko. . Osaka paykpae culkiki [How to enjoy Osaka one hundred
times]. Seoul: RH Korea.
Kim, Seung-Hui. . Tokyo matcip kaiteu [Guide to famous Tokyo restaurants]. Seoul:
Amoeba.
Kim, Wu-Suk. . Friends Mini Japan Kyoto (translated from Tabimaru Kyoto, ,
Shobunsha Publications). Seoul: Joongangbooks.
Ko, Hyunsjin & Kyung-Suk. . Ilpon [Japan]. Seoul: RH Korea.
Park, Chung-Pae. . Nangmaneui Ilponkicha Yohaeng [Romantic Japanese train travel].
Seoul: Sikongsa.
Yang, Won-Suk. .Tokyo nolicito. Seoul: RH Korea.
Yang, Won-Suk. . Tokyo paykpae culkiki [How to enjoy Kyusu one hundred times]. Seoul:
RH Korea.
Yun, Hui-Sang. . Just go Tokyo. (Translated from Teku Teku Aruki series: Tokyo, Hakone,
Izu, Nikko. . Nohihon Sha.)
(a)
lenis
fortis
aspirated
other consonants
[pː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
[kː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
[tː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
[sː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
(b)
lenis
fortis
aspirated
other consonants
[pː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
—
[kː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
[sː]
.% (/)
.% (/)
—
.% (/)

Kim

Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere thanks to Takeki Kamiyama, who recorded Japanese test
words, to Seung-Un Park and Eun-Hae Park, who helped in conducting perception experi-
ments, and also to all the participants. My sincere thanks also go to June-Yeop Kim for
statistics, and to Haruo Kubozono and two anonymous reviewers for comments and feedback.
Earlier versions of the present study were presented at the rd International Conference of
Phonetics and Phonology held at NINJAL, Tokyo, Japan in and the workshop on
geminate consonants at the th ICPhS conference held at Glasgow, England in . This
work is supported by Hongik University Research Fund. All errors remain my own.
Korean perception of Japanese geminates


References
Abramson, Arthur S. (a). Distinctive length in initial consonants: Pattani Malay. Journal
of the Acoustic Society of America : –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (b). The perception of word-initial consonant length: Pattani Malay.
Journal of the International Phonetic Association (): –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (). Word-initial consonant length in Pattani Malay. Haskins Labora-
tories Status Report on Speech Research SR-: –. Repr. in Thomas V. Gamkrelidze (ed.),
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, vol. (Tallinn: Academy of
Sciences of the Estonian SSR), –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (). Amplitude as a cue to word-initial consonant length: Pattani
Malay. In Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, vol. . Aix-en-
Provence: Université de Provence, –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (). The complex acoustic output of a single articulatory gesture:
Pattani Malay word-initial consonant length. In U. Warotamasikkhadit and T. Panakul
(eds), Fourth Annual Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society . Tempe:
Program for Southeast Asian Studies, Arizona State University, –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (). Fundamental frequency as a cue to word-initial consonant length:
Pattani Malay. In J. J. Ohala et al. (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, vol. . San Francisco: University of California Press, –.
Abramson, Arthur S. (). Acoustic cues to word-initial stop length in Pattani Malay.
In M.-J. Solé, D. Recasens, and J. Romero (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress
of Phonetic Sciences. Australia: Causal Productions (CD-ROMs)/Barcelona: Futurgraphic
(print proceedings), –.
Al-Tamimi, Jalal, and Ghada Khattab (). Acoustic cue weighting in the singleton vs
geminate contrast in Lebanese Arabic: the case of fricative consonants. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Alderete, John D. (). Faithfulness to prosodic heads. Rutgers Optimality Archive, ROA-
-.
Alderete, John D. (). Morphologically governed accent in optimality theory. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Amano, Shigeaki, and Yukari Hirata (). Correspondence of perception and production
boundaries between single and geminate stops in Japanese. In Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, –.
Amano, Shigeaki, and Yukari Hirata (). Perception and production boundaries between
single and geminate stops in Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America ():
–.
Amano, Shigeaki, and Yukari Hirata (). Perception and production of singleton and
geminate stops in Japanese: implications for the theory of acoustic invariance. Phonetica
(): –.

Amano, Shigeaki, Ryoko Mugitani, and Tessei Kobayashi (). Perceptual boundary
between a single and a geminate stop in Japanese. In J. Trouvain and W. J. Barry (eds),
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saarbrücken: Saarland
University, –.
Andrews, J. Richard (). Introduction to Classical Nahuatl. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Aoyama, Katsura (). A Psycholinguistic Perspective on Finnish and Japanese Prosody:
Perception, Production and Child Acquisition of Consonantal Quantity Distinctions. Boston,
Mass.: Kluwer Academic.
Aoyama, Katsura, and Lawrence A. Reid (). Cross-linguistic tendencies and durational
contrasts in geminate consonants: an examination of Guinaang Bontok geminates, Journal
of the International Phonetic Association : –.
Applegate, Joseph R. (). An Outline of the Structure of Shilha. New York: American
Council of Learned Societies.
Ardentov, Boris Petrovich (). Fonologija Sovremennogo Russkogo Literaturnogo Jazyka
[Phonology of the Contemporary Literary Russian Language]. Kishenev: Shtiintsa.
Armosti, Spyros (). The phonetics of plosive and affricate gemination in Cypriot Greek.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge.
Armosti, Spyros (). The phonetics of plosive and affricate gemination in Cypriot Greek.
Revised version of doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge.
Arnason, Kristjan (). Quantity in Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Arvaniti, Amalia (). A (brief) overview of the phonetics and phonology of Cypriot Greek.
In A. Voskos, D. Goutsos, and A. Moser (eds), Η Ελληνική Γλώσσα στην Κύπρο από την
Αρχαιότητα ως Σήμερα [The Greek Language in Cyprus from Antiquity to Today]. Athens:
University of Athens, –.
Arvaniti, Amalia (). The usefulness of metrics in the quantiﬁcation of speech rhythm.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Arvaniti, Amalia, and Georgios Tserdanelis (). On the phonetics of geminates: evidence
from Cypriot Greek. In B. Yuan, T. Huang, and X. Tang (eds), Proceedings of International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP). Beijing: Chinese Friendship Pub-
lishers, –.
Avanesov, Ruben Ivanovich (). Russkoje Literaturnoje Proiznoshenije [Russian Literary
Pronunciation]. Moscow: Prosveshchenie.
Avery, Paul, and William J. Idsardi (). Laryngeal dimensions, completion and enhance-
ment. In T. Hall (ed.), Phonology and Phonetics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, –.
Baayen, Harald, Richard Piepenbrock, and Leon Gulikers (). The Celex Lexical Database,
Release . Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Baker, Brett (). Edge crispness: segment to mora isomorphism. In E. Curtis, J. Lyle, and
G. Webster (eds), Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics.
Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press, –.
Baker, Wendy, and Pavel Troﬁmovich (). Perceptual paths to accurate production of L
vowels: the role of individual differences. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language
Teaching (): –.
References


Baldwin, John. R. (). Syllable division in Russian. STUF: Language Typology and Universals
(–): –.
Balota, David A., Maura Pilotti, and Michael J. Cortese (). Subjective frequency estimates
for ,monosyllabic words. Memory and Cognition (): –.
Bamakhramah, Majdi (). Syllable structure in Arabic varieties with a focus on superheavy
syllables. Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University.
Barnes, Jonathan (). Positional neutralization: a phonologization approach to typological
patterns. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Beckman, Mary (). Segmental duration and the ‘mora’ in Japanese. Phonetica : –.
Beckman, Mary E., and Jan Edwards (). Lengthenings and shortenings and the nature of
prosodic constituency. In J. Kingston and M. E. Beckman (eds), Papers in Laboratory
Phonology I: Between the Grammar and Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, –.
Behne, Dawn M., Peter E. Czigler, and Kirk P. H. Sullivan (a). Perceived Swedish vowel
quantity: effects of postvocalic voicing. Phonum : –.
Behne, Dawn M., Peter E. Czigler, and Kirk. P. H. Sullivan (b). Perceived Swedish vowel
quantity: effects of postvocalic consonant duration. Phonum : –.
Bell, Arthur J. (). Gemination, degemination and moraic structure in Wolof. Working
Papers of the Cornell Phonetics Laboratory : –.
Bentin, Schlomo, Gregory McCarthy, and Charles C. Wood (). Event-related potentials,
lexical decision and semantic priming. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology
(): –.
Best, Catherine (). A direct realist view of cross-language speech. In W. Strange (ed.),
Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience. Baltimore: York Press, –.
Bishop, Jason B. (). Incomplete neutralization in eastern Andalusian Spanish: perceptual
consequences of durational differences involved in s-aspiration. In J. Trouvain and W. J. Barry
(eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saarbrücken:
Universität des Saarlandes, –.
Blanc, Haim (). Communal Dialects in Baghdad. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Blevins, Juliette (a). Evolutionary Phonology: The Emergence of Sound Patterns. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Blevins, Juliette (b). Klamath sibilant degemination: implications of a recent sound
change. International Journal of American Linguistics : –.
Boersma, Paul (). Functional Phonology: Formalizing the Interaction between Articulatory
and Perceptual Drives. The Hague: Holland Academic Graphics.
Boersma, Paul (). Praat: a system for doing phonetics by computer. Glot International
(/): –.
Boersma, Paul (). Phonology without markedness constraints: slides for presentation at
rd International Conference on Language Variation in Europe, Amsterdam, –June.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (–). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer.
Software.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer. Software.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer, version ...
Software.

References

Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer. Software.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (). Praat: doing phonetics by computer. Glot International
(/): –.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer, version
... Software.
Bölte, Jens, and Else Coenen (). Domato primes paprika: mismatching pseudowords
activate semantic and phonological representations. In A. Cutler, J. M. McQueen, and
R. Zondervan (eds), Proceedings of SWAP (Spoken Word Access Processes). Nijmegen:
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, –.
Borden, Gloria J., Katherine S. Harris, and Lawrence J. Raphael (). Speech Science Primer:
Physiology, Acoustics and Perception of Speech, rd edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Borgstrøm, Carl H. (). Zur Phonologie der norwegischen Schriftsprache (nach der
ost-norwegischen Aussprache). Norsk Tidskrift for Sprogvidenskap : –.
Borowsky, Toni, and Ralph-Armin Mester (). Aspiration to roots: remarks on the Sanskrit
deaspirates. In M. Marks and J. Richardson (eds), Papers from the th Regional Meeting of
the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society, –.
Borrelli, Doris (). Raddoppiamento Sintattico in Italian: A Synchronic and Diachronic
Cross-Dialectal Study. London: Routledge.
Bortolini, Umberta, and Antonio Zampolli (). Frequenza e distribuzione dei gruppi
consonantici nella lingua italiana. Acta Phoniatrica : –.
Bouarourou, Fayssal, Béatrice Vaxelaire, Rachid Ridouane, Fabrice Hirsch, and Rudolph Sock
(). Gemination in Tariﬁt Berber: X-ray and acoustic data. In R. Sock, S. Fuchs, and
Y. Laprie (eds), Proceedings of the th International Seminar on Speech Production.
Strasbourg: Inria, –.
Braver, Aaron (). Incomplete neutralization in American English ﬂapping: a production
study. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics (): –.
Brunner, Rudolf (). Die Stimmhaftigkeit der französischen und zürichdeutschen Lenislaute:
eine vergleichende experimentalphonetische Studie. Berlin: Akademie.
Calabrese, Andrea, and W. Leo Wetzels (). Loan Phonology. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Canepari, Luciano (). Manuale di pronuncia italiana. Bologna: Zanichelli.
Canepari, Luciano (). Dizionario di pronuncia italiana. Bologna: Zanichelli.
Catford, Ian (). A Practical Introduction to Phonetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cedrus Corporation (). Superlab, version .. Software.
Chatterji, Suniti Kumar (). Origin and Development of the Bengali Language. Calcutta:
Calcutta University Press (repr. Calcutta: Rupa, ).
Cho, Taehong (). Effects of prosody on articulation in English. Doctoral dissertation,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Cho, Taehong (). Prosodically conditioned strengthening and vowel-to-vowel coarticu-
lation in English, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Cho, Taehong (). Manifestation of prosodic structure in articulatory variation: evidence
from lip kinematics in English. In L. Goldstein, D. H. Whalen, and C. T. Best (eds), Laboratory
Phonology : Varieties of Phonological Competence. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, –.
Cho, Taehong, and Sun-Ah Jun (). Domain-initial strengthening as featural enhancement:
aerodynamic evidence from Korean. In M. Ziolkowski et al. (eds), Papers from the
References


th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, vol. . Chicago: Chicago Linguistic
Society, –.
Cho, Taehong, and Patricia Keating (). Effects of initial position versus prominence in
English. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
Cho, Young-Mee (). Parameters of consonantal assimilation. Doctoral dissertation, Stan-
ford University.
Cho, Young-Mee, and Sharon Inkelas (). Post-obstruent tensiﬁcation in Korean and
geminate inalterability. In Y.-K. Kim-Renaud (ed.), Theoretical Issues in Korean Linguistics.
Stanford, Calif.: CSLI, –.
Chomsky, Noam, and Morris Halle (). The Sound Pattern of English. New York: Harper
& Row.
Christodoulou, Christiana (). Phonetic geminates in Cypriot Greek: the case of voiceless
plosives. In H. van Hamme and R. van Son (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Conference
of the International Speech Communication Association. Red Hook, NY: Curran Associates,
–.
Chung, Y.-H. (). The lexical tone system of North Kyungsang Korean. Doctoral disserta-
tion, Ohio State University.
Churchyard, Henry (). Some problems of reduplication and vowel harmonic spreading in
Trukese. MS, University of Texas.
Churchyard, Henry (). Compensatory lengthening and ‘gemination throwback’ in
Trukese and Puluwat as evidence for rime and onset in moraic phonology. MS, University
of Texas.
Clements, George N., and Samuel J. Keyser (). CV Phonology: A Generative Theory of the
Syllable. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Cole, Jennifer, Heejin Kim, Hansook Choi, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson (). Prosodic
effects on acoustic cues to stop voicing and place of articulation: evidence from radio news
speech. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
Connine, Cynthia M., Debra Titone, and Jian Wang (). Auditory word recognition:
extrinsic and intrinsic effects of word frequency. Journal of Experimental Psychology :
–.
Cornell, Sonja A., Aditi Lahiri, and Carsten Eulitz (). Inequality across consonantal
contrasts in speech perception: evidence from mismatch negativity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance (): –.
Côté, Marie-Hélène, and Viktor Kharlamov (). The impact of experimental tasks on
syllabiﬁcation judgments: a case study of Russian. In C. E. Cairns and E. Raimy (eds),
Handbook of the Syllable. Leiden: Brill, –.
Coutsougera, Photini (). The Cypriot Greek syllable. Oxford University Working Papers in
Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics : –.
Crystal, Thomas H., and Arthur S. House (). Segmental durations in connected-speech
signals: current results. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Cubberley, Paul (). Russian: A Linguistic Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Curtis, Emily (). Geminate weight: case studies and formal models. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Washington.

References

Cutler, Anne, and Dennis G. Norris (). The role of strong syllables in segmentation for
lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
(): –.
D’Imperio, Mariapaola, and Sam Rosenthall (). Phonetics and phonology of main stress in
Italian. Phonology : –.
Davis, Stuart (). Geminate consonants in moraic phonology. In R. Aranovich et al. (eds),
Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Stanford, Calif.: CSLI,
–.
Davis, Stuart (a). On the moraic representation of underlying geminates: evidence from
prosodic morphology. In H. van der Hulst, R. Kager, and W. Zonneveld (eds), The Prosody–
Morphology Interface. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Davis, Stuart (b). On the representation of initial geminates. Phonology : –.
Davis, Stuart (). The controversy over geminates and syllable weight. In C. Fery and R. van
de Vijver (eds), The Syllable in Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
–.
Davis, Stuart (). Geminates. In M. van Oostendorp et al. (eds), The Blackwell Companion
to Phonology, vol. . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Davis, Stuart, and Marwa Ragheb (). Geminate representation in Arabic. In S. Farwaneh and
H. Ouali (eds), Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXIV–XXV. Amsterdam: Benjamins, –.
Davis, Stuart, and Gina Torretta (). An optimality-theoretic account of compensatory
lengthening and geminate throwback in Trukese. In P. N. Tamanji and K. Kusumoto (eds),
Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the North East Linguistics Society. Amherst, Mass.:
GLSA, –.
de Jong, Nivja H., Margarita P. Steinel, Arjen Florijn, Rob Schoonen, and Jan H. Hulstijn
(). Linguistic skills and speaking ﬂuency in a second language. Applied Psycholinguistics
: –.
de Lacy, Paul (). Markedness: Reduction and Preservation in Phonology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
de Lacy, Paul (). Phonological evidence. In S. Parker (ed.), Phonological Argumentation:
Essays on Evidence and Motivation. London: Equinox, –.
de Lacy, Paul, and John Kingston (). Synchronic explanation. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory (): –.
Dehaene, Stanislas (). The neural basis of the Weber–Fechner law: a logarithmic mental
number line. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (): –.
Dell, François, and Mohamed Elmedlaoui (). Syllabic consonants and syllabiﬁcation in
Imdlawn Tashlhiyt Berber. Journal of African languages and Linguistics : –.
Dell, François, and Mohamed Elmedlaoui (). Syllabic consonants in Berber: some new
evidence. Journal of African Languages and Linguistics : –.
Dell, François, and Mohamed Elmedlaoui (). Les géminées en berbère. Linguistique
africaine : –.
Dell, François, and Mohamed Elmedlaoui (). Syllables in Tashlhiyt Berber and in Moroc-
can Arabic. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Denes, P. (). Effect of duration on the perception of voicing. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (): –.
References


Derr, Marcia, A., and Dominic W. Massaro (). The contribution of vowel duration, F
contour, and frication duration as cues to the /juz/-/jus/ distinction. Perception and Psycho-
physics (): –.
Derwing, Bruce L. (). A ‘pause-break’ task for eliciting syllable boundary judgments from
literate and illiterate speakers: preliminary results for ﬁve diverse languages. Language and
Speech : –.
Dinnsen, Daniel (). Phonological rules and phonetic explanation. Journal of Linguistics :
–.
Dmitrieva, Olga (). Asymmetries between production and perception of consonant
length. Studies in the Linguistic Sciences: Illinois Working Papers : –.
Dmitrieva, Olga (). Geminate typology and the perception of consonant duration.
Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
Dmitrieva, Olga, Allard Jongman, and Joan Sereno (). Phonological neutralization by
native and non-native speakers: the case of Russian ﬁnal devoicing. Journal of Phonetics
(): –.
Docherty, Gerry J., and Paul Foulkes (). Derby and Newcastle: instrumental phonetics and
variationist studies. In P. Foulkes and G. J. Docherty (eds), Urban Voices. London: Arnold,
–.
Domalski, Patricia, Michael E. Smith, and Eric Halgren (). Cross-modal repetition effects
on the N. Psychological Science (): –.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Kazuhiko Kakehi, Yuki Hirose, Christophe Pallier, and Jacques Mehler
(). Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: a perceptual illusion? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance (): –.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Christophe Pallier, Kazuhiko Kakehi, and Jacques Mehler ().
New evidence for prelexical phonological processing in word recognition. Language and
Cognitive Processes (/): –.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Erika Parlato, Sonia Frota, Yuki Hirose, and Sharon Peperkamp ().
Where do illusory vowels come from? Journal of Memory and Language : –.
Durand, Jacqes (). Loan phonology (review). Language (): –.
Dyen, Isadore (). On the history of the Trukese vowels. Language : –.
Dyen, Isadore (). A Sketch of Trukese Grammar. New Haven, Conn.: American Oriental
Society.
Eddington, David, Rebecca Treiman, and Dirk Elzinga (). Syllabiﬁcation of American
English: evidence from a large-scale experiment, pt . Journal of Quantitative Linguistics
(): –.
Ehrenhofer, Lara (). Processing of medial geminate and singleton consonants in Swiss
German. MPhil thesis, University of Oxford.
Elbert, Samuel H. (). Puluwat Grammar. Canberra: Australian National University.
Elert, Claes-Christian (). Phonological Studies of Quantity in Swedish. Uppsala: Almqvist &
Wiksell.
Elert, Claes-Christian (). Allmän Och Svensk Fonetik, th edn. Stockholm: Norstedts
Förlag.
Eliasson, Stig (). Stress alternations and vowel length: new evidence for an underlying
nine-vowel system in Swedish. Nordic Journal of Linguistics : –.

References

Elman, Jeffrey L. (). Intonation-contingent adaptation to speech. Perception and Psycho-
physics (): –.
Engstrand, Olle, and Diana Krull (). Durational correlates of quantity in Swedish, Finnish
and Estonian: cross-language evidence for a theory of adaptive dispersion. Phonetica :
–.
Enomoto, Kayoko (). Interlanguage phonology: the perceptual development of durational
contrasts by English-speaking learners of Japanese. Edinburgh Working Papers in Applied
Linguistics : –.
Enstrom, Daly H., and Sonja Spörri-Bütler (). A voice onset time analysis of initial Swiss-
German stops. Folia Phoniatrica : –.
Esposito, Anna, and Maria Gabriella Di Benedetto (). Acoustical and perceptual study of
gemination in Italian stops. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Fant, Gunnar, Anita Kruckenberg, and Lennart Nord (). Prosodic and segmental speaker
variations. Speech Communication : –.
Ferguson, Charles A. (). Diglossia. Word (): –.
Filik, Ruth, and Hartmut Leuthold (). Processing local pragmatic anomalies in ﬁctional
contexts: evidence from the N. Psychophysiology (): –.
Fintoft, Knut (). The duration of some Norwegian speech sounds. Phonetica : –.
Flege, James Emil (). The production of ‘new’ and ‘similar’ phones in a foreign language:
evidence for the effect of equivalence classiﬁcation. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Fleischer, J., and Schmid, S. (). Zurich German. Journal of the International Phonetic
Association (): –.
Flemming, Edward (). Auditory representations in phonology. Doctoral dissertation,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Flemming, Edward (). Contrast and perceptual distinctiveness. In B. Hayes, R. Kirchner,
and D. Steriade (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
–.
Forster, Kenneth I. (). The microgenesis of priming effects in lexical access. Brain and
Language (/): –.
Forster, Kenneth, and Jonathan Forster (). DMDX: a Windows display program with
millisecond accuracy. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers : –.
Fougeron, Cécile, and Patricia A. Keating (). Articulatory strengthening at edges of
prosodic domains. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Frellesvig, Bjarke (). A History of the Japanese Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Presss.
Fretheim, Thorstein (). Norwegian stress and quantity reconsidered. Norsk Tidsskrift for
Sprogvidenskap : –. Repr. in E. H. Jahr and O. Lorentz (eds), Fonologi/Phonology
(Oslo: Novus, ), –.
Friedrich, Claudia K., Carsten Eulitz, and Aditi Lahiri (). Not every pseudoword disrupts
word recognition: an ERP study. Behavioral and Brain Functions . http://behavioraland-
brainfunctions.biomedcentral.com/articles/./---.
Friedrich, Claudia K., Aditi Lahiri, and Carsten Eulitz (). Neurophysiological evidence for
underspeciﬁed lexical representations: asymmetries with word initial variations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance (): –.
References


Fujimoto, Masako, Seiya Funatsu, and Philip Hoole (). Articulation of single and geminate
consonants and its relation to the duration of the preceding vowel in Japanese. In Scottish
Consortium for ICPhS (ed.), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences. Glasgow: University of Glasgow, paper no. : –.
Fujimura, Osamu (). Methods and goals of speech production research. Language and
Speech : –.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, Kimie Nakamura, and Toshiaki Imoto (). Auditory perception of
duration of speech and non-speech stimuli. In G. Fant and M. A. A. Tatham (eds), Auditory
Analysis and Perception of Speech. London: Academic Press, –.
Fujisaki, Hiroya, and Miyoko Sugito (). Onsei no butsuriteki seishitsu [Physical properties
of speech sounds]. In S. Ōno and T. Sibata (eds), Iwanami Kōza Nihongo : On’in [Iwanami
Japanese series : Phonology]. Tokyo: Iwanami, –.
Fukui, Seiji (). Nihongo no heisaon no enchō/tanshuku ni yoru sokuon/hisokuon to shite
no chōshu [Perception of Japanese stop consonants with reduced and extended durations].
Onsei Gakkai Kaihō [Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan] : –.
Fulop, Sean (). Acoustic correlates of the fortis/lenis contrast in Swiss German plosives.
Calgary Working Papers in Linguistics : –.
Galand, Lionel (). Les consonnes tendues du berbère et leur notation. In M. Taïﬁ(ed.),
Voisinage: Mélanges en hommage à la mémoire de Kaddour Cadi. Fez: Faculté des lettres et
des sciences humaines, –.
Games, Sara (). Quantity in Icelandic: Production and Perception. Hamburg: Buske.
Ganong, William F. III (). Phonetic categorization in auditory word perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance : –.
Gaskell, M. Gareth, and William D. Marslen-Wilson (). Phonological variation and infer-
ence in lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
(): –.
Gaskell, M. Gareth, and William. D. Marslen-Wilson (). Integrating form and meaning: a
distributed model of speech perception. Language and Cognitive Processes : –.
Gaskell, M. Gareth, and William. D. Marslen-Wilson (). Representation and competition
in the perception of spoken words. Cognitive Psychology (): –.
Gay, Thomas (). A cineﬂuorographic study of vowel production. Journal of Phonetics :
–.
Georgeton, Laurianne, and Cécile Fougeron (). Domain-initial strengthening on French
vowels and phonological contrasts: evidence from lip articulation and spectral variation.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Ghada, Khattab, and Jalal Al-Tamimi (). Inﬂuence of geminate structure on early Arabic
templatic patterns. In M. M. Vihman and T. Keren-Portnoy (eds), The Emergence of
Phonology: Whole-Word Approaches and Cross-linguistic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
Ghada, Khattab, and Jalal Al-Tamimi (). Geminate timing in Lebanese Arabic: the relation-
ship between phonetic timing and phonological structure. Laboratory Phonology (): –.
Ghada, Khattab, and Jalal Al-Tamimi (). The acquisition of gemination in Lebanese
Arabic children. In Scottish Consortium for ICPhS (ed.), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Glasgow: University of Glasgow.

References

Giriko, Mikio (). Heibangata akusento seiki jōken ni taisuru reigai goi ni tsuiteno kōsatsu
[Remarks on the exceptions to the deaccenting rule in loanwords]. Handout of talk given at
the regular meeting of the Phonological Association in Kaisai (Kobe University, July ).
Glaser, Elvira, and Natascha Frey (). Empirische Studien zur Verbverdoppelung in
schweizerdeutschen Dialekten. Linguistik Online . http://www.linguistik-online.com/
_/editorial.html
Gobl, Christer, and Ailbhe Ní Chasaide (). The effects of adjacent voiced voiceless
consonants on the vowel voice source: a cross language study. STL-QPSR –/: –.
Goldsmith, John (). Autosegmental phonology. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. Published
New York: Garland Press, .
Goodenough, Ward, and Hiroshi Sugita (). Trukese–English Dictionary. Philadelphia:
American Philosophical Society.
Goodman, Beverly (). Features in Ponapean phonology. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell
University.
Gordon, Matthew (). Syllable Weight: Phonetics, Phonology, Typology. London: Routledge.
Grabe, Esther, and Low Ling (). Durational variability in speech and the rhythm class
hypothesis. In C. Gussenhoven and N. Warner (eds), Laboratory Phonology VII. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, –.
Grill-Spector, Kalanit, Richard Henson, and Alex Martin (). Repetition and the brain:
neural models of stimulus-speciﬁc effects. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (): –.
Gruenenfelder, Thomas M., and David B. Pisoni (). Fundamental frequency as a cue
to postvocalic consonantal voicing: some data from speech perception and production.
Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Guenther, Frank (). Speech sound acquisition, coarticulation, and rate effects in a neural
network model of speech production. Psychological Review : –.
Guerssel, Mohamed (). Constraints on phonological rules. Linguistic Analysis : –.
Haggard, Mark (). Abbreviation of consonants in English pre- and post-vocalic clusters.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Hajek, John, and Rob Goedemans (). Word-initial geminates and stress in Pattani Malay.
Linguistic Review : –.
Halle, Morris, and Kenneth N. Stevens (). A note on laryngeal features. In Quarterly
Progress Report . Cambridge, Mass.: Research Laboratory of Electronics, MIT,
–.
Hallé, Pierre A., and Catherine T. Best (). Dental-to-velar perceptual assimilation: a cross-
linguistic study of the perception of dental stop+/l/ clusters. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America : –.
Ham, William H. (). Phonetic and phonological aspects of geminate timing. Doctoral
dissertation, Cornell University.
Ham, William H. (). Phonetic and Phonological Aspects of Geminate Timing. London:
Routledge.
Hamzah, Hilmi (). The acoustics and perception of the word-initial singleton/geminate
contrast in Kelantan Malay. Doctoral dissertation, University of Melbourne, Australia.
Hamzah, Hilmi, Janet Fletcher, and John Hajek (). Durational correlates of word-initial
voiceless geminate stops: the case of Kelantan Malay. In in W.-S. Lee and E. Zee (eds.),
References


Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong: City
University of Hong Kong, –.
Han, Jeong-Im (). The phonetics and phonology of ‘tense’ and ‘plain’ consonants in
Korean. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University.
Han, Mieko S. (). The feature of duration in Japanese. Onsei no Kenkyū [The Study of
Sounds] : –.
Han, Mieko S. (). The timing control of geminate and single stop consonants in Japanese:
a challenge for non-native speakers. Phonetica : –.
Han, Mieko S. (). Acoustic manifestations of mora timing in Japanese. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Hankamer, Jorge, Aditi Lahiri, and Jacques Koreman (). Perception of consonant length:
voiceless stops in Turkish and Bengali. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Hansen, Benjamin B., and Scott Myers (). The consonant length contrast in Persian:
production and perception. MS, University of Texas.
Hardcastle, William, Wilf Jones, Colin Knight, Ann Trudgeon, and G. Calder (). New
developments in electropalatography: a state-of-the-art report. Clinical Linguistics and
Phonetics : –.
Hardison, Debra M., and Miki Motohashi (). Development of perception of second
language Japanese geminates: role of duration, sonority, and segmentation strategy. Applied
Psycholinguistics : –.
Hart, Michele (). The moraic status of initial geminates in Trukese. In L. Sutton,
C. Johnson, and R. Shields (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society, –.
Hayes, Bruce (). Inalterability in CV phonology. Language (): –.
Hayes, Bruce (). Compensatory lengthening in moraic phonology. Linguistic Inquiry :
–.
Hayes, Bruce, and Donca Steriade (). Introduction: the phonetic bases of phonological
markedness. In B. Hayes, R. Kirchner, and D. Steriade (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Hejná, Michaela (). Pre-aspiration in Welsh English: a case study of Aberystwyth.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Manchester.
Helgason, Pétur (). Preaspiration in the Nordic languages: synchronic and diachronic
aspects. Doctoral dissertation, Stockholm University.
Helgason, Pétur, and Catherine Ringen (). Voicing and aspiration in Swedish stops.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Hirata, Yukari (). Tango reberu bun reberu ni okeru nihonjin no sokuon no kikitori
[Perception of geminated stops in Japanese word and sentence levels]. Onsei Gakkai Kaihō
[Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan] : –.
Hirata, Yukari (). Effects of speaking rate on the vowel length distinction in Japanese,
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Hirata, Yukari (). Durational variability and invariance in Japanese stop quantity distri-
bution: roles of adjacent vowels. Onsei Kenkyū [Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan]
(): –.

References

Hirata, Yukari, and Shigeaki Amano (). Production of single and geminate stops in Japanese
three- and four-mora Japanese words. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America ():
–.
Hirata, Yukari, and Stephen G. Lambacher (). Role of word-external contexts in native
speakers identiﬁcation of vowel length in Japanese. Phonetica : –.
Hirata, Yukari, Elizabeth Whitehurst, and Emily Cullings (). Training native English
speakers to identify Japanese vowel length contrast with sentences at varied speaking rates.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Hirata, Yukari, and Jacob Whiton (). Effects of speaking rate on the single/geminate stop
distinction in Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Hirose, Aki, and Michael Ashby (). An acoustic study of devoicing of the geminate
obstruents in Japanese. In J. Trouvain and W. J. Barry (eds), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (Saarbrücken), –.
Homma, Yayoi (). Durational relationship between Japanese stops and vowels. Journal of
Phonetics : –.
Hsieh, Feng-Fan, Michael Kenstowicz, and Xiaomin Mou (). Mandarin adaptations of
coda nasals in English loanwords. In A. Calabrese and W. Leo Wetzels (eds), Loan
Phonology. Amsterdam: Benjamins, –.
Huh, Wung (). Kuke Eumunhak [Korean Phonology]. Seoul: Cengeumsa.
Hume, Elizabeth, Jennifer Muller, and Aone van Engelenhoven (). Non-moraic geminates
in Leti. Phonology (): –.
Hura, Susan, Björn Lindblom, and Randy Diehl (). On the role of perception in shaping
phonological assimilation rules. Language and Speech : –.
Hurme, Pertti, and Aatto Sonninen (). Development of durational patterns in Finnish
CVCV and CVCCV words. Papers on Speech Research : –.
Hyman, Larry M. (). The role of borrowing in the justiﬁcation of phonological grammars.
Studies in African Linguistics : –.
Hyman, Larry M. (). A Theory of Phonological Weight. Dordrecht: Foris.
Idemaru, Kaori, and Susan G. Guion (). Acoustic covariants of length contrast in Japanese
stops. Journal of the International Phonetic Association (): –.
Idemaru, Kaori, and Susan Guion-Anderson (). Relational timing in the production and
perception of Japanese singleton and geminate stops. Phonetica (/): –.
Ikeda, Kiyoshi, Kanji Arisato, Akio Nishimura, Yoshinari Yonetama, and Shiro Kori (eds).
(). I-Wa Chūjiten [Italian–Japanese Dictionary], nd edn. Tokyo: Shogakukan.
Ille, Nicole, Patrick Berg, and Michael Scherg (). Artifact correction of the ongoing EEG
using spatial ﬁlters based on artifact and brain signal topographies. Journal of Clinical
Neurophysiology : –.
Irwin, Mark (). Loanwords in Japanese. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Isei-Jaakkola, Toshiko (). Lexical Quantity in Japanese and Finnish. Helsinki: University
of Helsinki.
Ito, Chiyuki, Yoonjung Kang, and Michael Kenstowicz (). The adaptation of Japanese
loanwords into Korean. In F. Hsieh and M. Kenstowicz (eds), Studies in Loanword Phonology.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Paper in Linguistics, –.
References


Ito, Junko (). Prosodic minimality in Japanese. In K. Deaton, M. Noske, and M. Ziolkowski
(eds), Papers from the th Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society: Parasession on
the Syllable in Phonetics and Phonology. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society, –.
Ito, Junko, Yoshihisa Kitagawa, and Armin Mester (). Prosodic faithfulness and corres-
pondence: evidence from a Japanese argot. Journal of East Asian Linguistics : –.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester (). Weak layering and word binarity. Linguistic Research
Center Working Paper LRC--, UC Santa Cruz. Repr. in T. Honma et al. (eds), A New
Century of Phonology and Phonological Theory: A Festschrift for Professor Shosuke Hara-
guchi on the Occasion of His Sixtieth Birthday (Tokyo: Kaitakusha, ), –.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester (). The core–periphery structure of the lexicon and
constraints on reranking. In J. Beckman, L.Walsh Dickey, and S. Urbanczyk (eds), Papers
in Optimality Theory. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA, –.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester (). Japanese Morphophonemics: Markedness and Word
Structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester (). Systemic markedness and faithfulness. In J. E. Cihlar et
al. (eds), Papers from the th Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago:
Chicago Linguistics Society, –.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester (). Word formation and phonological processes. In Haruo
Kubozono (ed.), The Handbook of Japanese Phonetics and Phonology. Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton, –.
Iverson, Gregory K., and Joseph C. Salmons (). Aspiration and laryngeal representation in
Germanic. Phonology (): –.
Jaeger, Jeri J. (). Speech aerodynamics and phonological universals. In J. J. Jaeger (ed.),
Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. Berkeley: University
of California Press, –.
Jahr, Ernst H., and Ove Lorentz (). Prosodi/Prosody. Oslo: Novus.
Jakobson, Roman, Gunnar Fant, and Morris Halle (). Preliminaries to Speech Analysis.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Jakobson, Roman, and Morris Halle (). Fundamentals of Language. The Hague: Mouton.
Jónsson, Jóhannes (). The feature [asp] in Icelandic phonology. Studia Linguistica : –.
Jun, Jongho (). Perceptual and articulatory factors in place assimilation: an optimality
theoretic approach. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Jun, Sun-A, (). The phonetics and phonology of Korean prosody. Doctoral dissertation,
Ohio State University.
Ka, Omar (). Wolof Phonology and Morphology. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.
Kabak, Bariş, and William J. Idsardi (). Perceptual distortions in the adaptation of English
consonant clusters: syllable structure or consonantal contact constraints? Language and
Speech (): –.
Kager, René (). Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kalenchuk, Maria Leonidovna, and Rosalia Frantsevna Kasatkina (). Slovar’ Trudnostej
Russkogo Proiznoshenija [Dictionary of Difﬁculties in Russian Pronuciation]. Moscow:
Russkij Jazyk.
Kanai, Yoshimitsu (). Gairaigo ni okeru sokuon [Moraic obstruents in loanwords in
Japanese]. Onsei Gakkai Kaihō [Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan] : –.

References

Kang, Eunji, Hoyoung Lee, and Juwon Kim (). The phonetic realization of syllable codas
in Korean, Malsori [Journal of the Korean Society of Phonetic Science and Speech
Technology] : –.
Kang, Yoonjung (). Loanword phonology. In M. van Oostendorp, C. J. Ewen, E. Hume,
and K. Rice (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology, vol. . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
–.
Kasatkin, Leonid Leonidovich, and Moon Joon Choi (). Dolgota/kratkost’ Soglasnogo na
Meste Sochetanij Dvuh Bukv v Sovremennom Russkom Literatunom Jazyke [Duration of
Doubly-Spelled Consonants in Contemporary Standard Russian]. Moscow: Dialog-MGU.
Katayama, Motoko (). Gemination in Japanese loanwords. MS, University of California,
Santa Cruz.
Katayama, Motoko (). Optimality theory and Japanese loanword phonology. Doctoral
dissertation, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Kato, Hiroaki (). Perceptual characteristics of temporal structures in speech: towards
objective assessment of synthesis rules. Doctoral dissertation, Kobe University.
Kato, Hiroaki, and Minoru Tsuzaki (). Intensity effect on discrimination of auditory
duration ﬂanked by preceding and succeeding tones. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
Japan (): –.
Kato, Hiroaki, Minoru Tsuzaki, and Yoshinori Sagisaka (). Acceptability for temporal
modiﬁcation of consecutive segments in isolated words. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America : –.
Kawagoe, Itsue (). Shakuyōgo ni miru sokuonka to rizumushōtotsu [Gemination and
rhythm clash in loanwords]. Gengo Kenkyū [Journal of the Linguistic Society of Japan] :
–.
Kawagoe, Itsue (). The phonology of sokuon, or geminate obstruents. In H. Kubozono (ed.),
The Handbook of Japanese Phonetics and Phonology. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Kawagoe, Itsue, and Masako Arai (). Shakuyōgo ni okeru sokuon [Consonant gemination
in loanwords]. Onsei Kenkyū [Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan] (): –.
Kawagoe, Itsue, and Akiko Takemura (). Geminate judgments of English-like words by
Japanese native speakers: differences in the borrowed forms of ‘stuff ’ and ‘tough’. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics (): –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (a). A faithfulness ranking projected from a perceptibility scale: the
case of [+voice] in Japanese, Language (): –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (b). Mimetic gemination in Japanese: a challenge for evolutionary
phonology. Theoretical Linguistics (): –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (). Sonorancy and geminacy. In L. Bateman et al. (eds), University of
Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics : Papers in Optimality Theory III. Amherst,
Mass.: GLSA, –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (). Amplitude changes facilitate categorization and discrimination of
length contrasts. IEICE Technical Report : –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (). Emphatic gemination in Japanese mimetic words: a wug-test with
auditory stimuli. Language Sciences : –.
Kawahara, Shigeto (a). Japanese /r/ is not featureless: a rejoinder to Labrune (). Open
Linguistics : –.
References


Kawahara, Shigeto (b). The phonetics of sokuon, or geminate obstruents. In H. Kubozono
(ed.), The Handbook of Japanese Phonetics and Phonology. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton,
–.
Kawahara, Shigeto, and Aaron Braver (). The durational properties of emphatically-
lengthened consonants in Japanese. Journal of the International Phonetic Association
(): –.
Kawahara, Shigeto, Melanie Pangilinan, and Kelly Garvey (). Spectral continuity and the
perception of duration: implications for phonological properties of geminates. Paper pre-
sented at the International Workshop on Geminate Consonants (GemCon ), Kobe
University, Japan, January, .
Keating, Patricia A. (). Universal phonetics and the organization of grammars. In
V. A. Fromkin (ed.), Phonetic Linguistic Essays in Honor of Peter Ladefoged. Orlando, Fla.:
Academic Press, –.
Kennedy, Robert (). Conﬂuence in phonology: evidence from Micronesian reduplication.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Arizona.
Kenstowicz, Michael (). Phonology in Generative Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kenstowicz, Michael, and Chiyoun Park (). Laryngeal features and tone in Kyungsang
Korean: a phonetic study, Studies in Phonetics, Phonology and Morphology : –.
Kenstowicz, Michael J., and Charles Pyle (). On the phonological integrity of geminate
clusters. In M. J. Kenstowicz and C. W. Kisseberth (eds), Issues in Phonological Theory. The
Hague: Mouton, –.
Kenstowicz, Michael, and Hyang-Sook Sohn (). Accentual adaptation in North Kyung-
sang Korean. In M. Kenstowicz (ed.), Ken Hale: A Life in Language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, –.
Kim, Chin-Wu (). On the autonomy of the tensity feature in stop classiﬁcation (with the
special reference to Korean stops). Word : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). The place of articulation of the Korean affricates revisited. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (a). A phonetically-based account of phonological assibilation. Phonology
: –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (b). The place of articulation of the Korean plain affricate in intervocalic
position: an articulatory and acoustic study. Journal of the International Phonetic Association
: –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Korean tense consonants as singletons. In M. Andronis et al. (eds),
Papers from the th Annual Meetings of the Chicago Linguistic Society: The Main Session.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). The feature [tense] revisited: the case of Korean consonants.
In K. Moulton and M. Wolf (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the North
East Linguistics Society. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Stroboscopic-cine MRI data on Korean coronal plosives and affricates:
implications for their place of articulation as alveolar. Phonetica : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). The representation of the three-way laryngeal contrast in Korean
consonants. In M. van Oostendorp and Jeroen van de Weijer (eds), The Internal Organiza-
tion of Phonological Segments. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, –.

References

Kim, Hyunsoon (). Feature-driven non-native perception in loanword adaptation of the
English and French voicing contrast into Korean. Paper presented at the th Manchester
Phonology Meeting, Manchester, –May.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Loanword adaptation between Japanese and Korean: evidence for L
feature-driven perception. Journal of East Asian Linguistics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Korean adaptation of English affricates and fricatives in a feature-
driven model of loanword adaptation. In A. Calabrese and W. Leo Wetzel (eds), Loan
Phonology. Amsterdam: Benjamins , –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (a). What features underline the /s/ vs. /s/ contrast in Korean? Phonetic
and phonological evidence. In G. N. Clements and R. Ridouane (eds), Where Do Phono-
logical Contrasts Come From? Cognitive, Physical and Developmental Basis of Distinctive
Speech Categories. Amsterdam: Benjamins, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (b). Kyungsang Korean subjects perception of Japanese pitch-accent.
In W. Lee and Eric Zee (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Gradual tongue movements in Korean palatalization as coarticulation:
new evidence from stroboscopic cine-MRI and acoustic data. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (). Seoul Korean subjects perception of Japanese pitch-accent: evidence
for the absence of tonogenesis in Korean. In B. Freliesvig and P. Sells (eds), Japanese/Korean
Linguistics . Stanford, Calif.: CSLI, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (a). An Lgrammar-driven model of loanword adaptation: evidence
from Korean. Korean Linguistics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon (b). The role of Fin Korean speakers categorization of Japanese plosives:
implications for Korean laryngeal features. MS, Hongik University, Seoul.
Kim, Hyunsoon, and George N. Clements (). The feature [tense]. In A. Rialland,
R. Ridouane, and H. van der Hulst (eds), Features in Phonology and Phonetics: Unpublished
Work from George N. Clements and His Colleagues. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, Kiyoshi Honda, and Shinji Maeda (). Stroboscopic-cine MRI study of the
phasing between the tongue and the larynx in the Korean three-way phonation contrast.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, and Allard Jongman (). Acoustic and perceptual evidence for complete
neutralization of manner of articulation in Korean. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, Shinji Maeda, and Kiyoshi Honda (). Invariant articulatory bases of the
features [tense] and [spread glottis] in Korean: new stroboscopic cine-MRI data. Journal of
Phonetics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, Shinji Maeda, and Kiyoshi Honda (). The laryngeal characterization of
Korean fricatives: stroboscopic cine-MRI data. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, Shinji Maeda, Kiyoshi Honda, and Stephane Hans (). The laryngeal
characterization of Korean fricatives: acoustic and aerodynamic data. In S. Fuchs, M. Toda,
and M. Zygis (eds), Turbulent Sounds: An Interdisciplinary Guide. Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton, –.
Kim, Hyunsoon, Shinji Maeda, Kiyoshi Honda, and Shinobu Masaki (). Japanese geminates
and Korean heterosyllabic consonants: implications for the role of prosodic organization in
phonetic realization. Paper presented at the th Laboratory Phonology meeting, Paris, June.
References


Kim, Hyunsoon, and Chae-Lim Park (). An acoustic study of the Korean fricatives /s, s’/:
implications for the features [spread glottis] and [tense]. In J. Goldsmith, B. Hume, and
W. L. Wetzels (eds), Tones and Features. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Kim-Renaud, Y.-K. (). Korean consonantal phonology. Doctoral dissertation, University
of Hawaii.
Kingston, John (). The phonetics–phonology interface. In P. de Lacy (ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Kingston, John, Shigeto Kawahara, Della Chambless, Daniel Mash, and Eve Brenner-Alsop
(). Contextual effects on the perception of duration. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
Kinoshita, Keisuke, Dawn M. Behne, and Takayuki Arai (). Duration and Fas perceptual
cues to Japanese vowel quantity. In J. H. L. Hansen and B. Pellom (eds), Proceedings of the
th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing. Denver: Center for Spoken
Language Research, University of Colorado Boulder, –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). Accent, syllable structure, and morphology in Ancient Greek. In
E. Mela-Athanasopoulou (eds), Selected Papers from the th International Symposium on
Theoretical and Applied Linguistics. Thessaloniki: Aristotle University, –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). Fenno-Swedish quantity: contrast in Stratal OT. In B. Vaux and
A. Nevins (eds), Rules, Constraints, and Phonological Phenomena. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, –.
Kirchner, Robert (). An effort-based approach to consonant lenition. Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of California, Los Angeles.
Kitahara, Mafuyu (). On’inron to bunpō: Shakuyōgo no sokuon to akusento no bunseki o
tsūjite [Phonology and grammar: on the analysis of geminates and accentuation in loan-
words]. In Onsei Bunpō Kenkyūkai (ed.), Bunpō to Onsei [Grammar and Speech]. Tokyo:
Kurosio, –.
Klatt, Dennis H. (). Durational Characteristics of Pre-stressed Word-Initial Consonant
Clusters in English. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Laboratory of Electronics, Quarterly Progress
Report No. .
Klatt, Dennis H. (). The duration of [s] in English words. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research : –.
Klatt, Dennis H. (). Vowel lengthening is syntactically determined in a connected dis-
course. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Klatt, Dennis H. (). Linguistic uses of segmental duration in English: acoustic and
perceptual evidence. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Knoblauch, Kenneth (). Psyphy: functions for analyzing psychophysical data in R, version
.-. Software.
Kohler, Klaus J. (). Phonetic explanation in phonology: the feature fortis/lenis. Phonetica
: –.
Kohler, Klaus J. (). The phonetics/phonology issue in the study of articulatory reduction.
Phonetica : –.
Kolesnikov, Nikolaj Pavlovich (). Slova s Dvojnimi Soglasnimi: Slovar-spravochnik [Words
with Double Consonants: Reference Dictionary]. Moscow: Russkij Jazyk.
Kolesnikov, Nikolaj Pavlovich (). Slovar’ Slov s Dvojnymi Soglasnymi [Dictionary of
Words with Double Consonants]. Rostov-na-Donu: Izdatel’stvo Rostovskogo Universiteta.

References

Komatsu, Hideo (). Nihongo no On’in [Phonology of Japanese]. Tokyo: Chuuookooron.
Kori, Shiro (). Itariago no inritsuteki tokuchō: oto no nagasa o kiteisuru yōin ni tsuite
[Prosodic characteristics of Italian: factors determining the duration of segments]. In
Retirement Festschrift in Honor of Professor Ikeda. Osaka: Osaka University of Foreign
Studies, –.
Kori, Shiro (). Itariago no shiin no nagasa to sono chiikisa: Boinkan no [ɲ][ʎ][ʃ][ʦ] o
chuushinni [Duration of consonants in Italian and their regional varieties: analysis of
intervocalic [ɲ][ʎ][ʃ][ʦ]]. Aula Nuova : –. Osaka: Osaka University of Foreign Studies.
Kotzor, Sandra, Allison Wetterlin, Adam C. Roberts, and Aditi Lahiri (). Processing
of phonemic consonant length: semantic and fragment priming evidence from Bengali.
Language and Speech (Apr.): –.
Kraehenmann, Astrid (). Swiss German stops: geminates all over the word. Phonology
(): –.
Kraehenmann, Astrid (). Quantity and Prosodic Asymmetries in Alemannic: Synchronic
and Diachronic Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kraehenmann, Astrid (). Initial geminates. In M. van Oostendorp e al. (eds), The Black-
well Companion to Phonology, vol. . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Kraehenmann, Astrid, and Aditi Lahiri (). Duration differences in the articulation and
acoustics of Swiss German word-initial geminate and singleton stops. Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America (): –.
Krämer, Martin (). Phonology of Italian. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krashen, Stephen D. (). Individual variation in the use of the monitor. In William
C. Ritchie (ed.), Second Language Acquisition Research: Issues and Implications. New
York: Academic Press, –.
Kristoffersen, Gjert (). Aspects of Norwegian syllable structure. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Tromsø.
Kristoffersen, Gjert (). The Phonology of Norwegian. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Speech errors and syllable structure. Linguistics and Philology :
–.
Kubozono, Haruo (). The organization of Japanese prosody. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Edinburgh. Published by Kurosio Publishers, Tokyo, .
Kubozono, Haruo (). The mora and syllable structure in Japanese: evidence from speech
errors. Language and Speech : –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Nihongo no onsetsuryō ni tsuite [On syllable weight in Japanese].
Kokugogaku : –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Gokeisei to On’in Kōzō [Word Formation and Phonological Struc-
ture]. Tokyo: Kuroshio.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Syllable and accent in Japanese: evidence from loanword accentu-
ation. Onsei Gakkai Kaihō [Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan] : –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Mora and syllable. In N. Tsujimura (ed.), The Handbook of Japanese
Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell, –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). The syllable as a unit of prosodic organization in Japanese. In C. Féry
and R. van de Vijver (eds), The Syllable in Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
References


Kubozono, Haruo (). Nihongo on’inron ni mirareru hitaishōsei [Asymmetries in Japanese
phonology]. Onsei Kenkyū [Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan] (): –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Where does loanword prosody come from? A case study of Japanese
loanword accent. Lingua : –.
Kubozono, Haruo (ed.) (). Special issue on sokuon, or moraic obstruents. Onsei Kenkyū
[Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan] ().
Kubozono, Haruo (). Gairaigo no sokuon: jijitsu to nazo [Geminates in loanwords: facts
and paradoxes]. Paper presented at Kansai Linguistics Society, Osaka Shoin Women’s
University, June.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Introduction to the special issue on Japanese geminate obstruents.
Journal of East Asian Linguistics : –.
Kubozono, Haruo (). Diphthongs and vowel coalescence. In H. Kubozono (ed.), The
Handbook of Japanese Phonetics and Phonology. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Kubozono, Haruo, Junko Ito, and Armin Mester (). Consonant gemination in Japanese
loanword phonology. In Linguistic Society of Korea (ed.), Current Issues in Unity and
Diversity of Languages: Collection of the Papers selected from the CIL , held at Korea
University in Seoul, on July –, . Seoul: Linguistic Society of Korea, –.
Kubozono, Haruo, Hajime Takeyasu, and Mikio Giriko (). On the ‘positional effect’ on
consonant gemination in Japanese. Paper presented at the International Workshop on
Geminate Consonants (GEMCON), Kobe University, January.
Kubozono, Haruo, Hajime Takeyasu, Mikio Giriko, and Manami Hirayama (). Pitch cues
to the perception of consonant length in Japanese. In W.-S. Lee and E. Zee (eds), Proceedings
of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong: City University of Hong
Kong, –.
Kubozono, Haruo, Hajime Takeyasu, and Mikio Giriko (). On the positional asymmetry of
consonant gemination in Japanese loanwords. Journal of East Asian Linguistics (): –.
Kunihiro, Tetsuya (). Gairaigo hyōki ni tsuite: nichi-ei on’in taikai no hikaku [On the
transcription of loanwords: comparative study of Japanese and English phonological sys-
tems]. In Nichi-Ei Ryōgo no Hikaku Kenkyū Jissen Kiroku [Reports on Comparative Study of
Japanese and English]. Tokyo: Taishuukan, –.
Kunnari, Sari (). Characteristics of early lexical phonological development in children
acquiring Finnish. Acta Universitatis Oulensis B, University of Oulu.
Kunnari, Sari, Satsuki Nakai, and Marilyn M. Vihman (). Cross-linguistic evidence for
acquisition of geminates. Psychology of Language and Communication : –.
Kutas, Marta, and Kara D. Federmeier (). Electrophysiology reveals semantic memory use
in language comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (): –.
Kutas, Marta, and Steven A. Hillyard (). Reading senseless sentences: brain potentials
reﬂect semantic incongruity. Science (): –.
Kutas, Marta, and Steven A. Hillyard (). An electrophysiological probe of incidental
semantic association. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience (): –.
Labrune, Laurence (). The phonology of Japanese /r/: a panchronic account. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics (): –.
LaCharité, Darlene (). Preservation and minimality in loanword adaptation. Journal of
Linguistics : –.

References

LaCharité, Darlene, and Carole Paradis (). Category preservation and proximity versus
phonetic approximation in loanword adaptation. Linguistic Inquiry : –.
Ladd, D. Robert, and James Scobbie (). External sandhi as gestural overlap? Counter-
evidence from Sardinian. In J. Local, R. Ogden, and R. Temple (eds), Papers in Laboratory
Phonology VI: Phonetic Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Ladefoged, Peter, and Ian Maddieson (). The Sounds of the World’s Languages, nd edn.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Lahiri, Aditi (). Hierarchical restructuring in the creation of verbal morphology in Bengali
and Germanic: evidence from phonology. In A. Lahiri (ed.), Analogy, Levelling, Markedness.
Berlin: Mouton, –.
Lahiri, Aditi (). Change in word prosody: stress and quantity. In P. Honeybone and
J. Salmons (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Historical Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and B. Elan Dresher (). Open syllable lengthening in West Germanic.
Language (): –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and Jorge Hankamer (). The timing of geminate consonants. Journal of
Phonetics : –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and Allard Jongman (). Intermediate level of analysis: features or segments?
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and Jacques Koreman (). Syllable quantity and stress in Dutch. In H. Borer
(ed.), Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and William D. Marslen-Wilson (). The mental representation of lexical
form: a phonological approach to the recognition lexicon. Cognition (): –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and William D. Marslen-Wilson (). Lexical processing and phonological
representation. In R. D. Ladd and G. J. Docherty (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology II:
Gesture, Segment, Prosody. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and Henning Reetz (). Underspeciﬁed recognition. In C. Gussenhoven and
N. Warner (eds), Laboratory Phonology VII. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, –.
Lahiri, Aditi, and Henning Reetz (). Distinctive features: phonological underspeciﬁcation
in representation and processing. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
Lass, Roger (). Linguistic orthogenesis? Scots vowel quantity and the English length conspir-
acy. In J. M. Anderson and C. Jones (eds), Historical Linguistics II. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
–.
Lau, Ellen F., Colin Phillips, and David Poeppel (). A cortical network for semantics:
(de)constructing the N. Nature Reviews Neuroscience (): –.
Lee, Ki-Moon (). Kuke Umunsa Yenku [A Study of Korean Historical Phonology]. Seoul:
Kukehankhoy.
Lehiste, Ilse (). Suprasegmentals. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Levin, Juliette (). A metrical theory of syllabicity. Doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Lewis, M. Paul, Gary Simons, and Charles D. Fenning (). Ethnologue: Languages of the
World, th edn. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International.
Liberman, Alvin M., and Ignatius G. Mattingly (). The motor theory of speech perception
revised. Cognition : –.
References


Liljencrants, Johan, and Björn Lindblom (). Numerical simulation of vowel quality
systems: the role of perceptual contrast. Language : –.
Lindblom, Björn (). Phonetic universals in vowel systems. In J. Ohala and J. J. Jaeger (eds),
Experimental Phonology. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press, –.
Lindblom, Björn, Susan Guion, Susan Hura, Seung-Jae Moon, and Raquel Willerman ().
Is sound change adaptive? Rivista di linguistica : –.
Linell, Per (). Vowel length and consonant length in Swedish word level phonology.
In E. Gårding, G. Bruce, and R. Bannert (eds), Nordic Prosody I. Lund: Gleerups, –.
Lisker, Leigh (). The Tamil occlusive: short vs. long or voiced vs. voiceless? Indian
Linguistics, Turner Jubilee vol. : –.
Lisker, Leigh, Alvin Liberman, Donna M. Erickson, David Dechovitz, and Roland Mandler ().
On pushing the voice-onset-time (VOT) boundary about. Language and Speech : –.
Local, John, and Adrian P. Simpson (). Phonetic implementation of geminates in Malay-
alam nouns. In J. J. Ohala et al. (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. San Francisco: University of California Press, –.
Löfqvist, Anders (). Interarticulator programming: effect of closure duration on lip and
tongue coordination in Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Löfqvist, Anders (). Tongue movement kinematics in long and short Japanese consonants.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Löfqvist, Anders (). Vowel-related tongue movements in speech: straight or curved paths?
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Löfqvist, Anders, and Vincent Gracco (). Interarticulator programming in VCV sequences:
lip and tongue movements. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Louali, N., and G. Puech (). Les consonnes fortes du berbère: indices perceptuels et
corrélats phonétiques. In Actes des e Journées d’Étude sur la Parole, Trégastel, –.
Loukina, Anastassia, Greg Kochanski, Burton Rosner, and Elinor Keane (). Rhythm
measures and dimensions of durarional varation in speech. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America : –.
Loukina, Anastassia, Burton Rosner, Greg Kochanski, Elinor Keane, and Chilin Shih ().
What determines duration-based rhythm measures: text or speaker? Laboratory Phonology
: –.
Lovins, Julie B. (). Loanwords and the phonological structure of Japanese. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Chicago. Distributed by the Indiana University Linguistics Club.
Macmillan, Neil, and Douglas Creelman (). Detection Theory: A User’s Guide, nd edn.
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Maddieson, Ian (). Patterns of Sounds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maddieson, Ian (). Phonetic cues to syllabiﬁcation. In V. A. Fromkin (ed.), Phonetic
Linguistics: Essays in Honor of Peter Ladefoged. Orland, Fla.: Academic Press, –.
Malikouti-Drachman, Angeliki (). Η αντιπροσώπευση των διπλών συμφώνων στα Νέα
Ελληνικά [The representation of double consonants in Modern Greek]. Studies in Greek
Linguistics : –.
Malikouti-Drachman, Angeliki (). On Cypriot geminates. Journal of Greek Linguistics
: –.

References

Mann, Virginia A. (). Inﬂuence of preceding liquid on stop-consonant perception.
Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Mann, Virginia A., and Bruno H. Repp (). Inﬂuence of vocalic context on perception of
the [ʃ]-[s] distinction, Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Mann, Virginia A., Harriet M. Sharlin, and Michael Dorman (). Children’s perception of
sibilants: the relation between articulation and perceptual development. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology : –.
Marotta, Giovanna (). Modelli e misure ritmiche: la durata vocalica in italiano. Bologna:
Zanichelli.
Marslen-Wilson, William D., and Pienie Zwitserlood (). Accessing spoken words: the import-
ance of word onsets. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
(): –.
Martin, Andrew, and Sharon Peperkamp (). Speech perception and phonology. In M. van
Oostendorp et al. (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology, vol. . Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell, –.
Martin, Samuel E. (). Morphophonemics of Standard Colloquial Japanese. Baltimore:
Linguistic Society of America.
Maruta, Koji (). Eigo shakuyōgo ni okeru sokuonka [Consonant gemination in loanwords
from English]. On’in Kenkyū [Phonological Studies] : –.
Massaro, Dominic W., and Michael M. Cohen (). Phonological context in speech perception.
Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Masuda, Kyoko, and Rachel Hayes-Harb (). Eigo bogo washa ni yoru sokuon seisei no
sutoratejī [Native English speakers’ strategies of producing moraic obstruents]. In M. Minami
(ed.), Gengogaku to Nihongo Kyōiku IV: New Directions in Applied Linguistics of Japanese.
Tokyo: Kurosio, –.
Matsui, Michinao F. (). Shakuyōgo ni okeru sokuon seiki no yokusei yōin [An inhibitory
factor of occurrence of voiceless geminate consonants in Japanese loanwords]. Theoretical
and Applied Linguistics at Kobe Shoin : –.
Matsumura, Akira (ed.) (). Daijirin, nd edn. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Matusevich, Margarita Ivanovna (). Sovremennij Russkij Jazyk: Fonetika [Contemporary
Russian: Phonetics]. Moscow: Prosveshchenie.
McCarthy, John J. (). Prosodic templates, morphemic templates, and morphemic tiers. In
H. van der Hulst and N. Smith (eds), The Structure of Phonological Representations. Dordrecht:
Foris, –.
McCarthy, John J. (). OCP effects: gemination and anti-gemination. Linguistic Inquiry :
–.
McCarthy, John J. (). Doing Optimality Theory: Applying Theory to Data. Malden, Mass.:
Blackwell.
McCarthy, John J., and Alan Prince (). Prosodic morphology. MS, University of Massachusetts
and Brandeis University
McCarthy, John J., and Alan Prince (). Faithfulness and reduplicative identity. In
J. Beckman, L. Walsh Dickey, and S. Urbanczyk (eds), Papers in Optimality Theory. Amherst,
Mass.: GLSA, –.
References


McCawley, James D. (). The Phonological Component of a Grammar of Japanese. The
Hague: Mouton.
McClelland, James L., and Jeffrey L. Elman (). The TRACE model of speech perception.
Cognitive Psychology : –.
McCrary, Kristie Marie (). Reassessing the role of the syllable in Italian phonology: an
experimental study of consonant cluster syllabiﬁcation, deﬁnite article allomorphy and
segment duration. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
McQueen, James, and Mark Pitt (). Transitional probability and phoneme monitoring.
Proceedings of the th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing. Philadelphia:
IEEE, –.
Mester, Armin, and Junko Ito (). Feature predictability and underspeciﬁcation: palatal
prosody in Japanese mimetics. Language : –.
Meyer, David E., and Roger W. Schvaneveldt (). Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words:
evidence of a dependence between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental Psychology
(): –.
Miller, Joanne L., Kerry P. Green, and Adam Reeves (). Speaking rate and segments: a look
at the relation between speech production and speech perception for the voicing contrast.
Phonetica : –.
Miller, Joanne L., and Alvin M. Liberman (). Some effects of later-occurring information
on the perception of stop consonant and semivowel. Perception and Psychophysics ():
–.
Minkova, Donka (). The environment for open syllable lengthening in Middle English.
Folia Linguistica Historica (): –.
Mithun, Marianne, and Hasan Basri (). The phonology of Selayarese. Oceanic Linguistics
: –.
Mohanan, Karuvannur P., and Tara Mohanan (). Lexical phonology and the consonant
system of Malayalam. Linguistic Inquiry : –.
Monahan, Philip, Eri Takahashi, Chizuru Nakao, and William Idsardi (). Not all epen-
thetic contexts are equal: differential effects in Japanese illusory vowel perception. In
S. Iwasaki et al. (eds), Japanese/Korean Linguistics, vol. . Stanford, Calif.: CSLI, –.
Morén, Bruce (). Distinctiveness, coercion and sonority: a uniﬁed theory of weight.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland.
Morén, Bruce (). Weight typology: an optimality-theoretic approach. Linguistic Review :
–.
Moreton, Elliott (). Structural constraints in the perception of English stop-sonorant
clusters. Cognition : –.
Moreton, Elliott (). Analytic bias and phonological typology. Phonology (): –.
Morimoto, Maho (). Degemination in Japanese loanwords from Italian. MA thesis,
Department of Linguistics, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Moss, Helen E., Ruth K. Ostrin, Lorraine K. Tyler, and William D. Marslen-Wilson ().
Accessing different types of lexical semantic information: evidence from priming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition (): –.
Moxness, Bente H. (). Preaspiration in Trønder. MA thesis, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology.

References

Muller, Jennifer S. (). Chuukese geminates revisited. Paper presented at the th Midconti-
nental Workshop on Phonology (McWOP), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, –Oct.
Muller, Jennifer S. (a). A uniﬁed mora account of Chuukese. In S. Bird et al. (eds),
Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Somerville, Mass.:
Cascadilla Press, –.
Muller, Jennifer S. (b). The phonetics of Chuukese geminates. MS, Ohio State University.
Muller, Jennifer S. (). The phonology and phonetics of word-initial geminates. Doctoral
dissertation, Ohio State University.
Muller, Jennifer S. (). On the theoretical implications of Cypriot Greek initial geminates.
Journal of Greek Linguistics : –.
Muller, Jennifer S. (). The production and perception of word initial geminates in Cypriot
Greek. In M.-J. Solé, D. Recasens, and J. Romero (eds), Proceedings of the th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Australia: Causal Productions (CD-ROMs)/Barcelona: Futur-
graphic (print proceedings), –.
Myers, Scott (). Expressing phonetic naturalness in phonology. In I. Roca (ed.), Derivations
and Constraints in Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Myers, Scott, and Benjamin Hansen (). The origin of vowel-length neutralization in
vocoid sequences. Phonology : –.
Nádasdy, Adám (). Consonant lengthening in recent borrowings into Hungarian. Acta
Linguistica Hungarica : –.
Nair, R. Bhaya (). Monosyllabic English or disyllabic Hindi? Language acquisition in a
bilingual child. Indian Linguistics : –.
Nakatani, Lloyd H., Kathleen D. O’Connor, and Carletta H. Aston (). Prosodic aspects of
American English speech rhythm. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (S): S.
Nasu, Akio (). Tyōfukukei onomatope no kyōtyō keitai to yūhyōsei [Emphatic forms
of reduplicative mimetics and markedness]. Nihongo/Nihon Bunka Kenkyū [Studies in
Japanese Language and Culture] : –.
Nasu, Akio (). Asymmetries in mimetic phonology. Onsei Kenkyū [Journal of the Phonetic
Society of Japan] : –.
Neely, James H. (). Semantic priming and retrieval from lexical memory: evidence for
facilitatory and inhibitory processes. Memory and Cognition (): –.
Newman, Aaron J., Antoine Tremblay, Emily S. Nichols, Helen J. Neville, and Michael
T. Ullman (). The inﬂuence of language proﬁciency on lexical semantic processing in
native and late learners of English. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience (): –.
Ní Chasaide, Ailbhe (). Preaspiration in phonological stop contrasts. Doctoral disserta-
tion, University College of North Wales.
Ní Chiosaín, Máire, and Jaye Padgett (). Phonological evidence. In S. Parker (ed.),
Contrast, Comparison Sets, and the Perceptual Space. London: Equinox, –.
NIKL (National Academy of the Korean Language) (). Woylayephyokipeyp [How to
Borrow Foreign Sounds]. Seoul.
Nishimura, Kohei (). Lyman’s law in loanwords. On’in Kenkyū [Phonological Studies] :
–.
Norris, Dennis G. (). Shortlist: a connectionist model of continuous speech recognition.
Cognition : –.
References


Obrecht, Dean H. (). Three experiments in the perception of geminate consonants in
Arabic. Language and Speech (): –.
Ofuka, Etsuko, Yoko Mori, and Shigeru Kiritani (). Sokuon no chikaku ni taisuru senkō
kōzoku boinchō no eikyō [Perception of a Japanese geminate stop: the effect of the duration
of the preceding/following vowel]. Onsei Kenkyū [Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan]
(): –.
Ohala, John J. (). The listener as a source of sound change. In C. S. Masek, R. A. Hendrick,
and M. F. Miller (eds), Papers from the Parasession on Language and Behavior. Chicago:
Chicago Linguistic Society, –.
Ohala, John J. (). The origin of sound patterns in vocal tract constraints. In P. F. MacNeilage
(ed.), The Production of Speech. New York: Springer, –.
Ohala, John J. (). The phonetics and phonology aspect of assimilation. In J. Kingston and
M. E. Beckman (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology I: Between the Grammar and Physics
of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Ohala, John J., and Carol Riordan (). Passive vocal tract enlargement during voiced stops.
In J. J. Wolf and D. H. Klatt (eds), Speech Communication Papers. New York: Acoustical
Society of America, –.
Ohala, Manjari. (). Experimental methods in the study of Hindi geminate consonants.
In M.-J. Solé, P. Beddor, and M. Ohala (eds), Experimental Approaches to Phonology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Öhman, Sven (). Numerical model of coarticulation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America : –.
Ohso, Mieko (). A phonological study of some English loan words in Japanese. MA thesis,
Ohio State University.
Ohye, Saburo (). Gairaigochū no sokuon ni kansuru ichi kōsatsu [The mora phoneme /Q/
in English loanwords in Japanese]. Onsei no Kenkyū [The Study of Sounds] : –.
Oldﬁeld, Richard C. (). The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh
inventory. Neuropsychologia (): –.
Ono, Koji (). Gairaigo to shite no eigo no sokuon-ka ni tsuite [The Q-insertion rule in
English loanwords in Japanese]. Gengo Kenkyū [Journal of the Linguistic Society of
Japan]: –.
Otaka, Hiromi (). Phonetics and Phonology of Moras, Feet, and Geminate Consonants in
Japanese. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.
Ouakrim, Omar (). Fonética y fonología del bereber. Doctoral dissertation, Universitad
Autonoma de Barcelona.
Ouakrim, Omar (). Un paramètre acoustique distinguant la gémination de la tension
consonantique. Études et documents berbères : –.
Ouakrim, Omar (). A perceptual study of tenseness: some acoustic cues identifying tense
vs. non-tenses contrast in Berber. In M.-J. Solé, D. Recasens, and J. Romero (eds), Proceed-
ings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Australia: Causal Productions
(CD-ROMs)/Barcelona: Futurgraphic (print proceedings), –.
Padgett, Jaye (). Contrast and postvelar fronting in Russian. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory : –.
Padgett, Jaye (). Systemic contrasts and Catalan rhotics. Linguistic Review (): –.

References

Pajak, Bozena (). Contextual constraints on geminates: the case of Polish. In I. Kwon,
H. Pritchett, and J. Spence (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society. Berkeley, Calif.: Berkeley Linguistics Society, –.
Pajak, Bozena (). Non-intervocalic geminates: typology, acoustics, perceptibility. In
L. Carroll, B. Keffala, and D. Michel (eds), San Diego Linguistics Papers . San Diego: UC
San Diego, –.
Panov, Michail Viktorovich (). Russkaja Fonetika [Russian Phonetics]. Moscow:
Prosveshchenie.
Panov, Michail Viktorovich (). Sovremennij Russkij Jazyk: Fonetika [The Contemporary
Russian Language: Phonetics]. Moscow: Vischaja Shkola.
Paradis, Carole, and Antoine Tremblay (). Nondistinctive features in loanword adapta-
tion: the unimportance of English aspiration in Mandarin Chinese phoneme categorization.
In A. Calabrese and W. L. Wetzels (eds), Loan Phonology. Amsterdam: Benjamins, –.
Paradis, Carole, and Darlene LaCharité (). Preservation and minimality in loanword
adaptation. Journal of Linguistics : –.
Paradis, Carole, and Darlene LaCharité (). Apparent phonetic approximation: English
loanwords in Old Quebec French. Journal of Linguistics : –.
Park, Hanyong, and Kenneth J. de Jong (). Perceptual category mapping between English
and Korean prevocalic obstruents: evidence from mapping effects in second language
identiﬁcation skills. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Parker, Ellen, Randy Diehl, and Keith Kluender (). Trading relations in speech and non-
speech. Perception and Psychophysics : –.
Pater, Joe (). Non-uniformity in English secondary stress: the role of ranked and lexically
speciﬁc constraints. Phonology : –.
Payne, Elinor M. (). Phonetic variation in Italian consonant gemination. Journal of the
International Phonetic Association (): –.
Payne, Elinor M. (). Non-durational indices of Italian geminates: an EPG study. Journal of
the International Phonetic Association (): –.
Payne, Elinor, and Eftychia Eftychiou (). Prosodic shaping of consonant gemination in
Cypriot Greek. Phonetica (–): –.
Peperkamp, Sharon (). A psycholinguistic theory of loanword adaptation. In M. Ettlinger,
N. Fleischer, and M. Park-Doob (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society, –.
Peperkamp, Sharon, and Emmanuel Dupoux (). Reinterpreting loanword adaptation: the
role of perception. In M.-J. Solé, D. Recasens, and J. Romero (eds), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Australia: Causal Productions (CD-ROMs)/
Barcelona: Futurgraphic (print proceedings), –.
Peperkamp, Sharon, Inga Vendelin, and Kimihiro Nakamura (). On the perceptual origin
of loanword adaptations: experimental evidence from Japanese. Phonology (): –.
Perkell, Joseph, Mark Cohen, Mario Svirsky, Melanie Matthies, Iñaki Garabieta, and Michel
Jackson (). Electromagnetic midsagittal articulometer (EMMA) systems for transducing
speech articulatory movements. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Peterson, Gordon E., and Ilse Lehiste (). Duration of syllable nuclei in English. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
References


Pickett, Emily R., Sheila E. Blumstein, and Martha W. Burton (). Effects of speaking rate
on the singleton/geminate consonant contrast in Italian. Phonetica (/): –.
Pickett, J. M., and Louis R. Decker (). Time factors in perception of a double consonant.
Language and Speech : –.
Piggott, Glyne (). At the right edge of words. Linguistic Review : –.
Pind, Jörgen (). The perception of quantity in Icelandic. Phonetica :–.
Pind, Jörgen (). Speaking rate, VOT and quantity: the search for higher-order invariants
for two Icelandic speech cues. Perception and Psychophysics : –.
Pind, Jörgen (). Speech segment duration and quantity in Icelandic. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Pisoni, David B. (). Identiﬁcation and discrimination of the relative onset time of two
component tones: implications for voicing perception in stops. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (): –.
Pitt, Mark A. (). Phonological processes and the perception of phonotactically illegal
consonant clusters. Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Podesva, Robert (). Constraints on geminates in Buginese and Selayarese. In R. Billerey-
Mosier and B. D. Lillehaugen (eds), Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on
Formal Linguistics. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Press, –.
Podesva, Robert (). Segmental constraints on geminates and their implications for
typology. Paper presented at the th Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America,
–Jan.
Pohl, Muna (). The perception of laryngeal and length contrasts in early language
acquisition. Doctoral dissertation, University of Konstanz.
Polivanov, E. D. (). La perception des sons d’une langue étrangère [The perception of non-
native language sounds]. Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague : –.
Polivanov, E. D. (). The subjective nature of the perceptions of language sounds.
In A. A. Leont’ev (ed.), Selected Works: Articles on General Linguistics. The Hague: Mouton,
–.
Port, Robert F., and Jonathan Dalby (). Consonant/vowel ratio as a cue for voicing in
English. Perception and Psychophysics (): –.
Port, Robert F., Jonathan Dalby, and Michael O’Dell (). Evidence for mora timing in
Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Poser, William J. (). Evidence for foot structure in Japanese. Language : –.
Prince, Alan S. (). Comparative tableaux. Rutgers Optimality Archive ROA-.
(Retrieved Aug. .)
Prince, Alan S., and Paul Smolensky (). Optimality theory: constraint interaction
in generative grammar, Technical Report CU-CS--, Dept of Computer Science,
University of Colorado, Boulder; Technical Report RuCCS-TR-, Rutgers University Center
for Cognitive Science.
Prince, Alan S., and Paul Smolensky (). Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in
Generative Grammar. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Proverbio, Alice M., Liza Vecchi, L., and Alberto Zani (). From orthography to phonetics:
ERP measures of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion mechanisms in reading. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience (): –.

References

R Development Core Team (–). R: a language and environment for statistical
computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Ramus, Frank, Marina Nespor, and Jacques Mehler (). Correlates of linguistic rhythm in
the speech signal. Cognition : –.
Reetz, Henning, and Allard Jongman (). Phonetics: Transcription, Production, Acoustics
and Perception. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Repp, Bruno H. (). Perceptual integration and differentiation of spectral cues for inter-
vocalic stop consonants. Perception and Psychophysics : –.
Riad, Tomas (). Structures in Germanic prosody: a diachronic study with special reference
to the Nordic languages. Doctoral dissertation, Stockholm University.
Riad, Tomas (). The Phonology of Swedish. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rice, Curt (). Norwegian quantity and the richness of the base. MS, University of Tromsø.
Ridouane, Rachid (). Suites de consonnes en berbère: phonétique et phonologie. Doctoral
thesis, Université Sorbonne Nouvelle-Paris .
Ridouane, Rachid (). Gemination in Tashlhiyt Berber: an acoustic and articulatory study.
Journal of the International Phonetic Association (): –.
Ridouane, Rachid (). Syllables without vowels: phonetic and phonological evidence from
Tashlhiyt Berber. Phonology : –.
Ridouane, Rachid (). Geminates at the junction of phonetics and phonology.
In C. Fougeron et al. (eds), Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, –.
Ridouane, Rachid (). Tashlhiyt Berber. Journal of the International Phonetic Association
: –.
Ridouane, Rachid, and Pierre Hallé (). On the perceptual reliability of articulation without
acoustics. In W.-S. Lee and E. Zee (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong, –.
Ridouane, Rachid, Anne Hermes, and Pierre Hallé (). Tashlhiyt’s ban of complex syllable
onsets: phonetic and perceptual evidence. STUF: Language Typology and Universals :
–.
Ringen, Catherine O., and Robert M. Vago (). Geminates: heavy or long? In C. Cairns and
E. Raimy (eds), Handbook of the Syllable. Leiden: Brill, –.
Ringen, Catherine, and Willem van Dommelen (). Quantity and laryngeal contrasts in
Norwegian. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Roberts, Adam C., Sandra Kotzor, Allison Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri (). Asymmetric
processing of durational differences: electrophysiological investigations in Bengali. Neurop-
sychologia : –.
Roberts, Adam C., Allison Wetterlin, and Aditi Lahiri (). Aligning mispronounced words
to meaning: evidence from ERP and reaction time studies. Mental Lexicon (): –.
Rose, Yvan, and Katherine Demuth (). Vowel epenthesis in loanword adaptation: repre-
sentational and phonetic considerations. Lingua : –.
Rosenthall, Sam (). The distribution of prevocalic vowels. Natural Language and Linguis-
tic Theory : –.
Röttger, Timo, Bodo Winter, and Sven Grawunder (). The robustness of incomplete
neutralization in German. In W.-S. Lee and E. Zee (eds), Proceedings of the th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong, –.
References


Saaristo-Helin, Katri, Tuula Savinainen-Makkonen, and Sari Kunnari (). The phono-
logical mean length of utterance: the methodological challenge from across linguistic
perspectives. Journal of Child Language : –.
Saib, Jilali (). The treatment of geminates: evidence from Berber. Studies in African
Linguistics : –.
Sande, Hannah, and Andrew Hedding (). Geminates and weight in Amharic. Paper
presented at Linguistic Society of America meeting, Minneapolis, –Jan.
Sanseido Hensyuuzyo (ed.) (). Concise Katakana-go jiten [Concise Dictionary of Katakana
Words], nd edn. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Sato, Yutaka, Mahoko Kato, and Reiko Mazuka (). Development of single/geminate
obstruent discrimination by Japanese infants: early integration of durational and nondura-
tional cues. Developmental Psychology (): –.
Savinainen-Makkonen, Tuula (). Geminate template: a model for ﬁrst Finnish words. First
Language (): –.
Sazonova, Inna Kuzminichna (). Orfograﬁcheskij Slovar’ Russkogo Jazyka: Odno ili Dva N?
[Orthographic Dictionary of the Russian Language: One N or Two?]. Moscow: ACT-Press.
Schaefﬂer, Felix (). Phonological quantity in Swedish dialects. Phonum (Umeå University).
Schaefﬂer, Felix, P. Wretling, and E. Strangert (). On the development of a quantity
typology for Swedish dialects. In B. Bel and I. Marlien (eds), Proceedings of Speech Prosody
. Aix-en-Provence: SProSIG, –.
Schein, Barry, and Donca Steriade (). On geminates. Linguistic Inquiry (): –.
Schieber, Stuart (). Evidence against the context-freeness of natural language. Linguistics
and Philosophy : –.
Schwartz, Jean-Luc, Louis-Jean Boë, Nathalie Valleé, and Christian Abry (a). The disper-
sion focalization theory of vowel systems. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Schwartz, Jean-Luc, Louis-Jean Boë, Nathalie Valleé, and Christian Abry (b). Major trends
in vowel system inventories. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Segui, Juan, Jacques Mehler, Uli Frauenfelder, and John Morton (). The word frequency
effect and lexical access. Neuropsychologia (): –.
Selkirk, Elizabeth O. (). A two-root theory of length. In E. Dunlap and J. Padgett (eds),
Papers in Phonology. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA, –.
Selkirk, Elisabeth (). The syntax–phonology interface. In J. Goldsmith, J. Riggle, and A. Yu
(eds), The Handbook of Phonological Theory, nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell, –.
Serianni, Luca (). Grammatica Italiana. Rome: UTET.
Sibata, Takesi (). Gairaigo ni okeru akusento kaku no ichi [On accent location in
loanwords]. In K. Sato (ed.), Kokugo Ronkyū : Gendaigo Hōgen no Kenkyū [Studies in
Japanese : Study of Modern Dialects]. Tokyo: Meiji Shoin, –.
Shibatani, Masayoshi (). The Languages of Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shimoji, Michinori (). Northern Ryukyuan. In N. Tranter (ed.), The Languages of Japan
and Korea. New York: Routledge, –.
Shinmura, Izuru (ed.) (). Kōjien, th edn. Tokyo: Iwanami.
Shinohara, Shigeko (). Emergence of universal grammar in foreign word adaptations.
In R. Kager, J. Pater, and W. Zonneveld (eds), Constraints in Phonological Acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.

References

Shinohara, Shigeko, and Masako Fujimoto (). Moraicity of initial geminates in the
Tedumuni dialect of Okinawan. In W.-S. Lee and E. Zee (eds), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong,
–.
Shirai, Setsuko (). Gemination in loans from English to Japanese. In S. Oh, N. Sawai,
K. Shiobara, and R. Wojdak (ed.), Proceedings of the Northwest Linguistics Conference
Vancouver: Dept of Linguistics, University of British Columbia, –.
Shirai, Setsuko (). Gemination in loans from English to Japanese. MA thesis, University of
Washington.
Silva, David (). The phonetics and phonology of stop lenition in Korean. Doctoral
dissertation, Cornell University.
Silva, David (). Acoustic evidence for the emergence of tonal contrast in contemporary
Korean. Phonology : –.
Silverman, Daniel (). Multiple scansions in loanword phonology: evidence from Canton-
ese. Phonology (): –.
Siptár, Péter, and Miklós Törkenczy (). The Phonology of Hungarian. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Smith, Caroline (). The timing of vowel and consonant gestures. Doctoral dissertation,
Yale University.
Smith, Caroline (). Prosodic patterns in the coordination of vowel and consonant
gestures. In B. Connell, and A. Arvaniti (eds), Laboratory Phonology IV: Phonology and
Phonetic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Smith, Jennifer L. (). Loan phonology is not all perception: evidence from Japanese loan
doublets. In T. J. Vance and K. A. Jones (eds), Japanese/Korean Linguistics, vol. . Stanford,
Calif.: CSLI, –.
Sohn, Hyang-Sook (). Underspeciﬁcation in Korean phonology. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Solé, Maria-Josep (). Aerodynamic characteristics of trills and phonological patterning.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Sonu, Mee (). The inﬂuence of adjacent phonemes on the perception of Japanese geminate
(/sokuon/) and singleton stops. The Special Interest Group Technical Reports of IPSJ: SLP-
(): –.
Steriade, Donca (). Greek prosodies and the nature of syllabiﬁcation. Doctoral dissertation,
MIT.
Steriade, Donca (). Directional assymetries in place assimilation. In E. Hume and
K. Johnson (eds), The Role of Speech Perception in Phonology. New York: Academic Press,
–.
Steriade, Donca (). Perceptual repair and syllable structure: a reply to Kabak and Idsardi.
MS, MIT.
Steriade, Donca (). The phonology of perceptibility effects: the P-map and its conse-
quences for constraint organization. In K. Hanson and S. Inkelas (eds), The Nature of the
Word. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, –.
Stevens, Kenneth. N. (). Features in speech perception and lexical access. In D. B. Pisoni
and R. E. Remez (eds), The Handbook of Speech Perception. Oxford: Blackwell, –.
References


Stevens, Mary (). Consonant length in Italian: gemination, degemination and preaspiration.
In S. M. Alvord (ed.), Selected Proceedings of the th Conference on Laboratory Approaches to
Romance Phonology. Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Stevens, Mary, and John Hajek (). Preaspiration in Sienese Italian and its interaction with
stress in /VCː/ sequences. In B. Bel and I. Marlien (eds), Proceedings of Speech Prosody 
(Nara), –.
Sugito, Miyoko (). Onsetsu ka haku ka [Syllable or mora?]. In Miyoko Sugito (ed.).
Nihongo no Onsei, On’in [Japanese Phonetics and Phonology]. Tokyo: Meiji-shoin, –.
Tajima, Keiichi, Hiroaki Kato, Amanda Rothwell and Kevin G. Munhall (). Training
English listeners to perceive phonemic length contrasts in Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (): –.
Takagi, Naoyuki, and Virginia Mann (). A perceptual basis for the systematic phono-
logical correspondences between Japanese loan words and their English source words.
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Takeyasu, Hajime (). Masatsuon no sokuonchikaku ni okeru masatsushūhasūtokusei no
eikyō [Effects of the spectral properties of frication on perception of singleton/geminate
fricatives]. On’in Kenkyū [Phonological Studies] : –.
Takeyasu, Hajime (). Consonant and vowel durations in the preceeding syllable on the
perception of geminate stops in Japanese. On’in Kenkyū [Phonological Studies] : –.
Takeyasu, Hajime, and Mikio Giriko (). Asymmetrical effects of adjacent syllable duration
on perception of vowel length in Japanese. On’in Kenkyū [Phonological Studies] : –.
Takiguchi, Izumi, Hajime Takeyasu, and Mikio Giriko (). Effects of a dynamic Fon the
perceived vowel duration in Japanese. Proceedings of Speech Prosody (the th Inter-
national Conference of the Speech Prosody Special Interest Group (SProSIG) of the Inter-
national Speech Communication Association (ISCA))[CD-ROM], : –.
Tanaka, Shin’ichi (). Itariago no jūshiin to sokuonkeisei: shurui to seikiichi ni chakumoku
shite [Geminates in Italian and gemination in Japanese: analysis of class and position of
consonants]. Proceedings of the th Meeting of the Linguistic Society of Japan, –.
Tanaka, Shin’ichi (). Itariago no nijūshiin ni taisuru nihongowasha no sokuonchikaku
[Perception of Italian geminate consonants by Japanese speakers]. Paper presented at
GemCon (International Workshop on Geminate Consonants), Kobe University, –Jan.
Taylor, Martha (). Some patterns of geminate consonants. University of Chicago Working
Papers in Linguistics : –.
Tengesdal, Eirik (). Plosivane i Bjerkreim: ein synkron og diakron studie av prespirasjon
og klanglause lenes [Stops in Bjerkreim: a synchronic and diachronic analysis of preaspira-
tion and voiceless lenis]. MA thesis, University of Oslo.
Tews, Andrea (). Japanese geminate perception in nonsense words involving German [f]
and [x]. Gengo Kenkyū [Journal of the Linguistic Society of Japan] : –.
Thornton, Anna M., Claudio Iacobini, and Cristina Burani (). Una base di dati sul
vocabolario di base della lingua italiana [A Database for the Italian Basic Dictionary].
Rome: Bulzoni.
Thurgood, Graham (). Geminates: a cross-linguistic examination. In J. A. Nevis, G. McMenamin,
and G. Thurgood (eds), Papers in Honor of Frederick H. Brengelman. Fresno: Dept of Linguistics,
California State University, Fresno, –.

References

Timberlake, Alan (). A Reference Grammar of Russian. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Toda, Takako (). Strategies for producing mora timing by non-native speakers of Japanese.
In T. Toda (ed.), Acquisition of Japanese as a Second Language. Tokyo: Bonjinsha, –.
Toda, Takako (). Nihongo gakushūsha ni yoru sokuon, chōon, hatsuon no chikaku
hanchūka [Categorical perception of moraic obstruents, long vowels, and moraic nasal by
learners of Japanese]. Bungei Gengo Kenkyū [Studies in Language and Literature] : –.
Toda, Takako (). Second Language Speech Perception and Production: Acquisition of
Phonological Contrasts in Japanese. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.
Toole, Floyd E., and Sean Olive (). The modiﬁcation of timbre by resonances: perception
and measurements, Journal of the Audio Engineering Society (): –.
Topintzi, Nina (). Moraic onsets. Doctoral dissertation, University of London.
Topintzi, Nina (). On the existence of moraic onset geminates. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory (): –.
Topintzi, Nina (). Onsets: Suprasegmental and Prosodic Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Tranel, Bernard (). CVC light syllables, geminates, and moraic theory. Phonology :
–.
Tronnier, M. (). Preaspiration in southern Swedish dialects. In Proceedings of Fonetik
. Stockholm: KTH, –.
Trubetzkoy, N. S. (). Grundzüge der Phonologie. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Trans. C. A. M. Baltaxe as Principles of Phonology (Berkeley: University of California
Press, ).
Tserdanelis, Georgios, and Amalia Arvaniti (). The acoustic characteristics of geminate
consonants in Cypriot Greek. In Y. Aggouraki et al. (eds), Proceedings of the th International
Conference on Greek Linguistics. Thessaloniki: University Studio Press, –.
Tsuchida, Ayako (). English loans in Japanese: constraints in loanword phonology.
Working Papers of the Cornell Phonetics Laboratory : –.
Tsuji Sho, Kenya Nishikawa, and Reiko Mazuka (). Segmental distributions and
consonant–vowel association patterns in Japanese infant- and adult-directed speech. Journal
of Child Language (): –.
Tsujimura, Natsuko (). An Introduction to Japanese Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Turk, Alice (). The American English ﬂapping rule and the effect of stress on stop
consonant duration. Working Papers of the Cornell Phonetics Laboratory : –.
Turk, Alice, Satsuki Nakai, and Mariko Sugahara (). Acoustic segment durations in
prosodic research: a practical guide. In S. Sudhoff et al. (eds), Methods in Empirical Prosody
Research. Berlin: De Gruyter, –.
Turk, Alice. E., and Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel (). Word-boundary-related duration
patterns in English. Journal of Phonetics : –.
Turk, Alice, and Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel (). What is speech rhythm? A commentary
on Arvaniti and Rodriquez, Krivokapic, and Goswami and Leong. Laboratory Phonology
(): –.
Turk, Alice E., and Laurence White (). Structural inﬂuences on accentual lengthening in
English. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
References


van Dommelen, Willem A. (a). Auditory accounts of temporal factors in the perception of
Norwegian disyllables and speech analogs. Journal of Phonetics : –.
van Dommelen, Willem A. (b). Preaspiration in intervocalic /k/ vs. /g/ in Norwegian.
In J. J. Ohala et al. (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences.
San Francisco: University of California Press, –.
van Dommelen, Willem A. (). Preaspiration in Norwegian: some results on speaker age,
gender and linguistic factors. In A. Botonis and N. Torstensson (eds). Proceedings of
FONETIK . Skövde: Dept of Languages, University of Skövde, –.
van Dommelen, Willem A., and Catherine Ringen (). Intervocalic fortis and lenis stops in
a Norwegian dialect. Speech Music and Hearing, Quarterly Progress and Status Report,
TMH-QPRS : –.
Vance, Timothy J. (). The Sounds of Japanese. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vendelin, Inga, and Sharon Peperkamp (). The inﬂuence of orthography on loanword
adaptations. Lingua (): –.
Vihman, Marilyn M., and William Croft (). Phonological development: toward a ‘radical’
templatic phonology. Linguistics : –.
Vihman, Marilyn M., and Sari Kunnari (). The sources of phonological knowledge.
Recherches linguistiques de Vincennes : –.
Vihman, Marilyn M., and Shelley L. Velleman (). Phonetics and the origins of phonology.
In N. Burton-Roberts, P. Carr, and G. Docherty (eds), Phonological Knowledge. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, –.
Vitevitch, Michael, and Paul Luce (). Probabilistic phonotactics and neighborhood
activation in spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language : –.
Vogt, Hugo (). The structure of the Norwegian monosyllables. Norsk Tidskrift for Sprogvi-
denskap : –. Repr. in E. H. Jahr and O. Lorentz (eds), Fonologi/Phonology (Oslo: Novus,
), –.
Wade, Travis, and Lori L. Holt (). Effects of later-occurring nonlinguistic sounds on
speech categorization. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (): –.
Warner, Natasha, and Takayuki Arai (). Japanese mora-timing: a review. Phonetica :
–.
Warner, Natasha, Allard Jongman, Joan Sereno, and Rachèl Kemps (). Incomplete
neutralization and other sub-phonemic durational differences in production and perception:
evidence from Dutch. Journal of Phonetics (): –.
Watanabe, Shinichiro, and Nobuo Hirato (). The relation between the perceptual bound-
ary of voiceless plosives and their moraic counterparts and the duration of the preceding
vowels. Onsei Gengo : –.
Watson, Janet (). Phonology and Morphology of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Westbury, John R. (). Aspects of the temporal control of voicing in consonant clusters in
English. Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Westbury, John (). On coordinate systems and the representation of articulatory move-
ments. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Westbury, John R., and Patricia Keating (). On the naturalness of stop consonant voicing.
Journal of Linguistics : –.

References

Wiget, Lukas, Laurence White, Barbara Schuppler, Izabelle Grenon, Olesya Rauch, and Sven
Mattys (). How stable are acoustic metrics of contrastive speech rhythm? Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America : –.
Willi, Urs (). Die segmentale Dauer als phonetischer Parameter von ‘fortis’ und ‘lenis’ bei
Plosiven im Zürichdeutschen. Stuttgart: Steiner.
Wilson, Colin (). Learning phonology with substantive bias: an experimental and
computational study of velar palatalization. Cognitive Science (): –.
Wolter, Hugo (). On preaspirated stops in a Norwegian dialect. In E. Zwirner and
W. Bethge (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Basel:
Karger, –.
Wretling, Pår, E. Strangert, and F. Schaefﬂer (). Quantity and preaspiration in northern
Swedish dialects. In B. Bel and I. Marlien (eds), Proceedings of Speech Prosody . Aix-en-
Provence: SProSIG, –.
Wright, Richard (). A review of perceptual cues and cue robustness. In B. Hayes,
R. Kirchner, and D. Steriade (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
Yip, Moira (). The symbiosis between perception and grammar in loanword phonology.
Lingua : –.
Youssef, Islam (). Place assimilation in Arabic: contrast, features, constraints. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Tromsø.
Yu, Alan (). Inﬁxing with a vengeance: Pingding Mandarin inﬁxation. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics : –.
Yupho, Nawanit (). Consonant clusters and stress rules in Pattani Malay. Mon-Khmer
Studies : –.
Zimmermann, Eva (). A phonological account of morphological length. Doctoral disser-
tation, University of Leipzig.
Zsiga, Elizabeth C. (). Local assimilation. In M. van Oostendorp et al. (eds), The Blackwell
Companion to Phonology, vol. . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Zuraw, Kie (). Patterned exceptions in phonology. Doctoral dissertation, University of
California, Los Angeles.
Zygis, Marzena, and Jaye Padgett (). A perceptual study of Polish fricatives, and its
implications for historical sound change. Journal of Phonetics : –.
References


Index
acquisition 
ﬁrst language (L) acquisition –
second language (L) acquisition –
allomorphy 
Amharic , , , –
amplitude change , –
anti-gemination constraint 
Arabic –, , –, , , , ;
see also Baghdadi Arabic; Cairene
Arabic; Hadhrami Arabic; Lebanese
Arabic; Moroccan Arabic; San’ani
Arabic
assimilative effect –, , , –
asymmetry , , –, , –, ,
–, –
positional asymmetry –, 
processing asymmetry –, , ,
–, , –
representational 
autosegmental representation , , 
autosegmental theory –
AXB discrimination , , 
Baghdadi Arabic , , , –, 
Bengali –, –, –, , –
Berber, see Tashlhiyt Berber
bimoraic foot , , , –,
, 
binary feature 
bisyllable –
borrowing process , , –, 
boundary ratio , , 
Cahuilla , –
Cairene Arabic –, 
categorical perception , 
Chuukese , , , –, –, 
Circassian 
Classical Nahuatl 
classiﬁcation accuracy , , –,
–, –
closed syllable vowel shortening ,
–
closure duration, see duration
coda faithfulness , 
compensatory lengthening , –,
, –
consonant-adjacent geminate, see geminate
consonant duration, see duration
contextual effect , –, , , 
contextual position –, –, –, –
contrast dispersion 
contrastive effect , –, , –, 
corpus study , –
CSVS, see closed syllable vowel shortening
Cypriot Greek –, –, , , ,
–, 
degemination , –, –, –, ,
, 
devoicing , , , , 
donor language , , 
duration
closure duration –, –, –, –,
–, –, , –, –,
, , , , , , –
consonant duration , –, , –,
–, , –, –, –,
–, –, , –, 
vowel duration , , , –, –,
–, –, –, 
durational ratio –
edge cluster –, –, –, 
edge geminate, see geminate
EEG –, –

electroencephalogram, see EEG
electrooculography, see EOG
electropalatography, see EPG
electrophysiology , –
English , , , , , –, –,
, , , , 
epenthesis , , , , –, ,
–
EOG , –
EPG , , , 
ERP , , –, –
Estonian 
event-related potential, see ERP
experimental phonetics , 
Faeroese –
Fenno-Swedish 
ﬁnal geminate, see geminate
ﬁnal mora deletion –, , 
Finnish –
foot, see bimoraic foot; head foot;
initial foot
fortis fricative , , –
frication , , , , , 
fricative –, –, –, –, ,
–, , –, –, ,
–, –
fricative geminate, see geminate fricative
FUL (Featurally Underspeciﬁed
Lexicon) , , 
Fula 
Gaelic 
geminate
consonant-adjacent geminate –, 
edge geminate , , , –
ﬁnal geminate , , –, , –, ,
, , , , –, –, –,
–, 
initial geminate , –, , , –,
–, , –, , , –,
–, –
lexical geminate , , , 
medial geminate –, –, –, ,
–, –, , , , –
voiced geminate –, –, , 
geminate consonant, see geminate; geminate
fricative; geminate stop; geminate
sonorant
geminate fricative , , , , , –,
, –
geminate sonorant –, , –, , ,
–, , , , –
geminate stop , –, –, , , , ,
, –, , , 
geminate throwback –, –, 
geminate voiced obstruent , ; see also
voiced geminate
Hadhrami Arabic –, –
head dependence (HD) –,
–, –
head foot (HF) , , 
Hindi 
host language, see recipient language
Hungarian , , , –, 
Icelandic , , –
Ilokano , 
implicational universal –, ,
, 
initial foot (IF) , , ,
–
initial geminate, see geminate
intensity , –, –, 
interarticulator programming , –
intermediate step , , 
intervocalic geminate , –, –, ,
, –
Italian –, , –, , , , ,
–
Italian geminate –
Japanese –, –, –, ,
–, –, –
Japanese loanword –
Index


Karo 
Korean , –
Korean speakers’ perception –
Koya , 
Lgrammar 
Lphonology –, ; see also native
phonology
labial consonant , 
Lake Miwok , 
language acquisition, see acquisition
Lardil 
later-occurring information , 
Latin , , –
Lebanese Arabic –; see also Arabic
length contrast , , –, –
length distinction, see length contrast
Leti , , , –, 
lexical access , –, –, –,
–
lexical geminate, see geminate
lexical representation , , –, 
lexically speciﬁc ranking –
lexical variation , , , 
Lhasa Tibetan 
lip movement , –, 
liquid –, , –, –, , ,
–
loanword adaptation , , , , ,
, , , –
loanword phonology , , 
long consonant , –; see also geminate
Luganda , , , 
Malay –, ; see also Pattani Malay
Malayalam , , –
manner of articulation , , , , ,
, –, 
Marshallese 
medial geminate, see geminate
mental lexicon –, –, –, 
minimal word constraint –, ,
, 
monosyllable –, –, 
mora , , , –, , , ,
–, , –, 
mora-timed rhythm, see rhythm
moraic representation –, –, ,
, , 
moraic theory –, 
moraicity –, –, –, –,
–
Moroccan Arabic –, ; see also Arabic
motor control 
N–
nasal –, –, , –, –,
–, –, –, –, ,
–, –, –, –,
–, 
nasal consonant –, , ; see also
nasal
nasal obstruent (NC) cluster , –
native phonology –, –, –;
see also Lphonology
native speakers of Japanese –
neurolinguistics , –, 
Ngalakgan , , –
non-native speaker (NN) –, 
non-temporal cue , 
nonﬁnality –, –, –
Norwegian –
Optimality Theory , –, –, 
Pattani Malay –, , , –, 
perceptibility , , 
perception –, –, , –,
–, , –, –, –,
, –, –, –; see also
speech perception
perceptual boundary , , –, 
phonetics –, –, –, , 
phonetics–phonology interface –,
, 
phonological contrast , , , 

Index

phonological length , –, –,
–, , , ; see also
length contrast; quantity contrast
phonological patterning , 
phonological representation , –
phonological system , –, 
phonological weight, see weight; syllable
weight
phonology –, , –, , ,
–, –, , , 
phonotactic constraint , –
phonotactics , , , , , –,

Pirahã 
pitch , , , , 
place of articulation (POA) , , ,
, , , , , , ,
, –
Ponapean , –, , , –,
, 
positional asymmetry, see asymmetry
positional effect , , 
preaspiration –, –, –
preceding vowel , , –, –,
–, , –, –, ,
, –, 
primary cue , , , , , 
priming –, , –, –,
–
Principle of Equal Weight for Codas 
privative feature –, –, 
processing , –, 
processing asymmetry, see asymmetry
production , , , , –, –, –,
–, , –, –, –,
, 
production accuracy , 
prosodic faithfulness , , –,
–, –, 
prosodic integrity 
prosodic markedness , –, –
prosodic strengthening, see strengthening
Puluwat 
quantity –, –, –, , 
quantity contrast –, , , ;
see also length contrast; phonological
length
quantity distinction, see quantity contrast
quantity-manipulating phonology , –
quantity-sensitive stress , 
radical underspeciﬁcation , , 
recipient language , –, 
reduplication , –, 
rhythm
mora-timed rhythm , , 
stress-timed rhythm –, 
syllable-timed rhythm –, 
rhythm class –, 
Russian –, 
Sami 
San’ani Arabic –, –, 
Sanskrit , 
secondary cue , , , , , –,
–
segmentation , , –, 
Selayarese 
Selkup , 
Seoul Korean, see Korean
Seto , 
Shuri Okinawan , , , 
singleton –, –, –, –
sonorant, see geminate sonorant
sonorant geminate, see geminate sonorant
speaking rate , , –, –, –,
, , –, , 
speech motor control, see motor control
speech rate, see speaking rate
speech perception , , –, , ;
see also perception
speech processing , ; see also
processing
speech production , –, , –;
see also production
stop, see geminate stop
Index


stop closure duration , , –;
see also closure duration
stop geminate, see geminate stop
strengthening , , 
stress , –, –, –, , , –,
–, , –, –,
–, 
stress effects on geminate duration ,
–
stress-timed rhythm, see rhythm
stress timing, see stress-timed rhythm
superheavy syllable , –, ,
, 
Swedish , , , –, , 
Swiss German , , , , –,
–, , –, 
syllable structure –, , , , ,
, , 
syllable structure constraint , –,
–
syllable weight , , , , , ,
, , , , 
syllable-timed rhythm, see rhythm
Tashlhiyt Berber –, –, , ,
–, –, 
Tedumuni Okinawan , , 
temporal cue –, –
tenseness , 
theoretical phonology , 
tone , 
tongue movement , , –
Trukese, see Chuukese
Tübatulabal , 
typology , , , , –, , –
underspeciﬁcation , , –, ;
see also radical underspeciﬁcation
voice onset time, see VOT
voiced geminate, see geminate
voiced obstruent , –, , ,
, , –, –, –,
–, 
voiceless obstruent , , , –, ,
, , , , , –
voiceless stop , , –, , –, ,
–, , , ; see also
voiceless obstruent
voicing , , , –, –, , –, ,
, –, , , , , –,
, ; see also devoicing
VOT , , , –, –, –, ,
–, –, , –
vowel duration, see duration
weight , , –, , –, –,
–, , –, , ; see also
syllable weight
weight identity –, 
Welsh 
West Swedish ; see also Swedish
Woleaian , , 
Wolof , , , 
word-ﬁnal geminate, see ﬁnal geminate
word-initial gemination, see initial geminate
word-medial geminate, see medial geminate
word minimality –, –, 
word minimum, see word minimality
X-slot representation , , , 

Index

