
 
The Quantum Theory of Fields 
 
 
Volume I 
Foundations 
 
Steven Weinberg 
University of Texas at Austin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

To Louise

In The Quantum Theory of Fields Nobel Laureate Steven Weinberg com-
bines his exceptional physical insight with his gift for clear exposition to
provide a self-contained, comprehensive, and up-to-date introduction to
quantum field theory.
Volume I introduces the foundations of quantum field theory . The
development is fresh and logical throughout, with each step carefully
motivated by what has gone before, and emphasizing the reasons why
such a theory should describe nature. After a brief historical outline, the
book begins anew with the principles about which we are most certain,
relativity and quantum mechanics, and the properties of particles that
follow from these principles . Quantum field theory then emerges from this
as a natural consequence.
The classic calculations of quantum electrodynamics are presented in a
thoroughly modern way, showing the use of path integrals and dimensional
regularization . The account of renormalization theory reflects the changes
in our view of quantum field theory since the advent of effective field
theories.
The book's scope extends beyond quantum electrodynamics to ele-
mentary particle physics and nuclear physics. It contains much original
material, and is peppered with examples and insights drawn from the
author's experience as a leader of elementary particle research. Problems
are included at the end of each chapter .
A second volume will describe the modern applications of quantum
field theory in today's standard model of elementary particles, and in
some areas of condensed matter physics .
This will be an invaluable reference work for all physicists and mathe-
maticians who use quantum field theory, as well as a textbook appropriate
to graduate courses .

To Louise

The quantum Theory of Fields
Volume I
Foundations

Published by the Press Syndicate of the Un iversity of Cambridge
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge C132 I RP
40 West 20th Street , New York , NY 100 1 1-42 1 1, USA
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia
Oc Steven Weinberg 199 5
First published 1995
Printed in t he United States of Ame rica
A catalogue record fbr this book is avai lable ,from the British Library
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data
Wein berg, Steven, 1933-
The quantum theory of fie lds / Steven Wein berg .
p. cm .
Includes bibliographical reference and index,
Contents : v .
1 . Foundations .
ISBN 0-52 1 -55(]01-7
1. Quantum field theory. I. Title .
Qc174.45.w45 1995
530.1'43-dc20 95-2782 CI P
ISBN 0 52 1 55{101 7
TAG

To Louise

To Louise

Contents
Sections marked with an asterisk are somewhat out of the book's main line of
development and may be omitted in a first reading .
PREFACE
NOTATION
1
HISTORI CAL INTRODUCTION
1.1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
xx
xxv
1
De Broglie waves K Schrodinger-Klein-Gordan wave equation K Fine structure
K Spin K Dirac equation K Negative energies 0 Exclusion principle K Positrons
D Dirac equation reconsidered
1.2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory 1 5
Born, Heisenberg, Jordan quantized field K Spontaneous emission K Anticom-
mutators K Heisenberg-Pauli quantum field theory 0 Furry - -Oppenheimer quan-
tization of Dirac field o Pauli-
eisskopf quantization of scalar field K Early
calculations in quantum electrodynamics K Neutrons K Mesons
1.3 The Prob lem of Infinities
3 1
Infinite electron energy shifts K Vacuum polarization K Scattering of light by light
0 Infrared divergences D Search for alternatives K Renormalization 0 Shelter
Island Conference K Lamb shift K Anomalous electron magnetic moment
Schwinger, Tornonaga, Feynman, Dyson formalisms o why not earlier ?
Bibliography
References
39
40
2
RELATIVISTIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 4 9
2.1 Quantum Mechan ics 4
9
Rays K Scalar products K Observables K Probabilities
Ix

x
Contents
2.2
Symmetries 5
0
Wigner's theorem K Antilinear and antiunitary operators 0 Observables K Group
structure K Representations up to a phase K Superselection rules K Lie groups
K Structure constants K Abelian symmetries
2.3
Quantum Lorentz Transformations 5 5
Lorentz transformations o Quantum operators D Inversion s
2.4 The Pnincare Algebra 58
.TPV and PP K Transformation properties K Commutation relations K Conserved
and non-conserved generators
K Finite translations and rotations K Inonu-
Wigner contraction K Galilean algebra
2.5 one-Particle States 62
Transformation rules
K Boosts K Little groups K Normalization
K Massive
particles K Massless particles K Helicity and polarization
2.6 Space Inversion and Time-Reversal 74
Transformation of JP' and PP 0 P is unitary and T is antiunitary K Massive
particles K Massless particles K Kratners degeneracy D Electric dipole moment s
2.7
Projective Representations' 81
Two-cocyles K Central charges K Simply connected groups K No central charges
in the Lorentz group K Double connectivity of the Lorentz group K Covering
groups K Superselection rules reconsidered
Appendix A The Symmetry Representation Theorem
9 1
Appendix B
Group Operators and Homotopy Classes 96
Appendix C Inversions and Degenerate Multiplets
100
Problems
References
1 04
1 05
3 SCATTERING THEORY 107
3. 1
'In' and `hut' States 107
Multi-particle states K Wave packets ID Asymptotic conditions at early and late
times K Lippmann- Schwinger equations K Principal value and delta function s
3.2
The S-matrix
1 1 3
Definition of the S-matrix, K The T-matrix K Born approximation CI Unitarily
Kf the S-matrix
3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix
116
Lorentz invariance
K Sufficient conditions K Internal symmetries 0 Electric
charge, strangeness, isospin, S U(3) K Parity conservation K Intrinsic parities K

Contents xi
Pion parity K Parity non-conservation K Time-reversal invariance o Watson's
theorem K PT non-conservation K C, CP, CPT K Neutral K-mesons K CP non-
conservation
3.4
Rates and Cross-Sections 134
Rates in a box 0 Decay rates K Cross-sections K Lorentz invariance K Phase
space K Dalitz plots
3.5 Perturbation Theory 141
Oid-fashioned perturbation theory
K 'Tfime-dependent perturbation theory C]
Time-ordered products K The Dyson series K Lormtz-invariant theories o Dis-
torted wave Born approximatio n
3.6 Implications of Unitarity 147
Optical theorem K Diffraction peaks o CPT relations o Particle and antipartic le
decay rates o Kinetic theory K Boltzmann H-theorem
3.7 Partial-Wave Expansions*
151
Discrete basis K Expansion in spherical harmonics K Total elastic and inelastic
cross-sections O Phase shifts K Threshold behavior : exothermic, endothermic,
and elastic reactions O Scattering length
K High-energy elastic and inelastic
scattering
3.8 Resonances' 159
Reasons for resonances : weak coupling, barriers, complexity
K
Energy-
dependence K Unitarity K Brefit-signer formula K Unresolved resonances K
Phase shifts at resonance r] Ramsauer-Townsend effec t
Problems
References
1 65
166
4
T HE CLUSTER DECOMPOSITION PRINCIPLE 16 9
4.1 Bosons and Fermions 170
Permutation phases o Bose and Fermi statistics K Normalization for identical
particles
4,2
Creation and A nnihilation operators 173
Creation operators 0 Calculating the adjoins K Derivation of commutation/
antic ornmutation relations El Representation of general operators El Free-particle
Hamiltonian K Lorentz transformation of creation and annihilation operators K
C, P, T properties of creation and annihilation operator s
4.3 C luster Decomposition and Connected Amplitudes 177
Decorrelation of distant experiments K Connected amplitudes K Counting delta
functions

xii
Contents
4.4
Structure of the Interaction 182
Condition for cluster decomposition K Graphical analysis 0 Two-body spattering
implies three-body scattering
Problems
References
189
189
5 QUANTUM FIELDS AND ANTIPARTICLES 19 1
5.1
Free Fields
19 1
Creation and annihilation fields K Lorentz transformation of the coefficient func-
tions K Construction of the coefficient functions K Implementing cluster decom-
position K Lorentz invariance requires causality K Causality requires antiparticles
K Field equations K Normal orderin g
5.2 Causal Scalar Fields 201
Creation and annihilation fields K Satisfying causality K Scalar fields describe
bosons K Antiparticles K P, C, T transformations K iro
53 Causal Vector Fields 207
Creation and annihilation fields D Spin zero or spin one
K Vector fields describe
bosons K Polarization vectors K Satisfying causality K Antiparticles K Mass zero
limit K P, C, T transformation s
5.4 The Dirac Formalism
213
Clifford representations of the Poincare algebra K Transformation of Dirac matri-
ces C7 Dimensionality of Dirac matrices K Explicit matrices K t5 K Pseudounitarity
K Complex conjugate and transpos e
5.5 Causal Dirac Fields 219
Creation and annihilation fields K Dirac spinors K Satisfying causality K Dirac
fields describe fermions K Antiparticles K Space inversion K Intrinsic parity of
particle-antiparticle pairs K Chorge-conjugation K Intrinsic C-phase of particle--
antiparticle pairs K Majorana fermions 0Time-reversal K Bilinear covariants El
Beta decay interaction s
5.6
General Irreducible Representations of the Homogeneous Lorentz
Group' 229
Isomorphism with S U(2) @ SU(2) d (A, B ) representation of familiar fields
K
Rarity-Schwinger field K Space inversion
5.7
General Causal Fields' 233
Constructing the coefficient function s K Scalar Hamiltonian densities K Satisfying
causality 0 Antiparticles El General spin-statistics connection K Equivalence of
different field types D Space inversion K Intrinsic parity of general particle-
antiparticle pairs El Charge-conjugation K Intrinsic C-phase of antipart icles K

Contents
Xiii
Self-charge-conjugate particles and reality relations K Time-reversal K Problems
for higher spin ?
5.8 The CPT Theorem 244
CPT transformation of scalar, vector, and Dirac fields K CPT transformation of
scalar interaction density K CPT transformation of general irreducible fields K
CPT invariance of Hamiltonian
5.9 Massless Particle Fields 246
Constructing the coefficient functions K Na vector fields for helicity ±1 K Need
for gauge invariance K AntisymmeEric tensor fields for helicity ±1 K Sums over
helicity K constructing causal fields for helicity ± 1 0 Gravitons o Spin >_ 3 K
General irreducible massless fields K Unique helicity for (A, B} fields
Problems
References
255
25 6
6
THE FEYNMAN RULES 25 9
6.1
Derivation of the Rules
259
Pairings K Wick's theorem 0 Coordinate space rules g Combinatoric factors K
Sign factors C] Examples
6,2 Calculation of the Propagator 274
Numerator polynomial K Feynman propagator for scalar fields K Dirac fields
K General irreducible fields K Covariant propagators K Non-covariant terms in
time-ordered products
6.3 Momentum Space Rules 280
Conversion to momentum space O Feynman rules
K Counting independent
momenta K Examples K Loop suppression factor s
6.4 Off the Mass Shell
286
Currents K Off-shell amplitudes are exact matrix elements of Heisenberg-picture
operators o Proof of the theore m
Problems
References
290
291
7 THE CANONICAL FORMALISM 292
7.1
Canonical Variables 293
Canonical commutation relations D Examples : real scalars, complex scalars,
vector fields, Dirac fields LJ Free-particle Harni4tonians O Free-field Lagrangian
K Canonical formalism for interacting fields

xis
Contents
7.2 The Lagrangian Formalism
298
Lagrangian equations of motion o Action
K Lagrangian density K Euler-
Lagrange equations K Reality of the action K From Lagrangians to Harniltvnians
a Scalar fields revisited K From Heisenberg to interaction picture o Auxiliary
fields K Integrating by parts in the action
7.3 Global Symmetries 306
Noether's theorem K Explicit formula for conserved quantities K Explicit formula
for conserved currents K Quantum symmetry generators K Ehergy-momentum
tensor K Momentum K Internal symmetries O Current commutation relations
7.4 Lorentz Invariance 314
Currents
K Generators J~`V
K Belinfante tensor K Lorentz invariance of
S-matrix
7.5 Transition to Intera ction Picture: Examples 318
Scalar field with derivative coupling o Vector field 0 Dirac field
7.6
Constraints and Dirac Brackets
325
Primary and secondary constraints K Poisson brackets K First and second class
constraints K Dirac brackets K Example : real vector field
7.7
Field Redefinitions and Redundant Couplings" 331
Redundant parameters K Field redefinitions K Example : real scalar field
Appendix Dirac Brackets from Canonical Commutators
332
Problems
References
8
ELECTRODYNAMICS
33 7
33 $
339
8.1 Gauge Invariance 339
Need for coupling to conserved current K Charge operator D Local symmetry El
Photon action o Field equations El Gauge-invariant derivative s
8.2
Constraints and Gauge Conditions 343
Primary and secondary constraints K Constraints are first class K Gauge fixing
K Coulomb gauge K Solution for A4
8.3 Quantization in Coulomb Gauge 346
Remaining constraints are second class 0 Calculation of Dirac brackets in
Coulomb gauge K Construction of Hamiltonian 0 Coulomb interaction
8.4
Electrodynamics in the Interaction Picture
350
Free-field and interaction Hamiltonians K Interaction picture operators K Normal
mode decomposition

Contents xV
8.5 The Photon Propagator 353
Numerator polynomial 0 Separation of non-covariant terms K Cancellation of
non-covariant terms
8.6
Feyurnan Rules for Spinor Electrodynamics 35 5
Feynman graphs K Vertices K External lines K Internal lines K Expansion in
a/4n K Circular, linear, and elliptic polarization K Polarization and spin sums
8.7 Compton Scattering
362
S-rnatrix K Differential cross-section K Kinematics K Spin sums o Traces K
Klein-Nishina formula K Polarization by Thomson scattering
K Total cross-
section
8.8 Generalization : p-farm Gauge Fields* 369
Motivation K p-farms K Exterior derivatives K Closed and exact p-forms Cl
p-form gauge fields K Dual fields and currents in D spacetime dimensions
K
p-form gauge fields equivalent to (D -- p - 2)-form gauge fields K Nothing new in
four spacetime dimensions
Appendix Traces 372
Problems
References
9
PATH-INTEGRAL METHODS
9.1 The General Path-Integral Formula
374
375
376
378
Transition amplitudes for infinitesimal intervals K Transition amplitudes for finite
intervals K Interpolating functions K Matrix elements of time-ordered products
D Equations of motion
9.2
Transition to the S-Matrix 385
Wave function of vacuum K ic terms
9.3
Lagrangian Version of the Path-Integral Formula
389
Integrating out the `momenta' K Derivatively coupled scalars ONon-linear sigma
model D Vector fiel d
9.4 Path-Integral Derivation of Feynman Rules 395
Separation of free-field actio n K Gaussian integration K Propagators : scalar
fields, vector fields, derivative coupling
9 .5
Path Integrals for Fermions
399
Anticommuting c-numbers K Eigenvectors of canonical operators K Summing
states by Berezin integration K Changes of variables K Transition amplitudes for
infinitesimal intervals K Transition amplitudes for finite intervals K Derivation
of Feynman rules K Ferrnion propagator K Vacuum amplitudes as determinants

xvr
Contents
9.6
Path-Integral Formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics 413
Path integral in Coulomb gauge o Reint roduction of a° K Transition to covariant
gauges
9.7
Varieties of 5tatistics* 41 8
Preparing `in' and 'out' states a Composition rules K Only bosons and fermions
in ~ 3 dimensions K Anyons in two dimensions
Appendix Gaussian Multiple Integrals
Problems
References
420
423
423
10
NON-PERTURBATIVE METHODS
425
10. 1 Symmetries 42 5
Translations K Charge conservation K Ferry's theorem
1 0.2 Polology 428
Pole formula for general amplitudes o Derivation of the pole formula E7 Pion
exchange
10.3 Field and Mass Renormalizatian 436
LSD reduction formula K Rcnormalized fields 0 Propagator poles 0 Na radiative
corrections in external lines K Counterterms in self-energy part s
10.4 Renormalized Charge and Ward identities 442
Charge operator K Electromagnetic field renormalization K Charge renormaliz-
ation K Ward-Takahashi identity K Ward identity
10.5 Gauge Invariance 448
Transversality of multi-photon amplitudes K Schwinger terms K Gauge terms in
photon propagator a Structure of photon propagator 0 Zero photon renormal-
ized mass K Calculation of Z3 K Radiative corrections to choice of gauge
10.6 Electromagnetic Form Factors and Magnetic Mo ment 452
Matrix elements of J O K Form factors of Jar : spin zero K Form factors of J0 ;
spin ~ D Magnetic moment of a spin ~ particle El Measuring the form factor s
10.7
The Ka iler -Lehmann Representation* 457
Spectral functions K Causality relations K Spectral representation K Asymptotic
behavior of propagators K Poles E Bound on field renormalization constant o
Z = 0 for composite particle s
10.8 Dispersion Relations' 462
History K Analytic properties of massless boson forward scattering amplitude

Contents
Xvi i
o Subtractions K Dispersion relation K Crossing symmetry K Pomeranchuk's
theorem K Regge asymptotic behavior K Photon scattering
Problems
References
469
470
ON&-LD P RADIATIVE CORRECTIONS IN QUANTUM
ELECTRODYNAMICS 47 2
11.1 Counterterms
Field, charge, and mass renormalization K Lagrangian countefterms
11 .2
Vacuum Polarization
472
47 3
One-loop integral for photon self energy part K Feynman parameters K Wick
rotation Q Dimensional regularization a Gauge invariance K Calculation of ~3 C1
Cancellation of divergences 0 Vacuum polarization in charged particle scattering
K Clehling effect K Muonic atoms
11.3
Anomalous Magnetic Moments and Charge Radii 485
One-loop formula for vertex function K Calculation of form factors o Anomalous
lepton magnetic moments to order ac K Anomalous moon magnetic moment to
order Y? ln(rxa./m,) El Charge radius of lepton s
11.4 Electron Self-Energy 493
One-loop formula for electron self-energy part 0 Electron mass renormalization
K Cancellation of ultraviolet dive rgences
Appendix Assorted Integrals
Problems
References
497
498
498
12
GENERAL RENORMALIZATION THEORY
499
12.1 D egrees of Divergence 500
Superficial degree of divergence K Dimensional analysis K Renormalizability D
Criterion for actual convergence
12,2 Cance llation of Divergences 505
Subtraction by differentiation 0 Re-normalization program
K Renvrrnalizable
theories
K Example : quantum electrodynamics
K Overlapping divergences K
SPH2 renormalization prescription
K Changing the renormalization point ; 04
theory
12.3
Is Renormalizability Necessary? 516

xviii
contents
Renormalizable interactions cataloged K No renormalizable theories of gravita-
tion K Cancellation of divergences in non-rena rrnalizable theories K Suppression
of non-renormalizable interactions K Limits on new mass scales K Problems with
higher derivatives? C1 Detection of non-renormalizable interactions El Low-energy
expansions in non-renormalizable theories K Example : scalar with only derivative
coupling K Saturation or new physics? K Effective field theorie s
12.4 The Floating Cutoff" 525
Wilson's approach K Renormalization group equation El Polchinski's theorem El
Attraction to a stable surface K Floating cutoff vs renormalization
12.5 Accidental Symmetries' 529
General renarrnaiizable theory of charged leptons K Redefinition of the lepton
fields K Accidental conservation of lepton flavors, P, C, and T
Problems
References
13 INFRARED EFFECTS
13.1
Soft Photon Amplitudes
53t
532
534
53 4
Single photon emission K Negligible emission from internal lines
K Lorentz
invariance implies charge conservation
K Single graviton emission 0 Lorentz
invariance implies equivalence principle 0Multi-photon emission K Factorization
13.2 Virtual Soft Photons
Effect of soft virtual photons K Radiative corrections on internal lines
539
1 3.3
Real Soft Photons; Cancellation of Divergences 544
Sum over helicities o Integration over energies K Sum over photon number K
Cancellation of infrared cutoff factors K Likewise for gravitation
13.4
General Infrared Divergences 548
Massless charged particles K Inf rared divergences in general K Jets K Lee-Nau-
enberg theorem
13.5 Soft Photon Scattering` 553
Poles in the amplitude K Conservation relations K Universality of the low-energy
limit
13.6
The External Field Approximation'
556
Sums over photon vertex permutations K Noo-relativistic limit K Crossed ladder
exchange
Problems 562
References 562

Co ntents
x1X
14
BOUND STATES IN EXTERNAL FIELDS 564
14.1 The Dirac Equation
565
Dirac wave functions as field matrix elements D Anticommutators and complete-
ness K Energy eigenstates K Negative energy wave functions K Qrthanormaliza-
tinn K `Large' and `mall' components K Purity K Spin- and angle-dependence
Radial wave equations K Energies K Fine structure K Nan-relativistic approxi-
mations
14.2 Radiative Corrections in External Fields 572
Electron propagator in an external field K Inhomogeneaus Dirac equation
Effects of radiative corrections K Energy shifts
14.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atoms
578
Separating high and low energies K High-energy term K Low-energy term
11
Effect of mass renormalization K Total energy shift 0 1' _ 0 D ( =~- 0 Numerical
results 0 Theory vs experiment for classic Lamb shift 11 Theory vs experiment
for 1s energy shift
Problems
References
AUTHOR INDEX
SUBJECT INDEX
OUTLINE OF VOLUME II
15
NON-ABELIAN GAUGE THEORIES
1 6 BACKGROUND FIELD METHODS
1 7 RENORMALIZATION GROUP METHODS
1 8 OPERATOR PRODUCT EXPANSIONS
19
SPONTANEOUSLY BROKEN GLOBAL SYMMETRIES
20
SPONTANEOUSLY BROKEN LOCAL. SYMMETRIES
21 ANOMALIES
22 TOPOLOGICALLY COMPLICATED FIELDS
23
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY
594
596
597
602

Preface To Volume I
Why another book
Kn quantum field theory? Today the student of
quantum field theory can choose from among a score of excellent books,
several of them quite up-to-date . Another book will be worth while only
if it offers something new in content or perspective .
As to content, although this book contains a good amount of new ma-
terial, I suppose the most distinctive thing about it is its generality ; I have
tried throughout to discuss matters in a context that is as general as pos-
sible. This is in part because quantum field theory has found applications
far removed from the scene of its old successes, quantum electrodynamics,
but even more because I think that this generality will help to keep the
important points from being submerged in the technicalities of specific
Eheories. Of course, specific examples are frequently used to illustrate gen-
eral points, examples that are chosen from contemporary particle physics
or nuclear physics as well as from quantum electrodynamics .
It is, however, the perspective of this book, rather than its content, that
provided my chief motivation in writing it . I aim to present quantum field
theory in a manner that will give the reader the clearest possible idea of
why this theory takes the form it does, and why in this form it does such
a good job of describing the real world .
The traditional approach, since the first papers of Heisenberg and Pauli
on general quantum field theory, has been to take the existence of fields for
granted, relying for justification on our experience with electromagnetism,
and `quantize' them --- that is, apply to various simple field theories
the rules of canonical quantization or path integration. Some of this
traditional approach will be found here in the historical introduction
presented in Chapter 1 . This is certainly a way of getting rapidly into
the subject, but it seems to me that it leaves the reflect ive reader with
too many unanswered questions. Why should we believe in the ru les of
canonical quantization or path integration? Why should we adopt the
simple field equations and Lagrangians that are found in the literature?
For that matter, why have fields at all?
It does not seem satisfactory to
me to appeal to experience ; after all, our purpose in theoretical physics i s
xx

Preface
xxi
not just to describe the world as we find it, but to explain - in terms of
a few fundamental principles - why the world is the way it is .
The point of view of this book is that quantum field theory is the way
it is because (aside from theories like string theory that have an infinite
number of particle types) it is the only way to reconcile the principles
of quantum mechanics (including the cluster decomposition property)
with those of special relativity. This is a point of view I have held for
many years, but it is also one that has become newly appropriate . We
have learned in recent years to think of our successful quantum field
theories, including quantum electrodynamics, as `effective field theories,'
low-energy approximations to a deeper theory that may not even be a
field theory, but something different like a string theory. On this basis, the
reason that quantum field theories describe physics at accessible energies
is that any relativistic quantum theory will look at sufficiently low energy
like a quantum field theory. It is therefore important to understand the
rationale for quantum field theory in terms of the principles of relativity
and quantum mechanics. Also, we think differently now about some of
the problems of quantum field theories, such as non-renormalizability and
`triviality,' that used to bother us when we thought of these theories as
truly fundamental, and the discussions here will reflect these changes . This
is intended to be a book on quantum field theory for the era of effective
field theories .
The most immediate and certain consequences of relativity and quan-
tum mechanics are the properties of particle states, so here particles come
first they are introduced in Chapter 2 as ingredients in the repre-
sentation of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group in the Hilbert space of
quantum mechanics. Chapter 3 provides a framework for addressing the
fundamental dynamical question : given a state that in the distant past
looks like a certain collection of free particles, what will it look like in the
future? Knowing the generator of time-translations, the Hamiltonian, we
can answer this question through the perturbative expansion for the array
of transition amplitudes known as the S-matrix. In Chapter 4 the princi-
ple of cluster decomposition is invoked to describe how the generator of
time-translations, the Hamiltonian, is to be constructed from creation and
annihilation operators. Then in Chapter 5 we return to Lorentz invariance,
and show that it requires these creation and annihilation operators to be
grouped together in causal quantum fields . As a spin-off, we deduce the
CPT theorem and the connection between spin and statistics. The formal-
ism is used in Chapter 6 to derive the Feynman rules for calculating the
S-matrix .
It is not until Chapter 7 that we come to L+agxangians and the canonical
formalism. The rationale here for introducing them is not that they have
proved useful elsewhere in physics (never a very satisfying explanation)

xxii
Preface
but rather that this formalism makes it easy to choose interaction Hamil-
tonians for which the S-matrix satisfies various assumed symmetries . In
particular, the Lorentz invariance of the Lagrangian density ensures the
existence of a set of ten operators that satisfy the algebra of the Poincare
group and, as we show in Chapter 3, this is the key condition that we need
to prove the Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix. Quantum electrodynam-
ics finally appears in Chapter 8. Path integration is introduced in chapter
9, and used to justify some of the hand-waving in Chapter 8 regarding
the Feynman rules for quantum electrodynamics . This is a somewhat later
introduction of path integrals than is fashionable these days, but it seems
to me that although path integration is by far the best way of rapidly
deriving Feynman rules from a given Lagrangian, it rather obscures the
quantum mechanical reasons underlying these calculations.
Volume I concludes with a series of chapters, 10---14, that provide
an introduction to the calculation of radiative corrections, involving loop
graphs, in general field theories . Here too the arrangement is a bit unusual ;
we start with a chapter on non-perturbative methods, in part because the
results we obtain help us to understand the necessity for field and mass
renormalization, without regard to whether the theory contains infinities
or not. Chapter 1 I presents the classic one-loop calculations of quantum
chromodynamics, both as an opportunity to explain useful calculational
techniques (Feynman parameters, wick rotation, dimensional and Pauli-
Villars regularization), and also as a concrete example of renormalization
in action. The experience gained in Chapter 11 is extended to all orders
and general theories in Chapter 12, which also describes the modern view
of non-renormalizability that is appropriate to effective field theories .
Chapter 13 is a digression on the special problems raised by massless
particles of low energy or parallel momenta. The Dirac equation for an
electron in an external electromagnetic field, which historically appeared
almost at the very start of relativistic quantum mechanics, is not seen here
until Chapter 14, on bound state problems, because this equation should
not be viewed (as Dirac did) as a relativistic version of the Schrodinger
equation, but rater as an approximation to a true relativistic quantum
theory, the quantum field theory of photons and electrons . This chapter
ends with a treatment of the Lamb shift, bringing the confrontation of
theory and experiment up to date.
The reader may feel that some of the topics treated here, especially in
Chapter 3, could more properly have been left to textbooks on nuclear
or elementary particle physics. So they might, but in my experience these
topics are usually either not covered or covered poorly, using specific
dynamical models rather than the general principles of symmetry and
quantum tnechanics . I have met string theorists who have never heard of
the relation between time-reversal invariance and final-state phase shifts,

Preface
xxiii
and nuclear theorists who do not understand why resonances are governed
by the Breit-Wigner formula. So in the early chapters I have tried to err
on the side of inclusion rather than exclusion .
Volume II will deal with the advances that have revived quantum field
theory in recent years : non-Abelian gauge theories, the renormalization
group, broken symmetries, anomalies, instantons, and so on .
I have tried to give citations both to the classic papers in the quantum
theory of fields and to useful references on topics that are mentioned
but not presented in detail in this book . I did not always know who was
responsible for material presented here, and the mere absence of a citation
should not be taken as a claim that the material presented here is original .
But some of it is . I hope that I have improved on the original literature or
standard textbook treatments in several paces, as for instance in the proof
that symmetry operators are either unitary or antiunitary ; the discussion
of superselection rules ; the analysis of particle degeneracy associated
with unconventional representations of inversions ; the use of the cluster
decomposition principle ; the derivation of the reduction formula ; the
derivation of the external field approximation ; and even the calculation
of the Lamb shift .
I have also supplied problems for each chapter except the first . Some of
these problems aim simply at providing exercise in the use of techniques
described in the chapter ; others are intended to suggest extensions of the
results of the chapter to a wider class of theories .
In teaching quantum field theory, I have found that each of the two
volumes of this book provides enough material for a one-year course
for graduate students. I intended that this book should be accessible to
students who are familiar with non-relativistic quantum mechanics and
classical electrodynamics . I assume a basic knowledge of complex analysis
and matrix algebra, but topics in group theory and topology are explained
where they are introduced .
This is not a book for the student who wants immediately to begin cal-
culating Feynman graphs in the standard model of weak, electromagnetic,
and strong interactions. Nor is this a book for those who seek a higher
level of mathematical rigor. Indeed, there are parts of this book whose
lack of rigor will bring tears to the eyes of the mathematically inclined
reader. Rather, I hope it will suit the physicists and physics students who
want to understand why quantum field theory is the way it is, so that
they will be ready for whatever new developments in physics may take us
beyond our present understandings .
~* *
Much of the material in this book I learned from my interactions over

Xx1V
Preface
the years with numerous other physicists, far too many to name here.
But I must acknowledge my special intellectual debt to Sidney Coleman,
and to my colleagues at the University of Texas : Arno Bohm, Luis Boya,
Phil Candelas, Bryce DeWitt, Cecile DeWitt-Morette, Jacques Distler,
Willy Fischler, Josh Feinberg, Joaquim Gomis, Vadim Kaplunovsky, Joe
Polchinski, and Paul Shapiro. I owe thanks for help in the preparation
of the historical introduction to Gerry Holton, Arthur Miller, and Sam
Schweber. Thanks are also due to Alyce Wilson, who prepared the
illustrations and typed the ITT input files until I learned how to do it,
and to Terry Riley for finding countless books and articles . I am grateful
to Maureen Storey and Alison Woollatt of Cambridge University Press
for helping to ready this book for publication, and especially to my editor,
Rufus Neal, for his friendly good advice .
STEVEN WEINBERG
Austin, Texas
October, 1994

Notation
Latin indices ij, k, and so on generally run over the three spatial coordi-
nate labels, usually taken as 1, 2, 3.
Greek indices A, v, etc. generally run over the four spacetime coordinate
labels 1, 2, 3, 0, with xO the time coordinate.
Repeated indices are generally summed, unless otherwise indicated .
The spacetime metric q,,, is diagonal, with elements ail = X22 = )113 _
The d'Alembertian is defined as C1
"'~? l /r~xy c?xv = V2 - a 2/at2, where
V2 is the Laplacian c"/eYO-xi .
The `Levi--Civita tensor' is defined as the totally antisymmetric
quantity with C0123 = +1 .
Spatial three-vectors are indicated by letters in boldface .
A hat over any vector indicates the corresponding unit vector : Thus,
"v = v /J v l .
A dot over any quantity denotes the time-derivative of that quantity .
Dirac matrices
j. are defined so that ~~~1,jti, + x',, r',u = 2q,,,,. Also, yF5 =
iYaYIY2T3} and fl = iy°.
The step function O(s) has the value +1 for s > 0 and 0 for s < 0 .
The complex conjugate, transpose, and Hermitian adjoint of a matrix or
vector A are denoted A", AT, and A# =AMT, respectively. The Hermitian
adjoins of an operator 0 is denoted Qt, except where an asterisk is used
to emphasize that a vector or matrix of operators is not transposed . +H.c.
or +c .c. at the end of an equation indicates the addition of the Hermitian
xxv

xxvi
Notation
adjoint or complex conjugate of the foregoing terms. A bar on a Dirac
spinor u is defined by u = utP .
Except in Chapter Z, we use units with h and the speed of light taken to
be unity. Throughout -e is the rationalized charge of the electron, so that
the fine structure constant is ac = e2/4n ~-- 1 /137 .
Numbers in parenthesis at the end of quoted numerical data give the
uncertainty in the last digits of the quoted figure. Where not otherwise
indicated, experimental data are taken from `Review of Particle Properties,'
Ph ys . Rev. D50, 1173 (1994) .

Historical Introduction
Our immersion in the present state of physics makes it hard for us to
understand the difficulties of physicists even a few years ago, or to profit
from their experience. At the same time, a knowledge of our history is a
mixed blessing - it can stand in the way of the logical reconstruction of
physical theory that seems to be continually necessary.
I have tried in this book to present the quantum theory of fields in
a logical manner, emphasizing the deductive trail that ascends from the
physical principles of special relativity and quantum mechanics. This
approach necessarily draws me away from the order in which the subject
in fact developed. To take one example, it is historically correct that
quantum field theory grew in part out of a study of relativistic wave
equations, including the Maxwell, Klein-Gordon, and Dirac equations .
For this reason it is natural that courses and treatises on quantum field
theory introduce these wave equations early, and give them great weight .
Nevertheless, it has long seemed to me that a much better starting point is
Wigner's definition of particles as representations of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group, even though this work was not published until 1939 and
did not have a great impact for many years after . In this book we start
with particles and get to the wave equations later .
This is not to say that particles are necessarily more fundamental than
fields. For many years after 1950 it was generally assumed that the
laws of nature take the form of a quantum theory of fields . I start
with particles in this book, not because they are more fundamental, but
because what we know about particles is more certain, more directly
derivable from the principles of quantum mechanics and relativity . If it
turned out that some physical system could not be described by a quantum
field theory, it would be a sensation ; if it turned out that the system did
not obey the rules of quantum mechanics and relativity, it would be a
cataclysm.
In fact, lately there has been a reaction against looking at quantum
field theory as fundamental . The underlying theory might not be a theory
of fields or particles, but perhaps of something quite different, like strings .
1

2 1 Historical Introduction
From this point of view, quantum electrodynamics and the other quantum
field theories of which we are so proud are mere `effective field theories,'
low-energy approximations to a more fundamental theory. The reason that
our field theories work so well is not that they are fundamental truths,
but that any relativistic quantum theory will look like a field theory when
applied to particles at sufficiently low energy. On this basis, if we want to
know why quantum field theories are the way they are, we have to start
with particles .
But we do not want to pay the price of altogether forgetting our past .
This chapter will therefore present the history of quantum field theory
from earliest times to 1949, when it finally assumed its modern form . In
the remainder of the book I will try to keep history from intruding on
physics .
One problem that I found in writing this chapter is that the history of
quantum field theory is from the beginning inextricably entangled with
the history of quantum mechanics itself, Thus, the reader who is familiar
with the history of quantum mechanics may find some material here that
he or she already knows, especially in the first section, where I discuss the
early attempts to put together quantum mechanics with special relativity .
In this case
I can only suggest that the reader should skip on to the less
familiar parts,
On the other hand, readers who have no prior familiarity with quantum
field theory may find parts of this chapter too brief to be altogether clear .
I urge such readers not to worry. This chapter is not intended as a
self-contained introduction to quantum field theory, and is not needed as
a basis for the rest of the book. Some readers may even prefer to start
with the next chapter, and come back to the history later. However, for
many readers the history of quantum field theory should serve as a good
introduction to quantum field theory itself.
I should add that this chapter is not intended as an original work
of historical scholarship. I have based it on books and articles by real
historians, plus some historical reminiscences and original physics articles
that I have read . Most of these are listed in the bibliography given at the
end of this chapter, and in the list of references . The reader who wants
to go more deeply into historical matters is urged to consult these listed
works .
A word about natation. In order to keep some of the flavor of past
times, in this chapter I will show explicit factors of h and c (and even
h), but in order to facilitate comparison with modern physics literature,
I will use the more modern rationalized electrostatic units for charge, so
that the fine structure constant a , 1/137 is e2 ~47rhc.
In subsequent
chapters I will mostly use the `natural' system
Kf units, simply setting
h =c= 1 .

1.1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
3
1.1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
Wave mechanics started out as relativistic wave mechanics . Indeed, as
we shall see, the founders of wave mechanics, Louis de Broglie and
Erwin 5chr6dinger, took a good deal of their inspiration from special
relativity. It was only later that it became generally clear that relativistic
wave mechanics, in the sense of a relativistic quantum theory of a fixed
number of particles, is an impossibility. Thus, despite its many successes,
relativistic wave mechanics was ultimately to give way to quantum field
theory. Nevertheless, relativistic wave mechanics survived as an important
element in the formal apparatus of quantum field theory, and it posed a
challenge to field theory, to reproduce its successes .
The possibility that material particles can like photons be described in
terms of waves was first suggested' in 1923 by Louis de Broglie . Apart
from the analogy with radiation, the chief clue was Lorentz invariance ; if
particles are described by a wave whose phase at position x and time t
is of the form 27r(ic • x - vt), and if this phase is to be Lorentz invariant,
then the vector rc and the frequency v must transform like x and t, and
hence like p and E . In order for this to be possible Kand v must have the
same velocity dependence as p and E, and therefore must be proportional
to them, with the same constant of proportionality . For photons, one had
the Einstein relation E = hv, so it was natural to assume that, for material
particles,
Yc = Ply ,
v = E 1 h , ( 1 .1 . 1 )
just as for photons. The group velocity clv/arc of the wave then turns
out to equal the particle velocity, so wave packets just keep up with the
particle they represent .
By assuming that any closed orbit contains an integral number of
particle wavelengths
A = 1/, de Broglie was able to derive the old
quantization conditions of Niels Bohr and Arnold Sommerfeld, which
though quite mysterious had worked well in accounting for atomic spectra .
Also, both de Broglie and Walter Elsasser2 suggested that de Broglie's
wave theory could be tested by looking for interference effects in the
scattering of electrons from crystals ; such effects were established a few
years later by Clinton Joseph Davison and Lester H . Germer.1 However,
it was still unclear how the de Broglie relations (1 .1 .1) should be modified
for non-free particles, as for instance for an electron in a general Coulomb
field.
Wave mechanics was by-passed in the next step in the history of
quantum mechanics, the development of matrix mechanics4 by Werner
Heisenberg, Max Born, Pascual Jordan and Wolfgang Pauli in the years
192 5- 1926. At least part of the inspiration for matrix mechanics was the

4
1 Historical Introduction
insistence that the theory should involve only observables, such as the
energy levels, or emission and absorption rates . Heisenberg's 1 925 paper
opens with the manifesto : The present paper seeks to establish a basis
for theoretical quantum mechanics founded exclusively upon relationships
between quantities that in principle are observable,' This sort of positivism
was to reemerge at various times in the history of quantum field theory,
as for instance in the introduction of the S-matrix by John Wheeler and
Heisenberg (see chapter 3) and in the revival of dispersion theory in the
1950s (see chapter 10), though modern quantum field theory is very far
from this ideal. It would take us too far from our subject to describe
matrix mechanics in any detail here.
As everyone knows, wave mechanics was revived by Erwin 5chr4dinger.
In his 1926 series of papers,5 the familiar non-relativistic wave equation
is suggested first, and then used to rederive the results of matrix mechan-
ics. Only later, in the sixth section of the fourth paper, is a relativistic
wave equation offered. According to Dirac, 6 the history is actually quite
different : Schrodinger first derived the relativistic equation, then became
discouraged because it gave the wrong fine structure for hydrogen, and
then some months later realized that the non-relativistic approximation
to his relativistic equation was of value even if the relativistic equation
itself was incorrect ! By the time that Schroainger came to publish his
relativistic wave equation, it had already been independently rediscovered
by Oskar Klein7 and Walter Gvrdon,s and for this reason it is usually
called the `Klein-Gordon equation .'
Schrodinger's relativistic wave equation was derived
by noting first
that, for a `Lorentz electron' of mass m and charge e in an external vector
potential A and Coulomb potential 0, the Hamiltonian R and momentum
p are related by*
0 = (H + eo) 2 - c2(p + eA/c)2 - m2c4 . (1 .1 .2)
For a free particle described by a plane wave exp {2lri(K . x - vt}the de
Broglie relations (1 . 1 . 1) can be obtained by the identification s
p ==: hrc -). -i# V
E _- by --+ ih ~ (1 .1 .3)
where h is the convenient symbol (introduced later by Dirac) for h/2 7r .
By an admittedly formal analogy, Schrodinger guessed that an electron
in the external fields A, 0 would be described by a wave function T(x, t)
satisfying the equation obtained by making the same replacements in
' This is Lorentz invariant, because the quantities A and 0 have the same Lorentz transformation
property as cp and E . Schradinger actually wrote U and p in terms of partial derivatives of an
action function, but this makes no difference to our present discussion.

1 .1 Relativistic Wave Mechanic s
(1 .x .2) :
f- m2C4
~(
X
} r
)
U = [(th ~ + e
o)2 - c2 (-thy + ~~
) 2
r~t
C
5
(1 .1.4 )
In particular, for the stationary states of hydrogen we have A = 0 and
0 == e/4nr, and y has the time-dependence exp(-iEt/h), so (1 .1 .4) becomes
2 ,
U= E +41z
r
C2hzv2 - M2C41
-
W(X)-
(1. 1 .5 )
Solutions satisfying reasonable boundary conditions can be found for the
energy values9
a2 a4
n
3
2n2 2n4
+
4
z
(1 .1.6)
where a = e2/4arhc is the `fine structure constant,' roughly 1/137 ; n is a
positive-definite integer, and the orbital angular momentum in units of
h, is an integer with 0 C t ~ n -- 1 . The u2 term gave good agreement
with the gross features of the hydrogen spectrum (the Lyman, Balmer,
etc. series) and, according to Dirac,6 it was this agreement that led
Schr;5dinger eventually to develop his non-relativistic wave equation. On
the other hand, the ac4 term gave a fine structure in disagreement with
existing accurate measurements of Friedrich Paschen . to
It is instructive here to compare 5chr5dinger's result with that of Arnold
Sommerfeld,"- - obtained using the rules of the old quantum theory :
al 14
E = mc~
1 - 2n2
20
n
3
k 4) +
(1 .1 .7)
where m is the electron mass. Here k is an integer between 1 and n, which
in Sommerfeld's theory is given in terms of the orbital angular momentum
eh as k + 1 . This gave a fine structure splitting in agreement with
experiment : for instance, for n = 2 Eq . (1 . 1 . 7) gives two levels (k = 1
and k
:;-- 2), split by the observed amount oc4mc~/32, or 4.53 x 10-' eV. In
contrast, Schrodinger's result (1 .1 .6) gives an n = 2 fine structure splitting
a4mcZ f 12, considerably larger than observed .
Schrodinger correctly recognized that the source of this discrepancy
was his neglect of the spin of the electron. The splitting of atomic
energy levels by non-inverse-square electric fields in alkali atoms and by
weak external magnetic fields (the so-called anomalous Zeeman effect)
had revealed a multiplicity of states larger than could be accounted for
by the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory ; this led George Uhlenbeck and Samuel
Goudsmitll in
1 925 to suggest that the electron has an intrinsic angular

6 1 Historical Introduction
momentum h/2. Also, the magnitude of the Zeeman splitting .12 allowed
them to estimate further that the electron has a magnetic momen t
eh
2mc
It was clear that the electron's spin would be coupled to its orbital
angular momentum, so that Schr6dinger's relativistic equation should not
be expected to give the correct fine structure splitting .
Indeed, by 1927 several authors13 had been able to show that the
spin-orbit coupling was able to account for the discrepancy between Sch-
r6dinger's result ( 1 .1.6) and experiment. There are really two effects here :
one is a direct coupling between the magnetic moment (1 .1.8) and the
magnetic field felt by the electron as it moves through the electrostatic
field of the atom ; the other is the relativistic `Thomas precession' caused
(even in the absence of a magnetic moment) by the circular motion of
the spinning electron.l¢ Together, these two effects were found to lift the
level with total angular momentum + ~ to the energy ( 1.1 .7) given
by Sommerfeld for k = ~ + 1 = j + while the level with - ~ was
lowered to the value given by Sommerfeld for k = t = j + ~. Thus the
energy was found to depend only on n and j, but not separately on
i" :
2 [1
a2 ~c4
n 3
2n2 2n4
j +
By accident Sommerfeld's theory had given the correct magnitude of the
splitting in hydrogen (j + ~ like k runs over integer values from 1 to n)
though it was wrong as to the assignment of orbital angular momentum
values e to these various levels. In addition, the multiplicity of the fine
structure levels in hydrogen was now predicted to be 2 for j = 1 and
2(2j + 1) for j >
(corresponding to z' values j ± ~ ), in agreement with
experiment .
Despite these successes, there still was not a thorough relativistic theory
which incorporated the electron's spin from the beginning . Such a theory
was discovered in 1928 by Paul Dirac . However, he did not set out
simply to make a relativistic theory of the spinning electron ; instead, he
approached the problem by posing a question that would today seem
very strange. At the beginning of his 1928 paper,15 he asks `why Nature
should have chosen this particular model for the electron, instead of
being satisfied with the paint charge.' To us today, this question is like
asking why bacteria have only one cell : having spin h/2 is just one of
the properties that define a particle as an electron, rather than one of the
many other types of particles with various spins that are known today .
However, in
1928 it was possible to believe that all matter consisted
of electrons, and perhaps something similar with positive charge in the

1 .1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
7
atomic nucleus. Thus, in the spirit of the times in which it was asked,
Dirac's question can be restated : `Why do the fundamental constituents
of matter have to have spin A/2?'
For Dirac, the key to this question was the requirement that probabilities
must be positive. It was known16 that the probability density for the non-
relativistic Schrodinger equation is ~ya
13, and that this satisfies a continuity
equation of the form
so the space-integral of Iy)12 is time-independent . On the other hand,
the only probability density p and current J, which can be formed from
solutions of the relativistic Schrodinger equation and which satisfy a
conservation law,
are of the form
0
p = 11T Im ~,~ ( #,~ t -
ie
~o )
W)
J = N cl Itn w '
V + IA V>
hc )
(1 .2 . 10)
X 1 .1 .1 1 )
(1 .1 .12 )
with N an arbitrary constant. It is not possible to identify p as the
probability density, because (with or without an external potential 0) p
does not have definite sign . To quote I]irac's reminiscencesO about this
problem
I remember once when I was in Copenhagen, that Bohr
asked me what I was working on and I told him I was trying
to get a satisfactory relativistic theory of the electron, and Bohr
said But Klein and Gordon have already done that!' That
answer first rather disturbed me. Bohr seemed quite satisfied
by Klein's solution, but I was not because of the negative
probabilities that it led to. I just kept on with it, worrying about
getting a theory which would have only positive probabilities .
According to George Gamow,18 Dirac found the answer to this problem
on an evening in 1928 while staring into a fireplace at St John's College,
Cambridge. He realized that the reason that the Klein-Gordon (or
relativistic Schrodinger) equation can give negative probabilities is that
the p in the conservation equation (1 . t .10) involves a time-derivative of the
wave function, This in turn happens because the wave function satisfies
a differential equation of second order in the time. The problem therefore

8
1 Historical In troduct io n
was to replace this wave equation with another one of first order in time
derivatives, like the non-relativistic Schrvdinger equation .
Suppose the electron wave function is a multi-component quantity WJx),
which satisfies a wave equation of the form,
~~
where F is some matrix function of space derivatives . In order to have a
chance at aLorentz-invariant theory, we must suppose that because the
equation is linear in time-derivatives, it is also linear in space-derivatives,
so that takes the form :
_ -Ca
' V + ~carnc2
a~Z
where oc 1 , 12, a3, and a4 are constant matrices . From (1. 1 .13) we can derive
the second-order equation
~2
2
2
2
2
2
at,
exi
-ihrrzc3(araa + aWt ) O
+ m2C4 14~ -
(The summation convention is in force here ; i and j run over the values
1, 2, 3, or X, y, z . ) But this must agree with the free-field form of the
relativistic Schrodinger equation (1 .1 .4), which just expresses the relativistic
relation between momentum and energy. Therefore, the matrices a and acs
must satisfy the relations
a ;aj + api = 2Stj 1 ,
(1 .1 .15)
act(X4 + a%-xi = 0 ~ 1 .l .16)
oc¢ = 1, ~i .1 .17)
where ~jj is the Kronecker delta (unity for i = j ; zero for i z~ j) and 1 is
the unit matrix . Dirac found a set of 4 x 4 matrices which satisfy these
relations
0
0
~i -
0
Z
0
0
1
0
0
f
Z
0
0
0
0 0-
0
Q
1
a a o
fY3 i a a
0 -1 0
0
-1
0
0
0
0
°`2
1
0
ad - 4
0
0 d
0
i
-1 0
0
U
a o
1
0
0 -1
0
0
- i
0
0
0
(1 .1 .18)
0-
0
0
--1

1 .1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
9
To show that this formalism is Lorentz-invariant, Dirac multiplied
Eq . ( 1. 1.13) on the left with aq, so that it could be put in the form
where
.,0
c X1,
Y
-ioc42 y
0
-ix4
(1 .1 .19)
(I . t .20)
(The creek indices p, v, etc. will now run over the values 1, 2, 3, 0, with
x° = ct . Dirac used x4 = [ct, and correspondingly y4 T a¢.) The matrices
,jA satisfy the anticommutation relations
1
+1
0
µ = v = 1,2,3
,U= v = U
P V
(1 .1 .21 )
Dirac noted that these anticommutation relations are Lorentz-invariant,
in the sense that they are also satisfied by the matrices 11 P ,,pv, where A is
any Lorentz transformation. He concluded from this that 11r`,7` must be
related to yA by a similarity transformation :
It follows that the wave equation is invariant if, under a Lorentz transfor-
mation x4 --+ AA, xu, the wave function undergoes the matrix transforma-
tion ip --+ 5 (A)V. (These matters are discussed more fully, from a rather
different point of view, in Chapter 5 . )
To study the behavior of electrons in an arbitrary external electromag-
netic field, Dirac followed the `usual procedure' of making the replacement s
ih ~ its ~~ eo
- ihV ---> -ih~7' + e A
(1 .1-22)
as in Eq. (1 . 1 .4) . The wave equation (1 . 1 . 13) then takes the form
+ er~
W -- (--mihcV + eA)
- ay) + mc2~c4~a
a t
Dirac used this equation to show that in a central field, the conservation
of angular momentum takes the form
[,,f , -ihr x V + ha/2] = 0 , (1 . 1 .24)
where is the matrix differential operator ( 1 . 1 . 14) and a is the 4 x 4
version of the spin matrix introduced earlier by Pauli1 9
0 0 t 0
0
0
1 0 0 0 (I .1 .25)
0 1
0
0

10
I Historical Introduction
Since each component of a has eigenvalues + t, the presence of the extra
term in (1124) shows that the electron has intrinsic angular momentum
h/2.
Dirac also iterated Eq. (1 .1 .23), obtaining a second-order equation,
which turned out to have just the same form as the Klein-Gordon equation
(1 . 1.4) except for the presence on the right-hand-side of two additional
terms
[- ehca , B - ieh cac - E] V7. 0 . 1 .26 )
For a slowly moving electron, the first term dominates, and represents a
magnetic moment in agreement with the value { 1 .1 .5} found by Goudsmit
and Uhlenbeck.11 As Dirac recognized, this magnetic moment, together
with the relativistic nature of the theory, guaranteed that this theory
would give a fine structure splitting in agreement (to order a'mc2) with
that found by Heisenberg, Jordan, and Charles G. Darwin." A little later,
an `exact' formula for the hydrogen energy levels in I]irac's theory was
derived by Darwin20 and Gordon21
-1/2
E = mc2 1 + --- - ,
~
~
n-j- ~+ [(i+ 1)` 21
1
(1 .1 .27)
The first three terms of a power series expansion in a2 agree with the
approximate result 0 . 1 .9).
This theory achieved Dirac's primary aim : a relativistic formalism with
positive probabilities. From (2 .1.13) we can derive a continuity equatio n
with
0.t + V • J =0
p=f
V1l2,
1 = eyatay
(1 .1.2s)
(1 .1.29)
so that the positive quantity IVr12 can be interpreted as a probability
density, with constant total probability f ly)12d3x . However, there was
another difficulty which Dirac was not immediately able to resolve.
For a given momentum p, the wave equation (1 .1. 3) has four solutions
of the plane wave form
W oc exp
1
~ (p • x - E t)I (1 . 1 . 34)
Two solutions with E = +
p_1c1 + rnIc4 correspond to the two spin states
of an electron with Jz = ±h/2.
The other two solutions have E

1 .1
Relativistic Wave Mechanics
1 1
- V$ cf m c ~, anno obvious physical interpretation . As Dirac pointed
out, this problem arises also for the relativistic Schrodinger equation : for
each p, there are two solutions of the form (1 .1.30), one with positive E
and one with negative E .
Of course, even in classical physics, the
relativistic
relation
E2 = p2c2 + m2 c¢ has two solutions, E - ±
p c + m2c4
However,
in classical physics we can simply assume that the only physical particles
are those with positive E. Since the positive solutions have E > m c;2 and
the negative ones have E < -mc2 , there is a finite gap between them,
and no continuous process can take a particle from positive to negative
energy.
The problem of negative energies is much more troublesome in rela-
tivistic quantum mechanics. As Dirac pointed out in his 1928 paper,' 5 the
interaction of electrons with radiation can produce transitions in which a
positive-energy electron falls into a negative-energy state, with the energy
carried off by two or more photons. Why then is matter stable?
In 1930 Dirac offered a remarkable solution.22 Dirac's proposal was
based on the exclusion principle, so a few words about the history of this
principle are in order here.
The periodic table of the elements and the systematics of X-ray spec-
troscopy had together by 1924 revealed a .pa#tern in the population of
atomic energy levels by electrons :23 The maximum K utnber N, of electrons
in a shell characterized by principal quantum number n is given by twice
the number of orbital states with that n
,:-1
Nn = 2
(24 + 1) = 2n2 _ 2, 8, 18, . . . .
~=a
Wolfgang Pauli24 in 1925 suggested that this pattern could be understood if
IVn is the total number of possible states in the nth shell, and if in addition
there is some mysterious `exclusion principle' which forbids more than one
electron from occupying the same state. He explained the puzzling factor
2 in (1 .1 .31) as due to a 'peculiar, classically non-describable duplexity' of
the electron states, and as we have seen this was understood a little later
as due to the spin of the electron, l l The exclusion principle answered a
question that had remained obscure in the old atomic theory of Bohr and
Sommerfeld : why do not all the electrons in heavy atoms fall down into
the shell of lowest energy? Subsequently Pauli's exclusion principle was
formalized by a number of authors25 as the requirement that the wave
function of a multi-electron system is antisymmetric in the coordinates,
orbital and spin, of all the electrons. This principle was incorporated into
statistical mechanics by Enrico Fermi26 and Dirac,27 and for this reason
particles obeying the exclusion pr inciple are gene rally called `fermions,*

12 1 Historical Introduction
just as particles like photons for which the wave function is symmetric
and which obey the statistics of Bose and Einstein are called 'bosons .' The
exclusion principle has played a fundamental role in the theory of metals,
white dwarf and neutron stars, etc., as well as in chemistry and atomic
physics, but a discussion of these matters would take us too far afield
here .
Dirac's proposal was that the positive energy electrons cannot fall down
into negative energy states because `all the states of negative energy are
occupied except perhaps a few of small velocity.' The few vacant states,
or `holes,' in the sea of negative energy electrons behave like particles with
opposite quantum numbers : positive energy and positive charge . The only
particle with positive charge that was known at that time was the proton,
and as Dirac later recalled,27a `the whole climate of opinion at that time
was against new particles' so Dirac identified his holes as protons ; in fact,
the title of his 1930 article22 was `A Theory of Electrons and Protons .'
The hole theory faced a number of immediate difficulties . One obvi-
ous problem was raised by the infinite charge density of the ubiquitous
negative-energy electrons : where is their electric field? Dirac proposed to
reinterpret the charge density appearing in Maxwell's equations as `the
departure from the normal state of electrification of the world .' An-
other problem has to do with the huge dissimilarity between the observed
masses and interactions of the electrons and protons . Dirac hoped that
Coulomb interactions between electrons would somehow account for these
differences but Hermann Weyl28 showed that the hole theory was in fact
entirely symmetric between negative and positive charge . Finally, Dirac22
predicted the existence of an electron proton annihilation process in which
a positive-energy electron meets a hole in the sea of negative-energy elec-
trons and falls down into the unoccupied level, emitting a pair of gamma
ray photons. By itself this would not have created difficulties for the hole
theory ; it was even hoped by some that this would provide an explana-
tion, then lacking, of the energy source of the stars. However, it was
soon pointed out29 by Julius Robert Oppenheimer and Igor Tatum that
electron-proton annihilation in atoms would take place at much too fast
a rate to be consistent with the observed stability of ordinary matter. For
these reasons, by 1931 Dirac had changed his mind, and decided that the
holes would have to appear not as protons but as a new sort of positively
charged particle, of the same mass as the electron.29a
The second and third of these problems were eliminated by the discovery
of the positron by Carl D. Anderson,30 who apparently did not know of
this prediction by Dirac. On August 2, 1932, a peculiar cosmic ray track
was observed in a Wilson cloud chamber subjected to a 15 kG magnetic
field. The track was observed to curve in a direction that would be
expected for a positively charged particle, and yet its range was at least

1 . 1 Relativistic Wave Mechanics
1 3
ten times greater than the expected range of a proton! Both the range
and the specific ionization of the track were consistent with the hypothesis
that this was a new particle which differs from the electron only in the
sign of its charge, as would be expected for one of Dirac's holes . (This
discovery had been made earlier by P.M.S. Blackett, but not immediately
published by him. Anderson quotes press reports of evidence for light
positive particles in cosmic ray tracks, obtained by Blackett and Giuseppe
Occhialini.) Thus it appeared that Dirac was wrong only in his original
identification of the hole with the proton.
The discovery of the more-or-less predicted positron, together with the
earlier successes of the Dirac equation in accounting for the magnetic
moment of the electron and the fine structure of hydrogen, gave Dirac's
theory a prestige that it has held for over six decades. However, although
there seems little doubt that Dirac's theory will survive in some form in
any future physical theory, there are serious reasons for being dissatisfied
with its original rationale :
(i)
Dirac's analysis of the problem of negative probabilities in Sch-
rodinger's relativistic wave equation would seem to rule out the existence
of any particle of zero spin . Yet even in the 1920s particles of zero spin
were known -far instance, the hydrogen atom in its ground state, and
the helium nucleus, Of course, it could be argued that hydrogen atoms
and alpha particles are not elementary, and therefore do not need to
be described by a relativistic wave equation, but it was not (and still is
not) clear how the idea of elementaxity is incorporated in the formalism
of relativistic quantum mechanics. Today we know of a large number
of spin zero particles - it mesons, K mesons, and so on -- that are
no less elementary than the proton and neutron . We also know of spin
one particles -the W± and Z° - which seem as elementary as the
electron or any other particle. Further, apart from effects of the strong
interactions, we would today calculate the fine structure of `mesonic
atoms,' consisting of a spinless negative it or K meson bound to an
atomic nucleus, from the stationary solutions of the relativistic Klein-
Gordon-Schrbdinger equation! Thus, it is difficult to agree that there is
anything fundamentally wrong with the relativistic equation for zero spin
that forced the development of the Dirac equation -the problem simply
is that the electron happens to have spin h/2, not zero .
(ii) As far as we now know, for every kind of particle there is an
`antiparticle' with the same mass and opposite charge . (Some purely
neutral particles, such as the photon, are their own antiparticles.) But
how can we interpret the antiparticles of charged bosons, such as the
aTI mesons or Wt particles, as holes in a sea of negative energy states?
For particles quantized according to the rules of Bose-Einstein statistics,

1 4
1 Historical Introduction
there is no exclusion principle, and hence nothing to keep positive-energy
particles from falling down into the negative-energy states, occupied or
not. And if the hole theory does not work for bosonic antiparticles, why
should we believe it for fermions? I asked Dirac in 1972 how he then felt
about this point ; he told me that he did not regard bosons like the pion
or Yet as `important: In a lecture271 a few years later, Dirac referred
to the fact that for bosons we no longer have the picture of a vacuum
with negative energy states filled up', and remarked that in this case `the
whole theory becomes more complicated." The next section will show
how the development of quantum field theory made the interpretation of
antiparticles as holes unnecessary, even though unfortunately it lingers
on in many textbooks. To quote Julian Schwinger, 3°u The picture of an
infinite sea of negative energy electrons is now best regarded as a historical
curiosity, and forgotten ."
(iii)
One of the great successes of the Dirac theory was its correct
prediction of the magnetic moment of the electron. This was particularly
striking, as the magnetic moment (1.1 .8) is twice as large as would be
expected for the orbital motion of a charged point particle with angular
momentum h/2 ; this factor of 2 had remained mysterious until Dirac's
theory. However, there is really nothing in Dirac's tine of argument that
leads unequivocally to this particular value for the magnetic moment . At
the point where we brought electric and magnetic fields into the wave
equation (1 .1 .23), we could just as well have added a `Pauli term'3 1
rcac4Yul TFit, ( 1 . 1 .32)
with arbitrary coefficient K. (Here F,tu is the usual electromagnetic field
strength tensor, with Fri = B3, F° 1 = EZ, etc .) This term could be
obtained by first adding a term to the free-field equations proportional
to y''](0,210x,,,ax'' )W , which of course equals zero, and then making
the substitutions (1 .1.22) as before. A more modern approach would be
simply to remark that the term (1 .1 .32) is consistent with all accepted
invariance principles, including Lorentz invariance and gauge invariance,
and so there is no reason why such a term should not be included in the
field equations. (See Section 12.3.) This term would give an additional
contribution proportional to K to the magnetic moment of the electron, so
apart from the possible demand for a purely formal simplicity, there was
no reason to expect any particular value for the magnetic moment of the
electron in Dirac's theory .
As we shall see in this book, these problems were all eventually to be
solved (or at least clarified) through the development of quantum field
theory.

1 .2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory
1.2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory
1 5
The photon is the only particle that was known as a field before it was
detected as a particle. Thus it is natural that the formalism of quantum
field theory should have been developed in the first instance in connection
with radiation and only later applied to other particles and fields .
In 1926, in one of the central papers on matrix mechanics, Born,
Heisenberg, and Jordan32 applied their new methods to the free radiation
field. For simplicity, they ignored the polarization of electromagnetic
waves and worked in one space dimension, with coordinate x running
from 0 to L ; the radiation field u(x,t) if constrained to vanish at these
endpoints thus has the same behavior as the displacement of a string with
ends fixed at x = 0 and x = L. By analogy with either the case of a string
or the full electromagnetic field, the Hamiltonian was taken to have the
form
1 ~L
c~z~
l
H i2 .1O
~ 0
+ c
dx .
ox
(1 .2.1 )
In order to reduce this expressi on to a sum of squares, the field u was
expressed as a sum of Fourier components with u = 0 at both x = 0 and
x
Z
u(x, t ) _ qk( t) sin (
COkX
k=1
C
Wk = k 7rcI L ,
so that
H
:)cE f .2
q2
4 k_ 1
{1 .2.2 }
(x .2.3 )
( 1 .2.4)
Thus the string or field behaves like sum of independent harmonic oscilla-
tors with angular frequencies wk , as had been anticipated 20 years earlier
by Paul EhrenfestYa
In particular, the `momentum' Pk(t) canonically conjugate to qk(t) is
determined, as in particle mechanics, by the condition that if H is expressed
as a function of the p s and q s, then
This yields a 'momentum'
{ 1 .2.5}

1 6
1 Historical Introduction
so the canonical commutation relations may be written
2 -2M
[4k (0, qj(0] =
L [pk (t), qj(t)] L
bkj
(126)
Also, the time-dependence of qk (t ) is governed by the Hamiltonian equa-
tion of motion
Mr} = 2
Pk(t) _ -~ ~
6 ~ -~~4k (~~ -
( 1 .2,8}
~'
k ( )
The form of the matrices defined by Eqs. (1 .2.6)-(1 .2.8) was already
known to Born, Heisenberg, and Jordan through previous work on the
harmonic oscillator. The q-matrix is given by
qk (t) = ~,r~~ Ia~` exp(-iw~.t) + a~ expo+icOkt)j ( 1 .2.9 )
with ak a time-independent matrix and a~ its Hermitian adjoint, satisfying
the commutation relations
ak , aj ~ =0. (1 .2.1)
The rows and columns of these matrices are labelled with a set of positive
integers nF, ~.~, . . . one for each normal mode. The matrix elements are
4akln' ,n ' ,. ..,~~,~r~. . .
nk J nk,nk_2 nfn1
(1 .2.12)
1*k
For a single normal mode, these matrices may be written explicitly as
o
0
o
0 0
a o
.
a o
0 0
0
0
0 0
o
0
a o
.
a =
0
0 0 0
at=
0 0
,f3-
0
It is straightforward to check that (1 .2. 12) and (1 .2 . 1 3) do satisfy the
commutation relations (1 .2. 10) and (1.2.1 1) .
The physical interpretation of a column vector with integer components
n1, rte,-. . . is that it represents a state with nk quanta in each normal mode
k. The matrix ak or ak acting on such a column vector will respectively

1 . 2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory
1 7
lower or raise rzk by one unit, leaving all n.~ with e =~ k unchanged ; they
may therefore be interpreted as operators which annihilate or create one
quantum in the kth norma l mode. In particular, the vector with all nk
equal to zero represents the vacuum ; it is annihilated by any ak .
This interpretation is further borne out by inspection of the Hamilto-
nian. Using { 1.2.9} and (1 .x.10) in (1 .2.4) gives
H
11Wk (a4ak +
12)
-
The Hamiltonian is then diagonal in the n-representatio n
(H)ni,nz, ...,ni ,nz . ._
hWk (nk + 2)
dn1 "j .
k
(1 .2. Z4)
(1 .2.15 )
We see that the energy of the state is just the sum of energies hu)k for
each quantum present in the state, plus an infinite zero-point energy
EO = ~ ~k hWk. Applied to the radiation field, this formalism justified the
Bose method of counting radiation states according to the numbers ray of
quanta in each normal mode .
Born, Heisenberg, and Jordan used this formalism to derive an expres-
sion for the r.m.s. energy fluctuations in black-body radiation . (For this
purpose they actually only used the commutation relations (1 .2.6)-(1 .2.7).)
However, this approach was soon applied to a more urgent problem, the
calculation of the rates for spontaneous emission of radiation .
In order to appreciate the difficulties here, it is necessary to go back
in time a bit. In one of the first papers on matrix mechanics, Born and
Jordan33 had assumed in effect that an atom, in dropping from a state
to a lower state x, would emit radiation just like a classical charged
oscillator with displacemen t
r(t) = r#,, exp(-27rivt) + r#,* exp(2nivt) ,
where
(1.2.16 )
{1.2.17 }
and
rg,, is the fl, ot element of the matrix associated with the electron
position. The energy E of such an oscillator is
E _ 1 2m ~ rZ + (2nv)2r ~~ = 87C 2 mv2 1 rp,, 12 . (1 .2 .18 )
A straightforward classical calculation then gives the radiated power , and
dividing by the energy by per photon gives the rate of photon emission
1brc3e2v
3 ~4~~ ~ ~) = ~ ~r~~~~ • (1 .2.9)
3hc-

18 1 Historical Introductio n
However, it was not at all clear why the formulas for emission of radiation
by a classical dipole should be taken over in this manner in dealing with
spontaneous emission .
A little later a more convincing though even less direct derivation was
given by Dirac.34 By considering the behavior of quantized atomic states
in an oscillating classical
electromagnetic field with energy density per
frequency interval u at frequency (1.2.17), he was able to derive formulas
for the rates uB(,x
--*
13) and uB(#
--+ oc) for absorption or induced
emission
2 2
g~~
P ) = B(fl
~
~
) "'~
2
3h2 ~r{~a
12
(1 .2.20)
(Note that the expression on the right is symmetric between states ac
and P, because rxp is just rg,w .) Einstein34' had already shown in 1917
that the possibility of thermal equilibrium between atoms and black-body
radiation imposes a relation between the rate A (J3 -} oc) of spontaneous
emission and the rates uB for induced emission or absorption :
A(# -, a) =
87rhu 3
$(P -> )c) . (1 . 2.21 )
C3
Using (1,2,20) in this relation immediately yields the Born-Jordan result
( 1 .2.19) for the rate of spontaneous emission . Nevertheless, it still seemed
unsatisfactory that thermodynamic arguments should be needed to derive
formulas for processes involving a single atom .
Finally, in 1927 Dirac35 was able to give a thoroughly quantum me-
chanical treatment of spontaneous emission. The vector potential A(x, t)
was expanded in normal modes, as in Eq. (1 .2.2), and the coefficients were
shown to satisfy commutation relations like (1 .2.6). In consequence, each
state of the free radiation field was specified by a set of integers rte, one
for each normal mode, and the matrix elements of the electromagnetic
interaction et • A took the form of a sum over normal modes, with matrix
coefficients proportional to the matrices ak and a~ defined in Eqs . (1 .2,1 ~)-
10)-
( 1.2.13). The crucial result here is the factor ,/n-k+ 1 in Eq. ( 1 .2.13) ; the
probability for a transition in which the number of photons in a normal
mode k rises from nk to nk + I is proportional to the square of this factor,
Kr nk + 1. But in a radiation field with nk photons in a normal mode k,
the energy density u per frequency interval is
v~
U(~'k )
S ~
=
I n
~
k x hvk
C 3
so the rate for emission of radiation in normal mode k is proport ional to
S nhvk

1.2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory 1 9
The first term is interpreted as the contribution of induced emission, and
the second term as the contribution of spontaneous emission. Hence,
without any appeal to thermodynamics, Dirac could conclude that the
ratio of the rates uB for induced emission and A for spontaneous emission
is given by the Einstein relation, Eq . (1 .12 1). Using his earlier result (1 .2.20)
for B, Dirac was thus able to rederive the Born-Jordan formula" (1 .2.19)
for spontaneous emission rate A . A little later, similar methods were
used by Dirac to give a quantum mechanical treatment of the scattering
of radiation and the lifetime of excited atomic states,3 6 and by Victor
Weisskopf and Eugene Wigner to make a detailed study of spectral line
shapes.Y" Dirac in his work was separating the electromagnetic potential
into a radiation field A and a static Coulomb potential A°, in a manner
which did not preserve the manifest Lorentz and gauge invariance of
classical electrodynamics . These matters were put on a firmer foundation
a little later by Enrico Fermi.16~ Many physicists in the 1930s learned
their quantum electrodynamics from Fermi's 1932 review .
The use of canonical commutation relations for q and p or a and a t
also raised a question as to the Lorentz invariance of the quantized theory .
Jordan and Pauli37 in 1928 were able to show that the commutators of
fields at different spacetime points were in fact Lorentz-invariant. (These
commutators are calculated in Chapter 5.)
Somewhat later, Bohr and
Lean RasenfelP used a number of ingenious thought experiments to
show that these commutation relations express limitations on our ability
to measure fields at spacetime points separated by time-like intervals .
It was not long after the successful quantization of the electromagnetic
field that these techniques were applied to other fields. At first this was
regarded as a `second quantization' ; the fields to be quantized were the
wave functions used in one-particle quantum mechanics, such as the Dirac
wave function of the electron . The first step in this direction seems to
have been taken in 1927 by Jordan.39 I n 1 921$ an essential element was
supplied by Jordan and Vdigner .4° They recognized that the Pauli exclusion
principle prevents the occupation number n k of electrons in any normal
mode k (counting spin as well as position variables) from taking any values
other than 0 or 1 . The electron field therefore cannot be expanded as a
superposition of operators satisfying the commutation relations (1 .2.10),
(1 .2.12), because these relations require ray to take all integer values from
0 to oc.. Instead, they proposed that the electron field should be expanded
in a sum of operators ak , ak satisfying the anticommutation relations
ak C~~ + at ak = 6jk ( 1 .122)
Clk aj + afar = 0. (1 .123)
The relations can be satisfied by matrices labelled by a set of integers

20
1 Historical Introduction
n1 , ra21 . . . , one for each normal mode, each integer taking just the value s
zero and one :
I
n~
0, nk = 1, n'
r~
= j for j * k
1 nfk =1, nk =0,nf~ = nffor j 4 k
0 otherwise .
(1 .2.24)
( 1 . 2.25)
For instance, for a single normal mode we have just two rows and two
columns, corresponding to the values unity and zero of n' and n ; the a
and at matrices take the form
1 0 0 -~
a 1
~ T
1
0
a
[0
Q
The reader may check that (1 .2 .24) and (1 .225) do satisfy the anticommu-
tation relations (1 .2.2) and ( 1 .2.2 3).
The interpretation of a column vector characterized by integers n1, '12, . . .
is that it represents a state with nk quanta in each normal mode k, just as
for bosons. The difference is, of course, that since each nk takes only the
values 0 and 1, there can be at most one quantum in each normal mode,
as required by the Pauli exclusion principle . Again, ak destroys a quantum
in normal mode k if there is one there already, and otherwise gives zero ;
also, at creates a quantum in normal mode k unless there is one there
already, in which case it gives zero. Much later it was shown by Fier
and Pauli401 that the choice between commutation and anticommutation
relations is dictated solely by the particle's spin : commutators must be
used for particles with integer spin like the photon, and anticommutators
for particles with half-integer spin like the plectron, (This will be shown
in a different way in Chapter 5 .)
The theory of general quantum fields was first laid out in 1 929, in a
pair of comprehensive articles by Heisenberg and Pauli .4i The starting
point
Kf their work was the application of the canonical formalism to
the fields themselves, rather than to the coefficients of the normal modes
appearing in the fields . Heisenberg and Pauli took the Lagrangian L as
the space-integral of a local function of fields and spacetime derivatives
of fields ; the field equations were then determined from the principle
that the action f Ldt should be stationary when the fields are varied ;
and the commutation relations were determined from the assumption
that the variational derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to any
field's time-derivative behaves like a `momentum' conjugate to that field
(except that commutation relations become anticommutation relations for
fermion fields. They also went on to apply this general formalism to the
electromagnetic and Dirac fields, and explored the various invariance and

1 .2 The Birth of Quan tum Field Theory 2 1
conservation laws, including the conservation of charge, momentum, and
energy, and Lorentz and gauge invariance .
The Heisenberg-Pauli formalism is essentially the same as that described
in our Chapter 7, and so for the present we can limit ourselves to a single
example which will turn out to be useful later in this section . For a free
complex scalar field O(x) the Lagrangian is taken a s
(mc2)2
]
If we subject O(x) to an infinitesimal variation ~O(x), the Lagrangian is
changed by the amount
6L _ [d3x[~f6~ + ~6~t - C2vOt . V60 C2vO - v60t
(?nc2)2(inc2)2
]
t6 o
It is ass umed in using the principle of stationary action that the variation
in the fields should vanish on the boundaries of the spacetime region of
integration. Thus, in computing the change in the action f L dt, we can
immediately integrate by parts, and write
J L C~~ = C2 ~X
jof
K -
(mc)2) 0+60
K - (mc)) Of
But this must vanish for any 50 and ~Ot, so 0 must satisfy the familiar
relativistic wave equation
0 (1 .2.28)
and its adjoint. The `momenta' canonically conjugate to the fields 0 and
of are given by the variational derivatives of L with respect to ~ and
which we can read off from (1 .2.27) as
It =- ~ ' = ~t, (1 .2.29)
art = & ~ _ ~ . (1 .2.30)
These field variables satisfy the usual canonical co mmutation relations ,

22
I Historical Introduction
with a delta function in place of a Kronecker delta
[7r(X,o,O(Y,t)J =
[7(X, 0, 0*(Y, 0 ]
[Ir(X, t), Z(Y, ol
[ 0 (X, t), 0 (y, 01
17~1(x, o, 01(y, ol = -ih5l(x - Y) ,
17rt(x, 0, O(Y, 01
0 ,
17t(x, t), 7rt(y, t)]
[7r(X,0, .g,(Y,01
0,
[01(x, o, 01(y, ol
[O(X, o, 01(y, o]
0
(1 . 2 .31)
(1 .2 .32)
(1 .2 .33)
(1 .2 .34)
The Hamiltonian here is given (just as in particle mechanics) by the `sum'
of all canonical momenta times the time-derivatives of the corresponding
fields, minus the Lagrangian ;
H -
dux [7r ~ + nf~f
I - L
or, using ( 1 .2.26), ( 1 .2.29), and (1 .2.30) :
H = f dux [gtn + C2 (VO)t
(VO) + (
( 1-2- 35)
M2c
,) Otol
(1 .2.3
)
After the papers by Heisenberg and Pauli one element was still missing
before quantum field theory could reach its final pre-war form : a solution
to the problem of the negative-energy states . We saw in the last section
that in 1930, at just about the time of the Heisenberg-Pauli papers, Dirac
had proposed that the negative-energy states of the electron were all filled,
but with only the holes in the negative-energy sea observable, rather than
the negative-energy electrons themselves . After Dirac's idea was seemingly
confirmed by the discovery of the positron in 1932, his `hole theory' was
used to calculate a number of processes to the lowest order of perturbation
theory, including electron-positron pair production and scattering .
At the same time, a great deal of work was put into the development
of a formalism whose Lorentz invariance would be explicit . The most
influential effort was the `many-time' formalism of Dirac, Vladimir Fock,
and Boris Padolsky,'2 in which the state vector was represented by a
wave function depending on the spacetime and spin coordinates of all
electrons, positive-energy and negative-energy. In this formalism, the total
number of electrons of either positive or negative energy is conserved ;
for instance, production of an electron-positron pair is described as the
excitation of a negative-energy electron to a positive-energy state, and the
annihilation of an electron and positron is described as the corresponding
deexcitation. This many-time formalism had the advantage of manifest
Lorentz invariance, but it had a number of disadvantages ; In particular,
there was a profound difference between the treatment of the photon,
described in terms of a quantized electromagnetic field, and that of the
electron and positron . Not all physicists felt this to be a disadvantage ;

1.2 The Birth of' Quantum Field Thenry. 23
the electron field unlike the electromagnetic field did not have a classical
limit, so there were doubts about its physical significance. Also, Dirac¢2a
conceived of fields as the means by which we observe particles, so that
he did not expect particles and fields to be described in the same terms .
Though I do not know whether it bothered anyone at the time, there was
a more practical disadvantage of the many-time formalism : it would have
been difficult to use it to describe a process like nuclear beta decay, in
which an electron and antineutrino are created without an accompanying
positron or neutrino. The successful calculation by Fermi43 of the electron
energy distribution in beta decay deserves to be counted as one of the
early triumphs of quantum field theory.
The essential idea that was needed to demonstrate the equivalence of
the Dirac hole theory with a quantum field theory of the electron was
provided by Fock4" and by Wendell Furry and Oppenheimer44 in 1933
.
To appreciate this idea from a more modern standpoint, suppose we try
to construct an plectron field in analogy with the electromagnetic field or
the Barn-Heisenberg-Jordan field (1 .2.2). Since electrons carry a charge,
we would not like to mix annihilation and creation operators, so we might
try to write the field as
where uk (x)eya"'kr are a complete set of orthonormal plane-wave solutions
of the Dirac equation (1 . 1 . 13) {with k now labelling the three-momentum,
spin, and sign of the energy) :
uk _ hr,UkUk a
(L2.35)
- ihc~e - V + a4rnc- X1 .2.39}
f u~~se dux = 6k(
( 1 .2.40)
and uk are the corresponding annihilation operators, satisfying the Jordan-
Wigner anticommutation relations
( 1 .2.22)-(1 .2.23 ). According to the
ideas of `second quantization' or the canonical quantization procedure
of Heisenberg and Pauli,41 the Hamiltonian is formed by calculating the
`expectation value' of with a `wave function' replaced by the quantized
field (1 .2.37)
H = /d3x
t .
V, =
~amk akak . (1 .2.41)
k
The trouble is, of course, that this is not a positive operator -half the c )k
are negative while the operators a~ak take only the positive eigenr~alues
I and D. (See Eqs. (1 .2.24) and (1 .2.25).) In order to cure this disease,
Furry and Oppenheimer picked up Dirac's idea42 that the positron is the
absence of a negative-energy electron ; the anticommutation relations are

24
1 Historical Introduction
symmetric between creation and annihilation operators, so they defined
the positron creation and annihilation operators as the corresponding
annihilation and creation operators for negative-energy electron s
(for Wk < 0) (1 .2.42)
bk = ak
bk = 41k
where the label k on b denotes a positive-energy positron mode with
momenta and spin opposite to those of the electron mode k . The Dirac
field (1 .2.3 7) may then he written
w (x) (+)ak Ux W + ~-}b~ Uk~W) a (1 .2.43)
k
where (+ ) and (-) indicate sums over normal modes k with (Ok > 0
and c0k < 0, respectively, and Uk(x) = Uk(x)e-Similarly, using the
anticommutation relations for the h s, we can rewrite the energy operator
(1 .2.4i) as
k
k
where E O is the infinite c-number
k
(1 .2.44)
(1 .2.45 )
In order for this redefinition to be more than a mere formality, it is
necessary also to specify that the physical vacuum is a state YD containing
no positive-energy electrons or positrons
Hence ( 1 . 2 . 4 ) gives the energy of the vacuum as just E0.
I f we measure
all energies relative to the vacuum energy Eo, then the physical energy
operator is hC - EO ; and Eq. (1 .2 .44) shows that this is a positive operator .
The problem of negative-energy states for a charged spin zero particle
was also resolved in 1934, by Pauli and VLfeisskopf,45 in a paper written
in part to challenge Dirac's picture of filled negative-energy states . Here
the creation and annihilation operators satisfy commutation rather than
anticommutation relations, so it is not possible to interchange the roles of
these operators freely, as was the case for fermions . Instead we must return
to the Heisenberg-Pauli canonical formalism4l to decide which coefficients
of the various normal modes are creation or annihilation operators .
Pauli and Weisskopf expanded the free charged scalar field in plane
waves in a cube of spatial volume V
0
OX, t ) = 1~ ~ q(k, t)e
~k ~x
(1 .2.48)
k

1 .2 The Birth of Q uantum Field Theory 25
with the wave numbers restricted by the periodicity condition, that the
quantities kJL/27r for j = 1,2,3 should be a set of three positive or
negative integers. Similarly the canonically conjugate variable (1 .2.29) was
expanded as
~ ( 1 .2 .49 )
(x a r) = ~~ 1: P(k, t )e-'k x
The minus sign is put into the exponent here so that (1 .2.29) now becomes :
The Fourier inversion formula gives
q (k} t) =
p(k, t) =
1
~~x O(x, t )e-~~ ~ ,~
J
d3X 7qX' t)e+ik,, ,
( 1.2 .5 )
(1.2 .51 )
(1 .2 .52)
and therefore the canonical commutation relations (1 .2 .31)-(1 .2.34) yield
for the q s and p s
_ih
[p (k, t)a q ( 1,
Y f d3x Pik-xe-il-x
( 1 . 2 .53 )
[p(k,t),qf(I,t)J [p(k,t),p(I,t)J [p(k,t),p'(I,t) J
_ [q(k,t).q(1t)] = [q(k.t)qt(Lt)] =0
(1 .2.54)
together with other relations that may be derived from these by taking
their Hermitian adjoints. By inserting (1 .2.48) and (t .2.49) in the formula
(1.2.36) for the Hamiltonian, we can also write this operator in terms of
psandgs :
where
H [p* (k, t)p(k, t)
+ (1)2 q~(k, t)q(k, t)
k
k
2
mi!2 ) 2
C~J
= C~'~ + ( r,
(1 .2.55 )
(1 .2.56)
The time-derivatives of the p s are then given by the Hamiltonian equation
p(k, t) _ {,~
Ok t
= --rO~ q~~ ( k,r) (1 .2. 5 7 )
~f(
)
(and its adjoint), a result which in the light of Eq . (1 .2.50) is just equivalent
to the Klein-Gordon-Schrodinger wave equation ( 1 .2.28) .
We see that, just as in the case of the 1926 model of Born, Heisenberg,
and Jordan,4 the free field behaves like an infinite number of coupled

26
1 Historical Introduction
harmonic oscillators. Pauli and Weisskopf could construct p and q op-
erators which satisfy the commutation relations ( 1 .2.53)-(1 .2 .54) and the
`equations of motion' { 1 .2.5} and (1 .2-57), by introducing annihilation
and creation operators a, b, aT, b' of two different kinds, corresponding
to particles and antiparticles :
q(k a t) - i
F~Wk
p(ka t)
r~_
2
where
[a(k) exp(-icOkt) - hl(k) exp(ic)kt} ]
[b(k)CXP(-iCOkt) + at(k) exp(+i(Ok t}]
[a(k), at(l)]
[b(k), bt(I)i = &I ,
[a(k), a([)]
[b(k), b(I)l = 0 ,
[a(k),b(l)] [a(k),bt(1)j
[at(k),b(l)]
[at(k), bt(l)]
0 -
( t .2 .58 )
(1 .2 ,5 )
(1_x .64)
(1.161 )
( 1 .2.62 )
I t is straightforward to check that these operators do satisfy the desired
relations Cl.2.53 ), (1 .2.54), ( 1 .2.50), and (1 . 2.57) . The field (1 .2.4$) may be
written
U r~O
-b~(-k) exp(-ak ' X + iwkt)]
and the H amiltonian (1 .2 .55) takes the form
(1 .2. 63 )
H
2 hwk [bt(k)b(k) + b(k)bf(k) + rx#(k)u( k) + a(k)a~{k }]
or, using ( 1.2.60)--(1 .2.62 )
H =~= 1: hO)k [b*(k)b(k) + a~(k)a(k)] + EO
k
where Efl is the in finite c-number
k
(1 .2.64 )
( 1 . 2,65 )
The existence of two different kinds of operators a and b, which appear
in precisely the same way in the Hamiltonian, shows that this is a theory
with two kinds of particles with the same mass . As emphasized by Pauli
and Weisskopf, these two varieties can be identified as particles and the
corresponding antiparticles, and if charged have opposite charges. Thus,

1 .2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory
27
as we stressed above, bosons of spin zero as well as fermions of spin 1/2
can have distinct antiparticles, which for bosons cannot be identified as
holes in a sea of negative energy particles .
We now can tell whether a and b or at and bt are the annihilation
operators by taking the expectation values of commutation relations in
the vacuum state To . For instance, if a~ were an annihilation operator
it would give zero when applied to the vacuum state, so the vacuum
expectation value of (1 .2 .60) would give
in conflict with the requirement that the left-hand side must be negative-
definite. In this way we can conclude that it is ak and bk that are the
annihilation operators, and therefore
- I la(k)Tol 12 = (TO, [a(k),af(k)jTo) = -~l (1 .2.66)
This is consistent with all commutation relations. Thus, the canonical
formalism forces the coefficient of the e+"'r in the field ( 1 .2.58) to be a
creation operator, as it also is in the Furry-Oppenheimer formalism for
spin 1/2.
Equations (1 .2 .64) and ( 1 .2.67) now tell us that E 0 is the energy of the
vacuum state. If we measure all energies relative to E0, then the physical
energy operator is H - Eo, and (1 .2.64) shows that this again is positive .
What about the problem that served Dirac as a starting point, the
problem of negative probabilities? As Dirac had recognized, the only
probability density p, which can be formed from solutions of the Klein-
Gardon-Schradinger free scalar wave equation ( 1.2.28), and which satisfies
a conservation law of the form
( 1 .1.10 ), must be proportional to the
quantity
r'
1
p = 21m lot 0t J
{ 2 .2 .6 8 }
and therefore is not necessarily a positive quantity. Similarly, in the
`second-quantized' theory, where 0 is given by Eq. {1 .2.63},pis not a
positive operator. Since Ot(x) does not commute with O(x) here, we can
write ( 1 .2. 68) in various forms, which differ by infinite c-numbers ; it proves
convenient to write it as
: r?o
a01 01
h P. t at
The space-integral of this operator is then easily calculated to b e
N
p dux =
(at (k )a(k) - bt (k )b( k))
k
(1 .2.69)
(1 _ 2.7a)
and clearly has eigenvalues of either sign .

28 1 Historical Introductio n
However, in a sense this problem appears in quantum field theory for
spin 1/2 as well as spin zero. The density operator ~ tyr of Dirac is
indeed a positive operator, but in order to construct a physical density
we ought to subtract the contribution of the filled electron states . In
particular, using the plane-wave decomposition (1 .2.43), we may write the
total number operator as
N = j dux tp'q) - t+)afi (k)a(k) + 1: (-) b( k)b'(k )
k
k
The anticommutation relations for the b s allow us to rewrite this as
N - No = E Wa
k
ak
(-)bklbk
(1 .2 .71)
k
k
where No is the infinite constant
k
According to Eqs. (1 .2.46) and (1.2.47), No is the number of particles
in the vacuum, so Furry and Oppenheimer reasoned that the physical
number operator is N - No, and this now has both negative and positive
eigenvalues, just as for spin zero.
The solution to this problem provided by quantum field theory is that
neither the y) Kf furry and Oppenheimer nor the 0 of Pauli and Weisskopf
are probability amplitudes, which would have to define conserved positive
probability densities. instead, the physical Hilbert space is spanned by
states defined as containing definite numbers of particles and/or antipar-
ticles in each mode. If (Dn are a complete orthonormal set of such states,
then a measurement of particle numbers in an arbitrary state T will yield
a probability for finding the system in state (D, , given by
where ((DM,T) is the usual Hilbert space scalar product. Hence, no question
as to the possibility of negative probabilities will arise for any spin. The
wave fields 0, ya, etc, are not probability amplitudes at all, but operators
which create or destroy particles in the various normal modes . It would
be a good thing if the misleading expression `second quantization' were
permanently retired ,
In particular, the operators N and N - No of Eqs . ( 1 .2.74) and (1 .2 .71)
are not to be interpreted as total probabilities, but as number operators
:
specifically, the number of particles minus the number of antiparticles . For
charged particles, the conservation of charge forces the charge operators to
be proportional to these number operators, so the minus signs in ( 1 .2.70)
and- (1 .2.71) allow us immediately to conclude that particles and antipar-
ticles have opposite charge. In this field-theoretic formalism, interactions

1 .2 The Birth ofQua ntum Field Theory 29
contrib ute terms to the Hamiltonian which are of third, fourth, or higher
order in field variables, and the rates of various processes are given by
using these interaction operators in a time-dependent perturbation theory .
The conceptual framework described in the above brief remarks will serve
as the basis for much of the work in this book.
Despite its apparent advantages, quantum field theory did not imme-
diately supplant hole theory ; rather, the two points of view coexisted for
a while, and various combinations of field-theoretic and hole-theoretic
ideas were used in calculations of physical reaction rates . This period saw
a number of calculations of cross sections to lowest order in powers of
e2 for various processes, such as eT + y ~ e- + ,/ in 1929 by Klein and
NXShina. ;46 e++ e- --* 2,i in 1930 by Dirac ; 47 e- + e ~ e- +e- in 1932 by
oller;48 e- +Z --* e- + y +Z and y + Z ---~ e++ e- +Z (where Z denotes
the Coulomb field of a heavy atom) in 1934 by Bethe and Heider ; 49 and
e+ +e- --* e+ + e- in 1936 by Bb abha.$° (Rules for the calculation of such
processes are given in Chapter 8, and worked out in detail there for the
case of electron-photon scattering .) These lowest-order calculations gave
finite results, in reasonable agreement with the experimental data .
Nevertheless, a general feeling of dissatisfaction with quantum field
theory (whether or not in the form of hole theory) persisted throughout
the 1930s. One of the reasons for this was the apparent failure of
quantum electrodynamics to account for the penetrating power of the
charged particles in cosmic ray showers, noted in 1936 by Oppenheimer
and Franklin Ca I'1SOn.50Q Another cause of dissatisfaction that turned
out to be related to the first was the steady discovery of new kinds
of particles and interactions. We have already mentioned the electron,
photon, positron, neutrino, and, of course, the nucleus of hydrogen, the
proton. Throughout the 1920s it was generally believed that heavier nuclei
are composed of protons and electrons, but it was hard to see how a light
particle like the electron could be confined in the nucleus . Another severe
difficulty with this picture was pointed out in 1931 by Ehrenfest and
Oppenheimer:" the Kucleus of ordinary nitrogen, IV14, in order to have
atomic number 7 and atomic weight 14, wo uld have to be composed of
1 4 protons and 7 electrons, and would therefore have to be a fermion, in
conflict with the result of molecular spectroscopy52 that N 14 is a boson.
This problem (and others) were solved in 1932 with the discovery of the
neutron, 53 and by Heisenberg's subsequent suggestion14 that nuclei are
composed of protons and neutrons, not protons and electrons . It was
clear that a strong non-e lectromagnetic force of short range would have
to operate between neutrons and protons to ho ld nuclei together .
After the success of the Fermi theory of beta decay, several authors54"
speculated that nuclear forces might be explained in this theory as due
to the exchange of electrons and neutrinos . A few years later, in 1935,

30
1 Historical Introduction
Hideki Yukawa proposed a quite different quantum field theory of the
nuclear force.55 In an essentially classical calculation, he found that the
interaction of a scalar field with nucleons (protons or neutrons) would
produce a nucleon-nucleon potential, with a dependence on the nucleon
separation r given by
Y(r) x 1 exp(-~.r) (1.2.74 )
instead of the 11r Coulomb potential produced by electric fields . The
quantity ~ was introduced as a parameter in Yukawa's scalar field equation,
and when this equation was quantized, Yukawa found that it described
particles of mass Uf c .
The observed range of the strong interactions
within nuclei led Yukawa to estimate that U /c is of the order of 200
electron masses. In 1 937 such `mesons' were discovered in cloud chamber
experiments" by Seth Neddermeyer and Anderson and by Jabez Curry
Street and Edward Carl Stevenson, and it was generally believed that
these were the hypothesized particles of Yukawa .
The discovery of mesons reveated that the charged particles in cosmic
ray showers are not all electrons, and thus cleared up the problem with
these showers that had bothered Oppenheimer and Carlson . At the same
time, however, it created new difficulties . Lothar Nardheim56a pointed
out in 1939 that the same strong interactions by which the mesons are
copiously produced at high altitudes (and which are required in Yukawa's
theory) should have led to the mesons' absorption in the atmosphere, a
result contradicted by their copious appearance at lower altitudes . In 1947
it was shown in an experiment by Marcello Conversi, Ettore Pancini, and
Oreste Piccioni57 that the mesons which predominate in cosmic rays at
low altitude actually interact weakly with nucleons, and therefore could
not be identified with Yukawa's particle. This puzzle was cleared up by
a theoretical suggestion,58 and its subsequent experimental confirmation59
by Cesare Lattes, Occhialini, and Cecil Powell -there are two kinds
of mesons with slightly different masses : the heavier (now called the
it
meson or pion) has strong interactians and plays the role in nuclear force
envisaged by Yukawa ; the lighter (now called the p meson, or muon) has
only weak and electromagnetic interactions, and predominates in cosmic
rays at sea level, being produced by the decay of rt mesons. In the same
year, 1947, entirely new kinds of particles (now known as K mesons and
hyperons) were found in cosmic rays by George Rochester and Clifford
Butler.60 From 1947 until the present particles have continued to be
discovered in a bewildering variety, but to pursue this story would take
us outside the bounds of our present survey. These discoveries showed
clearly that and conceptual framework which was limited to photons,
electrons, and positrons would be far too narrow to be taken seriously as

1 .3 The Problem of Infinities
3 1
a fundamental theory . But an even more important obstacle was presented
by a pu rely theoretical problem --- the problem of infinities.
1.3
The Problem of Infinities
Quantum field theory deals with fields V7(x) that destroy and create parti-
cles at a spacetime point x. Earlier experience with classical electron theory
provided a warning that a point electron will have infinite electromagnetic
self-mass ; this mass is e2 /6nac-2 for a surface distribution of charge with
radius a, and therefore blows up for a -> U. Disappointingly this problem
appeared with even greater severity in the early days of quantum field
theory, and although greatly ameliorated by subsequent improvements in
the theory, it remains with us to the present day .
The problem of infinities in quantum field theory was apparently first
noted in the
1 929-30 papers of Heisenberg and Pauli .41 Soon after, the
presence of infinities was confirmed in calculations of the electromagnetic
self-energy of a bound electron by Oppenheimer, 61 and of a free electron
by Ivor Waller .62 They used ordinary second-order perturbation theory,
with an intermediate state consisting of an electron and a photon : for
instance, the shift of the energy E, of an electron in the nth energy level
of hydrogen is given by
AE,
dk j < m ; k, ~jH' I ra > 1 z
X 1 .3 . 1 )
where the sums and integral are over all intermediate electron states
in. photon helicities ~, and photon momenta k, and H' is the term in
the Hamiltonian representing the interaction of radiation and electrons .
This calculation gave a self-energy that is formally infinite ; further ; if
this infinity is removed by discarding all intermediate states with photon
wave numbers greater than I /a, then the self-energy behaves like 11a2
as a --+ 0. Infinities of this sort are often called ultraviolet divergences,
because they arise from intermediate states containing particles of very
short wavelength .
These calculations treated the electron according to the rules of the
original Dirac theory, without filled negative-electron states . A few years
later Weisskopf repeated the calculation of the electron self-mass in the
new hole theory, with all negative-energy states full . In this case another
term appears in second-order perturbation theory, which in a non-hole-
theory language can be described as arising from processes in which the
electron in its final state first appears out of the vacuum together with
a photon and a positron which then annihilate along with the initial

32 1 Historical Introduction
electron. Initially Weisskopf found a 1/a2 dependence on the photon
wave-number cutoff 11a. The same calculation was being carried out (at
the suggestion of Bohr) at that time by Carlson and Furry . After seeing
Weisskopf's results, Furry realized that while Weisskopf had included an
electrostatic term that he and Carlson had neglected, Weisskopf had made
a new mistake in the calculation of the magnetic self-energy. After hearing
from Furry and correcting his own error, Weisskopf found that the 1/02
terms in the total mass shift cancelled! However, despite this cancellation,
an infinity remained : with a wave-number cutoff 1 f a, the self-mass was
found to be63
Sac
h
flZem
27t M In (MCL2 )
1. 0 .3.2)
The weakening of the cut-off dependence, to Ina as compared with the
classical 1/a or the early quantum I/a 2, was mildly encouraging at the
time and turned out to be of great importance later, in the development
of renormalization theory.
An infinity of quite a different kind was encountered in 1 933, apparently
first by Dirac.64 He considered the effect of an external static nearly
uniform charge density 8(x) on the vacuum, i .e., on the negative-energy
electrons in the filled energy levels of hole theory . The Coulomb interaction
between E(x) and the charge density of the negative-energy electrons
produces a `vacuum polarization,' with induced charge densit y
2
=Af + $ ~
11
p2.E + . . .
(1 .3.3)
me
The constant B is finite, and of order oc, On the other hand, A i
logarithmically divergent, of order a Ina, where I f a is the wave-number
cutoff.
Infinities also seemed to occur in a related problem, the scattering of
light by light. Hans Euler, Bernard Kockel, and Heisenberg15 showed in
1935w6 that these infinities could be eliminated by using amore-ar-less ar-
bitrary prescription suggested earlier by DiraC66 and Heisenberg67 . They
calculated an effective Lagrangian density for the non-linear electrody-
namic effects produced by virtual electron-positron pairs :
4
( E2 - ]32)
+ 3CO,nzrra~c~
E2 - B 2~
2 + 7(E . g)'] + . . . ? (1 .3 .4)
valid for frequencies v < m,c2/h. Soon after, Nicholas Kemmer and
Weisskopf68 presented arguments that in this case the infinities are spuri-
ous, and that Eq. (1 .3.4) can be derived without any subtraction prescrip-
tion.
One bright spot in the struggle with infinities was the successful treat-

1.3 The Problem of Infinities
33
ment Kf infrared divergences, those that arise from the low-energy rather
than the high-energy part of the range of integration . In
1937 it was
shown by Felix Bloch and Arne Nordsieck68, that these infinities cancel
provided one includes processes in which arbitrary numbers of low-energy
photons are produced . This will be discussed in modern terms in Chapter
13 .
Yet another infinity turned up in a calculation by Sidney Michael
Dancoff69 in 1939 of the radiative corrections to the scattering of electrons
by the static Coulomb field of an atom . The calculation contained a
mistake (one of the terms was omitted), but this was not realized until
later.69a
Throughout the 1930s, these various infinities were seen not merely as
failures of specific calculations. Rather, they seemed to indicate a gap
in the understanding of relativistic quantum field theory on the most
fundamental level, an opinion reinforced by the problems with cosmic
rays mentioned in the previous section .
One of the symptoms of this uneasy pessimism was the continued
exploration throughout the 1930s and 1940s of alternative formalisms .
As Julian 5chwinger~9h later recalled, The preoccupation of the majority
of involved physicists was not with analyzing and carefully applying the
known relativistic theory of coupled electron and electromagnetic fields
but with changing it.' Thus in 1938 Heisenberjo proposed the existence
of a fundamental length L, analogous to the fundamental action h and
fundamental velocity c. Field theory was supposed to work only for
distances larger than L, so that all divergent integrals would effectively
be cut Kff at distances L, or momenta h/L. Several specific proposals7°V
were made for giving field theory a non-local structure. Some theorists
began to suspect that the formalism of state-vectors and quantum fields
should be replaced by one based solely
Kn observable quantities, such
as the S-matrix introduced by John Archibald Wheeler7l in
1 937 and
HeisenberJz in 1943, whose elements are the amplitudes for various
scattering processes. As we shall see, the concept of the S-matrix has now
become a vital part of modern quantum field theory, and for some theorists
a pure S-matrix theory became an ideal, especially as a possible solution
to the problems of the strong interactions." In yet another direction,
wheeler and Richard Feynman74 in 1945 attempted to eliminate the
electromagnetic field, deriving electromagnetic interactions in terms of an
interaction at a distance. They were able to show that a pure retarded (or
pure advanced) potential could be obtained by taking into account the
interaction not only between source and test charges, but also between
these charges and all the other charges in the universe. Perhaps the
most radical modification of quantum mechanics suggested during this
period was the introduction by Dirac75 of states of negative probability,

34 1 Hislarical Introduction
as a means of cancelling infinities in sums over states. This idea, of an
`indefinite metric' in Hilbert space, has also flourished in quantum field
theory, though not in the form originally suggested .
A more conservative idea for dealing with the infinities was also in
the air during the 1930s. Perhaps these infinities could all be absorbed
into a redefinition, a `renormalization' of the parameters of the theory .
For instance, it was already known that in any Lorentz-invariant classical
theory the electromagnetic self-energy and self-momentum of an electron
must take the form of corrections to the mass of the electron ; hence the
infinities in these quantities can be cancelled by a negative infinity in the
`bare' non-electromagnetic mass of the electron, leaving a finite measurable
`renormalized' mass. Also, Eq . (1 . 3 .3) shows that the vacuum polarization
changes the charge of the electron, from e = f dux E, to
eTOTAL ;-- f
Vacuum polarization gives finite results in lowest order if observables like
scattering cross-sections are expressed in terms of eTOTAL rather than e .
The question was, whether all infinities in quantum field theory could be
dealt with in this way. In 1936 VVeisslcopf76 suggested that this is the case,
and verified that known infinities could be eliminated by renormalization
of physical parameters in a variety of sample calculations . However, it
was impossible with the calculational techniques then available to show
that infinities could always be eliminated in this way, and DancQff's
calculation69 seemed to show that they could not .
Another effect of the appearance of infinities was a tendency to believe
that any effect which turned out to be infinite in quantum field theory
was actually not there at all. In particular, the 1928 Dirac theory had
predicted complete degeneracy of the 2s1/2--2p1/2 levels of hydrogen to
all orders in cc ; any attempt at a quantum electromagnetic calculation
of the splitting of these two levels ran into the problem of the infinite
self-energy of a bound electron ; therefore the existence of such a splitting
was generally not taken seriously. Later Bethego recalled that This shift
comes out infinite in all existing theories, and has therefore always been
ignored.' This attitude persisted even in the late 1930s, when spectroscopic
experiments77 began to indicate the presence of a 2si/2-2p1/2 splitting of
order 1 000 MHO. One notable exception was Edwin Albrecht Uehling, 78
who realized that the vacuum polarization effect mentioned earlier would
produce a 2si/3-2p1/3 splitting ; unfortunately, as we shall see in Chapter
14, this contribution to the splitting is much smaller than 1 00(} MHz, and
of the wrong sign .
The gloom surrounding quantum field theory began to lift soon after
World War II . On June 1-4, 1947, the Conference on the Foundations of

1.3 The Problem of Infinities
35
Quantum Mechanics at Shelter Island, NY brought theoretical physicists
who had been working on the problems of quantum field theory through
the 1930s together with a younger generation of theorists who had started
scientific work during the war, and of crucial importance a few
experimental physicists. The discussion leaders were Hans Kramers, O p-
penheimer, and Weisskopf, One Kf the experimentalists (or rather theorist
turned experimentalist), Willis Lamp, described a decisive measurement79
of the 2s,/2-2p1/2 shift in hydrogen . A beam of hydrogen atoms from an
oven, many in 2s and 2p states, was aimed at a detector sensitive only to
atoms in excited states . The atoms in 2p states can decay very rapidly to
the is ground state by one-photon (Lyman a) emission, while the 2s states
decay only very slowly by two-photon emission, so in effect the detector
was measuring the number of atoms in the metastable 2s state. The
beam was passed through a magnetic field, which added a known Zeeman
splitting to any 2s,/2-2pl/2 splitting naturally present. The beam was
also exposed to a microwave- frequency electromagnetic field, with a fixed
frequency v - 10 GHz. At a certain magnetic field strength the detector
signal was observed to be quenched, indicating that the microwave field
was producing resonant transitions from the metastable 2s state to the 2p
state and thence by a rapid Lyman a emission to the ground state. The
total (Zeeman plus intrinsic) 2s-2p splitting at this value of the magnetic
field strength would have to be just hv, from which the intrinsic splitting
could be inferred. A preliminary value of
1400 MHz was announced,
in agreement with the earlier spectroscopic measurements .77 The impact
of this discovery can be summarized in a saying that was current in
Copenhagen when I was a graduate student there in 1954 : `Just because
something is infinite does not mean it is zero!'
The discovery of the Lamb shift aroused intense interest among the
theorists at Shelter Island, many of whom had already been working on
improved formalisms for calculation in quantum electrodynamics. Kra-
mers described his work on mass renormalization in the classical electro-
dynamics of an extended electron, 79a which showed that the difficulties
associated with the divergence of the self-energy in the limit of zero radius
do not appear explicitly if the theory is reexpressed so that the mass pa-
rameter in the formalism is identified with the experimental electron mass.
Schwinger and Weisskopf (who had already heard rumors of Lamb's re-
sult, and discussed the matter on the trip to Shelter Island) suggested that
since the inclusion of intermediate states involving positrons was known
to reduce the divergence in energy level shifts from 1/a2 to Ina, perhaps
the di fferences of the shifts in atomic energy levels might turn out to be
finite when these intermediate states were taken into account . (In fact,
in 1946, before he learned of Lamb's experiment, Weisskopf had already
assigned this problem to a graduate student, Bruce French .) almost im-

3 6
1 Historical Introduction
mediately after the conference, during a train ride to Schenectady, Hans
Bethe8° carried out a non-relativistic calculation, still without including
the effects of intermediate states containing positrons, but using a simple
cutoff at virtual photon momenta of order m,c2 to eliminate infinities . He
obtained the encouraging approximate value of 1040 MHz . Fully rela-
tivistic calculations using the re-normalization idea to eliminate infinities
were soon thereafter carried out by a number of other authors, 81 with
excellent agreement with experiment.
Another exciting experimental result was reported at Shelter Island by
Isidor I. Rabi. Measurements in his laboratory of the hyperfine structure
of hydrogen and deuterium had suggested 82 that the magnetic moment
of the electron is larger than the Dirac value ehl2rrac by a factor of
about 1 .0013, and subsequent measurements of the gyromagnetic ratios in
sodium and gallium had given a precise value8 3
2rn [I DO 118 ± 0.00003] .
Learning of these results, Gregory Breit suggested$ 3a that they arose from
an order a radiative correction to the electron magnetic moment . At Shel-
ter both Breit and Schwinger described their efforts to calculate this
correction . Shortly after the conference Schwinger completed a successful
calculation of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron 84
P =:
eh
n 2m
[ 1.001162]
~mc [i+__]
in excellent agreement with observation. This, together with Beth's
calculation of the Lamb shift, at last convinced physicists of the reality of
radiative corrections .
The mathematical methods used in this period presented a bewilder-
ing variety of concepts and formalisms . One approach developed by
Schwinget'$ 5 was based on operator methods and the action principle,
and was presented by him at a conference at Pocono Manor in 1948,
the successor to the Shelter Island Conference. Another Lorentz-invariant
operator formalism had been developed earlier by Sin-Itiro Tomonaga$6
and his co-workers in Japan, but their work was not at first known in the
Vest. Tamonaga had grappled with infinities in Yukawa's meson theory
in the 1930s . In 1947 he and his group were still out of the loop of
scientific communication ; they learned about Lamb's experiment from an
article in Newsweek .
An apparently quite different approach was invented by Feynman,$7
and described briefly by him at the Pocono Conference. Instead of in-
troducing quantum field operators, Feynman represented the S-matrix as
a functional integral of exp (iW) , where W is the action integral for a

1 .3 The Problem of Infinities 37
set of Dirac particles interacting with a classical electromagnetic field,
integrated over all Dirac particle trajectories satisfying certain initial and
final conditions for t --> ±oo. One result of great practical importance that
came out of Feynman's work was a set of graphical rules for calculating
5'-matrix elements to any desired order of perturbation theory . Unlike
the old perturbation theory of the 1920s and 1930s, these Feynman rules
automatically lumped together particle creation and antiparticle annihi-
lation processes, and thereby gave results that were Lore ntz-in variant at
every stage. We have already seen in Weisskopf's early calculatian63 of the
electron self-energy, that it is only in such calculations, including particles
and antiparticles on the same footing, that the nature of the infinities
becomes transparent.
Finally, in a pair of papers in 1949, Freeman I]yson$$ showed that the
operator formalisms of Schwinger and Tomonaga would yield the same
graphical rules that had been found by Feynman. Dyson also carried out
an analysis of the infinities in general Feynman diagrams, and outlined a
proof that these are always precisely the sort which could be removed by
renormalization. One of the most striking results that could be inferred
from Dyson's analysis was a criterion for deciding which quantum field
theories are `renormalizable', in the sense that all infinities can be absorbed
into a redefinition of a finite number of coupling constants and masses.
In particular, an interaction like the Pauli term (1 .1.32), which would have
changed the predicted magnetic moment of the electron, would spoil the
renormalizability of quantum electrodynamics. With the publication of
Dyson's papers, there was at last a general and systematic formalism that
physicists could easily learn to use, and that would provide a common
language for the subsequent applications of quantum field theory to the
problems of physics .
I cannot leave the infinities without taking up a puzzling aspect of
this story. Oppenheimer6l in 1930 had already noticed that most of the
ultraviolet divergence in the self-energy of a bound electron cancels when
one takes the difference between the shifts of two atomic energy levels,
and Weisskopf 3 in 1934 had found that most of the divergence in the
self-energy of a free electron cancels when one includes intermediate states
containing positrons. It would have been natural even in 1934 to guess
that including positron intermediate states and subtracting the energy
shifts of pairs of atomic states would eliminate the ultraviolet divergence
in their relative energy shift." There was even experimental evidence77 fo r
In fact, this guess wou ld have been wro ng. As discussed in Section 14.3, radia tive corrections to
the electron mass affect atomic e nergy leve l s not only through a shift i n the electron rest energy,
which is the same in all atomic energy levels, but also through a change in the electron kinetic
energy, that va ries from one level to another.

38 1 Historical Introduction
a 2s1/2-2pt/2 energy difference of order 1000 MHz. So why did no one
before 1947 attempt an numerical estimate of this energy difference ?
Strictly speaking, there was one such attempt8gQ in 1939, but it focused
on the wrong part of the problem, the charge radius of the proton, which
has only a tiny effect on hydrogen energy levels. The calculation gave
a result in rough agreement with the early experiments.77 This was a
mistake, as shown in 1939 by Lamb ."'
A fully relativistic calculation of the Lamb shift including positrons in
intermediate states could have been attempted during the 1930s, using the
Kld non-relativistic perturbation theory. As long as one keeps all terms up
to a given order, old-fashioned non-relativistic perturbation theory gives
the same results as the manifestly relativistic formalisms of Feynman,
Schwiner, and Tamonaga. In fact, after Be#he's work, the first precise
calculations8l of the Lamb shift in the USA by French and Weisskopf and
Norman Kroll and Lamb were done in just this way, though Tomonoga's
group 81 in Japan was already using covariant methods to solve this and
other problems.
The one missing element was confidence in renormalization as a means
of dealing with infinities . As we have seen, renormalization was widely
discussed in the late 1930s. But it had become accepted wisdom in
the 1930s, and a point of view especially urged by Oppenheimer,"' that
quantum electrodynamics could not be taken seriously at energies of more
than about 100 Mel, and that the solution to its problems could be found
only in really adventurous new ideas .
Several things happened at Shelter Island to change this expectation .
One was news that the problems concerning cosmic rays discussed in
the previous section were beginning to be resolved ; Robert Marshak
presented the hypothesis58 that there were two types of "meson' with
similar masses ; the muons that had actually been observed, and the pions
responsible for nuclear forces. More important was the fact that now there
were reliable experimental values for the Lamb shift and the anomalous
magnetic moment that forced physicists to think carefully about radiative
corrections. Probably equally important was the fact that the conference
brought together theorists who had in their own individual ways been
thinking about renormalization as a solution to the problem of infinities .
When the revolution came in the late 1940s, it was made by physicists
who though mostly young were playing a conservative role, turning away
from the search by their predecessors for a radical solution.

Bibliography
39
Bibliography
K S. Arama.ki, 'Development of the Renormalization Theory in Quantum
Electrodynamics,' Historia 5cientiarum 36, 97 (1989) ; ibid. 37, 9 1 {1989}.
[Section 1 .3 ]
D R. T. Beyer, ed., Foundatians af' Nuclear Physics (Dover Publications,
Inc., New York, 1949). [Section 1 .2.]
K L. Brown, `Yukawa's Prediction of the Meson,' Centauros 25, 71 (1981 ).
[Section 1 .2.]
K L. M. Brown and L. Hoddeson, eds., the Birth of Particle P hysics
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983) . [Sections 1 .1, 1 .2, 1 .3]
K T. Y. Cao and S . S . Schweber, `The Conceptual Foundations and the
Philosophical Aspects of Renormalization Theory," Syrathese 97, 33
(1993) . [Section 1 .3.]
K P. A. Dirac, The Development of Quantum Theory (Gordon and
Breach Science Publishers, New York, 1971). [Section 1 .1 .]
K E. Fermi, `Quantum Theory of Radiation,' Rev. Mod. Whys. 4, 87 (1932) .
[Sections 1.2 and 1 .3.1
Q G. Gamo
Thirty Years that Shook Physics (Doubleday and Co.,
Garden City, New York, 1 966 ) . [Section 1 .1 .]
K
hammer,
The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics
(McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 19 65). [Section
1 .1 .1
D J. Mehra, `The Golden Age of Theoretical Physics : P.A .M . Dirac's
Scientific work from 1924 to 1933,' in Aspects of Quantum Theory, ed.
by A. Salam and E. P. Wigner, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1972). [Section 1 .1 ]
d A_ I. Miller, Early Quant um Electrodynamics - A Source Book (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1994) . [Sections 1 .1, 1 .2, 1 .3.]
K A. Pais, Inward Bound (Clarendon Press, oxford, 1986). [Sections 1.1,
i .2, 1 .3 .]
K S. S. Schweber, `Feynman and the Visualization of Space-Time Fro-
cesses,' Rev. Mod. Phvs. 58, 449 (1986) . [Section 1 .3 .]
K S . S. 5chweber, `dome Chapters for a History of Quantum Field Theory :
19 38-1952,' in Relativity, Groups , and Topology 11, ed. by B . S . DeWitt
and R . Stora (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984) . [Sections 1 . 1 , 1 .2, 1 .3 .]

40
1 Historical Introduction
K S . S . Schweher, `A Short History of Shelter Island I,' in Shelter Island II,
ed. by R. 3aclciw, S. Weinberg, and E . Witten (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1985). Section 1 .3.]
K S.
S. Schweber, QED and the Men Two Made It : Dyson, Feynman,
Schwinger, and Tornonaga (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1994) .
[Section 1 .1, 1 .2, 1 . 3]
C3 J. Schwinger, ed., Selected Papers in Quantum Electrodynamics (Dover
Publications Inc., New York, 1958) . [Sections 1 .2 and 1 .3 .]
K SA. Tomonaga, in The Physicist's Conception of Nature (Reidel, Dor-
drecht, 1973). [Sections 1 .2 and 1 .3]
CJ S. Weinberg, The Search for Unity : Notes for a History of Quantum
Field Theory,' Daedalus, Fall 1977. [Sections 1.1, 1 .2, 1 .3 .]
K V. F. Weisskopf, `Growing Up with Field Theory : The Development of
Quantum Electrodynamics in Half a Century,'
1979 Bernard Gregory
Lecture at CERN, published in L. Brown and L. Hoddeson, op. cit..
[Sections 1 .1, 1 .2,
1 .3.]
K G. Wentzel, `quantum Theory of Fields (Until 1947)' in
Theoretical
Physics in the Twentieth Century, ed. by M. Fierz and V. F. Weisskopf
(Interscience Publishers Inc., New fork, 1 960) . [Sections 1 .2 and 1.3]
D E . Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity (Hu-
manities Press, New York, 1 9 73). [Section 1 .1 .]
References
1. L. de Broglie, Comptes Rendus 177, 507, 545, 630 (1923) ; Nature 112,
540 (1923) ; These de doctorat (Masson et Cie, Paris, 1924) ; Annales
de Physique 3, 22 (1925) [reprinted in English in Wave Mechanics,
ed. by G. Ludwig, (Pergamon Pass, New York, 1968)} ; Phil. Mag.
47, 446 (1924) .
2 . W. Eisasser, ,Nuturwiss. 13, 7 11 { 1925 }.
3 . C . J. Davison and L. H. termer, Fhys. Rev. 30, 705 (1927).
4. Heisenberg, A. Phys. 33, 879 (1925) ;
Born and P. Jordan,
Z. f Phys. 34, 85 8 (1925) ; P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc . A109,
642 (1925) ; M. Born, W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan, Z.,f: Whys. 35,
557 (1925) ; W. Z. f. Phys. 36, 336 (1926) . These papers are
reprinted in Sources of Quantum Mechanics, ed. by B. L. van der
Waerden (Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1968) .

References
41
5. E. Schrodinger, Ann. Phys. 79, 36 1, 489 ; 80, 437 ; $1, 1 09 (1 926).
These papers are reprinted in English, unfortunately in a somewha t
abridged form, in Were Mechanics, Ref. 1 . Also see Collected Papers
on Wave Mechanics, trans. by J . F. Schearer and W. Deans
(Blackie and Son, London, 1928) .
6. See, e.g., P. A . M. Dirac, The Development of Quantum Theory (Gor-
don and Breach, New Fork, 1971).
Also see Dzrac°s obituary of
Schrodinger, Nature 189, 35 5 (I961), and his article in Scientific
American 248, 45 (1963).
7. 0. Klein, Z. f Phys. 37, 895 (1926) . Also see V Fock, Z. f. Phys. 38,
242 (1926) ; ibid, 39, 226 (1926).
8 . W. Gordon, Z, f Whys. 40, 117 (1926) .
9. For the details of the calculation, see, e.g., L. I. Schiff, Quantum
Mechanics, 3rd edn, (McGraw-Hill, Inc, New York, 1968) : Section
51 .
10. F. Paschen, Ann. Phys. 50, 901 (1916) .
These experiments were
actually carried out using He+ because its fine structure splitting is
16 times larger than for hydrogen. The fine structure of spectra l
lines was first discovered interferametrically by A. A. Michelson,
Phil. Mag. 31, 338 (1891) ; ibid., 34, 280 (1892),
1 0a. A. 5ommerfeld, Munehner Berich te 1915, pp. 425, 429 ; Ann. Pays.
51 , 1 , 125 ( 191 6). Also see W. Wilson, Phil. Mag. 29, 795 (1915) .
11 . G. E. Uhlenbeck and S. Goudsmit, Naturwiss. 13, 953 ( 1925) ; Nature
11 7, 264 ( .1920. The electron spin had been earlier suggested for
other reasons by A. H. Compton, J. Frank. Inst . 192, 145 (1921).
12. The general formula for Zeeman splitting in one-electron atoms ha d
been discovered empirically by A. Lande, Z . f Phys . 5, 231 ( 1921 ) ;
ibid., 7, 398 (1921) ; ibid., 1 5, 189 (1 923 ) ; ibid., 19, 112 (1923). At
the time, the extra non-orbital angular momentum appearing in thi s
formula was thought to be the angular momentum of the atomic
`yore ;' A. Sammerfeld, Ann. Phys. 63, 221 (1 920) ; ibid., 70, 32 (1923).
It was only later that the extra angular momentum was recognized,
as in Ref. 11, to be due to the spin of the electron.
13. W. Heisenberg and P. Jordan, Z. f. Phys .
37, 263 (1926) ; C. G.
Darwin, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 116, 227 (1927). Darwin says that several
authors did this work at about the same time, while Dirac quotes
only Darwin .

42
I Historical Introduction
14. L. H. Thomas, Nature 11 7, 514 (1926). Also see S . Weinberg,
Gravitation and Cosmology, {Wiley, New York, 1972)- Section 5 .1 .
15 . P. A. M. Dirac, .Proc. Roy. Soc. A117, 610 ( 1 928). Also see Dirac,
ibid., A118, 351 (1928), for the application of this theory to the
calculation of the Zeeman and Paschen-Back effects and the relative
strengths of lines within fine-structure multiplets .
16. For the probabilistic interpretation of non-relativistic quantum me-
chanics, see M. Born Z. f Phys. 37, 853 (1926) ; ibid, 38, 803 (1926)
(reprinted in an abridged English version in Wage Mechanics, Ref.
41) ; G. Wentzel, Z.f Phys . 40, 590 (1926) ; W.Heisenberg, Z . .f: Phys.
43, 172 (1927) . N. Bohr . Nature 121 , 580 (1928) ; Naturwissenchaften
17, 483 (1929) ; Electrons et Photons - Rapports et Discussions du V'
Consei l de Physique Solvay
Gauthier-pillars, Paris, 1928) .
17. Conversation between Dirac and J. Mehra, March 28, 1969, quoted
by Mehra in Aspects of Quantum Theory, ed. by A. Salem and E. P.
signer (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1972) .
18. Cr. Gamow, Thirty Years that Shook Physics, (Doubleday and Co.,
Garden City, NY, 1966) : p. 125 .
1 9. W. Paul i, Z. f Phys. 37, 263 (19 26) ; 43, 601 (1927).
20. C. G. Darwin, P roc. Roy. .Sac. A118, 654 (1928) ; ibid ., A120, 62 1
(1928).
21 . W. Gordon, z. f Phys. 48, 11 (1928).
22. P. A. M. Dirac Proc. Roy. Soc . A 1 26, 360 (1930) ; also see Ref. 47.
23. E. C. Stoner, Phil. Mag . 48, 719 (1924).
24. W Pauli, Z. f. Phys . 31, 765 (1925).
25 . W. Heisenberg, Z. f Phys . 3$, 411 (1926) ; ibid., 39, 499 (1926) ;
P. A. Dirac, Proc . Roy. Soc. A112, 661 ( 1926) ; W Pauli, Z . .f:
Phys . 41, 81 (1927) ; J . C. Slater, Phys . Rev. 34, 1293 (1929 ).
2 6. E. Fermi, Z. f. Phys. 36, 902 (1926) ; Rend. Accad. Lineei 3, 14 5
(1926).
27. P. A. M. Di rac, Ref. 25.
27a. P. A. M. Dirac, First R. Crane Lecture at the University of
Michigan, April 17, 1989, unpublished .

References
43
28. H. Weyl, The Tfzeary of Groups and Quantum Mechanics, translated
from the second (1931) German edition by H. P. Robertson (Dover
Publications, Inc., New York) : Chapter IV, Section 12 . Also see
P. A. M . Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 1 33, 61 (193 1) .
29. J. R. Oppenheimer, Whys . Rev. 35, 562 (1930); I. Tatum, Z. f Whys .
62, 545 (1930) .
29a. P. A. M .Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. 133, 60 (1931 ) .
30. C. D. Anderson, Science 76, 238 (1932) ; Phy?s. Re v. 43, 491 (1933).
The latter paper is reprinted in Foundations of Nuc lear Physics, ed.
by R. T. Beyer (Dover Publications, Inc ., New York, 1949) .
30a. J. Schwinger, `A Report on Quantum electrodynamics,' in The Physi-
cist's Conception of Nature (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1973) : p.415 .
31. W. Pauli, Handbuch der Physik (Julius Springer, Berlin,
1 932-1933) ;
Rev. Mod . Whys. 13, 203 (1941) .
3 2. Born, Heisenberg, and Jordan, Ref. 4, Section 3 .
32a. P. Ehrenfest, Phys. Z. 7, 528 ( 1 906 ).
33. Born and Jordan, Ref. 4. Unfortunately the relevant parts of this
paper are not included in the reprint collection Sources of Quantum
Mechanics, cited ire Ref. 4.
34. P. A. M. Dirac, Froc. Roy . inc. Al 12, 661 (1926) .- Section 5. For a
more accessible derivation, see L. I . Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, 3rd
eds. (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1968) : Section 44 .
34a. A. Einstein, Whys. Z. 18, 121 (1917) ; reprinted in English in van der
Waerden, Ref. 4.
35. P. A. Dirac, Proc. Roy.
Soc.
A114, 243 (1927) ; reprinted in
Quantum Electrodynamics, ed. by J. Schwinger (Dover Publications,
Inc., New York, 195 8).
36. P. A . M . Dirac, Proc. Roy . Soc. A114, 710 (1927).
36a . V F Weisskopf and E. signer, Z. f Pays. 63, 54 (1 934)
36h. E. Fermi, .Lincei Rend. 9, 881 (1929) ; 12, 431 (1930) ; Rev. Mod. Phys.
4, 87 ( 1 932).
37, P. Jordan and W. Pauli, Z . f Phys. 47, 151 (1928).

44
1 Historical Introduction
38 . N. Bohr and L. Rosenfeld, Kon. dansk. vid. Sedsk., Mat.-Fys. Medd.
III, Na. 8 (1933) (translation in Selected Papers of Leon Rosenfeld,
ed. by R. S . Cohen and J. Stachel (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1979)) ; Whys .
Rev . 78, 794 (1950).
3 9. P. Jordan, Z. f. Phys. 44, 473 (1927). Also see P. Jordan and 0. Klein ,
Z. f Phys. 45, 751 (1929) ; P. Jordan, Phys. Zeit . 30, 700 (1929) .
40. P. Jordan and E. Wigner, Z. . f. Phys. 47, 631 (1928). This article is
reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35.
40a. M. Fierz, Hein Phys. Acta 1 2, (1939) ; W Pauli, P}zys . Rev. 58, 716
(1940) ; VLF Pauli and F. J. Belinfante, Physica 7, 177 (1940) .
41. W. Heisenberg and W Pauli, Z. f: Phys. 56,
1 (1929) ; ibid., 59, 168
(1930).
42. P. A. M. DiracProc. Roy. Soc. A 136, 453 (1932) ; P. A. M. Dirac
W. A. Fork, and B. Padolsky, Phys . Veit . der Sowjetura[on 2, 468
(1932) ; P A. M. Dirac, Phys . Veit. der Sowjeturzion 3, 64 (1933). The
latter two articles are reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35,
pp. 29 and 3 1 2. Also see L. Rosenfeld, Z. f Whys. 76, 729 (1932).
42a. P. A. M . Dirac, Prot. Roy. Soc . London A136, 453 (1932) .
43. E. Fermi, Z. } : Phys . 88, 1 6 1 (1934) . Fermi quotes unpublished work
of Pauli for the proposition that an unobserved neutral particle is
emitted along with the electron in beta decay . This particle was called
the neutrino to distinguish it from the recently discovered neutron .
43a. V. Fock, C. R. Leningrad 1933, p. 267.
44. W. H. Furry and J . R. Oppenheimer, Phys . Rev. 45, 245 (1934). This
paper uses a density matrix formalism developed by P. A. M. Dirac,
Prot. Carob. Phil. Soc. 30, 150 (1934). Also see R. E. Peierls, Proc.
Roy. Soc.
1 46, 420 (1934) ; W. Heisenberg, Z . J: Pays. 90, 209 (1934) ;
L. Rosenfeld, Z . f Phys. 76, 729 (1932).
45. W. Pauli and V. Weisskopf, HeIv. Whys. Acts 7, 709 (1934), reprinted
in English translation in A. I. Miller, Early Quantum Electrodynamics
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994) . Also see W. Pauli,
Ann. Inst. Henri Poincare 6, 13 7 (1936)-
4b. 0. Klein and Y. Nishina, Z. ,f: Phys. 52, 853 (1929) ; Y. Nishina, ibid.,
$69 (1929) ; also see I. Tamm, Z. f Phys . 62, 545 (030)-
47. P. A . M . Dirac, Prat . Camp . Phil. Soc . 26, 361 (1930).

References
48. C . Miller, Ann. d. Phys . 14, 531, 5 68 { 1 932} .
45
49. H. Bethe and W. Heitter, Proc . Roy. Soc.
A146, 83 (1934) ; also see
G. Racah, Nuovo Cimento 11, Na. 7 (1934) ; ibid., 13, 69 (1936).
50. H. J. Bhabha, Proc. Roy. Soc. A154, 195 (1936) .
50a. J. F. Carlson and J. R . Oppenheimer, Phys. Rev. 51, 220 (1937).
51 . P. Ehrenfest and J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. Rey. 37, 333 (1931} .
52. W. Heitler and G. Herzberg, Naturwiss. 17, 673 (1929) ; F. Rasetti, Z .
f. Phys. 61, 598 (1934)-
53. J. Chadwick, Prot. Roy. Soc. A136, 692 (1932). This article is
reprinted in the Foundations of Nuclear Physics, Ref. 30.
54. W. Heisenberg, Z. f. Whys . 77, 1 (1932) ; also see I. Curie-Joliet and
F. Joliot, Campt. Rend . 194, 273 (1932) .
54a. For references, see L. M. Brown and H. Rechenberg, Hiss . Stud. in
Phys. and Rio. Science, ZS, 1 (1994) .
55. H. Yukawa, Proc. Whys .-Math. Soc. (Japan) (3) 17, 48 (1935), This
article is reprinted in The Foundations of Nuclear Physics, Ref 3U.
56. S . H. Neddermeyer and C. D. Anderson, Phys . Rev . 5 1 , 884 (1937) ;
J. C. Street and E. C. Stevenson, Phys. Rev. 52, 1403 (1937) .
56a. L. Nordheirn and N . Webb, Whys. Rev. 56, 494 (1939) .
57. M. Conversi, E. Pancini, and 0. Piccioni, Pays. Rev. ?i., 209L (1947).
58 . S. Sakata and T. Inoue, Prog .
Them. Phys.
1, 143 (1946) ; R. E.
Marshak and H. A. Bettie, Fhys. Rev . 77, 506 (1947) .
59. C. M. G. Latter, G. P. S. acchialini, and C. F. Powell, Nature 160,
453, 486 (1947).
60. G . D. Rochester and C. C . Butler, Nature 160, 855 (1947) .
61. J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. Rev . 35, 45 1 (1930) .
62. I. Waller, Z. f Phys. 59, 168 (1934) ; ibid., 61, 721, 837 (1930) ; ibid.,
62, 673 (1930) .
63. F. Weisskopf, Z. f Phys, 89, 27 (1934), reprinted in English
translation in Early Qua ntum Electrodynamics, Ref. 45 ; ibid., 90,
81 7 (1934). The electromagnetic self energy- is calculated only to
lowest order in ct in these references ; the proof that the divergence

46
1 Historical Introduction
is only logarithmic in all orders of perturbation theory was given by
Weisskopf; Phys . Rev . 56, 72 (1939). (This last article is reprinted in
Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35).
64. P. A. Dirac, XVII Conseil Solvay de Physique, p . 203 (1933),
reprinted in Early Quantum Electrodynamics, lief. 45 . For subsequent
calculations based on less restrictive assumptions, see Heisenberg,
Z. f Pays . 90, 209 (1934) ; Sachs . Akad . Wiss. 86, 317 (1934) ; R .
Serber, Whys. Rev. 43, 49 (1935) ; E. A . Uehling. Phys . Rev. 48, 5 5
(1935) ; W. Pauli and M . Rosy, Phys . Rev. 49, 462 ( 1936). Also see
Furry and Oppenheimer, Ref. 44 ; Peierls . Ref. 44 ; Weisskopf, Ref.
63 .
65. H. Euler and B. Kockel, Naturw iss. 2 3, 246 (1935) ; W. Heisenberg
and H. puler, Z. f: Phys. 98, 714 (1936) .
66. P. A . M. DiracProc . Comb. Phil. Soc. 30, 1 50 (1934).
67. Heisenberg, Z . f Pays. 90, 209 (1934).
68. N. Kemmer and V. F. Weisskopf. .Nature 137, 659 (1 93 6).
68ca. F. Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Whys. Rev. 52, 54 (1937).
Also see
W. Pauli and M. Fier, Nuovo Cimento 15, 1 67 (1938), reprinted in
English translation in Early Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 45.
69. S. M . Dancoff, Phys. Rey. 55, 959 (1939).
69a. H. Lewis, Phys. Rev . 73, 173 (1948) ; S. Epstein, Phys. Rev. 73, 177
(1948). Also see J. 5chwinger, Ref. $4 ; Z. Koba and S. Tarnonaga,
Prog. Theor. Ahys. 3/ 3, 290 (1948),
69b. J. Schwinger, in The Birth oj'Particle Physics, ed. by L. Brown and L .
Hoddeson (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983) : p. 336 .
70. Heisenberg, Ann. d. Pays. 32, 20 (1938), reprinted in English
translation in Early Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 45 .
70a. G. Wentzel, Z. f Phys .
86, 479, 635 (1933) ; Z. f. Phys.
87, 726
(1034) ; M. Borand L . Infeld, Prac. Roy. Soc.
A150. 141 (1935) ;
W. Pauli, Ann. inst . Henri Pnincare 6, 137 ( 1 93 6) .
7 1. J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 52, 1 107 (193 7).
72. Heisenberg, Z. f. Phys. 120, 51 3, 673 (1943) ; Z. Naturforsch. 1,
608 (1946). Also see C. Miller, Kos . Dansk. Vid. Sels. Ma t.-Fys.
Redd. 23, No. 1 (1945) ; ibid. 23, No. 19, (1946).

} References
47
7 3. See, e.g., G. Chew, the S-Matrix Theory of'Strong Interactions (W.
A. Benjamin, inc . New York, 196 1).
74. J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 157 (1945),
ibid., 2 1, 425 (1949). For further references and a discussion of
the application of action-at-awdistance theories in cosmology, see S .
Weinberg Gravitation and Cosmology, (Wiley, 1972) : Section 16.3.
7 5. P. A . M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. inc . A 180, 1 (1942). For a criticism, see
W. Pauli, Rev . Mod. Phys . 15, 175 (1943). For a review of classica l
theories of this type, and of yet other attempts to solve the problem
of infinities, see R. E. Peierls in Rapports du 8'e Conseil de Physique
Solvay 1948 (R. Stoops, Brussels, 1950) : p. 241 .
76. V. F. Weisskopf, Kon. Dan.
Vid. Seg ., Mat. fys. Medd.
XJV, No .
6 (1936), espec ially p. 34 and pp. 5-6. This article is reprin ted
in Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35, and in English translation in
Early Quan tum Electrodynamics, Ref. 45. Also see W. Pauli and M .
Fierz, Ref. 68a; H . A. Kramers, Ref. 79a.
77 . S. Pasternack, Phys. Rev. 54, 1113 (1938). This suggestion was based
on experiments of W.V. Houston, Pays. Rev. 51 , 446 (1937) ; R . C .
Williams, Phys. Rev . 54, 558 (1938). For a report of contrary data ,
see J . W. Drinkwater, 0 . Richardson, and W. E. Williams, Proc. Roy .
Soc. 174, 164 (1940) .
78. E. A. Uehling, ref: 64.
79. W. E. Lamb, Jr and R . C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 72, 241 (1947) .
This article is reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35.
79a. H. A. Kramers, Nuovo Cimento 15, 108 (1938), reprinted in English
translation in Early Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 45 ; Ned .
T.
Natwink. 1 1 , 134 (1944) ; Rapports du Se Conseil de Physique Solvay
1 945 (R. Stoops, Brussels, 1 9 50).
80. H. A. Bathe, Phys. Rev. 72, 339 (1947). This article is reprinted in
Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35.
8 1. J. B. French and V. F. Weisskopf; Phys. Rev. 75, 1240 (1949) ; N.
M. Kroll and W E. Lamb, ibid., 75, 388 (1949) ; J . Schwinger, Phys.
Rev . 75, 898 (1949) ; R. P. Feynman, Rev, Alfod. Phys. 20, 367 (1948) ;
Phys . Rev., 74, 939, 1430 (1948) ; 76, 749, 769 (1949) ; 80, 440 (1954) ,
H. Fukuda, Y. Miyarnoto, and S. Tomonaga, P rog. Theor. Phys. Rev.
Mod . Fhys. 4, 47, 121 (1948). The article by Kroll and Lamb i s
reprinted in Quantum E lectrodyncrrrzics, Ref. 35 .

49
1 Historical Introduction
82. J. E. Nafe, E . B. Nelson, and I. I. Rabi, Whys. Rev, 7 1 , 91 4 (1947) ;
D. E. Nagel, R. S. Julian, and J . R. Zacharias, Phys. Rev. 7 2, 973
(1947).
83. P. Ku sch and H . M. Foley Phys. Rev. 72, 1 256 (1947).
83a. G . Breit, Phys. Rev. 71, 984 (1947) . Schwinger in Ref. 84 includes a
corrected version of Breit's results .
84. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 73, 416 (1948). This article is reprinted in
Qua ntum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35 .
8 5. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rey;. 74, 1439 (194$) ; ibid., 75, 651 (1949) ; ibid.,
76, 790 (1949), ibid., 82, 664, 314 ( 1951) ; chid., 91, 7 1 3 ( 1 953) ; Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 37, 452 (1951) . All but the first two of these articles
are reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref, 35 .
86. S. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Whys . Rev. Mod. Phys. 1, 27 (1946) ; Z-
Koba, T. Teti, and S. Tornonaga, ibid., 2, 101 (1947) ; S. Kanesaw a
and S. Tomonaga, ibid., 3, 1, 141 (1948) ; S. Tomonaga, Phys. Rev. 74,
224 (1945) ; D. Ito, Z . Kona, and S. Tomonaga, Prog . Theor. Phys . 3,
276 {1948} ; Z. Koba and S. Tamonaga, ibid., 3, 290 (1948). The first
and fourth of these articles are reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics,
Ref. 35.
87. R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys .
20, 367 (1948) ; Phys. Rev.
74,
939, 1430 (1948) ; ibid., 76, 749, 769 (1949) ; ib id 80, 440 (1950). All
but the second and third of these articles are reprinted in Qua ntum
Electrodynamics, Ref. 35.
88. F. J. Dyson, Phys . Rev. 75, 486, 1736 (1949). These articles are
reprinted i n Quantum Electrodynamics, Ref. 35.
88a. H . Frohlich, W. Heitler, and B. Kahn, Prot. Roy, Soc.
A1 7 1, 269
(1939) ; Phys. Rev . 56, 96 1 (1933).
88b. Vi{ E. Lamb, Jr, Phys . Rev. 56, 384 (1939) ; Whys. Rev. 57, 458 (1940).
89. Quoted by R. Serber, in the Birth of Particle Physics, Ref. 69b,
p. 270.

Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
The point of view of this book is that quantum field theory is the way
it is because (with certain qualifications) this is the only way to reconcile
quantum mechanics with special relativity. Therefore our first task is
to study how symmetries like Lorentz invariance appear in a quantum
setting.
2.1
Quantum Mechanics
First, some good news : quantum field theory is based on the same
quantum mechanics that was invented b y Schradinger, Heisenberg, Pauli,
Born, and others in 1925-26, and has been used ever since in atomic,
molecular, nuclear, and condensed matter physics. The reader is assumed
to be already familiar with quantum mechanics ; this section provides
only the briefest of summaries of quantum mechanics, in the generalized
version of Dirac . 1
(i) Physical states are represented by rays in Hilbert space. A Hilbert
space is a kind of complex vector space; that is, if cD and T are vectors
in the space (often called `state-vectors') then so is ~ O + j7T, for arbitrary
complex numbers ~, q. It has a normw : for any pair of vectors there is a
complex number {0,T}, such that
The norm (T, T) also satisfies a positivity condition : (T, T) ~ 0, and
vanishes if and only if 'Y = 0. (There are also certain technical assumptions
that allow us to take limits of vectors within Hilbert space.) A ray is a
We shall often use the Dirac bra-ket rtotatian : instead of (T 1,T2), we may write (1k2) .
49

50
set of normalized
the same ray if T'
ICI = 1 -
2 Relativistic Quan tum Mechan ics
vectors (i.e., (T, T) = 1) with T and T' belonging to
= ~T, where ~ is an arbitrary complex number wit h
(ii) Observables are represented by Hermitian operators. These are map-
pings T -+ AT of Hilbert space into itself, linear in the sense that
(2.1 .4)
and satisfying the real ity condition At = A, whe re for any linear operator
A the adjoint At is defined by
(2. 1 .5 )
(There are also technical assumptions about the continuity of AT as a
function of T.) A state represented by a ray . has a definite value i for
the observable represented by an operator A if vectors T belonging to this
ray are eigenvectors of A with eigenvalue Y :
AT = aT for T in 4 .
( 2.1 .
)
An elementary theorem tells us that for A Hermitian, x is real, and
eigenvectors with different as are orthogonal .
(iii) If a system is in a state represented by a ray A, and an experiment
is done to test whether it is in any one of the different states represented
by mutually orthogonal rays
1, 2, . . . (for instance, b y measuring one or
more observables) then the probability of finding it in the state represented
by n is
where T and T, are any vectors belonging to rays r and , ,, respectively .
(A pair of rays is said to be orthogonal if the state-vectors from the two
rays have vanishing scalar products .) Another elementary theorem gives
a total probability unity ;
if the state-vectors T, form a complete set .
2.2 Symmetries
(11 .8 )
A symmetry transformation is a change in our point of view that does not
change the results of possible experiments . If an observer 0 sees a system
in a state represented by a ray ' or : fi r or R2 . . . , then an equivalent
observer 0' who looks at the same system will observe it in a different

2. 2 Symmetries
5 1
state, represented by a ray M' or 1 or ~ . . . , respectively, but the two
observers must find the same probabilitie s
(This is only a necessary condition for a ray transformation to b e a
symmetry; further conditions are discussed in the next chapter .) An
important theorem proved by Wigner2 in the early 1930s tells us that for
any such transformation
--+ .1' of rays we may define an operator U
on Hilbert space, such that if T is in ray then
UT is in the ray fir,
with U either unitary and linear
{ (D, UT) = ((D, T) , (2.2 .2)
U~~ (D + qT) T
U cD + q U P
(2.2 .3 )
or else antauraitary and antifineur
(
(D, UT) _ (ck,T)w , (2.2.4 )
Wigner's proof omits some steps, A more complete proof is given at the
end of this chapter in Appendix A .
As already mentioned, the adjaint of a linear Kperator L is defined by
This condition cannot be satisfied for an antilinear operator, because in
this case the right-hand side of Eq. (2.2.6) would be linear in 0, while
the left-hand side is antilinear in cD. Instead, the adjoint of an antilinear
operator A is defined by
With this definition, the conditions for unitarily or antiuriitarity both take
the form
Ut - U- 1
(2.2.8 )
There is always a trivial symmetry transformation M ---), R, represente
by the identity operator U = 1.
This operator is, of course, unitary
and linear. Continuity then demands that any symmetry (like a rotation
or translation or Lorentz transformation) that can be made trivial by
a continuous change of some parameters (like angles or distances or
velocities) must be represented
by a linear unitary operator U rather
than one that is antilinear and antiunitary. (Symmetries represented by
antiunitary antilinear operators are less prominent in physics ; they all
involve a reversal in the direction of time's flow . See Section 2 .6. )
In particular, a symmetry transformation that is infinitesimally close
to being trivial can be represented by a linear unitary operator that is

52
2 R elativist ic Quantum Mechanics
i nfinitesimally close to the identity :
U -
1 + tit
(2.2.9 )
with e a real infinitesimal. For this to be unitary and linear, t must be
Hermitian and linear, so it is a candidate for an observable . Indeed, most
(and perhaps all) of the observables of physics, such as angular momentum
or momentum, arise in this way from symmetry transformations.
The set of symmetry transformations has certain properties that define
it as a group. If T, is a transformation that takes rays n into Win, and T2
is another transformation that takes n into
", then the result of per-
forming both transformations is another symmetry transformation, which
we write T2Tj, that takes .,, into
;'. Also, a symmetry transformation
T which takes rays „into R' ' has an inverse, written T-1, which take s
into fin, and there is an identity transformation, T = 1, which leaves
rays unchanged .
The unitary or antiunitary operators U(T) corresponding to these sym-
metry transformations have properties that mirror this group structure,
but with a complication due to the fact that, unlike the symmetry trans-
formations themselves, the operators U(T) act on vectors in the Hilbert
space, rather than on rays. If T, takes n into
', then acting on a vector
T, in the ray A,, U( Tj must yield a vector U(TI)T,, in the ray 4", and
if T2 takes this ray into Win, then acting on U (T1)T, it must yield a vector
U ( T2) U(TI)T, in the ray R" . But U( T2 Tl )'Pn is also in this ray, so these
vectors can differ only by a phase 0,(T2, T2 )
U(T2)U(T, )`pn = eiO"(Tz°T1) U(T2 Ti )`Yn . (2.2.0)
Furthermore, with one significant exception, the linearity (or antilinearity)
of U(T) tells us that these phases are independent of the state T, Here
is the Proof. Consider any two different vectors TA,TB, which are not
proportional to each other. Then, applying Eq. (2.2.10) to the state
TAB = T,4 + Tg, we have
e~OAU( T2 TI)TA + e 'O$ U( T2TI)T$ . (2.2.11 )
Any unitary or antiunitary operator has an inverse (its adjoint) which
is also unitary or antiunitary . Multiplying (2.2.1 1) on the left with
U-~ (T2 ?'i ), we have then
the upper and lower signs referring to U(T2T1) unitary or antiunitary,
respectively. Since TA and Tu are linearly independent, this is only

2.2 Symmetries
possible if
e iOAB
e
dO A
ei0y
53
(2.2. 13)
So as promised, the phase in Eq. (2 .2.10) is independent of the state-vector
'Y., and therefore this can be written as an operator relation
U(T2)U(TI) = e101 T2, T, ) U(T2T,) .
(2.2.14)
For 0 = 0, this would say that the U('I') furnish a representation of the
group of symmetry transformations. For general phases O(T2, TI), we
have what is called a projective representation, or a representation `up to
a phase'. The structure of the Lie group cannot by itself tell us whether
physical state-vectors furnish an ordinary or a projective representation,
but as we shall see, it can tell us whether the group has any intrinsically
projective representations at all .
The exception to the argument that led to Eq . {2 .2.14} is that it may
not be possible to prepare the system in a state represented by 'FA + Ta .
For instance, it is widely believed to be impossible to prepare a system in
a superposition of two states whose total angular momenta are integers
and half-integers, respectively. In such cases, we say that there is a
`superseiection rule' between different classes of states, 3 and the phases
O(?'2, T1 ) ray depend on which of these classes of states the operators
U(T'2) [1(7'1) and U{ T2, Ti) act upon. We will have more to say about
these phases and projective representations in section 2. 7. As we shall
see there, any symmetry group with projective representations can always
be enlarged (without otherwise changing its physical implications) in such
a way that its representations can all be defined as non-projective, wit h
0. Until section 2.7, we will just assume that this has been done, and
take 0 = 0 in Eq. (2 .2.14).
There is a kind of group, known as a connected Lie group, of special
importance in physics. These are groups of transformations T(O) that are
described by a finite set of real continuous parameters, say 0a, with each
element of the group connected to the identity by a path within the group .
The group multiplication law then takes the farm
T(R) T (0) = T (f (0, 0))
( .2. 1 5 )
with f°(Q, 0) a function of the 0 s and fps. Taking $4 =- 0 as the coordinates
of the identity, we must have
{2.2. t6 }
As already mentioned, the transformations of such continuous groups
must be represented on the physical Hilbert space by unitary (rather than
antiunitary) operators U( T(9 )). For a Lie group, these operators can be

54
2 Relativistic Quantum Mecha n ics
represented in at least a finite neighborhood of the identity by a power
series
U T(O) = I +
if~~ t~, +
; (]~' f~`' tb~, +
. . . ~ (2,2.1 7 )
where ta,
tbc = tcb, etc. are Hermitian operators independent of the
Os. Suppose that the U(T (B ) ) form an ordinary (i.e., not projective)
representation of this group of transformations, i.e.,
U(T(O)) U(T(O)) = U(T(f(O_,O))) .
(2.2.18 )
Let us see what this condition looks like when expanded in powers of
06 and Oa. According to Eq . (2.2.16), the expansion of fO( B,B) to second
order must take the form
f u (O, 0) =
Ou + Oa + fa
bcOhOC +
. . .
(2.2.19 )
with real coefficients f"b{,. (The presence of any terms of order 02 or
would violate E q. {2.2.10.} Then Eq . (2.2.18) reads
I + ioata + 1 610crbc +
X
[I + i0ata +
loboctbc +
2
2
I + i (Oa + 04 + fab'oboc + _ ) t'
The terms of order 1,0, 0, 02 , and ~' automatically match on both sides
of Eq. (2 .2.20), but from the 00 terms we obtaia non-trivial condition
This shows that if we are given the structure of the group, i.e., the
function f(O, [7}, and hence its quadratic coefficient f 'bt., we can calculate
the second-order terms in U(T (O) ) from the generators t. appearing in the
first-order terms . However, there is a consistency condition : the operator
th, must be symmetric in b and c (because it is the second derivative of
U(T (0)) with respect to 6# and H') so Eq. (2.2.21) requires that
[t b, tcl = i C
. tu ,
(2 . 2 . 22)
where 'ab, are a set of real constants known as s tructure constants
Such a set of commutation relations is known as a Lie a lgebra. In Section
2.7 we will prove in effect that the commutation relation (2 .2.22) is the
single condition needed to ensure that this process can be continued : the
complete power series for U(T ( B) ) may be calculated from an infinite
sequence of relations like Eq. (2.2.21), provided we know the first-order
terms, the generators t, This does not necessarily mean that the operators
U{ T (O)} are uniquely determined for all 0 " if we know the t., but it

2.3 Quantum Lorentz Transformations
5 5
does mean that the U( T(H) ) are uniquely determined in at least a finite
neighborhood of the coordinates 0' - 0 of the identity, in such a way that
Eq. ( 2.2.15) is satisfied if 0, 0, and f {0, B} are in this neighborhood. The
extension to all 01' is discussed in Section 2.7.
There is a special case of some importance, that we will encounter again
and again. Suppose that the function f (0, 0) (perhaps just for some subset
of the coordinates 0a} is simply additive
This is the case for instance for translations in spacetime, or for rotations
about any one fixed axis (though not for both together). Then the
coefficients f ab, in Eq . ( 2.2. 9) vanish, and so do the structure constants
(2 . 2 , 23). The generators then all commut e
[tb, tt•] = 0 .
(2.2.25)
Such a group is called Abelian . In this case, it is easy to calculate U(T(B))
for all 0'. From Eqs. (2 .2.18) and (2.2.24), we have for and integer N
(T(o)) = U (T
0
U
Letting N --* oo, akeeping only the first-order term in (J( T( B f N) ), we
have then
and hence
N
U(T(O)) = lim
[1 +
001a
U(T(O)) = exp(it,,O' )
2.3 Quantum Lorentz Transformations
(2.2.26 )
Einstein's principle of relativity states the equivalence of certain `inertial'
frames of reference . It is distinguished from the Galilean principle of rela-
tivity, obeyed by Newtonian mechanics, by the transformation connecting
coordinate systems in different inertial frames . If x4 are the coordinates in
one inertial frame (with x', x2, x3 Cartesian space coordinates, and x° = t
a time coordinate, the speed of light being set equal to unity) then in any
other inertial frame, the coordinates xg must satisfy
or equivalently
r~.v dx"'dxf ~ = q,,dx1`dxv
cx f~ ~x V
qAV
cox r~x~
(2.3.1 )
(2,3 .2)

SG
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Here q,,, is the diagonal matrix, with elements
q i l = q22 = q33 = + 1, boa = -1
{2.3.3 }
and the summation convention is in force : we sum over any index like y
and v in Eq . (2 .3 .2), which appears twice in the same term, once upstairs
and once downstairs. These transformations have the special property
that the speed of light is the same (in our units, equal to unity) in all
inertial frames ;* a light wave travelling at unit speed satisfies ~dx/dtl T 1,
or in other words 1,,,dxmdx'' = dx2 - dt' = 0, from which it follows that
also r1,,Vdx'Pdx' 1 = 0, and hence ldx`/dt'l ^ 1 .
Any coordinate transformation xP -f x'Y that satisfies Eq . (2.3.2) is
dinear3a
x'
l` = 11u,,xV + ap
(2.3.4)
with a,' arbitrary constants , and AO, a constant matrix satisfying the
conditions
q,Ur APp~ c -- ?Ipff ~
(2, 3 . 5)
For some purposes, it is useful to write the Lorentz transformation
condition in a different way. The matrix q,,,, has an inverse, written
qW, which happens to have the same components : it is diagonal, with
q00 := --1, n ii = q22 = r1 33 = + 1 .
Multiplying Ey, (2.3.5) with ql'W z and
inserting parentheses judiciously, we hav e
'r ,1Vl l,up(Av 6 A
1C'C ' f [TT) = Ahf] _
qpA
1' 1C A l1
p
i i
Multiplying with the inverse of the matrix q,,k A,', then give s
These transformations form a group . If we first perform a Lorentz
transformation (2.3.4), and then a second Lorentz transformation xA
X",U, with
then the effect is the same as the Lorentz transformation x" -} x`/ y, with
X lip = ('A'p PAPV)J C v + (AP
Gdp + Ceti ) .
(2.3 . 7 )
(Note that if AP, and AP, both satisfy Eq. (2.3. 5), then so does
PP11P, , so
this is a Lorentz transformation . The bar is used here just to distinguis h
There is a larger class of coordinate transformations, known as conformal transformations, for
which iu,,dx+,d.x" is proportional though generally not equal to quudxPdxw, and which therefore
also leave the speed of light invariant. Conformal invariance in two dimensions has proved
enormously important in string theory and statistical mechanics, but the physical relevance of
these conformal transformations in four spacetime dimensions is not yet clear .

2.3 Quantum Lorentz Tra.rasfbrmatinras
57
one Lorentz transformation from the other. The transformations T(A, a)
induced on physical states therefore satisfy the composition rule
Taking the determinant of Eq. (2. 3.5) gives
(DetA)2 = 1
(2.3.9 )
so M, has an inverse, (1L- 1)'p which we see from Eq. (2.3.5) takes the
form
The inverse of the transformation T (
, a) is seen from Eq. ( 2 .3 .8) to be
T( --t, - -ta), and, of course, the identity transformation is T(1,0).
In accordance with the discussion in the previous section, the transfor-
mations T(A, a) induce a unitary linear transformation on vectors in the
physical Hilbert space
T --~- U(11, aff .
The operators U satisfy a composition rul e
U(11, a) U(11, a) = U( A,11u + a) .
(2-3.11 )
(As already mentioned, to avoid the appearance of a phase factor on the
right-hand side of Eq. (2 .3.11), it is, in general, necessary to enlarge the
Lorentz group. The appropriate enlargement is described in Section 2.7. )
The whole group of transformations x'(11, a) is properly known as the
anhomogeneous Lorentz g roup, or Poirtcrxre group.
It has a number of
important subgroups. First, those transformations with a A = 0 Kbviously
form a subgroup, with
T(A, 0) T (A, 0) = T(A# 0)> (2.3.12 )
known as the homoge neous Lorentz group. Also, we note from Eq . (2.3.9)
that either DetA = + 1 or DetA - ----1 ; those transformations with
DetA = +1 obviously form a subgroup of either the homogeneous or
the inhomogeneous Lorentz groups. Further, from the 00-components of
Eqs. (2.3 .5) and (2.3 . 6), we have
(A°0)2 = I + 11'o'a = 1 + 11°jVj . (2.3.13 )
with i summed over the values 1, 2, and 3 . We see that either A +1 or
A°0 <_ -1. Those transformations with A°o ~!: +1 form a subgroup. Note
that if All, and kl`,, are two such A s, then
(11A)°() = 11°oA°p + VIA'() + 1102A20 + 11 °3A'p
; .
But Eq. (2.3 .13) shows that the three-vector ( A lo, A20, ~ 3()) has length
(W) -1, and similarly the three-vector ( A° j, ° 2,
O 3 ) has length

58
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanic s
( A°0 )2 - 1, so the scalar product of these two three-vectors is bounded
by
Ii1°1 10 + Ao?A
2 0 +
03A3() I ~ V(A(10)2 - 1/(A°o)
2 - 1 ,
(2.3.14)
and so
(AA)')o >_ A'OAO() - V(A~O()- I ~(A(10)2 - I.
I
The subgroup of Lorentz transformations with Detl1 = + 1 and AOO > + 1
is known as the proper orthochroraous Lorentz group. Since it is not
possible by a continuous change of parameters to jump from I]et 11 =
+1 to DetA = -1, or from 1~Oo > +1 to 110 < -1, any Lorentz
transformation that can be obtained from the identity by a continuous
change of parameters must have Det 11 and A °0 of the same sign as for
the identity, and hence must belong to the proper orthochronous Lorentz
group.
Any Lorentz transformation is either proper and orthn chron o us, or
may be written as the product of an element of the proper orthochronous
Lorentz group with one of the discrete transformations .6311 or t3~- or 9P,~T,
where 41 is the space inversion, whose non-zero elements ar e
and T is the time-reversal matrix, whose non-zero elements ar e
.s7-° 0 = --- I, ti II = ~ 2
2 = sF3 3 = I
.
(2.3 .16)
Thus the study of the whole Lorentz group reduces to the study of its
proper orthochronous subgroup, plus space inversion and time-reversal .
We will consider space inversion and time-reversal separately in Section
2.6. Until then, we will deal only with the homogeneous or inhomogeneous
proper orthochronous Lorentz group .
2.4 The Poincare Algebra
As we saw in Section 2.2, much of the information about any Lie symmetry
group is contained in properties of the group elements near the identity.
For the inhomogencous Lorentz group, the identity is the transformation
Alt, = P, , a}' = D, so we want to study those transformations wit h
11~'ir = r~ a' + coyU , a}` = ey , (2.4.1 )
both c~y, and e" being taken infinitesimal. The Lorentz condition (2. .5)

2.4 The 1'aincare Algebra 59
reads here
We are here using the convention, to be used throughout this book, that
indices may be lowered or raised by contraction with q,,,, or r~4 v
t11160)
P
(0 14 P
11PO (1),7p
Keeping only the terms of first order in co in the Lorentz condition (2. 3 .5),
we see that this condition now reduces to the antisymmetry of wpv
An antisymmetric second-rank tensor in four dimensions has (4 x 3)/ 2
6 independent components, so including the four components of el`,
an inhomageneous Lorentz transformation is described by 6 + 4 = 1 0
parameters.
Since U {1, 0} carries any ray into itself, it must be proportional to the
unit operator,* and by a choice of phase may be made equal to it . For an
infinitesimal Lorentz transformation {2 .4.1}, €I( 1 + w, r) must then equal
1 plus terms linear in w,,, and c.. We write this as
X1( 1 + (t), 0 = 1 +
; i cr~"'JP' -~ i~P P P + . . .
(2.4. 3 )
Here Jill and PP are ro- and e-independent operators, and the dots denote
terms of higher order in w and/or e. In order for X1(1 + w, c) to be unitary,
the operators P" and PP must be Hermitian
,1
paf = .I
PGF
Pit = P p ,
(2.4.4 )
Since (o,,, is antisymmetric, we can take its coefficient JP' to be antisym-
metric als o
As we shall gee, P
1 , P2 , and P1 are the components of the momentum
operators, J 23 , J31, and J1 2 are the components of the angular momentum
victor, and P° is the energy operator, or Ha na ihonian.*"
' In the absence of 5upersclcction rules, the possibility that the propnrtionality factor may depend
on the stale on which V (1, 0) acts can be ruled out by the same reasoning that we used in Section
12 to rule out the possibility that the phases in projective representations of symmetry group
may depend on the states on which the symmetries act. Where superselection rules apply, it may
be necessary to redefine U(1 70) by phase factors that depend on the sector on which it acts .
We will see that this identification of the angular-momentum generators is forced on us by the
commutation relations of the Ji" _ On the other hand . the commutation relations do not allow
us to distinguish between Per and -P P, so the sign for the epP x' term in {2.4.3) is a matter of
convention. The consistency of the choice in (2 .4.3) with the usual definition of the Hamiltonian
P0 is shown in Section 3 .1 .

64 2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
We now examine the Lorentz transformation properties of JAff and P P
We consider the product
where Am, and aO are here the parameters of a new transformation,
unrelated
to w
and
P.
According
to Eq.
(2-3,11),
the
product
U(A-', -A-'a) U(A, a) equals U(1, 0), so U( l1 -1 , -A-' a) is the
inverse
of U(A, a). It follows then from (2.3 .11) that
U(A, a) U(I + cc, -)U-'(A, a) = U (A(I + (u)A-1, Ae
To first order in co and E, we have then
Aa)A-'a) (2.4.6)
2
2
-(Ae - Aco -la)~PY . (2 .4.7)
Equating coefficients of wp, and c. on both sides of this equation (and
using (2 .3.1) ), we find
(2.4.8 )
(2.4.9)
For homogeneous Lorentz transformations (with a" = 0 ), these transfor-
mation rules simply say that .T " is a tensor and PP is a vector. For pure
translations (with Al`,
Pv), they tell us that PP is translation-invariant,
but JP' is not. In particular, the change of the space-space components
of JP' under a spatial translation is just the usual change of the angular
momentum under a change of the origin relative to which the angular
momentum is calculated .
Next, let's apply rules (2 .4.8), (2.4.9) to a transformation that is itself
infinitesimal, i.e ., Au,, = 6P, +caPw and al' = eA, with infinitesimals coPV and
e" unrelated to the previous w and c . Using Eq. (2 .4.3), and keeping only
terms of first order in oil', and -P, Eqs. (2.4.8) and (2.4.9) now become
(2 .4.1 1
Equating coefficients of r~~p, and c,, on both sides of these equations, we
find the commutation rues
i [J f l wy JPG] = JJVPJUff _
q,UPJu (7
y
7 6tijuv + y7 awJPP a (2.4.12}
i ipu
JPCJ = ~~~p .7 ,
tifrpp
(2.4.13)
a
[P P , FPI = 0 .
(2.4.14)
This is the Lie algebra of the Poincare group .

2.4 The Poincure Algebra
6 1
In quantum mechanics a special role is played by those operators
that are conserved, Le., that commute with the energy operator H = Pa.
Inspection of Eqs. (2.4.13) and (2.4.14) shows that these are the momentum
three-vector
P = 1 P 1, P 2 , F 3 1
and the angular-momenturn three-vector
(2.4. 1 5 )
(2.4. 1 6 )
and, of course, the energy P° itself. The remaining generators form what
is called the `vast' three-vector
K = jj1Q,j2O,j3O1
.
(2.4.17 )
These are not conserved, which is why we do not use the eigenvalues of K
to label physical states. In a three-dimensional notation, the commutation
relations (2.4,12), (2.4.13), (2.4. 4) may be written
V , .1j] = i cijkJk
[its Kjj
ifi}kKk
[
i a K,jj -- - i E'ijkJk
x
[Jr, Pj J = t CijkPk
[Kz , Pj ~ = iH 5 Ij ,
[i,H] = i Pj ,
(2 .4.i 8 )
(2 .4.19)
(2 .4.20)
(2.4.2j )
(2.4.22)
(2.4.23)
(x,4.24)
where i,j, k, etc . run over the values 1, 2, and 3, and ezjk is the totally
antisymmetric quantity with e,23 = +1 . The commutation relation (2,4.18)
will be recognized as that of the angular-momentum operator .
The pure translations T(1, Q) form a subgroup of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group with a group multiplication rule given by (2.3.7) as
(2.4 .25)
This is additive in the same sense as (2 .2.20, so by using (2.4.3) and
repeating the same arguments that led to (2 . 2,26), we find that finite
translations are represented on the physical Hilbert space by
(2.4.26)
In exactly the same way, we can show that a rotation RO by an angle ~O
around the direction of 0 is represented on the physical Hilbert space by
U(41O) = exp(iJ • 0). (2.4.27)
It is interesting to compare the Poincare algebra with the Lie algebra
of the symmetry group of Newtonian mechanics, the Galilean grou p. We

62
2 Relativistic Quan tum Mechanics
could derive this algebra by starting with the transformation rules of the
Galilean group and then following the same procedure that was used
here to derive the Paincare' algebra . However, since we already have
Eqs. (2.4.18)-(2 .4.24), it is easier to obtain the Galilean algebra as a
low-velocity limit of the Poincare algebra, by what is known as an Inona-
Wigner contraction 4r5 .
For a system of particles of typical mass rn and
typical velocity z', the momentum and the angular-momentum operators
are expected to be of order J - 1, P - mv. On the other hand, the energy
operator is H = M + W with a total mass M and non-mass energy W
(kinetic plus potential) of order M - m, W - mv-' . Inspection of Eqs .
(2.4.1$)-(2.4.24) shows that these commutation relations have a limit for
v << I of the form
Vs, Jil = i Eiik A ,
[Ji, Kj] i Eiik Kk ~
[K
r, KJ = 0 ,
[Ji, W1 Z- [Pi, W1
0,
[Ki, W1 = i Pi
L
ie M] = [Pi , MI = [K is M] = [
} M] = 0
,
with K of order 11v. Note that the product of a translation x --). x + a
and a `boost' x --~ x + vt should be the transformation x --} x + vt + a, but
this is not true for the action of these operators on Hilbert space :
exp(A , v) exp(-iP • a) = exp(iMa • v/2) exp (i(K
- v - P - a)) .
The appearance of the phase factor exp(iMa • v/2} shows that this is a
projective representation, with a superselection rule forbidding the super-
position of states of different mass . In this respect, the mathematics of the
Poincare group is simpler than that of the Galilean group. However, there
is nothing to prevent us from formally enlarging the Galilean group, by
adding one mare generator to its Lie algebra, which commutes with all
the other generators, and whose eigenvalues are the masses of the various
states. In this case physical states provide an ordinary rather than a
projective representation of the expanded symmetry group. The difference
appears to be a mere matter of notation, except that with this reinterpre-
tation of the Galilean group there is no need for a mass superselection
rule.
2.5
One-Particle states
We now consider the classification of one-particle states according to their
transformation under the inhomogeneous Lorentz group.
The components of the energy-momentum four-vector all commute with
each other, so it is natural to express physical state-vectors in terms of

2.5 One-Particle States 63
eigenvectors of the four-momentum. Introducing a label a to denote all
other degrees of freedom, we thus consider state-vectors 'Y ,., with
p P'yP,Q = pJUTP..7 .
(2. 5. 1
For general states, consisting for instance of several unbound particles,
the label u would have to be allowed to include continuous as well as
discrete labels. We take as part of the definition of a one-particle state,
that the label cT is purely discrete, and will limit ourselves here to that
case. (However, a specific bound state of two or more particles, such
as the lowest state of the hydrogen atom, is to be considered as a one-
particle state. It is not an elementary particle, but the distinction between
composite and elementary particles is of no relevance here . )
Eqs. (2 . 5 . 1) and (2.4,26) tell us how the states 'F' prd transform under
translations :
We must now consider how these states transform under homogeneous
Lorentz transformations .
Using (2,4.9), we see that the effect of operating on ,,,, with a quantum
homogeneous Lorentz transformation U( A, 0) = U(A) is to produce an
eigenvector of the four-momentum with eigenvalue 11 p
P"U(A)Tp,, = U(A) I U-'(A)P" U(A)] Ipp, = U(A)(A . "~PP)T,,,,
Hence U(A)T,,,, must be a linear combination of the state-vectors TAp,d '
rr'
In general, it may be possible by using suitable linear combinations of
the 'Pp,, to choose the a labels in such a way that the matrix
,,, (A, p)
is block-diagonal ; in other words, so that the 'Pp,, with a within any
one block by themselves furnish a representation of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group. It is natural to identify the states of a specific particle
type with the components of a representation of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group which is irreducible, in the sense that it cannot be further
decomposed in this ay.* Our task now is to work out the structure of th e
' Of course, different particle species may correspond to representations that are komarphic, i .e.,
that have matrices C',!, (11,p ) that are either idenlacal, or identical up to a similarity transforma-
tion. In some cases it may he convenient to define particle types as irreducible representations
of larger groups that contain the inharnogeneous proper orthochronous Lorentz group as a sub-
group ; for instance, as we shall sec, for massless particles whose interactions respect the symmetry
of space inversion it is customary to treat all the components of an irreducible representation of
the inhomogeneous Lorentz group including space inversion as a single particle type .

64
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanic s
coefficients C,,Q(A, p) in irreducible representations of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group .
For this purpose, note that the only functions of p" that are left invariant
by all proper arxhochranous Lorentz transformations AP, are the invariant
square p2 =_ q.wpAp', and for p2 :5 0, also the sign of p°, Hence, for each
value of p2, and (for p2 <_ 0) each sign of p0, we can choose a `standard'
four-momentum, say ky , and express any p~` of this class as
PP = Ley(p)k' a
(2 . 5 .4)
where L", is some standard Lorentz transformation that depends on p P,
and also implicitly on our choice of the standard P. We can then define
the states 'Y,,, of momentum p by
T A,7 =__N (p ) (
t' ) U(L(p))Tk,, ,
(L..5 .5 )
where N(p) is a numerical normalization factor, to be chosen later. Up to
this point, we have said nothing about how the ff labels are related for
different momenta ; Eq. (2.5.5) now fills that gap.
Operating on (2.5 .5) with an arbitrary homogeneous Lorentz transfor-
mation U(11), we now find
The point of this last step is that the Lorentz transformation L-'( t1p)
L{p}
takes k to L(p)k = p, and then to gyp, and then back to k, so it belongs
to the subgroup of the homogeneous Lorentz group consisting of Lorentz
transformations WP, that leave k}` invariant :
WP ti,kti' = V.
(2 .5. 7)
This subgroup is caI1ed the little graup.$ For and W satisfying Eq . (2 .5 .7),
we have
U 'l W lTk,,rf
D t7F d 1 • r
~Tk,, F
(2.5 .8)
The coefficients D (W) furnish a representation of the little group ; that is,
for and elements W, W we have
Du'a(WW)Tk ,a~ = ~(WW)Tk,, == U(W)U( aril)Tk,d
'_ 4 1 ~YY ~`~6 rr~ ~~f~C,~lf = ~ d1f~~~~6r~rf ~YY } T~~r
ff{~ d~Qf'
and so
~„

2.5 One-Particle States
65
In particular, we may apply E q. (2.5.8) to the little-group transformation
W(A,p) = L- ' {AP}AI..(P) (2.5.10 )
and then Eq. (2.5.6) takes the form
at
or, recalling the definition (2.5 .5)
U(A)TP,OF = ( ) 1: D,,, (W (A, p)) TAp,'
(2 .5 .11)
(
p)
6r
Apart from the question of normalization, the problem of determining the
coefficients C,1,, in the transformation rule (2.5.3) has been reduced to the
problem Kf finding the representations of the little group. This approach,
of deriving representations of a group like the inhomogeneous Lorentz
group from the representations of a little group, is called the method of
induced representations.6
Table 2.1 gives a convenient choice of the standard momentum V and
the corresponding little group for the various classes of four-momenta .
Of these six classes of four-momenta, only (a), (c), and (f) have any
known interpretations in terms of physical states . Not much needs to
be said here about case (f) g P = 0 ; it describes the vacuum, which
is simply left invariant b y U( A). In what follows we will consider only
cases (a) and (c), which cover particles of mass M > 0 and mass zero,
respectively.
This is a good place to pause, and say something about the normal-
ization of these states . By the usual orthonormalization procedure of
quantum mechanics, we may choose the states with standard momentum
k" to be orthonormal, in the sense that
(The delta function appears here because Tk,# and Tkf,¢f are eigenstates
of a Hermitian operator with eigenvalues k and k', respectively.) This has
the immediate consequence that the representation of the little group in
Eqs. (2.5.8) and (2,5.11) must be unitary"
D'(
) = D-' (W)- (2 . .13 )
Now, what about scalar products for arbitrary momenta? Using the
unitarity of the operator U(A) in Eqs. (2.5.5) and (2.5.11), we find for the
" The little groups S O( 2, 1) and SO{3, 1) for p2 > 0 and p+i = 0 have no non-trivial finite-
dimensional unitary representations, so if there were any stales with a given momentum pF' with
p2 > 0 or p9 = 0 that transform non-trivially under the little group, there would have to be an
infinite number of them.

66 2 Relativistic Q u antum Mechanics
Table 2.1 . Standard momenta and the corresponding little group for various
classes of Four-rnornenta. Here K is an arbitrary positive energy, say
I eV.
The little groups are mostly pretty obvious : S O(3) is the ordinary rotation
group in three dimensions (excluding space inversions), because rotations are the
only proper orthochronous Lorentz transformations that leave at rest a particle
with zero momentum, while S O (2,1 ) and SO (3,1 ) are the Lorentz groups in
(2 + 1)- and (3 + l)-dimensions, respectively. The group IS O(2) is the group of
Euclidean geometry, consisting of rotations and translations in two dimensions.
Its appearance as the little group for p2 = 0 is explained below .
(b) P2 = -M'
0, p~
0
(C) p2 = 0, P
O
0
(e) p2 = N2 > 0
(f) PP _ 0
scalar product :
tandard V
(0, 0, 0, M)
(0, 0, 0' -M )
(0, 0, K, K)
(0, 0, K3~ _K)
(0, 0, N a 0)
Little Group
SO(3)
SO(3)
IS O(2)
ISO(2)
S't](2,1 )
SO ( 3, 1 )
(TPF'C7"TP,1qr) = N(p) ( U-'(L(p))TP',U'~ Tk,cr)
=N(p)N*(p')D(W(L-'(p),p'))*
6'(k'-k)
UU1
where k' = L-l (p)p'. Since also k = L-1(p)p, the delta function 63(k - k')
is proportional to 63(P - p') . For p' = p, the little-group transformation
here is trivial, W(L^t ( p), p ) = 1, and so the scalar product i s
It remain s to work out the proportionality factor relating r5 3(k - k') and
c53 (p - p'). Note that the Lorentz-invariant integral of an arbitrary scalar
function f(p) over four-momenta with -p2 == M1 >_ 0 and p~
0 {i.e.,

2 .5 One-Particle States
cases (a) or (c)) may be written
j
d4p 6 (P2 + M2)()(pO)f (p)
d3 P,f(P,
Pl +
I)
2 ' p +
2
67
{O(pl) is the step function : O(x) = 1 for x >_ 0, O(x) = 0 for x < 0 .) We
see that when integrating on the
`mass shed]' p2 + M2 = 0, the invariant
volume element is
d3 PI
P2 + M2
The delta function is defined by
F(p) =
F(F r)b'(P - p' )d i p
dip
F(p) [4~_+_M263(pl _ P)
j'2 -+
2
so we see that the invariant delta function is
~+M261(pf - P) = PW(P 1 - P)
(2.5.1
)
(2-5- 1 6)
Since p' and p are related to k' and k respectively by a Lorentz transfor-
mation, L(p), we have then
and therefore
PO) 63(pl - P)
(2.5.17 )
The normalization factor N(p) is sometimes chosen to be just IV(P) = 1 ,
but then we would need to keep track of the pOlk' factor in scalar
products . Inste ad, I will here adopt the more usual con vention that
N(p) = ~Vlpll
for which
(2.5 . 1 S )
(2.5 .19 )
We now consider the two cases of physical interest : particles of mass
Al > 0, and particles of zero mass .

GS
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Mass Positive-Definite
The little group here is the three-dimensional rotation group . Its unitary
representations can, be broken up into a direct sum of irreducible unitary
representations7
D~J~(R) of dimensionality 2j+ 1 , with j ;-- p, ~, 1, These
can be built up from the standard matrices for infinitesimal rotations
Pl,k = Pik + Ozk} with Pik = -ski infinitesimal :
F
(!
)
23 - 31 1
2
~
)
)~+ ~ ~ ~ CJ ~1d 7
1 4
(
~ J
(2-5-20)
(2.5.2! )
(2-5.22 )
with o- running over the values j, j - 1 , . . . , -j. For a p a rticle of mass
M > 0 and spin j, Eq. (2.5.11) now becomes
u(A)T,,,,, = rLA
~ iJ~ rd ( ' ` (l x, p)) TAp,a'
(2.5.23 )
with the little-group element W ( A, p) (the signer rotation') given by Eq .
(2.5.10)
To calculate this rotation, we need to choose a `standard boast' L(p)
which carries the four-momentum from kit - (0.0.0, NI) to p4. This is
conveniently chosen as
LVP) = bik + (7 - WNpk
Lzo(p) = L" t(p)
P V~2 i Z
}
where
A = P111,
7 _
p2 + M21M .
It is very important that when A"V is an arbitrary three-dimensional
rotation , the Wigner rotation W{ A , p} is the same as for all p. To see
this, note that the boost (2 .5.24) may be expressed a s
L(p) =
(P)B(~ FI)R-i(P)
where R(A ) is a rotation (to be defined in a standard way below, in Eq.

2.5 One-Particle States
(2.5.47)) that takes the three-axis into the direction ofp, and
1 ~
BOP I}
0
1
=
a
o
Then for an arbitrary rotation
0
0
yr
0
0
ry~ 2 ~ 1
fk
69
But the rotation R-1 (
p)RR(p) takes the three-axis into the direction
and then into the direction gyp, and then back to the three-axi s, so it must
be just a rotation by some angle 0 around the three axis
cos 0
R(A) = R(O)
sin 0
sin 0
0 0
cvs 0 0
0
0 1 0
D 0
1
Since R($) commutes with B
PI), this now gives
and hence
W(
, P)
as was to be shown. Thus states of a moving massive particle (and,
by extension, multi-particle states) have the same transformation un-
der rotations as in non-relativistic quantum mechanics. This is another
piece of good news the whole apparatus of spherical harmonics,
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, etc. can be carried over wholesale from
non-relativistic to relativistic quantum mechanics .
Mass sera
First, we have to work out the structure of the little group . Consider
an arbitrary little-group element YY",, with
YVy, ku = V, where V is
the standard four-momentum for this case, kju = (0, 0,1,1 ). Acting on a
time-like four-vector 0 = ( D, 0, 0, 1), such a Lorentz transformation must
yield afour-rector Wt whose length and scalar product with Wk = k are
the same as those of t :
Any four-vector that satisfies the second condition may be written

70
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanies
and the first condition then yields the relation
( 2.5.25)
It follows that the effect of W", on tV is the same as that of the Lorentz
transformation
1
0
Sy V(a, 9)
4
1
= ~ ~
(X P
--~c oc
(2.5.2b)
This does not mean that W equals S(oc, fl), but it does mean that
S-1 (a, Vii) is a Lorentz transformation that leaves the time-like four-
vector (0,0,0,1 ) invariant, and is therefore a pure rotation . Also, S" y like
}l,, leaves the light-like four-vector (0,0,1,1 ) invariant, so S-1 (a, fl )
must be a rotation by some angle 0 around the three-axis
where
(2.5 .27 )
The most general element of the little group is therefore of the form
Cos 0
RPk (O) sin 0
4
0
yin 0 0 0
cos 0 0
0
0 1 0
0
0
1
What group is this? We note that the transformations with 0 = 0 or
with rx = # = 0 form subgroups :
( .5 .29)
(2.5 .30)
These subgroups are Abelian -that is, their elements all commute with
each other. Furthermore, the subgroup with 0 = 0 is invariant, in the
sense that its elements are transformed into other elements of the same
subgroup by any member of the grou p
R(O) S (ac, P)R-1(0) = 5' ( ac cos f~ + fl sin 0, -.x si n 0 + fl cos H) . (1531 )
From Eqs. (2.5.29)-(2.5 .31) we can work out the product of any group
elements. The reader will recognize these multiplication rules as those
of the group ISM{2}, consisting of translations (by a vector {a, fl }) and
rotations (by an angle 9 ) in two dimensions.
Groups that do not have invariant Abelian subgroups have certain
simple properties, and for this reason are called semi-si mple. As we have

2.5 One-Particle States
7 1
seen, the little group ISO(2) like the inhomageneaus Lorentz group i s not
semi-simple, and this leads to interesting complications . First, let's take
a look at the Lie algebra of I SD ( 2). For O a, # infinitesimal, the general
group element is
1'! ` (0, '~E, MI V = 61 1' ~
V
D {l
'_`oL
+x
-H
0
Cl)~iv ~
~~
0
0
0
0
From (2.4.3), we see then that the corresponding Hilbert space operator is
where A and B are the Hermitian operators
A = - J 1 3 + Jl() = J2 + K 1
,
(2 .5.32)
(2.5 .3 )
and, as before, J3 = J1 2. Either from (2.4.18)-(2.4.20), or directly from
Eqs . (2 .5 .29) - (2-5-31), we see that these generators have the commutator s
Since A and B are commuting Hermitian operators they (like the momen-
tum generators of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group) can be simultane-
ously diagonalized by states Tk.,, b
The problem is that if we find one such set of non-zero eigenvalues of
A, B, then we find a whole continuum. From Eq . ( 2.5.32 , we have
* [R(H)]A U
[R(B)] = A cos 0 - B sin 0 ,
* [R(O)]B U -1 [ R (0)] = A sin 0 + B cos B ,
and so, for arbitrary B ,
AT'k.,,b =(a co s 0 -- b sin OMk a,b
B'I'~.0 =(a sin 0 + h cos [1) TOk.a,h ,
where

72
Massless particles
freedom like 0 ; to
that physical states
a -- b = 0 :
2 Re lativistic Quantum Mechanics
.re not observed to have any continuous degree of
avoid such a continuum of states, we must require
(now called Tk,,) are eigenvectors of A and B with
ATka,, = B Tk ,,T = 0 .
{x..5, 38 }
These states are then distinguished by the eigenvalue of the remaining
generator
J3'I'k ,a = orTk,a -
{2.5.39 }
Since the momentum k is in the three-direction, a gives the component of
angular momentum in the direction of motion, or helicity.
We are now in a position to calculate the Lorentz transformation
properties of general massless particle states . First note that by use of the
general arguments of Section 2 .2> Eq . (2. 5.32) generalizes for finite x and
P to
and for finite 0 to
U(R(B)) = expOJ30) .
(2 .5.40 )
(2-5-41 )
An arbitrary element W of the little group can be put in the form (2 .5 .28),
so that
U( Y~)Tk,d = exp(taA + iflB) exp(iBJ3)Tk,, = exp(a0(7)kI'k,,,
and therefore Eq . (2.5.8) gives
where 0 is the angle defined by expressing W as in Eq .
(2.5.28). The
Lorenz transformation rule for a massless particle of arbitrary helicity is
now given by Eqs. (2. 5.11 ) and (2.5 .18) as
iJ(A)''p,Q = ~~~~
P
with O(A,p) defined by
exp (io-O( , p)) TAp,
(2 .5.42)
We shall see in Section 5.9 that electromagnetic gauge invariance arises
from the part of the little group parameterized by oc and fl .
At this point we have not yet encountered any reason that would forbid
the helicity a of a massless particle from being an arbitrary real number.
As we shall see in Section 2.7, there are topological considerations that
restrict the allowed values of a to integers and half-integers, just as for
massive particles .

2.5 One-Particle States
7 3
To calculate the little-group element (2 .5.43) for a given A and p, (and
also to enable us to calculate the effect of space or time inversion on these
states in the next section) we need to fix a convention for the standard
Lorentz transformation that takes us from V = (0 , 0, rc, rc) to p". This may
conveniently be chosen to have the for m
L(p) = R(P)B( ~ pI1K)
where B(u) is a pure boost along the three-direction-
'1 0
B(u)
0
1
0
0
00
0
0
0 Q
( U 2 + 1)/2u
(U2 -1 )12u
(2.5.44 )
and R( P) is a pure rotation that carries the three-axis into the direction
of the unit vector p. For instance, suppose we take p to have polar and
azimuthal angles 9 and 0 :
p = (sin 0 cos 0, sin6 sin 0, cos B)
(2.5.4G)
Then we can take R(p) as a rotation by angle
0 around the two-axis,
which takes (0, 0,1 ) into (sin 9, 0, cos 0), followed by a rotation by angle
0 around the three-axis :
U(R
( p)
) = C xp(iOJ3) exp(iM),
(2.5.47)
where 0 :!9 0 ~ ff, 0 21r . (We give U(R(P}) rather than R(P),
together with a specification of the range of 0 and B, because shifting
0 or 0 by 27r would give the same rotation R(P), but a different sign
for U(R(p)) when acting on half-integer spin states.) Since (2.5.47) is a
rotation, and does take the three-axis into the direction (2 .5.46), any other
choice of such an R{ P} would differ from this one by at most an initial
rotation around the three-axis, corresponding to a mere redefinition of the
phase of the one-particle states .
Note that the helicity is Lorentz-invariant ; a massless particle of a
given helicity a looks the same (aside from its momentum) in all inertial
frames. Indeed, we would be justified in thinking of massless particles
of each different helicity as different species of particles . However, as
we shall see in the next section, particles of opposite helicity are related
by the symmetry Kf space inversion. Thus, because electromagnetic and
gravitational forces obey space inversion symmetry, the massless particles
of helicity ±1 associated with electromagnetic phenomena are both called
photons, and the massless particles of helicity ±2 that are believed to
be associated with gravitation are both called gravito ns. On the other
hand, the supposedly massless particles of helicity ±1/2 that are emitted
in nuclear beta decay have no interactions (apart from gravitation) that

74
2 Relati vistic Q uantum Mechanics
respect the symmetry of space inversion, so these particles are given
different names : neutrinos for helicity +1/2, and antineutrinos for helicity
-1/2.
Even though the helicity of a massless particle is Lorentz-invariant, the
state itself is not. In particular, because of the helicity-dependent phase
factor exp(i a H) in Eq. (2 .5.42), a state formed as a linear superposition of
one-particle states with opposite helicities will be changed by a Lorentz
transformation into a different superposition . For instance, a general
one-photon state of four-momenta may be writte n
where
I
X+I
2 + I U_ 11 = 1 .
The generic case is one of elliptic polarization, with
I oc+ I both non-zero and
unequal . Circular polarization is the limiting case where either Y+ or x_
vanishes, and linear polarization is the opposite extreme, with a+ = la-1 .
The overall phase of ac+ and a_ has no physical significance, and for linear
polarization may be adjusted so that ac_ = a+, but the relative phase is
still important. Indeed, for linear polarizations with a_ = a+, the phase
of ac+ may be identified as the angle between the plane of polarization
and some fixed reference direction perpendicular to p. Eq . (2.5.42) shows
that under a Lorentz transformation A,, , this angle rotates by an amount
B(11> p) . Plane polarized gravitons can be defined in a similar way, and
here Eq. (2 .5.42) has the consequence that a Lorentz transformation A
rotates the plane of polarization by an angle 20 (A, P) •
2.6
Space Inversion and Time-Reversal
We saw in Section 2.3 that any homogeneous Lorentz transformation is
either proper and orthochronous (i .e., DetA
:;-- +1 and AOO > +1) or
else equal to a proper orthochronous transformation times either : or
9- or Yg-, where 9 and JV are the space inversion and time-reversal
transformations
4
p -
L-
0
0
0
0
0
1
a a
0 - 1
0
0 0
1
1
0
~~ o
1
~'
V = o 0
U 4
0 0
0
0
1
0
0 - 1
It used to be thought self-evident that the fundamental multiplication rule
of the Poincare group

2.6 Space Inversion and Time-Reversal
7 5
would be valid even if A and/or A involved factors of ~P or °l or 503T.
In particular, it was believed that there are operators corresponding to
and ~F themselves :
such that
(2 .6.1)
{ .G.2}
for any proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation 11P, and translation
aP. These transformation rules incorporate most of what is meant when
we say that P or T are 'conserved' .
In 1956-57 it became understaod8 that this is true for P only in the
approximation in which one ignores the effects of weak interactions, such
as those that produce nuclear beta decay . Time-reversal survived for a
while, but in 1964 there appeared indirect evidence9 that these properties
of T are also only approximately satisfied. (See Section
3 .3.)
In what
follows, we will make believe that operators P and T satisfying Sys . (2-6-1)
and (2.6.2) actually exist, but it should be kept in mind that this is only
an approximation .
Let us apply Eqs.
( 2. 6.1 ) and ( 2.6.2) in the case of an infinitesimal
transformation, i.e.,
~ ~ ~
alt =
,U
with w. ,, _ -o),,, and e. both infinitesimal . Using (2 .4.3), and equating
coefficients of r~),o¢ and eP i n Eqs. (2.6. 1 ) and ( 2 . 6.2) , we obtain the P and
T transformation properties of the Poincare generators
p i P{3p- 1 = i
4 PP Y ,
T iPP T-' = ?' .1JU P P P
.
(2.6.3 )
(2.6.4)
(2.6.5)
(2.6.6)
This is much like Eqs. (2.4.8) and (2.4.9), except that we have not cancelled
factors of i on both sides of these equations, because at this point we have
not yet decided whether P and T are linear and unitary or antilinear an d
antiunitary-
The decision is an easy one . Setting p = 0 in Eq . (2.6.4) gives
P i HPR t = i H ,
where H - P ° is the energy operator. If P were antiunitary and antiline ar
then it would anticommute with i, so PHP-l = -H. But then for and
state T of energy E > 0, there would have to be another state P-1 T of

76
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
energy - E < 0. There are no states of negative energy (energy less than
that of the vacuum), so we are forced to choose the other alternative- P
is linear and unitary, and commutes rather than anticommutes with H .
On the other hand, setting p =Din Eq . (2 .6 .6) yields
T i HT-1 _ ----i H .
If we supposed that T is linear and unitary then we could simply cancel
the is, and find TAT-1 = -H, with the again disastrous conclusion that
for any state T of energy E there is another state T-1 'I' of energy -E .
To avoid this, we are forced here to conclude that T is antilinear and
antxura ita ry.
Now that we have decided that P is linear and T is antilinear, we
can conveniently rewrite Eqs.
(2.6.3)-(2.6.6) in terms of the generators
(2.4.15)-(2.4.17) in a three-dimensional notation
PIM P-1 = -K (2. 6.8)
PPP-1 = _P, (2.6.9)
TKTT' _ +K , (2.6. 1 1 )
TPT-1 = -P, (2.6.12)
and, as shown before,
PHP-1 = THT-1 = H. (2.6. 1 3 )
It is physically sensible that P should preserve the sign of J, because at
least the orbital part is a vector product r x p of two vectors, both of which
change sign under an inversion of the spatial coordinate system. On the
other hand, T reverses J, because after time-reversal an observer will see
all bodies spinning in the opposite direction. Note by the way that Eq .
(2 .6 .10) is consistent with the angular-momentum commutation relations
J x J = iJ, because T reverses not only J, but also i. The reader can easily
check that Eqs .
(2. 6.7 )-(2.6.13) are consistent with all the commutation
relations (2 .4.1$)-(2 .4.24).
Let us now consider what P and T do to one-particle states :
P :M> O
The one-particle states 'I'k,, are defined as eigenvectors of P . H, and J3
with eigenvalues 0, M, and a, respectively. From Eqs. (2.6.7), (2.6.9), and
(2 .6.13), we see that the same must be true of the state P`F'k, ,, and therefore
(barring degeneracies) these states can only differ by a phase
with a phase factor (I~ j = 1) that may or may not depend on the spin a .

2.6 Space Inversion and Time-Reversal
77
To see that 1, is a-independent, we note from (2 .5.8), (2.5.20), and (2.5 .21)
that
where j is the particle's spin . Operating on both sides with P, we fin d
170- = qa+l
and so q, is actually independent of a. We therefore write
with q a phase, known as the intrinsic parity, that depends only on the
species of particie on which P acts .
To get to finite momentum states, we must apply the unitary operator
U(L(p)) corresponding to the `boost' (2 .5.24) :
TP,O' = ~Mlpl U (L(p)) Tk,a
We note that
L{P}
-' = L(P)
p - (-P,
p +
so using Eqs. (2.6.1) and (2.6.15), we have
PTA, = /M/p0 U(L(
F))qTk,~
or in other word s
T : M
0
From Eqs. (2,6 .10), ( 2.6.12 ), and (2.6.13), we see that the effect of T on the
zero-momentum one-particle state Tk,, is to yield a state with
and so
where d is a phase factor. Applying the operator T to (2.6.14), and
recalling that T anticom utes with J and i, we find
Using Eq, (2.6. 14) again on the left, we see that the square-root factors
cancel, and so
- ~~ _ ~a+ t

7 8
2 Relativistic Quantu m Mechanics
We write the solution as Cd with C another phase that depends
only on the species of particle :
However, unlike the `intrinsic parity' q, the time-reversal phase ~ has no
physical significance. This is because we can redefine the one-particle
states by a change of phase
in such a way that the phase is eliminated from the transformation rul e
In what follows we will keep the arbitrary phase C in Eq . ( 2 .6.17), just to
keep open our options in choosing the phase of the one-particle states,
but it should be kept in mind that this phase is of no real importance .
To deal with states of finite momentum, we again apply the 'boost'
(2.5 .24). Note that
YP
P, ~P 2 + M2
(That is, changing the sign of each element of D', with an odd number
of time-indices is the same as changing the signs of elements with an odd
number of space-indices . Using Eqs. ( 2,6.2) and (2.5 .5), we have then
P ;M = 0
Acting on a state Yk,,7, that is defined as an eigenvector of Psi with
eigenvalue V _ (0, 0, :c, K) and an eigenvector of J 3 with eigenvalue a, the
parity operator P yields a state with four-momentum
(0, U, -rC, rc)
and J3 equal to a. Thus it takes a state of helicity (the component of spin
along the direction of motion) a into one of helicity - u. As mentioned
earlier, this shows that the existence of a space-inversion symmetry re-
quires that any species of massless particle with non-zero helicity must be
accompanied with another of opposite helicity. Because P does not leave
the standard momentum invariant, it is convenient to consider instead
the operator U(R; 1)P, where R2 is a rotation that also takes k to :k,
conveniently chosen as a rotation by -180° around the two-axi s
Since U(R2 ') reverses the sign Of J3 , we have

2 .6 'pace Inversion and Time-Reversal
79
with q, a phase factor. Now, Rj-19 commutes with the Lorentz `boost'
(2 .5.45), and 9 commutes with the rotation R(p) which takes the three-
direction into the direction of p, so by operating on (2.5.5) with P, we find
for a general four-momentum pP
P Tk,,
U (R(L,.)R2B
I CI
U(R2 1 )PTk
},
r
11
R(-)R2 B
P1
Tk,-ff
To-
q, U ( P ( K
Note that R( ~)Ri is a rotation that takes the t hree-axis into the direction of
~p, but U(R(p)R2) is not quite equal to U{R(- P)). According to (2.5.47),
P
(0 ± 70h) CXP (47 - O)J2 )
with azimuthal angle chosen as + -g or 7c according to whether
0 ~ 0 < n or it <_ 0 < 27c, so that it remains in the range of 0 to 2n. Then
U-1 (R(-P)) U(R(P)R2) = exp
*t - OW2 )
x exp ~ - x(O ± 71),I3) expO'Oh} exp(iBJ2) exp(-i7rJ2)
exp ~ -- [(Ir - Owl) exp(-inJj) exp ~ - i(II - B )J2
But a rotation of ±180° around the three-axis reverses the sign of J2 , so
U(R(-)R2) = U (R(--)) exp(±V9J3)
(2.6.21 )
Also , R(-p)B( ~ p~/k) is just the standard boost L (Yp) in the direction
`P =_ (-p, P° )• We have then finall y
with the phase -no- or +ncr according to whether the two-component of
p is positive or negative, respectively. This peculiar change of sign in the
operation of parity for massle ss particles of half-integer spin is due to the
convention adopted in Eq. (2.5 .47) for the rotation used to define massless
particle states of arbi trary momentum. Beca use th e rotat ion group is not
simply connected , some discontinuity of this sort is unavoidable ,
T : M =U
Acting on the state LI' k,,, which has values ky = {0 , 0, K, K) and a for
P" and .I3, the time-reversal operator T yields a state which has values
(gAk)y = (0,10, - rc, rc) and - --a for P Y and J3 . Thus T does not change the
helicity J
- k, and by itself has nothing to say about whether massless
particles of one helicity cr are accompanied with others of helicity -0 .
Because T like P does not leave the standard four-momentum k invariant ,

80
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
it is convenient to consider the generator LT(R2 1)T, where R2 is the rotation
(2.6,19), which also takes k into 01k. This commutes with J3, s o
with
a another phase . Since H~ l_-If commutes with the boost (2.5 .45), and
l commutes with the rotation R(p), operating with T on the state ( 2.5 .5 )
gives
(P) R2B
IPA (2.b.24)
TTP,a = FjK~ U R
Using Eq. (2.6.21), this yields finally
TTP,O- = , exp(±iza)'Py,,,
.
(2.6.25)
Again, the top or bottom sign applies according to whether the two-
component of p is positive or negative, respective ly.
~**
It is interesting that the square T2 of the time-reversal operator has a
very simple action on both massive and massless one-particle states . Using
Eq. (2.6.18), and recalling that T is antiunitary, we see that for massive
one-particle states
T'T
or in other word s
We get the same result for massless particles. If the two-component of p
is positive then the two-component of 9p inegative, and vice-versa, so
Eq. (2 .6.25) gives
T'Tp,, = T', exp(±i-gd)TyP,, exp(}irra)', exp(+bra}`'Fad
= exp(:~2ira )TA, .
As long as a is an integer or half integer, this can be writte n
T2y Pad = (- )2~~ j%V P,#. (2.6 .2 7)
By the `spin' of a massless particle, we usually mean the absolute value of
the helicity, so Eq . (2.6.27) is the same as Eq . (2.6.26).
This result has an interesting consequence . When T2 acts on any state
T of a system of non-interacting particles, either massive or massless,
it yields a factor (-)2j or (---)21'1 for each particle. Hence if the state
contains an odd number of particles of half-integer spin or helicity (plus
any number of particles of integer spin or helicity), we get an overall
change of sign

2. 7 Projective Rep rese ntations
8 1
If we now `turn on' various interactions, this result will
be preserved,
provided these interactions respect invariance under time-reversal, even if
they do not respect rotational invariance. (For instance, these arguments
will apply even if our system is subjected to arbitrary static gravitational
and electric fields.) Now, suppose that T is an eigenstate of the Hamil-
tonian. Since T commutes with the Hamiltonian, TT will also be an
eigenstate of the Hamiltonian . Is it the same state? If so, then TT can
differ from T only by a phase
TT = CT ,
but then
in contradiction with Eq. (2. 6. 28). We see that any energy eigenstate
T satisfying Eq .
(2.6.28) must be degenerate with another eigenstate
of the same energy. This is known as a `framers degeneracy .'10 Of
course, this conclusion is trivial if the system is in a rotationally invariant
environment, because the total angular-momentum j of any state of this
system would have to be a half-integer, and there would therefore be
2j + 1 = 2,4' . . . degenerate states. The surprising result is that at least
a two-fold degeneracy persists even if rotational invariance is perturbed
by external fields, such as electrostatic fields, as long as these fields
are invariant under T. In particular, if any particle had an electric or
gravitational dipole moment then the degeneracy among its 2j + 1 spin
states would be entirely removed in a static electric or gravitational field,
so such dipole moments are forbidden by time-reversal invariance .
For the sake of completeness, it should be mentioned that P and T can
have more complicated effects on multiplets of particles with the same
mass. This possibility will be considered in Appendix C of this chapter .
No physically relevant examples are known .
2.7
Projective Representatiansw
We now return to the possibility mentioned in Section 2.2, that a group
of symmetries may be represented projectively on physical states ; that is,
the elements T, T, etc. of the symmetry group may be represented on
the physical filbert space by unitary operators U(T), U { T}, etc., which
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading .

8 2
2 Relativistic Quant um. Mechanics
satisfy the composition rule
U(T) U(T) = exp (io(T, T)) U(T T)
(2.7.1 )
with a real phase. (A b ar is used here just to distinguish one symmetry
operator from another.) The basic requirement that any phase 0 in
Eq. (2 .7. 1) would have to satisfy is the associativity condition
which imposes on 0 the corresponding conditio n
O( x'27 T1 ) + ~ (T3 7 T2 Tl ) = ~(T3 a T2) + ~(Tj T2, T1 )
Of course, any phase of the form
(2.7 .2)
(2.7 . 3)
will automatically satisfy Eq . (2.7.2), but a projective representation with
such a phase can be replaced with an ordinary representation b y replacing
U(T) with
(J(T) =_ U(T)exp (ia(T))
for which
Any set of functions O(T, T) that satisfy Eq . (2.7.2), and that differ only
by functions K O ( T, T) of the form {2 .7.3}, is called a `two-cocycle'. A
trivial cocycle is one that contains the function c~ = 0, and hence consists
of functions of the form (2.7 .3 ), which can be eliminated by a redefinition
of U(T). We are interested here in whether a symmetry group allows any
non-trivial two-cocyles ; that is, whether it may have a representation on
the physical Hilbert space that is intrinsically projective, in the sense that
the phase
(T, T) cannot be eliminated in this way .
In order to answer this question, it is useful first to consider the effect
of a phase 0 in Eq . (2 .7.1) on the commutation relations of the generators
of infinitesimal transformations. When either T or T is the identity, the
phase 0 must clearly vanish
O (T, 1) = 0(1J) = 0. (2.7 .4)
When both T and 1' are near the identity the phase must be small. Using
coordinates 0" to parameterize group elements (as in Section 2 .2), with
T(O)
1 , Eck. {2.7.4} tells us that the expansion of O(7`(O), ~(D)] around
0 = 9 = 0 must start with terms of order H H
(T(O), T(O)) = .f.bO`~Ob + • . . ,
(2.7.5 )

2.7 Projective Representations
83
where fib are real numerical constants. Inserting this expansion in the
power series expansion of Eq. (2 .7.1), and repeating the steps that led to
(2 .2.22), we now have
where Cbt is the antisymmetric coefficient
(2 .? .7)
The appearance of terms on the right-hand side of the commutation
relation proportional to the unit element (so-called central charges) is the
counterpart for the die algebra of the presence of phases in a projective
representation of a group.
The constants Cb, as well as Cuh, are subject to an important constraint,
which follows from the Jacobi identity. Taking the commutator of (2.7 .6)
with td, and adding the same expressions with b, c, d replaced with c, d, b
and d, b, c, the sum of the three double-commutators on the left-hand side
vanishes identically, and s o
C'7 hcC8ad + Cacd Ceah + Cdh Coac
0
and also
C abc Cud + C'cd Cub + CadhCae = 0 .
(2.7 .8 )
(2.7 .9 )
Eq. (2.7 .9 ) always has one obvious class of non-zero solutions for Ca b
Cab = C'abO e
(2.7.10 )
where rye is an arbitrary set of real constants . For these solutions, we
can eliminate the central charges from Eq . (2 .7 .6) by a redefinition of the
generators
(2 .7 .1 ! )
The new generators then satisfy the commutation relations without central
charges
A given Lie algebra may or may not allow solutions of Ec
than Eq . (2.7.10) .
We can now state the key theorem that governs the
intrinsically projective representations. The phase
Kf any
U(T ) of a given group can be chosen so that 0 in Eq .
conditions are met :
(2 .7 .12 )
(2.7 .9) other
occurrence of
representation
(2.7.1), if two
(a) The generators of the group in this representation can be redefined
(as in Eq. (2.7. 11) ), so as to eliminate all central charges from the
Lie algebra .

84
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
(b) The group is simply connected, i.e., and two group elements may be
connected by a path lying within the group, and any two such path s
may be continuously transformed into one another . (An equivalent
statement is that any loop that starts and ends at the same grou p
element may be shrunk continuously to a point .)
This theorem is proved in Appendix B of this chapter, which also
offers comments about the case of groups that are not simply connected .
It shows that there are just two (not exclusive) ways that intrinsically
projective representations may arise : either algebraically, because the
group is represented projectively even near the identity, or topologically,
because the group is not simply connected, and hence a path from
I to
T and then from T to T may not be continuously deformable into some
other path from 1 to TT. In the latter case, the phase in E q. (2.7. 1)
depends on the particular choice of standard paths, leading from the origin
to the various group elements, that are used to define the corresponding
U-operators.
Let's now consider each of these possibilities in turn for the special case
of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group.
(A) Algebra
With central charges, the commutation relations of the generators of the
inhomvgeneous Lorentz group would read
(TUjpv
q
a
J
" t
' t
` !
a
(2.7. 14)
(2.7.15)
(2.7.1b)
in place of Eqs. (2.4.12)-(2.4.14). We see that the C s also satisfy the
antisymmetry conditions
CAP = -CAP
.
(2.7.17)
(2.7.18)
(2.7.19)
We will now show that all these constants have additional algebraic
properties that allow them to be eliminated by shifting the definitions of
JP and PP by constant terms . (This corresponds to redefining the phase
of the operators U( 11, a) .) To derive these properties, we apply the Jacobi

2.7 Projective Representations
identities
J L
85
(2.7.20)
(2.7.21)
(2.7.22)
(The Jacobi identity involving three P s is automatically satisfied, and
hence yields no further information .) Using Eqs . (2.7.13)-(2.7 .16) in
Eqs. ( 2.7.20)--X2.7.22}, we obtain algebraic conditions on the C s
= n
. t
Contracting Eq . (2.7.23) with q w ,, gives
C14, = 4 ,
(2. 7.23)
(17.24)
(2.7.25 )
(2.7.26)
On the other hand, the constants C}`°" and CP°°f`u are not necessarily
zero, but their algebraic structure is simple enough so that they can
be eliminated by shifting the definitions of FP and
JW , respectively.
Contracting Eq. (2.7.24) with rl VF gives
C~.
= ~ ~~~~ C'F.'`~~
Also, contracting (2..7. 5) with q,, gives
2
(2 .7.28 )
(2 .7.29)
(2.T.3U)
(These expressions automatically satisfy Eqs . (2.7.24) and (2.7.25), so there
is no further information to be gained from the Jacobi identities .) We now
see that if the C s are not zero, they can be eliminated by defining new
generators
P~= P A + C y ,
(2.7 . 3
)

SG 2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
and the commutation relations are then what they would be for an
ordinary representation
0~1,p pl = 0 .
(2.7.33)
(2.7 .34)
The commutation relations will always be taken in the form Eqs . (2.7. 33 )--
( 2.7.35), but with tildas dropped .
Incidentally, the fact that there is no central charge in the algebra
of the Ji" could have been immediately inferred from the fact that this
algebra is of the type known as `serrYi-simple'. (Semi-simple Lie algebras are
those that have no invariant Abelian' subalgebra, consisting of generators
that commute with each other and whose commutators with any other
generators also belong to the subalgebra.) There is a general theorem"
that and central charges in semi-simple Lie algebras may always be
removed by a redefinition of generators, as in Eq . (2.7-32). On the other
hand, the full Poincare algebra spanned by J11' and PA is not semi-simple
(the PY form an invariant Abelian subalgebra), and we needed a special
argument to show that its central charges can also be eliminated in this
way. Indeed, the non-semi-simple Galilean algebra discussed in Section
2.4 does allow a central charge, the mass M .
We see that the inhotnogeneous Lorentz group satisfies the first
K f the
two conditions needed to rule out intrinsically projective representations .
How about the second
(B )
Topology
To explore the topology of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group, it is very
convenient to represent homogeneous Lorentz transformations by 2 x 2
complex matrices. Any real four-vector VY can be used to construct an
Hermitian 2 x 2 matrix
V° + V,
V, R- iv,
vO - Y3 ) 7
(2.7.3
)
where a-, are the usual Pauli matrices with cro - 1 . Conversely any 2 x 2
Hermitian matrix can be put in this form, and therefore defines a rea l
four-vector V .
The property of Hermiticity will be preserved under the transformatio n
~VAI
(2.7.37)
wi th ~. an arbitrary complex 2 x 2 matrix .
Furthermore, the covariant

2 .7 Projective Representations
97
square of the four-vector i s
V11 VJU - ( V
1)2 + ( V 2 ) 2 + (VI)2 - {V°}' = -Det z; (2 .7 .35 )
and this determinant is preserved by the transformation (2.7.37) provided
that
J De# ).I = i .
(2 . 7 . 39)
Each complex 2 x 2 matrix ). satisfying Eq . (2 .7.39) thus defines a real linear
transformatian of VA that leaves Eq. (2.7.38) invariant, i.e., a homogeneous
Lorentz transformation A0.? )
Furtherm ore, for two such matrices A and ;, we have
and so
However, two As that differ only by an overall phase have the same effect
on :; in Eq. (2.7.37), and so correspond to the same Lorentz transformation .
It is therefore convenient to adjust the phase of the As so tha t
Det ~ = 1, (2 .7.42)
which is consistent with Eq. (2.7.41). The 2 x 2 complex matrices with
unit determinant form a group, known as S' L( 2, C ). (The SL stands
for `special linear', with `special' denoting a unit determinant, while
C
stands for `complex'.) The group elements depend on 4 - 1 = 3 complex
parameters, or 6 read parameters, the same number as the Lorentz group .
However, L(2, C) is not the same as the Lorentz group ; if A is a matrix
in S L (2, C), then so is -;., and both ), and -A produce the same Lorentz
transformation in Eq . (2.7 .37) . Indeed, it is easy to see that the matri x
I ei9'r2
0
0
e-
dO/z
produces a Lorentz transformation A(.~( H )) which is just a rotation by
an angle 0 around the three-axis, and hence ~ = -1 produces a rotation
by an angle 27z . The Lorentz group is not the same as S L(2, C), but

S$
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
rather" SL(2, C} fZ2, which is the group of complex 2 x 2 matrices with
unit determinant, and with ). identified with -),.
Now, what is the topology of the Lorentz group? By the polar decom-
position theoreml2 , any complex non-singular matrix ~ may be written in
the form
2 = U eh
where u is u nitary and h is Hermitian
ufu = 1 ,
ht = h .
Since Det u is a phase factor, and Det exp h = exp Tr h is real and positive,
the condition (2 .7.42) requires both
Det u = 1 ,
T"rh = D.
(The factor u simply provides the rotation subgroup of the Lorentz group ;
ifs is unitary then Tr(uvut) =Try, so Va = 'Tr v is left invariant by A(u).)
Furthermore, this decomposition is unique, so SL(2, C) is topologically
just the direct product (i.e., the set of pairs of points) of the space of all
us and the space of all hs. Any Hermitian traceless 2 x 2 matrix h can be
expressed as
c a - ib
~ = a + ib -c
with a, b, c real but otherwise unconstrained, so the space of all hs is
topologically the same as ordinary three-dimensional flat space, R3. On
the other hand, any unitary 2 x 2 matrix with unit determinant can be
expressed as
d +ie f + ig
u =
-,f +ig d - ie
with d, e, f, g subject to the single non-linear constraint
d2 + e2 + P + g 2 =1 ,
so the space SU(2) of all us is topologically the same as S3, the three-
dimensional surface of a spherical ball in flat four-dimensional space .
Thus SL (2, C) is topologically the same as the direct product R3 X S 3. This
is simply cannected : any curve connecting two points of R3 or S3 can be
deformed into any other, and the same is true of the direct product. (All
The group Z2 Cansists of just elements + Z and -I. In general, when we write GI H, with H an
invariant subgroup of G, we mean the group G with elements g and gh identified if g - G and
h e H. The subgroup Z, is trivially invariant because its elements commute with all elements of
SI.(2.C') .

2.7 Projective Representations
89
spheres S, except the circle S1 are simply connected.) However, we are
interested in S L(2, CVZ2, not SL(2, C). Identifying A with --). is the same
as identifying the unitary factors u and -u (because eh is always positive),
so the Lorentz group has the topology of R3 X S3/ Z2, where S~3fZ2 is
the three-dimensional spherical surface with opposite points of the sphere
identified. This is not simply connected ; for instance, a path on S3 from u
to u' cannot be continuously deformed into a path on S3 from u to -u',
even though these two paths link the same points of S3/Z2. In fact, S3/Z2
is doubly cannected ; the paths between any two points fall into two classes,
depending on whether or not they involve an inversion u --+ -u, and any
path in one class can be deformed into another path of that class . An
equivalent statement is that a double loop, that goes twice over the same
path from any element back to itself, may be continuously contracted to
a point. (As discussed in Appendix B, this is summarized mathematically
in the statement that the fundamental group, or first homotopy group, of
S31 ,Z2 is Z2.) Similarly, the inhomogeneous Lorentz group has the same
topology as R4 x R3 X S3/Z2> and is therefore also doubly connected.
Because the Lorentz group (homogeneous or inhomogeneous) is not
simply connected, it does have intrinsically projective representations.
However, because the double loop that goes twice from 1 to A to AA and
then back to 1 can be contracted to a point, we must have
[U (A) U(A) U- 1 (AA)] I = 1
and hence the phase eiO4A,A1 is just a sig n
U(A)U(A) = ± U(AA) . (2.7.3 )
Likewise, for the inhomogeneous Lorentz grou p
These `representations up to a sign' are familiar ; they are just the states
of integer spin, for which the signs in Eqs . (2 .7.43) and (2.7.44) are always
+1, and the states of half integer spin, for which these signs are +1 or -1
according to whether the path from 1 to A to AA and then back to 1 is
or is not contractible to a point. This difference arises because a rotation
Kf 2n around the three-axis acting on a state with angular-momentum
three-component a produces a phase ezi" ", and thus has no effect on a
state of integer spin and produces a sign change when acting on a state
of half-integer spin. (These two cases correspond to the two irreducible
representations of the first hamotoAY group, Z2.) Thus Eq. (2.7.43) or
Eq. (2.7.44) imposes a superselection rule : we must not mix states of
integer and half-integer spin .
For finite mass, the limitation to integer or half-integer spin was pre-

90 ? Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
viously derived by purely algebraic means from the well-known repre-
sentations of the generators of the little group, which here are ,~us~ the
angular-momentum matrices J(P with j integer or half-integer. On the
other hand, for zero mass the action of the little group on physical one-
particle states is just a rotation around the momentum, and here there
is no algebraic reason for a limitation to integer or half-integer helicity.
There is, however, a topological reason: a rotation by an angle 47r around
the momentum can be continuously deformed into no rotation at all, so
the factor exp{47riu} must be unity, and hence 6 must be an integer or
half-integer.
Instead of working with projective representations and imposing a su-
perselection rule, we can just as well expand the Lorentz group, taking
it as SL(2, C) itself, instead of SL(2, C)/Z2 as before. Ordinary rotation
invariance forbids transitions between states of integer and half-integer
total spin, so the only difference is that now the group is simply-connected,
and it therefore has only ordinary representations, not projective represen-
tations, so that we cannot infer a superselection rule . This does not mean
that we actually can prepare physical systems in linear combinations of
states of integer and half-integer spin, but only that the observed Lorentz
invariance of nature cannot be used to show that such superpositions are
impossible .
Similar remarks apply to any symmetry group . If its Lie algebra
involves central charges, then we can always expand the algebra to include
generators that commute with anything, and whose eigenvalues are the
central charges, just as we did when we added a mass operator to the Lie
algebra of the Galilean group at the end of Section 2 .4. The expanded
Lie algebra is then, of course, free of central charges, so the part of the
group near the identity has only ordinary representations, and does not
require any superselection rule. Likewise, even though a Lie group G
may not be simply connected, it can always be expressed as C IH, where
C is a simply connected group known as the `universal covering gTOUP'
of G, and H is an invariant subgroupt of C . In general, we may just
as well take the symmetry group as C instead of G, because there is no
difference in their consequences, except that G implies a superselection
rule, while C does not . In short, the issue of superselection rules is a bit of
a red herring; it may or it may not be possible to prepare physical systems
in arbitrary superpositions of ' state,s, but one cannot settle the question by
t The first homatapy group of C/ti is H . We have seen that the covering group of the homogeneous
Lorentz group is SL(2,C' ), and the covering group of the three-dimensional rotation group is
S U(2). This connection with S f , and SU groups is special to the case of three, four, or six
dimensions ; for gcneral dimensions d the covering group of 50 (d) is given a special name,

Appendix A
Symmetry Representation Theorem.
9 1
reference to symmetry principles, because whatever one thinks the symmetry
group of nature may be, there is always another group whose consequences
are ide ntical exceptfbr the absence of superselection rules .
Appendix A The Symmetry Representation Theorem
This appendix presents the proof of the fundamental theo rem of Wigner2
that any symmetry transformation can be represented on the Hilbert
space of physical states by an operator that is either linear and unitary
or antilinear and antiunitary. For our present purposes , the property of
symmetry transformations on which we chiefly rely is that they are ray
transformations T that preserve transition probabilities, in the sense that
if 'I' , and 'i'2 a re state-vectors belong ing to rays
i and z then any
state-vectors T' and T' belonging to the transformed rays 'T' 1 and ~' 2
satisfy
We also require that a symmetry transformation should have an inverse
that preserves transition probabilities in the same sense .
To start, consider some complete orthonormal set of state-vectors Tk
belonging to rays A , wit h
and let T~ be some arbitrary choice of state-vectors belonging to the
transformed rays TX . From Eq. (2.A .1), we have
But (T~, '~) is automatically real and positive, so this requires that it
should have the value unity, and therefor e
it is easy to see that these transformed states T~ also form a complete
set, for if there were and non-zero state-vector T' that was orthogonal to
all of the T~, then the inverse transform of the ray to which 'V `' belongs
would consist of non-zero state-vectors V for which, for all k :
which is impossible since the Tk were assumed to form a complete set .
We must now establish a phase convention for the states Vk. For this
purpose, we single out one of the Tk, say 'Pt . and consider the state-vectors
-,,F2

92
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
belonging to some ray Yk , with k =~ 1. Any state-vector Yk' belonging to
the #ransformed ray T9 k may be expanded in the state-vectors 'Y{ ,
Ti =
CWTi
From Eq. (2.A . 1 ) we have
ICkk 1=
CkI 1 =
and for I :~ k and 14 1 :
ckl = 0 .
For any given k, b y an appropriate choice of phase of the two state-
vectors Y'~ and T~ we can clearly adjust the phases of the two non-zero
coefficients ckk and ckl so that both coefficients are just 1 1
.From now
on, the state-vectors Ti and 'Yk chosen in this way will be denoted U Y'k
and UTk . As we have seen,
72
However, it still remains to define UT for general state-vectors T .
Now consider an arbitrary state-vector T belonging to an arbitrary ray
and expand it in the Tk ;
k
(2.A .6 )
Any state T' that belongs to the transformed ray T'1 may similarly be
expanded in the complete orthonormal set U'I'k
T' = 1: CkUTk
k
(2 .A.7)
The equality of I (Tk,T) 12 and I (UTk,T')~2 tells us that for all 1c (including
k = 1) :
while the equality of I( Y'k , Y)I1 and
J{UY`k, 'I'`y2 tells us that for all k :~ 1 :
~ C'k + C112 = IG'
k, + C, C~.
The ratio of Eqs. (2.A.9) and (2.A.8) yields the formula
which with Eq. (2.A.8) also requires
(2.A.9)
P .
. 1o)
(2.A. i 1)

Appendix A Symmetry Representation Theore m
and therefore either
Ck ICI = CLIC1 ,
or e1 se
93
(2.A . 12)
(2.A .13 )
Furthermore, we can show that the same choice must be made for each
k. (This step in the proof was omitted by Wigner.) To see this, suppose
that for some k, we have Ck /C1 = Ck' /Ci, while for some I k, we have
instead C'IfC1 = (C' IC')* . Suppose also that both ratios are complex, so
that these are really different cases . (This incidentally requires that k :~ 1
and 10 1, as well as k * 1.) We will show that this is impossible.
Define a state-vector (D - ~ [fir + ~'k + TI] . Since all the ratios of the
coefficients in this state-vector are real, we must get the same ratios in
any state-vector V belonging to the transformed ray :
where oc is a phase factor with jal = 1 . But then the equality of the
transition probabilities
1 {0, T} I and l(V, T') I requires that
r
r
+ ~~ +
i
i
and hence
~ +
k +
C C*
1 1
C1 C1
2
~
=
Ck + ~1
i
C1
This is only possible if
or, in other wards, if
Re
Ck Ci
= Re
Ck(
:)
1
Im
~` IM " = Q .
i
1
Hence either Ck/fir or CI/CI must be real for any pair k,
1, in contra-
diction with our assumptions. We see then that for a given symmetry
transformation T applied to a given state-vector ~~ ~kTk, we must have
either Eq. (2.A.1 2) for all k, or else Eq. ( 2.A. 1 3 ) for all k .
signer ruled out the second possibility,
Eq. (2.A.13), because as he
showed any symmetry transformation for which this possibility is realized
would have to involve a reversal in the time coordinate, and in the proof
he presented he was considering only symmetries like rotations that do

94 2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
not affect the direction of time. Here we are treating symmetries involving
time-reversal on the same basis as all other symmetries, so we will have
to consider that, for each symmetry T and state-vector k C' kTk, either
Eq . (2.A.12) or Eq . (2 .A.13) may apply. Depending on which of these
alternatives is realized, we will now define UT to be the particular one Kf
the state-vectors T' belonging to the ray T
with phase chosen so that
either C 1 = C' or C1 = C11', respectively. Then either
~ (~~kTk) =
ck UTk
k
k
or else
k k
(2 .A. 15)
It remains to be proved that for a given symmetry transformation,
we must make the same choice between Eqs . (2.A.14) and (2.A.15) for
arbitrary values of the coefficients Ck. Suppose that Eq. (2A14) applies
for a state-vector ~kAkTk while Eq. (2.A. 1 5) applies for a state-vecto r
BkTk. Then the invariance of transition probabilities requires that
k
k
or equivalently
Im (4A1) I m (B~ B~ ) = 0
k 1
We cannot rule out the possibility that Eq. (2.A.1 6) may be satisfied for
a pair of state-vectors k Ak Tk and Ek Bk'I'k belonging to different rays.
However, for any pair of such state-vectors, with neither Ak nor Bk all of
the same phase (so that Eqs. (2.A.14) and (2.A . 15) are not the same), we
can always find a third state-vector k C'kTk for which `
lM<Ci ) Im(Ak~~ ) z7L 0
k 1
and also
Im ( C~ Cj) Irr►( BZ Bt) * 0 .
k1
(2.A . 17)
(2.A . 18)
if for some pair k,d both AkAf and BkDI arc complex, then choose all C's to vanish except for Ck
and C+, and choose these two coefficients to have different phases . If AkAp is complex but B' 8j
is real for some pair k,l, then there must be some other pair m,n (possibly with either m or n but
not both equal to k or 1) for which BmBR is complex . If also A; A , is complex, then choose all
Cs to vanish except for C.',,, and Cn, and choose these two coefficients to have different phase .
If A.Art is real, then choose all Cs to vanish except for Ck, C'j ,C,,, and C',,, and choose these
four coefficients all to have different phases_ The case where Bk Bf is complex but AkA+ is real is
handled in just the same way.

Appendix A Symmetry Representation Theorem
95
As we have seen, it follows from Eq. ( 2 .A . 1 7 ) that the same choice between
Eqs. (2.A.14) and (2.A.15 ) must be made for ~:k A kTk and Ek CkTk, and
it follows from Eq. (2 .A. 1 8 ) that the same choice between Eqs . (2.A.14)
and (2.A,15) muss be made far Ek BkTk and Ek CkPk, so the same choice
between Eqs . (2.A.14) and (2 .A.15) must also be made for the two state-
vectors Ek Ak Pk and kBkTk with which we started. We have thus
shown that for a given symmetry transformation T either all state-vectors
satisfy Eq. (2.A.14) or else they all satisfy Eq. ( 2.A. 15) .
It is now easy to show that as we have defined it, the quantum mechan-
ical operator U is either linear and unitary or antifinear and antiunitary .
First, suppose that Eq. (2.A.14) is satisfied for all state-vectors Ek CkTk•
Any two state-vectors 'Y and (D may be expanded as
T =AkTk}
k
(D 1: BkTk
and so, using Eq. (2.A .14),
k
k
_ a
Ak UtiYk + fl
Bk U Tk
.
k
k
Usi ng Eq. (2 . A. 14) again, this gives
(2.A. 1
)
so U is linear. Also, wing Eqs. (2.A.2) and (2.A.3), the scalar product of
the transformed states is
k
k ,
k1
k
and hence
(2.A .20)
so U is unitary.
The case of a symmetry that satisfies Eq . (2.A.15) for all state-vectors
may be dealt with in much the same way. The reader can probably
supply the arguments without help, but since antilinear operators may be
unfamiliar, we shall give the details here anyway. Suppose that Eq . (2.A,1 5)
is satisfied for all state-vectors Ek CkTk. Any two state-vectors T and cD
may be expanded as before, and so :
k
k
k k

96
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Using Eq. (2.A. 1 5 ) again, this gives
(2.A.2 1 )
so U is antidinear . Also, using Eqs. (2.A.2) and (2.A.3), the scalar product
of the t ransformed states is
k i
k
and hence
so U is antiuraitary.
(2.A .22)
Appendix B
Group Operators and Homotopy Classes
In this appendix we shall prove the theorem stated in section 2 .7, that the
phases of the operators U( T) for finite symmetry transformations T may
be chosen so that these operators form a representation of the symmetry
group, rather than a projective representation, provided (a) the generators
of the group can be defined so that there are no central charges in the Lie
algebra, and (b) the group is simply connected . We shall also comment on
the projective representations encountered for groups that are not simply
connected, and their relation to the homotopy classes of the group .
To prove this theorem, let us recall the method by which we construct
the operators corresponding to symmetry trans#'vrmations. As described
in Section 2.2, we introduce a set of real variables 0' to parameterize
these transformations, in such a way that the transformations satisfy the
composition rule {2.2.15} ;
T (0) T (0) == T (f (0, 0)) .
We want to construct operators U( T (O )) ; U[0] that satisfy the corre-
sponding condition'
U [9] U [ H] -- U [f( , 0)] .
(2.g. i )
To do this, we lay down arbitrary `standard' paths 0(s) in group pa-
0
rarneter space, running from the origin to each point 0, with 0$(0) = 0
and 0 ~(1) = Ba, and define ~Tr~(s) along each such path by the differential
Square brackets are used here to distinguish U operators constructed as functions of the group
parameters from those expressed as functions of the group transformations themselves .

Appendix B Group Operators and Hnmotvpy Classe s
equation
N 5 s)
~ U6 ( 5) ` it,, ~Io(s)h~ ( Oe ( s))
d
0
d s
with the initial condition
uO(o) = 1 7
where
00, 6=o
9 7
(2 .B.2)
{2 .5.3}
(2,B.4 )
We are eventually going to identify the operators U[0] with U,9(1), but
first we must establish some of the properties of Uo(s) .
In order to check the composition rule, consider two points 01 and 02,
and define a path that runs from 0 to 01 and thence to f (02, Oi ) :
Da(2s)
0 Cs ~ 1
pa (s) _
03 2 (2.8 .5 )
At the end of the first segment, we are at Uy (~) = ~1g~{1} . To evaluate
U,;o(s) along the second segment, we need the derivative of f '(09,(2s -
1 ), 01). For this purpose, we use the fundamental associativity condition :
.fa (.f(03 , e2), 0 1 ) = P (03 , f ( e2, 01 ) ) -
(2.B.6)
Matching the coefficients of 0~ in the limit 03 ~ 0 yields the result :
Do,
(2. B.7)
Along the second segment the differential equation (2 .B.2) for U,9(s) is thus
the same as the differential equation for Utz (2s - 1). They satisfy different
initial conditions, but Ug( s)Uil ( 1 ) also satisfies the same differential
equation as U02(2s - 1), and in addition the same initial condition- at
s = ~, both are unity. We therefore conclude that for Z - 1,
9 1
and in particular
URM -z- U020) U91(1)-
(2 . B. 8 )
However, this does not say that Uo(1 ) satisfies the desired composition
rule (2.8. 1), because although the path Oy(s) runs from 0 a = 0 to 0' =
,fa ($2 , 01), in general it will not be the same as whatever 'standard' path
Df(o,,01) we have chosen to run directly from 0' _ 0 to 0' = fa(O?, 0 1 ). We
need to show that U0(l) is independent of the path from 0 to 0 in order
to be able to identify U[9] as U,9( 1 ).

98 2 Relativistic Quantum Mechan ics
For this purpose, consider the variation b U of UO(s) produced by a
variation 60{s} in the path from 0 to 0 . Taking the variation of Eq. (2 .B,2)
gives the differential equation
ds 6 U = ttabU h ~,( O)dOl + its U h ~,e(O)~Ot~ d~' + itaUh ~~~r~D~'
ds
ds
ds
where h',~ = Oh' /00' .
Using the Lie commutation relations (2 .2.22)
(without central charges) and rearranging a bit, this give s
~s (u'u)
~ (i U-' t~Uh%JO')
ds
ds
( "'
b b C)
.
(2. B . 9 )
However, by taking the limit 03, 02 -r 0 in the associativity condition
{2.B.6}, we find for all 0 :
where f ~e is the coefficient defined by (2.2 .19). Antisymmetrizin~, in b and
c shows that the last term in Eq. (2.B,9) vanishes
Eq. (2.B.9) thus tells us that the quantity
is constant along the path 9(,5). It follows that Uq{1} is stationary under
any infinitesimal variation of the path that leaves the endpoints Q( 0) = 0
and 0(1) = 0 (and UO{O} = 1) fixed. But assumption (b) tells us that any
path from Vi(a) = 0 to 0(1) = 0 can be continuously deformed into any
other, so we may now regard UO(1) as apath - independent function of 0
aline :
In particular, since the path leads from 0 to f (02, 0 1), we have
UYG) = U If(02, OA
(2.R, 13 )
so that Eq . (2.B.8) shows that U[B] satisfies the group multiplication law
(2.B . 1), as was to be proved .
Now that we have constructed a non-projective representation Uff)],
it remains to prove that any projective representation fJ[0] of the same
group with the same representation generators t a can only differ from
£I J9] by a phase :

Append ix B
Group Operators and Homotopy Classes
99
so that the phase (P in the multiplication law for 0[01 :
can be removed by a simple change of phase of U [0]. To see this, consider
the operator
Because U[O] and U[O] have the same generators, the derivative of the
left-hand side with respect to 0" vanishes at 0' = 0, and so
0=
' JU[0I_IU[01J+i0b(0)UI0I J 101 ,
where
Differentiating this result with respect to
0': and antisymmetrizing in b
and c gives immediately
0 - NO) 00C(0)
OOC
60b
A familiar theorem 13 tells us that in a simply connected space, this requires
that Ob is just a gradient of some function J~
afl(o)
040 ) =
aBb
Thus the quantity U[#]] -ICJ [0] e00) is actually constant in 0. Setting it
equal to its value at 0 = 4, we see that & is just proportional to U :
as claimed above .
The above analysis provides some information about the nature of the
phase factors that can appear in the group multiplication law when the Lie
algebra is free of central charges but the group is not simply connected.
Suppose that the path from zero to 0 to f (B, 0) cannot be deformed into
the standard path we have chosen to go from zero to f {$, 0), or in other
words, that the loop from zero to 0 to f {0, 0) and then back to zero is not
continuously deformable to a point. Then U-' (f ( 0-, , 60) U((~~ )U(01) can
be a phase factor exp(1'0(02,01)) * 1, but 0 will be the same for all other
loops into which this can be continuously deformed . The set consisting
of all loops that start and end at the origin and that can be continuously
deformed into a given loop is known as the hamotopy class14 of that loop ;
we have thus seen that 0(02, fir) depends only on the homotopy class of

100 2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
the loop from zero to 0 to f (#], 0) and then back to zero. The set of
homotopy classes forms a group ; the `product' of the homotopy class for
loops Y1 and 2'2 is the homotopy class of the loop formed by going
around Y1 and then Y2 ; the `inverse' of the homo#opy class of the loo p
is the homotopy class of the loop obtained by going arount! in the
opposite direction ; and the `identity' is the homotopy class of loops that
can be deformed into a point at the origin . This group is known as the
first homotopy group or fundamental group of the space in question. It is
easy to see that the phase factors form a representation of this group : if
going around loop Y gives a phase factor e0, and going around loo p
gives a phase factor e'O, then going around both loops gives a phase
factor e~Od. Hence we can catalog all the possible types of projective
representations of a given group 9 (with no central charges) if we know
the one-dimensional representations of the first homotopy group of the
parameter space of 19.
groups will be discussed in greater detail
in Volume II .
Appendix C Inversions and Degenerate Multiplets
It is usually assumed that the inversions T and P take one-particle states
into other one-particle states of the same species, perhaps with phase
factors that depend on the particle species . In Section 2.6 we noted in
passing that inversions might act in a more complicated way than this
on degenerate multiplets of one-particle states, a possibility that seems to
have been first suggested by VVigner15 in 1964. This appendix will explore
generalized versions of the inversion operators, in which finite matrices
appear in place of the inversion phases, but without making some of
VVigrter's limiting assumptions.
Let us start with time-reversal . Wigner limited the possible action of
the inversion operators by assuming that their squares are proportional
to the unit operator. Because T is antiunitary, it is easy to see that the
corresponding proportionality factor for T2 can only be ±1, perhaps with
different signs for subspaces separated by superselection rules. When the
sign for T2 on the space of states with even or odd values of 2j is opposite
to the sign (--1)2j found in Section 2.6, the physical states involved must
furnish representations of the operator T that are more complicated than
that assumed so far. But if we are willing to admit this possibility,
there does not seem to be any good reason to impose Wigner's condition
that T2 is proportional to unity. It is not convincing to appeal to the
structure of the extended Poincare group ; the only useful definition of
any of the inversion operators is one that makes the operator exactly or

Appendix C Inversions and Degenerate Multiplets
101
approximately conserved, and this may not be the definition that makes
T2 proportional to the unit operator .
To explore more general possibilities for time-reversal, let us assume
that on a massive one-particle state it has the actio n
1 )j-" 1 9 mn T-p,-C,M
}
(2 . C .1 )
where p, j, and ff are the particle' s momentum , spin, and spin z-component,
and n, m are indices labelling members of a degenerate multiplet of particle
species . (The appearance of the factor I )J-1 and the reversal of p and
cr are deduced in the same way as in section 2.6.) The matrix is
unknown, except that because T is antiunitary, 9- must be unitary.
Now let us see how we can simplify this transformat ion by an ap-
propriate choice of bas is for the one-particle states. Defining new states
by the un itary transformation T~ , ~,
we find the same
transformation (2 .C .1), with the matrix l,,, changed to
We cannot in general make 9' diagonal by such a choice of basis of the
one-particle states, as we could if T were unitary . But we can instead make
it block-diagonal, with the blocks either 1 x 1 phases, or 2 x 2 matrices of
the form
1
0
eiOl2
e- °0/2
0
'
where the 0 are various real phases .
{Here is the prof. First, note that Eq. (2.C.2) gives
(2-C- 3 )
This is a unitary transformation, so it can be chosen to diagonalize the
unitary matrix tl T*, Assuming this to have been done, and dropping
primes, we have
9- =D g- T
(2.C.4)
where D is a unitary diagonal matrix, say with phases e*R along the main
diagonal. One immediate consequence is that the diagonal component
,n vanishes unless e*, = 1 . Furthermore, if e`en =
1 but e~~- =~ 1 , then
Eq. (2.C .4) tells us that 5
=
= 0. By listing first all rows and
columns for w hich e*, = 1 , the matrix .l is put in the form
0
'
(2.C.5)
.~ _
0 -4
where 4 is symmetric as well as unitary, and the diagonal elements of
all vanish. Because is symmetric, it can be expressed as the exponential

102
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
of a symmetric anti-Hermitian matrix, so it can be diagonalized
by a
transformation (2.C.2) acting only on W, with the corresponding submatrix
of °ll real and hence orthogonal. It is therefore only necessary to consider
the subrhatrix that connects the rows and columns for which e~O, D .
For n :~ in, Eq. (2.C.4) gives J'_nm and
so
°fnm =
and also J~ = Hence
=J-,,, = 0
unless ~~O,, e' O- = 1 . If we list first all rows and columns of; with a given
phase eiO E :~ 1, and then all rows and columns with the opposite phase,
and then all rows and columns with some other phase eat' * 1 not equal
to e±* , and then all rows and columns with opposite phase, and so on,
the matrix ' becomes of block diagonal form
where
A _
ar
0
. . .
0
~22
. . .
0
~ i
0
(2. . C.6)
(2.C.7)
Furthermore, the unitarity of
~F and hence of requires that ~~jw'T =
W~
; = 1, and hence 1 is square and unitary. By applying a transforma-
tion {2 .C.2} with V block-diagonal in the same sense as and with the
matrix in the ith block of form
vi
0
1
a
with Vi and Wj unitary, the submatrices, , are subjected to the transfor-
mations W; ---~ V,- i WiW,*, so we can clearly choose this transformation to
make Wz = 1 . This establishes a correspondence between pairs of individ-
ual rows and columns within each block with phases e' 0i and e-'6 . To put
the matrix into block-diagonal form with 2 x 2 blocks of form (2.C-3),
it is now only necessary to rearrange the rows and columns so that within
the nth block we list rows and columns with phase e* alternating with
the corresponding rows and columns with phase e -' Pi . )
It is important to note that where eat =~ 1, it is not possible to choose
states to diagonalize the time-reversal transformation . If we have a pair
of states `Yp, ,,t on which T acts with a matrix (2 .C .3), then
(2.C.$)
Then on an arbitrary linear combination of these states, time-reversal
gives

Appendix C Inversions and Degenerate Multiplers
103
For c+TpcF,+ + c_T Q,,,,_ to be transformed under T by a phase A, it is
necessary that
But combining these equations gives e±`ol2 c+ =
1 ~ 1 ?c+e+T0l?r which is
impossible unless either c+ T c_ = 0 or eio is unity. Thus for e", i,
time-reversal invariance imposes a two-fold degeneracy on these states,
beyond that associated with their spin .
Of course, if there is an additional `internal' symmetry operator S which
subjects these states to the transformation
+i0/2
then we can redefine the time-reversal operator as T' - S- 1T, and this
operator would not mix the states Tp, 17r+ with one another. It is only in
the case where no such internal symmetry exists that we can attribute the
doubling of particle states to time-reversal itself .
Let's come back now to the question of the square of T . Repeating the
transformation (2.C.
) gives
2 ~i +1o
If we were to assume with Wigner that T2 is proportional to the unit
operator, then we would have to have eio = e-fo, and since the phase is
then real it would have to be + 1 or -1 . The choice e °O _ - 1 would still
require a two-fold degeneracy of one-particle states be yond that associated
with their s pin, and under signer's assumptions all particles would show
this doubling. But there is no reason not to take a general phase 0 in
Eq . (2 .C .8), one that may vanish for some particles and not for others .
Thus the fact that observed particles do not show the extra two-fold
degeneracy does not rule out the possibility that others m ight.
We may also consider the possibility of more complicated representa-
tions of the parity operator P, with
with a unitary but otherwise unconstrained matrix Y. Unlike the case of
time-reversal, here we may always diagonalize this matrix by a choice of
basis for the states. But this choice of basis may not be the one in which
time-reversal acts simply, so, in principle, P and T together can impose
additional degeneracies that would not be required by P or T alone.
As discussed in chapter 5, any quantum field theory is expected to
respect a symmetry known as CPT, which acts on one-particle states as

104
2 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
where n' denotes the antiparticle (or `charge-conjugate') of particle n . No
phases or matrices are allowed in this transformation (though of course
we could always introduce such phases or matrices by combining CPT
with good internal symmetries.) It follows that
( APT)'Tp,0r,n = (-1 )'iTP,-aM a (2.C. 12)
so the possibility suggested by Wigner of a sign -(-1)2j in the action of
(CPT)2 does not arise in quantum field theory .
To the extent that T is a good sYmmetry of some class of phenomena,
so is the inversion CP =_ (CPT)T-1 . For the states that transform under T
in the conventional way
TTpaa,n GC T-p, v- ,n
i
(2.C.13)
the GP operator also acts conventionall y
The operator C ; CPP-1 then just interchanges particles and antiparticle s
CTP,cr,,, ac Tp,rryn E'
.
(2.C.15 )
On the other hand, where T has the unconventional representation (2 .x.5),
Eq. (2 . C. 11) gives
In particular, it is possible that the degeneracy indicated by the label
± may be the same as the particle-antiparticle degeneracy , so that the
a ntiparticle (as defined by CPT) of the state T± Is T:;. In this case, CP
would have the unconventional property of not
i nterchanging particles
and antiparticles. As far as these particles are concerned , C P and T would
be what are usually called P and CT . But this is not merely a matter of
definition ; on other particles CP and T would still have their usual effect.
No examples are known of particles that furnish unconventional repre-
sentations of inversions, so these possibilities will not be pursued further
here. From now on , the inversions will be assumed to have the conven-
tional action assumed in section 1 6.
Problems
1. Suppose that observer C sees a W-boson (spin one and mass m =~ 0)
with momentum p in the y-direction and spin z-component 6 . A
second observer ur' moves relative to the first with velocity v in the
z-direction. How does V describe the W state?

References
10 5
2. Suppose that observer 0 sees a photon with momentum p in the
y-direction and polarization vector in the z-direction. A second
observer
G' moves relative to the first with velocity v in the z-
direction. How does '' describe the same photon ?
3. Derive the commutation relations for the generators of the Galilean
group directly from the group multiplication law (without using
our results for the Lorentz group), Include the most general set
of central charges that cannot be eliminated by redefinition of th e
group generators.
4. Show that the operators P.Pj" and YV.WP commute with all Lorentz
transformation operators U ( A, a), where Wp = ~~,,pAJ° Pp'.
5. Consider physics in two space and one time dimensions, assuming
invariance under a `Lorentz' group ,S O ( 2, 1 ). How would you describe
the spin states of a single massive particle? How do they behave under
Lorentz transformations? What about the inversions P and T ?
6. As in Problem 5, consider physics in two space and one time di-
mensions, assuming invariance under a `Lorentz' group x(2,1). How
would you describe the spin states of a single massless particle? How
do they behave under Lorentz transformations? What about the
inversions P and T?
References
1. F. A. M. Dirac The Principles of' ( uantum. Mechanics, 4th edn (Ox-
ford University Press, oxford, 1958).
2. E. P. aligner, Gruppentheorie end ihre Anwendung auf die Quaraten-
mecharaak der Atomspektren (Braunschweig, 1931) : pp. 251-3 (English
translation, Academic Press, Inc, New work, 1959) .
For massless
particles, see also E. P. Wigner, in Theoretical Physics (International
Atomic Energy Agency, sienna, 1963) : p. 64 .
3. G. C. Wick, A . S. Wightman, and E. P. signer, Pays . Rev. 88, 101
(1952).
3a. See, e .g, S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New work,
1972) : Section 2.1 .
4. E. Inane and E. F. Wigner, Nuovo Cimento IX, 705 (1952) .
5. E . P. Wigner, Apra. Math. 40, 149 (1939).

106
2 Relativistic Quantum mechanics
6. G. W. Mackey, Ann. Math.
55, 101 (19521) ; 58, 193 (1953) ; Acta.
Math . 99,265 (1958) ; Induced Representations of Groups and Quantum
Mechanics (Benjamin, New York, 1968)-
7. See, e.g., A. R. Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechanics,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1957) :
Chapter 4 ; M. E .
Rose, Elementary Theory of'Angular Momentum (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1957) : Chapter IV; L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz,
Quantum Mechanics - Non Relativistic Theory, 3rd edn. (Pergamon
Press, Oxford,
1 97 7 ) : Section 5$ ; Wu-K] Tung, Group Theory in
Physics (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995) : Sections 7.3 and 8 .1 .
8. T. D. Lee and C . N. Yang, Phys . Rev .
104, 254 (1956) ; C. S. Wu
et a l., Phys .
Re v. 105, 1413 (195 7) ; R. Darwin, L. Lederman, and
M. Weinrich, Phys. Rev. 105, 1415 ( 1957) ; J . I. Friedman and V. L .
Telegdi, Phys. Re v . 105, 1 68 1 ( 1957) .
9. J. H . Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, and R. Turlay, Phys.
Rev. Letters 13, 13 8 (1964).
1 0. H. A. Kra.mers, Proc. Acad. Sci. Amsterdam 33, 959 (1930) ; also see
F. J . Dyson, J. Math. Phys. 3, 140 (1 962),
11. V. Bargmann, Ann. Math. 59, 1 (1954)- Theorem 7.1 .
12. See, e.g., H. W. Turnbull and A. C. Aitken, An Introduction to the
Theory of Canonical Matrices (Dover Publications, New York, 1961) :
p. 194.
13. See e. g. H. Flanders, Differential Forms (Academic Press, New dark,
1963) . Section 3 .6.
14. For an introduction to homotflpy classes and groups, see, e .g.,
J. G. Hocking and C. S. Young, Topology (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1961) : Chapter 4 ; C. Nash and S . yen, Topology and Geometry
for Physicists (Academic Press, London, 1983) : Chapters 3 and 5 .
1 5. E. P. Wigner, in Group Theoretical Concepts and Methods in Elemen-
tary Particle Physics, ed. by F. {Gursey (Gordon and Breach, New
`fork, 1964): p . 37 .

Scattering Theory
The general principles of relativistic quantum mechanics described in the
previous chapter have so far been applied here only to states of a single
stable particle. Such one-particle states by themselves are not very exciting
- it is only when two or more particles interact with each other that any-
thing interesting can happen . But experiments do not generally follow the
detailed course of events in particle interactions. Rather, the paradigmatic
experiment (at least in nuclear or elementary particle physics) is one in
which several particles approach each other from a macroscopically large
distance, and interact in a microscopically small region, after which the
products of the interaction travel out again to a macroscopically large dis-
tance. The physical states before and after the collision consist of particles
that are so far apart that they are effectively non-interacting, so they can be
described as direct products of the one-particle states discussed in the pre-
vious chapter. In such an experiment, all that is measured is the probability
distribution, or `cross-sections', for transitions between the initial and final
states of distant and effectively non-interacting particles . This chapter will
outline the farmalism1 used for calculating these probabilities and cross-
sections .
3.1
`In' and `hut' States
A state consisting of several non-interacting particles may be regarded as
one that transforms under the inhomogeneaus Lorentz group as a direct
product of one-particle states. To label the one-particle states we use their
four-momenta p", spin z-component (or, for massless particles, helicity)
a, and, since we now may be dealing with more than one species of
particle, an additional discrete label r: for the particle type, which includes
a specification or its mass, spin, charge, etc. The general transformation
rule is
107

108
3 Scatter ing Theory
X
j(APi )1(
P2)' . . .
d 1 d~
X
I Ap I
~a', in2 iAp2,d'rn2 ; , . .
(3. 1 . 1 )
where WA P) is the Wigner rotation (x.5.20), and DYa(YV) are the con-
ventional (2j + 1}-dimensional unitary matrices representing the three-
dimensional rotation group. (This is for massive particles ; for any mass-
less particle, the matrix D
( 14 (A, p)) is replaced with 6,1a exp(idO(11,p)),
G CF
where 0 is the angle defined by Eq. (2.5.43) .) The states are normalized as
in Eq . (2.5.19)
(Y ,
.
0
F, 1,
0 ;- , T
+ permutations
(3 .1 .2)
with the terra `± permutations' included to take account of the possibility
that it is some permutation of the particle types nl, nz, . . . that are of the
same species of the particle types ni, n2> . . .. (As discussed more fully in
Chapter 4, its sign is - 1 if this permutation includes an odd permutation
of half-integer spin particles, and otherwise +1. This will not be important
in the work of the present chapter.)
We often use an abbreviated notation, letting one Greek letter, say Y ,
stand for the whole collection pj, ui, n 1 ; p2, C2, n2 ; . . .. In this notation,
Eq. (3 .1 .2) is written simply
(TCXF~ 'Y,) = 6(a' - a)
(3. 1 .3 )
with 6(oc' -- ar) standing for the sum of products of delta functions and
Kronecker deltas appearing on the right-hand side of Eq . (3 .1 .2) . Also, in
summing over states, we write
d L x . . , =
1:
f
.
d3Pi d
3p~, . . .
.
(3 .1 .4)
..
In particular, the completeness relation for states normalized as in
Eq. (3.1 .3) reads
T = /dcx T, (T,,, T). (3 .1 .5)
The transformation rule (3 .1.1) is only possible for particles that for
one reason or another are not interacting. Setting AP, = P, and aP =
(a, Q, 0, r), for which U(A, a) = exp(iH T), Eq . (3,1 .1 ) requires among other
D(jl) (W(A,p~))DC~Tj`a), (W(A, P2))

3. 1
`fin ' and
`Out' States
109
things that T, be an energy eigenstat e
HT, = ExTo:
with an energy equal to the sum of the one-particle energies
(3 .1 .6)
= p° + p°+~-- (3.1 .7)
and with no interaction terms, terms that would involve more than one
particle at a time.
On the other hand, the transformation rule (3.1 1) does apply in scat-
tering processes at times t
__* boo. As explained at the beginning of
this chapter, in the typical scattering experiment we start with particles
at time t --,, -oa so far apart that they are not yet interacting, and end
with particles at t -r +oo so far apart that they have ceased interacting .
We therefore have not one but two sets of states that transform as in
Eq . (3.1 . 1) : the `in ' and `nut' states 'P,+ and T,- will be found to contain
the particles described by the label ac if observations are made at t --~ -oo
or t --~, +oo, respectively.
Note how this definition is framed. To maintain manifest Lorentz
invariance, in the formalism we are using here, state-vectors do not change
with time - a state-vector kI' describes the whole spacetime history of a
system of particles. (This is known as the Heisenberg picture, in distinction
with the hradinger picture, where the operators are constant and the
states change with time.) Thus we do not say that T.± are the limits at
t -). Tao of a time-dependent state-vector T(t) .
However, implicit in the definition of the states is a choice of the inertial
frame from which the observer views the system ; different observers see
equivalent state-vectors, but not the same state-vector . In particular,
suppose that a standard observer e) sets his or her clock so that t = 0
is at some time during the collision process, while some other observer
G' at rest with respect to the first uses a clock set so that t' = 0 is at
a time t = T ; that is, the two observers' time coordinates are related by
t' = t - -r.
Then if G~ sees the system to be in a state T,
60' will see
the system in a state U( 1, --T)T = exp(-iHr)T. Thus the appearance
of the state long before or long after the collision (in whatever basis is
used by 61) is found by applying a time-translation operator eXp(-iHT)
with r --* -oo or r -+ +oo, respectively. Of course, if the state is really
an energy eigenstate, then it cannot be localized in time the operator
exp(-iH,u) yields an inconsequential phase factor exp(-iE~,c) . Therefore,
we must consider wave-packets, superpositions flac g(ac)T,, of states, with
an amplitude g(cc) that is non-zero and smoothly varying over some finite
The labels `+' and `- ' for `in' and 'out' states may seem backward, but they seem to have become
traditional. They arise from the signs in Eq. (3, 1,16).

110
3 Scattering Theory.
range KE of energies. The `in' and `out' states are defined so that the
superposition
exp(-iH-c)
da g(2)T,± _ da e i Ex-cg(a)Tx ±
has the appearance of a corresponding superposition of free-particle states
for r < -1/LE or r > +1 /AE , respectively.
To make this concrete, suppose we can divide the time-translation gen-
erator H into two terms, a free-particle Hamiltonian HO and an interaction
V,
in such a way that HO has eigenstates (Da that have the same appearance
as the eigenstates T~ and ~'~ of the complete Hamiltonia n
NOcD7 = E.101 ,
(3.1 .9)
Note that HO is assumed here to have the same spectrum as the full
Hamiltonian H . This requires that the masses appearing in Ho be the
physical masses that are actually measured, which are not necessarily the
same as the `bars' mass terms appearing in H ; the difference if there is
any must be included in the interaction V . not HO. Also, any relevant
bound states in the spectrum of H should be introduced into HO as if they
were elementary particles ." *
The `in' and `out' states can now be defined as eigenstates of H , not Ho,
which satisfy the cond i tion
f da e-iE,-cg (a) 'Pa
du e-iE,Tg(a),Da
for r --* -oo or -c -> +x, respec tively .
Eq. (3 .1.12) can be rewritten as the requirement that :
. / j
( 3,I, 1 1 )
(3 . l.lZ)
for r -r -oo or -r --* +oo, respectively. This is sometimes rewritten as a
formula for the `in' and `out' states :
(3.1 .13)
Alternatively, in non-rciativislic problems we can include the binding potential in HO . In the
application of this method to 'rearrangement collisions,' where some bound states appear in the
initial state but not the final state, or vice-versa, one must use a different split of H into HO and
V in the initial and final states.

3. 1
=rn f and ;out ' States
where
Q(r) - exp(+iH-u)exp(-iHoz)
.
II I
(3.1 .14 )
However, it should be kept in mind that in Eq .
( 3 .1 . 13) gives
meaningful results only when acting on a smooth superposition of energy
eigenstates .
One immediate consequence of the definition (3 . 1 .1 2) is that the `in' and
`out' states are normalized just like the free-particle states . To see this,
note that since the left-hand side of Eq. (11 .12) is obtained by letting the
unitary operator exp(-iHr) act on a time-independent state, its norm is
independent of time, and therefore equals the norm of its limit forz --* ~)c-,
i.e., the norm of the right-hand side of Eq . ( 3 .1 .12) :
f
do~ d# exp(-i(E, - Ep),r)g(a)g*(fl)(Tp±1 Y1X± )
= J da d# e xp(-i(Ea - E#) T)g (1) g * (#) (Op, IDX)
.
Since this is supposed to be true for all smooth functions g{a}, the scalar
products must be equal
(3.1 .15 )
It is useful for some purposes to have an explicit though formal solution
of the energy eigenvalue equation (3 .1. 1) satisfying the conditions (3 . 1 .12).
For this purpose, write Eq . (3.1 .11) as
The operator E, - Ho is not invertible ; it annihilates not only the free-
particle state cD, but also the continuum of other free-particle states (D# of
the same energy. Since the `in' and 'out" states become just (D,, for V -i 0,
we tentatively write the formal solutions as (1), plus a term proportional
to V :
or, expanding in a complete set of free-particle states ,
T#7t Dp
± =
J
E, - Ep + ie
(3.1 .16)
(3.1 .17)
(3 .1 . 15)
with E a positive infinitesimal quantity, inserted to give meaning to the
reciprocal of E, - Ho. These are known as the Lippmann-Schwinger
equation5 . 'O We shall use Eq. ( 3 .1 .17 ) at the end of the next section to give
a slightly less unrigorous proof of the orthonormality of the `in' and 'out'
states.

112 3 Scattering Theory
It remains to be shown that Eq. (3.1 .17), with a +aF or -ie in the
denominator, satisfies the condition (3.1 .12) for an `in' or an `out' state,
respectively. For this purpose, consider the superposition s
`fi'g±~t} = fdri eiExtg(~c)''.x± , ( 3 .1 .19)
I
We want to show that 'fig+(t) and W,,-(t) approach (Pg{t} for t --* -oo and
t -k +co, respectively. Using Eq. (3 .1 . 1 ?) in Eq. (3.1 .19) gives
E, - E + ie
,~
Let us recklessly interchange the order of integration, and consider first
the integrals
E,,
#
For t --+ -co, we can close the contour of integration for the energy
variable E, in the upper half-plane with a large semi-circle, with the
contribution from this semi-circle killed by the factor exp(-iE,,t), which
is exponentially small for t -* -ao and Im E,
0. The integral is then
given by a sum over the singularities of the integral in the upper half-
plane. The functions g(ac) and T#,,t may, in general, be expected to have
some singularities at values of E,, with finite positive imaginary parts,
but just as for the large semi-circle, their contribution is exponentially
damped for t -; -oo . (Specifically, -t must be much greater than both
the time-uncertainty in the wave-packet g(a) and the duration of the
collision, which respectively govern the location of the singularities of
g(a) and Tfl,± in the complex E,, plane.) This leaves the singularity in
(Ea - E# ± ie)-', which is in the upper half-plane for
.-fp- but not
We conclude then that J-fl+ vanishes for t --* -oc. In the same way, for
t --~ +oo we must close the contour of integration in the lower half-plane,
and so Jlp vanishes in this limit. We conclude that 'Yg±(t) approaches
cDg(t) for t -> +oc, in agreement with the defining condition (3 .1 .12).
For future use, we note a convenient representation of the factor ( E, -
E# ± ic)-1 in Eq. ( 3.1 .17). In general, we can write
(E ± ic)-~ _ ~e + i7r~~(E) , {3.] .22 )

3 .2 The S-matrix
where
Y,
E
E -E 2 + e2
ir(V + C2)
11 3
(3-1 .23)
(3 . 1 .24)
The function (3 .1 .23) is just 1/E for JE ~ > e, and vanishes for E ~ 0, so
for - --+ 0 it behaves just like the `principal value function' JE , which
allows us to give mean ing to integrals of 11E times any smooth funct ion
of E, by excluding an infinite simal interval around E = 0. The function
( 3 . 1 .24 ) is of order e for
JE J >> e, and gives unity when integrated over
all E, so in the limit e -+ 0 it behaves just like the familiar delta function
J(E ). With this understanding, we can drop the label e in Eq. (3 .1 .22),
and write simply
3.2
The S-ma trix
(3.1 .25 )
An experimentalist generally prepares a state to have a definite particle
content at t -> -oc ,and then measures what this state looks like at
t --+ +ac. If the state is prepared to have a particle content for t -> -cc,
then it is the `in' state T,+, and if it is found to have the particle content
P at t --* +oo, then it is the `out' state T#-. The probability amplitude for
the transition OG -> # is thus the scalar product
This array of complex amplitudes is known as the S- matrix .2 If there were
no interactions then `in' and `out' states would be the same, and then Spa
would be just 6 (a - f3 )• The rate for a reaction a ~ f3 is thus proportional
to ISPO:
6 {0c We shall see in detail in Section 3 .4 what Sp, has to
do with measured rates and cross-sections.
Perhaps it should be stressed that `in' and 'out" states do not inhabit
two different Hilbert spaces. They differ only in how they are labelled :
by their appearance either at t ---r -oa or t --* +oc . Any `in' state can be
expanded as a sum of `out' states, with expansion coefficients given by the
S-matrix ( 3 .2.1 ).
Since Spa is the matrix connecting two sets of orthonormal states, it
must be unitary. To see this in greater detail, apply the completeness
relation (3.1 .5) to the `opt' states, and write

1 14
3 Scattering Theory
Using (3.1-15), this gives
~ sPfla
V)
(3 .2.2)
or in brie, StS = 1 . In the same way, completeness for the `in' states
gives
f dfl S-~flSp* = 6(y - 2)
(3 .2.3)
or, in other words, SSA = 1 .
It is often convenient instead of dealing with the S-matrix to work with
an operator S, defined to have matrix elements between ftce-particle state s
equal to the corresponding elements of the S-matrix :
(3,2.4)
The explicit though highly formal expression (3 .1. 3 ) for the `in' and `out'
states yields a formula for the S-operator :
where
(3 .2.5 )
~('Us Ta)= il(z)~~(,ro) = exp(il~oT)exp(-aH(,r-,co))exp(-iHOz0) . (3 . 2.6)
This will be used in the next section to examine the Lorentz invariance
of the 5-matrix, and in Sec . 3.5 to derive a formula for the S-matrix in
time-dependent perturbation theory .
The methods
Kf the previous section can be used to derive a useful
alternative formula for the S-matrix . Let's return to Eq . (3 .1 .21) for the
`in' state T+, but this time take t -> +x.. We must now close the contour
of integration for E, in the lower hatf-E,-plane, and although as before
the singularities in T#x+ and g(a) make no contribution for t -* +ou, we
now do pick up a contribution from the singular factor (E, - E# + ae)-' .
The contour runs from E, = ----co to E, = +oa, and then back to E, = -co
on a large semi-circle in the lower half-plane, so it circles the singularity
in a clockwise direction. By the method of residues, this contribution to
the integral over E, is given by the value of the integrand at E,, = Efl - ie,
times a factor -2in. That is, in the limit e --* 0 +, for t --* +ao the integral
over a in (3.1 .2I) has the asymptotic behavior
JP+ --+ -2bre-iEfi "I'dot 6(Ea - Efl)g(x)Tpo!+
" An alternative proof` is given at the end of this ctinn_ Note that for infin ite 'matrices,' the
unitarity conditions S td=1 and SSt = I are not equivalent .

3.2 The S-matrix
and hence, for t --~- +oo,
T~ +W --* j dfl e-iE~t(D~ [g(fl) - 2in I da 6(Eot
But expanding (3 . 1.19 ) forT9+ in a complete set of 'out' states give s
T9 +(t) =
dy e-rE,t g(U)
dpi T#- S#a
.
Since Sfi,, contains a factor 6( E# - Ea ), this may be rewritten
Tg+(t) = I
dfl Tfl- CiEgt f
da g(a)S#,,
11 5
and, using the defining property ( 3. 1 .1 2) for `out' states, this has the
asymptotic behavior for t ---), +o~~
Comparing this with our previous result, we fin d
j
da &)Sfl, = g(ji) - 2i7rI
doc 6(Ea - Efl)goc)Tfl~4 +
or in other words
(3.2.7 )
This suggests a simple approximation for the S-matrix : for a weak
interaction Y, we can neglect the difference between `in' and free-particle
states in (3.1 .18), in which case Eq. (3.2.7) gives
Spa ^-' ~(# - a) - 2kr6 (E, - E~)((D#, V(D.x) . ( 3 . 2.8 )
This is known as the Born approximation .3 Higher-order terms are dis-
cussed in Section 3.5.
~* *
We can use the Lippmann-Schwinger equations (3.1 .1 6) for the `in' and
`out' states to give a proof4 of the orthanorrnality of these states and
the unitarity of the S-matrix, as well as E q. (3.2.7), without having to
deal with limits at t -r +oc . First, by using (3 .1 .1 6) on either the left- or
right-hand side of the matrix element (T~ , V`~'~ ) and equating the results,
we find that
= ((Dp , V Ta±) + (T#±, V (Ep - Ho + iF)- ' via±).
Summing over a complete set
., of intermediate states, this gives the

11 6
equation :
3 Scattering Theory
x ([E, - E, ± i-F] -' - [Ep - E, T ie]-') . (3.2.9)
To prove the orthonormality of the `in' and `out' states, divide Eq . (3 . 2.9)
by E, - E'g ± 2ic. This gives
Tap
+
Efl - Ea ± 2ie
+
Tflxt
E, --E# ± 2ic
Tr•~-
- E,, + ir
Eff
-
Tyx±
E, - E# ic
The 2,-s in the denominators on the left-hand side can be replaced with
Es, since the only important thing is that these are positive infinitesirnals .
We see then that b (P - a) + Tflx±I (E# --- E, ± ie) is unitary. With {3.1 . 1 7},
this is just the statement that the T,± form two arthonorma] sets of
state-vectors . The unitarity of the S-matrix can be proved in a similar
fashion by multiplying (3.2.9) with 6 ( E# - E,) instead of (E,, - Ep ±2ie)-1 .
3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix
In this section we will consider both what is meant by the invariance of
the S-matrix under various symmetries, and what are the conditions on
the Hamiltonian that will ensure such invariance properties .
Lorentz Invar iance
For any proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation x
---~ Ax + a, we
may define a unitary operator U(A, a)
by specifying that it acts as in
Eq . (3 .1 .1) on either the `in' or the `opt' states. When we say that a theory
is Lorentz-invariant, we mean that the same operator U(A, a) acts as in
(3 .1.1) on both `in' and `out' states. Since the operator CT(A,a) is unitary,
we may write
SP = (T#-, T,+) = (U(A, a)T#-, U(A, a)T,,+)
so using (3 .1 .1), we obtain the Lorentz invariance (actually, covariance)
property of the S-matrix: for arbitrary Lorentz transformations A" V and
translations am,

3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix
'T
!
exp (iap(Pl' + P? +
pP1?P0 P
~o
P~ . . .
x
D~il),(W(A,p))D(j2),(W(A,P2))''-
6~ ~~ . . .
I
')* ( W (A, p')) . . .
X
D
W (A, pf )) D(j2
2
7
- ra
2
, . .
X SApl ,Crl ani ;Ap2 a~2,n2 ;'-'
AP1 >d1 ,nj ; ~1P 2,~2,M2 ; . .,
1 1 7
(3 .3.1 )
(Primes are used to distinguish final from initial particles ; bars are used
to distinguish summation variables .) In particular, since the left-hand side
is independent of aju, so must be the right-hand side, and so the S-matrix
vanishes unless the four-momentum is conserved. We can therefore wn'te
the part of the S-matrix that represents actual interactions among the
particles in the form :
S13« - 6(fl - a) = -
7r i M#,64(PA - p.,:).
(3.3.2
(However, as we will see in the next chapter, the amplitude Mfl .,, itself
contains terms that involve further delta function factors .)
Eq . (3 .3 .1) should be regarded as a definition of what we mean by the
Lorentz invariance of the S'-matrix, rather than a theorem, because it is
only for certain special choices of Hamiltonian that there exists a unitary
operator that acts as in ( 3.1 .1 ) on both `in' and `out' states . We need to
formulate conditions on the Hamiltonian that would ensure the Lorentz
invariance of the S-matrix. For this purpose, it will be convenient to work
with the operator S defined by Eq. (3 .2 .4) :
SPY - (oft, S (Da).
As we have defined the free-particle states (D, in chapter 2, they furnish
a representation of the inhamogeneaus Lorentz group, so we can always
define a unitary Kperator Uo {11, a} that induces the transformation (3 .1 .1)
on these states :
Uo(A, a)Opj,uj,nj ;p2,cr2,n2 ; - - = exp ( - ia'.W1, + P5, + - - .) )
~
(APj)0(
~2P -
P~~o . . .
x d)Apj ,t7;, nj ;nP2 ,6 t2,nz ; ...
D(jl)
D(j2)
I , (W(A,P2))
a 'I a~ (W(A~ P, 1
9, Cr
E q. (3.3 .1) will thus hold if this unitary operator commutes with the

11 8
S-operator :
3 Scattering Theory
This condition can also be expressed in terms of infinitesimal Lorentz
transformations. Just as in Section 2.4, there will exist a set of Hermitian
operators, a momentum PO, an angular momentum
JO, and a boost
generator KO, that together with HQ generate the infinitesimal version
of inhomogeneous Lorentz transformations when acting on free-particle
states. Eq. (3 .3 . 1) is equivalent to the statement that the S-matrix is
unaffected by such transformations, or in other words, that the S'-operator
commutes with these generators :
Because the operators HO, PO, J . and KOy generate infinitesimal inhomo-
geneous Lorentz transformations on the (D, they automatically satisfy the
commutation relations (14 . 1 8 )--(2.4.24) :
[4, Joj] = i eijkJo'
[Jo, col = [Po , Ho] = [Po, POj] = 0 >
(3 .3 .4)
(3 .3.5)
(3 .3 .6)
(3 .3. x)
(3 .3.8)
(3 .3.9)
( 3 .3.10)
where i, j, k, etc. run over the values 1, 2, and 3, and € ijk is the totally
antisymmetric quantity with C123 = +1-
In the same way, we may define a set of `exact generators,' operators P, J,
K that together with the full Hamiltonian H generate the transformations
(3.1 .1) on, say, the `in' states. (As already mentioned, what is not obvious
is that the same operators generate the same transformations on the 'out'
states.) The group structure tells us that these exact generators satisfy the
same commutation relations :
1.1 Pil = Y CIA p
k
[it I H1
1P 11 HI
1PI, Pjj
0 ,
(3 .3 .11)
(3 .3.12)
(3 .3 .13)
(3 .3 .14)
(3 .3 .15)
(3 .3 .16)
(3-3-17)

3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix 1 1 9
In virtually all known field theories, the effect of interactions is to add an
interaction term V to the Hamiltonian, while leaving the momentum and
angular momentum unchanged :
(The only known exceptions are theories with topologically twisted fields,
such as those with magnetic monopoles, where the angular momentum of
states depends on the interactions .) Eq. (3 .3. 5) implies that the commu-
tation relations (3 .3.11), (3.3.14), and (3 .3 .1 6) are satisfied provided that
the interaction commutes with the free-particle momentum and angular-
momentum operators
IV, pol = [V, col = 0.
(3.3 .19 )
It is easy to see from the Lippmann-Schwinger equation
(3,1 . 16) or
equivalently from (3 .1 .1 3) that the operators that generate translations
and rotations when acting on the `in' (and `out') states are indeed simply
P0 and J0. Also we easily see that P0 and J(j commute with the operator
U(t, to) defined by Eq .(3.2 . 6), and hence with the S-operator U (oo, -oc ).
Further, we already know that the S-operator commutes with H0, because
there are energy-conservation delta functions in both terms in {3 .2.7}. This
leaves just the boost generator Ko which we need to show commutes with
the S-operator .
On the other hand, it is not possible to set the boost generator K
equal to its free-particle counterpart K4, because then Eqs . (3.3.15 ) and
(3.3.8) would give H = H0, which is certainly not true in the presence Kf
interactions . Thus when we add an interaction V to H4, we must also add
a correction W to the boost generator-
K = KD+ W.
(3 .3 .20)
Of the remaining commutation relations, let us concentrate on Eq . (3,3 .1 7) ,
which may now be put in the form
B y itself, the condition (3.3 .21) is empty, because for any V we could
always define W by giving its matrix elements between H-eigenstates T .
and T# as -(T#, {K0, V]`I`x} f (E# - E
. Recall that the crucial point in
the Lorentz invariance of a theory is not that there should exist a set
of exact generators satisfying Eqs . ( 3 .3.11 )-( 3.3 .17), but rather that these
operators should act the same way on `in' and `out' states ; merely finding
an operator K that satisfies Eq. (3 .1 21 ) is not enough. Eq . (3 .3 .21) does
become significant if we add the requirement that matrix elements of
W should be smooth functions of the energies, and in particular should
not have singularities of the form (Eff -- E«)- l. We shall now show that

120 3 Scattering Theory
Eq. (3.3 .21), together with an appropriate smoothness condition on W,
does imply the remaining Lorentz invariance condition [Ko, S] = D .
To prove this, let us consider the commutator of KO with the operator
U(t, to) for finite t and to. Using Eq. (3.3. 10) and the fact that PO commutes
with HO yields :
[Ko,exI~(Wat)] = -t Pp exp(iHot)
while Eq. (3.3.21) (which is equivalent to Eq. (3.3.17)) yields
[K,exp(tHt)] = -tP exp(iH t) = -tPa exp(W t)
.
The momentum operators then cancel in the commutator of K-0 with
U,
and we find :
where
W(t) = exp(iHot)W exp(-Wot) .
(3.3 .23 )
If the matrix elements of W between Ufa-eigenstates are sufficiently smooth
functions of energy, then matrix elements of W(t) between smooth super-
positions of energy eigenstates vanish for t --* foo, so Eq . (3.3.22) gives in
effect
as was to be shown. This is the essential result : Eq. (3 .3 .21 ) together
with the smoothness condition on matrix elements of W that ensures that
W(t) vanishes for t --~, ±aa provides a sufficient condition for the Lorentz
invariance of the S-matrix. This smoothness condition is a natural one,
because it is much like the condition on matrix elements of V that is
needed to make V(t) vanish for t --* ±oo, as required in order to justify
the very idea of an S-matrix .
We can also use Eq .(3.3.22) with x = 0 and to = Too to show that
KS~(Too) = U(+oo)Ko ,
(3 . 3 .25 )
where S~(:Foo) is according to (3.1 .13) the operator that converts a free-
particle state dux into the corresponding `gin' or `out' state T
. Also, it
follows trivially from Eqs. {3 . 3 . 18} and ( 3.3.19) that the same is true for
the momentum and angular momentum :
PSG(+00) - Q(--oo)Po, (3.3. 6)
Finally, since all 4),,, and T,-i are eigenstates of HO and H respectively
with the same eigenvalue E, we have

3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix 12 1
Eqs . (3.3.25)-(3 .3 .28) show that with our assumptions, `in' and `out' states
do transform under inhomogeneous Lorentz transformations just like the
free-particle states . Also, since these are similarity transformations, we
now see that the exact generators K, P, J, and H satisfy the same com-
mutation relations as KO, Po, J O, and HO. This is why it turned out to be
unnecessary in proving the Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix to use the
other commutation relations (3 .3 .12), (3.3.13), and {3.3.15} that involve K .
Internal Symmetries
There are various symmetries, like the symmetry in nuclear physics under
interchange of neutrons and protons, or the `charge-conjugation' symmetry
between particles and antiparticles, that have nothing directly to do with
Lorentz invarlance, and further appear the same in all inertial frames .
Such a symmetry transformation T acts on the filbert space of physical
states as a unitary operator U( T), that induces linear transformations on
the indices labelling particle species
X
(
.3.29 )
In accordance with the general discussion in Chapter 2, the U(T) must
satisfy the group multiplication rule
U(T) U(T) = U(TT) ,
(3 .3 .30)
where TT is the transformation obtained by first performing the trans-
formation T, then some other transformation T . Acting on Eq. (3 .3.29)
with U(T), we see that the matrices 2 satisfy the same rule
!2(T )_9(T) = Q( T T).
(3 .3.31 )
Also, taking the scalar product of the states obtained by acting with U(T)
on two different `in' states or two different 'out' states, and using the
normalization condition (3 .1 .2), we see that -9(T) must be unitary
Finally, taking the scalar product of the states obtained by acting with
U(T) on one `out' state and one `in' state shows that Q commutes with
the S-matrix, in the sense tha t
X S~,i~~~y~yp~~z~2, .. Pi~iNi ;I~2~aN2 ;' .'

1 22
3 Scattering Theory
Again, this is a definition of what we mean by a theory being invari-
ant under the internal symmetry T, because to derive
Eq. (3.3 .33) we
still need to show that the same unitary operator U(T) will induce the
transformation (3.3 .29) on both `in' and `out' states. This will be the case
if there is an `unperturbed' transformation operator UQ( T ) that induces
these transformations on free-particle states ,
P l
i : F3 2 N , nl (T)
N2 2,, (T)
Alai P?a2AV2 ; ".
and that commutes with both the free-particle and inte raction parts of
the Hamiltonian
(3 .3.35 )
(3 .3 .3b)
From either the Lippmanrt-Schwinger equation (3 .1 .17) or from (3 .1 .13),
we see that the operator UO ( T ) will induce the transformations (3 .3.29)
on `in' and `out' states as well as free-particle states, so that we can derive
Eq. (3 .3 .29) taking U(T) as UO(T) .
A special case of great physical importance is that of a one-parameter
Lie group, where T is a function of a single parameter 0, with
(3 . 3 . 37)
As shown in Section 2 .2, in this case the corresponding Hilbert-space
operators must take the form
(3 .3 . 3
)
with Q a Hermitian operator. Likewise the matrices 5,A (T) take the form
9,jFn (T(O)) = 6,+,, exP(iqn O)
_
(3.3.39)
where q, are a set of real species-dependent numbers . Here Eq . (3. 3 .33 )
simply tells us that the q s are conserved : Sfl, vanishes unless
(3.3.4 )
The classic example of such a conservation law is that of conservation of
electric charge. Also, all known processes conserve baryon number (the
number of baryons, such as protons, neutrons, and hyperons, minus the
number of their antiparticles) and lepton number (the number of leptons,
such as electrons,, muons, r particles, and neutrinos, minus the number of
their antiparticles) but as we shall see in Volume II, these conservation
laws are believed to be only very good approximations. There are other
conservation laws of this type that are definitely only approximate, such

3 .3 Symmetries ofthe S-Matrix
1 23
as the conservation of the quantity known as strangeness, which was in-
troduced to explain the relatively long life of a class of particles discovered
by Rochester and Butlers in cosmic rays in 1947 . For instance, the mesons
now called# K+ and KO are assigned strangeness + 1 and the hyperons 11 O,
E+, E0, Z- are assigned strangeness - 1, while the more familiar protons,
neutrons, and it mesons (or pions) are taken to have strangeness zero . The
conservation of strangeness in strong interactions explains why strange
particles are always produced in association with one another, as in reac-
tions like n+ + n --i, K+ + A~, while the relatively slow decays of strange
particles into non-strange ones such a s 11O --~ p +7E- and K + -~, ir + + irc)
show that the interactions that do not conserve strangeness are very weak.
The classic example of a `non-Abelian' symmetry whose generators
do not commute with one another is isotopic spin symmetry, which
was suggested in 19 37 on the basis of an experiment} that showed the
existence of a strong proton-proton force similar to that between protons
and neutrons. Mathematically, the group is S U(2 ), like the covering group
of the group of three-dimensional rotations ; its generators are denoted ti,
with i = 1, 2, 3, and satisfy a commutation relation like (2 .4.1$ )
[t af tf] = iF ijk tk .
To the extent that is o topic s pin symmetry is respected, it requires particles
to form degenerate mult iplets labelled with an integer or half-integer T
and with 2 T + 1 components distinguished by their t 3 values, just like
the degenerate spin mul tiplets required by rotational invariance .
These
include the nucleons p and n with T
and tj T ~ , - ~ ; the pions ir+,
7°, and ar- with T = 1 and t3 -: +1,,0, - 1
and the 11O hyperon with
T = 0 and 0 = D. These examples illustrate the relation between electric
charge Q, the third component of isotopic spin t.1, the baryon number B,
and the s trangeness S :
This relation was originally inferred from observed selection rules, but
it was interpreted by Dell-Mann and Ne'eman in 1960 to be a conse-
quence of the embedding of both the isospin T and the `hypercha .r e'
Y =- B + S in the Lie algebra of a larger but more badly broken non-
Abelian internal symmetry, based on the non-Abelian group SU(3) . As
we will see in Volume II, today both isospin and SU(3) symmetry are
understood as incidental consequences of the small masses of the two or
three lightest quarks in the modern theory of strong Interactions, quantum
chramodynamics.
Superscripts denote e lectric ch4ryes in units of the absolute value of the electronic charge, A
`hypero n" is any particle carrying non-zero strangeness and unit baryon number .

124 3 Scattering Theory
The implications of isotopic spin symmetry for reactions among strongly
interacting particles can be worked out by the same familiar methods that
were invented for deriving the implications of rotational invariance. In
particular, for a two-body reaction A + B -+ C + D, Eq. ( 3 .3.3 3) requires
that the S-matrix may be put in the form (suppressing all but isospin
labels) :
Sfr3tD3,tA31B3
:7
'r ,r _j
where C}1}, (ju ; a, o-2) is the usual Clebsch-Gordan coefficient9 fo
r ing a spin j with three-component or from spins j
, and j2 with three-
components al and 0-2, respectively ; and ST is a `reduced' S-matrix
depending on T and on all the suppressed momentum and spin variables,
but not on the xsospin three-components W, t,93 , tC 3, tn3
. Of course, this,
like all of the consequences of isotopic spin invariance, is only approx-
imate, because this symmetry is not respected by electromagnetic (and
other) interactions, as shown for instance by the fact that different mem-
bers of the same isospin multiplet like p and n have different electric
charges and slightly different masses.
Parity
To the extent that the symmetry under the transformation x
--+ -x is
really valid, there must exist a unitary operator P under which both `ire'
and 'out" states transform as a direct product of single-particle states :
where ran is the intrinsic parity of particles of species n, and P reverses the
space components of p#- (This is for massive particles ; the modification
for massless particles is obvious .) The parity conservation condition for
the S-matrix is then :
SPi CTl~~ ; p~a~n2 ; . .. i pj ~1,~j ;p2~2,~2 ; .,. ~ qni q~~ - . .
Just as for internal symmetries, an operator P satisfying Eq . {3 .3. 1} will
actually exist if the operator P0 which is defined to act this way on
free-particle states commutes with V as well as Ho.
The phases rl,, may be inferred either from dynamicai models or from
experiment, but neither can provide a unique determination of the qs.
This is because we are always free to redefine P by combining it with
any conserved internal symmetry operator. For instance, if P is conserved,

3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix
125
then so is
P' - P exp(iaB + iflL + iy Q),
where B, L, and Q are respectively baryon number, lepton number, and
electric charge, and a, P, and 7 are arbitrary real phases ; hence either P or
P' could be called the parity operator. The neutron, proton, and electron
have different combinations of values for B, L, and Q, so by judicious
choice of the phases a, fl, and y we can define the intrinsic parities of all
three particles to be +1 . However, once we have done this the intrinsic
parities of other particles like the charged pion (which can be emitted in a
transition n --* p + 7-) are no longer arbitrary. Also, the intrinsic parity of
any particle like the neutral pion 0 which carries no conserved quantum
numbers is always meaningful .
The foregoing remarks help to clarify the question of whether intrinsic
parities must always have the values + 1 .
It is easy to say that space
inversion P has the group multiplication law p2 = 1 ; however, the parity
operator that is conserved may not be this one, but rather may differ
from it by a phase transformation of some sort, In any case, whether
or not p2
::= 1 , the operator P2 behaves just like an internal symmetry
transformation :
p2T t 2 z
. . . ~±
{~1d1M1 4 2ft2n2s - ' -
?I 1l1 ?7n2 P1 ffl M1 ,P2d 2M2 ; .. .
If this internal symmetry is part of a continuous symmetry group of
phase transformations, such as the group of multiplication by the phases
exp(ixB + iflL + iyQ) with arbitrary values of a, fl, and y, then its inverse
square root must also be a member of this group, say I p, with I~P' = I
and [Ip, P] = 0. {For instance, if P2 = exp(iocB + . . .}, then take Ip =
expo- 2 iaB + - -} .} We can then define a new parity operator P' -= PIP
with P'2 = 1 . This is conserved to the same extent as P, so there is no
reason why we should not call this the parity operator, in which case the
intrinsic parities can only take the values ±1 .
The only sort of theory in which it is not necessarily possible to define
parity so that all intrinsic parities have the values +1 is one in which
there is some discrete internal symmetry which is not a member of and
continuous symmetry group of phase transformations .10 For instance, it is
a consequence of angular-motnentutn conservation that the total number
F of all particles of half-integer spin can only change by even numbers,
so the internal symmetry operator (-1)' is conserved. All known particles
of half-integer spin have odd values of the sum B + L of baryon number
and lepton number, so as far as we know, (-1 )F = (- 1 )B+L. If this is
true, then (-I)' is part of a continuous symmetry group, consisting of
the operators exp(ioc{B + L}) with arbitrary real oc, and has an inverse
square root exp(-in(B + L)/2). In this case, if p2 = (-1 )F then P can be

126 3 Scattering Theory
redefined so that all intrinsic parities are + 1. However, if there were to be
discovered a particle of half integer spin and an even value of B + L (such
as a so-called ajorana neutrino, with j = ~ and B + L = 0), then it
would be possible to have p2
without our being able to redefine
the parity operator itself to have eigenvalues +1 . In this case, of course,
we would have P4 = 1, so all particles would have intrinsic parities either
±1 or (like the Majorana neutrino) ±i .
It follows from Eq. (3.3,42 that if the product of intrinsic parities in the
final state is equal to the product of intrinsic parities in the initial state, or
equal to minus this product, then the S-matrix must be respectively even
or odd overall in the three-momenta. For instance, it was observed" in
1951 that a pion can be absorbed by a deuteron from the ~ = 0 ground
state of the nd atom, in the reaction 7r- + d ~ n + n. (As discussed
in Section 3.7, the orbital angular-momentum quantum number ~' can be
used in relativistic physics in the same way as in non-relativistic wave
mechanics.) The initial state has total angular-momentum j = I (the pion
and deuteron having spins zero and one, respectively), so the final state
must have orbital angular-momentum f.~ = I and total neutron spin s = 1 .
(The other possibilities e = 1, s - 0
; 4 = 0, s = I
and / = 2, s = 1,
which are allowed by angular-momentum conservation, are forbidden by
the requirement that the final state be antisymmetric in the two neutrons .)
Because the final state has t,' = 1, the matrix element is odd under reversal
of the direction of all three-momenta, so we can conclude that the intrinsic
parities of the particles in this reaction must be related by :
The deuteron is known to be a bound state of a proton and neutron
with even orbital angular-momentum (chiefly / = 0), and as we have seen
we can take the neutron and proton to have the same intrinsic parity,
sa rid = q., and we can conclude that -1 ; that is, the negative
pion is a pseudoscalar particle. The n+ and 7r° have also been found to
have negative parity, as would be expected from the symmetry (isospin
invariance) among these three particles.
The negative parity of the pion has some striking consequences . A
spin zero particle that decays into th ree pions must have intrinsic parity
3 _ -1, because in the Lorentz frame in which the decaying particle is
at rest, rotational invariance only allows the matrix element to depend on
scalar products of the pion momenta with each other, all of which are
even under reversal of all momenta . (The triple scalar product pl ' ( P2 X P3)
formed from the three pion momenta vanishes because pt + p2 + p3 = 0.)
For the same reason, a spin zero particle that decays into two pions must
have intrinsic parity 1 2 = -~ 1 . In particular, among the strange particles
discovered in the late 1940s there seemed to be two different particles of

3.3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix
12 7
zero spin (inferred from the angular distribution of their decay products
) one, the z, was identified
by its decay into three pons, and hence was
assigned a parity - 1 , while the other, the 0, was identified by its decay
into two pions and was assigned a parity + I I . The trouble with all this was
that as the r and 0 were studied in greater detail, they seemed increasingly
to have identical masses and lifetimes . After many suggested solutions
of this puzzle, Lee and Yang in
1 956 finally cut the Gordian knot, and
proposed that the r and 0 are the same particle, (now known as the K± )
and that parity is simply not conserved in the weak interactions that lead
to its decay . 1 2
As we shall see in detail in the next section of this chapter, the rate for a
physical process .7 --+ P (with a
P) is proportional to ISXx12, with propor-
tionality factors that are invariant under reversal of all three-momenta .
As long as the states x and P contain definite numbers of particles of
each type, the phase factors in Eq. (3 .3.42) have no effect on
I SP,
I2, so
Eq. (3.3.42) would imply that the rate for x -# # is invariant under the
reversal of direction of all three-momenta. As we have seen, this is a
trivial consequence of rotational invariance for the decays of a K meson
into two or three pions, but it is a non-trivial restriction on rates in more
complicated processes. For example, following theoretical suggestions by
Lee and Yang, Wu together with a group at the National Bureau of Stan-
dards measured the angular distribution of the electron in the final state
of the beta decay Co6° --* Ni60 + e- + v with a polarized cobalt saurce.13
(No attempt was made in this experiment to measure the momentum
of the antineutrino or nickel nucleus .) The electrons were found to be
preferentially emitted in a direction opposite to that of the spin of the
decaying nucleus, which would, of course, be impossible if the decay rate
were invariant under a reversal of all three-momenta. A similar result
was found in the decay of a positive moon (polarized in its production in
the process ac+ --.>, P+ + v) into a positron, neutrino, and antineutrino . 14
In this way, it became clear that parity is indeed not conserved in the
weak interactions responsible for these decays . Nevertheless, for reasons
discussed in Section
1 2. 5, parity is conserved in the strong and electro-
magnetic interactions, and therefore continues to play an important part
in theoretical physics.
Time-Reversal
We saw in Section 2.6 that the time-reversal operator T acting on a
one-particle state TP,a,n gives a state with reversed spin and
momentum, times a phase "j- t )j-'.
A multi-particle state transforms
as usual as a direct product of one-particle states, except that since this

12 8
is a time-reversal
interchanged :
3 scattering Theory
transfo rmation, we expect `in' and `out' states to b e
TTP1¢ 1 n 1 : F2 d2n2.. . - i~ nj
~aM 2 ~
1~ ~Ypl -d 1 M 1 ; YPZ -d 1_ M2 ; .. .
(3 .3.43)
(Again, this is for massive particles, with obvious modifications being
required for massless particles.) It will be convenient to abbreviate this
assumption as
TT~ _'~'~a , (3.3 .44 )
where Y- indicates a reversal of sign of three-momenta and spins as well
as multiplication by the phase factors shown in Eq . (3.3 .43) . Because T is
antiunitary, we have
so the time-reversal invariance condition for the S-matrix is
or in more detail
, . f f
'
n1
~ +r k
~
X S~aP
I -C1 nI ; 9P~ -a2 n2 ;---
.dpi -a~ n ~ ; :YpI2 -a2 nZ ; . , .
(3.3 .45}
(3.3 .46)
( 3.3 .47)
Note that in addition to the reversal of momenta and spins, the role
of initial and final states is interchanged, as would be expected for a
symmetry involving the reversal of time .
The S-matnix will satisfy this transformation rule if the operator To that
induces time-reversal transformations on free-particle state s
Toga = Dg-cc
(3.3 .48 )
commutes not only with the free-particle Hamiltonian (which is automatic)
but also with the interaction :
To 'Ho To = HO , (3. 3 .49)
T1 VTQ = Y.
(3. 3 . 50)
In this case we can take T = T4, and use either (3 .1 . 3) or (3 .1-16) to show
that time reversal transformations do act as stated in Eq . (3 .3 .44). For
instance, Kperating on the Lippmann-Schwinger equation (3.1 .16) with T
and using Eqs. ( 3.3 .48)-(3,3.50), we have
0!
f
I

3.3 Symmetries aj'the S-Matrix 129
with the sign of +ic reversed because T is antiunitary. This is just
the Lippmann-Schwinger equation for T-~ thus justifying Eq. (3 .3.44),
Similarly, because T is antiunitary it changes the sign of the i in the
exponent of (t), so that
again leading to Eq. (3.3.44).
In contrast with the case of parity conservation, the time-reversal in-
variance condition (3 .3.46) does not in general tell us that the rate for
the process a --* ft is the same as for the process 9-a -+ JI-fl. However,
something like this is true in cases where the S-matrix takes the for m
Sol! = ~~~ + ~~~~ ,
(3.3 .51 )
where 5 M is small, while 5 P happens to have matrix element zero for
some particular process of interest, though it generally has much larger
matrix elements than S M. (For instance, the process might be nuclear beta
decay, N -+ N' + e- + :V, with 5O the S-matrix produced by the strong
nuclear and electromagnetic interactions alone, and S ( i ) the correction to
the S-matrix produced by the weak interactions . Section 3 .5 shows how
the use of the `distorted-wave horn approximation' leads to an S-matrix
of the form (3 .3 .51) in cases of this type. In some cases S' M is simply
the unit operator.) To first order in S( i ), the unitarity condition for the
S-operator reads
1 - SAS = ~~~W5 ((,) + S(W S M + SOA 5M.
Using the zeroth-order relation SAT 5O) = 1, this gives a reality condition
for SM
If SM as well as SM satisfies the t ime-reversal condition (3 .3.46), then this
can be put in the form
5fl(ii) ~ f- Jdy
dy'
S(O) S
.~~~ .~? S
.
(3. 3.53)
Since 5 (G) is unitary, the rates fog the processes ac --~. P and Ta -y 9-fl
are thus the same if summed over sets J and of final and initial states
that are complete with respect to SO . (By being 'complete' here is meant
that if ST) is non-zero, and either ac or cc' are in J, then both states are
in J
; and similarly for .~F.} In the simplest case we have 'complete' sets
J and .3;' consisting of just one state each ; that is, both the initial and
the final states are eigenvectors of SM with eigenvalues ev° a nd eNa~,
respectively. (The 3, and 60 are called `phase shifts' ; they are real because

1 30
3 Scattering Theory
S (°) is unitary.) In this case, Eq . (3 .3 .53) becomes simply =
and it is clear that the absolute value of the S-matrix for the process
Of --+ 13 is the same as for the process J_ac -> 9-fl. This is the case
for instance in nuclear beta decay (in the approximation in which we
ignore the relatively weak Coulomb interaction between the electron and
nucleus in the final state), because both the initial and final states are
eigenstates of the strong interaction S-matrix (with 6 x = 6# = 0). Thus if
time-reversal invariance is respected, the differential rate for a beta decay
process should be unchanged if we reverse both the momenta and the spin
z-components a of all particles . This prediction was not contradicted in
the 1956 experiments13.i4 that discovered the non-conservation of parity ;
for instance, time-reversal invariance is consistent with the Kbservation
that electrons from the decay Co 60 ---), Ni60 + e- + V are preferentially
emitted in a direction opposite to that of the Co 6° spin. As described
below, indirect evidence against time-reversal invariance did emerge in
1964, but it remains a useful approximate symmetry in weak as well as
strong and electromagnetic interactions.
In some cases we can use a basis of states for which Ti = !x and
.lfl = ft, for which Eq. (3.3.54) read s
( 1 )
2t(a' +sO) S~( ~r ) M
Spa _ -e (3.3.55)
which just says that iS~,r) has the phase r~, + 5# mod 7r . This is known
as Wa tson :s theorem.15 The phases in Eqs. (3 .3.54) or (3-3-55) may be
measured in processes where there is interference between different final
states. For instance, in the decay of the spin 1/2 hyperon A into a nu-
cleon and a pion, the final state can only have orbital angular-momentum
e = 0 or e = I ; the angular distribution of the pion relative to the A
spin involves the interference between these states, and hence according
to Watson's theorem depends on the difference ds - 6P of their phase shifts .
PT
Although the 1957 experiments on parity violation did not rule out time-
reversal invariance, they did show immediately that the product PT is
not conserved. If conserved this operator would have to be antiunitary
for the same reasons as for T, so in processes like nuclear beta decay its
consequences would take the form of relations l i ke Eq. (3.3 .54) :
flu
zp'-Tfl

3 . 3 Symmetries of the S-Matrix 13 1
where Y3- reverses the s igns of all spin z-components but not any mo-
menta.
Neglecting the final-state Coulomb interaction, it would then
follow that the re could be no preference for the electron in the decay
Co"" -* Ni6° + e- + v to be emitted in the same or the opposite directi on
to the Ca6° spin, in contradiction with what was observed .
C, CP, and CPT
As already mentioned, there is an internal symmetry transformation,
known as charge-conjugation, which interchanges particles and antiparti-
cles. Formally, this entails the existence of a unitary operator C, whose
effect on multi-particle states i s
~~a I n3 ; P2 0-2n2 .1 11
l~~(Y tf0i aP292 n2 ; , ..
where n{~ is the antiparticle of particle type n, and ~,, is yet another phase.
If this is true for both `in' and `out' states then the S-matrix satisfies the
invariance conditions
SFr~ Qi td1 ; Py qZny ; ., . Pl alnf ;f~2~2~2a ., .
w • *
~ ii 2
. . ~
Sp] ] '
2#2h~~
p 1 a 1 n ~
s p2CI~ i22 : ,. .
1 3 .~.5
1
As with other internal symmetries, the S-matrix will satisfy this condition
if the operator Co that is defined to act as stated in Eq. (3.3-56) on free-
particle states commutes with the interaction V as well as H4 ; in this case,
we take C - Co .
The phases
,, are called charge-conjugation parities. Just as for the
ordinary parities q,,, the ~„ are in general not uniquely defined, because
for any operator C that is defined to satisfy Eq . (3 .3,56), we can find
another such operator with different ~, by multiplying C with any internal
symmetry phase transformation, such as exp(iocB + iflL + iy Q) ; the only
particles whose charge-conjugation parities are individually measurable
are those completely neutral particles like the photon or the neutral pion
that carry no conserved quantum numbers and are their own antiparticles .
In reactions involving only completely neutral particles, Eq . (3 .3. 7 ) tells us
that the product of the charge-conjugation parities in the initial and final
states must be equal ; for instance, as we shall see the photon is required by
quantum electrodynamics to have charge-conjugation parity ref = -1, so
the observation of the neutral pion decay no -> 2r requires that ~o = +1 ;
it then follows that the process
7E° --* 3y should be forbidden, as is in
fact known to be the case. For these two particles, the charge-conjugation
parities are real, either +1 or --1 . Just as for ordinary parity, this will
always be the case if all internal phase transformation symmetries are

1 32
3 Scattering Theory
members of continuous groups of phase transformations, because then we
can redefine C by multiplying by the inverse square root of the internal
symmetry equal to CZ, With the result that the new C satisfies C2 = 1 .
For general reactions, Eq. (3.3.57 ) requires that the rate for a process
equals the rate for the same process with particles replaced with their
corresponding antiparticles . This was not directly contradicted by the
1957 experiments on parity non-conservation (it will, be a long time before
anyone is able to study the beta decay of anticobalt), but these experiments
showed that C is not conserved in the theory of weak interactions as
modified by Lee and Yang12 to take account of parity non-conservation,
(As we shall see below, the observed violation of TP conservation would
imply a violation of C conservation in any field theory of weak interactions,
not just in the particular theory considered by Lee and Yang .) It
Is
understood today that C as well as P is not conserved in the weak
interactions responsible for processes like beta decay and the decay of the
pion and muon, though both C and P are conserved in the strong and
electromagnetic in#eractions.
Although the early experiments on parity non-conservation indicated
that neither C nor P are conserved in the weak interactions, they left
open the possibility that their product OP iuniversally conserved. For
some years it was expected (though not with complete confidence) that CP
would be found to be generally conserved . This had particularly important
consequences for the properties of the neutral K mesons. In 1954 Gell-
Mann and Pais" had pointed out that because the KO meson is not its
own antiparticle (the ICS carries a non-zero value for the approximately
conserved quantity known as strangeness) the particles with definite decay
rates would be not Ii° or K°, but the linear combinations KO + KO.
This was originally explained in terms of C conservation, but with C not
conserved in the weak interactions, the argument may be equally well be
based on CP conservation. If we arbitrarily define the phases in the C P
operator and in the K° and K° states so tha t
CPTy,o = Tko
and
CPTKa = `i'K a
then we can define self-charge-conjugate one-particle state s
1
i
-, L
and
1
TKO [TKO - TK01

3.3 Symmetries of the S- Matrix 1 3 3
which have CP eigenvalues +1 and -1, respectively. The fastest available
decay mode of these particles is into two-pion states, but CP conservation
would allow this only*' for the If I, not the K2 . The K4 would thus be
expected to decay only by slower modes, into three pions or into a pion,
moan or electron, and neutrino. Nevertheless, it was found by Fitch and
Cronin in 1964 that the long-lived neutral K-meson does have a small
probability for decaying into two pions.17 The conclusion was that CP is
not exactly conserved in the weak interactions, although it seems more
nearly conserved than C or P individually .
As we shall see in Chapter 5, there are good reasons to believe that
although neither C nor CP is strictly conserved, the product CPT is
exactly conserved in all interactions, at least in any quantum field theory.
It is CPT that provides a precise correspondence between particles and
antiparticles, and in particular it is the fact that CPT commutes with
the Hamiltonian that tells us that stable particles and antiparticles have
exactly the same mass. Because CPT is antiunitary, it relates the S-matrix
for an arbitrary process to the S-matrix for the inverse process with all
spin three-components reversed and particles replaced with antiparticles .
However, in cases where the .S-matrix can be divided into a weak term
5M that produces a given reaction and a strong term SO) that acts in
the initial and final states, we can use the same arguments that were used
above in studying the implications of T conservation to show that the rate
for any process is equal to the rate for the same process with particles
replaced with antiparticles and spin three-components reversed, provided
that we sum over sets Kf initial and final states that are complete with
respect to SO). In particular, although the partial rates for decay of the
particle into a pair of final states 1, P2 with 5(O) 0 may differ from the
partial rates for the decay of the antiparticle into the corresponding final
states W019-J31 and
JV-fl2, we shall see in Section 3 .5 that (without any
approximations) the total decay rate of any particle is equal to that of its
antiparticle.
We can now understand why the 1957 experiments on parity violation
could be interpreted in the context of the existing theory of weak interac-
tions as evidence that C conservation as well as P conservation are badly
violated but OP is not. These theories were field theories, and therefore
automatically conserved CPT. Since the experiments showed that PT con-
servation but not T conservation is badly violated in nuclear beta decay,
any theory that was consistent with these experiments and in which CPT is
conserved would have to also incorporate C but nit CP non-conservation .
The neutral K-mesons have spin zero, so the two-pion final state has ~ = 0, and hence P = +1 .
Further, C =- +1 for two ;r4s because the rya has C = +1, and also for an I = 0 7c it - slate
because C interchanges the two pions .

1 34
3 Scattering Theory
similarly, the observation in 1964 of small violations of CP conservation
in the weak interactions together with the assumed invariance of all
interactions under CPT allowed the immediate inference that the weak
interactions also do not exactly conserve T . This has since been verifiedls
by more detailed studies of the KI-KO system, but it has so far been
impossible to find other direct evidence of the failure of invariance under
time-reversal.
3.4
Rates and Cross-Sections
The S-matrix S¢ , is the probability amplitude for the transition oc -~ fl ,
but what does this have to do with the transition rates and cross-sections
measured by experimentalists? In particular, (3 .32
shows that Spa has
a factor 64(Pp _p'), which ensures the conservation of the total energy
and momentum, so what are we to make of the factor [61(F# -- p« )] 2
in the transition probability
j 5p,12 ? The proper way to approach these
problems is by studying the way that experiments are actually done, using
wave packets to represent particles localized far from each other before
a collision, and then following the time-history of these superpositions of
multi-particle states. In what follows we will instead give a quick and
easy derivation of the main results, actually more a mnemonic than a
derivation, with the excuse that (as far as
I know) no interesting open
problems in physics hinge on getting the fine points right regarding these
matters.
We consider our whole system of physical particles to be enclosed in a
large box with a macroscopic volume V . For instance, we can take this
box as a cube, but with points on opposite sides identified, so that the
single-valuedness of the spatial wave function requires the momenta to be
quantized
where the ray are integers, and L 3 = V . Then all three-dimensional delta-
functions become
(27c)3 V (27E)3
}
where 6P" P is an ordinary Kronecker delta symbol, equal to one if the
subscripts are equal and zero otherwise . The normalization condition
( 3.1 .2) thus implies that the states we have been using have scalar products
in a box which are not just gums of products of Kronecker deltas, but
also contain a factor [V/(27r } 3] 1, where N is the number of particles in

3.4 Rates and Cross-Sections
135
the state. To calculate transition probabilities we should use states of unit
norm, so let us introduce states normalized approximately for our box
"
2
with norm
TBox, T Box
(3 .4,4)
where 6#x is a product of Kronecker deltas, one for each three-momentum,
spin, and species label, pl us terms with particles permuted . Correspond-
ingly, the S-matrix may be written
{N, +N,}l2
fox
SP, = [V/(27] (3 .4.5)
where S}B` is calculated using the states (3 .4.3).
Of course, if we just leave our particles in the box forever, then every
possible transition will occur again and again. To calculate a meaningful
transition probability we also have to put our system in a time box' .
We suppose that the interaction is turned on for only a time T. One
immediate consequence is that the energy-conservation delta function is
replaced with
1 T/2
- 27z I-T/
2 The probability that a multi-particle system, which is in a state oc before
the interaction is turned on, is found in a state P after the interaction is
turned off, is
13 Z
(,Vtc+N#)~S~,12 .
c`~
= [(2z)'/V] (3 .4.7)
P ("Z --+ P) = ~ P I
This is the probability for a transition into one specific box state P. The
number of one-particle box states in a momentum-space volume d3p is
VdIp/(2n )3, because this is the number of triplets of integers nj,n?,n3
for which the momentum (3.4.1 ) lies in the momentum-space volume d 3P
around p . We shall define the final-state interval d fl as a product of d3p
for each final particle, so the total number of states in this range i s
dA-ff = [V/(2.)3] N 'dfl .
(3 .4,8)
Hence the total probability for the system to wind up in a range d# of
final states is
~ ~~P,~12 dfl . (3 .4.9)
dP (cx --+ fl) = P(a ---.> fl) d. IV-fl = [(2)3/VJ'

136 3 Scattering Theory
We will restrict our attention throughout this section to fina l states P that
are not only different (however slightly) from the initial sta te rc, but that
also satisfy the more stringent condition, that no subset of the particles
in the state fl (other than the whole state itself) has prec isely the same
four-momentum as some corresponding subset Kf the particles in the state
oc. (In the language to be introduced in the next chapter, this means that
we are considering only the connected part of the S-matrix .) For such
states, we may define a delta function-free matrix element M#,,
Our introduction of the box allows us to interpret the s quares of delta
functions in ~~P"'12 for fi 7~ cc a s
2
15 IV(Pfl - Pol V
V
16T(Efl - E,)] 6T(E# - E.x)h(0) = 6T(Efl - E.,)T/27r ,
so Eq. (3.4.9) gives a differential transition probability
dP(ot (2n)2 [(27r)31~] '- 1
( T 127r )I
fi.x l
x &v (PO - P06r(Ep - E x)dfl
.
If we let V and T be very large, the delta function product here may
be interpreted as an ordinary four-dimensional delta function 64(pfl - p ')•
In this limit, the transition probability is simply proportional to the time
T during which the interaction is acting, with a coefficient that may be
interpreted as a differential transition rate :
= (2r~ )3Ny-2 W-N, imo264(I~, - Pix)dfl , (3.4. 11 )
where now
SP# = -27dP(Pfl - Px)p~! .
(3 .4.12)
This is the master formula which is used to interpre t calculations of S-
matrix elements in terms of predictions for actual experiments. We will
come back to the interpretation of the factor r]d(P' - P#)dp later in this
section.
There are two cases of special importance :
1V,, ,- 1
Here the volume V cancels in Eq. (3.4.11), which gives the transition rate
for ajingle-particle state ~c to decay into a general mu lti-particle state
as

3. 4 Rates and Cross-Sections
13 7
Of course, this makes sense only if the time T during which the interaction
acts is much less than the mean lifetime r,, of the particle a~, so we cannot
pass to the limit T -+ 00 in J T( E, - E#). There is an unremovable width
KE ^F 1/T
1/T,, in this delta function, so Eq. (3.4.13) is only useful
if the total decay rate is much less than any of the characteristic
energies of the process.
N,, =2 :
Here the rate (3 .4.11) is proportional to 11V, or in other words, to the
density of either particle at the position of the other one . Experimentatists
generally report not the transition rate per density, but the rate per flux,
also known as the cross-section. The flux of either particle at the position
of the other particle is defined as the product of the density 1 / V and the
relative velocity u~
(D,x = ux/ V. ( 3.4.14)
(A general definition of u,, is given below ; for the moment we will content
ourselves with specifying that if either particle is at rest then
Ux is defined
as the velocity of the other.) Thus the differential cross-section is
d~(a --+ fl) = dr(a ---Y P)/(D, = (2-g)'u.x i i
p, 1'6'(Pp - F,)dfl . (3 .4.15)
Even though the cases N, - 1 and N,, = 2 are the most important,
transition rates for N,
3 are all measurable in principle, and some Kf
them are very important in chemistry, astrophysics, etc . (For instance, in
one of the main reactions that release energy in the sun, two protons and
an electron turn into a deuteron and a neutrino.) Section 3 . 6 presents
an application of the master transition rate formula (3 .4.1 1) for general
numbers N,,, of initial particles.
We next take up the question of the Lorentz transformation properties of
rates and cross-sections, which will help us to give a more general definition
of the relative velocity u, in Eq . (3.4.15). The Lorentz transformation
rule (3.3.1) for the S-matrix is complicated by the momentum- dependent
matrices associated with each particle's spin. To avoid this complication,
consider the absolute-value squared of (3.3 .1) (after factoring out the
Lorentz-invariant delta function in Eq . (3 .4.12)), and sum over all spins .
The unitarity of the matrices D(f)( ) (or their analogs for zero mass)
then shows that, apart from the energy factors in (3.3 . 1), the sum is
Lorentz-invariant. That is, the quantity
I11fffl,~12 rl E H E - R$«
(3 .4.16)
spins
is a scalar function of the four-momenta of the particles in states a and # .
(By rI« E and f1p E is meant the product of all the single-particle energies
p0 =
p2-+m2 for the particles in the states a and f3 .)

138
3 Scattering Theory
We can now write the spin summed single-particle decay rate (3.4. 13 )
as
sp in s
P
The factor dJ3/ jl# E may be recognized as the product of the Lorentz-
invariant momentum-space volume elements (2.5.15), so it is Lorentz-
invariant. So also are Rflx and 64(Pfl - P.), leaving just the non-invariant
factor 1 1 E, where E, is the energy of the single initial particle. Our
conclusion then is that the decay rate has the same Lorentz transformation
property as 11E, This is, of course, just the usual special-relativistic time
dilation -the faster the particle, the slower it decays .
Similarly, our result (3 .4.15) for the spin-summed cross-section may be
written as
spin
s where
El and E2 are the energies of the two particles in the initial stat e
-x. It is conventional to define the cross-section to be (when summed
over spins) a Lorentz-invariant function of four-momenta. The factors
Rflx,
6'(pfl - p.), and dfl f f1p E are already Lorentz-invariant, so this
means that we must define the relative velocity u, in arbitrary inertial
frames so that u.,EIE2 is a scalar. We also mentioned earlier that in the
Lorentz frame in which one particle (say, particle 1) is at rest, u, is the
velocity of the other particle. This uniquely determines u" to have the
value in general Lorentz frames *
UU = r(P ~7N ~~ M'1 M2 E I E2
(3 .4.17)
where p h p2 and Ml, m2 are the four-momenta and mass of the two particles
in the initial state y ,
As a bonus, we note that in the 'center-of-mass' frame, where the total
three-momentum vanishes, we have
pi = (P} Et ) a
and here Eq. (3. 4. 17) gives
P2 = (`Pa E2
U0, ` AP I{Ej + E2 } _ pi ~ P2
El E2
~ E 1
E2
(3.4.1$ )
Eq. (3_4_17) makes it obvious that El Eiua is a ycalxr. Also, when particle 1 is at rest, we have
p, = O. E , _ IMi , so pi
- P2 = -m, F,, , and so Eq. (3 .4 , I7 ) gives
2 _
2
which is just the ve l ocity ofparticle 2 .

3. 4 Rates and dross-Sections
] 39
as might have been expected for a relative velocity . However, in this frame
tt', is not really a physical velocity ; in particular, Eq . (3 .4.19) shows that
for extremely relativistic particles, it can take values as large as 2 .
We now turn to the interpretation of the so-called phase-space factor
6 4(Fo -P,,)dp, which appears in the general formula (3 .4.1 1) for transition
rates, and also in Eqs. (3.4.13) and (3.4.15) for decay rates and cross-
sections. We here specialize to the case of the 'center- of-mass' Lorentz
frame, where the total three-momentum of the initial state vanishe s
p, =0. (3 .4. 19 )
(For N,, = 1, this is just the case of a particle decaying at rest .) If the final
state consists of particles with momenta p', p 2, then
54(P# --Pl)dfl =3(P i+ P ~+ . . .~~(E~ + E~+ . .--F )d' Fi d'P2-
. . (3.4.20)
where E - E, is the total energy of the initial state. Any one of the
p ~ integrals, say over p i, can be done trivially by just droppi ng the
momentum delta functio n
64(PI; - Px )d~ --* r5[Er + E2 +
E ) d3p2
. . .
(3A.21 ~
with the understanding that wherever p' appears (as in E') it must be
replaced with
P 1
= _P
2
P 3 -
.
.
.
We can similarly use the remaining delta function to eliminate any one of
the remaining integrals .
In the simplest case, there are just two particles in the final state. Here
(3 .4.21) gives
In more detail, this is
64(p# - pl:)dp -> ~
rlpC~ + n r 2 + I ~~
+ 21 - E
IP1'I'dI px'IdQ ,
(3.4.?3 )
where
P7 =
P 1
and dQ = sin 2 O dEl do is the solid-angle differential fo r pi'. This can be
simplified by using the standard formul a
where f(x) is an arbitrary real function with a single simple zero at x = x O .
In our case, the argument Ej + E~ - E of the delta function in Eq . (3 .4.23)

140
3 Scattering Theory
has a unique zero at l P i l = k', where
3
2
1
2
E2 -rn'2+ mr2
E i =
k'~ +2 2 = 2
1
2 E
2 f 2 r2
E~ -
~f2 + M~2 ~ ~ ~1 ~ ~~
2 E
with derivative
(VFlp ~+aj2+V1Fpj'~+m22-E) ]
d1p, 11 kp;1 =k'
k' k'
k'Ei ~~
(3 . 4.24 )
(3.4.25 )
(3.4.26 )
(3A27 )
We can thus drop the delta function and the differential d lpi' l
in
Eq. {3.4.23}, by dividing by (3 .4.27),
k' E' 12
dQ
(3.4.28)
with the understanding that k', E~, and E~ are given everywhere by
Eqs . (3.4.24)-(3 .4.26). In particular, the differential rate (3 .4.13) for decay
of cone-particle state of zero momentum and energy E into two particles
is
dI'( ac
2ar1c'EiE2' IMPG, 12
and the differential cross-section for the two-body scattering process
1 2 -}
1'2' is given by Eq . (3 .4.15) as
A2
Eu,
Elk
where k = I P t 1 -= I P 2 I
The above case N# = 2 is particularly simple, but there is one rtice
result for Np = 3 that is also worth recording. For N# = 3, Eq. (3 .4.21)
gives
64(P~ ~ ~~ )~fl --* d'P ~ d3P ~
+ tW 2 + Vp r22 + m'22 + lp 32 + tW32 - E)
x
V(~72 + P 13 Y_
I
We write the momentum-space volume as
d3 P~ d3P~ = IA~,I 2 d I P ~I IF 31
2 d~ P ~I dQ3 d d~23 d cas 0z3

3 .5 Perturbation Theory 14 1
where dQ3 is the differential element of solid angle for p', and 023 and
023 are the polar and azimuthal angles of p' relative to the p' direction .
The orientation of the plane spanned by p 2 and p' is specified by 2 3
and the direction of P', with the remaining angle Or fixed by the energy-
conservation condition
+
VI V3 21 + ae, 2 = E
The derivative of the argument of the delta function with respect to cos 023
is
OEi
IP ' II P ~I
0 cos 023
El1
so we can do the integral over cos 02, by just dropping the delta function
and dividing by this derivative
~~ ~~fl --*
Ia ~I d IP ~I IP ~ I d IP ~ I Ei d 03 d023 .
Replacing momenta with energies, this is finall y
6'(Pp - Pa)dfl -+ Ei Ea E3 dE~dE ~ K13 d023
•
(3.4.31 )
But recall that the quantity (3 .4.16), obtained by summing
IM0, 12 over
spins and multiplying with the product of energies, is a scalar function
of dour-momenta. If we approximate this scalar as a constant, then
Eq. (3.4.31) tells us that for a fixed initial state, the distribution of events
plotted in the E~, ~~ plane is uniform. Any departure from a uniform
distribution of events in this plot thus provides a useful clue to the
dynamics of the decay process, including possible centrifugal barriers or
resonant intermediate states. This is known as a Dalitz plot," because of
its use by Dalitz in 1953 to analyze the decay K+ --* 7E+ + g+ + 77-.
3.5 Perturbation Theory
The technique that has historically been most useful in calculating the
S-matrix is perturbation theory, an expansion in powers of the interaction
term V in the Hamiltonian H = Ho + V . Eqs. (3.2.7) and (3 .1 .18) give the
S-matrix as

142
3 Scattering Theory
where T,+ satisfies the Lippmann-Sch finger equation (3 . 1 .17) :
+
j
. /
E.,
E~, + iE
Operating on this equation with V and taking the scalar product with (D#
yields an integral equation for T+
Tfiu+
V#a + f
Ea -
r
where
(3,5.1 )
(3.5.2)
The perturbation series for Tpa+ is obtained by iteration from Eq. (3 .5 .1 )
V#11 V,1 ~
~`flx+ = V{~x +
fir' Ex - F + ie
f
I dydy'
V/3 -~ V7 Y 1 T/`f!a +
(Ea - Er + fie)(E, - E-e, + ice)
(3 .5.3 )
The method of calculation based on
Eq.
(3.5.3), which dominated
calculations of the S-matrix in the 1930s, is today known as oldfashioned
perturbation theory . Its obvious drawback is that the energy denominators
obscure the underlying Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix . It still has some
uses, however, in clarifying the way that singularities of the S-matrix arise
from various intermediate states. For the most part in this book, we
will rely on a rewritten version of Eq. (3 . 5 . 3), known as time-dependent
perturbation theory, which has the virtue of making Lorentz invariance
much more transparent, while somewhat obscuring the contribution of
individual intermediate states .
The easiest way to derive the time-ordered perturbation expansion is to
use Eq . (3 .2 .5), which gives the S-operator a s
where
U(z, -ro) - exp( iHoz) exp(-iH (T - xo) ) exp{-iHo-co).
Differentiating this formula for U(r, ro) with respect to T gives the differ-
ential equation
t
d
~~ U(z~~o) = V(T) U( z, TO),
where
(3 .5 .4)
V(t) - exp(Ho t ) V exp(- Wot) .
(3 .5 . 5 )

3.5 Perturbation Theory
1 43
(Operators with this sort of time-dependence are said to be defined in
the interaction picture, to distinguish their time-dependence from the time-
dependence Op(t) = cxp(iHt)OHexp(-iHt) required in the Heisenberg
picture of quantum mechanics .) Eq . (3 .5.4) as well as the initial condition
~(,ro, -c o) = I is obviously satisfied b y the solution of the integral equation
To
By iteration of this integral equation, we obtain an expansion for U('r, zo)
in powers of V
J
1'0
ta
T
O
T
ti t"
+
/cc
dt,
10
dt2 JT (}
Setting T = c and to - -oo then gives the perturbation expansion for the
S-operator :
LI
S
-i dt I V(t I) + (-i)'
dt, f
dtl V(tl)V(t') )
: ~.
IX 0C
.
00
This can also be derived directly from the old-fashioned perturbation
expansion ( 3 .53), by using the Fourier representation of the energy factors
in Eq. ( 3 .5 .3 ) :
Y,;
with the understanding that such integrals are to be evaluated by inserting
a convergence factor e-"' in the integrand, with e ->~ 0+.
There is a way of rewriting
Eq. (3 .5.8) that proves very useful in
carrying out manifestly Lorentz-invariant calculations . Define the time-
ordered product of any time-dependent operators as the product with
factors arranged so that the one with the latest time-argument is placed
leftmost, the next-latest next to the leftmost, and so on. For instance,
and so on, where O(T) is the step function, equal to + 1 for -c > 0 and to
zero fo r r < 0. The time-ordered product of n Vs is a sum over all rz !
permutations of the Vs, each of which gives the same integral over all

144
3 Scattering theory
tl - - - t,,, so E q. (3.5.8) may be writte n
S = 1 + E --~~ ,
io dtl dt2 . . . dtn T V(ti) . V0,0
(3 .5.10)
r~ .
=1
This is sometimes known as the Dyson series.20 This series can be summed
if the V(t) at different times all commute ; the sum is then
S = exp _if
Q0
dt V(t)
00
Of course, this is not usually the cage ; in general (3.5 . 1 0) does not even
converge, and is at best an asymptotic expansion in whatever coupling
constant factors appear in V . However Eq. (3 .5.10) is sometimes written
in the general case as
S = T exp
__if
'00
dt Y(t)
with T indicating here that the expression is to be evaluated by time-
ordering each term in the series expansion for the exponential .
We can now readily find one large class of theories for which the 5 -
matrix is manifestly Lorentz-invariant . Since the elements of the S-matrix
are the matrix elements of the S-operator between free-particle states
(1), Ofi, etc., what we want is that the S-operator should commute with
the operator
UO{A, a} that produces Lorentz transformations on these
free-particle states. Equivalently, the S-operator must commute with the
generators of UO (A, a) : H0, P0 Ja, and K0. To satisfy this requirement,
let's try the hypothesis that V(t) is an integral over three-space
V (t} =
d3x {x, t) (3-5.11 )
with (x) a scalar in the sense that
(By equating the coefficients of ao for infinitesimal transformations it can
be checked that (x) has a time-dependence consistent with E q . (3 . 5 .5 ).)
Then S may be written as a sum of four-dimensional integrals
~~ /'!
. . .
.X, ~' [ (x1) • . . P(xn )
3 .5.13)
S = 1 +
n
}
.
1
n_1
Everything is now manifestly Lorentz invariant, except for the time-
ordering of the operator product .
Now, the time-ordering of two spacetime points x1, x2 is Lorentz-
invariant unless x1 - x2 is space-like, i .e., unless (XI -- x2)2 > 0, so
the time-ordering in Eq. (3.5.13) introduces no special Lorentz frame if

3.5 Perturbation Theory
145
(though not only if) the (x) all commute at space-like or light-like*
separations
~{x}, (x')] = 0 for
(x - x')2 > Q. (3.5.14 )
We can use the results of Section 3.3 to give a formal non-perturbative
proof that an interaction (3.5.11) satisfying Eqs . ( 3,5.12) and (3 .5.14) does
lead to an S-matrix with the correct Lorentz transformation properties .
For an infinitesimal boost, Eq. (3 . 5.12) gives
i [Ko, ~f(xa t)] = tV, (x, t) + X cat
(x, t)
so integrating over x and setting t - 0,
where
[Ko, V] = [Kin, I d3 X ~W (X,
0)] =
[Ho, W1 ,
W =
dux x
'( x, 0).
(3.5.15 )
(3.5.16 )
(3.5.17 )
If (as is usually the case) the matrix elements of (x, 0) between eigen-
states of H4 are smooth functions of the energy eigenvalues, then the same
is true of V, as is necessary for the validity of scattering theory, and also
true of W, which is necessary in the proof of Lorentz invariance . The
other condition for Lorentz invariance, the commutation relation (3.3.21),
is also valid if and only if
0 = [W, YJ = I d'x j
d3 Y X [,k(x, 0), 0(y, 0)] . (3.5.18)
This condition would follow from the `causality' condition (3 .5.14), but
provides a somewhat less restrictive sufficient condition for Lorentz in-
variance of the S-matrix .
Theories of this class are not the only ones that are Lorentz invariant,
but the most general Lorentz invariant theories are not very different . In
particular, there is always a commutation condition something like (3 .5. 14)
that needs to be satisfied . This condition has no counterpart for non-
relativistic systems, for which time-ordering is always Galilean-invariant.
It is this condition that makes the combination of Lorentz invariance and
quantum mechanics so restrictive .
We write the condition on ?c and x' here as (x -- xr )2 ~ 0 instead of (x - x')2 > 0, because as
we shall see in Chapter 6, Lorentz invariance can be disturbed by troublesome singula rities at
r
X = X
.

146 3 Scattering Theory
The methods described so far in this section are useful when the
interaction operator V is sufficiently small . There is also a modified version
of this approximation, known as the distorted-wave Born approximation,
that is useful when the interaction contains two term s
V = Y, + Vw~ ( 3 .5.19 )
with V, weak but Vs strong. We can define TS.x± as what the `in' and ` out'
states would be if V, were the whole interaction
+
1
F
We can then write (3 . 1 .16) as
Tfl-ot+
((Dg, VTc+ )
([T,#- - (Efl - Ho - + Vw)T .x
(Tp-, VwTz' )
+ (T,,-, [V, - V~;(E# - Ho + I.F)-'(V, + Vw)] T,,+ )
and SO
The second term on the right-hand side is just what Tlf,+ would be in the
presence of strong interactions alone
(For a proof of Eq . (3.5.22), just drop V., everywhere in the derivation of
Eq . (3.5.21).) Eq. (3. 5 .21 ) is most useful when this second term vanishes :
that is, when the process cc --* # cannot be produced by the strong
interactions alone. (For example, in nuclear beta decay we need a weak
nuclear force to turn neutrons into protons, even though we cannot ignore
the presence of the strong nuclear force acting in the initial and final
nuclear states.) For such processes, the matrix element (3 .5.22) vanishes,
so Eq. (3.5 .21) reads
T#x + = (T,sg-, YwT,x+ ). (3 .5 .23 )
So far, this is all exact. However, this way of rewriting the T-matrix
becomes worthwhile when V,, is so weak that we may neglect its effect
on the state T,,+ in Eq. (3.5.23), and hence replace T,+ with the state
'~s:,:+, which takes account only of the strong interaction V, In this
approximation, Eq . (3.5 .23) becomes
This is valid to first order in Vw, but to all orders in V . This approximation
is ubiquitous in physics ; for instance, the S-matrix element for nuclear

3.6 Implications of Unitarity
147
beta or gamma decay is calculated using Eq. (x . .24) with V, the strong
nuclear interaction and V, respectively either the weak nuclear interaction
or the electromagnetic interaction, and with TSfl- and T5,+ the final and
initial nuclear states .
3.6
Implications of Unitarity
The unitarity of the S-matrix imposes an interesting and useful condition
relating the amplitude M,, for forward scattering in an arbitrary multi-
particle state a to the total rate for all reactions in that state . Recall that
in the general case, where the state # may or may not be the same as the
state g, the S-matrix may be written as in ( 3 . 3 .2) :
The unitarity condition then give s
~ (,.r - Ol ~ _
L~fl S rS,, = 6(,, - a) "_ 27L1[54(p
}
i 'x
)
"SIX
+2,gi64{Py, - p.x}M,*f + 4;r2 [d13 54( P~ - P~ )61( P# - P
.x)J~t.
p
°~
Cancell i ng the term 6(y - i) and a factor 27z 64 (Pf - p'), we find that for
pry = N
+ 2n
dfl
(3 .6.1 )
This is most useful in the special case ac = j, where it reads
(3.6.2)
Using Eq. (3,4.11 ), this can be expressed as a formula for the total rate
for all reactions produced by an initial state a in a volume V
dfl
dT{ ~c --~
dfl
r,,,
f
(27L ) 314',,-2 v 1 -N,,
dfl P(pp _ Pa) I W#j, 1 2
I (2,n)' rv,-zyt -Nx IM M".
In particular, where oc is a two-particle state, this can be writte n
Irn Mx, = ---u~c,,/ 161z3 ,
(3.6.3 )
(3 . b.4)
where u, is the relative velocity (3 .4.17) in state x, and d, is the total

148
3 Scattering Theory
cross-section in this state, given by (3 .4.15) as
GIX = f
d# dd(a --* #)Id# = (2,g)4U
a 1 d# ( P# - P, ).
(3.6.5 )
This is usually expressed in a slightly different way, in terms of a scattering
amplitude f (a -). fl }. Eq. (3 .4.30) shows that the differential cross-section
for two-body scattering in the center-of-mass frame is
dQ
kE 2
where k' and k are the magnitudes of the momenta in the initial and final
states. We therefore define the scattering amplitude as p
E k
Mfl
4~2 /k'EEEiE2
so that the differential cross-section is simply
M If[~ ---> ft
In particular, for elastic two-body scattering, we have
4z2Ei E2
Mfla
E
(3-6-7)
(3.6.s )
(3.6.9 )
Using (3.4.15) for the relative velocity u, the unitarity prediction (3 .6.3 )
now reads
Im f (a --+ a) = ~ ca. (3 .6. 10)
This form of the unitarity condition (3.6.3) is known as the optical thear-
ern.22
There is a pretty consequence of the optical theorem that tells much
about the pattern of scattering at high energy . The scattering amplitude
f may be expected to be a smooth function of angle, so there must be
some solid angle dSZ within which
If 12 has nearly the same value (say,
within a factor 2) as in the forward direction. The total cross-section is
then bounded by
~a ~ If I'M 2! ~ i.f(a ~ ~)I'as~ ~ ~ I IM .f(a -+ o~)
l 2Asj .
The phase of f is conventional, and is motivated by the wave mechanical inte rpretatian21 of
f as the coefficient of the outgoing wave in the solution of the time-independent Schrodinger
equati on .
The no rmalization of f used here is slightly unconventional for 1t7e)3,ST1C SC&XtP] '1(]g;
usually f is defined so that a ratio of final and initial velocities appears in the formula for the
differential cross-section.

3. 6 Implica tions of Unitarity 149
Using Eq. (3.6.10) then yields an upper bound on AQ
Ail
327E 2 Ik
2Q.x
( 3 .6. 11 )
As we shall see in the next section, total cross-sections are usually expected
to approach constants or grow slowly at high energy, so Eq . (3 .6.11 )
shows that the solid angle around the forward direction within which the
differential cross-section is roughly constant shrinks at least as fast as 1 /k2
for k -y oo. This increasingly narrow peak in the forward direction at high
energies is known as a diffraction peak.
Returning now to the general case of reactions involving arbitrary
numbers of particles, we can use Eq . (3,6.2) together with CPT invariance
to say something about the relations for total interaction rates of particles
and antiparticles. Because CPT is antiunitary, its conservation does not
in general imply any simple relation between a process cc -~ ~ and the
process with particles replaced with their antiparticles. Instead, it provides
a relation between a process and the inverse process involving antiparticles
we can use the same arguments that allowed us to deduce (3.3.46) from
time-reversal invariance to show that CPT invariance requires the S ;matrix
to satisfy the condition
where leg g- indicates that we must reverse all spin z-components, change
all particles into their corresponding antiparticles, and multiply the matrix
element by various phase factors for the particles in the initial state and
by their complex conjugates for the particles in the final state . Since
CPT invariance also requires particles to have the same masses as their
corresponding antiparticles, the same relation holds for the coefficient of
64(P
c, - P#) in S U,
In particular, when the initial and final states are the same the phase
factors all cancel, and Eq. (3 .6.13 ) says that
(3.6. 1 4)
where a superscript c on n indicates the antiparticle of n . The generalized
optical theorem (3 .6.2) then tells us that the total reaction rate foam an
initia l state consisting of some set of particles is the same as for an initial
state consisting of the eorresponding antiparticles with spins reversed :
r'Fia 1 nt ; p20_2n2 ; .. . = 1FP1 -al n' ; F2 -Uz riz ; . . .
.
(3.6 .1 5)
In particular, applying this to one-particle states, we see that the decay
rate of any particle equals the decay rate of the antiparticle with reversed

150
3 Scattering Theory
spin. Rotational invariance does not allow particle decay rates to depend
on the spin z-component of the decaying particle, so a special case of the
general result (3 .6. 5) is that unstable particles and their corresponding
antiparticles have precisely the same lifetimes .
The same argument that led from the unitarity condit ion S tS = 1 to
our result (3.6.2) al so allows u s to use the other unita rity relation SSA = 1
to derive the result
Im M,, = -a C
dpi 64(p# - pj I
x
p 1 1. (3.6,1 6 )
Putting this together with Eq. (3.6 .2) then yields the reciprocity relation
f dfl jI (Pfi - P.) ~ mo~
2 :_
f ~fl (34(po - P.1) I gIXp 12
(3.6.17)
or in other words
f
dF(
fi d F
00
This result can be used in deriving some of the most important results
of kinetic theory, 23 If P,, dg i s the probability of finding the syste m in a
volume hoc of the space of multi-particle states (D,,,, then the rate of decrease
in F., due to transition s to all other states is F, fdfl dT'(a --* P)/dpi, while
the rate of increase of Px due to transitions from all other states
is
f dp PV dT'(g --* a )fda ; the rate of change of P, is then
do
,
da
d
It follows immediately that f P,doc is time-independent. (Just interchange
the labelling of the integrat i on variables in the integral in the second term
in Eq . (3.6 .29)) On the other hand, the rate of change of the entropy
-,f daP, In P, i s
~~ d~c P, In P,, = -
doc
dpi (In P, + 1 )
x
P
dr(P --+ ,7) _
Pa
dr(a --* fl)
o
da dfl
Interchanging the labelling of the integration variables in the second term,
this may be written
-
d
dcc F, In P,, =
dcc
dfl Pfi In
~fl ) dr~
--~ oo
d t
Pa
da
Now, for any positive probabilities P, and Pp, the function Pfl ln(P# f P,,)

3.7 Partial-Wave Expansions
satisfies the inequality**
Ffl In ~
L
P
# - P
a -
The rate of change of the entropy is thus bounded b y
- '
c~a PIX In P, >
dac
df3
[ P
P - P~] dr( -+ a)
dt J
di
or interchanging variables of integration in the second term
- d
doc P. In P, >
da dfl P# [dIu
_+ a) _ dI'{ o( --I,# )
dt f
da
d
1 5 1
But the unitarity relation (3.6.18 ) tells us that the integral over ac on the
right-hand side vanishes, so we may conclude that the entropy alway s
increases :
- dt
f~CC P,, In P,, ~ 0 ,
I
(3. 6.20 )
This is the `Boltzmann H-theorem.' This theorem is often derived in
statistical mechanics textbooks either by using the Born approximation,
for which MP,12 is symmetric in ac and J3 so that d'(
-> x)/dac =
dT'(oc --+ #)/dfl, or by assuming time-reversal invariance, which would tell
us that N1fl,I2 is unchanged if we interchange o~ and fl and also reverse
all momenta and spins. Of course, neither the Born approximation nor
time-reversal invariance are exact, so it is a good thing that the unitarily
result (3 . 6.1$) is all we need in order to derive the H-theorem .
The increase of the entropy stops when the probability P, becomes
a function only of conserved quantities such as the total energy and
charge. In this case the conservation laws require dr'(# --~ a)/da to
vanish unless P, = P#, so we can replace P# with P, in the first term of
Eq . (3.6 .19 ). Using Eq. ( 3 . 6 . 18) again then shows that in this case, P,, is
time-independent. Here again, we need only the unitarity relation (3 .6 .18),
not the Born approximation or time-reversal invarrtanc:e .
3.7 Partial-Wave Expansions *
It is often convenient to work with the S-matrix in a basis of free-particle
states in which all variables are discrete, except for the total momentu m
The d ifFerencc between the left- and right-ha nd sides approaches the posit i ve qu antity (P, -
Po'-/2,P# fo r Pr - Pj~, and has a derivative ►vith respect to P.z that is positive- or negative-
d C fi I11tC for all P, > P# or P,, < Yfl, respectively,
This sectio n lies somewh at aui of the hook's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first readi n g .

1 52
3 Scattering Theory
and energy. This is possible because the components of the momenta
F1, . . . , pn in an n-particle state of definite total momentum p and total
energy E form a (3n - 4)-dimensional compact space ; for instance, for
n = 2 particles in the center-of-mass frame with p = 0, this space is a
two-dimensional spherical surface. Any function on such a compact space
may be expanded in a series of generalized `partial wares', such as the
spherical harmonics that are commonly used in representing functions on
the two-sphere. We may thus define a basis for these n-particle states that
apart from the continuous variables p and E is discrete: we label the free-
particle states in such a basis as (DEON, with the index N incorporating
all spin and species labels as well as whatever indices are use to label the
generalized partial waves. These states may conveniently be chosen to be
normalized so that their scalar products are :
(OE F p} Nr,E F N) = d(E' - E )6 3 ( p' - p)6Nr N, (3.7.1 )
The S-operator then has matrix elements in this basis of the form
((DEI p,Nf , 5 (DE p N) = 6 (E' - E)6 3(p' --- P)SN',rv(E, p), (3 .7.2)
where ,SNf,N is a unitary matrix. Similarly, the T-operator, whose free-
particle matrix elements ( (D#, T(D,,) are defined to be the quantities Tflx+
defined by Eq . (3.1 .18), may be expressed in our new basis (in accordance
with Eq. (3 .4.12)) as
and the relation (3.2.7) is now an ordinary matrix equation :
We shall use this general formalism in the following section ; for the
present we will concentrate on reactions in which the initial state involves
just two particles.
For example, consider a state consisting of two non-identical particles
of species nl, nz with non-zero masses M1, 11ri2 and arbitrary spins Si,
s2. In this case, the states may be labelled by their
total momentum
P = PI + P2, the energy E, the species labels n1, n2, the spin z-components
U1, 62, and a pair of integers 4,m (with Iml ~ f) that specify the depen-
dence of the state on the directions of, say, pi . Alternatively, we can
form a convenient discrete basis by using Clebsch-Gordan coefficients'
to combine the two spins to give a total spin s with z-component u, and
then using Clebsch-Gordan coefficients again to combine this with the
orbital angular momentum ~ with three-component na to form a total
angular momentum j with three-component o- . This gives a basis of states
(DEpj,1,n with n a `channel index' labelling the two particle species' ni,
n2), defined by their scalar products with the states of definite individual

3.7 Partial-Wane Expansions
153
momenta and spin three-components :
((Dp, .71 p2 ff: W , (DE F j 6 Is n) = O Pil E i Ezl E)-"'P( F - Fr
----pz.)
x 6 (E -
p21 + i -
p22 + M22) 6nF,~
X 1: CS, S_' (S, Y ;a 1 , Cr2 ) C(s (.1, IV a M}P) Y"' (P1). (3 .7 .5 )
M,Y
where Y,1 are the usual spherical harmanics .2' The factor (I p i ~ EtE2/E)-1/2
is inserted so that in the center-of-mass frame these states will be properly
normalized :
(OE'P' j' d'l's'M'> OE U jd f sn) = 63(pf)63 (Ef - E)6j,J6a',a61Vks bn',n . (3.7 .6 )
For identical particles to avoid double counting we must integrate only
over half of the two-particle momentum space, so an extra factor
should appear in the scalar product (3.7.6).
In the center-of-mass frame the matrix elements of any momentum-
conserving and rotationally-invariant operator 0 must take the firm
((bEptYCf,`Sr nf , 0 4DEO W s O =
(3'7 '7 )
(The fact that this is diagonal in j and a follows from the commutation
of 0 with j2 and J3, and the further fact that the coefficient of 6,,r is
independent of a follows from the commutation of 0 with ,11 ±U2. This is
a special case of a general result known as the signer-Eckert theorem, 25)
Applying this to the operator f whose matrix elements are the quantitie s
#,,, it follows that the scattering amplitude ( 3.6.7) in the center-of-mass
system takes the form
2 F~ f ~1 ~~~ 1 E 2
----47C
~~k
MW t7, -k'a;n', k aj -k Q2 n
47t 2
f
}
Cs 1 s2 lS7 P ; d I 5 (72)C6( j, G ; M, P 1
~ff~+ TR + S~ ft '~iFiS~.d
}C ~~~~ kf ) Y~ * ~k) ~ Y~I
+ Sii1, I 5 t1(E) .
(3.T8)
The differential scattering cross-section is If 12 . We will take the direction
of the initial momentum k to be along the three-direction, in which case
YM k) =-
5m
°F477C
.
(3.7.9)

1 54
3 Scattering Theory,
Integrating 11,12 over the direction of the final momentum k' and respec-
tively summing and averaging over final and initial spin three-components
gives the total crass-section*` for transitions from channel n to
Tj' :
2 (3.7.10)
X
Summing ( 3.7 .1 0) over all two-body channels gives the total cross-sectio n
for all elastic or inelastic two-body reactions :
X L(1 - Sj(E)) t(l - Si (E))] r s n ," ~ ►~
.
(17.11 )
For comparison, Eqs. (3 .7 .8 ) , (3 .7 .9), (3.7.4), and the Clebsch-Gordan sum
rules`* give the spin-averaged forward scattering amplitude a s
The optical theorem (3-6. 10) then gives the total cross-section as
27
r Utotal(+~
; E) =
1:
~~,~~~1 + 1)(2s,-) + 1~ (2i +!) Re [1-S] (E)l (.~i:,rs,~ . (3.7.12 )
j~s
If only two-body channels can be reached from the channel n at energy E,
then the matrix Sj (E ) (or at least some subrnatrix that includes channel
n) is unitary, and thus
[(1 - S}{E})t(1 - Sj(E)
)]
_ 2 Re [ 1 - Sj( E )] (5n,l,n ,
(3 .7.13)
so (3 .7.12) and (3 .7.1 I) are equal. On the other hand, if channels involving
three or more particles are open, then the difference of (3 .7.12) and (3 .7 .11 )
" In deriving this result, we use standard sum rulc .0 for the Clebsch-Gordan cneflicient6 : first
~4 •5~ ..%71~~ ~+ d l ~¢?l~a~ r~ i ,5. ~d , fl l ,{f7~ _ ~.ss'~+iji
r1 L .d 2
and the same with primes ; then
fir ., {l, (7 : m, a)C'" p (J, FT ; m, a) = ~jjb¢;,
Rdf}
and finally
2j+ 1
CMj' (Y ;
2(+ 1
a~l

3 .7 Partial- Wage Expansions
155
gives the total cross-section for producing extra particles :
Uproductinn(ns E) - k2(2s 1 + 1
7E
-
)(252 + 1)
4~~ + 1 )
. 1
X [I
fs ,
.,, ,
and this must be positive .
The partial wave expansion is particularly useful when applied to pro-
cesses where the relevant part of the S-matrix is diagonal . This Is the case,
for instance, if the initial channel n contains just two spinless particles,
and no other channels are open at this energy, as in a E+ - n + or rE+ - 7r
scattering at energies below the threshold for producing extra pions (pro-
vided one ignores weak and electromagnetic interactions) . For a pair of
spinless particles we have j = f, and angular momentum conservation
keeps the S-matrix diagonal. It is also possible for the S-matrix to be
diagonal in certain processes involving particles with spin ; for instance in
pion-nucleon scattering we can have j + or j but for a
given j these two states have opposite parity, so they cannot be connected
by non-zero S-matrix elements. In any case, if for some n and
E the
S-matrix elements SN Fj,,:Sr=(E, U) all vanish unless N' is the two-body state
j, l, s, n, then unitarity requires that
SiFsrN.Vs„ ( F ) = exp [20ys~(E)]~ee6,',rj ►?fn 1
( 3 .7.1 5 )
where dj,,,,,(E ) is a real phase, commonly known as the phase shift. This
formula is also often used where the two-body part of the S-matrix is
diagonal but channels containing three or more particles are also open ;
in such cases the phase shift must have a positive imaginary part, to keep
(3 .7.14) positive. For real phase shifts, the elastic and total cross-sections
are then given by Eq . (3.7.10) or Eq. (3 .7. 2) as :
41r
-
k'(2~'1 + 1)(2S2 + ~)
(2j + 1) sing Jjl,M(E) .
(3 .7. 1 6)
This familiar result is usually derived in non-relativistic quantum me-
chanics by studying the coordinate space wave function for a particle in
a potential. The derivation given here is offered both to show that the
partial wave expansion applies for elastic scattering even at relativistic ve-
locities, and also to emphasize that it depends on no particular dynamical
assumptions, only on unitarily and invariance principles .
It is also often useful to introduce phase shifts in dealing with problems
where several channels are open, forming a few irreducible representations
of some internal symmetry group . The classic example of such an internal
symmetry is isotopic spin symmetry, for which the channel index n includes

156
3 Scattering Theory
a specification of the isospins Ti, T2 of the two particles together with
their three-components tl, t2 ; the states in channel n may be expressed as
linear combinations Kf the tth components of irreducible representations
T, with coefficients given by the familiar Clebsch-Gordan coefficients
CT, Tz(T, r : tl, tz). Suppose that for the channels and energy of interest
the S'-matrix is diagonal in rf and s as well as j, T, and t . Unitarity and
isospin symmetry then allow us to write the S-matrix a s
S]e f s' Tf e,lsrr = exp[2ibj e s T (E )J6rf~ 6,,?i 5 6Tf Tbe r,
(3,7.1 7 )
with Sjl S T(E) a real phase shift, t-independent according to the Wigner-
Eckart theorem. The partial cross-sections can again be calculated from
Eq. (3.7.10), and the total cross-section is given by Eq. (3 .7.I2) as
Orr
Gtotal(tl, t2 ; E) =
X 1: (2.1 + OCr, , ~~ (T ~ t a t1 , r2)2 sing 6j,sT (E) .
(3.7. 1 $}
j?s Tf
For instance, in pion-pion scattering we have phase shifts 6~ ea r (E) with
T == 0 or T = 2 for each even z" and T
=-- I for each odd ,, while for
pion nucleon scattering we have phase shifts bjj+ 11 1 T with T or
T = 2 ,
We can gain some useful insight about the threshold behavior of the
scattering amplitudes and phase shifts from considerations of analyticity
that are nearly independent of and dynamical assumptions . Unless there
are special circumstances that would produce singularities in momentum
space, we would expect the matrix element M1',-Jkr dz nf, k ar, -k d2n to be
an analytic functions of the three-momenta
k and k' near k -- 0 or
k' = 0 or (for elastic scattering) k = k'
=-- 0. Turning to the partial wave
expansion (3.7 .$) for
we note that k , Y,, ( k) is a simple polynomial
function of the three-vector k, so ire order for Mk',' -k' d~ nr, k o-1 -k a~.n to be
an analytic function of the three-momenta k and k' near k = 0 or lc' = [},
the coefficients 's'n'/sn or equivalently 6r1bv ., 6n'n - Sk1n',,sn must go as
k~+1k'~+~ when k and/or k' go to zero. Hence for small k and/or W.
it is only the lowest partial waves in the initial and/or final state that
contribute appreciably to the scattering amplitude . We have three possible
cases :
For instance, in the Born approximation (3.2.$), M is proportional to the Fourier transform of
the coordinate space matrix elements of the interaction, and hence is analytic at zero momenta as
long as these matrix elements fall off sufficiently rapidly at large separations . The chief exception
is for scattering involving long-distance forces, such as the Coulomb force .

3.7 Partial- Wave Expansions
157
Exothermic reactions
Here k ' approache s a finite value as k --+ 0, and in this limit beFA'sb"Fn -
Si
goes as k~+ I . The cross-section (3.7. 11) in this case goes as k2~- i ,
where e is here the lowest orbital angular momentum that can lead to the
reaction. In the most usual case e _ 0, so the reaction cross-section goes
as 11k. (This is the case, for instance, in the absorption of slow neutrons
by complex nuclei, or for the annihilation of electron-positron pairs into
photons at low energy, aside from the higher-order effects of Coulomb
forces.) The reaction rate is the cross-section times the flux, which goes
like k, so the rate for an exothermic reaction behaves like a constant for
k --1, 0. However, it is the cross-section rather than the reaction rate that
determines the probability of absorption when a beam crosses a given
thickness of target material, and the factor
1/k makes this probability
very high for slow neutrons in an absorbing m aterial like boron .
Endothermic Reactions
Here the reaction is forbidden until k reaches a finite threshold value,
where k' = 0. Just above this threshold 61Y'6sf,v6n1„ - 5i
n,,, ,n goes as
WYf+ ' . The cross-section (3 .7 .11) in this case goes as {k'where er
is here the lowest orbital angular momentum that can be produced at
threshold. In the most usual case ~' - 0, so the reaction cross-section
rises above threshold like k', and hence like E - Elhres~old . (This is the
case, for instance, in the associated production of strange particles, or the
production of electron-positron pairs in the scattering of photons . )
Elastic Reactions
Here k = k', so k and k' go to zero together. (This is the case where n' = n,
or where n' consists of particles in the same isotopic spin multiplets as
are those in n.) In elastic scattering the partial waves with ( _ er = 0
are always present, so in the limit k -+ 0 the scattering amplitude (3 .7.8)
becomes a constant :
2 (s y cr r a ~ , a~ ) a 5 (~'
(3.1 .17 )
SQ
whe re a is a constant, known as the scattering length, defined by the limi t
so.wnr,nsn --* bnF,n + 2ika,(rz --*~ n')
(3 .7.20)

158
3 Scattering Theory
for k = k' -} 0. Summing 4zlf 1' over final spins and averaging over initial
spins gives the total cross-section for the transition n --* n' at k - k' = 0 :
4 ar
5
The classic instance of the use of this formula is in neutron-proton
scattering, where there are two scattering lengths, with the spin singlet
length ao considerably larger than the spin triplet length a, .
The partial wave expansion can also be used to make a crude guess
about the behavior of cross-sections at high energy . With decreasing
wavelengths, we may expect scattering to be described more or less
classically : a particle of momentum k and orbital angular momentum
would have an impact parameter I'/k, and will therefore strike a disk of
radius R if f. < kR. This can be interpreted as a statement about S-matrix
elements
f I > kRn
I
D kRn
where R, is some sort of interaction radius for channel n . For a given
e > s, them are 2s + I values of j, all close enough to (. to approximate
2j + f ^-' 2/ + 1, so the sum over
1' and s in Eq . (17.12) merely gives a
factor of orde r
} .S
5
The tata.l cross-section is then given for k > i/ by Eq . {3.7.12 as
clolal (n x E) ---).
Clsld,
2n
k2
In exactly the same way, Eq . (3.7.1 D ) gives the elastic scattering cross-
section
r~ (ra~~.; E)~~R~
(3.?.24 )
The difference between Eqs . ( 3 .7.2 3) and (3 .7.24) gives an inelastic cross-
section ark, which is what we would expect for collisions with an opaque
disk of radius R, (The somewhat surprising elastic scattering cross-section
7rR,2, may be attributed to diffraction by the disk.) On the other hand, if
we assume along with Eq . ( 3. 7.22) that S~Is n/s n is complex only for impact
parameters Ilk within a small range of width K,_ < R, around (1k T R,, ,
then using the inequality jIm (1 -- Slisn/sO I ~ 2, the same analysis gives a
bound on the real part of the forward scattering amplitude

3 .8 Resonances
159
The smallness of the real part of the forward scattering amplitude at high
energy is confirmed by experiment .
So far we have not said anything about whether the interaction radius
R, itself may depend on energy. As a very crude guess, we may take
R, as the distance at which the factor exp{-fir} in the Yukawa potential
(1 .2.74) takes a value proportional to some unknown power of E, in
which case R, goes as log E for E ---~ oc:., and the cross-sections go as
(log F}2. As it happens, it has been rigorously shown26 on the basis of
very general assumptions that the total cross-section can grow no faster
than (log E)2 for E --* co, and in fact the observed proton-proton total
cross-section rises something like (log E )' at high energies, so this rough
picture of high-energy scattering does seem to have some correspondence
with reality .
3.8
Resonances*
It often happens that the particles participating in a multi-particle collision
can form an intermediate state consisting of a single unstable particle R,
that eventually decays into the particles observed as the final state. If the
total decay rate of R is small the cross-section exhibits a rapid variation
(usually a peak), known as a resonance, at the energy of the intermediate
state R .
We shall see that the behavior of the cross-sections near a resonance is
pretty much prescribed by the unitarily condition alone, which is a good
thing since there are a number of very different mechanisms that can
produce a nearly stable state :
(a) The simplest possibility is that the Hamiltonian can be decomposed
into two terms, a °strong' Hamiltonian HO} + Y.S, which has the particle
R as an eigenstate, plus a weak perturbation V, which allows R to
decay into various states, including the initial and final states a, fl of our
collision process. For instance there is a neutral particle, the ZO, with
j = 1 and mass 91 GeV, that would be stable in the absence of the
electroweak interactions . These interactions allow the Z' to decay into
electron-positron pairs, muon-antimuon pairs, etc ., but with a total decay
rate that is much less than the ZO mass . In 1989 the Z° particle was seen
as a resonance** in electron-positron collisions at CORN and Stanford ,
' This section lies somewhat out of the honk's main ling of dcvclnpment, and may be omitted in
a first reading.
Incidentally, this example shows that a resonant state only needs to decay relatftrely slowly ; the
L'~ lifetime is 2.6 x i0- 25 seconds, which is not long enough for a ZO travelling near the speed
of light to cross an atomic nucleus, What is important is that the decay rate is 36 limes smaller
than the rate #t/Mz of oscillation of the Z(' wave function in its rest frame .

1 60 3 Scattering Theory
in the reactions e+ + e- --* ZQ --). e+ + e-, e+ + e- -4 ZO -> y+ +
etc.
(b) In some cases a particle is long-lived because there is a potent ial
barrier that nearly prevents its constituents from escaping. The classic
example is nuclear alpha decay : it may be energetically possible for a nu-
cleus to emit an alpha particle (a He 4 nucleus) but the strong electrostatic
repulsion between the alpha part icle and the nucleu s create s a barrier
region around the daughter nucleu s, which the alpha particle is classically
forbidden to enter. The decay then can proceed only by quantum me-
chanical barrier penetration, and is exponentially slow. Such an unstable
state shows up as a resonance in the scattering of the alpha particle on
the daughter nucleus. For instance, the lowest-energy state of the Be g
nucleus is unstable against decay into two alpha particles, and is seen as a
resonance in Hey-Hey scattering. (In addition to Coulomb barriers, there
are also centrifugal barriers that help lengthen the life of alpha- , beta-,
and gamma-unst able nuclei of high spin.)
(c) It is possible for complicated systems to be nearly unstable for
statistical reasons, without the presence of any potential barriers or weak
interactions. For instance, an excited state of a heavy nucleus may be
able to decay only if, through a statistical fluctuation, a large part of its
energy is concentrated on a single neutron. This state will then show up
as a resonance in the scattering of a neutron on the daughter nucleus .
These mechanisms for producing long-lived states are so different that it
is truly fortunate that most of the properties of resonances follow from
unitarity alone, without regard to the dynamical mechanism that produces
the resonance .
First, let's consider the energy dependence of the matrix element for a
reaction near a resonance . A wave packet f da g(cc)T.,+ exp(-iE,t) of `in'
states has a time-dependence given by (3 .1 .19)
f da g(a)T~+~ iEr =
~~ ~ ( ~)(D,e-iE,t
+ f dfi 0, f d. e-iE,t g(a) T#a +
Ea -E + ic
As mentioned in Section 11, a pole in the function Tp,+ in the lower-half
complex E, plane would make a contribution to the second term that
decays exponentially as t ---), oa.
Specifically, a pole at Ex - ER - iI'f2
yields a term in the amplitude that behaves like expo-iERt - Ft/2), so
it corresponds to a state whose probability decays like exp(-r t ).
We
conclude then that a long-lived state of energy ER with a slow decay rate

3.8 Resonances
I' produces a term in the scattering amplitude that varies as
161
To go further, it will be convenient to adopt as a basis the orthonormal
discrete multi-particle states ~~EN discussed in the previous section ; p and
E are the total momentum and energy, and N is an index that takes only
discrete (though infinitely many) values. In this basis, the S-matrix may
be written
SVWN' , pEN = 63 (Pf - P)b(E' - E ) rvFN (P, E) . (3 .8 .2)
Near a resonance, we expect the center-of-mass frame amplitude 5 (0, E)
(E) to have the form
YNF N(E ) = 5N'N {0, E} = YarwN +
N'N
(3.8 .3)
E -T Ex ~ iF/2
where YO and are approximately constant at least over the relatively
small range of energie s
I E - ER ~
F.
In this basis, the unitarity of the S-matrix is an ordinary matrix equation
Y( E )tY(E ) = 1 .
(3 .8 . 4)
Applied to Eq. ( 3 .$.3), this tells us that the non-resonant background
S-matrix is unitary
,9110t,5"O = 1 , {3.8.5}
and also that the residue matrix , satisfies the two conditions
(3.8.6)
2
2
These conditions can be put in a more transparent form by settin g
The unitarity conditions on the matrix dare then simply
(3.8.8)
X3.5.9)
Any such Hermitian idempotent matrix is called a projection matrix . Such
matrices can always be expressed as a sum of dyads of orthonormal
vectors u(r)
.54W N 1N _ u 7~r
1 N~~ *
3Y
t Y
The d iscrete part of the S-matrix is then
r5rYN(E) =
6N
,W,r - i
U~~ U~~*
orvF~x .
(3 . 8 . 11
E - E~ ~' iI'
] 9'
~+F /
2

1 62
3 Scattering Theory
Each term in the sum over r can be thought of as arising from a different
resonant state, all these states having the same values for ER and T .
What has this to do with rates and cross-sections? For simplicity let's
now ignore the non-resonant background scattering, setting ,9'0N1,v equal
to 4rN ; we will come back to the more general case a little later . Then
for the two-body discrete center-of-mass states described in the previous
section, Eq . (3. 8.1 1 ) reads :
e i
F{r'/ 1Sf ix+ , J6( 5Yi (1: ) = 6i+f 6 fSrQAV" 3fSbfitrYi
r
(r) (r)*
E -- E~ + i~'/2 u}rar"'IsI,~, u~~e'sn
(3 .8 . 1 2 )
In all cases the label r will include an index UR giving the z-component of
the total angular momentum of the resonant state ; for a resonant state of
total angular momentum jR, GR takes 2jR + I values. If there is no other
degeneracy, then r just labels the value of o -R , and
]aVsn
.1RA6 R,d
tin
where ~a~sn are a set of complex amplitudes that (because o f the Wigner-
Eckart theorem) are independent of cF . Now Eq. (3.5.12.) gives the ampli-
tude Si defined by Eq. (3.7.7) as
E - ER + il-'/ 2
Also, Eq. {3.8.1 0} now reads
Isn
(3 . 8. 14)
(3 .8. 1 5)
with the dots representing the positive contribution of and states contain-
ing three or more particles . As we shall see, the quantities
I U~,, 12 have the
interpretation of branching ratios for the decay of the resonant state into
the various accessible two-body states .
Eq. (3.7 .1 2) now gives the total cross-section for all reactions in channel
n :
E)
n(2.1R + 1 )
rrn
where
r, = r
f
2
(3 .$. 1 6)
(3 .8. 17)
This is a version of the celebrated Breit-Wigner singe-level formula.27
We can also use these re su lts to calculate the cross-section for resonant
scattering from an in it ial two-body channel n to a final two-body channel

3. 8 Resonances
n'. Using Eq, (3 .8.14) in Eq . (3.7.10) gives
163
(n E)
F
_ , !
ER )2 + 1-2/4
k2(2sl +1)(2S2 +1 )
This shows that the probabilities that the resonant state will decay into
any one of the final two-body channels n' are proportional to the IF,, .
According to Eq . ( 3.8.15 ), the sum of the r, (including contributions from
final states containing three or more particles) is just equal to the total
decay rate T`, so we can conclude that IF, is just the rate for the decay of
the resonant state into channel n.
We see in Eqs. (3.8.1 6) and ( 3 .8 . 1 8) the characteristic resonant peak at
energy ER, with a width (the full width at half maximum) equal to the
decay rate F.
( The individual T', are often called partial widths .) Since
Fn < F, the total cross-section at the peak of the resonance is roughly
bounded by one square wavelength, (2n/k)2 . This rule, that cross-sections
at a single resonance are roughly bounded by a square wavelength, is
universally applicable even in classical physics (where energy conservation
plays the role played here by unitarity), as for instance in the resonant
interaction of sound waves with bubbles in the sea, or gravitational waves
with gravitational wave antennae . (In the latter case, the branching
ratio for oscillations in any laboratory mass to lose their energy through
gravitational radiation is tiny, so the cross-section even at a resonance
peak is vastly less then a square wavelength .28 }
Incidentally, it often happens that a resonance is detected, but energy
measurements are insufficiently precise to resolve its width . In this case,
what is measured experimentally is the integral of the cross-section over
the resonant peak. For the total cross-section (3 .8.14), this is
2~~{2 jR + 1 ~ ',~
2s2 + 1
(3.8 .19)
Gtotai (n ; EWE = k 2
R (f2s1 + 1)fl
Such experiments can reveal only the partial width for decay of the
resonant state into the initial particles, not the total width or branching
ratios .
This formalism can also be applied when the resonant states with
a given spin z-cornponent form a multiplet related by some symmetry
group. For instance, to the extent that isospin symmetry is respected, for a
resonance of total isospin TR the index r labelling resonant states includes
a specification not only of the angular-momentum z-component GR, but
also of an isospin three-component tR, taking values -?'R, -TR+ 1,
. . . TR
In this case there is no change in the above results for the total and partial
cross-sections, because each two-body channel n has definite values ti, t2 of
the isospin z-components of the two particles, and hence can only couple

164 3 Scattering Theory
to the resonant state with the single value tl + t2 for 4. The partial widths
r,, here depend on t I and t2 only through factors C T,J-,(?'R, tR ; t1 , t2 )2 .
The presence of a resonance shows itself in a characteristic behavior of
phase shifts near the resonance. Returning to the general formula (3 .8 .11)
(but still taking Yo = 1), we see from Eq
. r~-
3.S.1U) that for each individual
resonant state r, there is an eigenvector u of YNN(E) with eigenvalue
or, in other words,
tan p)(E) _
~r~ E
(x .8.20)
We see that over an energy range of order IF centered around the resonant
energy, the the `eigenphase' ~ (') (E) jumps from a value vn (with v a positive
or negative integer) below the resonance to (v + 1)7z above it . However,
in order to use this result to say something about reaction rates, we need
to know the eigenvectors u~), which, in general, have components with
arbitrary numbers of particles with various momenta, spin, and species .
These results are much more useful in those special cases when the
particles in a particular channel N are forbidden (usually by conservation
laws) from making a transition to any other channel . With this assumption,
it is not difficult to include the effects of a non-resonant background
scattering matrix Yo in the general result (3.9 .11) . In order for YN1N to
vanish for some particular N and all N' * N, it is necessary that the same
is true of YoN + N, and also true of u~~ for any r for which u(") ~ 0 . The
unitarity requirement (3.8 .5) then requires that for this N
~ONr N = exp(2iSnnr)bN +N
and Eq . (3.8.10) requires that
u
(r)*U (3) - b
1V N - rs }
so that there can be only one term r in Eq. (3-8.11) for which u~;} * 0. In
this case, Eq. (3 . 9.11) gives
ir
E - ER +ar/2
6N1 N exp(2ibN (E))
with total phase shift
6N( E) _ 60N - arctan
r/2
(E - ER
(3 .8 .2 1 )
We see that over an energy range of order r entered around the resonant
energy ER, the phase shift 6N(E ) Jumps from a val ue ~ON below the

Problems
165
resonance to &N + iT a bove it. For instance, as we saw in the previous
section, these assumptions are satisfied in various two-body reactions such
as pion-pion and pion-nucleon scattering at energies below the th reshold
for producing extra pions, with N incorporating the total and orbital
angular-momenta j, 1 (with j = t for pion-pion scattering) and the total
angular-momentum z-component ff, as well as the total isospin T and its
three-component r. The Wigner-Eckart theorem a llows the phase shifts to
depend only on j, rf, and T, not on t or if. There are famous resonances in
these channels : in pion-pion scattering there is a resonance at 770 Mehl
called p with j = ~ = 1, T = 1, and F = 150 Mel ; in pion-nucleon
scattering there is a resonance at 1232 Mel called d with j = 2 ,
T = A and F_ 110ta 120MeV.
Inspection of Eq . (3.7.12) or Eq. (3 .7.18) shows that the total cross-
section reaches a peak when the resonant phase shift passes through 7r/2
(or odd-integer multiples of n/2.) The non-resonant phase shifts are
typically rather small, so as we saw earlier, Utotal will exhibit a sharp
peak when the phase shift 6,r goes through 7r/2, at an energy close to ER -
Hawever, it sometimes happens that the non-resonant background phase
shift 6ON is near 7r/2, in which case the cross-section w ill exhibit a sharp dip
as the phase shift rises through it near ER, due to destructive interference
between the resonance and the non-resonant background amp litude. Such
dips were first observed by Ramsauer and Townsend29 In 1922, in the
scattering of electrons by noble gas atoms .
Problems
1. Consider a theory with a separable interaction ; that is,
( cDg, V(D, ) = g u~ u,* ,
where g is a real coupling constant, and u,, is a set of complex
quantities with
Use the Lipptnann-Schwinger equation (3.1.16) to find explicit solu-
tions for the `i n' and °out' states and the S-matrix.
2. Suppose that a resonance of spin one is discovered in e+-e- scatterin g
at a total energy of 150 GeV and with a cross-section (in the center -
of-mass frame, averaged over initial spins, and summed over final
spins) for elastic e+-e- scattering at the peak of the resonance equa l
to 14-34 cm2 . What is the branching ratio for the decay of the
resonant state R by the mode R --i, e- + e+? What is the total

166
cross-section
(in answering
scattering.)
for e+-e- scattering at the peak of the resonance?
both questions, ignore the non-resonant backgroun d
3. Express the differential cross-section for two-body scattering in th e
laboratory frame, in which one of the two particles is initially at rest ,
in terms of kinematic variables and the matrix element M
. (Derive
the result directly, without using the results derived in this chapter
for the differential cross-section in the center-of-mass frame . )
4. Derive the perturbation expansion (3 .5.8) directly from the expansion
( 3.5.3 ) of old-fashioned perturbation theory .
5. We can define `standing wave' states T,° by a modified version of
the Lippmann- ch infer equation
r
lil
l'!IO
ttO = rTti, +
i~lT
I
~!~
Y
E~ - &
3 Scattering Theory
Show that the matrix Kp, = 7r6(E# - E, ) (Op , VT,O) is Hermitian .
Show how to express the S-matrix in terms of the ,K-matrix .
6. Express the differential cross-section for elastic n+-proton and 7r--
proton scattering in terms of the phase shifts for states of definite
total angular momentum, parity, and isospin .
7. Show that the states OE p f, defined by Eq.
(3.7.5) are correctly
normalized to have the scalar products (3 .7.6) .
References
1. For more details, see M. L. Goldberger and K. M . Watson, Collision
Theory (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1964) ; R. G. Newton,
Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles, 2nd edn (Springer- erlag,
New York, 1982).
1 a. B. Lippmann and J . Schwinger, Phys . Rev. 79, 469 (1950 )-
2. J. A. Wheeler, Phy1,s. Rev. 52, 1107 (1937) ; W. Heisenberg, Z . Phys .
120, 513, 673 (1943).
3. M,horn, Z. Whys .. 37, 863 ( 1926) ; 38, 803 (1926) .
4 . C. Moller, Kg1. Danske Vide nskah. Wat . Fys . Medd. 23, Na 1 (1945) ;
22, No. 19 (194).

Rcjerences
1 67
S. G. D. Rochester and C. C. Butler, Nature 160, 855 (1947). For a
historical review, see G. D. Rochester, in Pions to Quarks - Particle
Physics in the 1950s, ed. by L. Brown, Dresden, and L.
Hoddeson (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1989) .
6. G. Breit, E . U . Condon,, and R. S. Present, Phys. Rev. 50, 825 (1036) ,
B. Cassen and E. U. Condon, Fhys . Rev. 50, 846 (1936) ; G. Breit
and E. Feenberg, Whys. Rev. 50, 850 (1936).
7. M. A. Tuve, N. Heydenberg, and L. R. Hafstad, Phys. Rev. 50, 806
(1936) .
8. M.Dell-Mann, Cal . Tech . Synchotron Laboratory Report CTRL-20
(1961) ; P hyrs. Rev . 125, 1067 (1962) ; Y. Ne'eman Nucl. Phys. 26, 222
(1961).
9. See e.g. A. R . Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechan-
ics (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957) : Chapter 3 (where
Cj1j2(jM ; M r M2)
is denoted
Ui .7? .7 In I,1r M i .12 MA ;
M .
E. Rose,
E leme ntary Theory of Angular Momentum (John Wiley
& Sons,
New York, 1957) : Chapter III (where Cj,~~ (jm ; m I rn2) is denoted
C01 j2 i ; MI M2 M A
10. C . Feinberg and S . Weinberg,1Vuvvo Cimento eerie X, 14, 571 (1959).
11. Chinowsky and J. Steinbrger, Phys, Rev . 95, 1561 (1954) ; also
see B. Ferret ti, Report oj' an International Cortf~rence on Fundamen-
tal Particles and Low Temperatures, Cambridge, 194 6 (The Physical
Society, London, 1947) .
12. T. D. Lee and C. N . Yang, Pays. Rev. 104, 254 (1956) .
13. C. S. Wu et al., PhyS . Rev. 105, 1413 (1957) .
14. R. Darwin, L . Lederman, and M . 11Veinrich, Phys. Rev .
105, 1415
(1957) ; T. I. Friedman and V. L. Telegdi, Phys. Rev . 105, 1681 (1957) .
15. K. M . Watson Pays. Rev. 88, 1163 (1952) .
16. M.Dell-Mann and A. Pais, Phys. Rev. 97, 1387 (1955) ; also see A.
Pais and 0 . Piccioni, Phys. Rev.. 100, 1487 (1955
,
17. J. H. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V L. Fitch, and R. Turlay, Ply=s .
Rev. Letters 13, 138 (1964).
18. K. R. Schubert et al., P hys. Lett. 31B, 662 (1970) . This reference an-
alyzes neutral kaon data without the assumption of CPT invariance,
and finds that the part of the CP-violating amplitude that conserves

1 6 8
3 Scattering Theory
CPS` and violates T has both real and imaginary parts five standard
deviations from zero, while the part that conserves T and violates
CPT is within a standard deviation of zero.
19. R . H . Dalitz, Phil. Mag. 44, 1068 (1953) ; also see E. Fabri, Nuovo
Cimento
1. 1 , 479 ( 1 9 54) .
2Q. F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 75, 486, 1736 (1949).
21. See, e.g., L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, 1st edn (McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1949)- Section 19 .
22. This was first proved in classical electrodynamics. Sep, e. g., H.
A. Kramers, Asti Congr. Intern. Fisici, Como, 1 927 ; reprinted in H.
A. Kramers, Collected Scientific Papers (North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1 956). For the proof in quantum mechanics, see E. Feenberg, Whys .
Rev. 40, 40 (1932) ; N . Bohr, R. E. Pelerls, and G. Placzek, Nature
1 44, 200 (1939).
23 . A general version of this argument was given in the late 1960s in
unpublished work of C. N. Yang and P. Yang. Also see A .
Aharony, in Modern Developments in Thermodynamics (Wiley, Now
York, 1973) : pp . 95-114, and references therein.
24. See, e.g., A. R. Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechanics ,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957 : Chapter 2; E .
Rose, Elementary Theory of Angular Momentum (John Wiley & Sons ,
New York, 1957) : Appendix III ; L. D. Landau and E. M . Lifshitz ,
Quantum Mechanics - Non Relativistic Theory, 3rd edn (Pergamon
Press, Oxford, 1977) : Section 28 .
25. E. P. Wigner, Gruppentheorie (Friedrich Vieweg and Sohn, Braun-
schweig, 1931) ; C. Eckart, Rev. Mod. Phys, 2, 305 (1930).
26. M. Froissart, Phys . R ev. 123, 1053 ( 196 1 ) .
27. C. Breit and E. P. Wigner, Phys . Rev. 49, 519 ( 193 6).
28. See, e.g., S . Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New fork,
1972) : Section 10.7.
29. R. Kollath, Phys. Veit. 31, 985 (1931) .

The Cluster
Decomposition Principle
Up to this point we have not had much to say about the detailed structure
of the Hamiltonian Kperator H . This operator can be defined by giving
all its matrix elements between states with arbitrary numbers of particles .
Equivalently, as we shall show hers, any such operator may be expressed
as a function of certain operators that create and destroy single particles.
We saw in Chapter 1 that such creation and annihilation operators were
first encountered in the canonical quantization of the electromagnetic field
and other fields in the early days of quantum mechanics . They provided
a natural formalism for theories in which massive particles as well as
photons can be produced and destroyed, beginning in the early 1930s with
Fermi's theory of beta decay.
However, there is a deeper reason for constructing the Hamiltonian out
of creation and annihilation operators, which goes beyond the need to
quantize any pre-existing field theory like electrodynamics, and has nothing
to do with whether particles can actually be produced or destroyed. The
great advantage of this formalism is that if we express the Hamiltonian
as a sum of products of creation and annihilation operators, with suitable
non-singular coefficients, then the S-matrix will automatically satisfy a
crucial physical requirement, the cluster decomposition principle,l which
says in effect that distant experiments yield uncorrelated results . Indeed, it
is for this reason that the formalism of creation and annihilation operators
is widely used in non-relativistic quantum statistical mechanics, where the
number of particles is typically fixed. In relativistic quantum theories, the
cluster decomposition principle plays a crucial part in making field theory
inevitable . There have been many attempts to formulate a relativistically
invariant theory that would not be a local field theory, and it is indeed
possible to construct theories that are not field theories and yet yield
a Lorentz-invariant S-matrix for two-particle scattering,2 but such efforts
have always run into trouble in sectors with more than two particles : either
the three-particle S-matrix is not Lorentz-invariant, or else it violates the
cluster decomposition principle .
In this chapter we will first discuss the basis of states containing ar-
1 69

1 70
4 The Clu ste r Decomposition Principle
bitrary numbers of bosons and ferrnians, then define the creation and
annihilation operators, and finally show how their use facilitates the
construction of Hamiltonians that yield 5-matrices satisfying the cluster
decomposition condition.
4.1 Bosons and Fermions
The H ilbert space of physical states is spanned by states conta ining 0,
1, 2, - - - free particles. These can be free-particle states, or `in' s tates, or
out' states ; for definiteness we shall deal here with the free-particle states
Fi f7 i n] M2 C72n_,- .# but all our results will apply equally to `in' or `out' states .
As usual, a labels spin z-components (or helicities, for massless particles)
and n labels particle species.
We must now go into a matter that has been passed over in chapter 3 ;
the symmetry properties of these states. As far as we know, all particles
are either bosons or .fermions, the difference being that a state is unchanged
by the interchange of two identical bosons, and changes sign under the
interchange of two identical fermions . That is
with an upper or lower sign if n is a boson or a fermion, respectively,
and dots representing other particles that may be present in the state.
(Equivalently, this could be stated as a condition on the `wave functions,'
the coefficients of these multi-particle basis vectors in physically allowable
state-vectors.) These two cases are often referred to as Bose or Fermi
`statistics'. We will see in the next chapter that Bose and Fermi statistics
are only possible for particles that have integer or half-integer spins, re-
spectively, but we shall not need this information in the present chapter . In
this section we shall offer a non-rigorous argument that all particles must
be either bosons or fermions, and then set up normalization conditions
for multi-boson or multi-fermion states .
First note that if two particles with spins and momenta p, u and p%cr'
belong to identical species n, then the state-vectors (D .,, p, .. . pf ufn . . . and
0. .. p+ c{ n ... p cr n
.. represent the same physical Mate ; if this were not the case
then the particles would be distinguished by their order in the labelling
of the state-vector, and the first listed would not be identical with the
second. Since the two state-vectors are physically indistinguishable, they
must belong to the same ray, and so
where i,, is a complex number of unit absolute value . We may regard this
as part of the definition of what we mean by identical particles .

4.1 Bosons and Fermions
17 1
The crux of the matter is to decide on what the phase factor a, may
depend. If`it depends on ly on the species index n, then we are nearly done .
Interchanging the two particles in Eq. (4. 1.2) aga i n , we find
z
4).
p'rr'n - ..
an ~., . Pd rr
, . . p, 17 , n
so that a~ = 1, yielding Eq. (4.1.1) as the only two possibilities .
On what else could a, depend? It might depend on the numbers
and species of the other particles in the state (indicated by dots in
Eqs. (4 .1.1) and (4.1.2}), but this would lead to the uncomfortable result
that the symmetry of state-vectors under interchange of particles here on
earth may depend on the presence of particles elsewhere in the universe .
This is the sort of thing that is ruled
Kut by the cluster decomposition
principle, to be discussed later in this chapter. The phase x, cannot
have any non-trivial dependence on the spins of the two particles that
are interchanged, because then these spin-dependent phase factors would
have to furnish a representation of the rotation group, and there are
no non-trivial representations of the three-dimensional rotation group
that are one-dimensional - that is, by phase factors. The phase g,,
might conceivably depend on the momenta of the two particles that are
interchanged, but Lorentz invariance would require o~n to depend only on
the scalar p2p ; this is symmetric under interchange of particles I and 2,
and therefore such dependence would not change the argument leading
to the conclusion that a~ = 1 ,
The logical gap in the above argument is that (although our notation
hides the fact) the states (Dpi cT, n,pz t7zn,--- may carry a phase factor that
depends on the path through momentum space by which the momenta
of the particles are brought to the values pi, p2, etc. In this case the
interchange of two particles twice might change the state by a phase
factor, so that ocn 1. We will see in Section 9.7 that this is a real
possibility in two-dimensional space, but not for three or more spatial
dimensions .
What about interchanges of particles belonging to different species? If
we like, we can avoid this question by simply agreeing from the beginning
to label the state-vector by listing all photon momenta and helicities first,
then all electron momenta and spin z-components, and so on through the
table of elementary particle types. Alternatively, we can allow the particle
labels to appear in any order, and define the state-vectors with particle
labels in an arbitrary order as equal to the state-vector with particle
labels in some standard order times phase factors, whose dependence
on the interchange of particles of different species can be anything we
like. In order to deal with symmetries like isospin invariance that relate
particles of different species, it is convenient to adopt a convention that
generalizes Eq. (4.1 .1) : the state-vector will be taken to be symmetric

172 4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
under interchange
Kf any bosons with each other, or any bosons with
any fermions, and antisymmetric with respect to interchange of any two
fermions with each other, in all cases, whether the particles are of the
same species or na#.'
The normalization of these states must be defined in consistency with
these symmetry conditions. To save writing, we will use a label q to
denote all the quantum numbers of a single particle : its momentum, p,
spin z-component (or, for massless particles, helicity) (r, and species n . The
N-particle states are thus labelled (Dqi . , . q N (with N = 0 for the vacuum
state (Do . ) For N = 0 and
= 1 the question of symmetry does not arise :
here we have
(0n, (Do) = 1
and
(4.1 .3)
where 6(q'-q ) is a product of all the delta functions and Kronecker deltas
for the particle's quantum numbers ,
6 (q' - q) = P(P f - p) 5,f~bWn .
(4.1 .5)
On the other hand, for
= 2 the states ~qlq~ and ~ 'q ~ are physically the
same, so here we must take
(q;q 2'
7 (Dqlq2
_ 6(
4i
- cat ) 6( Ri - q2) ± 6(R2 - 4i ) b( ~'i - 42 )
(4.1 .6)
the sign ± being - if both particles are fermions and + otherwise . This
obviously is consistent with the above stated symmetry properties of the
states . More generally,
The sum here is over all permutations ~)" of the integers 1, 2, . . . , N. (For
instance, in the first term in E q . (4.1.6), ' is the identity, Y1 = 1 , Y2 = 2,
while in the second term Y 1 = 2, Y2 = 1 . ) Also, bg is a sign factor equal
to -1 if 9/ involves an odd permutation of fermions (an odd number of
fermion interchanges) and +1 otherwise. It is easy to see that Eq. (4.1 .7)
has the desired symmetry or antisymmetry properties under interchange
of the qj, and also under interchange of the q j.
In fact, by the same reasoning, the symmetry or antisyrnrnetry of the state-vector under inter-
change of particles of the same species but different heliczkies or spin a-components is purely
conventional, because we could have agreed from the beginning to list first the momenta of
photons of helicity +1, then the momenta of all photons of helicity -1, then the momenta of
all electrons of spin z-component + ~, and so on. We adopt the cr~nuentfnM that the state-vector
is symmetric or antisymmetric under interchange of identical bosons or fermians of diftrent
bell-cities or spin z-components in order to facilitate the use of rotational invariance.

4.2 Creation and Annihilation Operators
17 3
4.2 Creation and Annihilation Operators
Creation and annihilation operators may be defined in terms of their effect
on the normalized multi-particle states discussed in the previous section .
The creation operator at(q) (or in more detail, at(p, a, n)] is defined as the
operator that simply adds a particle with quantum numbers q at the front
of the list of particles in the stat e
a t ( 4)(Dq,qz ...q. - q)qq jq2 . ..qN . (4.2.1 )
In particular, the N-particle state can be obtained by acting on the vacuum
with N creation operators
It is conventional for this operator to b e called at (q) ; its adjoint, which
is then called a(q), may be calculated from Eq. (4.1 .7). As we shall
now show, K(4) removes a particle from and state on which it acts, and
is therefore known as an annihilation operator .
In particular, when the
particles q ql , . . qN are either all bosons or all fermions, we hav e
r= 1
with a +1 or -1 sign for bosons or fermivns, respectively
. (Here is the
proof. We want to calculate the scalar product of a ( q )(Dqjq2 .. .qN with an
arbitrary state
qi .. .q~ . Using Eq . (4.2 .1), this is
We now use Eq. (4.1 .7). The sum over permutations
01 of 1,2, . . .,N
can be written as a sum over the integer r that is permuted into the
first place, i.e. gr = 1, and over mappings ]' of the remaining integers
1, . . . , r - 1, r + 1, . . • , N into 1, • -
- , N -- 1. Furthermore, the sign factor i s
with upper and lower signs for bosons and fermions, respectively . Hence,
using Eq . (4.1.7) twice,
N M
x
N
_ 6jV,M+ 1
q
1, . .qlM? 0ql"' .9r- 1 qj,+ 1 ., .qN
r= 1

174
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
Both sides of Eq. (4.2.3) thus have the same matrix element with any state
1D,7F, ..q~, and are therefore equal, as was to be shown . As a special case
of ~Ec~. (4.2.3), we note that for both bosons and fermions, a(q) annihilates
the vacuum
a(q ) (Do = 0 .
(4 .2 .4 )
As defined here, the creation and annihilation operators satisfy an im-
portant commutation or anticommutation relation . Applying the operator
a(q') to Eq- (4.2-1) and using Eq. (4.2.3) gives
'IV
ti
r = 1
- qr~(DqtIl
.. ,qr-I qr-1 , . .t1.ti
`
(The sign in the second term is (±),,+2 because cox is in the (r + 1)-th place
in (N. j ,.,q .k - ) On the other hand, applying the operator at(q) to Eq. (4.2.3)
gives
a'( R)a(qr)(1)q, . . .q N
N
r= l
Subtracting or adding, we have the n
[a(q')a*(q) :~ a1(q)a(q')1
(Vqj-qjv
6(q' - q)(Dql . . .qN
'
But this holds for all state s cDq , . ., .,,; (and may ea sily be seen to hold also
for states containing both bosons and fermions) and therefore i mplies the
operator relation
In addition, Eq. (4.2.2) gives immediately
and so also
(42s)
(4.2.6 )
(4.2.7 )
As always, the top and bottom signs apply for bosons and fermions,
respectively. According to the conventions discussed in the previous
section, the creation and/or annihilation operators for particles of two
different species commute if either particle is a boson, and anticomrnute
if both are fermions .
The above discussion could have been presented in reverse order (and
in most textbooks usually is). That is, we could have started with the
commutation or anticomrnutation relations Eqs . (4.2.5)-(427), derived
from the canonical quantization of some given field theory . Multi-particle

4.2 Creation and Annihilation Operators
175
states would have then been defined by
Eq.
(4.2.2), and their scalar
products Eq. (4.1 .7) derived from the commutation or anticammutation
relations. In fact, as discussed in Chapter 1, such a treatment would be
much closer to the way that this formalism developed historically. We
have followed an unhistorical approach here because we want to free
ourselves from any dependence on pre-existing field theories, and rather
wish to understand why field theories are the way they are .
We will now prove the fundamental theorem quoted at the beginning
of this chapter : any operator 6' may be expressed as a sum of products of
creation and annihilation operators
N=O ?4t =o
x CNkr (q i . . . q~v R j . . . q±tir)
(4 .2.8)
That is, we want to show that the C'NAf coefficients can be chosen to give
the matrix elements of this expression any desired values . We do this by
mathematical induction . First, it is trivial that by choosing Coo properly,
we can give ((Do, 60p) any desired value, irrespective of the values of C N,u
with N > 0 and/or M > 0. We need only use Eq. {4_2.4} to see that
Eq. (4.2.8) has the vacuum expectation valu e
Now suppose that the same is true for all matrix elements of 6 between
N- and M-particle states, with N
L,
:!~ K or N ~ L, M
K ; that
is, that these matrix elements have been given some desired values by
an appropriate choice of the corresponding coefficients Cvm . To see that
the same is then also true of matrix elements of G between any L- and
K-particle states, use Eq. (4.2.8) to evaluate
+ terms involving CNM with N < L, Nl S K or N < L, A4
K
Whatever values have already been given to C NM with N < L, M K
or N < L, Al
K, there is clearly some choice of CLK which gives this
matrix element any desired value.
Of course, an operator need not be expressed in the form (4.2.8), with
all creation operators to the left of all annihilation operators . (This
is often called the 'normal' order of the operators .) However, if the
formula for some operator has the creation and annihilation operators
in some other order, we can always bring the creation operators to the
left of the annihilation operators by repeated use of the commutation or

1 76
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e
anticommutation relations, picking up new terms from the delta function
in Eq. (4 .2.5) .
For instance, consider any sort of additive operator F (like momentum,
charge, etc .) for which
F (Dql .. .q1V _ (f (4i) + . . . + f (q nr ) ) (Dq , . . .qN . (4. 2.9)
Such an operator can be written as in Eq. (4 .2.8), but using only the term
with N = M - 1 :
In particular, the free-particle Hamiltonian is alway s
Ho == f dq a~(q)a(q)E(q )
where E(q) is the single-particle energy
(4. 2. 10)
(4.2.21 )
We will need the transformation properties of the creation and annihila-
tion operators for various symmetries, First, let's consider inhamogeneous
proper orthochronous Lorentz transformations. Recall that the N-particle
states have the Lorentz transformation property
UO(A, a)(DPI 01 1 n 1,P 2(72n2,- .
PPIP2
, (W(Ap)D/
. ( FF ( LL p,))
x
L6
II0-
al Qty . . .
.
. . F1 .4IT 1 n] ,p2nQ 2n2,
Here PA is the three-vector part of lip, D~j~(R) is the same unitary spin-j
representation of the three-dimensional rotation group as used in Section
2.5, and W(A,p) is the particular rotation
where L(p) is the standard `boot' that takes a particle of mass m from rest
to four-momentum p" . (Of curse, m and j depend on the species label n.
This is all for m
0; we will return to the massless particle case in the
following chapter.) Now, these states can be expressed as in Eq. (4.12)
where (DD is the Lorentz-invariant vacuum state

4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitudes 17 7
In order that the state (4.2.2) should transform properly, it is necessary
and sufficient that the creation operator have the transformation rule
Up(l~, a)al(pffn) U6-1 (A, OL) = 8 r(Ap )•x~(Ap)G/pl
x
Da (W {A+ P)) al ( PA Cr (4.2.1 2)
In the same way, the operators C, P, and T, that induce charge-conjugation,
space inversion, and txxne-reversal transformations on free particle states'
transform the creation operators as :
Put( p o- n)PTi = i}, at(---p a n) , (4.2.14)
Tal (P a n)T-1 = ~, (- I )j-d al (-p - a n) ,
(4.2.15)
As mentioned in the previous section, although we have been dealing
with operators that create and annihilate particles in free-particle states,
the whole formalism can be applied to `gin' and 'out' states, in which case
we would introduce operators aM and a,,ut defined in the same way by
their action on these states. These operators satisfy a Lorentz transforma-
tion rule just like Eq. (4.2.12), but with the true Lorentz transformation
operator U(A, oc) instead of the free-particle operator Uo( 11, a ).
4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitude s
It is one of the fundamental principles of physics (indeed, of all science)
that experiments that are sufficiently separated in space have unrelated
results. The probabilities for various collisions measured at Fermilab
should not depend on what sort of experiments are being done at CERN
at the same time,
If this principle were not valid, then we could never
make any predictions about any experiment without knowing everything
about the universe.
In S-matrix theory, the cluster decomposition principle states that if
multi-particle processes al ` #I , ac2 ` fl2s . . . a aAf --* fl..y are studied in K
very distant laboratories, then the S-matrix element for the overall proces s
We omit the subscript '0' on these operators, because in virtually all cases where C, P, and/or
T are conserved, the operators tha t induce these transformations on 'in' and 'out' states are the
same as th ose dofined by their action on free-partic le states. This is not the case for continuous
Lorentz transformations, for which it is necessary to distinguish between the operators U(A,a)
and U60, a) .

178
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
factorizes . That is, *
if for all i ~ j, all Kf the particles in states ocj and /i i are at a great spatial
distance from all of the particles in states uj and flj. This factorization of S-
matrix elements will ensure a factorization of the corresponding transition
probabilities, corresponding to uncorrelated experimental results .
There is a combinatoric trick that allows us to rewrite Eq . (4.3.1) in
a more transparent way. Suppose we define the connected part of the
S-matrix, Sc, by the formula"
sflit
SC SC
(4.3 .2)
fil-Itl V7 2
PART
Here the sum is over all different ways of partitioning the particles in
the state ac into clusters Xi, oc2, - . ., and likewise a sum over all ways of
partitioning the particles in the state fl into clusters fi1, fl2, , not counting
as different those that merely arrange particles within a given cluster
or permute whole clusters. The sign is + or - according to whether
the rearrangements a -r xj,)c2 . . . and # -}
fl 1 02 . . . involve altogether
an even or an odd number of fermion interchanges, respectively . The
term `connected' is used because of the interpretation of S(' in terms of
diagrams representing different contributions in perturbation theory, to
be discussed in the next section.
This is a recursive definition . For each i and 11, the sum on the right-
hand side of Eq . (4.3.2) consists of a term 5~, plus a sum I' over products
of two or more SI-matrix elements, with a total number of particles in
each of the states aj and #j that is less than the number of particles in
' We are here returning to the notation used in Chapter 3 ; Greek letters a or {3 stand for a
collection of particles, including for each particle a specification of its momentum, spin, and
species . AIR). x , + a -) + - • • + cc.,4- is the state formed by combining all the particles in the states
. x l , a2, . . ,and x .t. ,and likewise for fli + f32 + . . . + fl.y .
" This decomposition has been used in classical statistical mechanics by Ur5e11, Mayer, and others,
and in quantum statistical mechanics by Lee and Yang and others .3 It has also been used
to calculate many-body ground state energies by Goldstone 4 and Hugenholta .5 In all of' these
applications the purpose ofisolating the connected parts of Green's functions, partition functions,
resolvents, etc,, is to deal with objects with a simple volume dependence . This is essentially our
purpose ton, because as we shall see, the crucial property of the connected parts ofthe S-matrix
is that they are proportional to a single momentum-conservation delta function, and in a box the
delta function becomes a Kronecker delta times the volurnc . The cluster decomposition is also
the same formal device as that used in the theory of naise 6 to decompose the correlation function
of several random variables into its 'cumulants' ; if' the random variable receives contributions
from a large number N of independent fluctuations, then each cumulant is proportional to N,

4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitude s
the states a and #
PART
1 79
Suppose that the S`-matrix elements in this sum have already been chosen
in such a way that Eq . (43 .2) is satisfied for states fl, ~c containing together
fewer than, say, N particles. Then no matter what values are found in this
way for the 5-matrix elements appearing in the sum E', we can always
choose the remaining term 5C so that Eq. (4.3.2) is also satisfied for
states a, fl containing a total of N particles. Thus Eq . (4.3.2) contains no
information in itself; it is merely a definition of SC.
If the states x and li each consist of just a single particle, say with
quantum numbers q and q' respectively, then the only term on the right-
hand-side of Eq. (4.3.2) is just S~' itself, so for one-particle state s
c
(Apart from possible degeneracies, the fact that S.rq is proportional to
(q' - q) follows from conservation laws. The absence of any proportion-
ality factor in Eq . (4.3.3) is based on a suitable choice of the relative phase
of `in' and `nut' states.) We are here assuming that single-particle states
are stable, so that there are no transitions between single-particle states
and any others, such as the vacuum .
For transitions between two-particle states, Ey . (4.3.2) reads
S11~q 7,~~~~z - ~~;~~,~~~~ + 6(qi - ~I1 )6(q~ -- c~?
± b (~fi - R? )6(q2- q 1 ) . (4.3.4)
(We are here using Eq. (4.3.3).) The sign ± is - if both particles are
fermions, and otherwise + . We recognize that the two delta function
terms just add up to the norm (4 .1.6), so here Spa is just (S - I)#,, . But the
general case is more complicated .
For transitions between three-particle or four-particle states, Eq . (4.3 .2)
reads
~+
c
`1q', q ~q ~~q i t~2q t
~q, q~ R3•q 1 q 2q3
+5(qi - ql)S~z q~.qz q3 + permutations
+b (qi - gl)cS(q~ - q2 )6(q~ -- q3) ± permutations
(4.3 .5 )
~ A technicality should be mentioned here. This argument works only if we neglect the possibility
that for one or more of the connected S-matrix elements in E q_ (4,3.2), the states x1 and ti~ both
contain no particles a I a 11 . We mist therefore de#2ne the cnlincued vacuum-vacuum element Soo
to he zero. We do not use Eq . {43.2} for the vacuum vacuum S-matrix So.o, which in the absence
of time-varying external fields is simply defined to be unity, 5 O,() = t . We will have more to say
about the vacuum vacuum amplitude in the presence of external fields in Volume II .

180
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e
and
Sc
S~Ii~~q'q~,Riqaq3Ra RtqzR34~ ,4i4z934a
+ Sc q',4~R2S~ R,R3 q4
+ permutations
1 2 3
4
+ 6(qi - q l )S~ ~3~~,~~~~~a ± permutations
+ 6(qi - q 1)6( ~`2 - 42 ) S3~~,q3 q4 + permutations
+ 6(qt - ql)6 (q2 --~- q2) 6(q~ - q3)6(q~ - q4) ± permutations . (4.3.6)
(Taking account of all permutations, there are a total of 1 + 9 + 6 = 1 6
terms in Eq . (4.3.5) and 1 + 18 + 1 6 + 72 + 24 = 131 terms in Eq. (4.3.6).
If we had not assumed that one-particle states are stable, there would
be even more terms.) As explained previously, the definition of S~'
recursive : we use Eq . (4.3.4) to define SC for two-particle states, then use
this definition in Eq. (4.3.5) when we define S~,! for three-particle states,
then use both of these definitions in Eq. (4 .3.6) to obtain the definition of
,5~ for four-particle states, and so on .
The point of this definition of the connected part of the S-matrix is
that the cluster decomposition principle is equivalent to the requirement
that S~ must vanish when any one or more of the particles in the states ~
and/or cc are far away in space from the others.t To see this, suppose that
the particles in the states P and a are grouped into clusters fil , P2, - { • and
11, act, ` ' ' ,and that all particles in the set a; + flz are far from all particles
in the set act + Pj for any j
i. Then if 5pc.y vanishes if any particles in
X or ac' are far from the others, it vanishes if any particles in these states
are in different clusters, so the definition (4 .3.2) yields
~Ply ___ (
1
)(±
) S
#i i a ii ~9iy Xix
. . . X 1: (2) (
+
)
S
21 a 21
S
0 22 222
X
.
. . ~ (4.3.7)
where 1W is a sum over all different ways of partitioning the clusters X31
and a j into su bclusters Pji, flj2, . . . and acjl, ccj2, . ., But referring back to
Eq. (4.3.2), this is just the desired factorization property (4 .3.1).
For instance, suppose that in the four-particle reaction 1234 --+ 1'2`3'4',
we let particles 1, 2, 1', and 2' be very far from 3,4J, and 4' . Then if
SC vanishes when and particles an # and/or a are far from the others,
the only terms in Eq. (4.3.6) that survive (in an even more abbreviated
notation) are
In order to give a meaning to 'far, we wil l have to Fourier transform SC, so that each
three-
momentum label p is replaced with a spatia l coordinate th ree-vector x.

4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitudes
18 1
S 1 '2'3'4', 1 234 ~ SIC'21,12S3C1 4',34
+ (61' l 62f2 ±
+ (436q4 ±
6 1'2 6Z' 0"J 4',34
63'4 43)S1'2',12
61'A'1)(63'3&4'4 ± 63'443 )
Comparison with Eq. (4 .3.4) shows that this is just the required factvriza-
tion condition (4.3 . 1)
S1'2'3r4',1234 --* S 1 '2',12S3'4',34
We have formulated the cluster decomposition principle in coordinate
spare, as the condition that SC vanishes if any particles in the states fl
or a are far from any others. It is convenient for us to reexpress this in
momentum space. The coordinate space matrix elements are defined as a
Fourier transform
S
x~ ...,~ J x2 ., . = Jd3p'td3p 2 . . . d~p1d 3 p2 . . . SFIp
2
.. .PiPz, ..
(We are here temporarily dropping spin and species labels, which just
go along with the momentum or coordinate labels .) If I SC
'2'_'P1
~ were
P 1PPa .,.
sufficiently well behaved (to be specific, if it were Lebesgue integrable) then
according to the Riemann-Lebesgue theorem7 the integral (4.3.8) would
vanish when any combination of spatial coordinates goes to infinity . Now,
this is certainly too strong a requirement . Translational invariance tells
us that the connected part of the S-matrix, like the S-matrix itself, can
only depend on differences of coordinate vectors, and therefore does not
change at all if all of the xi and x') vary together, with their differences
held constant. This requires that the elements of S' in a momentum
basis must, like those of S, be proportional to a three-dimensional delta
function that ensures momentum conservation (and makes ISp P' . .•p lP2' .'~
got Lebesgue integrable), as well as the energy-conservation delta function
required by scattering theory. That is, we can write
This is no problem : the cluster decomposition principle only requires that
Eq. (4.3.8) vanish when the differences among some of the xi and/or x4
become large. However, if C itself in Eq. (4.3.9) contained additional delta
functions of linear combinations of the three-momenta, then this principle
would not be satisfied. For instance, suppose that there were a delta func-
tion in C that required that the sum Kf the g ~ and -pj for some subset of
the particles vanished. Then Eq. (4.3.8) would not vary if all of the x' and

182 4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e
x1 for the particles in that subset moved together (with constant differ-
ences) away from all the other x~ and x~, in contradiction to the cluster
decomposition principle. Loosely speaking then, the cluster decomposition
principle simply says that the connected part of the 5-matrix, unlike the
S-matrix itsetf; contains just a single momentum-conservation delta Junction .
In order to put this a bit more precisely, we can say that the coefficient
function CP r P f,, .,, P i p_ ... in Eq.4.3.9 is a smoo th function of its momentum
labels. But how smooth? It would be most straightforward if we could
simply require that C'~~yy, .,,~~ n~ . .. be analytic in all of the momenta at p' _
p z
pi = P2 0. This requirement would indeed guarantee
that Sx~i s , ' . . .,X i X2 .., vanishes exponentially fast when any of the x and x' is
very distant from any of the other x and x' . However, an exponential fall-
off of SC is not an essential part of the cluster decomposition principle,
and, in fact, the requirement of analyticity is not met in all theories . Most
notably, in theories with massless particles, S' can have poles at certain
values of the p and p '. For instance, as we will see in Chapter 10, if a
massless particle can be emitted in the transition I --+ 3 and absorbed in the
transition 2 --* 4, then 5~ .12 will have a term proportional to 1 API - p3 )2 .
After Fourier transforming, such poles yield terms in x X2---,Xlx2-- . that fall
off only as negative powers of coordinate differences.' There is no need
to formulate the cluster decomposition principle so stringently that such
behavior is ruled out. Thus the `smoothness' condition on SC should be
understood to allow various poles and branch-cuts at certain values of the
p and p ', but not singularities as severe as delta functions .
4.4 Structure of the Interaction
We now ask, what sort of Hamiltonian will yield an S-matrix that sat-
isfies the cluster decomposition principle? It is here that the formalism
of creation and annihilation operators comes into its non . The answer is
contained in the theorem that the S-matrix satisfies the cluster decompo-
sition principle if (and as far as I know, only if) the Hamiltonian can be
expressed as in Eq. (4.2 .8) :
~~.
~ J dqi
. . . dqnr dql . . . ~~ w
N=o
M=O
x a~(q 1 ) . . . a*(qN)a(RM) . a(q1)
x hNM(qi
. . . qnr , Ri
. . . qnf)
{4.4.1 }
with coefficient functions hNMthat contain just a single three-dimensional
momentum-conservation delta function (returning here briefly to a more

4 . 4 Structure of'the Interaction
1 8 3
explicit notation )
x hN ~w (P 1(71 Uzi ' ' " ~ ~~ ~~ nN , A i H i rai ' ' ' P?~ G'Mnm } , (4.4. 2)
where h NM contains no delta function factors . Note that Eq . (4.4.1 ) by
itself has no content -- we saw in Section 4.2 that any operator can be
put in this form. It is only Eq. (4.4.1 ) combined with the requirement that
hNM has only the single delta function shown in Eq . (4.4.2) that guarantees
that the S-matrix satisfies the cluster decomposition principle .
The validity of this theorem in perturbation theory will become obvious
when we develop the Feynman diagram formalism in Chapter 6 . The
trusting reader may prefer to skip the rest of the present chapter, and
move on to consider the implications of this theorem in Chapter 5 .
However, the proof has some instructive features, and will help to clarify
in what sense the field theory of the next chapter is inevitable.
To prove this theorem, we make use of perturbation theory in its time-
dependent form . (One of the advantages of time-dependent perturbation
theory is that it makes the cornbinatorics underlying the cluster decom-
position principle much more transparent ; if E is a sum of one-particle
energies then e-aEl is a product of functions of the individual energies,
while [E - E.x + ie] -1 is not .) The S-matrix is given by Eq . (3. 5.10) as'
~~~ = ,
~
r~ .
H )~~~ f
dtl
. . . dtn (D
T
fl, '' ( V(ti) ' ' V (tM)cDa {4 .4.3 }
,:=n
where the Hamiltonian is split into a free-particle part Ha and an interac-
tion V, and
V(f) =_ exp(Wt~ t)Vexp(--iHo t) . (4 .4 .4)
Now, the states (D., and cD# may be expressed as in Eq. (4.2.2) as products
of creation operators acting on the vacuum cD4, and V(t) is itself a sum of
products of creation and annihilation operators, so each term in the sum
(4.4.3) may he written as a sum of vacuum expectation values of products
of creation and annihilation operators. By using the commutation or
anticommutation relations (4 .2.5) we may move each annihilation operator
in turn to the right past all the creation operators. For each annihilation
operator moved to the right past a creation operator we have two terms,
as shown by writing Eq. (4 .2.5) in the form
We are now adapting the convention that for n = 0, the time-ordered product in F .q. (4,4.3) is
taken as the unit operator, so the n = 0 term in the sum just yields the term ri( # - x) in S
.

184
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
Moving other creation operators past the annihilation operator in the first
term generates yet more terms . But Eq . (4,2,4) shows that any annihilation
operator that moves all the way to the right and acts on (Do gives zero, so
in the end all we have left is the delta functions . In this way, the vacuum
expectation value of a product of creation and annihilation operators is
given by a sum of different terms, each term equal to a product of delta
functions and ± signs from the commutators or anticommutators. It
follows that each term in Eq . (4.4.3) may be expressed as a sum of terms,
each term equal to a product of delta functions and ± signs from the
commutators or anticommutators and whatever factors are contributed
by V(r), integrated over all the times and integrated and summed over the
momenta, spins, and species in the arguments of the delta functions .
Each of the terms generated in this way may be symbolized by a
diagram. (This is not yet the full Feynman diagram formalism, because
we are not yet going to associate numerical quantities with the ingredients
in the diagrams ; we are using the diagrams here only as a way of keeping
track of three-momentum delta functions.) Draw n points, called vertices,
one for each V(t) operator. For each delta function produced when
an annihilation operator in one of these V(t) operators moves past a
creation operator in the initial state (D, draw a line coming into the
diagram from below that ends at the corresponding vertex . For each delta
function produced when an annihilation operator in the adjoint of the
final state Op moves past a creation operator in one of the V(t}, draw
a line from the corresponding vertex upwards out of the diagram . For
each delta function produced when an annihilation operator in one V(t)
moves past a creation operator in another V(t) draw a line between the
two corresponding vertices. Finally, for each delta function produced
when an annihilation operator in the adjoint of the final state moves
past a creation operator in the initial state, draw a line from bottom to
top, right through the diagrams . Each of the delta functions associated
with one of these lines enforces the equality of the momentum arguments
of the pair of creation and annihilation operators represented by the
line. There is also at least one delta function contributed by each of the
vertices, which enforces the conservation of the total three-momentum at
the vertex.
Such a diagram may be connected (every point connected to every
other by a set of lines) and if not connected, it breaks up into a number
of connected pieces. The V(t) operator associated with a vertex in one
connected component effectively commutes with the V(t) associated with
any vertex in any other connected component, because for this diagram,
we are not including and terms in which an annihilation operator in one
vertex destroys a particle that is produced by a creation operator in the
other vertex if we did, the two vertices would be in the same connected

4.4 Structure of the Interaction
185
component. Thus the matrix element in Eq. (4.4.3) can be expressed as a
sum over products of contributions, one from each connected component :
((Dfl, T I V(ti) . . . V(t,) I 10C, )
m
clusterings j=1
((Dpj, Tf V(tp) . . . V(tj.) I(D,,j ),:7
.
(4A,5)
Here the sum is over all ways of splitting up the incoming and outgoing
particles and V(t) operators into v clusters including a sum over v from
I to n) with the nj operators V (tj,) . . . V(t3,} ) and the subsets of initial
particles a} and final particles flj all in the jth cluster .
Of course, this
means that
n = n 1 +
. . . + nV
and also the set Lx is the union of all the particles in the subsets a l, ac?, . . . xV,
and likewise for the final state. Some of the clusters in Eq. (4.4.5) may
contain no vertices at all, i.e., nj = 0 ; for these factors, we must take the
matrix element factor in Eq . (4.4.5) to vanish unless Pj and act are both
one-particle states (in which case it is just a delta function 6(aj - flj)},
because the only connected diagrams without vertices consist of a single
line running through the diagram from bottom to top. Most important,
the subscript C in Eq. (4.4.5) means that we exclude any contributions
corresponding to disconnected diagrams, that is, any contributions in
which any V(t) operator or any initial or final particle is not connected
to every other by a sequence of particle creations and annihilations .
Now let us use Eq. {4.4.5} in the sum (4.4.3). Every time variable is
integrated from -ao to +cxD, so it makes no difference which of the ti,
. . . to
are sorted out into each cluster. The sum over clusterings therefore yields
a factor u ! f ni ?n2? --- n,!, equal to the number of ways of sorting out n
vertices into v clusters, each containing n> > n2, • . . vertices
'CK~'
dt i
. . . dtn ((DP!' Tf V(ti) V(tn))(D~~)
.~
ova
n r
i ' 2 '
n,!
00
PA RT nl +~y j:= 1
ni + . ..+n, ~n
x ((D#,, TI V (tj, ) . . . V(ti,)J(D,), -
The first sum here is over all ways of partitioning the particles in the
initial and final states into clusters al
. . . cc, and X31 . . . P, (including a sum
over the number v of clusters). The factor n! here cancels the 1/ref in
Eq. (4.4.3), and the factor (----fi)l in the perturbation series for (4 .4.5) can
be written as a product (--i)",
. . . so instead of summing over n and

186
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
then summing separately over ni, . . . n,, constrained by n1 + . . . + rzw = n,
we can simply sum independently over each ral, . . . nV . This gives finall y
PART
j= 1
nf=O
i
X (00J,
1
l
Comparing this with the definition (4.2.2) of the connected matrix elements
5fic., we see that these matrix elements are just given by the factors in the
product here
«~
~ n
x
S~
n dt, dt, (Op, T ~ V(t 1) . . . V(tn)I(D,)c (4.4.6)
n=O
00
(The subscript j is dropped on all the t s and n s, as these are now mere
integration and summation variables.) We see that SCE is calculated by a
very simple prescription : S~~ is the sum of all contributions to the S-matrix
that are connected, in the sense that we drop all terms in which any initial
orfinal partite or any operator V(t) is not connected to all the others by a
sequence of particle creations and annihilations . This justifies the adjective
`connected' for Sc-
As we have seen, momentum is conserved at each vertex and along
every line, so the connected parts of the S-matrix individually conserve
momentum : S~ contains a factor 5 -~(pfl - p,,). What we want to prove is
that SC: contains no other delta functions.
We now make the assumption that the coefficient fractions hNM in the
expansion (4.4.1) of the Hamiltonian in terms of creation and annihilation
operators are proportianai to a single three-dimensional delta function,
that ensures momenta conservation. This is automatically true for the
free-particle Hamiltonian HO~, so it is also then true separately for the
interaction V. Returning to the graphical interpretation of the matrix
elements that we have been using, this means that each vertex contributes
one three-dimensional delta function . (The other delta functions in matrix
elements V, 6 simply keep the momentum of any particle that is not created
or annihilated at the corresponding vertex unchanged.) Now, most of these
delta functions simply go to fix the momentum of intermediate particles .
The only momenta that are left unfixed by such delta functions are those
that circulate in loops of internal lines . (Any line which if cut leaves the
diagram disconnected carries a momentum that is fixed by momentum
conservation as some linear combination of the momenta of the lines
coming into or going out of the diagram. If the diagram has L lines
that can all be cut at the same time without the diagram becoming
disconnected, then we it has L independent loops, and there are L

momenta that are not fixed by momentum conservation .) With V vertices,
I internal lines, and L hoops, there are V delta functions, of which I --- I.
go to fix internal momenta, leaving V - I + L delta functions relating the
momenta of incoming or outgoing particles. But a well-known topological
identity" tells that for any graph consisting of C connected pieces, the
numbers of vertices, internal lines, and loops are related by
V - I + L = G ,
(4 .4.7)
Hence for a connected matrix element like Six, which arises from graphs
with C = 1, we find just a single three-dimensional delta function 63 (P# -
Px ), as was to be proved .
It was not important in the above argument that the time variables
were integrated from -oo to +oo . Thus exactly the same arguments can
be used to show that if the coefficients h N ,M in the Hamiltonian contain
just single delta functions, then U ( t, to) can also be decomposed into
connected parts, each containing a single momentum-conservation delta
function factor. On the other hand, the connected part of the S-matrix
also contains an energy-conservation delta function, and when we come to
Feynman diagrams in Chapter 6 we shall see that SC contains only a single
energy-conservation delta function, 5( Ep - E.,), Zile U(t, to) contains no
energy-conservation delta functions at all .
It should be emphasized that the requirement that h NXI in Eq . (4.4.1)
should have only a single three-dimensional momentum conservation delta
function factor is very far from trivial, and has far-reaching implications .
For instance, assume that V has non-vanishing matrix elements between
two-particle states. Then Eq. (4.4.1) must contain a teem with N = Al = 2,
and coefficient
V'),z[ Pi A ? , Pr P2 ) = VP 1 p ;-P i p2 • (4.4.8)
(We are here temporarily dropping spin and species labels.) But then the
matrix element of the interaction between three-particle states i s
+ V?,2W1 P'2a P1 132) 63(P ~ - p3) ± permuttion ~.
(4 .4.9 )
A graph consisting of a single vertex has V = 1, L = 0, and C = 1 . if we add V - 1 vertices
with just enough internal lines to keep the graph cnnnccted, we have I =
V -- 1, L = 0, and
C = 1. Any additional internal lines attached (without new vertices) to the same connected graph
produce a n equal number of loops, so I -=V+L-1 and C = 1 . [f a disconnected graph consists
of C such connected parts, the sums of I. V, and I. in each connected part will than satisfy
E ! =Y +L---C .

1 8$
4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we might try to make a
relativistic quantum theory that is not a field theory by choosing V2,2 SO
that the two-body S-matrix is Lorentz-invariant, and adjusting the rest of
the Hamiltonian so that there is no scattering in states containing three
or more particles. We would then have to take X3,3 to cancel the other
terms in Eq. (4.4.9)
V3-3(P iP '2 P '3, P I Pz P3) = -V2,2(P i P '2, P I Pz) 6 3 ( P '3 - R3) + permutations.
(4.4. 10)
However, this would mean that each term in V3r3 contains two delta
function factors (recall that V2,2(p gip ;, P1 P2) has a factor 63(P + P 2 - p,
p2) }and this would violate the cluster decomposition principle . Thus
in a theory satisfying the cluster decomposition principle, the existence
of scattering processes involving two particles makes processes involving
three or more particles inevitable .
When we set out to solve three-body problems in quantum theories
that satisfy the cluster decomposition principle, the term V3 ,3 in Eq. (4.4.9)
gives no particular trouble, but the extra delta function in the other terms
makes the Lippmann-Schwinger equation difficult to solve directly. The
problem is that these delta functions make the kernel [E, - Ep + ie]-1 VO,
of this equation not square-integrable, even after we factor out an overall
momentum conservation delta function. In consequence, it cannot be
approximated by a finite matrix, even one of very large rank . To solve
problems involving three or more particles, it is necessary to replace the
Lippmann-Schwinger equation with one that has a connected right-hand
side . Such equations have been developed for the scattering of three or
more particles,8,9 and in non-relativistic scattering problems they can be
solved recursively, but they have not turned out to be useful in relativistic
theories and so will not be described in detail here .
However, recasting the L,ippmann-5ch wi equation in this manner
is useful in another way. Our arguments in this section have so far
relied on perturbation theory. I do not know of any non-perturbative
proof of the main theorem of this section, but it has been shown 9 that
these reformulated non-perturbative dynamical equations are c onsistent
with the requirement that Uc(t, ta) (and hence S C) should also contain
only a single momentum-conservation delta function, as required by the
cluster decomposition principle, provided that the Hamiltonian satisfies
our condition that the coefficient functions hN,M each contain only a single
momentum-conservation delta function .

Problems
Problems
189
1. Define generating functionals for the S-matrix and its connected
part :
rv-t nrr- 1
x S'qi-.-q~~, q,- ..q, dpi . . . dqfv d~'1 ' ' ' dq m
X SC
Derive a formula relating F[v] and FC [u] . (You may consider the
purely bosonic case . )
2. Consider an interactio n
where g is a real constant and a(p) is the annihilation operator of a
spinless boson of mass M
O. Use perturbation theory to calculate
the S-matrix element for scattering of these particles in the center-
of-mass frame to order g2 . What is the corresponding differential
cross-section ?
3. A coherent state (DA is defined to be an eigenstate of the annihilation
operators a(q) with eig envalues ~(9).
Construct such a state as a
superposition of the mult i-particle states (Dq , qa ., .qN .
References
1. The cluster decomposition principle seems to have been first stated
explicitly in quantum field theory by E . H. Wichmann and J. H .
Crichton, Phys. Rev . 132, 278 8 ( 1 963).
2. See, e.g., B . Bakamij ian and L. H. Thomas, Phys. Rev . 92, 1 300
(1953).
3. For references, see T. D . Lee and C . N. Yang, Phys. R ev. 113, 116 5
(1959) .
4. J. Goldstone, 'roc. Roy, Soc. London A239, 267 (1957) .

1 94
4 The Clus ter Decomposition Pr inciple
5. N. M. Hugenholtz, Physica 23, 481 (1957).
6. See, e.g-, R. Kubo, J. Math. Phys. 4, 174 (1963).
7. E. C. Titchmarsh, lntroducricrn to the theory oJ' Fourier Integrals
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1937) : Section 1 .8 .
8. L. D. Faddeev, Zh, Ekxper, i Teor. Fig . 39. 1459 (1961) (translation
Soviet Phys - JETP
1 2, 1014 (1961)) ; DAl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR
138, 565 (1961) and 145, 30 (1962) (translations Soviet Physics -
Doklady 6, 3 84 (196 1) and 7, 600 (1963)} .
9. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 133, B232 (1964)

Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
We now have all the pieces needed to motivate the introduction of quan-
tum fields.' In the course of this construction, we shall encounter some of
the most remarkable and universal consequences of the union of relativity
with quantum mechanics : the connection between spin and statistics, the
existence of antiparticles, and various relationships between particles and
antiparticles, including the celebrated APT theorem .
5.1
Free Fields
We have seen in Chapter 3 that the S-matrix will be Lorentz-invariant if
the interaction can be written as
V(t} = dux fix, 0 ,
where rte' is a scalar, in the sense that
and satisfies the additional condition :
( 5 . x . 1 )
(5 .1 .2 )
t_flx},
(
')] = 0
for (x _ x` )2 > 0 .
(5.1 .3 )
As we shall see, there are more general possibilities, but none of them
are very different from this . (For the present we are leaving it as an open
question whether A here is restricted to a proper orthochronous Lorentz
transformation, or can also include space inversions .) In order to facilitate
also satisfying the cluster decomposition principle we are going to con-
struct (x) out of creation and annihilation operators, but here we face
a problem : as shown by Eq. (4.2.12), under Lorentz transformations each
such operator is multiplied by a matrix that depends on the momentum
carried by that operator. How can we couple such operators together
to make a scalar? The solution is to build X,`(x) out of fields - both
191

192 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
annihilation fields Ve-~W and creation fields -(x) :
PI ~(X) _
d
3P UAX -5 p, a} n)a(p, Q , n) ~
(5.1 .4)
6M
V -(X) E
d3p ve(x ; P, CT' n)a
(5.1 .5)
il
an f
(P, a, 0.
with coefficients* u,,(x ; P, a, n) and
ve(x ; p, a, ra) chosen so that under
Lorentz transformations each field is multiplied with aposition-inde-
pendent matrix :
Uo(A, a) w+ (x) U~ ' (A, ac) _
De?(
-1)T' {Ax + a.} ,
(5.1 .6)
Ua(, a) I ( x )ilo' ( A, a) _
De? (A- k )W? (Ax + a )
(We might, in principle, have different transformation matrices D± for the
annihilation and creation fields, but as we shall see, it is always possible
to choose the fields so that these matrices are the same.) By applying a
second Lorentz transformation A, we find that
so tak ing A, = (
)-I and 112 = (A)-', we see that the D-matrices furnish
a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group :
There are many such representations, including the scalar D(A) = 1, the
vector D(Li)"1= Af1,a and a host of tensor and spinor representations .
These particular representations are irreducible, in the sense that it is not
possible to by a choice of basis to reduce all D(A) to the same b lock-
diagonal form, with two or more blocks . However, we do not require at
this point that D(A) be irreducible ; in general it is a block-diagonal matrix
with an arbitrary array of irreducible representations in the blocks. That
is, the index ?' here includes a label that runs over the types of particle
described and the irreducible representations in the different blocks, as
well as another that runs Kver the components of the individual irreducible
representations. Later we will separate these fields into irreducible fields
that each describe only a single partic le species (and its antiparticle) and
transform irreducibly under the Lorentz group .
A reminder : the labels n and a run over all dilF`erent particle species and spin a -carnppnerils ,
respectively -

5.1 Free Fields
193
Once we have learned how to construct fields satisfying the Lorentz
transformation rules (5.1 .6) and (5.1 .7), we will be able to construct the
interaction density as
I IV
and t his will be a scalar in the sense ofEy. (5 .1.2) if the constant coefficients
gli---/,
t1, ..(, are chosen to be Lorentz covariant, in the sense that for a ll
De,
2)
?,--- ?N •
(5 .1 .10)
g?f
G
,
(Note that we do not include derivatives here, because we regard the
derivatives of components of these fields as just additional sorts of field
components .) The task of finding coefficients g _r, ., ---~
that satisfy
Eq. (5 .1.14) is no different in principle (and not much more difficult
in practice) than that of u sing Clebsch-Gordan coefficients to couple
together various representations of the three-dimensional rotation group
to form rotational s calars.
Later we will be able to combine creation
and annihilation fields so that this den sity also commutes with itself at
space-like separations .
Now , what shall we take as the coefficient functions u~(x ; p, a, ra) and
ve (x ; p, a, n) ? Eq . (4 . 2.12 ) and its adjoint give the transformation rules**
for the annihilation and creation operators
Uo(A, b)a(p, u, n)U~l (A, b) = exp (i(Ap) - b) ~(ApPle
x
D(
(W-'(A, p)) a(PA, eF, n )
UO(A, b)a~(p, ~T, n) U6-1 (A, b) = exp
i(Ap) - b) ~F(ApP 1po
x 1: Di"
W- 1 (A, p)) a' (PA, Er, n)
(5.1 .11 )
(s.i .12)
where j, is the spin of particles of species n, and PA Is the three-vector
part of Ap. (We have used the unitarity of the rotation matrices D~j~) to
put both Eqs. (5-1 .11) and (5.1 .12) in the form shown here.) Also, as we
saw in Section 2 .5 the volume element d3 p f p° is Lorentz-invariant, so we
This i5 for massive particles. The case of zero mass will be taken up in Section 5 .9 .

194
5 Qu antum Fields and Antiparticles
can replace dip in Eqs. (5 .1.4) and (5.1..5} with d'( 11,p)pOf ( Ap)II . Putting
this all together, we find
Cron
x exp(i(Ap)-b)D(j')(W-'(A, i~, n)
Cr CT
P)) ~POAAPr OPA ,
and
ddY2
x exP(-i(Ap)-b)D(j'~)*(W-1(A,P)) VpOI(Ap)O a'(PA, a ,
We see that in order for the fields to satisfy the Lorentz transformation
rules (5.1 .6) and ( 5 .1 .7), it is necessary and sufficient tha t
?
.. (A
rr, n) = ~pO/(Ap)O
x I:D(j')(W-'(A,p))exp(+i(Ap)-b)u,,,(,v ;p,c,n)
and
D,,?(A-l)v?(Ax + b ; PA, 0, n) = ~pO/(Ap)P
x D(j)µ - t(, P)) exp
or somewhat more conveniently
i(Ap) - b) V((X ; P, a, n )
u~(Ax + h ; p,,, ~7)D(j-) ( W (A, p)) = VFp;/(TA P
x
D ?,, (A ) exP (i(Ap) ' b) u,,(x ; P, a, n)
and
v?{11x + b ; fin, d}D(j~) * (W(A.p)') ° (AP ~
x
~~,, (11) exp - i(Ap) - b V,.,{.x ; p, 6, n}
(5.1 .13 )
(5 .1 .14)
These are the fundamental requirements that will allow us to calculate
the ue and ve coefficient functions in terms of a finite number of free
parameters.

5. 1 Free Fields
195
We will use Eqs . (5 . x .13) and (5.1 .14) in three steps, considering in turn
three different types of proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation :
Translations
First we consider Eqs. (5.1 . 13) and (5 .1 .14) with A = 1 and b arbitrary .
We see immediately that ue(x ; A, a, n) and vr(x ; p, a , n) must take the form
so the fields are Fourier transforms :
and
W+(x) T (2 n )-1/2
dip u~(P, a, n) e~rx a( p, u, n) ,
d,n
d,M
(5. 1 .15)
(5.1 .1 6)
( 5. 1 . 17)
( 5 . 1 . 1 8 )
(The factors (2 ;T)-3/2 could be absorbed into the definition of u,, and r .,j,
but it is conventional to show them explicitly in these Fourier integrals .)
Using Eqs . (5.1.15) and (5 .1.10, we see that Eqs. (5 . 1 ,13) and (5.1.14) are
satisfied if and only if
U?(PA, FT, n)Dc(,j,,-) (W(A,p))
P" D?,,
n)
(5 .1 .19)
CT
and
C1~ 4 PA 'l {T 7 f i)D ~Vl7 ~ * (V(A.p))
V
i ~
~~ f D
1• F, ~~~ `,f (P 7 l/ ~ J, 1 .~~~
I
for arbitrary homogeneous Lorentz transformations A.
Boosts
Next take p = 0 in Eqs. ( 5 .1 .19) and (5 .1 . 20), and let A be the standard
boost L(q) that takes a particle of mass m from rest to some faur-
rnornentum qP . Then L(p) = 1, and
Hence in this special case, Eqs . (5.1.19) and (5.1 .20) give

196
and
5 Quantum Fields and Antipa rtic les
v? (q. 6T n) - (mlq0) 1/2
D?c ~~~~~ ) vl(0, a, n) .
(5.1 .22)
In other words, if we know the quanti ties ut(Q, a, n) and ve(0, a, n) for zero
momentum, then for a given representation D(A) of the homogeneous
Lorentz group, we know the functions u,~( p, ff, n) and ve( P, a, n) for all p .
(Explicit formulas for the matrices D~,(L(q)) wil l be given for arbitrary
representations of the homogeneous Lorentz group in Section 5 .7 . )
Rotations
Next, take g = 0, but this time let A be a Lorentz transformation with
PA = 0; that is, take A as a rotation R. Here obviously W(A,p) = R, and
so Eqs . (5.1.19) and (5 .1.20) read
and
M
or equivalently
and
IT
(
. 1 .
.4)
6 .7
{5.1 .25}
( 5. 1 .2b)
where JW and are the angular-momentum matrices in the represen-
tations DUO) and D(R), respectively. Any representation D(A) of the
homogeneous Lorentz group obviously yields a representation of the ro-
tation group when A is restricted to rotations R ; Eqs. (5 .1 .25) and (5.1 .26)
tell us that if the field (x) is to describe particles of some particular spin
j, then this representation D(R) must contain among its irreducible com-
ponents the spin-j representation DOW}, with the coefficients u,,(O,o-,n)
and ae(O, u, ra) simply describing how the spin-j representation of the ro-
tation group is embedded in D(R). We shall see in Section 5.5 that each
irreducible representation of the proper orthochronous Lorentz group con-
tains any given irreducible representation of the rotation group at most
once, so that if the fields W,'( x ) and V., (x) transform irreducibly, then
they are unique up to overall scale. More generally, the number of free

5.1 Free Fields
19 7
parameters in the annihilation or creation fields (including their overall
scales) is equal to the number of irreducible representations in the field .
It is straightforward to show that coefficient functions ue(P, cT, n) and
ve (ps ff,n) given b y Eqs. (5.1 .x.1 ) and ( 5 .1.22), with u~ (0, a , rah and vj {0, a , n)
satisfying Eqs . (5.1 .23) and (5.1,24), will automatically satisfy the more
general requirements (5 .1.19 and ( 5 .1 .20). This is left as an exercise for
the reader.
Let us now return to the cluster decomposition principle. Inserting
Eqs. (5.1.17) and ( 5.1 .18 ) in Eq. { 5.1.9} and integrating over x, the interac-
tion Hamiltonian is
1 h
1
N
x afi(Pi ai ni)
. . . af(Pnr Div Div ) a( F~r~?~t n nr ) . . . a(P i s i nj )
X
'NM41 Ori nl . . . ~~ ~~ n'N , pit7ln I . . . ~M (7MnM)
(5.1 .27)
with coefficient functions given by
X -T-NM{Pi al ni
. . . p ] U[n 1 . ..~ ~ (5.1 .28 )
where
nrm(Pi ~i n1
. . . p~ d~ n~ p, 6i,71 . . . p~runfr n~r) = (2~ )I-1rv,1-~~~~
v~,
or ' r r
'
x
X uez(p l alnl },
u~ .tiJpMamn nr )
(5.1.9 )
This interaction is manifestly of the form that will guarantee that the
S-matrix satisfies the cluster decomposition principle : 'VNm has a single
delta function factor, with a coefficient ir NM that (at least for a finite
number of field types) has at most branch point singularities at zero par-
ticle momenta. In fact, we could turn this argument around ; any operator
can be written as in Eq . (5 .1.27), and the cluster decomposition principle
requires that the coefficient 'VN,W may be written as in Eq. (5.1 .28) as the
product of a single momentum -conservation delta function times a smooth
coefficient function. Any sufficiently smooth function (but not one con-
taining additional delta functions) can be expressed as in Eq . (5 .1 .29).t The
cluster decomposition principle together with Lorentz invariance thus makes
it natural that the interaction density should be constructed out of the anni-
hilation and creation fields.
For general functions the indices ( and :` may have to run over an infinite range . The reasons for
restricting ( and G' to a finite range have to do with the principle of renorrnaliaability, discussed
in Chapter 12 .

198 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
If all we needed were to construct a scalar interaction density that
satisfied the cluster decomposition principle, then we could combine an-
nihilation and creation operators in arbitrary polynomials (5.1 .9), with
coupling coefficients g~' ...~' ,, subject only to the invariance condition
(5.1 . 0) (and a suitable reality condition) . However, for the Lorentz in-
variance of the S-matrix it is necessary also that the interaction density
satisfy the commutation condition ( 5.1 .3). This condition is not satisfied
for arbitrary functions of the creation and annihilation fields becaus e
(P, a , n)ed''l(x- ►')
(5 . i .3o)
L1P1.+1 W, T~-_ (Y) IT = (2~~-3
d 3 p u~ dpi cya n)v?
I
(with the sign + indicating a commutator or anticommutator if the parti-
cles destroyed and created by the components y} + and yi~. are bosons or
fermions, respectively,) and in general this does not vanish even for x - y
space-like. It is obviously not possible to avoid this problem by making
the interaction density out of creation or annihilation fields alone, for then
the interaction could not be Hermitian. The only way out of this difficulty
is to combine annihilation and creation fields in linear combinations .,
(X) Kt
-'-(X) + A~
00
(5.1 .:1 )
with the constants K and ~ and any other arbitrary constants in the fields
adjusted so that for x - y space-like
1~~~~), I~-'r, ( Y)~+ = 14,c~~~, ~I~'~r(Y)1~ _ 0. (5. 1 .32 )
We will see in subsequent sections of this chapter how to do this for various
irreducibly transforming fields . (B y including explicit constants K and ~ in
Eq. (5.1 .3 1) we are leaving ourselves free to choose the overall scale of the
annihilation and creation fields in any way that seems convenient .) The
Hamiltonian density '(x) will satisfy the commutation condition (5 .1 .3)
if it is constructed out of such fields and their adjoins, with an even
number of any field components that destroy and create fermions .
The condition (5 . 1 .32) is often described as a causality condition, because
if x - y is space-like then no signal can reach y from x, so that a
measurement of We at point x should not be able to interfere with a
measurement of ~.~~+ or w~, at point y. Such considerations of causality
are plausible for the electromagnetic field, any one of whose components
may be measured at a given spacetime point, as shown in a classic
paper of Bohr and Rosenfeld,' However, we will be dealing here with
fields like the Dirac field of the electron that do not seem in any sense
measurable. The point of view taken here is that Eq. (5.1.32) is needed for
the Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix, without any ancillary assumptions
about measurability or causality .
There is an obstacle to the construction of fields (5 .1.31) satisfying

5.1 Free Fields
1 99
( 5.1 .32). It may be that the particles that are destroyed and created by
these fields carry non-zero values of Kne or more conserved quantum
numbers like the electric charge. For instance, if particles of species n
carry a value q(ra) for the electric charge Q, then
Lea a(p, a, n)] = -q (n)a( A, a, n) ,
[Q, al ( P, a# n)] = +q (n )a~(p, ff, n) .
In order that (x) should commute with the charge operator Q (or some
other symmetry generator) it is necessary that it be formed out of fields
that have simple commutation relations with Q :
~~~~"Wj _ ~q,,,Vj(x) (5 . 1 .33 )
for then we can make (x) commute with Q by constructing it as a sum
of products of fields V(, We, . . . and adjoints ip~ [ V)~2
. . . such that
fir, + qe2 + . . . - q,,, - q.2 - . . . -_ 0 .
Now, Eq. ( 5. i..33 ) is satisfied for one particular component ~)Px) of the
annihilation field if and only if all particle species n that are destroyed
by the field carry the same charge q(n) = q(, and it is satisfied for one
particular component y)e (x) of the creation field if and only if all particle
species n that are created by the field carry the charge q(h) = -q(. We
see that in order for such a theory to conserve quantum numbers like
electric charge, there must be a doubling of particle species carrying non-
zero values of such quantum numbers : if a particular component of the
annihilation field destroys a particle of species n, then the same component
of the creation field must create particles of a species n-, known as the
antiparticles of the particles of species n, which have opposite values of
all conserved quantum numbers. This is the reason fir antiparticles.
If the representation D( A) is not irreducible, then we can adopt a basis
for the fields in which D(A) breaks up into blocks along the main diagonal,
such that fields that belong to different blocks do not transform into
each other under Lorentz transformations. Also, Lorentz transformations
have no effect on the particle species. Therefore, instead of considering
one big field, including many irreducible components and many particle
species, we shall from now on restrict our attention to fields that destroy
only a single type of particle (dropping the label n) and create only
the corresponding antiparticle, and that transform irreducibly under the
Lorentz group (which as mentioned above may or may not be supposed
to include space inversion), with the understanding that, in general, we
shall have to consider many different such fields, some perhaps formed as
the derivatives of other fields . In the following sections we are going to
finish the determination of the coefficient functions u(. (p, c7) and ve (P, a) ,

200
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
fix the relative values of the constants rc and ~, and deduce the relations
between the properties of particles and antiparticles first for fields that
belong to the simplest irreducible representations of the Lorentz group,
the scalar, vector, and Dirac spinor representations . After that we will
repeat the analysis for a completely general irreducible representativn .
A word about field equations. Inspection of Eqs . (5.1 .31), (5.1.17), and
(5.1 .18) shows that all the components of a field of definite mass m satisfy
the Klein-Gordon equation :
(0 - M')A
} = 0. (5.1 .34)
Some fields satisfy other field equations as well, depending on whether
or not there are more field components than independent particle states .
Traditionally in quantum field theory Kne begins with such field equations,
or with the Lagrangian from which they are derived, and then uses them
to derive the expansion of the fields in terms of one-particle annihilation
and creation operators. In the approach followed here, we start with the
particles, and derive the fields according to the dictates of Lorentz invari-
ance, with the field equations arising almost incidentally as a byproduct
of this construction .
~* *
A technicality must be mentioned here . According to the theorem
proved in Section 4,4, the condition that guarantees that a theory will
satisfy the cluster decomposition principle is that the interaction can be
expressed as a surn of products of creation and annihilation operators,
with all creation operators to the left of all annihilation operators, and
with coefficients that contain only a single momentum-conservation delta
function. For this reason, we should write the interaction in the `normal
ordered' form
V =
dux
(W(x)y W~(x)} : (5 . 1 . 3 5 )
the colons indicating that the enclosed expression is to be rewritten
(ignoring non-vanishing commutators or anticommutators, but including
minus signs for permutations of fermionic operators) so that all creation
operators stand to the left of all annihilation operators.
By using the
commutation or anticommutation relations Kf the fields, any such normal-
ordered function of the fields can just as well be written as a sum of
ordinary products of the fields with c-number coefficients. Rewriting
in this way makes it obvious that despite the normal ordering,
: . {w(x), Ox}) :will commute with
: . (W (y), qt(y)}
when x - y is
space-like, if it is constructed out of fields that satisfy Eq . (5.1 .32), with
even numbers of any fermianic field components .

5.2 Causal Scalar Fields
5.2
Causal Scalar Fields
20 1
We first consider one-component annihilation and creation fields 0+(x)
and 0-(x) that transform as the simplest of all representations of the
Lorentz group, the scalar, with D(A) = 1 . Restricted to rotations, this is
just the scalar representation of the rotation group, for which I =:;-- 0, so
Eqs. (5.1 .25) and (5 . 1 . 26) have no solutions except for j == 0, in which case
Cr, & take only the value zero. Thus a scalar field can only describe particles
of zero spin. Assuming also for the moment that the field describes only
a single species of particle, with no distinct antiparticle (and dropping
the species label n as well as the spin label a and the field label I), the
quantities ue(0an) and ve(Dun) are here just the numbers u{0} and v(D) . It
is conventional to adjust the overall scales of the annihilation and creation
fields so that these constants both have the values {ern.]-W. Eqs. (5.1 .21)
and ( 5 .1 .22) then give simply
u(p) = (2pa)-"z
and
v(p) = (2Po)-"'
The fields (5 .1 .17) and (5 .1.18) are then, in the scalar case,
and
0-0 -- f d'p (2n )-1/2(2pO)-1/2 at(p)e-P` ;-- 0-11(x).
(5 .2.1 )
(5 .2.2)
(5.2.3 )
(s.2.4 )
A Hamiltonian density (x) that is formed as a polynomial in 0+(x)
and 0-(x) will automatically satisfy the requirement (5 .1.9), that it trans-
form as a scalar. It remains to satisfy the other condition for the Lorentz
invariance of the S-matrix, that (x) commute with (Y) at space-like
separations x - y . If (x) were a polynomial in +(x) alone, there would
be no problem. All annihilation operators commute or anticommute,
so 0+(x) either commutes or anticommutes with O+(Y} for all x and y,
according to whether the particle is a Cason or fermion, respectively :
to,{x}, 0+(y}]:~ = 0 . (525)
Hence any (x) formed as a polynomial in 0+(x) (or, for fermions,
any such even polynomial) will commute with
-YC(y) for all x and y .
The problem, of course, is that, in order to be Hermitian, fix) must
involve +1(x) = 0-(x) as well as +(x), and 0+(x) does not commute
or anticommute with 0-(Y ) for general space-like separations. Using the
commutation (for bosons) or anticommutation (for fermions) relations

202
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
(4.2.5), we have
2~r 2
21 `1)1/2
which collapses to the single integral
where d+ is a standard function :
d+(x} - 1
d3~ e~P~x (5.2 .7)
~
(21r)3
P
This is manifestly Lorentz-invariant, and therefore for space-like x it can
depend only on the invariant square x2 0. We can thus evaluate K+(x)
for space-like x by choosing the coordinate system so tha t
x° = 0 ~x~ = x1 .
Eq. (5 .2.7) then gives
1 d3P zp.x
A+~~
(27r )
3
2 ,,
~
/~~xa~
41E
p 2dp
sin(p x2 )
(27z)3
vIp~rr~.~ F
x 2
.l0
2
Changing the variable of integration to u = p f rra, this is
00
K+{x} _ ~
udu
sin(rx2u) (5 .2 .8 )
4ar x2 o u + ~
or, in terms of a standard Hanlcel function ,
4iz 2
x2
(M-~X')
This isn't zero, so what are we to do with it? Note that even though
K+(x) is not zero, for x2 0 it is even in x" . Instead of using only 0+(x),
suppose we try to construct {x} out of a linear combination
Using Eq. (5.2.6), we have then for x - y space-like

5.2 Causal Scalar Fields
203
Both of these will vanish if and only if the particle is a boson (i.e., it is the
top sign that applies) and rc and ). are equal in magnitude
~~ ~ ~= P~l -
We can change the relative phase
Of K and A by redefining the phases
of the states so that a(p) --* eil a(P) , a#(p) -+ e ~"at(P), and hence K
rce`u , A --+ ire`~. Taking oc = ~Arg(~./rc), we can in this way make K and
A equal in phase, and bence equal .
Redefining () to absorb the overall factor :c = A'., we have then
The interaction density (x) will commute with ' (y) at space-like sepa-
rations x - y if formed as a normal-ordered polynomial in the self-adjoint
scalar field O(x) .
Even though the choice of the relative phase of the two terms in
Eq. (5 .2.10) is a matter of convention, it is a convention that once adopted
must be used wherever a scalar field for this particle appears in the
interaction Hamiltonian density. For instance, suppose that the interaction
density involved not only the field ( 5 .2.10), but also another scalar field
for the same particle
with a an arbitrary phase. This ~, like 0, would be causal in the sense
that O(x) commutes with 0(y) when x - y is space-like, but O(x) would
not commute with 0 (y) at space-like separations, and therefore we cannot
have both of these fields appearing in the same theory.
If the particles that are destroyed and created by O(x) carry some
conserved quantum number like electric charge, then
(x) will conserve
the quantum number if and only i f each term in fi(x) contains equal
numbers of operators a(p) and a(A)' . But this is impossible if
(x) is
formed as a polynomial in O(x) = +(x) + O+t(x). To put this another
way, in order that (x) should commute with the charge operator Q (or
some other symmetry generator) it is necessary that it be formed out of
fields that have simple commutation relations with Q . This is true for
0+(x) and its adjoint, for which
but not for the self-adjoint field ( 5 .2 .8 ).
In order to deal with this problem, use must suppose that there are
two spinless bosons, with the same mass in, but charges +q and -q,
respectively. Let +(x) and 0+'(x) denote the annihilation fields for these

204
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticle s
two particles, so that*
Define O(x) as the linear combinatio n
which manifestly has the same commutator with Q as 0+(x) alon e
The commutator or anticommutator of O(x) with its adjoint is then, at
space-tike separation
( I K I' T I A I')A+ (X - v )
while O(x) and 0(Y ) automatically commute or anticommute with each
other for all x and y because 0+ and O+'t destroy and create different
particles. In deriving this result, we have tacitly assumed that the particle
and antiparticle have the same mass, so that the commutators or anticorn-
mutators involve the same function K+(x -- y ) . Fermi statistics is again
ruled out here, because it is not possible that O{x} should anticommute
with 4t(Y) at space-like separations unless K = ~ = 0, in which case the
fields simply vanish. So a spinless particle must be a boson.
For Bose statistics, in order that a complex O(x) should commute with
Ot{y} at space-like separations, it is necessary and sufficient that IKI' = I A I' x
as well as for the particle and antiparticle to have the same mass . By
redefining the relative phase of states of these two particles, we can again
give rc and A the same phase, in which case K = A. This common factor
can again be eliminated by a redefinition of the field 0, so that
or in more detail
d3 P
[a(p)el" + up-t(p)e-'P'x1
(5.2.11)
((27r)3/2(2pO)1/2
This is the essentially unique causal scalar field . This formula can be used
both for purely neutral spinless particles that are their own antiparticles
(in which case we take al(p) =a(p)), and for particles with distinct
antiparticles (for which a(p)
a(p)).
The label `c' denotes `charge conjugate'. It should be kept in mind that a particle that carr ies no
conserved quantum numbers may or may not be its own antiparticle, with u`( p) = u(P) .

5.2 Causal Scalar Fields
245
For future use, we note here that the commutator of the complex scalar
field with its adjoint i s
where
(5 .2. 1 Z)
~
2ir
(5.2.13)
Let's now consider the effect of the various inversion symmetries on
this field. First, from the results of Section 4.2, we can readily see that
the effect of the space-inversion operator on the annihilation and creation
operators is :**
Pa( P)P-' = q •a(_P)X5.2.14 )
(5.2.1 5 )
where jj and q1 are the intrinsic parities of the particle and antiparticle,
respectively. Applying these results to the annihilation field (5 .2.3) and the
charge-conjugate of the creation field (5 .2.4), and changing the variable of
integration from p to -p, we see that
Pct+(x)P-1 = q*O+(fix)
(5 .2.16)
(5.2.17)
where as before 9x = (-x,x°). We see that in general applying the space
inversion to the scalar field O(x) - 0+(x) + O+lfi(x) would give a different
field Op = q*0+ + q10+Gt . Both fields are separately causal, but if 0
and Of appear in the same interaction then we are in trouble, because
in general they do not commute at space-like separations. The only way
to preserve Lorentz invariance as well as parity conservation and the
hermiticity of the interaction is to require that OP be proportional to 0,
and hence that
q C = r,
* .
(5.2.18 )
That is, the intrinsic parity rlq' of a state containing a spinless particle and
its antiparticle is even . We have now simply
PO(x)P-' = n *o(fix)
.
(5.2.19 )
We are omitting the subscript 0 on inversion operators P, C, and T, because in virtually all cases
where these inversions are good symmetries, the same operators induce inversion transformations
on `in' and `out' states and on free-particle states

206
5 Quantum Fields and A ntiparticles
These results also apply when the spinless particle is its own a ntiparticle,
for which q' = q, and imply that the intrinsic parity of such a particle is
real : rI = ± 1 ,
Charge-conjugation can be handled in much the same way. From t he
results of Section 4 . 2, we have
Ca'l( P)C-i = ~'at( P),
(5 .2.21 )
where and ~` are the phases associated with the operation of charge-
conjugation on one-particle states . It follows then that
(5 .2.22)
(,2.23 )
In order that CO(x)C-1 should be proportional to the field
Of(x) with
which it commutes at space-like separations, it is evidently necessary that
Just as for ordinary parity, the intrinsic charge-conjugation parity ~~ ' of
a state consisting of a spinless particle and its antiparticle is even . We
now have simply
Again, these results apply also in the case where the particle is its own
antiparticle, where In this case the charge-conjugation parity like
the ordinary parity must he real, ~ = ±1 .
Finally we come to time-reversal. From Section 4.2 we have
(5 .2.26)
Recalling that T is antiunitary, and again changing the variable of inte-
gration from p to -p, we find that
Tck+ (x) T-i = C " O+(-fix )
(5 .2.28 )
(5 .2.29)
In order for To(x)T-' to be simply related to the field 0 at the time-
reversed point -fix, we must have
~C = C o
and then
TO(x)T-' = C ' (h(-fix) .
(5 .2.30)
(5 .2.31)

5 .3 Causal Vector Fields
5.3 Causal Vector Fields
207
We now take up the next simplest kind of field, which transforms as a
four-vector, the simplest non-trivial representation of the homogeneous
Lorentz group . There are massive particles, the ± and Z4, that at
low energies are described by such fields and that play an increasing
role in modern elementary particle physics, so this example is not merely
of pedagogical interest. (Also, although we are here considering only
massive particles, one approach to quantum electrodynamics is to describe
the photon in terms of a massive vector field in the limit of very small
mass). For the moment we will suppose that only one species of particle
is described by this field (dropping the species label rah ; then we shall
consider the possibility that the field describes both a particle and a
distinct antiparticle .
In the four-vector representation of the Lorentz group, the rows and
columns of the representation matrices D(A) are labelled with four-com-
ponent indices u, v, etc ., with
The annihilation and creation parts of the vector field are written :
0+"(x) = Y:(21r)-1/2
f d
3 P U,(p, a) a(p, u) eip-x
f d3p V"(p, u) a,(P, a) eip-x
ff
(5.3 .1 }
(5. 3 . 2 )
(5 . 3 . 3 )
The coefficient functions O(P> d) and aPtP, a) for arbitrary momentum are
given in terms of those for zero momentum by Eqs . (5 . 1 .21 ) and ( 5.1.22),
which here read :
UNPa U) = (M I P
0)1/2L (F)A, uv (0, a ) }
(5 .3 .4)
(s. 3.5)
(We are using the usual summation convention for spacetime indices it, v,
etc.) Also, the coefficient functions at zero momentum are subject to the
conditions ( 5 .1 .25) and (5.1 .26) :
and
111(01
JW*
ji V, (0, a)
(5. 3.6)
(5.3.7)

208
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticle s
The rotation generators
~'u in the four-vector representation are given
by Eq . (5.3. 1) as
Vk Y
ifi jk
(5 .3.8)
(5 .3.9)
with i, j, k here running over the values 1, 2, and 3 . We note in particular
that f2 takes the form
L
i = d6 i
~ }
i
From Eqs. (5.3 .6) and (5.3.7) it follows then that
Er
u6~~ ~ ~ )p(J))a ~ 2u~ (Or Q )
and
( 5.3. 10)
(5.3 .11 )
(x.3.12)
(5.3 .13)
(5.3 .14)
X5.3 . 1 S)
Also, we recall the familiar result that ( J(})}2 Q = j(1 + 1)6~ra.
From
Eqs. (5 .3.12)-(5.3.15) we see that there are just two possibilities for the
spin of the particle described by the vector field : either j = 0, for which
at p = 0 only u° and vo are non-zero, or else j = I (so that j(j + 1) = 2),
for which at p = 0 only the space-components uj and v` are non-zero . Let
us look in a little more detail at each of these two possibilities .
Spin Zero
By an appropriate choice of normalization of the fields, we can take the
only non-vanishing component of ull(O) and vP(0) to have the conventional
values
uo (0) = r(m12) 1/2
(The label
a here takes only the single value zero, and is therefore
dropped .) Then Eqs, (5 .3.4) and (5 .3.5) yield for general momenta
U"(P) = ip" (?po)-1/ 2
(5 .3.16)

5.3 Causal Vector Fields
and
The vector annihilation and creation fields here are nothing but the
derivatives of the scalar annihilation and creation fields ± for a spinless
particle that were defined in the previous section :
0+1~ (x) = 011`0+(X )
0-10 - 010-fix} .
(5.3.18)
It is obvious that the causal vector field for a spinless particle is also just
the derivative of the causal scalar field :
01,U} = 0+,`(X) + 0-1(X) ~ 010W . (53. 1 9)
Hence we need not explore this case any further here .
Spin One
From Eqs. (5.3.6) and ( 5.3.7) we see immediately that the vectors ui(0,0)
and vx(0, 0) for a = 0 are in the 3-direction. By a suitable normalization
of the fields, we can take these vectors to have the value s
0
1
0
209
(5.1 17)
(5.3.20
with four-vector components listed always in the order 1, 2, 3, 0 . To find
the other components, we use Eqs. (5 .3 .6), (5.3 .7), and (5.3.9) to calculate
the effect of the raising and lowering operators J~1) ± J~1) on u and v .
This gives :
1
+i
0
0
(5.3 .21)
Applying Eqs. (5.3.4) and (5.3.5) now yields
0
0
where
{5.3 .22}
(5.3.3)
(5 .3 .24)

2 1 0
with
I
0
5 Quantum Fields and Anttparticle .3
[L]
1
,j2_ 0
0
The annihilation and creation fields (5 .3 . 2 ) and (5.3.3) here . are
0
0
(5.3.25 )
0- 1'1(x) _ (2n )-3/2
: 1
d'p~ e ~` (p, a ) a(P, a ) e'~'-x
(5.3.26)
V2
Thy fields 0+"(x) and 0+'(y) of course commute (or anticommute) for all
x and y, but 0+;;(x) and 0- " (.Y ) do not. Their commutator (for bosons)
or anticommutator (for fermions) i s
where
2~ ) 2
~ P
(5.3.27 )
(5.3.2$ )
A straightforward calculation using Eq . (5.3.25) shows that III''{D} is
the projection matrix on the space orthogonal to the time-direction, and
Eq. (5 .3.24) then shows that HA''( P) is the projection matrix on the space
orthogonal to the four-vector py
2
The commutator (or anticommutator) (5.3.27 ) may then be written in
terms of the K + function defined in the previous section, as
10" {A 0' (Y)lT _
qg` M2 d+(x - y ) . (5.3 .34)
For our present purposes, the important thing about this expression is
that for x - y space-like it does not vanish and is even in x -- y. We
can therefore repeat the reasoning of the previous section in seeking to
construct a causal field : we form a linear combination of annihilation and
creation fields
for which, for x - y spacelike,
&
1V ~ `k~J , V `' (Y )l ~ = ACA
L 1 1 ~17PV
~ Y
A TRx
I

5 .3 Causal Vector Fields
21 1
and
~~~~IV
M2
1
In order for both to van ish for space-like x-y, it is necessary and sufficient
that the spin one particles be bosons and that
J rcJ =
~ Al . By a suitable
choice of phase of the one-particle states we can give rc and A the same
phase, so that K = )., and then drop the common factor rc by redefining
the overall normalization of the field . After all this, we find that the causal
vec tor field for a massive particle of spin one is
U'(x) = 0"`(x ) + c~'~'t{x} .
(5.3.31 )
We note that this is real :
O(X) = 01(x)
.
(5.3.32)
However, if the particles it describes carry a non-zero value of some
conserved quantum number Q, then we cannot construct an interaction
that conserves Q out of such a field . Instead, we must suppose that there
is another boson of the same mass and spin which carries an opposite
value of Q, and construct the causal field a s
VP(X) T +11(X) + O+QA(x) {5.3.33)
or in more detail
d3
J
where the superscript c indicates operators that create the antiparticle that
is charge-conjugate to the particle annihilated by O+}'(x) . This again is a
causal field, but no longer real. We can also use this formula for the case
of a purely neutral, spin one particle that is its own antiparticle, by simply
setting ac(P) == a(p). In either case, the commutator of a vector field with
its adjoint is
c~PP
[V" (X), V"(Y )] = 17Yu - M2 A (x - y') (5.3 .3
)
where K (x - y) is the function ( 5 .2. 1 3) .
The real and complex fields we have constructed for a ma ssive, spin one
partic le satisfy i nteresting field equations. First, since pp in the exponent ial
in Eq. (5.3.26) satisfies p2 _ -M', the field satisfies the Kle1 in-Gordon
equation :
( K - MI )v U(x) = 0,
(5.3.36)

2 1 2
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticle s
just as for the scalar field. In addition, since Eq. (5.3.24) shows that
we now have another equation
ajuv"(x ) = 0 .
(5.3 .37)
{5.3 .38}
In the Limit of small mass, Eqs . (5. 3 . 6) and (5. 3.38) are just the equations
for the potential four-vector of electrodynamics in what is called Lorentz
gauge.
However, we cannot obtain electrodynamics from just any theory of
massive spin one part icles by letting the mass go to zero. The trouble can
be seen by considering the rate of production of a spin one particle by an
interaction density
= ,I,,vl`, where .fi, is an arbitrary four-vector current .
Squaring the matrix element and summing over the spin z-components of
the spin one particle gives a rate proportional t o
< Ji, > ey (p, iT)* =< .1i,, >< .I, > " III''{P} ,
where p is the momentum of the emitted spin one particle, and < ,I1, >
is the matrix element of the current (say, at x = 0) between the initial
and final states of all other particles. The term pgp'/m2 in IIP" (p) will, in
general, cause the emission rate t o blow up when m -y 0. The only way
to avert this catastrophe is to suppose that < J~, > py vanishes, which
in coordinate space is just the statement that the current J " must be
conserved, in the sen se that O,.1P = 0. Indeed, the need for conservation
of the current can be seen by simply counting states . A massive spin one
particle has three spin states, which can be taken as the states with helicity
+ 1 , 0, and -1, while any massless , spin one particle like the photon can
only have helicities + 1 and -1 : the current conservation condition just
ensures that the helicity zero states of the spin one particle are not emitted
in the limit of zcro mass.
The inversions can be dealt with in much the same way as for the scalar
field discussed in the previous section .
To evaluate the effect of space
inversion, we need a formula for e;(-p, a ) . Using DIJ-P} = 91-1 PLP z(P}
r V
and Eq. (5.3.24), we have
(5.3 .39)
Also, to evaluate the effect of time-reversal we need a formula for
(-l )i+'e,'*(- p,-a), Using e" *( -a) = -el`(cr) and the above formula
for Lf'4,(-p), we find
{5.3 .4 }
Using these results and the transformation properties of the annihila-
tion and creation operators given in Section 4.2, it is straightforward to

5.4 The Dirac Formalism
21 3
work out the inversion transformation properties of the annihilation and
creation fields. Once again we find that, in order for causal fields to
be transformed into other fields with which they commute at space-like
separations, it is necessary that the intrinsic space inversion, charge-
conjugation, and time-reversal phases for spin one particles and their
antiparticles be related by
q C =I,* ,
( 53 .41 )
(5 .3 .42)
C` = ~ *. (5 .3 .43 )
(In particular all phases must be real if the spin one particle is its own
antiparticle.) With these phase conditions satisfied, our causal vector field
(5.3.34) has the inversion transformation properties
PVi`(x)P-' _ -q '
~"vy(°x} , (5 .3 .44)
W`(x)C-1 = ~ •V"t(x), (5 .3 .45)
In particular, the minus sign in Eq. (5.3. 4) means that a vector field that
transforms as a polar vector, with no extra phases Kr signs accompanying
the matrix YP,, describes a spin one particle with intrinsic parity q = -1 .
5.4
The Dirac Formalism
Among all the representations of the homogeneous Lorentz group, there
is one that plays a special role in physics. As we saw in Section 1 .1, this
3
representation was introduced into the theory of the electron by Dirac,
but as so often happens it was already known to mathernaticians,4 because
it provides the basis of one of the two broad classes of representations
of the rotation or Lorentz groups (actually, of their covering groups ---r
see Section 2.7) in any number of dimensions . From the point of view
we are following here, the structure and properties of any quantum field
are dictated by the representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group
under which it transforms, so it will be natural for us to describe the
Dirac formalism as it first appeared in mathematics, rather then as it was
introduced by Dirac .
By a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group, we mean a set
Kf matrices D(A) satisfying the group multiplication law

214 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
Just as for the unitary operators U (A), we can study the properties of
these matrices by considering the infinitesimal case,
for which
(5.4.1 )
(5.4.2 )
(5 .4.3)
with P w = -FA a set of matrices satisfying the commutation relations
(2.4.12) :
L
To find such a set of matrices, suppose we first construct matrices
that satisfy the arttacommutation relation s
and tentatively define
It is elementary, using E q. (5.4.5), to show that
(5.4.5)
{5.4.x)
O.4. 7)
and from this we easily see that E q. (5.4.6) does indeed satisfy the desired
commutation relation Eq . (5.4.4). We shall further assume that the matrices
'/,U are irreducible ; that is, that there is no proper subspace that is left
invariant by all these matrices. Otherwise we could choose some smaller
set of field components, which would transform as in Eqs . (5.4.3) and
(5.4.6), with an irreducible set of -1,,s.
Any set of matrices satisfying a relation like Eq . (5.4.5) (or its Euclidean
analog, with j,,, replaced with a Kronecker delta) is called a Clifford
algebra. The importance in mathematics of this particular representation
of the homogeneous Lorentz group (or, more accurately, its covering
group) arises from the fact (shown in Section 5.6) that the most general
irreducible representation of the Lorentz group is either a tensor, or a
spinor transforming as in Eqs. (5 .4.3) and (5.4.6), or a direct product of a
spinor and a tensor.
The commutation relation (5.4.7) can be summarized by saying that y P
is a vector, in the sense that Eq. (5.4.3) satisfies
In the same sense, the unit matrix is trivially a scala r
D(A) 1 D-'(A) - 1
(5.4.8)
(5.4.9)

5.4 The Dirac Formalism
and Eq . (5.4.4) shows that JP11 is an antisymmetric tensor
2 1 5
(5.4.10)
The matrices yP can be used to construct other totally antisymmetric
tensors
PUT
'Y
LPY
r~~1ff TT~ n1 l!'~},,~YL .y}7J
~~ f ~ f
(5.4.11 )
(5.4 . 12 )
The brackets here are a standard notation, indicating that we are to
sum over all permutations of the indices within the brackets, with a plus
or minus sign for even or odd permutations, respectively . For instance,
Eq. (5.4.Z 1) is shorthand for
I
{ R
F
P
f f R f ! r
{
By repeated use of Eq. (5 .4.5) we can write any product of ys as a sum
of antisymmetrized products of ys times a product of metric tensors, so
the totally antisymmetric tensors form a complete basis for the set of all
matrices that can be constructed from the Dirac matrices .
This formalism automatically contains a parity transformation, conven-
tionally taken as
iY0
Applied to the Dirac matrices, this gives
( 5 .4. 1 3
(We here label indices so that p runs over values 0, 1 , 2, . . .
. ) The same
similarity transformation, applied to any product of 7-Matrices, then yields
just a plus or minus sign, according to whether the product contains an
even or an odd number of ys with space-like indices, respectively . In
particular,
P,f4-
1 ;
"~ ( 5.4.15)
Everything so far in this section applies in any number of spacetime
dimensions and for any `metric' r},,,. In four spacetime dimensions, how-
ever, there is a special feature, that no totally antisymmetric tensor can
have more than four indices, so the sequence of tensors 1, y 0, YPI , 'ryfpl", . . .
terminates with the tensor (5 .4.12) . Furthermore, each of these tensors
transforms differently under Lorentz and/or parity transformations so

2 16 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
they are all linearly independent .' The number of linearly independent
components of these tensors is Kne for 1, four for yP, six for +°O, four
for P", and one for P'P" , or 1 6 independent components in all . (The
general rule is that a totally antisymmetric tensor with n indices in d di-
mensions has a number of independent components equal to the binomial
coefficient d!/n ?(d - ra) !) There are at most v2 independent v x v matrices,
so they must have at least 16 = 4 rows and columns. Dirac matrices of
the minimum dimensionality are necessarily irreducible ; if reducible, the
subspace left invariant by these matrices would furnish a representation of
lower dimensionality. We shall therefore take the y " to be 4 x 4 matrices.
(More generally, in any even number d of spacetime dimensions, one
can form antisymrnetric tensors with 0, 1,
- • -, d indices, which contain
altogether a number of independent components equal to
d
df
- 2d
,=o n!(d
n) !
so the y-matrices must have at least 2d/1 rows and columns . In spaces or
spacetimes with odd dimensionality, the totally antisymmetric tensors of
rank n and d - n can be linearly related by the conditions"
[;' 1
Y 0
2 . . .
Y P
r] ~ C.U 1 P2 . ..~ Y Lur+l 7jur+2 ' * Yf'Rd) x
for r = 0, 1, 2, ..., d -T 1, with EP 1 A2 ' W totally antisymmetric, and the left-
hand side taken as the unit matrix for r = 0. Under these conditions there
are only 211-1 independent tensors, requiring ~/-matrices of dimensionality
at least 2(d-')I' . )
Returning now to four spacetime dimensions, we shall choose an expl icit
set of 4 x 4 y-ma t rices. One very conven ient choice is
d 1
7 = -i
0
~ ~ (5.4.17)
1 U -or
Q
where 1 is the unit 2 x 2 matrix, and the components of er are the usua l
Alternatively, these matrices can be shown to be linearly independent by noting that they form
an orthogonal set, with the scalar product of two matrices defined by the trace of their product .
Note that none of these matrices can vanish, because each component of each of these tensors is
proportional to a product of different y-matrices, and such a product has a square equal to plus
or minus the product of the corresponding squares, and hence equal to ±1 .
This constraint does not interfere with the inclusion of space inversion in the Dirac representation
of the Lorentz group in odd-dimensional spacetirne, because here the tensor e~IP2--A' is even
under inversion of space coordinates. If we don't care about space inversion, we can also
construct lid-r]}2 _dimensional irreducible representations of the proper orthochronous Lorentz
group in even spacetime dimensions by imposing the above condition relating antisymmetrized
products of r and d-r Dirac matrices. An example is provided by the submatrices in Eqs . (5-4.19)
and (54.24) below.

Pali matrices
0
Ui =
1
5.4 The Dirac Formalism
1 0 -a Z
0
CT2
21 7
(5.4.18)
(The a; are just the 2 x 2 y-matrices in three dimensions .) It can be
shown that any other irreducible set of i-matrices are related to these by
a similarity transformation . From Eq. (5 .4.17), we can easily calculate the
Lorentz group generators (5 .4.6) :
C:ik
2
~
io _ + ~
cri
2
0
6k
0
0 Crk
0
_(7
i
(5.4. I9)
(5.4.20)
(Here fi}k is the totally antisymmetric tensor in three dimensions, with
61 23 = + W
We note that these are block-diagonal, so the Dirac ma~
traces provide a reducible representation of the proper orthochrvnaus
Lorentz group, the direct sum of two irreducible representation with
,V = ±i Cijkf'o.
It is convenient to write the totally antisymmetric tensors (5 .4.11) and
(5 .4.12) in a somewhat simpler way . The matrix (5.4.12) is totally antisym-
rne#ric, and therefore proportional to the pseudotensor eP"q, defined as a
totally antisymmetric quantity with E0123 = +1 . Setting p, a , r, q equal to
0,1,2,3, respectively, we see that
where
Ys = -iy Oy I y2y3 .
The matrix ~s is a pseudoscalar in the sense that
( 5.4.2 1 )
(5.4.22)
(5.4.23 )
(s.4.24)
Similarly, vlP" must be proportional to &"n contracted with some matrix
4, and by setting p, u, z equal in turn to 0,1,2 or 0,1,3 or 0,2,3 or 1,2,3,
we find
The 16 independent 4 x 4 matrices can therefore be taken as the com-
ponents of the scalar 1, the vector y P, the antisymmetric tensor "fP¢, the
`axial" vector,,j5y,, and the pseudoscalar y 5. It is easy to see that the matrix
y5 has unit square

218
5 Quantum Fields and Antipartic les
and anticommutes with all YY
fy5"19 = 0 .
(5 .4.27)
The notation y5 is particularly appropriate, because the anticommuta-
tion relations (5.4.26) and (5 .4.27), together with Eq. (5.4.5) show that
'75 provide a Clifford algebra in five spacetime dimensions .
~'°~ T 1 T Y2 , Y3
For the particular 4 x 4 representation (5 .4.17) of the it-matrices, the
matrix Y5 is
a
-~11
(5 .4.28)
Y5 =
1
This representation is convenient because it reduces V1 and ^ 5 to block-
diagonal farm. As we shall see, this makes it particularly useful for dealing
with particles in the ultra-relativistic limit, v --- > c. (fit is not, however, the
representation described in Section 1.1 that was originally introduced by
Dirac, because Dirac was mostly interested in electrons in atoms where
V << c, and in this case it is more convenient to adopt a representation
for Which YO rather than y5 is diagonal . )
The representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group we have con-
structed here is not unitary, because the generators
K are not all
represented by Hermitian matrices. In particular, in the representation
(5 .4.17) we have 'j Hermitian, but Y ~a is anti-Hermitian. Such reality
conditions can conveniently be written in a manifestly Lorentz-invariant
fashion by introducing the matrix P - iy O of Eq. (5.4.13), which in the
representation (5.4.17) takes the form
0
1
1
0
Inspection of Eq. (5 .4. 17) shows that
and it follows then that
fljp6 f
fl = /P17
(5 .4.29)
(5.4.30)
(5,x.3 1 )
Hence, though not unitary, the matrices D(A) satisfy the pseudounitarity
relation
Also, 75 is Hermitian and anticommutes with ffs o
and it follows that
-75Y,,
(5-4-32)
(5.4.33 )
(5 .4 . 34)

5. 5 Causal Dirac Fields
21 9
The Dirac and related matrices al so have important symmetry proper-
ties. Inspection of Eqs . ( 5 .4.17) and (5.4.18) shows that
j' ~ is symmetric
for u = 0, 2 and antisymmetric for y = 1 , 3, so
where T denotes a transpose, and
rr2
0
It follows immediately that
is
+(K ~5w
{ 5 .4. 35 }
(5.4.36)
{x.4.37}
(5 .4 .38)
(5 .4 .39)
These signs will prove significant when we consider the charge-conjugation
properties of various currents in the next section .
Of course, we can
combine our results for adjoints and transposes to obtain the complex
conjugates of the Dirac and allied matrices :
Y5 - -~`~"r~5`~~~~ ,
-flWi5y~'W-1fl-
5.5 Causal Dirac Fields
(5.4.40)
(5.4.41 )
(5.4.42 )
(5.4.43)
We now want to construct particle annihilation and antiparticle creation
fields that transform under the Lorentz group according to the Dirac
representation of this group, discussed in the previous section . In general
these take the form given in Eqs. (5. 1.17) and ( 5 . 1 .18 ) :
and
(5 . 5. x )
(5.5 .2)

220
5 Quanturn. Fields and Antiparticles
with the particle species label omitted here.
In order to calculate the
coefficient functions u~(P, cr) and vr(P, a) appearing in these formulas,
we must first use Eqs. (5.1.25) and (5 .1.26) to find ue and ve for zero
momentum, and then apply Eqs . (5.1 .21) and (5.1.22) to calculate them
for arbitrary momenta, with D?,,(A) in both cases taken as the 4 x 4
Dirac representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group discussed in the
previous section .
Using Eq. (5.4,19), the zero-momentum conditions (5,1 .25) and {5.1 . 6}
read*
and
In other words, if we regard u,,±(O, u) and v,,t(a, a) as the m,a elements
of matrices U± and Y±, we have in matrix notation
U+J(P =
' au+
-
2 -
and
(5.5.3 )
(5.5.4 )
Now, the (2j + 1)-dimensional matrices J(}1 and ----J{ j)* and the 2 x 2
matrices ~a all provide irreducible representations of the Lie algebra of
the rotation group. A general theorem of group theory known as Schur's
lemma tells us that when a matrix like Ut or V± connects two such
representations as in Eqs. ( 5 .5.3) and (5 .5.4), the matrix must either vanish
(a possibility of no interest here) or else be square and non-singular .
Hence the Dirac field can only describe particles of spin j = ~ (so that
2j + 1 = 2) and the matrices J O/1) and -J ( 1~2),, must be the same as 'a
up to a similarity transformation . In fact, in the standard representation
(2.5 . 2 1 ), (2.5.22) of the rotation generators, we have j(1/2) = ~a and
-J(1/2)* = ~d2662. It follows then that U± and Vtff2 roust commute with
a, and hence must be proportional to the unit matrix :
We are here dropping the specie s label n, and replacing the four-component inde x C with a
pair of indices, one 2-valued index m labelling the rows and columns of the submatrices in Eqs .
(5 .4.19) and (5.4 .20), and a second index taking values t, labelling the rows and columns of the
supermatrix in Eqs . (5 .4.19) and (5.4.20).

5.5 Causa l Dirac Fields
In other words
c+
0
C_ 0
D c-
0
VA 1)
d+
0
d_
d+
and the spinors at finite momentum are
U(P' U) = ~mlpPD (L(p)) u(O, a)
V(P'U) = ~m1pPD(L(p))v(0,a)
22 1
(5 . 5 .G)
(5-5-7)
It now only remains to say something about the constants ct and d± . In
general, these are quite arbitrary - we could even choose c_ and d_ or c+
and d+ to be zero if we liked, so that the Dirac field would have only two
non-vanishing components. The only physical principle that could tell us
anything about the relative values of the ct or the d± is the conservation
of parity. We recall that under a space inversion, the particle annihilation
and antiparticle creation operators undergo the transformations :
and so
a
, j d'p ve -p, cr)e-~"Y-V~ (p, a)
or
(5.5.$ )
(5.5.9)
(5.5.10)
(5 . 5 .1 1 )
( .5 . 1 2)
(5-5 -1 3 )
(Since J32 = 1, we are no longer making a distinction between # and #- 1 .)
In order that the parity operator should transform the annihilation and
creation fields at the point x into something proportional to these fields

222
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticle s
at fix, it is necessary that flu(O, a) and flv(0, a) be proportional to u(4, rr)
and v(O, a), respectively :
where bu and b, are sign factors, b2 = h~ = 1 . In this case, the fields have
the simple space-inversion properties :
(5-5-15 )
( S .S .1G)
By adjusting the overall scales of the fields, we can choose the coefficient
functions at zero momentum to have the form :
V2
bu
Z1 (O,
2 ~ = 1
0
bV
0
U(O, -
0
bu
0
( 5 .5 .1 7 )
(5 .5.18)
Now let's try to put together the annihilation and creation fields in a
linear combination
that commutes or anticommutes with itself and its adjoint at space-like
separations. A straightforward calculation gives
(5.5.20)
where
(5.5.21 )
By using either the eigenva]ue conditions (5 .5.14) or the explicit formulas
(5 .5. 7) and (5.5.18), we find at zero momentum :
2(2n)3
2(2n)3 -

5.5 Cau sal Dirac Fields
From Eqs. (5 .5 . 6) and (5.5.7) we have then
_N(p) = ~~D (L(p)) [I + bjIDI (L(p))
M(p) = ' D (L(p)) [1 -~ bt;#]DI (L(p))
2po
The pseudounitarity condition (5.4.32) yield s
D (L(P)) flDI (L(p)) = fl
and
D (L(p)) DT (L(p)) -- D (L(p)) #D-'(L(p)) # -
223
{s.5.2a}
( .s.2 s )
We also recall that ~ T -iyo, so by using the Lorentz transformation rule
(5.4.8) we have
,O(L(p))#D_'(L(p)) = -iL$I'(P)TI' = -iP'7I'/M'
(5.5.26)
Putting this together, we find'
P
1
Using this in Eq. ( 5. 5 .20) yields finally
[W((X), W'(Y)l T
b,mjflA+(x - y)
where A+ is the function introduced in Section 5 . 2 :
P(
(5.5 .27)
d P
ip_x
(5.5 .28)
(s.s.29 )
We saw in Section 5 . 2 that for x - y space-like K +(x - y) is an even
function of x -- y and, of course, this implies that its first de rivatives are
odd functions of x - y . Hence, in order that both the derivative and the
non-derivative terms in the commutator or anticommutator should vanish
at space-like separations , it is necessary and suffic ient that
~ II = +
141 z
(5 .5.30)
Sometimes an extra factor
p° f m is included in the Dirac spinnrs, so that m appears in place
of 10 in the denominators of the spin sums (5 .5 .27) and (5.5.28). The normalization convention
used here has the advantage that it goes smoothly over to the case rn = 0.

224
and
IKt'bu = ± IAI'bu
.
Clearly Eq. (5 . 5.30) is only possible if we choose the bottom sign, -}- = + ;
that is, the particles described by a Dirac field must be fermions . It is also
then necessary that ~K [2 = 1~12 and b,, = --b,. Just as for scalars we have
the freedom to redefine the relative phase of the creation and annihilation
operators to make the ratio rc/A real, in which case K = A, and by adjusting
the overall scale and phase of the field W we may then tak e
K = A = 1. (5.5 .32)
Finally if we like we can replace tp with y 5W, which changes the sign of
both b. and b, so we can always take
For future use, we record here that the Dirac field is now
0
wc (x ) = (21r)-1/2
dip [ue( P, u)~'"a(p x a) + vc{P, a }e-t# '-xa't(P} er)]
(5.5.34)
while the coefficient functions at zero momentum are
0
- 1
The spin sums are
(5. 5.3 1 )
(5 . 5 . 33 )
(5.5.35)
P
P
so the anticommutator is given by Eq. (5 .5.20) as
(5. 5.37
(5.5.3$)
Now let's return to the requirement that under a space inversion the
field T(x) must transform into something proportional to W{gx} . For this
to be possible the phases in Eqs. (5.5.15) and (5.5.16) must be equal, and
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles

5.5 Causal Dirac Fields
225
so the intrinsic parities of particles and their antiparticles must be related
by
That is, the intrinsic parity r~rl` of a state consisting of a spin ~ particle
and its antiparticle is odd. It is for this reason that negative parity mesons
like the p1 and .l/ can be interpreted as s-wave bound states of quark-
antiquark pairs. Eqs . (5.5 .15) and ( 5 . 5.1 6) now give the transformation of
the causal Dirac field under space inversion as
P
(x)P-' = q*flT(9X) . (5 .5.41 )
Before going on to the other inversions, this is a good place to mention
that Eqs. (5.5.14), (5.5.33), and (5 .5 .26) show that u(p, a) and v(p, cr) are
eigenvectors of -ip"y,,f rra with eigenvalues + 1 and - 1, respectively :
(i
`YY + M)U(P} (-T) = 0 ,
( --- aplyu + M) V (p} a) = 0 -
(5 .5.42 )
If follows then that the field (5.5 .33) satisfies the differential equation
(710~ + M.)fi(x) = 0 .
(S . S.43 )
This is the celebrated Dirac equation for a free particle of spin ~ . From the
point of view adopted here, the free-particle Dirac equation is nothing but
a Lorentz-invariant record of the convention that we have used in putting
together the two irreducible representations of the proper orthochronous
Lorentz group to form a field that transforms simply also under space
inversion.
In order to work out the charge-conjugation and time-reversal properties
of the Dirac field, we will need expressions for the complex-conjugates
of the u and v coefficient functions . These functions are real for zero
momentum, but to obtain the coefficient functions at finite momentum we
have to multiply with the complex matrix D(L(p)). From Eq. (5.4.41) we
see that for general real co,,, ;
and so in particular
We also note that Wmmi flu(0, cr) = -v( O, a) and -1 Pv(O, u) = -u(0, 6 ), so
(5.5.44)
(5.5 .45)
In order for the field to transform under charge-conjugation into another
field with which it commutes at space-like separations, it is necessary

226
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
again that the charge conjugation parities of the particle and antiparticle
be related by
In this case, the field transforms as
(5 .5.46)
W(X)C- 1 ~ -~* flyW *W
(5 .5 .47)
(We are calling the Hermitian adjoint of the field on the right-hand side
w' instead of ipt to emphasize that this is still a column vector, not a row .)
Although we have been distinguishing particles from their antiparticles,
we have not ruled out the possibility that the two are actually identical.
Such spin ~ particles are called Majorana fermions. Following the same
reasoning that led to Eq. (5.5 .47), the Dirac field of such a particle must
satisfy the reality conditio n
For Majorana fermians the intrinsic space-inversion parity must be imag-
inary, q = Vii, while the charge-conjugation parity must be real, ~ = ± 1 .
There is an important difference between fermions and bosons in the
intrinsic charge-conjugation phase of states consisting
Kf a particle and
its antiparticle. Such a state may be written
c'a' J
/d3p'
where (Do is the vacuum state. Under charge-conjugation, this state is
transformed into
a}a ,
Interchanging the variables of integration and summation and using the
anticommutation of the creation operators and Eq. (5,5.46), we can rewrite
this as
C - -- /d3p
d3p' :C (P {f LT' ; P, a)u'(p, Q) a" (p ', a')(Dq
C'C'
That is, the intrinsic charge-conjugation parity of a state consisting of a
particle described by a Dirac field and its antiparticle is odd, in the sense
that if the wave function Z of the state is even or odd under interchange
of the momenta and spins of the particle and antiparticle, then the
charge-conjugation operator applied to such a state gives a sign -1 or
+1, respectively. The classic example here is positronium, the bound
state of an electron and a positron. The two lowest states are a pair
of nearly degenerate s-wave states with total spin s = 0 and s = 1,

5.5 Causal Dirac Fields
227
known respectively as para- and ortho-positronium . The wave function
for these two states is even under interchange of momenta and odd or
even respectively under interchange of spin z-components, so pars- and
ortho-positronium have C = +1 and C = -1, respectively . These values
are dramatically confirmed in the decay modes of positronium : para-
positronium decays rapidly into a pair of photons (each of which has
C = -1), while ortho-positronium can only decay much more slowly
into three or more photons. In the same way, single p° and w° mesons
are produced as resonances in high-energy electron-positron annihilation
through a one-photon intermediate state, so they must have C = -1,
which is consistent with their interpretation as quark-antiquark bound
states with orbital angular momentum zero and total quark spin one .
Now we come to time-reversal . Recall the transformation properties
of the particle annihilation and antiparticle creation operators given by
Eq. (4.2.1 S) Ta(
p, a)T- i
Time-reversal of the field (5 .5. 4) thus gives
(5.5 .49)
(5.5.50)
In order to put this back in the form given for
ip, we shall redefine
the variables of integration and summation as -p and - a, so we need
},
T) and v*(-p, -a-) in terms of z~~ (P, a) and r~~(P, a
formulas for uf(-p, --C
respectively. For this purpose, we can use the fact that Ito anticommutes
with P and commutes with y5 together with our former result for D(L(P) )'
to write
Also, Eqs. (5 .4 .3 6) and (5.5.35)-(5 .5-36) give
S O
U*
-75W V(P' U)
(5.5.5 Z )
(5.s.s 2)

228 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
We see thin that in order for time-reversal to take the Dirac field into
something proportional to itself at the time-reversed point (with which
it would anticommute at space-like separations) it is necessary that the
intrinsic time-reversal phases be related by
C
e
C
s
and in this case
(5 .5. 53)
TW(x)T`1 -~ ' Y5`6W(-'Yx). (5 .5.54)
Now let us consider how to construct scalar interaction densities out
of the Dirac fields and their adjoints . As already mentioned the Dirac
representation is not unitary, so WtW is not a scalar . To deal with this
complication it is convenient to define a new sort of adjoint :
Using the pseudounitarity condition (5.4.32), we see that the fermion
bilinears constructed with have the Lorentz transformation propert y
Uo (A)Ifp(x)Mw (x)] pro' (A) = y~ (Ax)D-1(A) M ~(A).~p(Ax).
(5 .5 .56)
Also, under a space inversion
Taking the matrix M as 1,
Yk~
f '1V, 757'1} or y5 yields a bilinear fPV
that transforms as a scalar, vector, tensor, axial vector, and pseudoscalar,
respectively. (The terms `axial° and 'pseudo" indicate that these have space-
inversion properties opposite to those of ordinary vectors and scalars : a
pseudoscalar has negative parity, while the space and time components
of an axial vector have positive and negative parity, respectively.) These
results apply also when the two fermion fields in the bilinear refer to
different particle species, except that in this case a space inversion also
yields a ratio of the intrinsic parities .
For instance, the original Fermi theory of beta decay involved an inter-
action density proportional to 1~0~'Vn Fp,,Y u
u . Later it was realized that
the most general Lorentz-invariant and parity-conserving non-derivative
beta decay interaction takes the form of a linear combination of products
like this, with y,, replaced with any one of the five covariant types of 4 x 4
matrices 1, y", u'', 75 YP, or ys- (As discussed in chapter 2, we are defin-
ing the space-inversion operator so that the proton, neutron, and electron
all have parity +1. If the neutrino is massless then its parity may also
be defined as + 1, if necessary by replacing the neutrino field with Y5 W,-)
When Lee and Yang7 called parity conservation into question in
1 956,
they expanded the list of possible non-derivative interactions to include
ten terms proportional to iP-PMWn xeMlPV and also t~,,MW,~ ~,M Ys WV, with
M running over the matrices 1 , y , , fA', M ' `} or Y 5 .

5.6 General Irreducible Representations
229
It is also of some interest to study the charge-conjugation properties Kf
these bilinears. Using Eqs. (5 .5.47) and (5 .4.35)-(5.4.39), we have
= jp(g- 1T y = ± tPMW
[5.5.5$]
the sign in the last expression being + for the matrices i, Mg, and y5,
and - for y,, and f~~ . (The minus sign in the first line arises from Fermi
statistics, We ignore a c-number anticommutator .) A boson field that
interacts with the current fpMV must therefore have C = + 1 for scalars,
pseudoscalars, or axial vectors, and C = -1 for vectors or antisymmetric
tensors. This is one way of seeing that the n° (which couples to pseu-
doscalar or axial-vector nucleon currents) has C = +1, while the photon
has C = -1 ,
5.6 General Irreducible Representations of the Homogeneous
Lorentz Group'
We shall now generalize from the special cases of vector and Dirac fields
to the case of a field that transforms according to a general irreducible
representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group . All fields may be
constructed as direct sums of these irreducible fields .
A general representation of the proper orthochronous homogeneous
Lorentz group (or, more properly, its infinitesimal part) is provided by a
set of matrices ~V satisfying the same commutation relations (5 .4.4) as
the generators of the group
P,~~ pIr I _ ~ ~ ~~ q(Yu + ~p 17vor - f a v1PIt - A40117 11P) 11 (5,x . 1 )
(Of course,
, .w =
and indices on
are as usual raised or
lowered by contraction with qy" or q,, .) To see how to construct such
matrices, first divide the six independent components of f., into two
three-vectors : an angular momentum matri x
f1 23 a
5a = f3l ,
3 =f12
(5.6.2)
and a boost
I = j lU a
2 _ f20,
,*-3 . = f30 .
(S.G.3 )
Eq. (5.6. 1) then reads
(5.6.4 )
* This section dies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

230
is •
jl = -icijk k 7
(5.6. 5 )
(5-6-6 )
where i, j, k run over the values 1, 2, 3, and ~ift is the totally antisymmetric
quantity with C123 + 1. Eq. (5 .6.4) just says that the matrices generate
a representation of the rotation subgroup of the Lorentz group, and
Eq. (5.6.5) just represents the fact that 4^ is a three-vector. The minus
sign in the right-hand side of Eq. (5.6 .6) arises from the fact that -1,
and plays a crucial role in what follows .
It is very convenient to replace the matrices and with two
decoupled spin three-vectors, writin g
~(~
L
`)
(5.6.8 )
It is easy to see that the commutation relations ( 5 . 6.4)-( 5 . 6 .6) are equivalent
to
(5-6-g )
(5.6.]D )
(s.6.i 1 )
We find matrices satisfying Eqs . { 5,6.9~-{5 .6.11 } in the same way that we
find matrices representing the spins of a pair of uncoupled particles as
a direct sum. That is, we label the rows and columns of these matrices
with a pair of integers and/or half-integers a, b, running over the value s
a =
b =
and take*F
A, -A+ 1, . .-,+A ,
B, -B + 1,-- - ,+B
6'h Ja 0
aA)
(-4)db',ab =7 bola
($)
(5.6. 1 2 )
(5.6.13 )
(5.6.14 )
(5.6.1 S )
where j(A) and J 111) are the standard spin matrices for spins A or B :
j(A)
3
) u'u
(jAJ ±
Ij
~A )
a'a
= a6a'~
(5.6.16 )
(5-6- 17 )
There is an alternative forrnalism,8 based on the fact that the spin j representation of the rotation
group can be written as the symmetrized direct product of 2j spin 1/2 representations - i .e., as
a symmetric 5 U[2] tensor with 2j lwo- valued indices. We can t herefore write fields belongin g to
the (A, B) representation with 2A two-valued (1/2.0) indices and 2 B two-valued (0, 1/2) indices,
the latter written with dots to distinguish them from the former ,
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles

5.6 General Irreducible Representations
23 1
and likewise for J01). The representation is labelled by the values of the
positive integers and/or half-integers A and B. We see that the (A, B)
representation has dimensionality ( 2A + 1)(2B + 1).
The finite-dimensional representations of the homogeneous Lorentz
group are not unitary, because and are Hermitian, and therefore
is Hermitian but is anti-Hermitian. This is because of the i i n
Eqs. (5.6.7) and (5.6 .8), which is required by the minus sign in (5.6 .6),
and hence stems from the fact that the homogeneous Lorentz group is
not the same as the four-dimensional rotation group SO(4), a compact
group, but instead is the non-compact group known as S O (3,1 ). It is only
compact groups that can have finite-dimensional unitary representations
(aside from representations in which the non-compact part is represented
trivially, by the identity). There is no problem in working with non-unitary
representations, because the objects we are now concerned with are fields,
not wave functions, and do not need to have aLorentz-invariant positive
norm .
In contrast, the rotation group is represented unitarily, with its genera-
tors represented by the Hermitian matrice s
f _ ~Q/ +
?
(5.6.18)
By the usual rules of vector addition, we can see that a field that transforms
according to the (A, B) representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group
has components that rotate like objects of spin j, with
This is enough to identify the (A, B) representations with the perhaps
more familiar tensors and spinors . For instance, a (0, 0) field is obviously
scalar, with only a single j - 0 component. A ( 1 , 0) or (0, -1) field can only
have i = +' ; these are the top {i.e., r' 5 = +1) and bottom 05 = -1) two
components of the Dirac spinor. A ( 1, field has components with j = 1
and j = 0, corresponding to the spatial part v and time-component vo of
a four-vector vy . More generally, an (A, A) field contains terms with only
integer spins 2A, 2A - 1, . . . , 0, and corresponds to a traceless symmetric
tensor of rank 2A. (Note that the number of independent components of
a symmetric tensor of rank 2A in four dimensions i s
and the tracelessness condition reduces this to
as expected for an (A, A) field.) One more example : a (1, 0) or {0,1} field
can only have j = 1, and corresponds to an antisymmetric tensor F"' that

232
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
satisfies the further irreducibility `duality' condition s
2
for (1, 0) and (0,1 ) fields, respectively.
Of course, it is only in four
dimensions that an antisymmetric two-index tensor FW can be divided
into such `self-dual' and 'anti-self-dual' parts .
A general tensor of rank N transforms as the direct product of N ( 1 , z )
four-vector representations . It can therefore be decomposed (by suitable
symmetrizations and antisymmetrizations and extracting traces) into irre-
ducible terms (A, B) with A = 12, N12 - 1, . . , and B =:; N12, N12 - 1, . . .
In this way, we can construct any irreducible representation
(A, B) for
which A + B is an integer. The spin representations, for which A + B is
half an odd integer, can similarly be constructed from the direct product
of these tensor representations and the Dirac representation ( 2, 0) D (0,
For instance, taking the direct product of the vector representatio n
and the Dirac ( ~, 0) ~ (D, ~ ) representation gives a spinor-vector VA, that
transforms according to the reducible representation
2 2 2 2
2
The quantity y,,WA would transform as an ordinary ( ~, 0) ~ (0,
Dirac
field, so we can isolate the ( ~,1 ) ED (1, -1) representationt by requiring that
ymT1` = 0. This is the Rarita-Schwinger field.9
So far in this section we have Knly considered the representations of
the proper orthochronous Lorentz group. In any representation of the
Lorentz group including space inversion, there must be a matrix # which
reverses the signs of tensors with odd numbers of space indices, and in
particular
In terms of the matrices (5. 6.7) and (5 .6.$), this is
(S.G.20)
Thus an irreducible
(A, B) representation
Kf the proper orthochronous
homogeneous Lorentz group does not provide a representation of the
Lorentz group including space inversion unless A = B . As we have seen,
these (A, A) representations are the scalar, the vector, and the symmetric
traceless tensors. For A :~ B, the irreducible representations of the Lorentz
~ According to Eq . (5.6.18), such a field transforms under ordinary rotations as a direct sum of two
j = 3/2 and two j = 1! components. The doubling is eliminated by imposing the Dirac equation
[y"a,, +m]VJ' = 0, and the remaining j =
-21 component is eliminated by requiring that a"V +2 -It d.
With these conditions, the field describes a single particle of spin j - 3f2,

5. 7 General Causal Fields
23 3
group including space inversion are the direct sums (A, B ) E) (S, A), of
dimensionality 2(2A + 1)(2B + 1). One of these is the (~, D ) @ (0, ~ } Dirac
representation discussed in Section 5 .4. The 4 x 4 matrix (5 .4.29) provides
the P-matrix for this representation. Another familiar example is the
(1,0)x(0,1 ) representation, which as we have seen is just the antisymmetric
tensor of second rank, including both self-dual and anti-self-dual parts.
5,7 General Causal Fields "
We now proceed to construct causal fields that transform according to
the general irreducible (A, B) representations described in the previous
section. The index I is replaced here with a pair of indices a, b, running
over the ranges (5.6.12 ), {5.6.13}, so the fields are now written as
Wab(x) = (2n)-'I' 1: J dip [x a(p, ff)~'P'xuab(P, 6 )
act (P a cr)e-p x vab ( P} d)] (5.7. 1 )
with rc and ~ arbitrary constants. We are here leaving open the possibility
that this particle is its own antiparticle, in which case a~(p, a) = a(p, a).
Our firs# task is to find the zero-momentum coefficient functions u ,,b(0, 6)
and vab(0, u). The fundamental conditions (5.1 .25)-(5.1 .26) on u(O, a) and
v (0, cT) read here
t1Rgo, dpt
a
.i1 =
'-'"
I f ab,abuab ( 0 , a )
ir
a,b
- dab
(()
,
&)J
ab
a ~ ,abVab (0 x CT)
~
0
or using Eqs. (5.6 .14)-(5.6. 15)
E Udbb (oa oiaff = E iaa"Uab(O~ a) + 1: j
bb
~ U
a
b (0, a} , (5.7.2)
A
b
But Eq. (5.7.2) is the defining condition for the Clebsch-Gordan coeffi-
cients CAR (,ju ;ab)! These coefficients are defined by the requirement that
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

234
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
if Tab are states that under an infinitesimal rotation transform a s
aa
bb
then, under the same rotation, the state
ab
transforms as
Inspection of Eq .
(5 .7.2) shows that this requirement is satisfied by the
coefficients uab(0, G), and therefore, up to a possible proportionality factor,
gab{0, U} is just CAB (, jU ; ab). This constant is conventionally chosen so tha t
uab(D, a ) = (2m)-"' CAB UU ; ab) .
(5 .7 .4)
This result is unique because each irreducible (A , B) representation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group contains a given spin j representation of the
rotation group at most once. Similarly, inspection of Eqs. (5 . 6.16)-(5,6,17)
shows that the complex conjugates of the angular momentum matrices
are
d fT
(5.7-5 )
Therefore if we write Eq . (5 .7.3) in terms of (- 1 )j-¢Vab (P, -9), it takes the
same form as Eq . (5.7.2). With a suitable adjustment of a constant factor,
the unique solution for v (0, u ) i s
We must now perform a boost to calculate the coefficient functions for
finite momentum. For a fixed direction P ° P/l Pl, we can write the boost
(2.5.24) as a function of a parameter 9 defined by
cosh 0 Z= Vp 2 + M2 /M ,
and write LPV(0) i n place of LP,(p), where
sink O = ~ P ~ Jm (5.7.7 )
LVO) = 6ik + (cosh 0 - 1)^;Fka
L'()(0) = L°i(F) = P; Binh 6,
Loo(O) = cosh 0
.
The advantage of this parameterization is that
( 5.7.5)
{5.7.x)
For infinitesimal 0, we have [L(O)]P, --+ Sou + wPu, where do = w°i = p ;B
and wii T woo = 0. Following the same reasoning that led from Eq .

5.7 General Causal Fields
(2.2.24) to Eq . (2.2.26), it follows then that
D (L(p)) = exp(-gip - . '0) .
23 5
(5 . 7.1Q )
This is for any representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group ; for the
irreducible (A,B) representations, Eqs . (5 .6.7) and (5.6.$) give
and since .4 and are commuting matrice s
D (L(P)) =exp(-p - t40 ) exp(+ p - W)
In more detail, using Eqs. (5 .6.14) and ( 5. 6.15 )
D (L(p))
db%ah = (exp
P
)Q'a (exp ( + P,
)) b1b
( 5 . 7. 11 )
(5.7.12)
(x.7. 1 3)
Eqs. (5 .7.4) and (5 .7.6) then give the coefficient functions at finite momen-
tum as
Uab* GT) (exp
P
, j(A)O))
ad (
eXp ( + P - j(B)
0) ) W
x CAB(Jo-; a'b' )
and
(5.7.14 )
These results give the field explicitly for a given transformation type (A, B),
so the field {5.1.31} of this type is unique up to the choice of the constant
factors ic and ). .
it is very easy in this formalism to construct Lorentz scalar interaction
densities. The (AB) representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group
is just the direct product of the (A, 0) and (0, B) representations, so the
general Lorentz transformation rules (5 .1 .6), (5-1.7) read here
Uo{A)v,,b (x) a 1~} _ ~~ °d(A-')Do~+ (A-1)~~r b' (Ax) .
{5 .7 .1 G}
a' b'
Furthermore, Etas. (5.6.14) and (5.6.15) show that the matrix generators
of the (A, D) and (0,8) representations are just the spin matrices for spin
A and B, respectively . Thus we can construct scalars of the form
5.7.17
$a , a4 . . . a,, ;hib2 -brt W al b i~~~ ~~~~2W
. . . ?1(X. )
Gl1ul ., .a n b 1 f12_ ..,hr r
by simply taking g,,,2 ...are ;b,b: . ..b,, as the product of a coefficient for coupling
spins A1, A2, . . . A„ to make a scalar and a coefficient for coupling spins
B1, B2, .. . . B, to make a scalar. (Even though we do not explicitly consider
interactions involving derivatives, we will in this way obtain the most
general interaction involving n fields, because the derivative of a field of

236
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
type (A, B) can always be decomposed into fields of other types without
derivatives.) For instance, the most general Lorentz scalar formed from
a product of three fields of transformation types (A,, BI), (A2, BA and
{A3 , BO is
y: ( A,
A2
A3 BI B2 B3
(1)
(2)
(3) (5.7.18)
g Y:
W Q 1}~[
p~2J~2 W p~3 ~j3
ayaza3 bj b2b3 ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~' ~ 3
with a single free parameter g . This is the most general three-field inter-
action. (The brackets in (5.7.17) denote the Wigner "three j„ sym6ols :10
it
j2 h 3 3
) = 1: Cil j2 (h M', M I M2)Cj3 ii (00, M' M3)
1
M2
M~
r
M 3
which describe the coupling of three spins to make a rotational scalar.)
For the S-matrix to be Lorentz-invariant it is not enough that the
interaction density (x) be a scalar like (5.7.1 8) ; it is also necessary that
fi(x) should commute with (y) at space-like separations x -- Y. To see
how to satisfy this condition, consider the commutator or anticommutator
of to fields for the same particle species, a field V of type
(A, B), and the
adjoint tit of a field of type (A, P) . We find
lvabw, V-alb(y)] :F = (21r)-'/' f d
3p (2~')-'nab,44)
x [Kke1P'(`-Y)
(5 .7.19)
where x(p) is the spin sum
(2po)-i 71ab,ab (R)
uab (P} 67) uQ( P, a) _
Vab (P, UP*b{p, a} (5.7.20)
and as usual, the top and bottom signs are for bosons and fermions,
respectively. (We allow here for different coefficients k a nd A in the t~
field.) In more detail
7r.b,a;(P) = E 1: E
CA,5 (ju; A) C;jp (jer ; 7a'Y
dW ~?hr
))aa' (
X exp ( - J, -
) P
j(
A
)O
~ (exp ~p j
~~~o)) ;b (5.7. 1 )
The function n(P) has been calculated explicitly." What concerns us
here is the fact that it turns out to be the mass-shell value of a polynomial
function P of p and p°
Ir"b'ab(p) ~
Paba6 (PI. V1W + MI) (5.7.22)

5.7 General Causal Fields
237
and that P is even or odd according to whether 2A + 2B is an even or
odd integer
p(_p, _Pa) = (_)1A +1k
P ( Pa P°
) .
(5.7 .23)
We shall check this here for just one particular direction of p . Taking p in
the three-direction, (5 .7 .21) gives
7tab,ab(P) _
CAR(.1a ; ab) C'qp (1a ; ab) exp ( [-a + b - & + b] B)
The Clebsch-Gordan coefficients vanish unless a = a + b and or = a + b,
so we can replace
-a +b - a + b = T2a +u + 2b- a =2b -2a .
We can write exp(±O) as (pp ± p3 )/M, so here
X
[(pp + p3)IM]
ke -
P,)/Mi 2b-2a
2Q-2h
(b ~ a}
(a ~ b)
where p° = p + m2. We see that 7r(p) can indeed be written as the
mass-shell value of a polynomial F (p, pO ). Also, Zb - 2a equals 2A + 2A
minus an even integer, so the polynomial satisfies the reflection condition
Any polynomial in p and p ~ + m. can be written in a form linear
in p 2 + m (by expressing even powers of p + W in terms Kf p) so
-n(R) can be written
Rab,ab(p) = Pab,A(P ) + 2 VP 2 + M2 Qal,db ( P)
where P and Q are now polynomials in p alone, with
p (_P) = (_)2A + 2,1 p (p)
Q(_p) =_ _(_)2A+2RQ(p) .
(5.7.24)
( 5.7.25)
(5.7.26)
For x - y space-like, we can adopt a Lorentz frame in which xO = y°, and
write Eq. (5.7.19) as
In order that this should vanish when x z~- y, we must have

238 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
Now let us consider the special case where and ip- are the same, so in
particular A = A and B = B. (It is unavoidable that such commutators
or anticommutators will appear in [-*(x),
(y)], because the hermiticity
of the Hamiltonian requires that if (x) involves y), it also involves Wf •~
In this case, Eqs. {5 .7.27} gives
This is possible if and only if
± (- 1 )2A +2B - +1 (5.7.28)
and
I K
I
2 = I~ I
1
(5.7.29)
Of course, 2A + 2B differs from 2j by an even integer, so Eq. (5.7 .28) says
that our particle is a boson or fermion according to whether 2j is even or
odd. This is the general relation between spin and statistics,12 of which
we have already seen special examples for particles described by scalar,
vector, or Dirac fields.
Now let's return to the general case, where the fields ip and i~ may be
different. Using Eq . (5.7.27 ), and dividing both sides by JR11
we
have
It follows that, for any field,
2 (-)2$c rc , (5.7.30)
where c is the same factor for all fields of a g iven particle. Furthermore,
Eq, (5.7.29) shows that c is just a phase, jcj = 1 . We can therefore
eliminate c for all fields by a redefinition of the relative phase of the
operators a(p, cr) and a0 ( P, a), so that c = 1, and hence ~ = (-)2' K. Also,
the factor K for each field type may be eliminated by a redefinition of the
over-all scale of the field. We emerge from all this with a formula for the
(A, B) field of a given particle, that is unique up to overall scale
Vaf~(_x)_ (27r)-9 f 2 Ejd3P
[u(p a cr)a(p} a)Bip• x
The different fields for a given particle do not really represent possibil-
ities that are physically distinct. For instance, the possible fields for j = 0
are those of tPe (A,A) because the triangle inequality ~ A - B ~ :!9 j :9 A+ B
here requires A - B ). Starting with a (U, 0) scalar field 0, we can easily

5 .7 General Causal Fields
construct such {A, A} fields from the 2Ath derivative
where 1 } here denotes the traceless part ; for instance
02
- 1
OXIIOXV
239
(5.7 . 32 )
(Recall that a traceless symmetric tensor of rank N transforms according
to the (N12, N/2) representation.) But Eq . (5 .7.31) represents the unique
causal (A, B) field for a given particle of spin j, so the (A, A) fields (5.7.3 1)
for j = 0 can be nothing but linear combinations of the 2Ath derivatives
(5 .7.32) of a scalar field.
More generally, any field (A, B) for a given particle of spin j can be
expressed as a differential operator of rank 2B acting on the fielcll3 rp,(x)
of type (j, 0) (or a differential operator of rank 2A acting on the field of
type (0, .1)). To see this, consider the field
This transforms as the direct product of the representations (B, B) and
(j, 4 ), and hence by the usual rules of vector addition, it can be decomp osed
into fields transforming according to all the irreducible representations
(A, B ) with
~j - B I S A :::~ j + B, or equivalently
J A -- BI j
A + B .
Since Eq. (x.7.31) represents the unique field of type (A, B) for a given
particle of spin j, it can be nothing" but the (A, B) field obtained from
the derivatives (5 .7.33) .
Now let us consider the behavior of these fields under inversions,
beginning with sp ace inversion. Using the results of Section 4. 2, the space-
inversion properties of the particle annihilation and antiparticle creation
operators are,
Pa"(p, Q )P-' = rjoao~ (-p, cr) ,
(5.7.34)
( 5.7.3 5 )
where q and r1° are the intrinsic parities for the particle and antiparticle,
respectively. The general causal (A, B) field (5.7.3t ) thus transforms under
The only possible flaw in this argument would be if some of the (A, B) fields obtained in
this way actually vanished. But in this case, the 0) field ~p, wou ld satisfy a field equation
f 6{r? f r?x} (p(x) 0 and fence, for each
E
T,
a(dp)u,,(P, a) R 0. For the (j, Q) repre-
sentation the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient Cfl[ja ; a-
is just the Kronecke r symbol Sid, so this
would require Ma(ip)Daa. (L(p)) _ O , which is impossible unless all the Mff(dp) vanish, since
D(A) has an inverse D(A-r ). The (j, 0) fields (p,(x ) thus satisfy no field equation other than the
Klein-Gordon equation (E] - m 2 } rpff(x) = 0, and therefore none of the (A, B) fields obtained
from (5,7.30 can vanish .

240
S Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
the parity operator P into
,b (x)P-' = (27r)-'/'E f dp [q*a(-p,a)eP'x uA,,b(p,a )
We want to change the integration variable from p to -p, and for this
purpose we will need to evaluate u,,b(-F, or) and a,,&(-F, a). To do this,
we need only glance back at (5 .7-14) and (5 .7.15), and use the symmetry
property of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient 1 4
CAB(Ja ; ab ) = (- )"-8T~ C,9A (iC ; bac ).
This gives
so
'
B(- Pr ~) = (-)A+B-j
U
~Q gyp, ~~ ,
PWab (x)P-
1 = (27c)-3f2 f
d3P ( _1 )A + 11-j
x [a(p.
e
•~xU
(p, ~) +
c (_) 2B ~ct(p, ~ )e
V(p, u)]
( 5 .7.37)
(5 .7.3 S)
(5 .7.39)
3 . 7.40)
where, as before, Yx _ (--x, x°) . This is the causal field W~~ evaluated at
fix, except that the coefficients of the annihilation and creation terms may
not be the same as called for in Eq. (5.7.31). But these coefficients must be
the same up to an overall constant factor as in Eq . (5.7.31) because, aside
from scale, Eq. (5 .7.31) is the unique causal field of any type. Hence the
ratio of the coefficients of the two terms in Eq . (5.7.40) must be the same
as in Eq. (5 .7.31) (but with B replaced with A because this is supposed to
be a (B, A) field s
But A - B differs from the spin j by only an integer, so this gives
(5.7.41 )
(5.7.42 )
We saw special cases of this result in Sections 5 . 2, 5.3, and 5.5, where j = 0,
j = 1, and j = 1 , respectively. We now see that the resutt is general ; the
intrinsic parity q'rJ of a particle-antiparticle pair is +1 for bosons, and - I
orferrnions. Using Eq. (5.7.42) in Eq. (5.7.40), our final result for space
inversion is
Let's see how this applies to the Dirac field . For the top 0) and
bottom (0, 1) components of the Dirac field, the sign (-1 )A+~-~ is just

5.7 General Causal Fields
24 1
+1, so the parity operator simply takes x into -x ; reverses the top and
bottom components ; and multiplies the field with q*. The reversal of the
top and bottom components of the Dirac field is accomplished by the
matrix P in (5 .5.41) .
Now let us consider charge-conjugation. Its effect on the particle
annihilation and antiparticle creation operators i s
Ca(Px a ) C-1 = ~* d(Pr a)y
(5.7.44)
( .7.45)
where and ~' are the charge-conjugation parities of the particle and
antiparticle, respectively . Applying this transformation to the field ( 5.7.31 ) ,
we find
C
V
~ ~(X)C- 1 T (27r)-'/'
d'~,
h(A} U)
x [~ *a'(p, a)e-"' + ~c(_)2B al(p,
J
It is useful to compare this formula for the charge-conjugate of an (A, B)
field with the adjoint of the (B, A ) field for the same particle :
~a fi(~r) = ( 2~ )-
3,2 f d'F
Uha
(p, U )
CT
X [(_I)IA(_l )j-" a'(p, -u)e'P" + at(p, c)e-iP'XI
To calculate the u', we use our previous resul t
The Clebsch-Gordan coefficient in Eq . (5.7.14) is real, so
{5 . 7,47}
Uba
_P
- j~A) 0))
eXp
J"
IA(p,
eXp( - P
'3) 0)) -b,-b'
of V
We use the reflection property of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients 1 4
and the fact that those coefficients vanish unless a' + b' = a, to writ e
U~h-a~~}-ff)* = ( -- )a-~b-f~ dab
(P, a) ,
(5.7,49)
The field adjoint (5.7 .47) is then (replacing a --+ -a, b -+ -b, a --* -a )
W-b,-a(x) = (27r
1: f d3p
ab (p, (-T)
X ~(_)2A(_~+U d(p, u)e'P'-x + al(p, cr)e-P" I -

242
5 Quan tum Fields and Antiparticles
Using the sign relation (-)-2A-i = (-)2B+j, this is
-b,-a(x) = (2z
E f d'P U'ab' (P, (r )
f
X [d (p, U) elp', + (_)j -a+2B at (p, -
1
]
In order that C Ta~ (x ) C-t should commute or anticommute with all
ordinary fields at space-like separations, it is necessary that it be propor-
tional to T$~t abecause this is the adjoint of the unique causal field of
transformation type (B,A) . Comparing Eq . (5.7.50) with Eq . (5 .7.46), we
see that this is only possible if the charge-conjugation parities are related
by
~* = ~c ,
in which case
(5.7 .51 )
(5.7.52)
We have already encountered the relation (5.7.51) for spins 0,
1, and
in Sections 5 .2, 5 . 3, and 5.5, and noted some of its implications for
electron-positron and quark-antiquark states in Section 5 .5 .
In particular, for a particle that is its own antiparticle, Eq. (5 .7.52) is
satisfied without any charge-conjugation operator on the left-hand side or
phase ~* on the right :
We have already seen an example of this sort of reality condition for
Majorana spin _' particles in Section 5.5.
Finally we come to time-reversal. Applied to particle annihilation and
antiparticle creation operators, this gives
The irreducibl e field (5 .7.3 1) thus has the transformation property
a
x L*a(_p, _Gr)e _ip-x + ; e(_ 1 )2BQct{„A } -or)etp'x
I
(5 .7.54)
(5.7.55 )
(x.7.56 )
To calculate the complex conjugate of the coefficient function, we use Eq.
(5-7.14) and the standard formula' 4
CAB (i
} or ; a4 b) = (_)A+8-jCAB(
.1 } -u ; - a, -b)
(5.7.57)

5.7 Genera l Causal Fields
243
and find :
Changing the variables of integration and summat ion in Eq. (5.7.56) to
-p and -a, we find that in order for an
(A, B ) field to be transformed
by time-reversal into something proportional to another (A, B ) field, it is
necessary that
~` _ C }
in which case
( 5.7.59)
ab -a ,
It should be mentioned that from time to time various difficulties
have been reported 15 in the field theory of particles with spin j
3/2.
Generally, these are encountered in the study of the propagation of a
higher spin field in the presence of c-number external field. Depending on
the details of the theory, the difficulties encountered include non-causality,
inconsistency, unphysical mass states, and violation of unitarity. I will not
go into details about these problems here, because it seems to me that
they are not relevant to the calculational scheme described in this chapter,
for the following reasons :
(1) The fields V,,b(x) have been constructed here directly from the cre-
ation and annihilation operators for physical particles, so no question of
inconsistency or unphysical mass states can arise . These are free fields,
but by incorporating them into an interaction Hamiltonian density in the
interaction picture, we can use perturbation theory to calculate S-matrix
elements that automatically satisfy the cluster decomposition principle .
As long as the interaction Hamiltonian is Hermitian, there can be no
difficulty with unitarity. Lorentz invariance is guaranteed in perturbation
theory as long as we add appropriate locol but non-covariant terms in
the Hamiltonian density ; though a rigorous proof is hacking, there is no
reason to doubt that this is always possibly . Thus any difficulties with
higher spin can only arise when we try to go beyond perturbation theory .
(2) As discussed in section 13 .6, the solution of field equations in the pres-
ence of a c-number background field (the context where all the problems
with higher spin have been found) does go beyond perturbation theory,
in that the results correspond to summing an infinite subset of terms in
the perturbation series . This partial summation is justified, even for weak
external fields, if the fields are sufficiently slowly varying, the smallness of
energy denominators making up for the weakness of the fields . But the
results obtained in this way depend on all the details of the interaction

244
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
of the high-spin particle with the external fields : not only the multipole
moments of the particle but also possible terms in the interaction that are
non-linear in the external fields . The problems reported 15 with higher spin
have been encountered only for higher-spin particles that have been arbi-
trarily assumed to have only very simple interactions with external fields .
No one has shown that the problems persist for arbitrary interactions,
and as we shall see in chapter 12, particles of higher spin are expected to
have interactions of all possible types allowed by symmetry principles .
(3) In fact, there are good reasons to believe that the problems with
higher spin disappear if the interaction with external fields is sufficiently
complicated. For one thing, there is no doubt about the existence of higher-
spin particles, including various stable nuclei and hadronic resonances. If
there is any problem with higher spin, it can only be for `point' particles,
that is, those whose interactions with external fields are particularly simple .
It should be kept in mind that the requirement of simplicity depends on
the choice of which field we choose to represent the higher-spin particle .
Remember that any free field types for a given particle can be expressed as
a derivative operator acting on any other field type, so in the interaction
picture any interaction with external fields may be written in terms of
any field types we like, but interactions that are simple when expressed
in terms of a field of one type may look complicated when expressed in
berms of a field of another type. So the requirement of simplicity does not
seem to have any objective content.
(4) Also, both higher-dimensional `Kaluza--Klein' theories and sting theo-
ries provide examples of consistent theories of a charged massive particles
of spin two interacting with a electromagnetic background field .16 (It was
found that the consistency of the theory depends on the assumption of
realistic external fields that satisfy the field equations, a point generally ne-
glected in earlier work.) Reformulating this work in the interaction picture,
the spin two particle is represented by a (1, 1) free field, but as mentioned
above, the interactions may be reexpressed in the interaction picture in
terms of any field type (A, B) that contains the j = 2 representation of the
rotation group.
5.8 The CPT Theorem
We have seen that the demands of relativity combined with quantum
mechanics require the existence of antiparticles. Not only is it necessary
that every particle have an antiparticle (which may for a purely neutral
particle be itself) ; there is a precise relation between the properties of
particles and antiparticles, that can be summarized in the statement that

5.8 The CPT Theorem
245
for an appropriate choice of inversion phases, the product CPT of all the
inversions is conserved. This is the celebrated CPT theorem . `
As a first step in the proof, let us work out the effect of the product
CPT on free fields of various types . For a scalar, vector, or Dirac field the
results of Sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.5 give
CPT (x) [CPT]-' = C**q*o~(-x) ,
(5.$.1 )
CPT 0,,(x) [CPT]-' =
( 5-8-2)
(Of course, the phases ~, and q depend on the species of particle
described by each field.) We are going to choose the phases so that for all
particles
Then any tensor formed from and set of scalar and vector fields
and their derivatives transforms int o
CPT [CPT]-
1 = (- )no
u~ ...~.,, ~-x) . (5 .8 .5)
(Any complex numerical coefficient appearing in these tensors is trans-
formed into its complex conjugate because CPT is antiunitary .) We can
easily see that the same transformation rule applies to tensors formed
from bilinear combinations of Dirac fields . Applying Eq . (5.8.3) to such a
bilinear gives
CRT Lip- I (X)
W2()l [CPTJ-~ = W
i(-X) 75fl
; 75 2(-x)
[ P_1(-x)Y5My5W2 (-x)]f . (5 .5.6)
(A minus sign from the anticommutation of P and ys is cancelled by
the minus sign from the anticommutation of fermionic operators .)
If
the bilinear is a tensor of rank n, then M is a product of n modulo 2
Dirac matrices, so Ys Ys = (°-- I)'M, and the bilinear therefore satisfies
A Hermitian scalar interaction density -yf(x) must be formed from
The original proofs of this theorem were by Luders and Pauli .17 It has been proved rigorously in
axiomatic field theory,lg by using commutativity assumptions to extend the Lorentz invariance
of the theory to the complex Lorentz group, then using complex Lorentz transformations to
prove a reflection property of vacuum expectation values of products of fields, and then using
this reflection property to infer the existence of an antiunitary operator that induces CPT
transformations on the fields .

246
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
tensors with an even total number of spacetime indices, and therefore
CPT W() [CPT]-' = (-x). (5.8 .7)
More generally (and somewhat more easily) we can see that the same is
true for Hermitian scalars formed from the fields Va~ (x) belonging to one
or more of the general irreducible representations of the homogeneous
Lorentz group. Putting together our results in the previous section for the
effects Kf inversions on such fields, we find
C PT WAll (x) [CPT]-' - (_ 1 )2BV~b t(-x} • {S.S .B )
(For the Dirac field the factor (-1)2" is supplied b the matrix
75 in
Eq. (5.8 .3).) In order to couple together a product y~~'hl' (x) y~~ b~ 2 (x) . . . to
form a scalar (x), it is necessary that both Al +A2+ . . . and 8i +B2+ '
be integers, so (-i)2B,+2B2+ . .. i la and so a Hermitian scalar -X,"(x) will
automatically satisfy Eq. (5.8.7).
From Eq. (5.8.7) it follows immediately that CPT commutes with the
interaction V = f d3X , (5~, 0 )
CPT V [CPT] -1 = V .
(5 .8.9)
Also, in any theory CPT commutes with the free-particle Hamiltonian Ho .
Thus the operator CPT, which has been defined here by its operation on
free-particle operators, acts on `in' and `out' states in the way described
in section 3. 3. The physical consequences of this symmetry principle have
already been discussed in Sections 3.3 and 3 .6.
5.9 Massless Particle Fields
Up to this point we have dealt only with the fields of massive particles .
For some of these fields, such as the scalar and Dirac fields discussed in
Sections 5.2 and 5.5, there is no special problem in passing to the limit
of zero mass. On the other hand, we saw in Section 5.3 that there is a
difficulty in taking the zero-mass limit of the vector field for a particle of
spin one : at least one of the polarization vectors blows up in this limit .
In fact, we shall see in this section that the creation and annihilation
operators for physical massless particles of spin j ~ 1 cannot be used to
construct all of the irreducible (A, B) fields that can be constructed for
finite mass. This peculiar limitation on field types will lead us naturally to
the introduction of gauge invariance .
Just as we did for massive particles, let us attempt to construct a
general free field for a massless particle as a linear combination of the
annihilation operators a(p, u) for particles of momentum p and helicity or,

5.9 Massless Particle Fields
247
and the corresponding creation operators a`#( p, a) for the antiparticles :*
L
¢
+ ~ ac, (F, Ov"* Q) e-ip'x
I
(5-9-1 )
where now F° = J p J. The creation operators transform just like the one-
particle states in Eq. (2.5 .42)
a
exp irrft, A) a' (PA, CO
P
0
U(11)acfi(p, a ) U-111} =
(Ap)
exp (iO(p, A )~ act (PA, C)
P
and hence also
U{1~}r~(p, ~) LI-1 (1~ ) =
~
exp - iuft, A)) a(Pn, Cr)
(5.9.2)
(5-9-3 )
(5 .9.4)
where PA =gyp, and 0 is the angle defined by Eqs. (2 .5 .43). Hence if we
want the field to transform according to some representation D(A) of the
homogeneous Lorentz group
~()ip,,(x)U-i(A) De?(
-1 )tp?(Ax) , (5.9 . 5 )
then we must take the coefficient functions u and v to satisfy the relations
a
U? (PA, CY) eXP ia 0(p, A) )
V (Ap)"
~
v?(pA, a) exp
ic 0(p, A) P
D?e(A)v((p, a)
) =
~Ap , 1:
(5 .9.6)
(5.9 .7)
in place of Eqs . (5.1 .19) and ( 5.1 .20) . (Again, PA =11p.) As in the massive
particle case, we can satisfy these requirements by setting (in place o f
We deal here with only a single species of particle, and drop the species label n . Also, rc and .i
are constant coefficients to be determined by the requirement of causality wL[h some convenient
choice of normalization of the coefficient functions ul and v,, .

248
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
Eqs. (5 . 1 .21 and (5. 1 . 22})
rLk,
VAP, CT)
rLk,
- sin O 0
0
cos B
0
0
0 1 0
U ~
1 _j
where k is a standard momentum, say (0,0, k), and Y(p) is a standard
Lorentz transformation that ta kes a massless particle from momentum k
to momentum p. Also, in place of Eqs. (5.1.23) and (5 .1.24), the coefficient
functions at the standard momentum must satisfy
U?(k, a) exp iaO(k, W)) D?e(W)U((k, cr)
v?(k, a) exp icrO(k, W)) D?,,(W)vl (k, u)
(5.9.8)
(5.9.9)
( 5.9.10)
(5.9. 11 )
where WAi, i s an arbitrary element of the
`little group' for four-momentum
k = (k, J k,l }, i.e., an arbitrary Lorentz transformation that leaves this four-
momentum invariant.
We can extract the content of Eqs . ( 5 .9.10) and (5.9.f 1 ) by considering
separately the two kinds of little-group elements in Eq. (2.5.28). For a
rotation R(9) by an angle 0 around the z-axis, given by Eq. (2.5 .27),
cos B
RAV(O
) -
sin 0
0
0
we find from Eqs . (5.x.10) and (5 .9 .11 )
,(k,o-)e"
=ED?,(R(O))u,(k,a)
u?
T'
v~(k, a)e-idlo
D?, (R(O))v,(k, u)
For combined rotations and boosts S(oc, fl) in the x
1 0
S
1
U V ~~a
0
t
(5.9.12)
X5.9. 13)
Y plane, given by
-ac o~
-~ ~
Y
-Y 1 +Y

5.9 Massless Partic le Fields
Eqs. ( 5.9. 10) and (5.9. 1 1) give
(S(cx,
}
v?(k, a)
D?, (S(a, fl)) v,(k, a)
249
5 .9.1 T)
( 5.9.15)
Eqs. (5.9.12)-( 5.9.15) are the conditions that determine the coefficient
functions u and v at the standard momentum k ; Eqs. (5.9.8) and (5.9 .9)
then give them at arbitrary momenta. The equations for v are just the
complex conjugates .of the equations for u, so with a suitable adjustment
of the constants rc and A we may normalize the coefficient functions so
that
vA P, Cr} _ UAp, Cr}' - (5.9.16)
The problem is that we cannot find a u e that satisfies Eq. (5.9.14) for
general representations of the homogeneous Lorentz group, even for those
representations for which it is possible to construct fields for particles of
a given helicity in the case m :~ 0.
To see what goes wrong here, let's try to construct the four-vector
[(~, ~ )1 field for a massless particle of helicity ±1 .
In the four-vector
representation, we have simpl y
D,u,,{A} = 1LA,,
It is conventional to write the coefficient function u. here in terms of a
`polarization vector' e,,,
so that Eq. (5 .9.8) gives
Also, Eqs . (5.9.12) and (5 .9.14) read here
(5.9 .17)
(5.9 . 15 )
(5.9 .19)
(5.9.20)
Eq. (5.9.19) requires that (up to a constant which can be absorbed into
the coefficients and ).),
(5 .9.21 )
But then Eq . ( 5.9.20) would require also that a + ifl -- 0, which is impos-
sible for general real a, fl. We therefore cannot satisfy the fundamental

250
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
requirement (5.9.14) or (5,9.10); instead, we have here
D'a, (W(O, 0C,fl))e'(k, +t) -- S1'),(a,#)R~,(0)e'(k, +1)
IC I
We have thus come to the conclusion that no four-vector field can be
constructed from the annihilation and creation operators for a particle of
mass zero and helicity ±1 .
Let's temporarily close our eyes to this difficulty, and go ahead anyway,
using Eqs. ( .9,18 and (5.9.2 1) to define a polarization vector for arbitrary
momentum, and take the field as
a,(X) = f
d3p (2,g)-'/'(2~' )-1/2
~ [ep(p,o)eXap,o) + e,,{P, a }*e- ~P"ar-l (p, -a)] .
(5.9 .23
We will come back later to consider how such a field can be used as an
ingredient in a physical theory.
The field (5 .9.23) of course satisfies
Other properties of the field follow from those of the polarization vector.
(We shall need these properties of the polarization vector later when we
come to quantum electrodynamics.). Note that the Lorentz transformation
(P ) that takes a massless particle momentum from k to p may be written
as a `boost' (I pl) along the z-axis which takes the particle from energy
Jkl to energy I PIk followed by a standardized rotation R( P) that takes the
z-axis in to the d irection of p. Since e''(k,+ 1) is a purely spatial vector
with only x and y components, it is unaffected by the boost along the
z-axis, and s o
In particular, e°(k, + 1 ) = 0 and k - e( k,±l) = 0 so
and
It follows that
a°{x} = 0
and
(5 .9.25)
(5 .9.26)
(5 .9.27)
( 5 .9.28 )
V - a(x) = 0 .
(5 .9. 29

5. 9 Massless Particle Fields
25 1
As we shall see in Chapter 9, these are the conditions satisfied by the
vacuum vector potential of electrodynamics in what is called Coulomb or
radiation gauge.
The fact that ao vanishes in all Lorentz frames shows vividly that aP
cannot be a four-vector. Instead, Eq. (5.9.22) shows that for a general mo-
mentum p ond a general Lorentz transformation A, in place of Eq . (5.9.6)
we have
so that under a general Lorentz transformation
(5.9.30)
(5.9.31 )
where Q(x,11) is a linear combination of annihilation and creation
o p-
erators, whose precise form will not concern us here. As we will see in
more detail in Chapter S, we will be able to use a field like al`(x) as an
ingredient in Lorentz-invariant physical theories if the couplings of a ~'(x)
are not only formally Lorentz-invariant (that is, invariant under formal
Lorentz transformations under which ~~ --+ AP,, a''), but are also invariant
under the `gauge' transformations a,, - + aA + aYO. This is accomplished by
taking the couplings of u U to be of the form a,,ju, where jP is a four-vector
current with 0,,jp = 0.
Although there is no ordinary four-vector field for massless particles of
belicity ±1, there is no problem in constructing an antisymmetric tensor
field for such particles. From Eq . (5.9.22) and the invariance of k " under
the little group we see immediate]} that
D'u, ( W (0, a, fl)) D V, ( W (0, o~, fl)) (Ve`(k, + 1) - ka eP (k, + 1) )
== e±iO (Ve'(k, + 1) - VeO(k, + 1))
(5.9 .32)
This shows that the coefficient function that satisfies Eq. (5-9-6) for the
antisymmetric tensor representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group
is (with an appropriate choice of normalization )
uyw(Pi ±1) = i(27z )-1/ 2 (2p)-312 [Pu
e'' (p, ± 1 ) - p`'e" (p, ±1)
] ,
(5 .9 . 3 3 )
where eAl{ p, ±1) is given by Eq .
( 5 .9.25). Using this together with
Eq. (5.9.23) gives the general antisymmetric tensor field for massless par-
ticles of helicity ±1 in the form
(5 .9 .34)
Note that this is a tensor even though & is not a four-vector, because
the extra term in Eq . (5 .9.31) drops out in Eq . (5.9.34). Note also that
Eqs. (5 .9.34), (5.9.24), (5 .9.28), and (5 .9.29 ) show that f~` satisfies the

252
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
vacuum Maxwell equations :
OJUfPV = 0 ,
PauV
(5 .9.35 )
(5 .9.36 )
To calculate the commutation relations for the tensor fields we need
sums over helicities of the bilinears ell e" . The explicit formula (5 .9. 1)
gives
k1kJ
Gr=t 1
and so, using Eq. ( 5 . 9.5) ,
ei~~ ~
Oej(p,
ff
)
.
-~ t
P
iPi
A straightforward calculation gives then
(5 .9.37 )
V,l V(x), J p,,(J )~ J = (27r)`
3 H'U{l OV~~ + th~ 09~~ + qY6 OVt+ p - ` f V 6 OP"PJ
x J d'p(2po)-'
[JKJ2e ipx _ 1A12e-ip,x
I -
This clearly vanishes for x O = y° if and only if
K[' = I A12
(5 .9.39 )
in which case since feu is a tensor the commutator also vanishes for all
space-like separations .
Eq. (5.9.39 ) also implies that the commutator of
the aJ` vanishes at equal times, and as we shall see in Chapter 8 this is
enough to yield a Lorentz-invariant S-matrix . The relative phase of the
creation and annihilation operators can be adjusted so that K = A; the
fields are then Hermitian if the particles are their own charge-conjugates,
as is the case for the photon .
Why should we want to use fields like aP( x) in constructing theories of
massless particles of spin one, rather than being content with fields like
fl"(x) with simple Lorentz transformation properties? The presence of the
derivatives in Eq. (5.9.34) means that an interaction density constructed
solely from f,,V and its derivatives will have matrix elements that vanish
more rapidly for small massless particle energy and momentum than one
that uses the vector field a,, . Interactions in such a theory will have
a correspondingly rapid fall-off at large distances, faster than the usual
inverse-square law. This is perfectly possible, but gauge-invariant theories
that use vector fields for massless spin one particles represent a more

5.9 Massless Particle Fields
253
general class of theories, including those that are actually realized in
nature.
Parallel remarks apply to gravitons, massless particles of helicity ±2 .
From the annihilation and creation operators for such particles we can
construct a tensor .R~,,,, with the algebraic properties of the Riemann-
Christoffel curvature tensor : antisymmetric within the pairs O,v and p,d,
and symmetric between the pairs. However, in order to incorporate the
usual inverse-square gravitational interactions we need to introduce a field
h., that transforms as a symmetric tensor, up to gauge transformations
of the sort associated in general relativity with general coordinate trans-
farmations. Thus in order to construct a theory of massless particles of
helicity ±2 that incorporates long-range interactions, it is necessary for
it to have a symmetry something like general covariance . As in the case
of electromagnetic gauge invariance, this is achieved by coupling the field
to a conserved "current' Of", now with two spacetime indices, satisfying
012 8111 = 0. The only such conserved tensor is the energy-momentum
tensor, aside from possible total derivative terms that do not affect the
long-range behavior of the force praduced .'* The fields of massless parti-
cles of spin j ~ 3 would have to couple to conserved tensors with three
or more space#ime indices, but aside from total derivatives there are none,
so high-spin massless particles cannot produce long-range forces .
** ~
The problems we have encountered in constructing four-vector fields for
helicities ±1 or symmetric tensor fields for helicity ±2 are just special cases
of a more general limitation. To see this, let's consider how to construct
fields for massless particles belonging to arbitrary representations of the
homogeneous Lorentz group . As we saw in section 5 . 6, and representation
D(A) of the homogeneous Lorentz group can be decomposed into (2A +
1)(2B + I)-dimensional representations (A, B), for which the generators of
the homogeneous Lorentz group are represented by
0'il )Q'b",Qb - 'FiJk [(Jk1A))ara bb'b + Vk {")) b'b bdu]
V MLIKat, -i [(J(A))a'a 6h1b - (Jk'B))b'b ba' a
where JW are the angular-momentum matrices for spin j. For 0 infinites-
If Bi'1-"YN is a tensor current satisfying d~,, 8R I- " ;` , = 0, then f d37G BaK . .. YN is a conserved quantity
that transforms like a tensor of rank N - 1 . The only such conserved tensors are the scalar
`charges' associated with various continuous symmetries, and the energy-momentum four-vector .
The conservation of any other four-vector, or any tensor of higher rank, would forbid afl but
forward collisions .

254 5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
imal, D(R(O)) = 1 + i
23 9, so Eqs. (5,9.12) and (5.9.13) give
and so uab (k, cr) and v,,b(k, rr) must vanish unless a = a+b and or = -a- b,
respectively. Also, letting oc and P become infinitesimal in Eq . (x.9 .1 4) gives
o = l
31 +
O1) Lib,Afhf u CIy FJr I~, (,T )
_ (-J1A) + aJ~'~u~rb(k, a) + (-.1iB) - iJ~$ ) }at~ U~b+(k, ~ ) a
or more si mply
1
2
) ad
J(B) + i J('))hY Uab' (k, a) = 0
These require that u,,b(k, (7) vanishes unless
a = -A, h = + B
(5.9.40 )
and the same is obviously also true of v,,b (k, a). Putting this together, we
see that a field of type (A, B), can be formed only from the annihilation
operators for a massless particle of helicity a and the creation operators
for the antiparticle of helicity -a, where
a = B - A. (5.9.4 )
For instance, the (Z, 0) and (0,
1 ) parts of the Dirac field for a massless
particle can only destroy particles of helicity - ~ and + ; respectively,
and create antiparticles of felicity + z and - z, respectively . In the 'two-
component' theory of the neutrino, there is only a ( ~ = 0) field and its
adjaint, so neutrinos have helicity - and antineutrinos helicity + z in
this theory.
By the same methods as in Section 5.7, it can be shown that the (j, 0) and
(U, j ) fields for massless particles of spin j (i.e., helicity +j) commute with
each other and their adjoints at space-like separations if the coefficients
of the annihilation and creation terms in Eq. (5.9.1) satisfy Eq . (5.9.39 ).
The relative phase of the annihilation and creation operators may then be
adjusted so that these coefficients are equal. It is-easy to see that the fields
for a massless particle of spin j of type (A , A + j) or (B + j, B) are just
the 2Ath or 2Bth derivatives of fields of type ( OJ) or (j, O), respectively,
so these more general fields do not need to be considered separately here .
We can now see why it was impossible to construct a vector field for
massless particles of helicity ±1 . A vector field transforms according to

Problems
255
the ( z, ; ) repre sentation, and hence according to Eq . (5 .9. 9) can only
describe helicity zero. (It is, of course, possible to construct a vector field
for helicity zero -just take the derivative 0,,0 of a massless scalar field
0.) The simplest covariant massless field for helicity ± 1 has the Lorentz
transformation type (1, D) (D (0, 1 ) ;; that is, it is an antisymmetric tensor
fi~V - Similarly, the simplest covariant massless field for helicity ±2 has the
Lorentz transformation type (2, 0) E) (0, 2) : a fourth rank tensor which l ike
the Rieman n-Christoffel curvature tensor is antisymmetric within each
pair of indices and symmetric between the two pairs.
The discussion of the inversions P, C, T given i n the previous section can
be carried over to the case of zero mass with only obvious modifications .
Problems
1. Show that if the zero-momentum coefficient functions satisfy the
conditions {5.1 . 3} and (5.1.24), then the coefficient functions (5 .1 .21)
and {5.1 .22} for arbitrary momentum satisfy the defining conditions
Eqs. (5 . 1.19) and ( 5 . 1 ,20) .
2. Consider a free field ip'(x) which annihilates and creates a self-
charge-conjugate particle of spin ~ and mass rM :~ D. Show how
to calculate the coefficient functions u'( p, a), which multiply the
annihilation operators a(p, cr) in this field, in such a way that the
field transforms under Lorentz transformations li ke a Dirac field
~i( with an extra four-vector index p . What field equat ions and
algebraic and reality conditions does this field satisfy? Evaluate the
matrix Pill (p), defined (for p 2 = --rn2} by
What are the commutation relations of this field? How does the field
transfatm under the inversions P, C, T ?
I Conside r a free field h,`°(x) satisfying hP'(x) = h''y(x) and hAy(x) = 0,
which annihilates and creates a particle of spin two and mass m *
0. Show how to calculate the coefficient functions O''( P, cr), which
multiply the annihilation operators a(p, a ) in this field, in such a way
that the field transforms under Lorentz transformations like a tensor .
What field equations does this field satisfy? Evaluate the function
pYV,"•.(p), defined by

256
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticle s
What are the commutation relations of this field ? How does the field
transform under the inversions P, C , T?
4. Show that the fields for a massless particle of sp i n j of type (,A, A+})
or (B + j, B ) are the 2Ath or 2Bth derivatives of fields of type (0, j)
or (f, D), respectively.
5. Work out the transformation properties of fields of transformation
type (,ls O) + (0a1) for massless particles of helicity ±j under the
inversions P, C, T .
6. Consider a generalized Dirac field W that transforms according to
the (J, D) + ( 0,,j) representation of the h omogeneous Lorentz gaup.
List the tensors that can be formed from products of the components
of W and Wt. Check your result against what we found for j = i,
7. Consider a general field Wab describing particles of spin j and mass
:~ 0, that transforms according to the (A, B) representation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group. Suppose it has an interact ion Hamil-
tonian of the form
where .Il'~ is an external c-number current. What is the asymptotic
behavior of the matrix element for emitting these particles for energy
E m and definite helicity? (Assume that the Fourier transform of
the current has values for different a, b that are of the same order of
magnitude, and that do not depend strongly on E . )
References
1. The point of view adopted in this chapter was presented in a series
of papers : S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 133, B131 8 (1964) ; 134, B882
(1964) ; 138, B98 8 (1965) ; 181, 1893 ( 1969), A similar approach has
been followed in unpublished lectures by E . Wichmann.
2. N. Bohr and L. Rosenfeld, Kgl. Danske Vidensk. Selskrxb Mat.-Fys.
Medd., No. 12 (1933) (translation in Selected Papers of Leon Rosen-
feld, ed, by R. S. Cohen and J. Stachel (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1979)) ;
Phys. Rev. 78, 794 (1950) .
3. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A11 7, 610 (1928).
4. E. tartan, Bull. Soc. Math. France 41, 5 3 (1913).

References
257
5. See, e.g., J. M. Jauch and F. Rohrlich, The Theory of Photons and
Electrons -(Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, MA, 1955) : Appendix A2 .
6. See, e.g., H. Georgi, Lie Algebras in Particle Physics (Benjamin/Cu-
mmings, Reading, MA, 1982) : pp. 15,198 . The original reference is
1. Schur, Sitz. Preuss. Akad., p. 406 (1905).
7. T D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Whys . Re v. 104, 254 (1956).
8. See, e.g., B. L. van dux Waerden, Die gruppentheoretische Meth-
ode in der Quantenmechanik (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1932) ; G. Ya.
Lyubarski, The Applications of Group theory in physics, translated
by S. Dedijer (Pergarnon Press, New York, 1960) .
9. Rarity and J. Schwinger, Pays. Rev. 60, 61 (1941).
10. See, e.g., A. R. , Edmonds, Angular Momen tum in Quantum Mechanics,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957} : Chapter 3 .
11. S.Feinberg, Phys. Rev. 181, 1893 (1969), Section V.
12. M . Fierz, Hedv. Phys. Acta 12, 3 (1939) ; W. Pauli, Whys . Rev. 5$, 71 6
(1940). Nora-perturbative proofs in axiomatic field theory were give n
by G. iluders and B. Zumino, Phis . Rev. 11 0, 1450 {195$} and N.
Burgoyne, Nuovo Cimento 8, 807 (1958). Also see R. F. Streater and
A. S. Wightman, PCT, Spin & Statist ics, and All That (Benjamin,
New York, 1968) .
13. Fields in the (j, 0) + (0, j) representation were introduced by H . Joos,
Fortschr. Phis. 10, 65 (1962) ; S. Weinberg, Ph}rs . Rev. 133, B1318
(1964) .
14. A. R. Edmonds, Ref. 10, or M. E . Rose, Elementary Theory of Angular
Momentum (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1957) : Chapter III .
1 5. G. Selo and D. Zwanziger, Phys. Rev . 186, 1337 ( 1969) ; 18$, 221 8
( 1969 ) ; A.
Wightman, in Proceedings of the Fifth Coral Gables
Conference on Symmetry Principles at High Energy, ed. by T. Gude-
hus, G . Kaiser, and A. Perlmutter (Gordon and Breach, New York ,
1969) ; B. Schroer, R. Seiler, and J. A. Swieca, Phys. Rev. D 2, 2927
(1 970 ) ; and other references quoted therein .
1 6. C. R . Nappi and L. Witten, Phys. Rev. D 40, 1095 (1989) ; P. C .
Argyres and C. R . Nappi, Phys. Lett. B224, 89 (1989).
17. G. Liiders, Kong. Dansk. Vid. Selskab, Mat.-Fys. Medd. 28, 5 (1954) ;
Ann. Whys. 2, 1 (1957) ; W Pauli, Nuovo Cimento 6, 204 (1957). When

258
5 Quantum Fields and Antiparticles
Coders first considered how the inversions are related, it was still
taken for granted that P is conserved, so his theorem stated that C
conservation is equivalent to T invariance .
1 8. R. Jost, HeIv . Phys. Acta 30, 409 (1957) ; F.I Dyson, Phys. Rev. 110,
579 (1958). Also see Streater and Wightman, lief. 12.

The Feynman Rules
In previous chapters the use of covariant free fields in the construction
of the Hamiltonian density has been motivated by the requirement that
the S-matrix satisfy Lorentz invariance and cluster decomposition con-
ditions. With the Hamiltonian density constructed in this way, it makes
no difference which form of perturbation theory we use to calculate the
S-matrix ; the results will automatically satisfy these invariance and clus-
tering conditions in each order in the interaction density. Nevertheless,
there are obvious practical advantages in using a version of perturba-
tion theory in which the Lorentz invariance and cluster decomposition
properties of the S-matrix are kept manifest at every stage in the calcu-
lation. This was not true for the perturbation theory used in the 1930s,
now known as `old-fashioned perturbation theory', described at the begin-
ning of Section 3 .5. The great achievement of Feynman, Sch finger, and
Tomonaga in the late 1940s was to develop perturbative techniques for
calculating the S-matrix, in which Lorentz invariance and cluster decom-
position properties are transparent throughout. This chapter will outline
the diagrammatic calculational technique first described by Feynman at
the Poconos Conference in 1948 . Feynman was led to these diagrammatic
rules in part through his development of a path-integral approach, which
will be the subject of Chapter 9. In this chapter, we shall use the ap-
proach described by Dyson' in 1949, which until the 1970s was the basis
of almost all analyses of perturbation theory in quantum field theory,
and still provides a particularly transparent introduction to the Feynman
rules.
6.1 Derivation of the Rules
Our starting point is a formula for the S-matrix, obtained by putting
together the Dyson series (3.5. 10) with expression (4.2.2) for the free-
particle states
259

260
6 The Feynman Rules
SP1,7i Ro~d~ti2 ; . ..
Pl~lnl ; l~2ff2n2 ;"'
1:4
N
E
! Id xi . . . d XN(Oo,
-a(FtcT1n1) [ P a 1 t)
x TfJOXI) . . . X(XN)Jat(P1e_T1nJat(P2cr2n2) . . . 4)0)
N=O
As a reminder : p, a, and n label particle momenta, spin, and species ;
primes denote labels for particles in the final state ; (Do is the, free-particle
vacuum state; a and at are annihilation and creation operators ; T in-
dicates a time-ordering, which puts the
(x} in an order in which the
arguments x° decrease from left to right; and
(x) is the interaction
Hamiltonian density, taken as a polynomial in the fields and their adjo ints
each term
i being a product of definite numbers of fields and field
adjoints of each type. The field of a particle of species n that transforms
under a particular representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group (with
or without space inversions) is given by
~IW = (2 7Z)-3/2f d3
P [u(p} Cr, n) a(ps u, n) eip •x
C r
Here nc denotes the antiparticle of the species n, and exp(±ip • x) is
calculated with po set equal to p I + M,; . The coefficient functions u?
and ae depend on the Lorentz transformation properties of the field and
the spin of the particle it describes ; they were calculated in Chapter
5. (For instance, in the scalar field the ue for a particle of energy E
is simply (2E)-1/7, while in a Dirac field ue and v,, are the normalized
Dirac spinors introduced in Section 5 .5 .) The index ef on the field should
here be understood to indicate the particle type and the representation of
the Lorentz group by which the field transforms, as well as including a
running index labelling the components in this representation. There is no
need to deal separately with interactions that involve derivatives of fields ;
from our point of view, the derivative of a fleld (61 .3) is just another
field described by (6.1.3), with different u,, and v~ . We will here make a
distinction between some particle species that we arbitrarily call `particles',
for instance electrons, protons, etc ., and those we call `antiparticles', such
as positrons and antiprotons. The field operators that destroy particles and
create antiparticles are called simply `fields' ; their adjoins, which destroy
antiparticles and create particles, are called `field adjoints' .
Of course,

6.1 Derivation of the Rules
26 1
some particle species like the photon and 70 are their own antiparticles ;
for these the field adjoints are proportional to the fields.
We now proceed to move all annihilation Kperators to the night in
Eq. (6.1 .1), repeatedly using for this purpose the commutation or anti-
commutation relations :
+6'(P' - P)bafa6wn (6. 1.4)
a(p a n)a(p'cr'n')
±a(PVW)a(p an)
(6.1 .5)
at(P a n)a'{p 'cr'n'} ±a l (P {a'nl )at( P an) (6.1 .6
(and likewise for antiparticles), the ± sign on the right being - if both
particles n, n' are fermions, and + if either or both are bosons. Whenever
an annihilation operator appears on the extreme right (or a creation
operator on the extreme left), the corresponding contribution to Eq . (6 .1 .1)
vanishes, because these operators annihilate the vacuum state :
0p'afi( p cr n) = 0 .
The remaining contributions to Eq. (6.1 . 1) are those arising from the delta
function terms on the right-hand side of Eq . (6.1.4), with every creation
and annihilation operator in the initial or final states or in the interaction
Hamiltonian density paired in this way with some other annihilation or
creation operator .
In this way, the contribution to Eq. ( 6.1.1) of a given order in each of
the terms j in the polynomial _VO(tp(x),Vt(x)) is given by a sum, over
all ways Kf pairing creation and annihilation operators,2 of the integrals
of products of factors, as follows :
(a) Pairing of a final particle having quantum numbers p ', a', nr with a
field adjoint Wt.(x) in i(x) yields a factor
[aii' 4Tfn% Wt(x)1 + == (2n)-'1'e-ie-Xu;(P fafn') ,
(6.1 .9)
(b) Pairing of a final antiparticle having quantum numbers p ', cr', rt" With
a field We(x) in ,
f(x) yields a factor
CAI
f d r n"), vC IJC~],, = (27Z)-3/2 e-iP"-ve (p rffl n) . (6 . 1 .10)
(c) Pairing of an initial particle having quantum numbers p, ff,iT with a
field ipe(x) in i(x) yields a factor
1w,,(x), at(pern)] -

262
6 The Feynman Rules
(d)
Pairing of an initial antiparticle having quantum numbers p, a, n'
with a field adjo int ~~ (x ) in
.-
a(x) yields a factor
[4x),at(p u n')]+ _ (2,g )-'1' e`P"'U* (p a n) . (6 . 1 . 12)
(e) Pairing of a final particle (or antiparticle) having numbers p ', a', ra'
with an initial particle (or antiparticle) having quantum numbers p, a, n
yields a factor
[aWcr'n'), a'(p a n)] , = 63(p I - War',gr6wn -
(6.1 .13 )
(f) Pairing of a field W& ) &x~ in i(x) with a field adjoint Trn(y) in QYPj (Y )
yields a factor*
O(X - Y) ~Ve' W, W r'n I (Y) ] , ± 0 (Y - X) [T
(Y), we- (X)] ,
-i (X, Y) , (6. 1 . 14)
where y+ and ip- are the terms in ip that destroy p articles a nd create
antiparticles, respectively
ipe+(x)
(2,A)-"' f d3P
uAP ~ n) d"'a(P a n )
Recall that O(x - y ) is a step function, equal to + 1 for x° > Y° and zero
for x° < y° . These step functions appear in Eq. (6.1 .14) because of the
time-ordering in Eq. (6.1. 1) ; we can encounter a pairing of an annihilation
field W+(x) in
(x) with a creation field W+t(Y) in
(Y) only if fi(x)
was i nitially to the left of ,ma(y) in Eq. (6.1 . 1), i.e ., if xO YO ; similarly,
we encounter a pairing of an annihilation field V-t(y) in
(y ) with a
creation field W- ( x) in (x) only if (y ) was initially to the left of {x}
in Eq. (6.1 .1), i.e., if yo
x°. (The + sign in the second term i n (6. 1 .14) will
be explained a little later.) The quantity (6. 1.14) is known as a propagator ;
it is calculated in the following section .
The 5-matrix is obtained by multiplying these factors together, along
wi th additional numerical factors to be discussed below, then integrating
over x l . . , xv , then summing over all pair i ngs, and then over the numbers
of interaction of each type.
Before filling in all the details, it will be
convenient first to describe a diagrammatic formalism for keeping track
of all these pairings .
If the interaction A(x) is written in the normal-ordered form, as in Eq, ( 5_ 1 _33), then there is no
pairing of fields and field adjoints in the some interaction . Otherwise some sort of regulari7ation
is needed to give meaning to d,~,(0).

6. 1 Derivation Qf the Rule s
p
C5 n
{2 n } 312
x
fal
~ , x
E °p-
TlYP 6 n)
(2 n) 3 12
~~
(d)
>0 0<
x
►~ , v
(f)
I
X VQ (P Q~n f
{2 n } 3r2
N
263
X
C tP
n)
(2 R) 1/2
P (T n
P
or
n
T}
Y
(e)
- i A gm (x
y)
Figure 6.1 . Graphical representation of pairings of operators arising in the
coordinate-space evaluation of the S-matrix . The expressions on the right are the
factors that must be included in the coordinate-space integrand of the S-matrix
for each line of the F'cynmar, diagram .
The rules for calculating the S-matrix are conveniently summarized in
terms of Feynrraan diagrams. (See Figure 6.1 .) The diagrams consist of
points called vertices, each representing one of the 'j(x), and lines, each
representing the pairing of a creation with an annihilation operator. More
specifically ;
-r. , fc
p a n
e
X
(a) The pairing of a final particle with a field a.djaint in one of the (x)

264
6 The Feynman Rules
is represented by a line runn ing from the vertex representing that
'(x)
upwards out of the diagram, carrying an arrow pointed up wards.
(b)
The pairing of a final antiparticle with a field in one of the -*'(x) is
also represented by a line running from the vertex representing that "C(x)
upwards out of the diagram , but carrying an arrow pointed downwards .
(Arrows are omitted throughout for particles like y, Ic0, etc. that are their
own antiparticles. )
(c) The pairing of an initial particle with a field in one of the
(x) is
represented hyaline running into the diagram from below, ending in the
vertex representing that -yf(x), carrying an arrow pointed upwards.
(d) The pairing of an initial antiparticle with a field in one of the
(x) is also represented by a line running into the diagram from below,
ending in the vertex representing that fi(x) , but carryi ng an arrow pointed
downwards .
(e)
The pairing of a final particle or antiparticle with an initial particle
or antiparticle is represented by a line running clear through the diagram
from bottom to top , not touching any vertex, with an arrow pointed
upwards or downwards for particles or antiparticles, respectively.
(f) The pairing of a field
in
-X,'7(x) with a field adjoint in -Ye(y) is
represented by a line joining the vertices representing
.e(x) and
(y ),
carrying an arrow pointing from y to x.
Note that arrows always point in the direction a particle is moving,
and opposite to the direction an antiparticle is moving. (As mentioned
above, arrows should be omitted for particles like photons that are their
own antiparticles.) The arrow direction indicated in rule (f) is consistent
with this convention because a field adjoint in
j(y) can either create a
particle destroyed by a field in
j(x), or destroy an antiparticle created
by a field in j(x). Note also that since every field or field adjoint in
A"';(x) must be paired with something, the total number of lines at a
vertex of type i, corresponding to a term j(x) in Eq. ( 6. 1 . 2), is just equal
to the total number of field or field adjoint factors in
j (x).
Of these
lines, the number with arrows pointed into the vertex or out of it equals
the number of fields or field adjoints respectively in the corresponding
interaction term.
To calculate the contribution to the S-matrix for a given process, of a
given order Ni in each of the interaction terms
;(x) in Eq. (6.1 .2), we
must carry out the following steps :
(i) Draw all Feynman diagrams containing Nj vertices of each type
i, and containing a line coming into the diagrams from below for each
particle or antiparticle in the initial state, and a line going upwards out
of the diagram for every particle or antiparticle in the final state, together

6. 1 Derivation of the Rules
265
with any number of internal lines running from one vertex to another,
as required to give each vertex the proper number of attached lines . The
lines carry arrows as described above, each of which may point upwards
or downwards. Each vertex is labelled with an interaction type i and
spacetime coordinate ~'. Each internal or external line is labe lled at the
end where it runs into a vertex with a field type ~ (corresponding to the
field T/(x) or Vt(x) that creates or destroys the part icle or antiparticle at
that vertex), and each external line whe re it enters or leaves the diagram
is labelled with the quantum numbers p, a, ra or p', ff', no of the initial or
final particle (or antiparticle) .
(ii) For each vertex of type i, include a factor --i (from the
(-i)N
in Eq. (6.1.1)) and a factor gj (the coupling constant multiplying the
product of fields in
j(x)}. For each line running upwards out of the
diagram, include a factor (6.1.9) or (6.1.10), depending on whether the
arrow is pointing up or down. For each line running from below into the
diagram, include a factor (6.1.11) or (6.1.12), again depending on the arrow
direction. For each line running straight through the diagram include a
factor (6.1 .13). For each internal line connecting two vertices include a
factor (6.1 .14).
(iii) Integrate the product of all these factors over the coordinates
x1, X2, . . . of each vertex .
(iv) Add up the results obtained in this way from each Feynman diagram.
The complete perturbation series for the S-matrix is obtained by adding
up the contributions of each order in each interaction type, up to whatever
order our strength permits .
Note that we have not included the factor 11N! from Eq. (6.1 .1) in
these rules, because the time-ordered product in Eq. (6. 1 .1) is a sum over
the N! permutations of x I x2 . . . xrv, each permutation giving the same
contribution to the final result . To put this another way, a Feynman
diagram with N vertices is one of N!
diagrams, which differ only
in permutations of the labels on the vertices, and this yields a factor of
N! which cancels the 11N! in Eq. (6.1 .1) . (There are exceptions to this
rule, discussed below.) For this reason, henceforth we do not include more
than one of a set of Feynman diagrams that differ only by relabelling the
ver#ices .
In some cases, there are additional combinataric factors or signs that
must be included in the contribution of individual Feynman diagrams-
(v) Suppose that an interaction ,(x) contains (among other fields and
field adjoints) M factors of the same field. Suppose that each
Kf these
fields is paired with a field adjaint in a different interaction (different for
each one), or in the initial or final state. The first of these field adjoints

266
6 The Feynmarz Rules
Figure 6.2. Example of a graph requiring extra combinatoric factors in the
S-matrix. For an interaction involving, say, three factors of some field (as well
as other fields) we usually include a factor 11 3? in the interaction Hamiltonian,
to cancel factors arising from sums over ways of pairing these fields with their
adjoints in other interactions. But in this diagram there are two such factors of
1/3! and only 3! different pairings, so we are left with an extra factor of 1/3! .
can be paired with any one of the M identical fields in -01i(x) ; the second
with any one of the remaining M - 1 identical fields ; and so on, yielding
an extra factor of N1 !. To compensate for this, it is conventional to define
the coupling constants g i so that an explicit factor 11M! appears in an y
j(x) containing M identical fields (or field adjaints .) For instance, the
interaction of Mth order in a scalar field O(x) would be written g OM/ M t.
(More generally, one often also displays an explicit factor of 11M
? when
the interaction involves a sum of M factors of fields from the same
symmetry multiplet, or when for this or and other reason the coupling
coefficient is totally symmetric or antisymmetric under permutations of
M boson or fermion fields, )
However, this cancellation of ?factors is not always complete . For
instance, consider a Feynman diagram in which the Al identical fields
in one interaction j(x) are paired with Ai corresponding field adjoints
in a single other interaction
j(Y). (See Figure 6.2.) Then by fallowing
the above analysis, we find only M! different pairings (since it makes
no difference which of the field adjoints we call the first, second,
. . .) ,
cancelling only one of the two factors of 11MT? in the two different
interactions. In this case, we would have to insert an extra factor of 1/ M ?
by hand' into the contribution of such a Feynman diagram .
Other combinatoric factors arise when some of the permutations
Kf
vertices have no effect on the Feynman diagram . We noted earlier that the
factor 11N! in the series ( b.1 . 1 ) is usually cancelled by the sum over the
N! diagrams that differ only in the labelling of the 1V vertices . However,
this cancellation is incomplete when relabelling the vertices does not
yield a new diagram. This happens most commonly in the calculation
of vacuum-to-vacuum 5-matrix elements in a theory with a quadratic
interaction where M may depend on external fields . (The
physical significance of such vacuum fluctuation diagrams is discussed
in detail in Volume II . ) The Feynman diagram of Nth order in A is a

6.1 Derivation of the Rules 26 7
ring with N corners. (See Figure 6.3 . ) There are only (N - 1)! different
diagrams here because a permutation of labels that moves each label to
the next vertex around the ring yields the same diagram. Hence such a
graph is accompanied with a facto r
(N - 1 )?
1
' (6. 1 .1?)
(vi) In theories involving fermion fields, the use of Eqs . ( 6.1.4)-( 6.1 .6) to
move annihilation and creation operators to the right and left introduces
minus signs into the contribution of various pairings . To be specific, we
get a minus sign wherever the permutation of the operators in Eq. ( 6. 1 .1)
that is required to put all paired operators adjacent to one another (with
annihilation operators just to the left of the paired creation operators)
involves an odd number of interchanges of fermion operators. (This is
because to compute the contribution of a certain pairing, we can first
permute all operators in Eq . (6.1 .1) so that each annihilation operator
is just to the left of the creation operator with which it is paired, ig-
noring all commutators and anticomrnutators of unpaired operators, and
then replace each product of paired operators with their commutators or
antic:ommutators.} One immediate consequence is to produce the minus
sign in the relative sign of the two terms in Eq . (6.1 .14) for the fermion
propagator. Whatever permutation puts the annihilation part W+(x) of a
field in (x) just to the left of the creation part y~+f (yt ) of a field adjoint
in. tr(y), the permutation that puts the annihilation part y)-~(Y) of the
field adjoint just to the left of the creation part V-(x) of the field involves
one extra interchange of fermian operators, yielding the minus sign in the
second term of Eq. (6.1.14) for fermions.
In addition, minus signs can rise in the contribution of whale Feynman
diagrams. As an example, let us take up a theory in which the sole
interaction of fermions takes the for m
fnik
where g(,,k are general constants, y((x) are a set of complex fermion fields,
and
..(x) are a set of real bosonic (but not necessarily scalar) fields . (Not
only quantum cle krodynarnics, but the whole `standard model' of weak,
electromagnetic, and strong interactions, has fermionic interactions that
can all be put in his form.) Let us first take up the process of fermion-
fermion scattering, 12 - - ►1'2', to second order in A . The fermion operators
in the second-order term in Eq . (6.1 .1) appear in the order (with obvious
abbreviations)
There are two connected diagrams to this order, corresponding to the

268
6 The Feynman Ru les
Figure 6.3. An eighth-order graph for the vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude with
particles interacting only with an external field. In this diagram the external field
is represented by wiggly lines . There are 7! such diagrams, differing only by
relabelling the vertices, and not counting as different those labellings that simp ly
rotate the ring. The factor 1/8! from the Dyson formula (6 .1 .1) is therefore not
entirely cancelled here, leaving us with an extra factor 1/8 .
pairings
an d
(See Figure 6 .4.) To go from (6.1 .19) to (6.1 .20) requires an even permuta-
tion of fermianic operators . (For instance, move W(x) past three operators
to the right, and then move a(l') past one operator to the right .) Thus
there is no extra minus sign in the contribution of the pairing ( 6.1 . 20).
This in itself is not so important ; the overall sign of the S-matrix does not
matter in transition rates, and in any case depends on sign conventions
for the initial and final states . What is important is that the contributions
of pairings (6.1 .20) and (6.1 .21) have opposite sign, as can be seen most
easily by noting that the only difference between these two pairings is
the interchange of two ferrnionic operators, a(1' ) and a(2') . In fact, this
relative minus sign is just what is required by Fermi statistics : it makes
the scattering amplitude antisymmetric under the interchange of particles
1' and 2' (or I and 2) .
However, it must not be thought that all sign factors can be related in
such a simple way to the antisymmetry of the final or initial states, even in
the lowest order of perturbation theory. To illustrate this point, let's now
consider fermion-antifermion scattering, 12' --+ 1'2'x, to second order in
the same interaction (6 .1 .15 ). The fermionic operators in the second-order

6. 1 Derivation of the Rules
1 '
2 '
> ------------
<
1
2
2'
-------------
2
269
Figure 6.4.
The connected second-order diagrams for fermior ►-fermion scattering
in a theory with interaction (6. 1 . 18). Here s traight lines represent fe rrnions ; dotted
lines are neutral bosons. There is a minus sign difference in the contribution s of
these two diagrams , arising from an extra interchange of fermion operators in
the pairings represented by the second diagram.
term in Eq. (6.1.1) appear in the order :
Here again there are two Feynman diagrams to this order, corresponding
to the pairings
and
(6.1 .23 )
(6.1 .24)
(See Figure 6.5.) To go from (6.1 .22) to {6. 1 .23} requires an even permu-
tation of fermionic operators (for instance, move ~)(x) past two operators
to the left and move ipf(y) past two operators to the right) so there is
no extra minus sign in the contribution of the pairing ( 6.1. 23 ). On the
other hand, to go from ( 6.1 .22) to (6. 1.24) requires an odd permutation
of fermionic operators (the same as for (6 .1.23), plus the interchange of
t(x) and rat(Y)) so the contribution of this pairing does come with an
extra minus sign, `
Additional signs are encountered when we consider contributions of
higher order. In theories
Kf the type considered here, in which the
interactions of fermions all take the form (6.1 .18), the fermian lines i n
Actually, this sign is not wholly unrelated to the requirements of Fermi statistics . The same
field can destroy a particle arld create an antiparticle, su there is a relation, known as `crossing
symmetry', between processes in which initial particles or antiparticles are exchanged with final
antiparticles or particles . In particular the amplitudes for the process 12' - 1'2'" are related to
those for the `crossed' process 12' - 1'2 ; the two pairings (6.1 .23) and (6 . 1 24) jusl correspond
to the two diagrams for this process, which differ by an interchange of 1 and 2' or ]' and 2),
so the antisymmetry of the scattering amplitude under interchange of initial (or final) particles
naturally requires a minus sign in the relative contribution of these two pairings . However,
crossing symmetry is not an ordinary symmetry it involves an analytic continuation in kinematic
variables} and it is difficult to use it with any precision for general processes .

270
6 The Feyntrtan Rules
11
2
{,
t'
2
{
2
Figure 6.5. The connected second-order diagrams for fermion-antifermion scat-
tering in a theory with interaction ( 6. 1 .18). Here straight lines represent fermions
or antiferrnions, depending on the arrow direction ; dotted lines are neutral
bosons . There is again a minus sign difference in the contributions of these two
diagrams, arising from an extra interchange of fermion operators in the pairings
represented by the second diagram ,
general Feynman diagrams form either chains of lines that pass through
the diagram with arbitrary numbers of interactions with the boson fields,
as in Figure 6.6, or else fermianic loops, like that shown in Figure 6 .7 .
Consider the effect of adding a ferminnie loop with M corners to the
Feynman diagram for any process . This corresponds to the pairing of
fermionic operators
On the other hand, these operators appear in Eq . (6.1.2) in the order
To go from (6. 1.26) to (6. 1 .25) requires an odd permutation of fermionic
operators (move Q(xi) to the right past 2Nf - 1 operators) so the con-
tribution of each such fermionic loop is accompanied with a minus sign .
These rules yield the full ,S-matrix, including contributions from pro-
cesses in which various clusters of particles interact in widely separated
regions of spacetime . As discussed in Chapter 4, to calculate the part
of the S-matrix that excludes such contributions, we should include only
connected Feynman diagrams. In particular, this excludes lines passing,
clean through the diagram without interacting, which would yield the
factors (6.1 .1 3).
To make the Feynman rules perfectly clear, we will calculate the low-
order contributions to the S-matrix for particle scattering in two differen t
theories.

6. 1 Derivation qf the Rules
27 1
i '
2.
-►
2
ti
L
Figure 6.6. The connected second-order diagrams for bosun-fcrtnion scattering
in a theory with interaction ( 6.1 .18). Straight lines are fermions ; dashed lines are
ricutral bosons.
ti
1 ,
r •
3 y
it
ti
Figure 6.7 . The lowest-order connected diagram for boson . bison scattering in
a theory with interaction (6 .1 .19) . Such fermion loop graphs yield an extra minus
sign, arising from permutations of the paired fermion fields .
Theory I
Consider the theory of fermions and self-ch arge-conjugate bosons with
interaction (6 .1 .18).
The lowest-order connected d iagrams for fermion-
boson scattering are shown in Figure 6.6 . Following the rules outlined in
Figure 6. 1, the corresponding S-matrix element i s
'SPi 'c ~ nj P2~d2~z
pla~ nl P2 ~:~~~ s
O'm' kim
1
f d
x [e-'P' .Y4'(P2 c2n~) e`
P2
'xUk{Pz(TaH2 )
+ e-'P~ xZdk(P2 Id2In'2)~'~PZ vUk,( P2U2n2), (61 .27)

272
6 The Feynman Rule s
(The labels I and 2 are used here for fermions and bosons, respectively.)
For fermion-fermion scattering there are also two second-order diagrams,
shown in Figure 6.4. They yield the S-matrix element
SPl n1 P2'a ~n ~ , PI ff I 61 P 2 0-2 42 = (2;T )-6
(-i)2g
►fir lt#~c f 9 ~ ~ I ~G
O'm'klm
xu;~r (Pz , aZ " ? ) uif (i~i' ai ni ) U~(P? C2 n2 ~~r( P I (TI n i )
X I
d4 X J d4y e- p~ 'xe- 6Ye Pz 'XeiP
1-Y (-i)Ak'klX - YI
with the last term indicating subtraction of the preceding term with
interchange of particles !' and 2' (or equivalently I and 2). There are
no second-order graphs for boson-boson scattering in this theory ; the
lowest-order graphs are of fourth order, such as that shown in Figure
6.7. More specific examples of formulas like Eqs . (6.1 .27 ) and (6.1 .28)
will be given in Section 6.3, after we have had a chance to evaluate the
propagators and go over to momentum space.
A different . It is instructive also to look at an example with a trilinear
interaction in which all three fields are the same, or at least enter into the
interaction in a symmetric way.
Theory If
Now take the interaction density to be a sum of terms that are trilinear
in a set of real bosonic fields 0&}
(X) =
t
gem, O~'~~ Om (x)On (x)
(6.1 .29)
~'mn
with g,,,,,, a real totally symmetric coupling coefficient. Suppose we want
to consider a scattering process
1 2 -+ 1'2' to second order in this
interaction. Each of the two vertices must have two of the four external
lines attached to it. (The only other possibility is that one Kf the external
lines is attached to one vertex and three to the other vertex, but the
vertex with three external lines attached to it would have no remaining
lines to connect it to the other vertex so this would be a disconnected
contribution .) The additional line required at each vertex must then just
serve to connect the two vertices to each other. There are three graphs of
this type, differing in whether the other external line that is attached to
the same vertex as line I is line 2 or 1' or 2' . (See Figure 6,8.) Following
the rules given above, the contribution to the S'-matrix from those three

6.1 Derivation of the Rules
1r L+
t
f
1
t
4
f
4
1
S
1
f
~
r t
yf
ti^}
1 G
lF 2 '
♦
t
k~ ~r
y
f
'r . . . . .' . . .(
rr
2
2
4 ~
r r
1
Y R
{ ti J
. ti
1 2
273
Figure 6.8. The connected-second order diagrams for boson-boson scattering in
a theory with interaction (6 . 1 .29).
diagrams is
SR jdinj P ~O2ny
Picini P2 a-n2
-1 )2 (Ga)-'
~ere fF 9 iTtM f TTtrr
d4'X
dy ~ - iAerf, rr ~~ ~ ~~)
U + P+ 1t3fTt + 11lr1
. /
I
* !
J
7 1 + "
s
1 ! !
!
Y
luf
I I I
P
2 2
2
x
x uM(P1al n i )e'pl v UM,{P2a2n? ) eIP'-y
+ U14149 i0I)e
ip''xu~( Pjainl)etP1'X
* u~!( A 2a2ni)e `P' x ue( Pit7ini)e'Pt~ x
F
x u yyirlp
(71 n' ) ~~Ep
1 Y UiiilP2U 7 Yd2~ ~rP2 }f
1
! .
(6.1 .30)
To be even more specific, if the bosons in this theory are spinless particles
of a single species, then we write the interaction (6.1 .29) in the form
= go 3 / 3 t
and the S-matrix element (6-1 .30) for scalar-scalar scattering i s
SPY, P'2 , P1 P2
=
2
(27r)6
f 6E1 E,'EjE !
x [exp(_i(pi + P'2) ' x) Cxp(i(pl + P2) ' A
* exP{i(P1 - Pi ) ' x) exP(a(P2 - Pz) - Y)
+eXP(r(P1 -Pa) ' X) eXP (i(P2 - Pi ) ' Y)
1
(6.1 .31)

274
6 The Feynman Rules
where dAx - y} is the scalar field propagator, calculated in the next
section. There are no terms of third order in {x}, or of any odd order
in 41(x) .
6.2
Calculation of the Propagator
We now turn to a calculation of the propagator {6.1.14}, an essential
ingredient in the Feynman rules that arises in the pairing of a field
W&) with a field adjoint ~m ( Y). Inserting Eys. {6.1.15} and (6 .I .16) in
Eq. (6.1 .14), and using the commutation or anticommutation relations for
annihilation and creation operators, we have immediatel y
f
Gr
Lr
In the course of calculating commutators and anticommutators in Chapter
5, we showed that
- ~
~~ (P ff n )u~(P u n) _ (2/p2 + m~ Pr„: (p,
p2 + rra~ (6.2 .2)
- ~
u,,,(p c n)v*(p c n)
+ (2 ~p~tn,2,
Ptm (-p, - Vp ~ m.2)
( G.2.3)
where P/,,, (P,cc)) is a polynomial in p and w . (Here as in Eq. (6.2 .1 ), the top
and bottom signs refer to bosonic and fermianic fields, respectively.) For
instance, if V,~,{x} and
,, (y) are scalar fields O(x) and 0(y ) for a particle
of spin zero, then we have simply
PW = I .
If ~)&) and V,,(y) are Dirac fields for a particle of spin then
(6 .2.4)
P"M(P) = [(-kw" +MVJ ,,, , (6 .2.5 )
where l and m are here four-valued Dirac indices . (The matrix P appears
here because we are considering the pairing of ~~~(x} with
V'~(Y). It is
absent in the pairing of V,,(x) with ~t(Y) - 1.pt(Y)p•) If W~(x) and W" (}' ) are
vector fields V~,(x) and Y, (y ) for a particle of spin one, then

6.2 Calculation of the Propagator
275
More generally, if ~~~{x} and W,„(y) are components of fields ~ ,b(x) and
Vab(y) for a particle of spin j, in the irreducible ( A, B ) and ( A, B ) repre-
sentations of the homogeneous Lorentz group, the n
[lr f]r 5 Fb f
a
P
I aa
exp(+ 0 - - P'))] by
X exp(-Op J(,!))] aa, exp(+Op . J(")] ~;, 1) (6.2.7)
where Binh 0 = P I/m, while a, b, a, run by unit steps from -A to +A, -B
to +B, -A to +.!, and -B to +B, respectively, and likewise for the
running indices a', b', ac', and R.
Inserting Eqs. (6.2.2) and (6.2.3) in Eq. (6.2.1) yields
Y) = O(X - Y)P~,, -i-) A+(x - Y )
+ 0 (Y - -X) P"'M
i-f-) A,(y - x)
Ux
where K+(x) is the function introduced in Chapter 5
(6.2.$)
(6.2.9)
in which po is taken as +
V + m2 .
To go further, we must say a bit about how to extend the definition
of the polynomial P(p). Eqs . ( .2 .2) and (6.2.3) only define P(p) for four-
momenta on the mass shell'. i.e., with p° = ± p -}- W. Any polynomial
function of such four-momentum can always be taken as linear in ffl,,
because any power (p°)2'' or {p°} 2v + l can be written as
(p' + m')ti' or
P°(A2 +m2), , respectively. Thus we can define a polynomial P(')(q) by the
conditions that
p, L) (P) = p (P)
(for p° =
p2 + rra2
~ILI(q) = Pl° )(9) + &(')(q) (for general q") ,
(6.2.10)
where P((,1) are polynomials depending only on q. We can now use the
relations
ax ~X_O
(recall that O(x) has a unit step at x°, and is otherwise constant) to move

276
6 The Feyn man Rules
the derivative operators to the left of the 0 functions in Eq. (6 .2.8)
(_ OX
(X1 - Y") P 2) (-iV) A+ (x - y) - A+(y - x)] , (6-2,12 )
where KF is the `Feynman propagator'
However, for x° = 0 the function
K+(x) is even in x, since a change
x --* -x in Eq. (6.2.9) can be compensated by a change p -* - p in the
integration variable. We can therefore drop the second term in Eq. (6.2.12),
and write simply
A,,. (x3 J' ) = P~.~) (_-i-_) Q~,-{x - y} . (6.2. 1 4)
f~ x
It will be most useful to use the expression of the Feynman propagator
as a Fourier integral. The step functions in Eq . (6 .2.13 ) have the Fourier
representation'
p(-+
) ds
(6.2.15 )
This can be combined with the Fourier integral (6.2.9) for K+(x). We
introduce new integration variables, q = p, qO = p4 + s in the first term of
Eq . (6.2.13), yielding
1
-~A,F(X)
2~i,
d3q dq
o exp(iq x - iq°x°)
(27z)3 V2
9 + W
X ~ 00
- ~q2_+M2
iE)
qO - ~q2 + m2 - ie)
Combining denominators and adopting afour-dirnensional notation, we
have simply
q, + rn, -ie
where q2 = q 2 -- (q°)2 . (In the denominator we have replaced 2,-
q
+ era
with e, because the o nly important thing about this quantity is tha t it
To prove this, note that if t > 0 then the contour of integration can be clascd with a large
clockwise semi-circ le in the lower half-plane, so the integral picks up a contribution of -2gi
from the pole at s = -iF. If t < 0 then the contour can be closed with a large cou nter-clockwise
.w1t7i-circle in the upper half-plane, where the integrand is analytic, giving an integral equal to
zero .

6.2 Ca lculat ion of the Propagator 277
is a positive infinitesimal.) This shows incidentally that AF is a Green's
function for the Klein-Gordon differential operator, in the sense that
with boundary conditions specified by the --re in the denominator :
as shown by Eq. (6.2.13), dF(x) for x0 ,--* hoc or x0 ---# -ac involves
only positive
Kr negative frequency terms, exg(-ix0
p + m) or
exp(+ix()
p2 + m 2), respectively .
Inserting Eq. (6.2.16) in Eq. (5.2.14) now gives the propagator as
f
q2 + M2 - ic
(6.2 .18 )
There is one obvious problem with this expression. The polynomial P(p)
is Lorentz-covariant when p is on the mass shell, p 2 = -rn2 , but in Eq.
( 5 . 2.18) we integrate over all q 1', not restricted to the mass shell. The
polynomial p(L)( q ) is defined for general q1' to be linear in q', a condition
that clearly does not respect Lorentz covariance unless the polynomial is
also linear in each spatial component q~ as well. We can instead always
define our extension of the polynomial P (p) to general four-momenta qt,
which we shall call simply P(q), in such a way that P(q) is Lorentz-
covariant for general qP, in the sense that
where At, is a general Lorentz transfarniation, and D(A) is the appropriate
representation of the Lorentz group. For instance, for scalar, Dirac, and
four-vector fields, these covariant extensions are obviously provided b y
just replacing p' with a general four-momentum q" in Eqs. (6 .2.4), (6 . 2.5 ),
and (6.2.6). For the scalar and Dirac fields, these are already linear in q
so here there is no difference between P (L) (q ) and P(q ) :
p~~~(q ) = P~„.(R) (scalar, Dirac fields) . (6.2 .19 )
On the other hand, for the vector field of a spin one particle, the 00
components of the covariant polynomial P,ti,(q ) _ qf,, + m-2 q,,q, are
quadratic in q0, so here there is a difference :
(6.2 .20
(The extra term here is fixed by the two conditions that it must cancel
the (4o)2 term in Poo(q), and must vanish when q P is on the mass shell.)
Inserting this in Eq. (6.2.18 gives the propagator of a vector field as

27 8
6 The Feynman Rules
The first term is manifestly covariant, and the second term, though not
covariant, is local, so it can be cancelled by adding a local non-covariant
term to the Hamiltonian density. Specifically, if Ve(x) interacts with other
fields through a term Y,,(x).IP{x} in (x), then the effect of the second
term in Eq . (6.2.21) is to produce an effective interactio n
- i"Y"ff (x) aP(x) ] [ - aJV (x)] I - ir~z-'6~~~ ] .
(The factors -i are the usual ones which always accompany vertices and
propagators. The factor is needed because there are two ways to pair
other fields with
,~~{x}, differi ng in the interchange of JP and P .) Thus
the effect of the non-covariant second term in Ey, (622 1 ) can be cancelled
by adding to (x) the non-covariant term
A""NC(X) = -~*"ff W =
I
~JO(X)l
(6.2.22)
It is the singularity of the equal-time commutators of vector fields at zero
separation that requires us to employ a wider class of interactions than
those with a scalar density. A detailed non-perturbative proof of the
Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix in this theory will be given in the next
chapter .
It should not be thought that this is solely a phenomenon associated
with spins j 1 . For instance, consider the vector field associated with a
particle of spin j -m 0, equal (as discussed in Chapter 5) to the derivative
0~0(x) of a scalar field . For the pairing of this field with a scala r
the polynomial P(p) on the mass shell i s
while the pairing of 0,*x) with O,O*(y ) yields a polynomial
(6.2.23)
(6.2.24)
The covariant polynomials for general off-shell four-momenta q" are
again obtained by just substituting qP for #` in Eqs. (6.2.23) and (6.2.24) .
Eq. (6.2.23) shows that PJq) is already linear in qa, so here there is no
difference between FJ g} and P~~'}(q ). However, for Eq . (6.2.24) there is a
difference :
A'11
0
A
17
so here the propagator is
q, e
f q2 + tn2
A J7
(6.2.25)
(6.2.26)

6 .2 Calcu latio n of the Propagator
279
Just as before, the non-covariant effects of the second term may be
removed by adding to the interaction a non-covariant ter m
X
;5 [J()(X)]
(6.2.27 )
where P(x) is here the current which multiplies 0,,O(x) in the covariant
part of z~(x).
It should be clear that at least for massive particles) the effects of
non covariant parts of the propagator can always be cancelled in this way
by adding non-covariant local terms to the Hamiltonian density . This is
because the numerator P (11)(q ) in the propagator must equal the covariant
polynomial P~„, (q ) when q~` is on the mass shell, so the difference between
P'2(q) and P~,(q) must contain a factor q 2 + m'. This factor cancels
the denominator (q2 + M2 - jr) in the contribution of this difference to
Eq. (6 .2.18), so Eq . ( . 2. 18) always equals a covariant term plus a term
proportional to the delta function bl(x - y ) or its derivatives. The effect
of the latter term may be cancelled by adding to the interaction a term
quadratic in the currents to which the paired fields couple, or in their
derivatives. In what follows, it will be assumed tacitly that such a term
has been included in the interaction, and in consequence we shall use
the covariant polynomial P4,(q ) in the propagator ( 6,2.1$ ), and will thus
henceforth drop the label `V .
It may seem that this is a rather ad hoc procedure. Fortunately, in the
canonical formalism discussed in the following chapter, the non-covariant
term in the Hamiltonian density needed to cancel non-covariant terms
in the propagator arises automatically . This, in fact, farms part of the
motivation for introducing the canonical formalism .
Before closing this section, it may be useful to mention some other defi-
nitions of the propagator, equivalent to Eq . ( 6.2.1), that appear commonly
in the literature. First, taking the vacuum expectation value of Eq . (6.1 .14)
gives
0
± O(y - x)
[Vm * ( Y ), ~),. W] +
(6.2.28)
(Here {A B . . . }() denotes the vacuum expectation value
((DO , AB
- -
- (Do)- )
Both +(x) and y~-' (y) annihilate the vacuum, so only one term in each
commutator or anticnmmutatar in Eq . (6.2 .28) actually contributes to the
propagator ,
-~~~~~~~Y) T ~(x-Y)~~'~ ~~~Wam~~3'}~0~~~~'-?~~~~ ►n~~Y)~'~' ~~)~o . (6.2.29 )

280
6 The Feynman Rules
Also, W-t and zp+ would annihilate a vacuum state on the right , and
W- and ap+f would annihilate the vacuum state on the left, so w+ and
y- may be replaced everywhere in Eq . (6 . 2. 9 ) with the complete field
This is often writte n
where T is a time-ordered product, whose definition is now extended"
to all fields, with a minus sign for and odd permutation of fermionic
operators.
6.3 Momentum Space Rules
The Feynman rules outlined in Section 6 .1 specify how to calculate the
contribution to the S-matrix of a given Nth order diagram, as the integral
over N spacetime coordinates of a product of spacetime-dependent factors .
For a final particle (or antiparticle) line with momentum p' ,' leaving a
vertex with spacetime coordinate x", we get a factor proportional to
exp(-ip' • x), and for an initial particle line with momentum pA entering
a vertex with spacetime coordinate xy, we get a factor proportional
to exp(+ip • x). In Section 6.2 we saw that the factor associated with
an internal line running from y to x can be expressed as a Fourier
integral, over off-shell four-momenta q, , of an integrand proportional to
exp(iq, (x - y) ). We can think of q,' as the four-momentum flowing along
the internal line in the direction of the arrow from y to x . Hence the
integral over each vertex's spacetime position merely yields a facto r
(27r )454 (1: p + 1: q - 1: pt - E q ;)
,
(6 .3,1 )
where E p' and Y_ p denote the total four-momentum of all the final or
initial particles leaving or entering the vertex, and Z q' and q denote
the total four-momentum of all the internal lines with arrows leaving or
entering the vertex, respectively . Of course, in place of these integrals over
xA s, we now have to do integrals over the Fourier variables q~`, one for
each internal line.
These considerations can be encapsulated in a new set of Feynman rules
This is not inconsistent with our previous definition of the lime-ordered product of Hamiltonian
densities in Chapter 3, because the Hamiltonian density can only contain even numbers of
fermionic ]'told factors.

6.3 Momentum Space Rules
P'W n '
(2
(a)
cy n
(2312 vp
P
(d)
,
PC
--) .~ n
P
312 -4 r
~
(2v~ ( P a n")
4
(b)
___)r r +
~
I1
or
P cyn
28 1
(2 p,ff n)
P a n
53
p'a n e
(e)
NI-
(q )
YTS
4 2
2
(f)
Figure 6.9 . Graphical representation of pairings of operators arising in the
momentum-spare evaluation of the S-matrix, The expressions on the right are
the factors that must be included in the momentum space integrand of the
S-matrix for each line of the Feynman diagram .
(see Figure 6.9) for calculating contribution to the S-matrix as integrals
over momentum variables :
(i) Draw all Feynman diagrams of the desired order, just as described
in Section 6.1. However, instead of labelling each vertex with a
spacetime coordinate, each internal line is now labelled with an off-
mass-shell four-momentum, considered conventionally to flow in the

282
6 The Feynman Rule s
direction of the arrow (or in either direction for neutral particle lines
without arrows . )
(ii) For each vertex of type i, include a factor
-- t{27r}4gi 64 (1: p + 1: q - 1: p-
q')
(6.3 . 2)
with the momentum sums having the same meaning as in (6 .3.1). This
delta function ensures that the four-momentum is conserved at every
point in the diagram. For each external line runn ing upwards out of
the diagram, include a factor {27r}-3/2u~( p 'U'rt' ) or (2n)-_1j2 a, (p 'a'nr),
for arrows pointing upwards or downwards, respectively. For each
external line running from below into the diagram, include a factor
(27r)-312U~(pan) or (2 ;T)-3/2V;(pUra), for arrows pointing upwards or
downwards, respectively . For each internal line with ends labelled ~
and m, the arrow pointing from in to e, and carrying a momentum
label q", include as a factor the integrand of the integral for -iA,,,,,(q )
- i(27r )J4pln7 (q)(R' + Mr -red . (6 .3 .3 )
A reminder : for scalars or antiscalars of four-momentum q, the us
and v s are simply (2q0)-1/`, while the polynomial P(q) is unity. For
Dirac spinors of four-momentum p and mass M. the us and vs
are the normalized Dirac spinors described in Section 5 .5, and the
polynomial P(p) is the matrix (-aT-,,pP + M)fl .
(iii) Integrate the product of all these factors over the Maur-moment
carried by internal lines, and sum over all field indices e, m,
(iv) Add up the results obtained in this way from each Feynman diagram .
Additional combinatoric factors and fermionic signs may need to be
included, as described in parts (v) and (vi) of Section 6.1 . Examples will
be given at the end of this section .
We have afour-monnentum integration variable for every internal line,
but many of these are eliminated by the delta functions associated with
vertices. Since energy and momentum are separately conserved for each
connected part of a Feynman diagram, there will be C delta functions
left over in a graph with C connected parts. Hence in a diagram with I
internal lines and V vertices, the number of 'independent four-momenta
that are not fixed by the delta functions is I f [ V - Q . This is clearly also
the number L of independent loops :
which is defined as the maximum number of internal lines that can
be cut without disconnecting the diagram, because any such and only

6.3 Momentum Space Rules 283
such internal lines can be assigned an independent four-momentum. We
can think of the independent momentum variables as characterizing the
momenta that circulate in each loop . In particular a tree graph is one
without loops ; after taking the delta functions into account there are no
momentum-space integrals left for such graphs .
For instance, in a theory with interaction (6 .1 .18), the S-matrix (6.1 .27)
for fermion-boson scattering is given by the momentum-space Feynman
rules as
Sp I
dl r~~ P2't7l2n2
- Pig] ni P26V12
n') ul(I)l gin
VlWklm
PrW,,( 9' )
x I d4q (-i(2 ;T)-4 q2
+ M2 -
ti p
+
Uk(P2 f6zn~ }uk+(P2a2r~2)6'(P2 - Pi f - ~`~~ ~ ~P~ - FT + 01
with labels l and 2 here denoting fermions and bosons, respectively. The
momentum-space integral here is trivial, and gives
Spl
rs 'j P:i P2 'OFzn2
PI (Yi n I P2 672r12 - i(27L )-264(p i + P2 ` P 1
P2 )
X
1: g r 'm+kf gmik Ul*,( Ai' n-i ni )UI( Pi (l ~ ~~ )
0{rWOm
X
Pm'm (Fl ' - p] ~
Ukr (P2 ~~2n2 )Uk(P262rI?)
~~1'l P1~~ + IYlm -iF
(p2' - pj)2 + M;~ - if
In the same way, the S-matrix element (6.1 .28) for fermion-fermion scat-
tering in the same theory is
SP i 'ffini P2+¢ n 1
p, ui ni P2 aY n:
i(27t )-2 64(p
t + P2 - P 1 - P2)
Pk +k( Pir -PI )
X
grn'mk' 9i'tk
These results illustrate the need for a more compact notation . We may
define a ferminn-boon coupling matrix
(6-3-7)
The matrix elements (6.3 .5) and (6 .3.6 ) for fermion-boson and fermion--

284
6 The Feyrtan R ule s
fermion scattering can then be rewritten in matrix notation a s
SA i fa~ni P2 'din' , , P i0- 1 n I P2 0-2 n2 = ~(27t)-2d4(p 1 + P2 - P1 - P2~
Wk
2
2
+
(t(p1 an.) ref
P(P2~ -
MI --~ i~-FkU(P i~in~~
x uk( R21'-T?n2)UkF(P2 ff?n2 )
and
SPi
pi'~2W~ , pi ai ni P2 dz n2 -
i(27Z )-2 6 1
lPl + P ? - Pi - F2~
X 57
Pk'k (P l ' - P1
k'k (PI
Mk
(f.3.8 )
x (.ut(p2 r ,g 2 n~ ) rk' u(Pl r 6 1
(.ut(p2 C72 n2)rk U(P i uI n 1 )~
where M2 and m2 are the diagonal mass matrices of the ferrnians and
bosons in Eqs. ( 6.3.8) and (6.3 .9), respectively. The general rule is that in
using matrix notation, one writes coefficient functions, coupling matrices,
and propagators in an order dictated by following lines backwards from
the order indicated by the arrows. In the same notation, the S-matrix for
boson-boson scattering in the same theory would be given by a sum of
one-loop diagrams, shown in Figure 6.7 :
SPI '~j ni Q2'azn2 , Pi u i ni P2aa n4 -' - ~~ (PI + P2 - P 1 T P? )
x Y
uZi (Pi , (-Ti,n1 )uZ~{ pi, a~ , na )Uk,(Pi , ~1, n 1 )Uk,(Ra, ff2} nz )
k,k2k~k2
P (q )
P(q + p')
~
x dq Tr I-'~ z q2+
z - i~
~r 1 (q + pj )2 + 11fi2 _ ie
x rk , (q + p' _ pi) 2 + M2 - a rk2 - (R - P~ )2 + M2 - ie
+ . .. , (6 . 3.10)
where the ellipsis in the last line indicates terms obtained by permuting
bosons 1', 2`, and 2. The minus sign at the beginning of the right-hand
side is the extra minus sign associated with ferrnionic loops. Note that
after elimination of delta functions there is just one momentum space

6.3 Momentum Space Rules
28 5
integral here, as appropriate for a diagram with one loop. We shall see
how to do this sort of momentum-space integral in Chapter
1 1 .
To make this more specific, consider a theory with a Dirac spinor field
W(x) of mass and a pseudoscalar field O(x) of mass m, interacting
through the interaction -ig~VyW (The factor -i is inserted to make
this interaction Hermitian for real coupling constants g . )
Recall that
the polynomial P(q) for the scalar is just unity, while for the spinor it is
L-iYp q}l+M] fl. Also, the u for a scalar of energy E is (2E )- 1 J2, while for the
spinor u is the conventionally normalized Dirac spinor discussed in Section
5.5. Eqs . (6.3 .8), ( 6.3.9), and (6.3.10) give the lowest-order connected S-
matrix elements for fermion-boson scattering, fermion-fermion scattering,
and boson-boson scattering :
SP
IIC' P?
P~ ~~ F~ - -~~~7~ )-2g2 (4 E~ E 2)= '1'6'(P1 + P2 - P1 - P21
r f
ar}~~~~1' W` POP +
+ (U(PI cyi)i5
-
. T5 U(PI al)
( P2
pl)2 + MI
IE
x (42 (;') ~/5 u(P' cr')) (142 (F2)Y5 U(P1 60)
1
X
fir; r~ ~ Pi P~ = -(27r)-6 g2 (16E1 E2EiE2)-1/2 6¢(P1 + P2 - Pi - Pa d
x coq Tr
-, -iyuq" + M
-iyu(q + plly + M
hi
q2 + X12 -
(q + pi )2 + M2 - iF
+
.
. .
where in the last formula the ellipsis indicates a sum over permutations
of particles 2, 1', 2'. The factors J3 in the fermion propagator numerators
have been used to replace uf with u .
Another useful topological result expresses a sort of conservation law
of lines. For the moment we can think of all internal and external lines as
being created at vertices and destroyed in pairs at the centers of internal
lines or when external lines leave the diagram . (This has nothing to do
with the directions of the arrows carried by these lines .) Equating the

286 6 The Feynman Rules
numbers of lines that are created and destroyed then give s
2I+ E =njYz, {6.3.1 1 )
where I and E are the numbers of internal and external lines, Yj are the
numbers of vertices of various types labelled f, and nj are the number of
lines attached to each vertex . (This also holds separately for fields of each
type,) In particular, if all interactions involve the same number nj = n of
fields, then this reads
where V is the total number of all vertices . In this case, we can eliminate
= 1)
f from Eqs. (6.3.4) and (6.3.11). and find that for a connected (i .e ., C
graph the number of vertices is given b y
For instance for a trilinear interaction the diagrams for a scattering
process (E = 4) with L = 0, 1, 2 - . . has V = 2, 4, 6 . . . vertices. In general,
the expansion in powers of the coupling constants is an expansion in
increasing numbers of loops .
6,4 Off the Mass S hell
In the Feynman diagrams for any 5-matrix element all external lines
are on the mass shell' ; that is, the four-momentum associated with an
external line for a particle of mass m is constrained to satisfy p,,Pq = -m2-
It is often important also to consider Feynman diagrams `off the mass
shell', for which the external line energies like the energies associated with
internal lines are free variables, unrelated to any three-momenta. For one
thing, these arise as parts of larger Feynman diagrams ; for instance, a
loop appearing as an insertion in some internal line of a diagram could
be regarded as a Feynman diagram with two external lines, both off the
mass shell .
Of course, once we calculate the contribution of a given Feynman
diagram off the mass shell, it is easy to calculate the associated S-matrix
elements by going to the mass shell, taking the four-momentum p y flowing
along the line into the diagram to have pO = p2 -+m2 for particles in
the initial state and p° = - p! + rrt
for particles in the final state, and
including the appropriate external line factors (2ar)-1/zUe or (2 7E)-31'- V;
for initial particles or antiparticles and (27z)-3/2u* or (2-H )- 312 zi~ for final
particles or antiparticles. Indeed, when we come to the path integral
approach in Chapter 8 we shall find it easiest first to derive the Feynman

6.4 Off the Mass Shell
28 7
rules for diagrams with all external lines off the mass shell, and then
obtain ,S-matrix elements by letting the momenta associated with external
lines approach their appropriate mass shells .
Feynman graphs with lines off the mass shell are just a special case of
a wider generalization of the Feynman rules that takes into account the
effects of various possible external fields . Suppose we add a sum of terms
involving external fields eJx} to the Hamiltonian, so that the interaction
V(t) that is used in the Dyson series (3.5.10) for the 5-matrix is replaced
with
VF(t ) =V ( t) +
dux e,, (x, t) n,, ( x, t) • (6 .4.1)
A
The `currents' op(t) have the usual time-dependence of the interaction
picture
Oa (t) = exp{iHot) o,, (0) exp{-i Ho t} ,
( 6.4.2)
but are otherwise quite arbitrary operators . The S-matrix for any given
transition a then becomes a functional S #, [,-] of the c-number
functions r,,(t). The Feynman rules for computing this functional are
given by an obvious extension of the usual Feynman rules . In addition to
the usual vertices obtained from V(t), we must include additional vertices :
if o,,(x) is a product of rya field factors, then any oa vertex with position
label x must have nu lines of corresponding types attached, and makes a
contribution to the position-space Feynman rules equal to -icA(x) times
whatever numerical factors appear in oa(x ). It follows then that the rth
variational derivative of S#, [e] with respect to F,(x) , eh(y) . . . at e = 0 is
given by position space diagrams with r additional vertices, to which are
attached respectively n,, ray, . . . internal lines, and no external fines . These
vertices carry position labels x,y - - -over which we do not integrate ; each
such vertex makes a contribution equal to -i times whatever numerical
factors appear in the associated current a,
In particular, in the ca::e where these currents are all single field factors,
i.e.,
VF(t) V( i ) +
~ ~ ~
C',
1X
7 t
l Y
l,, (X
7 t)
the rth variational derivative of 5fl,, [e] with respect to e~,(x ) , e,, (y) . . . at
dF = 0 is given by position space diagrams with r additional vertices carry-
ing spacetime la bels x, y - -, to each of w hi ch is attached a single internal
particle line of type ~, m These can be thought of as off-shell external
lines, with the difference that their contribution to the matrix element is
not a coefficient function like (2 7t)-3f2ut( j}, ~)dP` or (27C ) -3/2 tL (p, (7) 8 -ip x
but a propagator, as well as a factor -i from the vertex at the end of

288
6 The Feynman Rules
the line. We obtain a momentum space Feynman diagram with particles
in states o: and # on the mass shell plus r external lines of type e, m
carrying momenta p , p' . . . from the variational derivative
6' SP a [El
by stripping away the propagators on each of the off-shell lines and
then taking the appropriate Fourier transforms and multiplying with
appropriate coefficient functions ue, u~, etc . and a factor (-a)r .
It is very useful for a number of purposes to recognize that there is a
simple relation between the sum. of contributions from all perturbation
theory diagrams for any off-shell amplitude and a matrix element, between
eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian, of a time-ordered product of corre-
sponding operators in the Heisenberg picture. This relation is provided
by a theorem,3 which states that to all orders of perturbation theory '
W 6 6 (Y)
loa(x), -iob(y) - - - I )
1
(6.4.3)
where 0,,(x), etc. are the counterparts of o,(x ) in the Heisenberg picture
n(t) i eff c CiHnr
(6.4.5 )
and Tp+ and Tfl- are `in' and `out' eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian
H, respectively.
Here is the proof. From Eq .
( 3.5.10), we see immediately that the
left-hand side of Eq. (6.43) is
61-S [6]
0C
(-i)N+r
dTj
AN
Ni rX
N-0
For definiteness, suppose that x° x°
. . .
x°. Then we can denote
and
by -ro 1 --- TaN4 all zs greater than x° ; by X11
. ~12V, all zs between and
and so on ; finally denoting by z,.1 - - -crNr all is that are less than x° .
For a single 0 operator, this is a version of the Schwinger action principle.4

6A Off the Mass Shell
289
Eq. (6.4.6) then becomes :
6rSjej
_ i)N+r
IY=O
J'x
f
x°
x
J ~
l~z 0 l • • - dT4N,
0 dT11 . . , dzl NI
fxi
.}x2
E
Np2Vi ... jlfr
xa
x . . . 0a (x, ) TJV(Txl )
. . . y(-CrN,+fix
The factor N f JN4 !Ni ? . . . Nx ! is the number of ways of sorting N r s
into r + I subsets, each containing No, N1 , . . . IVr of these -c s. Instead of
-
summing over No, N1 , • , NT, subject to the condition No + N, + . . . + Nr
N, and then summing over we can just sum independently over
No, ATt, . . . ,IVY, setting N where it appears in (-i)' equal to No + NI +
. . . + N . This gives
0
00" (X,)
(xr ~ -00)(P,,)
(6.4.7)
where
0C
N
11
U(t t) =; Y ( ')
d-r, . . . dTNTJ V(-11) V(TN)J
? Jr
N=o
The operator U(t', t) satisfies the differential equatio n
dt,
with the obvious initial condition
This has the solution
UW , t} = exp (iHot) exp{- iH(t' - t)} exp{- iHa0 = Q-lWA t)
(6 .4.8)
tb.4.9 )
(6.4 .10)
(6.4. 11 )
with n given by Eq . (6.4.5). Inserting Eq. (6 .4.11) in Ey. (6.4,7) and using

290
6 The Feyraman Rules
Eq. (6.4.4), we have
J S [6]
(_Ot (Q(CXD)(DO' 0", (X 1) 0", (X')Q(-OO)q)') (6.4.12)
In deriving this result we supposed that x° ~ x° ~ --- > x~, so we could
just as well replace the product of operators on the right-hand-side with
the time-ordered product :
6S [E]
T 0~1(xl) . . . pOr (.Xe )JQ(-oo)d},
{6.4.13}
But now both sides are entirely symmetric (or for fermions antisymmetric)
in the as and x s, so this relation holds whatever the order of the times
x~ . . . x4. Also, we saw in Section 3 . 1 that (in the sense of Eq . (3 .1 .12) )
Tp± = p+oc?)(DO. (6.4. 14 }
Hence Eq. (6.4A) is the desired result (6.4.3),
Problems
1 . Consider the theory of a real scalar field 0, with interaction (in the
interaction picture) V = g f d3x O(x)'/ 3 ? .
Calculate the connected
S-matrix element for scalar-scalar scattering to second order in g ,
doing all integrals. Use the results to calculate the differential cross-
section for scalar-scalar scattering in the center-of-mass system.
2. Consider a theory involving a neutral scalar field O(x) for a boso n
B and a complex Dirac field y ){x} for a fermion F, with interactio n
(in the interaction picture) V = ig .f dux TFWyMx) O( x).
Draw all
the connected order-g 2 Feynman diagrams and calculate the cor-
responding ,S-matrix elements for the processes F `' + B --* F" + B ,
F + F" --* F + F`, and F+ F --* B + B (where F' is the antiparticle
of F) . Do all integrals .
3. Consider the theory of a real scalar field O{x}, with interaction
V .- g f dux O{x}4/4 !. Calculate the S'-matrix for scalar-scalar scat-
tering to order g , and use the result to calculate the differentia l
scattering cro ss-section.
Calculate the correction terms in the S-
matrix for scalar-scalar scatteri ng to order g2, expressing the resu lt
as an integral over a si ngle four-momentum, but do all x -integrals.

References
29 1
4. What is the contribution in Feynman diagrams from the contraction
of the derivative
. (x) of a Dirac field with the adjoint
m~}~) of
the field ?
5, Use the theorem of Section 6.4 to give expressions for the vacuum
expectation values of Heisenberg picture operators ( TO, 4~(xffQ) and
(To, 7"{<D(x ), (D(y')fTo) in the theory of Problem 1., to orders g and
grespectively.
References
1. F. J. Dyson, Pays. Rev. 75, 486, 1736 (1949) .
2, The formal statement of this result is known as Wicks theorem ; see
G. C . Wick, Whys . Rev. 50, 268 (1950).
3. I do not know who first proved this theorem . It was known in the
early 1950s to several theorists, iDcludi-ng ell-Mann and F E .
Low.
4. J. Schwinger, Phys, Rev . $2, 914 ( 1951).

The Canonical Formalism
Ever since the birth of quantum field theory in the papers of Born, Dirac,
Fermi, Heisenberg, Jordan, and Pauli in the late 1920s, its development
has been historically linked to the canonical formalism, so much so that it
seems natural to begin any treatment of the subject today by postulating a
Lagrangian and applying to it the rules of canonical quantization. This is
the approach used in most books on quantum field theory . Yet historical
precedent is not a very convincing reason for using this formalism. If
we discovered a quantum field theory that led to a physically satisfactory
S-matrix, would it bother us if it could not be derived by the canonical
quantization of some Lagrangian ?
To some extent this question is moot because, as we shall see in Section
7.1, all of the most familiar quantum field theories furnish canonical
systems, and these can easily be put in a Lagz'angian form. However,
there is no proof that every conceivable quantum field theory can be
formulated in this way. And even if it can, this does not in itself explain
why we should prefer to use the Lagrangian formalism as a starting point
in constructing various quantum field theories .
The point of the Lagrangian formalism is that it makes it easy to
satisfy Lorentz invariance and other symmetries : a classical theory with
a Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian density will when canonically quantized
lead to a Lorentz-invariant quantum theory. That is, we shall see here
that such a theory allows the construction of suitable quantum mechanical
operators that satisfy the commutation relations of the Pvincare algebra,
and therefore leads to a Loren tz-invariant S-matrix .
This is not so trivial. We saw in the previous chapter that in theories
with derivative couplings or spins j ~ 1, it is not enough to take the
interaction Hamiltonian as the integral over space of a scalar interaction
density ; we also need to add non-scalar terms to the interaction density
to compensate for non-covariant terms in the propagators . The canonical
formalism with a scalar Lagrangian density will automatically provide
these extra terms. Later, when we come to non-Abelian gauge theories
in volume II, this extra convenience will become a necessity ; it would be
292

7.1 Canonical Variables
293
just about hopeless to try to guess at the form of the Hamiltonian in such
theories without starting with a Lorentz-invariant and gauge-invariant
Lagrangian density.
7.1 Canonical Variables
In this section we shall show that various quantum field theories that we
have constructed so far satisfy the commutation rules and equations of
motion of the Hamiltonian version of the canonical formalism . It is the
Hamiltonian formalism that is needed to calculate the S-matrix (whether
by operator or path-integral methods) but it is not always easy to choose
Hamiltanians that yield a Lorentz-invariant S-matrix . In the balance
of this chapter we shall take the Lagrangian version of the canonical
formalism as our starting paint, and use it to derive physically satisfactory
Hamiltonians. The purpose of the present section is to identify the
canonical fields and their conjugates in various field theories, to tell us
how to separate the free-field terms in the Lagrangian, and incidentally to
reassure us that the canonical formalism is indeed applicable to physically
realistic theories .
We first show that the free fields constructed in chapter 5 automatically
provide a system of quantum operators q'(x, t) and canonical conjugates
pn(x, t) that satisfy the familiar canonical commutation or anticommuta-
tion relations :
[q"(x, t)} pjj(y, t)]+ = i63(x -- y)fin ,
(7.1 .1 )
where the subscripts + indicate that these are commutators if either of
the particles created and destroyed by the two operators are bosons, and
anticommutators if both particles are fermions. For instance, the real
scalar field O(x) for aself-charge -conjugate particle of zero spin was
found in Section 5.2 to obey the commutation relation
where K is the function
AW J 2.]cO(27C)3
with k° = + m2 . We note that

294
7 The Canonical Formalis m
(A dot denotes the derivative with respect to the time x° .) It is easy
then to see that the field and its time-derivative ~ obey the equal-time
commutation relations :
Therefore we may define canonical variables
(7 . 1 .4)
(7 . 1 .5)
(7.1 .6)
(7.1 .7)
which satisfy the canonical commutation relations (7 .1 . 1)-(7. 1.3 ).
For the complex scalar field of a particle of spin zero with a distinct
antiparticle, the commutation relations ar e
We may therefore define the free-particle canonical variables as the com-
plex operators
4{x, t} _ (x , t) , (7.1 .8)
Equivalently, writing (01 + i02)/ wi th Ok Hermitian for k = t,2,
we have canonical variables
Pk(X, 0 = ~k (X, 0 ,
(7.1 .11 )
and these satisfy the commutation relations (7.1 .1)-- .(7.1 .3).
For the real vector field of a particle of spin one, the commutation
relations are given by section 5.3 as
M2
1
(We are using 0 rather than V AI for the vector field because we want to
reserve upper case letters here for the fields in the Heisenberg picture.)
Here the free-particle canonical variables may be taken as
f
OV°(x, t)
(7.1 .12)
(7.1 .13)
with i = 1, 2, 3. The reader may check that (7.1.1 2) and (7.1 .13) satisfy
the commutation relations (7 .1 .1)-(7,1 .3), The field equations (5-3-36) and

7. 1 Canonical Variables
29 5
(5.3.38) together with Eq . ( 7.2 . 1 3) allow us to express 0 in terms of the
other variables as
so ~;~° is not regarded as one of the q s. The extension of these results to
complex vector fields may be handled just as for complex scalar fields.
For the Dirac field of a non-ajorana spin ; particle, Section 5 .6 shows
that the anticammutator is
and
Here it would be inconsistent to take W, and f to
canonical variables, because their anticommutator does
equal times. It is conventional instead to define
be independent
not vanish a t
(7.1 .15 )
( 7.1 .1b )
It
is easy then to see that
( 7.1 . 15 ) and
( 7 .1 .1 6) satisfy the canonical
anticommutation relations (7 . 1 . 1)-( 7.1 . 3 ).
For any system of operators that satisfy commutation or anticommu-
tation relations like (7. 1.1)-(7 . 1 . 3), we may defi ne a quantum mechanical
functional derivative : for an arbi trary bosonic functional
,F[R(t),F(t)] of
qn(x, t ) and p,, (x, t) at a fixed time t, we define'
5 F [q (t) a P( t)]
. [Pn(X, t), F[q(t), p(t)]
6F[q(t),p(t)]
[F[q(t), p(t)] , qn(X, t)
( 7.1 . 1? )
(7 . 1 . 1 8)
This definition is motivated by the fact that if F [q(l), p(t)] is written with
all qs to the left of all ps, then ( 7,1.17) and (7.1 .18) are respectively just
the left- and right-derivatives with respect to q ' and pM. That is, for an
'We are here using a notation that will be adopted hencelorlh ; If f (x, v) I's a function of two
classes of variables collectively called x and y, then F[f (y)] indicates a functional that d(Lpends
on the values of f [x, y] for all x at fixed y. By a bosonic functional we mean Kne in which each
term contains only even number-, of fcrrnionic fields .

296
7 The Canonieal Formalism
arbitrary c-number' * variation 6q and 3p of the q s and ps, we have
6F[q(t), p(t)] = dux 1: (5(x, t)
~
6F[q (t), p(t)]
~
qn(xa r)
+ 6 F Lq (t) , P(t)]
6Fn (X, t)
6 Pn\xi 0
For more general functionals we need the definitions (7.1.17) and (7.1 .18)
to pin down various signs and equal time commutators that may appear .
In particular, HO is the generator of time-translations on free-particle
states in the sense that
q'(x, t) = exp(iHot)q'(x, 0) exp(-Wat) ,
p"(x, t) = exp(Wot)P, (x, 0) exp(--iHot) ,
so the free-particle operators have the time-dependenc e
Pn (x, 0
Pn (x, 0 = -i IP't(x, 0, Hol
J Ho
6qn (x, r )
(7 . 1 .1 9)
(?.1 .2U)
(7 .i.2 1 )
We recognize these as the familiar dynamical equations in the Hamiltonian
formalism.
The free-particle Hamiltonian is given as always by
HO
d3 k c~~ (k, u, n) a (k, a, n)
k2 + MI
(7. 1 .23 )
n, (7
This HO may be rewritten in terms of the q s and ps at time t . For instancy,
it is easy to see that for a real scalar field, Eq . (7.1,23) is equal up to a
constant term to the functional
Ho _
d 3X [ ~P2 + ~(Vq)2 + ;M2 q2~ (7.1 .24)
To be more precise, using (7. 1 .7 ) and the Fourier representation of the
scalar field 0, we find that Eq. (7.1 .24) becomes ;
.Ho
f A ko [a(k), a'(k)]
_ ft31C 0 (a(k)a(k) + 16'(k - 1C)) . (7 . 1 .25 )
Where q'tl and p„ are bosunic or fermionic, dqn and bph are understood to commute or anticom-
mute with all fermionic operators, respectively, and to commute with all bosnnk operators.

7.1 Canonical Variables
297
This is the same as Eq. (7. 1 .23), except for the infinite constant term. Such
terms only affect the zero of energy, and have no physical significance in
the absence of gravity,f . Explicit forms for HO as a functional of the q
and p variables for other fields will be given in Section 7 .5 .
It is usual in textbooks on quantum field theory to derive Eq . (7.1.25) as
a consequence of Eq. (7.1.24), which in turn is derived from a Lagrangian
density. This seems to me backward, for Eq. (7.1 .25) must hold ; if
some assumed free-particle Lagrangian did not give
Eq. (7. 1.25) up to
a constant term, we would conclude that it was the wrong Lagrangian .
Rather, we should ask what free-field Lagrangian gives Eq . (7.1 .25) for
spinless particles, or more generally, gives the free-particle Hamiltonian
(7.1 .23). This question may be answered by the well-known Legendre
transformation from the Hamiltonian to the Lagrangian ; the free-field
Lagrangian is given by
LO [q(t), 4 [t)1
::= 1: f d3x p, (x, t ) q' (
, t) - Ho } (7. 1 .26)
n
it being understood that pn is replaced everywhere by its expression in
terms of qn and q' (and, as we shall see, perhaps some auxiliary fields
as weli). For instance, from the Hamiltonian (7 .1.24) and (7.1 .7) we can
derive the free-field Lagrangian for a scalar field :
)2 _
M1
2
Lo
f d'x [pq - lp' - I(Vq
q
f d3X la,o apo _ I M202]
Whatever we suppose the complete Lagrangian of the scalar field may be,
this is the term that must be separated out and treated as a term of zeroth
order in perturbation theory. A similar exercise may be carried out for
the other canonical systems described in this section, but from now on we
shall content ourselves with guessing the form of the free-field Lagrangian
and then confirming that it gives the correct free-particle Hamil#onian .
We have seen that various free-field theories can be formulated in
canonical terms . It is then a short step to show that the same is true of the
interacting fields. We can introduce canonical variables in what is called
the 'Heisenberg picture', defined b y
Q'(x, t) = exp(iH t)q'(x,, 0) exp(-iHt),
{7 . 1 .2$ }
Pn(X, t) = eXp(iH r )PM(X, 0) exp (- iHt),
(7 . 129 )
~ However, charges in such terms due to changes in the boundary conditions for the fields, as
for instance quantizing in the space between parallel plates rather than in infinite space, are
physically significant, and have even been measured .E

298
7
The Canonical Formalism
where H is the full Hamiltonian. Because this is a similarity transformation
that commutes with H, the total Hamiltonian is the same functional of
the Heisenberg picture operators as it was of the q s and PS :
Also , because Eqs. (7.1 .28)-(7.1 .29) define a similarity transformation, the
Heisenberg picture operators agai n satisfy the canonical commutation or
anticommutation relations :
However, they now have the time-dependence
n (X, 0
Pn (x , t) =
i[P,(x, t), H]
--
6H
6 Q (x, t)
{7 .1 .30 )
(7 .1 .31 )
(7 . 1 .32)
(7-1 .33)
(7.1 .34)
For instance, we might take the Hamiltonian for a real scalar field as the
free-particle term (7-1,24) plus the integral of a scalar interaction density
so that in terms of Heisenberg-picture variable s
1(VQ)2 + 1M2 Q2 + .y
H = Jd'x [ 'P' +
_ f (Q)]
(7.1-35)
2 2
2
In this case the canonical conjugate to Q is given by the same formula as
for free fields
P = Q .
(7.1 .36)
However, as we shall see, the relation between the canonical conjugates
P,(x) and the field variables and their time-derivatives is in general not
the same as for the free particle operators, but must be inferred from
Eqs . (7.1 .3 3) and (7.1 .34) .
7.2 The Lagrangian Formalism
Having seen that various realistic theories may be cast in the canonical for-
malism,, we must now face the question of how to choose the Hamiltonian .
As we will see in the next section, the easiest way to enforce Lorentz in-
variance and other symmetries is to choose a suitable Lagxangian and use
it to derive the HarrwiXtonian. There is not much loss of generality in this ; .

7,27 The Lagrangian Formalism
299
given a realistic Hamiltonian, we can generally reconstruct a Lagrangian
from which it could be derived, by reversing the process that we are
going to describe here of deriving Hamiltonlans from Lagrangians. (The
derivation of Eq. (7. 1 ,26) gives one example of this reconstruction .) But
although we can go from Hamil#onians to Lagrangians or Lagrangians
to Hamiltonian, it is easier to explore physically satisfactory theories by
listing possible Lagrangians, rather than Hamiltonians.
The Lagrangian is, in general, a functional' L[T(t), +(t)] of a set of
generic fields V{x, t} and their time-derivatives 'Y'(x, t) . The conjugate
fields II/(x, t) are defined as the variational derivatives* *
F[1(X, t)
a4"', (x, t)
The equations of motion are
W(x , t)
(7.2.1 )
(7.2.2 )
These field equations can be usefully reformulated as a variational prin-
ciple. We define a functional of V(x) over all spacetime, known as the
action
Under an arbitrary variation of T(x), the change in I [T] is
~I [~'] =
dt dux
dT~(x) +
~
J~((x)
Eck;
[JT/(x) ~
'I}(x
)
Assuming that 6'P'(x) vanishes for t --i, ±oo, we may integrate by parts,
and write
_ I
IL
]
61 [T] = dux ~~'~[x
dt
+,`~ W(x)
.
(7.2.4)
~
6
x)
We see that the action is stationary with respect to all variations b T"' that
vanish at t --* Sao if and o nl y if the fields satisfy the field equations (7.2.2) .
Recall that ire the notation we use for f'unctaonals, a functional like L in which we display
the variable i is understood to depend on the fields V(x . t) and V(x, i), With the undisplayad
variables { and x running over a ll their values at a fixed value of the displayed variable t . We
use upper case `3's and 1 1 s to indicate that these are interacting rather than free fields .
Because the `f's and Ts do not in general satisfy simple commutation or anticommulation
relations, we cannot give a simple definition of the functional derivatives oc :curing here as we did
for functional derivatives with respect to the Qs and Ys in the previous section . [nstead, we will
simply specify that the variational derivatives are what they would be for c-numbel variables,
with minus signs and equal-time commutators or anticornmutatars supplied as needed to make
the formulas correct quantum-mechanically . As far as I know, no -important issues hinge on the
details here .

300
7
The Canonical Formalism
Because the field equations are determined by the functional I [T),
it is natural in trying to construct aLoren tz-invariant theory to make
IM a scalar functional. In particular, since I[T] is a time-integral
of L[T(t),T(t)], we guess that L should itself be a space-integral of an
ordinary scalar function of T(x) and OT(ac)JOxP, known as the Lagrangian
density
L[T(t), T(t)]
f d'x Y (T(x, t), VT(x, t), ~V(x, t))
so that the action is
f d
4X y (T(x),OT(x)/OW')
,
(7.2.s)
(?.Z .6)
All field theories used in current theories of elementary particles have
Lagrangians of this form .
Varying V(x) by an amount 6V(x), and integrating by parts, we find
a variation in L :
6L =
dux ~~ 6T,,' +
'f V6 `I~r
a(VT )
d3X
O OY ) W
P, Te a(w )
so (with obvious arguments suppressed)
6 L
aY
OY
e " - ~W' - ' - t
T O(Wf)
6L
0.Y
d Ve
--
OT"
.
The field equations (7 .2 . 1) then read
a
Oxju O(OtYI/Ox'A)
aY
OT"
.
+ ~
&Pr
Ale
+ O
(7.2.7)
(7.2.8 )
(7.2.9)
These are known as the Euler-Lagrange equatio ns. As expected, if 2 is a
scalar then these equations are Lorentz-invariant .
In addition to being Loren#z-invariant, the action I is required to be
real . This is because we want just as many field equations as there are
fields. By breaking up any complex fields into their real and imaginary
parts, we can always think of I as being a functional only of a number
of real fields, say N of them. If I were complex , with independent real
and imaginary parts, then the real and imaginary parts of the conditions
that I be stationary (the Eyler-Lagrange equations) would yield 2N field
equations for N fields, too many to be satisfied except i n special cases.
We will see in the next section that the reality of the action also ensures

7.2 The Lagrangian Formalism
30 1
that the generators of various symmetry transformations are Hermitian
operators .
Although the Lagrangian formalism makes it easy to construct theories
that will satisfy Lorentz invariance and other symmetries, to calculate the
S-matrix we need a formula for the interaction Hamiltonian . In general,
the Hamiltonian is given by the Legendre transformation
H dux II' (X
a t)4',-(X' t) - L['Y(t), +(t )] -
(7.2.10)
Although Eq . (7 .2.1) does not in general allow 'Pe to be expressed uniquely
in terms of 'F" and III, it is easy to see that Eq. (7.2.14 has vanishing
variational derivative with respect to 'I'1 for any IF satisfying Eq . (7 .2.1),
so in general it is a functional only of V and H~, . Its variational derivatives
with respect to these variables are
- " ~ = I d3 y
nr(y, t) 6 T'~'(Y, 0' - -
6L
d3 6 L
r (Y,)T 6T"(
}
y
~F (
iIH
3~
6 11e (X, t
6 rr (X, t) T
d3y
6L
5kP""(y, t )
where subscripts denote the quantities held fixed in these variational
derivatives . Using the defining equation (7.2.1) for III, this simplifies to
and
6H
6L
6T,"(x, t)
~ n
6T((X,
T
6H
V
The equations of motion (7.2.2) are then equivalent to
6H
( 7 .2.1 1 )
(7 .2 .12)
(7.2.1 3)
It is tempting now to identify the generic field variables V and their
conjugates n, with the canonical variables Qn and P, of the previous
section, and impose on them the same canonical commutation relations
(7. 1,30)-(7.1.32, so that Eqs. (7.2.12) and (7 .2 . 1 3 ) are the same as the
Hamiltonian equations Kf motion (7.1.33) and (7 .1 .34). This is indeed the

302
7 The Canonical Formalism
case for the simple example of the real scalar field (D with non-derivative
coupling. Consider the Lagrangian density
rn 2
2 0' -
J(D)
(7.2 . 1 4)
which can be obtained by adding a real function - ((D) of cD to the
free-field Lagrangian density found in the previous section . The Euler-
Lagrange equations here are
11 (7.2.15 )
From this Lagrangian density, we calculate a canonical conjugate to V
01(b
(7.2.16 )
which is the same as Eq . ( 7.1 .36) if we identify d} and IT with the canonical
variables Q and P . The Hamiltonian is now given by Eq. (7.2. 10) ash
H = /i3.(nth_-
. )
' + ( V~)l +
n~
;2 cDI + (7.2. 17 )
_
dux [ I II
which we recognize as the Hamiltonian (7.I .35). This little exercise should
not be regarded as another derivation of this Hamiltonian, but rather as a
validation of the Lagrangian (7 .2.14) as a possible theory of scalar fields.
Matters are not always so simple. We have already seen in the previous
section that there are field variables, such as the time component of a
vector field or the Hermitian conjugate of a Dirac field, that are not
canonical field variables Q " and do not have canonical conjugates ; yet
Lorentz invariance dictates that these must appear in the Lagrangtans for
the vector and Dirac fields.
From the point of view of the Lagrangian formalism, the special char-
acter of field variables like the time component of a vector field or the
Hermitian conjugate of a Dirac field arises from the fact that although
they appear in the Lagrangian, their time-derivatives do not . We shall
denote the field variables T' whose time-derivatives do not appear in
the Lagrangian as Cr ; the remaining independent field variables are the
t We do not include a free constant factor in the term - 5 0,00RD, because any such constant if
positive can be absorbed into the normalization of Q} . As we shall see, a negative constant here
would lead to a Hamiltonian that is not bounded below- The constant m is known as the bare
mass. The most general Lagrangian that satisfies the principle of rennrmaliaability (discussed in
Chapter 12) is of this form, with .*'(<D) a quartic polynomial in <~ .
In order for if to be interpreted as an energy, it should be bounded below . The positivity of the
first two terms shows that we guessed correctly as to the sign in the first term in Eq . (72A4). The
remaining condition is that _11m'- 0= + ((D) must be bounded below as a function vl' (D.

7.2 The Lagrangian Formalism
canonical variables Q'. The Q' have canonica l conjugates
303
(7.2.18)
and satisfy the commutation relations (7 . 1 .30)-( 7. 1 ,32), but there are no
c anonical conj ugates for the C'. Becau se 6L16& = 0, the Hamiltonian
( 7. 2.10) is in general
H = f
d3 x P, Q~ - L[Q(t), 0(t) , C(t) ] ,
(7 .2. 19)
but this is not yet useful until we express the Cr and
4 in terms of the
Q s and P s. The equations of motion of the Cr involve only fields and
their first time-derivative s
0 _ 6L EQ(t), Q(t), C(t)]
(7 .2.20)
6 Cr(x, t )
In the simple cases to be discussed in this chapter, these equations together
with Eq. (7.2 .18) can be solved to give the C' and 0110 in terms of the Q s
and P s. Section 7 .6 shows how in such cases one can avoid the task of
actually solving for the Cr and T. In gauge theories like electrodynamics
other methods must be used : either choosing a particular gauge, as in
chapter 8, or the more modern covariant methods to be discussed in
Volume 11.
Once we have derived a Hamiltonian as a functional of the Heisenberg
picture Q s and P s, to use perturbation theory we must make a transition
to the interaction picture. The Hamiltonian is time-independent, so it can
be written in terms of the Pn and Q ' at t = Q, which are equal to the
corresponding operators p, and q' in the interaction picture at t -- 0. The
Hamiltonian derived in this way may then be expressed in terms of the
q s and p s of the interaction picture, and split into two parts, a suitable
free-particle term Ho and an interaction V. Finally, the time-dependence
equations ( 7.1.21) and (7.1 .22) and the commutation or anticommutation
relations (7.1 . 1)-(7. 1.2) are used to express the q s and ps in V (t) as linear
combinations of annihilation and creation operators .
We shall present a number of examples of this procedure in Section
7,5; for the moment we will give only one example of the simplest type,
the scalar field with Hamiltonian (7 .2.17) . We split H into a free-particle
term and an interaction
H = H4 + Y
~pd))2 +
m2 cp~~
Ho =f d'x
1 z FI2 +
2
2
V =
d3x
{(D) .
(7.2.21 )
(7.2.22)
(7 .2.23)

3(}4 7 The Canonical Formalism
Here (D and II are taken at the same time t, and H is independent of t,
though HO and V usually are not.
We now pass to the interaction representation . Taking t =Din
Eqs. (7.2.22) and (7.2 .23), we can simply replace 0, Il with the inter-
action picture variables , 7r, since they are defined by Eqs . (7. 1 .28) and
(7. 1 .29 ) to be equal at that time. To calculate the interaction Y(t) in the
interaction picture, we apply the similarity transformation (3 .5.5)
f d'x -ye (O(x, t)) .
The same transformation applied to HO leaves it constant :
HO
exp(iHot) HO exp(-Wo(x ) }
d'x [ 1-n'(x, t) +
1, (VO(X, o)']
.{
The relation between 7c and ~ is dictated by Eq. (7.1 .21 )
JHO
(X,
!
(7.2.24)
(7.2.25 )
{7.2.2b )
(This happens to be the same relation as in Eq. (7.2.16), but as we shall
see this is not to be expected in general .) Also, the equation of motion for
0 is dictated by Eq . ( 7.1 .22) :
60(X, t)
which together with Eq. (7.2.26) yields the field equation s
The general real solution may be expressed as
O(x) = (27r )-3/2
J
d3P(2PD ) -1{2 [eu1a(p) + elpxulw]
(7.2.27)
(7.2 .28 )
with p° = p2-+m2 understood, and a(p) some as-yet-unknown operator
function of p. Eq. (7 .2. 26) then gives the canonical conjugate as
[e'a(p
) In order to get the desired commutation relations ,
[O(X, o' F(Y' o]
{x, o , 0 L Y' ol
[2T(X, 0 , n(y, 0)
= 0 ,
5
(7.2.30)
(7.2.31 )
( 7. x. 3 2)
{7 .x. 33)

7.2 The Lagrangian Formalism
we must take the as to satisfy the familiar commutation relations
[a(p), a*(pf)]
[a(p). a(P f)] =0 .
305
(7.2.34)
(7.2.35 )
Also, we have already shown in the previous section that using these
~
expansions in Eq. (7 .2.25) gives the usual formula (4 .2.i 1) for the free-
particle Hamiltonian, up to an inconsequential additive constant. A s
remarked before, these results should not be regarded so much as a n
alternative derivation of Eqs . (7.2.29), (7.2.34), and (7.2.35) (which were
obtained in Chapter 5 on quite other grounds) but rather as a validatio n
of the first two terms of Eq. (7.2.14) as the correct free-particle Lagrangia n
for a real scalar field . We can now proceed to use perturbation theory to
calculate the S-matrix, taking (7.2.24) as V(t), with the field O{x} given by
Eq. (7.2.29).
The procedures illustrated here will be carried out for examples that
are more complicated and more interesting in Section 7 .5 .
In considering the various possible Lagrangian densities for physical
theories it is common to apply integration by parts, treating as equivalent
and Lagrangian densities that differ only b y total derivatives It is
obvious that such total derivative terms do not contribute to the action
and hence do not affect the field equations. It is also obvious that a
space-derivative term V -
in the Lagrangian density does not contribute
to the Lagrangian and hence does not affect the quantum theory defined
by the Lagrangian.¶ What is less obvious and worth noting here is that
a time-derivative ao ° in the Lagrangian density also does not affect the
quantum structure of the theory. To see this, let's first consider the effect
of adding a term to the Lagrangian of the more general for m
AL(t) = f d'x Dn,x M01 ~"(X, 0 ,
(7.2.36)
where D is an arbitrary n- and x-dependent functional of the values of Q
at a given time. This changes the formula for the conjugate variables P(t)
as functionals of Q(t) and
(t) by the amount
KP,(x, t) _
6 KL(t)
6 n(yx t) = Dn,x [Q(t)] . (7.2.37)
It follows that there is no change in the Hamiltonian as expressed as a
~ This is under the usual assumption, that the fields vanish at infinity. These resells do not
necessary apply when we allow fields or different topology, as discussed in Volume il .

306
7 The Canonical Formalis m
functional of the Q(t) and Q(t) :
f
dux KP,, {x, t}Q' (x, t) y- KL( t ) = 0.
Hence also there is no change in the Hamiltonian as expressed as a
functional of the old canonical variables Q " and P,, . However, the Hamil-
tonian is not the same functional of the new canonical variables (3 1 and
P„ + FPM as it was of the Q " and PM, and in a theory described by the new
Uagrangian Y + K
it is the new canonical variables Q" and P,, + KP„
rather than the Q' and P, that would satisfy the canonical commutation
relations. The commutators of the Q' with each other and of the Q" with
the Pm are given by the usual canonical relations, but the commutators of
the P, with each other are now
_ _~bD ►~,~ [Q(t)] + t bDm y~ «
tt)~ ('x . 2.39 )
In general this doesn't vanish, but if the added term in the Lagrangian is
a total time-derivative
Q
_
then D in Eq. (7 .2.36) is of the special form
Qn \
T
( 7 .2 .44)
(7.2.41 )
In this case the commutator (7 .2.39 ) vanishes, so the variables Q' and
Pn satisfy the usual commutation relations . We have seen that a change
of the form (7.2.36) in the Lagrangian does not change the form of the
Hamiltonian as a functional of the Q' and P, and since, as we have now
shown,, the commutation relations of these variables are also unchanged,
the addition to the Lagrangian of the term
(7.2.36) has no effect on the
quantum structure of the theory. Different Lagrangian densities K btained
from each other by partial integration may therefore be regarded as
equivalent in quantum as well as classical field theory .
7.3 Global symmetries
We now come to the real point of the Lagrangian formalism, that it
provides a natural framework for the quantum mechanical implementation

7.3 Global Symmetries
307
of symmetry principles. This is because the dynamical equations in
the Lagrangian formalism take the form of a variat ional principle, the
principle of stationary action . Consider and infinitesimal transformation
of the fields
'I'"'(x) --o, 'I'"(x) + i~ ~{x )
that leaves the action (7.2.3) invariant :
R [T]
0 = J1 = Ie f dx JT"(x) {
(7.3 .i )
(7.3 .2)
(With e a constant, such symmetries are known as global symmetries. In
general, 3w"' depends on the fields and their derivatives at x .) Of course
Eq. (7.3 .2) is automatically satisfied for all infinitesimal variations of the
fields if the fields satisfy the dynamical equations ; by an infinitesimal
symmetry transformation we mean one that leaves the action invariant
even when the dynamical equations are not satisfied. If we now consider the
same transformation with e an arbitrary function of position in spacetime :
'Y~(x) --o, 'i'~(x) + ie(x) .~F~(x), (7.3 .3)
then, in general, the variation of the action will not vanish, but it will
have to be of the form
61
dux P(x)he(x) (7-3-4)
0x P
in order that it should vanish when e(x) is constant . If we now take
the fields in I [T] to satisfy the field equations then I is stationary with
respect to arbitrary field variations that vanish at large spacetime distances,
including variations of the form (7.3 . 3), so in this case (7.3.4) should vanish .
Integrating by parts, we see that P(x) must satisfy a conservation law-
it follows immediately tha t
where
O xA
dF
0 = dt
F =_ /d3xJ0
(7.3 .5)
(7.3 .6)
(7.3,7)
There is one such conserved current J P and one constant of the motion
F for each independent infinitesimal symmetry transformation . This rep-
resents a general feature of the canonical formalism, often referred to as
Noether's theorem : symmetries imply conservation laws .
Many symmetry transformations leave the Lagrangian and not just
the action invariant . This is the case, for instance, for translations and

308
7 The Canonical Formalism
rotations in space and also isospin transformations and other internal
symmetry transformations, though not for general Lorentz transforma-
tions. When the Lagrangian is invariant we can go further, and write an
explicit formula for the conserved quantities F . Consider a field variation
( 7 .3.3 ) in which c(x) depends on t but not x . In this case the variation in
the action is
61 =1 dt dux [5L[1(t)41(tJ1) .(()
J ~Y
t
(~€,
)
, (6(t)'F"'(X' t)
The requirement that the Lagrangian be invariant under this transforma-
tion when c is a constant yields
() W( x, t)
_d t
so for general fields (whether or not the field equations are satisfied) the
variation in the action is
61 = i
dt /d3x
'40
(x, t). (7-3-10)
qj"(Xa t)
Comparing this with Eq . (73.4) gives
F = -i d'x 6L CT(r )a 4'~tfl
_F"' (X, t).
(7.1 11)
bV(x t
a
)
Using the symmetry condition (7.3.9), the reader can easily check that
this F is indeed time-independent for any fields that satisfy the dynamical
equations (7 . 2 .2) .
Other symmetry #ransformations such as isospin rotations leave not
only the action and the Lagrangian invariant but also the Lagrangian
density. In such cases we can go even further, and write an explicit
formula for the current .IP{x}. Writing the action as in Eq. (7.2.6) as the
integral of the Lagrangian density, its variation under the transformation
(7. 3. 3) with a general infinitesimal parameter e(x) i s
14
Ml'(x)
+ (7.3.1 2)
The invariance of the Lagrangian density when e is a constant requires

7.3 Global Symmetries
309
that
so for arbitrary fields the variation of the action is
31 ['T'] = i
dx OY(~'(x)
,~ju TO) alu--W. (7.3, 1 4
Comparison with Eq . (7 .3.4) shows that
J'U
'
~' x~`~ l ' (7.3 .15)
~(~ ~
)
Using the symmetry condition (7.3 .13), it is easy to see directly that O".l"
vanishes when the fields satisfy the puler-Lagrange equations (7.2.9) . Note
also that the integral of the time component of the current (7.3.15) has
the previously derived value (7.3.11) .
So far everything we have said would apply to classical as well as quan-
tum mechanical field theories. The quantum properties of the conserved
quantitie s F are most easily seen for symmetries of the Lagrangian (not
necessarily the Lagrangian density) that transform the canonical fields
Qn(x , t) (that is, tho se of the V whose time derivatives appear in the
Lagrangian) into x-dependent functi onals of themselves at the same time .
For such transformations, we have
n(x, t) = .Fn [Q(t) ; x] .
(7.3. 16 )
As we shall see, infinitesimal spatial translations and rotations as well as
all infinitesimal internal symmetry transformations are of the form (7.3.1),
(7.3.16), with . "' a linear functional of the Q', but we will not need to
assume here that the symmetry is linear. For all such symmetries the
operator F is not only conserved ; it also acts in quantum mechanics as a
generator of this symmetry.
To see this, note first that when V is a canonical field Q1, the functional
derivative 6L15V is equal to the canonical conjugate P,,, while when V
is an auxiliary field C', this functional derivative vanishes ; hence we may
rewrite Eq . (7.3.11) in the form
F = -i /d3xPx4t).-'cxt) = -i fd3xfd3vPx,t) .P1[Q(t),x]
(7.3.17)
To calculate the commutator (not anticommutator) of F w ith a canonical
field QI(x, t) at an arbitrary time t, we can invoke Eq . ( 7.3.6) to evaluate F
as a functional of the Qs and P s at the time t, and then use the equal-time

3 10
7 The Canonical Formalism
canonical commutation relations (7.1.30)-(7.1.32) to obtain*
(7 . 3. 15 )
It is in this sense that F is the generator of the transformation with
Eq. (7. 3 .1 6). Eq- (7.3 .17) and the canonical commutation rules give also
Where F1 is linear, Eq. (7. 3.19) tells us that P„ transforms contragrediently
to Q'.
As a first example, consider the symmetry transformation of spacetime
translation :
This is of the form (7.3 .1), with four independent parameters cy and four
corresponding transformation function s
In consequence we have four independent conserved currents, convention-
ally grouped together in the energy-momentum tensor TP, :
a4"TPV = 0
(7.3 .22)
from which we can derive time-independent quantities as the spatial
integrals of the time components of the translation 'currents' (not to be
confused with the canonical conjugate field variables P,(x, t) )
P, = d 'x T°ti,
d
dt P, _
0
.
(7.3 .23)
(7.3 .24 )
The Lagrangian is invariant under spatial translations, so in accordance
with the above general results we can conclude that the spatial components
of P, take the form
P - - dux Pn(x, t )VQ" (x, r) . (7 .3.25 )
Using the equal-time commutation relations
(7.1 .30)-(7.1,32), we also
find the commutator of this operator with the canonical fields an d
We are here assuming that for C]" bosonic or 3ermionic the variation
F" is also respectively
bosonic or fermionic, so that F is bosonie . The only exceptions are certain symmetries known
as %upersymmetries, for which F is fermionic and (7.3 .18) is an anticommutator if Q1 is also
Ferrnionic .

7.3 Global Symmetrie s
conjugates :
31 1
(7.3 .27)
It follows that for any function of Qs an d P s that does not also depend
explicitly on x, we have
1P, 27(x)] = ivs(x) .
(73,28)
These results show that the operator P is indeed the generator of space
translations.
In contrast, time-translations do not leave the Lagrangian L(t) invariant,
However, we already know the generator of time-translations ; it is the
Hamiltonian P° =- H, which as we know satisfies the commutation relation
for any function o f Heisenberg picture operators.
If we further assume that the Lagrang ian is the integral of a Lagrangian
dens ity, then we may also obtain an explicit formula for the energy-
momentum tensor T
.
However, the Lagrangian dens ity Y(x) is not
invariant under spacetime translations, so we cannot use Eq. (7.3.151 here.
Instead, note that the change in the action under a spacetime-dependent
translation
T'~(x) --+ T~ (x + c(x)) _ T"{x} + e(x)r?,,T"(x)
(7.3 .30)
is
ill
y 61
[LI'] = J dux
~, e~`~~p`' ' + 0 (0~
e c,. [Ep r?~'I~4]
{7.3. 31 }
L
The Euler-Lagrange equations (7.2.9) show that the terms proportional
to e add up to E-uvA
, so
Y CJU + OY
OyT1O,,FP
((7xp 0 (0 v
)
Integrating by parts, we see that this takes the form of Eq. (7 .3.4)
U = - dux T ''.a,,eju
with `currents'
VP 6
~
Y
02
C~ T~
f1 ~~
V
( 7.3 .32)
(?.3.33 )
(7.3. 34)
As a check, we may note that the spatial components of Eq . (7.3.23)
are the same as our prev ious formula (7.3.25) for P, while for p = 0

312
7 The Canonical Formalism
Eq. {7.3.23} gives the usual formula for the Hamiltonian :
H = -PO
d'x
Pn Qn -
,
n
(7.3 .35 )
(A warning : the tensor TI" obtained by raising the second index in
Eq . (7.3 .34) is not in general symmetric, and therefore cannot be used as
the right-hand side of the field equations of general relativity. The correct
energy-momentum tensor to use as the source of the gravitational field is
the symmetric tensor OM introduced in the next section .)
In many theories there are also one or more symmetry principles
that state the invariance of the action, under a set of linear coordinate-
independent transformations of the canonical fields
together with a set of suitable transformations on any auxiliary field s
Cr(x) __+ C''(x) + i ,_a (z. )r
,, CS(x) . (7 .3.3 7)
Here t,, and r,, are sets of Hermitian matrices furnishing some representa-
tions of the Lie algebra of the symmetry g roup, and we sum over repeated
group indices a, b, etc. (For instance, in electrodynamics there is such
a symmetry, for which the one matrix tn,, is diagonal, with the charges
carried by each field on the main diagonal.) From any such symmetry, we
can infer the existence of another set of conserved currents
.1~
whose time components are the densities of a set of time-independent
operators
T,, ~ d3xJa .
(7.3 .39)
When the Lagrangian as well as the action is invariant under the trans-
formation (7.3.36), Eq . ( 7 .3.1 1) provides an explicit formula for the T~, :
Ta = - i
,}
~3xP,,(Y, t)lral'm '(xr t)
The equal-time commutation relations here give
[T"' Qjl(x)l
[T11 , P"(X)j
= -(ta)%QNX),
+(ta)MnPm (X)
(7 .3 .40)
(7.3.41 )
(7.3.42)
(Where r,, is diagonal, this tells us that Qn and P,, respectively lower and
raise the value of T,, by an amount equal to the nth diagonal element
of t,,.) Using these results, we can calculate the commutator of 7'Q with

7.3 Global Symmetries
another generator Tb
31 3
[Ta , Tbl- = i I d'x [` P. (ta)ten (tb)' lr Q' +
n (th)'k (ta)'mQ']
.
(7.3 .43)
Thus, if the matrices t, form a Lie algebra with structure constants fufiC,
[ta , thl- = ifab cte
a
then so do the quantum operators Ta
(?.3 .44)
(7. 3 .45 )
This confirms that the quantities (7 .3,40) are correctly normalized to
qualify as generators of the symmetry group.
Where the Lagrangian is the integral of a Lagrangian density which is
invariant under (7 .3 .36) and (7.3.37) we can go further, and use Eq . (73.1 5)
to provide an explicit formula for the currents associated with these global
symrhetries ;
O(OCr /~xP)
(1a)rsC
'S
(7.3.46)
As an illustration, suppose we have two real scalar fields of equal mass,
with Lagrangian density
2a)2
2q)2 _ ,
(7.3.47 )
This is invariant under a linear transformation like (7 .3 .36) :
so there is a conserved current (73 ,46) :
602 = +601 ,
The explicit formula (7 .3. 6) for the current can be used to derive other
useful commutation relations. In particular, since the Lagrangian density
does not involve time-derivatives of the auxiliary fields, we hav e
J° = -iPn(tU )11MQM . (7.3 .4$ )
We can then derive the equal-time commutators of general fields not only
with the symmetry generators T, but also with the densities Ja
Ijal (X, t) , Qn (y, t)] = _ 6 1 (X _ y) (t a)n?nQm (,, t) ,
[j,O7 (X, t) , pm(y, t)j 3 (X _ Y) (tay, m pjj (X, t)
(7-3 .49)
(7.3 .50)
If the auxiliary fields are constructed as local functions of the Ps and Q s
in such a way that they transform according to a representation of the

314
7 The Canonical Formalism
symmetry algebra with generators -ca, then also
We often summarize Eqs . (7 .3.49) and ( 7.3 .51 ) in the single commutation
relation
~J,O(x, t)# T"(Y, t )] - -63(x - Y) (ta)"j, T"' (xa t) .
(7.3.52)
Commutation relations like (7.3.49)-(7.3 .51) will be used in Chapter 10 to
derive relations called ward identities for matrix elements invoicing the
current P.
7,4 Lorentz Invariance
We are now going to show that the Lorentz invariance of the Lagrangian
density implies the Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix . Consider an
infinitesimal Lorentz transformation
According to the analysis of the previous section, the invariance of the
action under such transformations tells us immediately that there are a
set of conserved `currents' ., PP' :
OP MPP'' = 0,
(7.4.3)
(7.4.4)
one current for each independent component of The integrals of
the time-components of these `currents' then provide us with a set of
time-independent tensors :
jyw =
d3 X
auv
}
d PV = 0,
dt
(7.4.5)
(7.4.6)
The J}" will turn out to be the generators of the homogeneous Lorentz
group.
We would like to have an explicit formula for the tensor but
Lorentz transformations act on the coordinates and hence cannot leave
the Lagrangian density invariant, so we cannot immediately use the results
of the previous section. However, translation invariance allows us to
formulate Lorentz invariance as a symmetry of the Lagrangian density

7. 4
Lorentz Invariance 3 1 5
under a set of transformations on the fields and field-derivatives alone .
The fields undergo the matrix transformatio n
OV
Y'
6T' V MV
nTm
(7.4.7 )
where
., are a set of matrices satisfying the algebra of the homogeneous
Lorentz group
For example, for a scalar field we have 60 = 0, so fj,,. = 0, while for
an irreducible field of type (A, B) we hav e
where .4 and are spin matrices for spin A and B, respectively . We
specially note that for a covariant vector field, 6 V,, = co,A VA, so here
The derivative of a field that transforms as in Eq. (7.4 .7 ) transforms like
another such field, but with an extra vector index
(7.4.9)
The Lagrangian density is assumed to be invariant under the combined
transformations Eqs. (7 .4.7) and (7.4 .9), so
OT/ 2
(OxT
4
K
Setting the coefficient of 01' equal to zero gives
a =
~'}
Vpti )fm~"~ + i ~ G~ ~~ ~ ~ ►r~
L ~} ~
2 OOK
~ij~
)
~d BEY' iii FC
I
1
0
a
2 0(0,V )
Using the Euler-Lagrange equations (7 .2.9), and our formula (7.3.34) for
the energy momentum tensor T}tV, we may write this as
., i
' mTm
K 12 V )
1
This immediately suggests the definition of a new energy-momentum

316 7 The Canonical Formalis m
tensor, known as the Belinfa nte tensor :2
(3)1v = TJuv -_ OK[- mT
2
O (
K
~
( ~`u'' n
("~` )t~`Y't'
(7 .4.11)
O(~)
O(a,V )
The quantity in square brackets is manifestly antisymmetric in P and K,
so 811v satisfies the same conservation law as T~11 ,
ayQyV = 4. (7.4.12)
For the same reason, when we set y _ 0 in Eq. (7.4.f 1) the index K runs
over space components only, so the derivative term here drops out when
we integrate over all space
where P° = H . Thus OPI can be regarded as the energy-momentum
tensor, just as well as T
. However, Eq . (7.4.10) tells us that, unlike Till',
the Selinfante tensor 0,1' is not only conserved but also sy mmetric :
E)Juv = EYP. (7.4.14)
It is QPI rather than T"' that acts as a source of the gravitational field .3
In consequence of the symmetry of OP'', we may construct one more
conserved tensor density
., lu ' = xPWw - x'' WA . (7.4.15)
This is conserved, in the sense that
Thus Lorentz invariance allows us to define one more time-independent
tensor
.] JUV = J
°;4'' d3x = J
d'x(xi`@°` - XVa°P) .
(7.4. 17)
The rotation generator Jk = eijk.T412 is not only time-independent, bu t
also has no explicit time-dependence, so it commutes with the Hamiltonian
[H, J] = 0. (7.4.18)
Also, applying Eq. (7.3 .28) to the function e4', we hav e
2 2
ax
-i Czjk J
d' x 0°'

7.4 Lorentz Invariance
and therefore
31 7
(7.4. 19 )
On the other hand, the `boost' generator Kk - .Tko, though time-independ-
ent, does explicitly involve the time coordinate
Kk = f d'x(x'9" - x"Ook) ,
or more explicitly
K - - tP + dux x 0"(x, t) . (7.4.2 0)
Since this is a constant, we have 0 = lk = - P + i [H, K], and therefore
Also, applying Eq. (7 .3.28 again gives
[PS, Kk] = i f
dux xk
a
0
xi
o°° = -iJjk f
dux Ow
and therefore
(7.4.21 )
(7.4.22)
For any reasonable Lagrangian density, the operator (7 .4.20) will be
'smooth" in the sense used in Section 3.3, i.e., the interaction terms in
elHo` f dux x 0°°(x, 0)e-t1111 vanish' for t --} ±ac . (Note that the interaction
terms in eiHot f dux 8C'0(x, 0)e`0r must vanish for t
---), hoc in order to
allow the introduction of `in' and `out' states and the S-matrix.) With this
smoothness assumption and the commutation relation (7 .4. 1) in hand, we
can repeat the arguments of Section 3 . 3, and conclude that the S-matrix
is Lorentz-invariant .
The same arguments were also used in Section 3 .3 to verify that the
remaining commutation relations of the Lorentz group, those of the P` ,
with each other, take the proper form . This can also be shown directly
for the commutators of the rotation generators, which here take the form
jjj = (.'OjTe -,00jTe - i (f'j)' ,Trn) (7 .4.23)
OT
Since the Lagrangian density does not depend on the time-derivatives of
the auxiliary fields, and the rotation generators do not mix canonical an d
When we say that some interaction-picture operator vanishes for r
-- ;, +x~ we mean that its
matrix elements between states that are smooth superpositions of energy eigenstates vanish in
this limit,

318
7 The Canonical Formalism
auxiliary fields, this can also be written as a sum over canonical fields
alone :
P = f d'x P. (x~ OjQn - Xiaj Q11 - i (J'j) " w V)
.
(7-4.24)
It follows immediately then from the canonical commutation relations
that
[.1'~, P,, { x }1- = i(x;0i - xj00P n ( x ) + V~}ni MPnf (x) .
(7 . 4.26 )
These results can be used to derive the usual commutation relations of
the 0 with each other and other generators .w` If there are no auxiliary
fields then the same arguments may be applied to the `boost' generators to
complete the demonstration that the P11 and Jill' satisfy the commutation
relations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group . However the `boost'
matrices 0 will in general mix canonical and auxiliary fields such as
the components W and VI of a vector field), so the direct proof of the
commutation relations of the 0 with each other has to be given on a
case by case basis . Fortunately, this is not needed for the proof of the
Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix given in Section 3 . 3 .
7.5
Transition to Interaction Picture : Examples
At the end of Section 7.2 we showed how to use the Lagrangian of a
simple scalar field theory to derive the structure of the interaction and
the free fields it contains in the interaction picture . We will now turn to
somewhat more complicated and revealing examples .
Scalar Field , Der ivative Coupling
First let's consider a neutral scalar field, but now with derivative coupling .
We take the Lagrangian as
_ - 2 ~~PWND -
~m, (DI - Jp r)YcI~ - ~'(~~ , (7 . 5. 1 )
where JA is either a c-number external current (unrelated to currents P
introduced earlier), or a functional of various fields other than cD (in which
case terms involving these other fields need to be added to (7. 5 . 1 ) ). The
Also, since JU commutes with H and P„ Q", it commutes with L . The commutator of Pi with
the au x iliary fie ld s must thus he consistent with the ro tationa l inva riance of L .

7.5 Transition to Interaction Pictur e
canonical conjugate to (D is now
F1
F~y
77-
and the Hamiltonian is
H=f
I
dux [III - .:P]
Xx[n(R + j°) + z {v(D)2 (n + ,r°)2
Collecting terms, we can write this a s
H = Ho +V,
Ho = J dux [ in' + ~{V~}2 + ~rn2d)2] ,
V
d3X[njO+J .V(D+ i(jO)2+ .e((D)
31 9
( 7 .5 .2
(7-5-3)
(7. 5.4)
( 7 .5.s )
As explained in Section 7 .2, we can pass to the interaction picture by
simply replacing f] and 4) with -a and 0 (and likewise for any fields in the
current P, though we will not bother to indicate this explicitly )
HQ
f (VO(X,
2
+ ~ M 01 (X, t)
l
+
[J,,(X, t)] 2
+ A-,OWX, O)l
-
(7 .5.6)
(7.5.7)
The free-particle Hamiltonian is just the same as Eq. (7.2.25), and leads
as in Section 7.2 to Eqs. (7.2.26)-( 7.2.35). Indeed, whatever the total
Hamiltonian may be, we must take (7.5 .6) as the part we split off' and call
the free-particle part, with the remainder called the interaction, because
as we have seen it is this form of the free-particle Hamiltonian that leads
to the correct expansion (7 .2.29) of the scalar field in terms of creation
and annihilation operators that satisfy the commutation relations (7 .2 .34),
(7.2.35). The last step is to replace g in the interaction Hamiltonian with
its value 4 in the interaction picture (not its value ~-,T ) in the Heisenberg
picture) :
V W _ f
dux [J1(x . t)OU O(X, 0 + ~ [J°x, ~~l, + ~~~x, t)
(7.5 .8)

320 7 The Canonical Formalis m
The extra non-invariant term in Eq . (7 .5 .8) is just what we saw in Section
6. 2 is needed to cancel a non-invariant term in the propagator of 00.
Vector Field, Spin one
similar results are obtained in the canonical quantization of the vector
field V,, for a particle of spin one. Let's here keep an open mind, and
write the Lagrangian density in a fairly general for m
2
~xc~4 VV c~~~~''~ ~~3 Ou V~,c~VV
J`- ; MZV, Vy--JM V ,
,
(7.5.9)
where ac, and m 2 are so far arbitrary constants, an d J. is either a c-
number external current, or an operator depending on fields other than
V,U, in which case additional terms involving these fields must be added
to Y . ThEuler-Lagrange field equations for V,, read
Taking the divergence gives
(7.S .lfl)
This is the equation for an ordinary scalar field with mass m 2/(ac +
and source ad til(a + M. We want to describe a theory containing only
particles of spin one, not spin zero, so to avoid the appearance of 0) .V~ as
an independently propagating scalar field, we take ac = -J3, in which case
al V' can be expressed in terms of an external current or other fields, as
-al,I1/mz . The constant oc can be absorbed in the definition of Y,,, so we
can take oc = -P = 1, and therefore
1 FMv P`
m, V1, Y" - ill VP
where
(7-5-11 )
(7.5-12)
The derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to the time-derivative of
the vector field is
-Fog
o V U
(7 .5 .13)
This is non-vanishing for ,u a spatial index i, so the W are canonical fields,
with conjugates
II` = Fi4 = Vz + di VQ
(7.5 .14)
On the other hand P" _ 0, so P" does not appear in the Lagrangian,
and VO is therefore an auxiliary field . This causes no serious difficulty- the
fact that 0
/ 0 VO vanishes means that the field equation for Vo involves
no second time-derivatives, and can therefore be used as a constraint that

7.5 Transition to Interaction Picture 32 1
eliminates a field variable. Specifically, the puler-Lagrange equation for
v - 0 is
~, Fa = Fn2 Va + jo
or using Eq. (7. 5 . 14)
(7.s.1 5)
Nov let us calculate the Hamiltonian H = f d3x (II • ~ -- Y) for this
theory. Eq. (7.5.14) allows us to write V in terms of H and A
V _ -V V° + II = II - pip ' fI --i°),
so
H ~ dux III + m-2(V . II){V . II - j ° )
2
2
2
Again, we split this up into afree-particle term HO and interaction V :
H = Ho+V r
(7.5.17)
and pass to the interaction picture by replacing the Heisen berg-picture
quantities V and II with their interaction-picture counterparts v and
it (and, though not shown explicitly, likewise for whatever fields and
conjugates are present in JP )
2
~D = ~~ ~ ~
[12+ ~~~ (V . n)2 + 4(v X Y)2 +
Y2
2
V = dux
J • v - -2j° V . n +
2
(j)2
(7. 5 . 1 9 )
The relation between a and v is then
6 Ho (v,
and the `field equation' i s
Since V° is not an independent field variable, it is not related by a
similarity transformation to any interaction-picture object A Instead, we
can invent a quantity
z'° = rra-2v . X .
(7.5 .22)

322
7 The Canonical Formalis m
Eq . (7 . 5 .20) then all ows us to write a as
?z =v + Vv0 .
( 7 .5.23)
Inserting this in Eqs. ( 7.5.22) and (7.5.21) gives our field equations in the
form
These can be combined in the covariant for m
Taking the divergence give s
and hence
(7.5 .24)
(7.5 .25)
( 7.S. 2b )
A real vector field satisfying Eqs. (7 .5.25) and (7.5.26) can be expressed as
a Fourier transform
VA(x) = (27C)- 1/2 ~
d3 p ( 2po )- 1/ 2
fe,( P, u )a(P, a )e ipX
(7.5.27)
where p° = /p2 + m ;the ett (p, u) for c = + 1 , 0, --1 are three independent
vectors satisfying
Ppe~`(P, U) = 0
and normalized so that
e" ( P} u )e" (Pf a) = q ~zti + PpP V /M 2
(7 .5 .28 )
(7 .5 .29 )
and the a( p, a) are operator coefficients. It is straightforward using
Eqs. (7.5.23), (7 .5,27), and (7.5.29) to calculate that v and it satisfy the
correct commutation relation s
[v(x. t), vi (X, t)I = 17r'(x, t), iri (x, t)] = 0 , (7.5.30)
provided that a(p, a) and aT(P, cr) satisfy the commut ation rel ation s
~a(p, 0-), at (P
r
~ Cr;)] = 6,(P, - Oju'cr
[a(P, cr), a(p', (T')] = 0
.
(7.5 .31 )
(7.5 .32)

7 .5 Transition to Interaction Pictu re
323
We already know that the vector field for a spin one particle must
take the form (7.5.27), so our derivation of these results serves to verify
that Eq. (7.5.18) gives the correct free-particle Hamiltonian for a massive
particle of spin one . It is easy to check also that Eq . (7.5 . 18) may be written
(up to a constant term) in the standard form of a free-particle energy, as
E d f d'P P~ al (p, a) a(Py a). Finally, using Eq . ( 7 .5 . 22) in Eq. {7 .5,19) yields
the interaction in the interaction picture
1i
2m
I -
The extra non-invariant term in Eq . (7 .5 .33) is just what we found in
Chapter 6 is needed to cancel anon-invariant term in the propagator of
the vector field .
Dirac field, Spin One Half
For the Dirac field of a particle
Kf spin 1/2, we tentatively take the
Lagrangian as
(7 .5 .34)
with a real function of kY and T, This is not real, but the action is,
because
Hence the field equations obtained by requiring the action to be stationary
with respect to T are the adjoints of those obtained by requiring the action
to be stationary with respect to P. as necessary if we are to avoid having
too many field eyuatians. The canonical conjugate to 'I' is
a
(7.5 .35 )
so we should not regard T as a field like T, but rather as proportional to
the canonical conjugate of T. The Hamiltonian is
.
H = dux [FIT -
] =
~
We write this as
where
Ho =
V I
I
H = Ho+ V .
d3x 1-17017 ' V + m]T ,
dax ,Yr('I' , `If) .
(7.5.3G)
(7 .5 .37 )
(7.5 .38)

324
7 The Canonical Formalism
We now pass to the interaction picture . Since Eq. (7.5 .35) does not
involve the time, the similarity transformation (7.1.28), (7.1 .29) yields
immediately
it = -FPY° - {7 .5 .39}
Likewise, HO and V(t) can be calculated by replacing 'Y and H with
W
and a in Eqs. (7.5.37) and (7. 5.38) . This gives the equation of motion
bHo
o r more neatly
(7.5.40 )
(7.5 .41 )
(The other equation Kf motion, it = -6 H~bip, yields just the adjoint of
this one.) Any field satisfying Eq. (7 .5.41) can be written as a Fourier
transform
(7.5.42)
where p° =
p 2-+m2 ; a(P, cr) and bt( p, ff) are operator coefficients ; and
u(p, ± ~ ) are the two independent solutions o f
and likewise
normalized so that
Q 20°
2JO
In order to obtain the desired anticommutators
~Va (X, 0, '~# (Y' 0 1 + = [Va (X, t), al, (Y' t)] +(Y )", P
(7.5 .43 )
(7.5 .44)
(7.5 .45)
(7.5 .46)
(7.5.47 )
(7.5.48 )
The matrix iy%, has eigenvalues ±m, so lu~ and tai must be proportional to the projection
matrices
+ m)/2m and (i,~upp + m) fZm, respectively . The proportionality factor may be
adjusted up to a sign by absorbing it in the definition of u and v . The overall sign is determined
by positivity ; Tr Iuuf3 = I u}u and Tr It, F# = Y-v{ V muss be positive .

7. 6 Constraints and Dirac Brackets
we must adopt the anticommutation relation s
[a(p, cr), af (P cr~ )] +
[a(p. tT), QTR a+
[a(p, o-), b(p U +
= [b(p, (7), b~(p I I a 0)] +
= [b(p, a-), b(p I , CTId
+
= {a(p. cr)' V(p {' ff
Id
+
PW - PM" r ~,
=d ,
(7.5. 50 )
325
(7.5.49 )
and their adjoints. These agree with the results obtained in Chapter 5,
thus verifying that (7.5.37) is the correct free-particle Hamiltonian for spin
In terms of the as and bs, this Hamiltonian i s
HO
d'p p' (a~(p, a)a(p, a) - b(p, a)O(p, a)) (7 .5 .51 )
We can rewrite this as a more conventional free-particle Hamiltonian, plus
another infinite c-number"
HO = E f d~~p P' [al(p, a)a(p,a) + b~(p, u)b(p, a) - P(p - p)] . (7,5.52)
CT
The c-number term in Eq . (7.5.52) is only important if we worry about
gravitational phenomena ; otherwise here, as for the scalar field, we can
throw it away, since it only affects the zero of energy with respect to
which all energies are measured. With this understanding, HO is a positive
operator, just as for bosons .
7.6 Constraints and Dirac Brackets
The chief obstacle to deriving the Hamiltonian from the Lagrangian is
the occurrence of constraints . The standard analysis of this problem is
that of Dirac,5 whose terminology we will follow here . Dirac's analysis is
not really needed for the simple theories discussed in this chapter, where
it is easy to identify the unconstrained canonical variables . We shall use
the theory of a real massive vector field for illustration here, returning to
Dirac's approach in the next chapter, where it will be actually useful .
Primary constraints are either imposed on the system (as when in the
next chapter we choose a gauge for the electromagnetic field) or arise from
the structure of the Lagrangian itself. For an example of the latter type,
consider the Lagrangian (7 .5 .11) of a massive vector field Vil interacting
Note the nega tive sign of the c- number terra. The conjectured symmetry icn own as su persymrnetry4
connects the numbers of boson and fermion fie lds, in such a way that the c-nutttbers in HO all
cancel .

326
with a current J
where
7 The Canonical Formalism
(7.G. 1 )
{7.b.2 )
Suppose we try to treat all four components of V" on the same basis . We
should then define the conjugates
-Foy
0(OOAP )
We immediately find the primary constraint
no = 0 .
(7 .6.3 )
( 7 .6.4)
More generally, we encounter primary constraints whenever the equations
rl? = 6L J60OT" cannot be solved to give all the OQV (at least locally)
in terms of He and V . This will be the case if and only if the matrix
61L/b(0()T1)b(OQT') has vanishing determinant, Such Lagrangians are
called irregular.
Then there are secondary constraints, which arise from the requirement
that the primary constraints be consistent with the equations of motion .
For the massive vector field, this is just the Euler-Lagrange equation
(7 .5 .16) for V °
Here we are finished, but in other theories we might encounter further
constraints by requiring consistency of the secondary constraints with the
field equations, and so on . The distinction between primary, secondary,
etc, constraints is not important ; we will treat them all together here.
There is another distinction between certain types of constraint that is
more important. The constraints we have found for the massive vector
field are of a type known as second class, for which there is a universal
prescription for the commutation relations . To explain the distinction
between first and second class constraints, and the prescription used to
deal with second class constraints, it is useful first to recall the definition
of the Poisson brackets of classical mechanics .
Consider any Lagrangian L(T,'i') that depends on a set of variables
T'(t) and their time -derivatives 'PI{t} . (The Lagrangians of quantum field
theory are a special case, with the index a running over all pairs of ~ and
x.) We can define canonical conjugates for all of these variables b y
.
III ~
C- q~a

7.6 Constraints and Dirac Brackets
327
The Its and Ys will in general not be independent variables, but may
instead be related b y various constraint equations, both primary and
secondary. The Poisson bracket is then defined by
CAa B] p =_
OA
c~B O B
OA
MO UTa
OTa 0. IIa
(7. 6. 7)
with the constraints ignored in calculating the derivatives with respect
to Ta and 1-1a, In particular, we always have [T",IIb ] p _ 6~. (Here
and below all fields are taken at the same time, and time arguments are
everywhere dropped .) These brackets have the same algebraic Properties
as commutators :
including the Jacobi identity
(7 .6.$ )
(7.6.9)
( 7. 6. 1o)
If we could adopt the usual commutation relations [ T6, III,] =ids
II~
,
1 = 0, then the commutator of any two functions
of the 'I's and Its would be just [A, B] = a[A, B] p. But the constraints do
not always allow this .
The constraints may in general be expressed in the form yy = 0, where
the yN are a set of functions of the Ts and TI s. Because we are including
secondary constraints along with the primary constraints, the set of all
the constraints is necessarily consistent with the equations of motion
A = [A, H] pa and therefore
when the constraint equations X?v = 0 are satisfied .
We call a constraint first class if its Poisson bracket with all the other
constraints vanishes when (after calculating the Poisson brackets) we im-
pose the constraints. We shall see a simple example of such a constraint in
the quantization of the electromagnetic field in the next chapter, where the
first class constraint arises from a symmetry of the action, electromagnetic
gauge invariance. In fact, the set of first class constraints XN = 0 is always
associated with a group of symmetries, under which an arbitrary quantity
A undergoes the infinitesimal transformation
(In field theory these are local transformations, because the index N con-

328
7 The Canonical Formalism
tains a spacetime coordinate.) Eq. (7 .6,11 ) shows that this transformation
leaves the Hamiltonian invariant, and for first class constraints it also re-
spects all other constraints . Such first class constraints can be eliminated
by a choice of gauge, or treated by gauge-invariant methods described in
Volume II .
After all of the first class constraints have been eliminated, the re-
maining constraint equations YN = 0 are such that no linear combination
EIr UN LXN, ZnfrI P of the Poisson brackets of these constraints with each
other vanishes. It follows that the matrix of the Poisson brackets of the
remaining constraints is non-singular :
Det C =~ 0 ,
where
constraints of this sort are called second c lass. Note that there must always
be an even number of second class constraints, because an antisymmetric
matrix of odd dimensionality necessarily has vanishing determinant .
As we have seen, in the case of the massive real vector field the
constraints are
Y, tx =X2x = 0 ,
CNAI = [XJ r, XMI P
(7.G . 1 3)
(7.6. 1 4 )
(7-6.15 )
whe re
X2x = e1II;{x} - rra, Ve(x) - .I°{x} .
(7.6.1 6)
The Poisson bracket of these constraints i s
and, of course,
C i x, ~ ~ - C2x,2y = 0 .
( 7. b. 1 7)
(7.6.18 )
This `matrix' is obviously non-singular, so the constraints ( 7. 6.15) are
second class .
Dirac suggested that when all constraints are second class, the comrnu-
tation relations will be given by
[A7 $} = i[A, BID, (7. 6.19)
where [A, B]D is a generalization of the Poisson bracket known as the
Dirac bracket :
(Here N and M are compound indices including the position in space,

7.6 Constraints and Dirac Brackets
329
taking values like 1, x and 2, x in the vector field example.) He noted
that the Dirac bracket like the Poisson bracket satisfies the same algebraic
relations as the commutators
and also the relations
(T6.21 )
(7.6.22)
(7 . 6.23 )
(7.s.24)
which make the commutation relations (7.6.19) consistent with the con-
straints XN = 0. Also, the Dirac brackets are unchanged if we replace the
XNwith any functions X~ for which the equations Z = 0 and XN = 0
define the same submanifold of phase space. But all these agreeable prop-
erties do not prove that the commutators are actually given by Eq. (7 .6.19)
in terms of the Dirac brackets.
This issue is illuminated if not settled by a powerful theorem proved
by Maskawa and iVakajima.6 They showed that for and set of canonical
variables T', III governed by second class constraints, it is always possible
by a canonical transformation* to construct two sets of variables Q",
~2r
and their respective conjugates P,, i, such that the constraints read
91 =
, = D. Using these coordinates to calculate Poisson brackets, and
redefining the constraint functions as ~1 , = ~ ~, ~2r = 9,, we have
~,7T r 1
r
C1 r, 1 s = P rr ~2'1 P = 0 ,
and for any functions A, B
cA
LA, J~2r]F = al
This C-matrix has inverse C-1 = -C, so the Dirac brackets (7.6.20) are
Recall that by a canonical transformation, we mean a transformation from a set of phase space
coordinates 'I'p,
17A to some other phase space coordinates 17Y", fl,, such that ['FO, IIblr = S db
and ['7y°, q'b]p - [III, Ilb)p = 0, the Poisson brackets being calculated in terms of the T° and
1IQ. It follows that the Poisson brackets for any functions A, B are the same whether calculated
in terms of `I'° and fIQ or in terms of T1 and fia . It also follows that if q j0 and fla satisfy
the Hamiltonian equations of maTion, then so do ~PQ and 1%, with the carne Hamiltonian . The
Lagrangian is changed by a canonical transformation, but only by a time-derivative, which does
not affect the action .

330
here
7 The Canonical Formalism
[A x BID = [A, B] P +[A, Z 1r] Y [y?r, Bj P - [A, X2rj P [Y1r,Bj P
OA a B
cB OA
C~ l~r~r
0,J T f~Ir
OA
OB
OB nA
(7 .G.2 5)
a Qn apr,
0, on aPn
In other words, the Dirac bracket is equal to the Poisson bracket ca lcula ted
in terms of' the reduced set of unconstrained canonical 'variables QI, P,
If we assume that these unconstrained variables satisfy the canonical
commutation relations, then the commutators of general operators A, B
are given by Eq. (7.6 .19 ) in terms of the Dirac brackets,* '
We now return to the massive vector field, to see how it can be quantized
using Dirac brackets. This is a case where it is easy to express the
constrained variables V° and CIQ in terms of the unconstrained onest Vj
and III ; we have simply III = 0, and V° is given by Eq . (7.6.5 ). From
Eqs. (7.6.17) and (7.6.18), we see that CN ,w here has the inverse
(C- l ) lx.l y _ (C -1 )2x.2v = o .
(7 ,6.26)
(7 .6 . 27)
Therefore the Dirac prescription (7-6.19), (7 . 6.20) yields the equal-time
commutators
CA, BI _ i[A, B]p
+ im
d3, ( [A, Ho (z] p [,,FjjZ)_M2VO(Z)-JO(z),Bjp -A" B
(? .6.25)
By definition, we have
(7 .6.29)
Hence
It is still an open question whether we should adopt canonical commutation relations for the
unconstrained variables Q . P,, constructed by the Maskawd-Nakajima canonical transformation .
Ultimately, the test of such canonical commutation relations is their consistency with the free-field
commutation relations derived in Chapter 5, but to apply this test we need to know what the
Q" and Pry are. In the Appendix to this chapter we display two large classes of theories in which
we can identify a set of unconstrained Qs and Ps, such that the Dirac commutation relations
( 7 .6,19 ) follow from the ordinary canonical commutation relations of the Q 5 and Ps. We shall
also show that in these cases, the Hamiltonian defined in terms of the unconstrained 'Ys and Rs
may be written just as well in terms of the constrained variables,
This is a special case of the theories discussed in Part A of the Appendix .

7.7 Field Redefinitions and Redundant Couplings
33 1
(7.6 .3
)
These are indeed just the commutation relations that we would find
by assuming that the unconstrained variables satisfy the usual canoni-
cal commutation relations [V`(x ), IIj(Y )] = i6~ b3( x - Y), [[~~(x), Vf ( y)]
(III{x}, II,.(Y )] = 0, and using the constraints to evaluate the commutators
involving IIO~ and VQ .
7.7 Field Redefinitions and Redundant Couplings *
Observables like masses and S-matrix elements are independent of some
of the coupling parameters in any action, known as the redundant pa-
rameters. This is because changes in these parameters can be un-
done by simply redefining the field variables . A continuous redefini-
tion of the fields, such as an infinitesimal local transformation V(x)
Te (x) + cF( {tI'(x), opT (x), ' - -), clearly cannot affect and observable of the
theory," though, of course, it would change the values of matrix elements
of the fields themselves.
How can we tell whether some variation in the parameters of a the-
ory can be cancelled by a field redefinition? A continuous local field
redefinition will produce a change in the action of the for m
}
bV{x
So any change 6gd in the coupling parameters gj> for which the change in
the action is of the form
(
E T ft =
i
fl gj
f
(
)
may be compensated by a field redefinition
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main linc of development, and may be Omitted -in
a first reading .
For instance, the theorem of Section 10.2 shows that as long as we multi-ply b y the correct field
renormalication constants. S-matrix elements can be obtained from the vacuum expectation value
of a time-ordered product of any operators that have non-vanishing matrix elements between the
vacuum and the one-particle states of the particles participating in the reaction .

332
7 The Canonical Formalism
and therefore can have no effect on any observables. In other words, a
coupling parameter is redundant if the change in the action when we nary
this parameter vanishes when we use the _ field equations H /6V' = 0,
For example, suppose we write the Lagrangian density of a scalar field
theory in the form
A
2 4
The constant Z is an redundant coupling, because
Z fd4x(EJIJI-_m2
_
(D ~gZ~3 )
f: =
and this vanishes when we use the field equation
On the other hand, neither the bare mass m nor the coupling g are
redundant, and no function of in and g is redundant .
In this example, the field redefinition needed to compensate for a change
of Z is a simple rescaling, in which F is proportional to (D. (For this reason
Z is called a field renormalization constant.) This is the most general field
transformation that leaves the general form of this action invariant . But
for the more general actions considered in sections 12.3 and 12 .4, with
arbitrary numbers of fields and derivatives, we would have to consider
non-linear as well as linear field redefinitions, and an infinite subset of the
parameters of the theory would be redundant .
Appendix Dirac Brackets from Canonical Commutator s
In this Appendix we shall show, in theories of two types, that the for-
mula giving commutators as Dirac brackets times i follows from the usual
canonical commutation relations for a reduced set of variables .
A
Suppose (as in the case of a massive vector field V~) that the quantum
variables T' and II, appearing in the Lagrangian L may be divided into
two classes :* one set Q 1 of independent canonical variables (like Vi(x))
with independent canonical conjugates f'n = aL/ 001 ; and another set
` We are again using a compact notation, in which labels like a, n, and r include a space coordinate
x as well as discrete indices . Repeated labels are summed and integrated. All quantum variables
are understood to be evaluated at the same time, with the common time argument dropped
everywhere. The quantities Y are the same as the Cr introduced in Section 7,2,

Appendix
Dirac brackets 33 3
2r(x) (like V°) whose time- derivatives do not appear in the Lagrangian.
The primary constra ints are the conditions Xjr = 0, where
fir =Yr (7.A. 1 )
are the variables conjugate to the A'. The secondary constraints arise from
the equations of motion 0 = OL/ 0221 for the Y ; we suppose that these
constraints can `solved' i.e., they may be written in the form /z, = 0,
with X2, in the form
(An example is provided by Eq . (7. 6.5), which gives YO in terms of the
independent Ps (here, the FIj) and Qs.) We assume that the independent
Qs and Ps satisfy the usual canonical commutation rules :
The constraint X2r = 0 yields the commutators involving 22 ;
OQn
12r, S 1 = ir'ts ,
where I-'11 is the Poisson bracke t
FPS = VWS]P ,
and, of course, all commutators involving
, vanish :
Pp,, T J ==
~
rs Pn] - Vr , -~)81 = L
ra s l _ 0 .
(7.A.4)
(7.A.5 )
(7.A.6)
(7.A.7 )
Now let us compare these commutators with the Dirac brackets. The
Poisson brackets of the constraint functions ar e
Ci y,is ° ~ 1" ;G i_d P -- 0 ,
Clr,2s = - C25,t!' = XIr, ;(z,slP
(7.A.8 )
(7.A,9 )
(7.A.in)
(In the example of the massive vector field I'r' vanishes, but the discussion
here will apply also for non-vanishing rr~ . )
It is easy to see that the
C-matrix has the inverse
(C-1}1r, ls = rrs
(c- 1 )2r,2s = 0
(7.x . 1 1 )
S

334
7 The Canonical Formalis m
Also, the Poisson brackets of any function A with the constraint functions
are
A
LA, %1 r] P =
IA O-A
0, A
}B G~_B 0, A
0211 'J"
Hence the Dirac bracket is
[A , BID = [Af B] p -
OA
0
Now, if A and B are both functions only of the independent canonical
variables Q' and Pry, then c'~i Jc~,2r = O.Blajr - 0, so the Dirac bracket is
equal to the Poisson bracket. In particular,
Where A is ' and B is a function of Qs and Ps, it is only the fifth term
on the right-hand side of Eq . ( 7.A.12 ) that contributes. In particular
o
r
r
f
1
T"
Where both A and B are l. s, we have only the fourth term
[
r
, A n = Fr
s
-
( 7 .A.] 5 )
Finally, where A is ~~r and B is anything, we have only the first and third
terms, which cancel :
Comparison of Eds. (7 . A. 13 )-(7.A.16) wi th Eqs. (7. A. 3 )-(7,A,7) shows that
in all cases, the commutators are equal t o the Dirac brackets times 1. This
is Knly to be expected, because as remarked in Section 7.6 all Dirac
brackets involving the constraint functions vanis h, so t he Dirac brackets
involving Y and/or ~_3AS are given by using the constraint equations to
express
r and/ or
Y- , in terms of the independent Qs and Ps .
B
Next consider the case where the constraints take the form of conditions
zi,('i') = 0 on the V, which can be solved by expressing them in terms
of a smaller set of unconstrained variables
Q', and an equal number
of separate conditions )(24I ) - {} on the III,, which can be solved b y
expressing then,, in terms of a smaller set of unconstrained P . (We will
see an example in the next chapter, where the constraints on the T" are

Appendix Dirac Brackets 33 5
gauge fixing conditions that are used to eliminate first class constraints,
and the constraints on the IIQ are secondary constraints arising from
the consistency of the first class constraints with the field equations .)
We assume that the unconstrained variables satisfy the usual canonical
commutation relations [Q' , P,,,] =tam,
[[fin, Q'] -= JP,, P.] = 0. The
constrained and unconstrained momenta are related b y
it follows that
or, in other words,
OT'
a
r7Tu
OT'
O
►I
D .
(7.A. 1 7 )
(7 .A . 18)
Now, the constraint Xi,(T) = 0 is satisfied for T' = T" ( Q) for all Q, so
O-ZI r OT'
(~ i7
0 .
O. 116 0
Furthermore, the vectors ( V, ) b = JY1 ,/ OT6 form a complete set perpen-
dicular to all the vectors (U,)~ , Y61C' Q'', because if there were some
other vector Vb with Vb ( U,)h = 0 for all n, then there would be additional
constraints on the 'I'a . Hence Eq. ( 7.A.18 ) implies that
O ,~ I r
i~~ + icy r? Tb
(7.A.20 )
with some unknown coefficients c~ . To determine these coefficients, we
make use of the other constraint, that .72,M) = 0. It follows that
0 = ~, i[`~`~, III,] OX 2,M)
P.III
Using Eq . {7.A.20}, we have then
0, X2rJI1 a Ox1s~ ~ ~ 0;(2r (FI)
aria ins
O'i'b
c'II,
We recognize the factor multiplying ca as the Poisson bracket
OV
a. rib
(7 .A . 21 )
Also, sine ~ls depends only on the T and Zz, depends only on the U .
these are the only non-vanishing Poisson brackets of constraints, so

336
7 The Canonical Formalis m
Thus Eq . (7.A.21) may be writte n
0'XN
III
-CS C'is,-N
,
(7.A .22)
with N running over all constraint functions. For second class constraints,
this has the unique solutio n
3 r7II.
a II,
Using this in Eq . (7.A.20) shows that
-
an" OTh
{7.A.23 }
(7.A .24)
The Poisson brackets of T' and III with the constraint functions are
[X lr, IMP
Oxir
-
f~~~
OX2,
[~``~a X2J p ~ aII '
[X2r , r1ir] P - 0 ,
( 7. A .25 )
so the quantity in brackets on the right-hand side of Eq. (7 .A.24) is the
Dirac bracket
[Ta, nfi] = tff'a f1b] r)
{7.A .26}
as was to be shown. Also, we can easi ly see that because C'-1 has no 1 1
or 22 components, the other Dirac brackets ar e
so trivially
In addition to commutation rules, we also need an explicit formula for
the Hamiltonian. The usual canonical formalism tells us to tak e
the sum running over independent canonical variables . In theories of both
types consi dered in this Appendix, this Hamiltonian may be written in
terms of the constrained variables as
For theories of type A, this is trivial; the sum over a runs over values n,
for which T' = Q'i and fl,, - P, are the independent canonical variables,

Problems
337
together with values r, for which II,. T 9, = 0 . For theories of type B, we
note that Eq . ( 7.A . 1 7) gives
h
PMn = ]Fjh
fJ~~ ~~ T
11 h
which again yields Eq , (7.A .30).
Problems
1 . Consider the theory of a set of real scalar fields (D" , with Lagrangian
density ' = -1 O~~~' OY~'f,~„z(~), where f ,,(O) is an arbitrary
real matrix function of the field. (This is called the non-linear cr-
model.) Carry out the canonical quantization of this theory. Derive
the interaction V [O(t),
(t)] in the interaction picture .
2. Consider a theory of real scalar fields V and Dirac fields V, wit h
Lagrangian density Y =
O +
1, where YO is the usual free-field
Lagrangian density, and 1 is an interaction term involving V and
Ti, but not their derivatives. Derive an explicit expression for the
symmetric energy-momentum tensor Oy' .
3. In the theory described in Problem 2, suppose that the Lagrangian
density is invariant under a global infinitesimal symmetry 60" =
ie Em Om Vn, 6kYi = aeT_j T'j kI'J
.. Derive an explicit expression for
the conserved current associated with this symmetry .
4. Consider the theory of a complex scalar field cD and a real vector
field VP, with Lagrangian density
where D,, = 0j, - ig V,, and F., - c7~, V, - 0, V,,, and , is an arbitrary
function. Carry out the canonical quantization of this theory. Derive
the interaction in the interaction picture .
5. In the theory of Problem 4, derive expressions for the symmetric
energy-momentum tensor OY' and for the conserved current associ-
ated with the symmetry under 60 = ic(D, 6 V ~` = 0 .
6. Prove that the Dirac bracket satisfies the Jacobi identity ( 7.6 .23 ).
7. Prove that the Dirac bracket is independent of the choice of con
straint functions XN used to describe a given submanifold of phase
space .

338
7 The Canonieal Formalis m
References
1. H. B. G. Casimir, Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet. 51, 635 (1948) ; M. J .
Spaarnay, Nature 1 80, 334 (1957) .
2. F. Belinfante, Physica 6, 8 $7 (1939 ) ; also see L. Rosenfeld,
femoires
de I'Academie Roy. Belgique 6, 30 (1930).
3 . See, e.g., S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New York,
1972) : Chapter 12 .
4. See, e.g., J. Wess and J. Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravaty,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1983), and original references
quoted therein .
5. P. A. M. Dirac Lectures on Quan tum Mechanics (Yeshiva University,
New York, 1964) . Also see P. A. M. Dirac Can. J. Math. 2, 129 (1950) ;
Prod. Roy . Soc . London, ser. A, 246, 326 (19 5 8) - P. G . Bergmann, Heiv .
Phys. Acta Suppl. IV, 79 (1956) .
6 . T. Maskawa. and H. Nakajima, Prog. Theor. Phys . 56, 1295 (1976 ). I
am grateful to J. Feinberg for bringing this reference to my attention .

Electrodynamics
The original approach to quantum electrodynamics was to take for granted
Maxwell's classical theory of electromagnetism, and quantize it. It will
probably not surprise the reader that this book will follow a different path .
We shall first infer the need for a principle of gauge invariance from the
peculiar difficulties that arise in formulating a quantum theory of massless
particles with spin, and then deduce the main features of electrodynamics
from the gauge invariance principle . After that we shall follow a more
conventional modern approach, in which one takes gauge invariance as
the starting point and uses it to deduce the existence of a vector potential
describing massless particles of unit spin .
It is too soon to tell which of these two alternatives corresponds to
the logical order of nature. Most theorists have tended to take gauge
invariance as a starting point, but in modern string theories the argument
runs the other way ; one first notices a state of mass zero and unit spin
among the normal modes of a string, and then from that deduces the
gauge invariance of the effective field theory that describes such particles.
At any rate, as we shall see, using either approach one is led to the
quantized version of Maxwell's theory, still the paradigmatic example of
a successful quantum field theory.
8.1 Gauge Invariance
Let's start by recalling the problems encountered in constructing covariant
free fields for a massless particle of helicity ± 1 . We saw in Section 5 .9
that there is no difficulty in constructing an antisymmetric tensor free
field f ft, (x) for such particles. This field can be expressed in terms of the
four-potential a,,(x), given by Eq . (5.9.23), through the familiar relation
fl,,,(x) = o . a,,(x) - c,.a,,(x) .
(8.1.1 )
However, Eq. (5 .9.23 shows that the a,,(x) transforms as a four-vecto r
339

340
8 Electrodynamics
only up to a gauge transformatio n
Uo(A)a, (x) Uo-i(11,) = A,,'ay(Ax) + o,Q(x, A ) . (5.1.2)
There is, in fact, no way to construct a true four-vector as a linear
combination of the creation and annihilation operators for helicity ±1 .
This is one way of underst anding the presence of singulariti es at m = 0 in
the prop agator of a massive vector fiel d
APv (x, Y) = (2-W,
.
d4, !q-(x-y) ~9V + 41'~fv /mz
q2 + m2 - ie
'
which prevent us from dealing with massless particles of helici#y ±1 by
simply passing #a the limit rra --* 0 of the theory of a massive particle of
spin one .
VI{e could avoid these problems by demanding that all interactions
involve only* F~,,(x) ~_ r7,,A,(x} - a,,A,,(x) and its derivatives, not Ap(x),
but this is not the mast general possibility, and not tie one realized
in nature . Instead of laanishing A,,{x} from the action, we shall require
instead that the part of the action IM far matter and its interaction with
radiation be invariant under tie general gauge transformatio n
(at least when the matter fields satisfy the field equations sa that the extra
term in Ey. (8. L2) should have n o effect. The change i n the matter action
under the transformatians ( 8. 1 .3 may be writte n
6! , _ dux
6A1~
X)
aue(x). (8 .1 .4)
Hence the Lorentz invariance of Im requires tha t
~~~
Op 6
A
AW
= 0 .
(8 .x .5 )
This is trivially true if Im involves only F,,4, (x) and its derivatives, along
with matter fields_ In this cas e
6IM
= 20
,,
b1m
6A"(X) a F,,v (x)
Bit if IM involves Ajx} itself then Eq. (5.1 .5 ) is anon-trivia] constraint
on the theory.
Now, what sort of theory will provide conserved currents to which we
can couple the field AP(x)? Vie saw in Section 7.3 that infinitesimal internal
We now use Au and F,,V for the electrornagnelic potential vector and the field strength tensor
because these are interacting fields .

8.1 Gauge Invariance
341
symmetnes of the action imply the existence of conserved currents . In
particular, if the transformation* *
leaves the matter action invariant for a constant c, then for general
infinitesimal functions E{x} the change in the matter action must take the
form
51M = -f
d4x ,I~` (x)aye(x). (8.1 .7)
When the matter fields satisfy their field equations, the matter action is
stationary with respect to any variation of the T4, so in this case (8 .1 .7)
must vanish, and hence
OPP = 0. (8 . 1 .8)
In particular, we saw in section 7.3 that if Im is the integral of a function
Ym afV and r?},V, then the conserved current is given by t
and this generates the transformations (8-1 .6) in the sense tha t
[Q , T'(x) ] = ----Rr T"'(x ) ,
(8 .1 .9)
where Q is the time-independent charge operato r
Q = I d'x .l° .
(8.1.1 0)
KVe can therefore construct a Lorentz-invariant theory by coupling the
vector field 4 to the conserved current P, in the sense that 6Im16A,,(x)
is taken to be proportional to P(x). Any constant of proportionality may
be absorbed into the definition of the overall scale of the charges q 1, so
we may simply set these quantities equal :
6
1M
= P {x}
6 A,U(X)
The conservation of electric charge only allows us to fix the values of all
charges in terms of the value of any one of them, conventionally taken to
k3ecausc the field transformation rnalrix is taken now to be diagonal it is not convenient here to
use the summation convention for sums over field indices, so there is no sum over C in Eq . (8.1 .6) .
Here V is understood to run over all independent fields other Than A
. We use a capital psi to
indicate that these are Heisenberg-picture fields, whose time-dependence includes the effects of
interactions . Of course, this `Yr is not to be confused with astate-vector or wave function .

342
8 Electrodynamic s
be the electron charge, denoted -e. It is Eq. (8, 1 .11) that gives a definite
rrieaning$ to the value of e.
The requirement (8.1.11 may be restated as a principle of invariance :-i°
the matter action is invariant under the joint transformation s
J A~(x) = a.,e (x) ,
(8 .1 .12
6 `~~ (-x) = ie(x)R,, `Y,,(x)
(8 . 1.13)
A symmetry of this type with an arbitrary function e(x) is called a local
symm.etryF, or a gauge invariance of the second kind . A symmetry under
a transformation with c constant is called a global symmetry, or a gauge
invariance of the first kind. Several exact local symmetries are now known,
but the only purely global symmetries appear to be accidents enforced by
other principles . (See Section 12.5.)
We have not yet said anything about the action for photons themselves .
As a guess, we can take this to be the same as for massive vector fields,
but with m. = 0 :
If ~ - ~
d 4x F11vF''~V -
(8 .1 . 14)
This is the same as the action used in classical clectradynamics, but its
real justification is that it is (up to a constant) the unique gauge-invariant
functional that is quadratic in F,,ti,, without higher derivatives. Also, as
we will see in the next section, it leads to a consistent quantum theory .
If there are any terms in the action of with higher derivatives and/or
of higher order in Feu they can be lumped into what we have called
the matter action. Using Eqs . (8.1 .11) and (8.1.14), the field equation for
electromagnetism now reads
o =
Crr + rte ] = ~~~~'v + F .
(8.1 .15)
5A ,,
We recognize these as the usual inhomogeneous Maxwell equations, with
current P . There are also other, homogeneous, Maxwell equations
which follow directly from the definition F., = "I,A v -- cruAp.
In the above discussion, we have started with the existence of massless
spin one particles, and have been led to infer the invariance of the matter
action under a local gauge transformation (8.1 .12), ( 8, 1 .13 ). As usually
presented, the derivation runs in the opposite direction . That is, one starts
Of course, Eq. (8. 1.I 1) fixes the definition of e only after we have de lined how we are normal izing
A,,(x) . The question of electromagnetic fie ld normalization is taken up in Section 10.4 .

8.2 Constraints and Gauge Conditions
343
with a global internal symmetry
and asks what must be done to promote this to a local symmetry
If the Lagrange density Y depended only on fields V(x) and not on
their derivatives then it would make no difference whether e is constant
or not ; invariance with
E constant would imply invariance with e a
function of spacetime position. But all realistic Lagrangians do involve
field derivatives, and here we have the problem that derivatives of fields
transform differently from fields themselves :
~ ~11V(x) = ie(x)qer',,V(x) + iq~V(x)c?,,-F{x} . ($.1 .1 9
In order to cancel the second term here, we `invent' a vector field A J!(x)
with transformation rule
and require that the Lagrangian density depend on
c~,,V and A ,, only in
the combination
D~~~ 0}jTt - i q(A$jTt-
which transforms just like V
A matter Lagrangian density Y' M(T, Dom) that is formed only out of V
and D.V will be invariant under the transformations (8.1,18), (8 .1.20),
with c(x) an arbitrary function, if it is invariant with E a constant. With
the Lagrangian of this form, we have
dIM M
c
which is the same as Eq . ($.i.ll). (We could also include F,,, and its
derivatives in Ym .)
From this point of view, the masslessness of the
particles described by AP is a consequence of gauge invariance rather
than an assumption : a term - ; rn2APAP in the Lagrangi an density would
violate gauge invariance .
8.2
Constraints and Gauge Conditions
There are aspects of electrodynamics that stand in the way of quantizing
the theory as we did for various theories of massive particles in the

344
8 Electrodynamics
previous chapter, As usual, we may define the canonical conjugates to the
electromagnetic vector potential by
rip OY
O(OaAM)
Quantization by the usual rules would give
(8.2 . 1
But this is not possible here, because Apt and II'' are subject to several
constraints.
The first constraint arises from the fact that the Lagrangian density is
independent* of the time-derivative of A O, and therefore
r1°(x) -- o. (8.2.2
This is called a primary constraint, because it follows directly from the
structure of the Lagrangian. There is also a secondary constraint here,
which follows from the field equation for the quantity fixed by the primary
constraint :**
1. OY
OFjQ
r1Aa
(8.2.3)
the time-derivative term dropping out because Fm = 0. Even though
the matter Lagrangian may generally depend on AO, the charge density
depends only on the canonical matter fieldst Qn and their canonical
conjugates P,~
JI) = _
i
qe'T'' = ---i ~ PnRn Q
n - 5.2.4)
E
Hence Eq. (8 .2.3) is a functional relation among canonical variables .
Both Eq . (8 .2.2) and Eq . (8 .2.3) are inconsistent with the usual as-
sumptions that [A,, (x, t),IU(y,t)] = t6~th 3(x - y) and [Q'(x, t),nV(y,t)] _
lpn(xa 01 [I V1Y' 01 = 0.
We encountered a similar problem in the theory of the massive vector
field. In that case we found two equivalent ways of dealing with it :
either by the method of Dirac brackets or, more directly, b y treating only
For Yp = -FuVFP'14, we have
= -FUP , whi ch vanishes for it = 0 because FO' is
antisymmetric. For matter
L..agrangians YM that involve only ' f"~ and D.V, the prescription
(8 .1 21 ) tells us that .PM does not depend on any der ivatives of any A
.
Even if the matter
LagKangian depends also on F~,V, r7~~q f~(c3, .4u) will be again anlisymmetric i n a and tip, and
therefore will vanish for ki = v = O .
As usua l , i, j, etc . run over the va lues 1, 2, 3 ,
Due to exhaustion of alphabetic resources, I have had to adopt a notation here that is different
from that of the previous chapter. The symbols Qn and P„ are now reserved for t he canonica l
matter fields and their canonical conjugates,
1`CfipCCT1VCly, while the canonica l electromagnetic
fields and canonical conjugates are A, and fl ; .

8.2 Constraints and Gauge Conditions
345
A j and n, as canonical variables, solving the analog of Eq . ( $.2.3) to
calculate A° in terms of these variables. It is clear that here we cannot
use Dirac brackets ; the constraint functions X here are II° and 0;IIi - J0
(as compared with an - m IA° - J') and these obviously have vanishing
Poisson brackets. In Dirac's terminology, the constraints (8.2.2) and ($ .2.3 )
arefirst class . Nor can we eliminate A 0 as a dynamical variable by solving
for it in terms of the other variables. Instead of giving A° for all time,
Eq. (8.2.3) is a mere initial condition ; if Eq. (8.2.3) is satisfied at one time,
then it is satisfied for all times, because (using the field equations for the
other fields A'), we have
~Y
0Fi6
o,
+ a
!
aj
~ ~
0-Fjj
- ai ~ ~ - ~0i"
and the current conservation condition then give s
00 0` r~F -
J° = 0 .
z4
(8 .15)
It should not be surprising that we still have four components of Au
with only three field equations, because this theory has a local gauge
symmetry that makes it, in principle, impossible to infer the values of the
fields at arbitrary times from their values and rates of change at any one
time. Given any solution A,,(x, t) of the field equations, we can always
find another solution Ai,(x, t) + 0~,c(x, t) with the same value and time-
derivative at t = 0 (by choosing e so that its first and second derivatives
vanish there) but which differs from Ap(x, t) at later times .
Because of this partial arbitrariness of A~t(x, t), it is not possible to apply
the canonical quantization procedure directly to A,, (or, as for finite mass,
to A). Of the various approaches to this difficulty, two are particularly
useful. One is the modem method of gauge-invariant quantization, to
be discussed in Volume II. The other, which will be followed here, is to
exploit the gauge invariance of the theory, to `change a gauge' . That is,
we make a finite gauge transformatio n
A,,(x) -+ A,jx) + 0,,).(x) ,
Tt(x) --~ exp (iq1;.(X)) T,,'(X)
to impose a condition on A,,(x) that will allow us to apply the methods
of canonical quantization. There are various gauges that have been found
useful in various applicatians :f
Here 0 is any comp lex scalar field with q ~- 0; this gauge condit ion is used w hen the gauge
symmetry is spontaneous ly broken by a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value of (P.

346
8 Electrodynamics
Lorentz (or Landau) gauge : oOAP = 0
Coulomb gauge: V
- A = 0
Temporal gauge: A° = 0
Axial gauge: A' = 0
Unitarity gauge: rea l
The canonical quantization procedure works most easily in the axial or
Coulomb gauge, but of course Coulomb gauge keeps manifest rotation
invariance in a way that axial gauge does not, so we will adopt Coulomb
gauge here.'-
To check that this is possible, note that if AP does not satisfy the
Coulomb gauge condition, then the gauge-transformed field A ' + ~P ~ will,
provided we choose ~ so that V2~ _ -V
- A. From now on, we assume
that this transformation has been made, so tha t
V•A=O. (82 6 )
It will be convenient henceforth to limit ourselves to theories in which
the matter Lagrangian Y m may depend on matter fields and their time-
derivatives and also on A' but not on derivatives of AP . (The standard
theories of the electrodynamics of scalar and Dirac fields have Lagrangians
of this type.) Then the only term in the Lagrangian that depends on F,,,
is the kinematic term -' F,,.,F , '', and the constraint equation (8.2.3) read s
O-i fro = J°
.
(8.2.7 )
Together with the Coulomb gauge condition (8 .2.6), this yields
- V2A0 , Ja ?
(8.2.8
which can be solved to give
A°(x, t) = day
JO(Y
' t)
(8.2.9)
47rlx -- Y l
The remaining degrees of freedom are Ai, with i = Z, 2, 3, subject to the
gauge condition V
- A = 0 .
As mentioned earlier, the charge density depends only on the canonical
matter fields Q" and their canonical conjugates iP,,, so Eq . ($.2.9) represents
an explicit solution for the auxiliary field A 0 .
8.3 Quantization in Coulomb Gauge
There is still an impediment to the canonical quantization of electrody-
namics in the Coulomb gauge. Even after we use Eq. (8.2.9) to eliminate
AO (and III) from the list of canonical variables, we cannot apply the usual

8.3 Quantization in Coulomb Gauge 34 7
canonical commutation relations to A ' and Iii, because there are two re-
maining constraints on these variables.* One of them is the Coulomb
gauge condition
X lx = O i Al (X) _ 0 .
(8 . 3 . 1 )
The Other is the secondary constraint Eq. ($.2.3), which requires that
(8 .3.2 )
Neither constraint is consistent with the usual commutation relations
[Ai{x},IIj (y)] = i6zj S 3 (x - y), because operating on the right-hand side
with either )/0x' or 0/0y} does not give zero .
These constraints are of a type known as second class, for which there
is a universal prescription for the commutation relations, discussed in
section 7.6. Note that the constraint functions have the Poisson bracket s
Czx,i Y = [i~ 1x, XIYl P _ 0 7
C2x,2y
LY,2xa x2}l P
0
where here, for any functionals U and V ,
JU
J V dV
6 U
lu, V]p
d3X
[
bAj (x) Mli(x)
bAi(x) bHi(x)
(8.3.3 )
The `matrix' CN ,W is non-singular, which identifies these as second class
constraints. Also, the field variables A ' may be expressed in terms of
independent canonical variables, which may, for instance, be taken as
Q 1 x = Al{x}, Q2x = A2(x), with A 3 given by the solution of Eq . (5 .3 .1 ) :
A'( x) _ - ~
ds [fir A ' (x% x2,
S) + e2A2(X 1
, X2, S)]
Using Eq . (8 .3.2), the canonical conjugates IIi to A ' may likewise be
expressed in terms of the canonical conjugates P,,, and A2, to Q1, , and
Q2x. In such cases, Part B of the Appendix to the previous chapter
tells us that if the independent variables Ql x, Qzx, P1, and Fix satisfy
the usual canonical commutation relations, then the commutators of the
constrained variables and their canonical conjugates are given (aside from
a factor i) by the corresponding Dirac brackets (7 .6 .20). This prescription
has the great advantage that we do not have to do use explicit expressions
for the dependent variables in terms of the independent ones .
In this section i, j, etc, run over the va lues 1,2,3 . We continue the practice of taking all operators
at the same time, and omitting the time argument .

348
8 Electrodynamics
To calculate the Dirac brackets, we note that the matrix C has the
inverse
d~k e lk'(x-r)
(27z) 3
k2
1
47zlx - Y I
(8.3.4)
Al so, the non-vanishing Poisson b rackets of the A' and Hi with the
constraint functions are
and
RIO), x2ylp = +f~~~
Y)
H ence according to Eqs. (7.6. 19) and (7.6. 20), the equal-time commutators
are
r'2
1
i
Oxi0 x' (4x - Y J
[A"(x), A"(y)] = [1-li(x), Hj(y)] - 0 .
(8 .3-5)
Note that these are consistent with the Coulomb gauge conditions (8 .3 .1)
and (8.3.2), as is guaranteed by the general properties of the Dirac bracket .
Now, what is H in electrodynamics? For the class of theories discussed
in the previous section where only the kinematic term - :1 f d3xF1, F"' in
the Lagrangian depends on A, varying the Lagrangian with respect to A
without worrying about the constraint V
- A = 0 give s
bAi (
)
P_XJ
But with A constrained by the condition V - A = 0, variational derivatives
with respect to A are not really well defined . If the variation of L under a
change A in A is 6L = f dux y . 6A, then since K - A = 0, we also have
6L - f dux [ , 4 0 + VJV] A for any scalar function ~flx). Thus all we can
conclude from inspection of the Lagrangian is that H equals A.(x)+VA°{x}
plus the gradient of some scalar. This ambiguity is removed by condition
( 8.3.2), which requires that V • H = --J° = V2 A Because V • A = 0, we
conclude that Eq. (5 .3 .6) does indeed give the correct formula for III .
Although the commutation relations (8 .3.5) are reasonably simple, we
must face the complication that IT does not commute with matter fields
and their canonical conjugates. If F is any functional of these matter
degrees of freedom, then its Dirac bracket with A vanishes, but its Dirac

8.3 Quantization in Coulomb Gauge 349
bracket with H is
[Fk H(Z)I D = -f
~3 xd3 y [F, %2x] P 47r lx - yj U lye ~(41 P
= - j d3x X Y [F, Jo(x)] p
47r Ix 1-y I
In order to facilitate the t ran sition to the interaction pictu re, instead of
expressing the Hamiltonian in terms of A and H, we shall write it in terms
of A and IIl, where IIl is the solenoidal part of H .
IIl = II -PA°=A, (8 .3.7)
for which L F, Tll(z)] vanishe s. By using the facts th at II1(x) commutes
with Il (y) - [I-L(y) = VA°(y) and that v j A° (x) commutes with OjA°(y ), it
i s easy to see th at 71( x) satisfies the same commuta ti on relations (8 .3.5)
as C[ (x), and also the simple constraint
v - n1= o .
(8 . 3.8)
Now we need to construct a Hamiltonian . According to the general
results of the Appendix to Chapter 7, we can apply the usual relation
between the Hamiltonian and Lagrangian using the constrained variables
A and IIL, without first having explicitly to write the Hamiltonian in
terms of the unconstrained Qs and P s . In electrodynamics, this gives
j d'x ~IIL jA~ + Pnon - Y1 1 (83.9)
where, as mentioned earlier, T and P,, are to be understood as the matter
canonical fie lds and their canonical conjugates. (We can use IIL in place
of 17 in Eq. (8 .3.9) because V • A = 0 .)
To be specific, consider a theory with a Lagrangian density of the for m
Y
~ FpvFyy + Jv A" + smatter
(8.3 .10)
where .I,,, is a current that does not involve AP , and maitc,- is the La-
grangian for whatever other fields do appear in P, aside from their
electromagnetic interactions, which are given explicitly by the term ,I,,A 4
in Eq . (8.3.10) . (The electrodynamics of spin particles has a Lagrangian
of this form, but the electrodynamics of spinless particles is more compli-
cated.) Replacing A everywhere with II-L, this gives a Hamiltonian (8 .3.9)
of the form
H _
d3 x
Lni +
~ (K X A)2 - ; (IIl + VA4)2 - .I
• A + ,]OAOI + HM }

350
8 Electrodynamics
where Hm is the Hamiltonian for matter fields, excluding their electro-
magnetic interactions
HM =
X x ~ P,, On - Yma iter) .
Using the solution (8.2.9) for A°, this i s
H
dux ~ 1JT~ + !(V x A)2 - J - A +
Z J°Ar'] + HM
The term
~ .IOA' may look peculiar, but this is nothing but the familiar
Coulomb energy
Vc0u] = z ~ dux JO Ao
? l fd
3YJ11(X)J11(Y)
47L I X -
( $.3.12)
The reader can verify, using the commutation relations (8 .3.5), that the rate
of change of any operator function F of A and R is given by iF = [F, H],
as it should be .
8.4 Electrodynamics in the Interaction Picture
We now break up the Hamiltonian (8.3 .11) into a free-particle term Ho
and an interaction V
H = Ho +
V,
H,, = f d-'x
L
V = - jdx J ' A + VCou j + smatter ,
(5 .4. x)
(8A . 2)
(8 .4.3)
where Hmattero and Vmatler are the free-particle and interaction terms
in Hmatxera and Vcqu] is the Coulomb interaction
(8.3.12) .
The total
Hamiltonian (8 .4.1) is time-independent, so Eqs. (8.4.2) and (8.4.3) can
be evaluated at any time we like (as long as both are evaluated at the
same time), in particular at t = 0. As in Chapter ?, the transition to the
interaction picture is made by applying the similarity transformatio n
V(t) = exp(iHot) V[A, Ill, Q, P] t=o exp{- Wo t}
V [*0, 140, q(t), At}] (8 .4.4)
where P here denotes the canonical conjugates to the matter fields Q, and
any operator a(x, t) in the interaction picture is related to its value O(x, U)

8.4 Electrodynamics in the Interaction Picture
in the Heisenberg picture at t - 0 by
so that
i o(x, t) = [o(x, t), fin]
35 1
(8.4 .5)
(5 .4 .6)
(We are dropping the subscript ,L on n(x) .) Since Eq. ($.4.5) is a similarity
transformation, the equal-time commutation relations are the same as is
the Heisenberg picture :
02
1
[ax, t ), az '(y, t)] = i
6j i 63(x - Y) + Ox~Oxf 41r Ix - y J
(8.4. 7)
~a ~ (x, t), ai (y, t)] =0, (8.4.8 )
and likewise for the matter fields and their conjugates . For the same
reason, the constraints ( $.2 .6) and (8 .3.8) still apply
V - a=0 ,
P•n=Q .
(8 .4. 10)
(8 .4 .11 )
To establish the relation between it and it, we must use Eq. (8.4.6) to
evaluate a :
i1.Ej(x5 t) - [a Z lx 7 t J} HV]
C72
: f d3y [3 .x - y) +
7z
f
(
y, t)
c;xYx}47zlx-y l
We can replace 0510xf in the second term with -r~ 10yf, integrate by parts,
and use E q. (8.4.11), yielding
a =It
(8.4.12)
just as in the Heisenberg picture . The field equation is likewise determined
by
ifzi (x , t) = [-icj (x, t), moo]
= -i f d'y [6,jj'(x - y) +
x (V x V x a{y, t})} ,
a2
i
Ox' Ox1 47c 1
- Y J
which (using Eys . ($.4.1 0) and (8.4.12) just yields the usual wave equatio n
11 a =;:= 0 . (8A 13)

352
8 Electrodynamics
since AO is not an independent Heisenberg-picture field variable, but rather
a functional (8.2.9) of the matter fields and their canonical conjugates
that vanishes in the limit of zero charges, we do not introduce any
corresponding operator ao in the interaction picture, but rather tak e
ao = 0. (8 ,4. 14)
The most general real solution of Eqs . (8.4.10), (8.4.13), and (8,4.14)
may be written
alu(x) = (21r)-'/'
d3P E PP eNP, a) op, cr) + e-'P" e'* (p, a) at (p, cr)
(8A.15 )
where pO -
JpJ ; eg(p, cr) are any two independent 'polarization vectors'
satisfying
P - e*a) = 0
(8.4.16)
e°( A} G ) T 0,
(8.4.17)
and a(p, a) are a pair of operator coefficients, with d a two-valued index .
By adjusting the normalization of u(p, a), we can normalize the e il(p, a ) so
that the completeness relation read s
ea* a}ei(p7 CO" = 6ij - Pi PjIIP I,
(8.4.15 )
For instance, we could take the e{ p, rr} to be the same polarization vectors
that we encountered in Section 5 .9 :
1/
el'(P, ±1 ) ;--= R(P)
0
(8.4. 19)
where R(p) is a standard rotation that carries the three-axis into the
direction of p. Using Eqs. (8.4.18) and (8.4.12), we can easily see that the
commutation relations (8 . 4. 7)-(8 .4 .9) are satisfied if (and in fact only if)
the operator coefficients in Eq. (8 .4 .15) satisfy
(8.4.20)
(8.4.21 )
As remarked before for massive particles, this result should be regarded
not so much as an alternative derivation of Eqs . (8 .4.20) and (8.4.21), but
rather as a verification that Eq . (8.4.2) gives the correct Hamiltonian for
free massless particles of helicity ±1 . In the same spirit one can also
use Eqs. (8.4.12) and (8.4.15) in Eq. (8 .4.2) to calculate the free-photon

8.5 The Photon Propagator 353
Hamiltonian
Ho
id3p
lp' [a(p,u), af(p, a] +
f
d'p E p' (a'(p, u)a(p, a) + W(p - p))
(8.4.22)
CT
which (aside from an inconsequential infinite c-number term) is just what
we should expect.
Finally, we record that the interaction (8 .4 .4) in the interactian picture
is
~ (O .- -
d 3X j,,(x, t) aP(x a t) + VCoul (t) + Vrnatier( t) }
(8.4.23 )
where in terms of the current J in the Heisenberg picture
j,,(x, t) = exp(Wot) J,, (x, 0) exp(-iHat) , ($.4.24)
while Vc,,,](t) is the Coulomb ter m
VCOU) (t} = exp(iHot)Vco„i exp(-Wo t )
= fd3, day ~~~x, t} j°(y, ~) (8.4.25)
J 4nIx - y I
and Vmatter~t) is the non -elect ramagnefic part of the matter field interaction
in the interaction picture :
Vrnatter(t) _ CxP(iHO0 smatter CW(-iHpO . (8 .4 .26)
We have written jl-ap instead of j
- a in Eq. ($.4.23), but these are equal
because am has been defined to have ao = 0.
8.5
The Photon Propagator
The general Feynman rules described in Chapter 6 dictate that an in-
ternal photon line in a Feynman diagram contributes a factor to the
corresponding term in the 5-matrix, given by the propagator :
- iAg,.(x - y ) = ((DVAcx T {a,, (x) , a, (Y)} (DvAc) (8 .5.1 )
where T as usual denotes atime-ardered product . Inserting our formula
(5.4.15) for the electromagnetic potential then yield s
- iAMV (x `W' Y) _
d
~ P~,,(p} [e18(x - y) + e ~'' fy--x} O(Y - x) ]
(2n ) 2 Ipl
(S.s.2)

354
where
8 Electrodynamics
=+a
(8.5 3 )
and pY in the exponentials is taken with p° =
pl- We recall from
Eqs. (5.4.18) and (8 .4.17) that
r
Pij(P) = 61] - F Fj
~A 1
(8.5 .4)
As we saw in Chapter 6, the theta functions in Eq. (8.5 .2) may be expressed
as integrals over an independent time-component q Q of an off-shell four-
momentum qP, so that Eq . (8 .5.2) may be rewritten
A,,, (x - y) = (27r )-4 f dq q2 - 1-6
eiq-(X-V)
.
(8-5 .5)
Thus in using the Feynman rules in momentum space, the contribution
of an internal photon line carrying four-momentum q that runs between
vertices where the photon is created and destroyed by fields a" and a' is
-i f'1,(9)
(27r)4 q2 - iF F
(8.5 .6)
It will he very useful (though apparently perverse) to rewrite Eq . (8.5 .4)
as
where n,' - (0, 0, 0, 1) is a fixed time-like vector, q' as usual is q2 - (q0)2,
but qO is here entirely arbitrary. We shall choose q° in Eq . (8 .5.7) to be
given by four-momentum conservation : it is the difference of the matter
p° s flowing in and out of the vertex where the photon line is created .
The terms proportional to q,, and/or q, then do not contribute to the
S-matrix, because the factors q,, or q, act like derivatives
0. and o,,,
and the photon fields aA and a, are coupled to currents jF` and ,jV that
satisfy the conservation condition 0,j" = O .W The term proportional to
n,nV contains a factor q2 that cancels the q2 in the denominator of the
propagator, yielding a term that is the same as would be produced by a
term in the action :
-i ~ J dux
day [-i~}A{x}] [-i.!°(Y)]
d" eiq
-(x-y)
.f
(2-g)" I CI 1
"1-his argument as given here is little better than hand-waving. The result has been justified
by a detailed analysis of Feynman diagrams,3 but the easiest way to treat this problem is by
path-integral methods, as discussed in Section 9 .6 .

8.6 Feynman Rules far Spinor Electrodynamics
35 5
The integral over q 0
here yields a delta function in time, so this is
equivalent to a correction to the interaction Hamiltonian
V(t), of the
farm
1 J d3, J d3y AX, t) j11(Y' t)
~ 47rlx- Y J
This is just right to cancel the Coulomb interaction (8 .4 .25) . Our result
is that the photon propagator can be taken effectively as the covariant
quantity
q2 - iF
with the Coulomb interaction dropped from now on . We see that the
apparent violation of Lorentz invariance in the instantaneous Coulomb
interaction is cancelled by another apparent violation of Lorentz invari-
ance, that as noted in Section 5 .9 the fields a"(x) are not four-vectors,
and therefore have a non-covariant propagator. From a practical point of
view, the important point is that in the momentum space Feynman rules,
the contribution of an internal photon line is simply given b y
-i 4'UV
(2tr)a q' - ie
and the Coulomb interaction is dropped .
8.6 Feynman Rules for Spin or Electrodynamics
(8.5 .9)
We are now in a position to state the Feynman rules for calculating the
S-matrix in quantum electrodynamics . For definiteness, we will consider
the electrodynamics of a single species of spin
-1 particles of charge q = -e
and mass m. We will call these fermions electrons, but the same formalism
applies to moons and other such particles . The simplest gauge- and
Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian for this theory is "
The electric current four-vector is then simply
J ~ _ c'AP
- i e 'I`yPT
($ . 6. 1 )
(8.b.2)
In Chapter 12 we wil l discuss reasons why more complicated leans are excluded from the
Lagrangian density .

356
8 Electrodynamics
The interaction (8.4.23) in the interaction picture is here
(There is no Vrr,atter here.) As we have seen, the Coulomb term VCo„ I (r)
just serves to cancel a part Kf the photon propagator that is non-covariant
and local in time .
Following the general results Kf Section 6.3, we can state the momentum
space Feynman rules for the connected part of the S-matrix in this theory
as follows :
(i) Draw all Feynman d iagrams with up to some given number of vertices.
The diagrams consist of electron lines carrying arrows and photon lines
without arrows, with the lines joined at vertices, at each of which there is
one incoming and one outgoing electron line and one photon line. There
is one external line coming into the diagram from below or going upwards
out of the diagram for each particle in the initial or final states, respec-
tively ; electrons are represented by external lines carrying arrows pointing
upwards into or out of the diagram, while positrons are represented by
lines carrying arrows pointing downwards into or out of the diagram.
`here are also as many internal lines as are needed to give each vertex
the required number of attached lines . Each internal line is labelled with
an off-mass-shell four-momentum flowing in a definite direction along the
line (taken conventionally to flow along the direction of the arrow for
electron lines. Each external line is labelled with the momentum and spin
z-component or felicity of the electron or photon in the initial and final
states .
{ii} Associate factors with the components of the diagram as follows
:
Vertices
Label each vertex with a four-component Dirac index ix at the electron
line with its arrow coming into the vertex, a Dirac index fl at the electron
line with its arrow going out of the vertex, and a spacetime index
1u at the
photon line. For each such vertex, include a factor
where k and k' are the electron four-momenta entering and leaving the
vertex, and q is the photon four-momentum entering the vertex (or minus
the photon momentum leaving the vertex) .

8.6 Feynman Rules for Spinor Electrodynamics 3 5 7
Externa l lines :
Label each external line with the three-momentum p and spin z-component
or helicity a of the particle in the initial or final state . For each line for an
electron in the final state running out of a vertex carrying a Dirac label ~
on this line, include a factar*
D P (p, a)
(21r )1/2
For each line for a positron in the final state running into a vertex carrying
a Dirac label a on this line, include a factor
L'x (p, (-T)
(8 .6.6)
(27r)3/2
For each line for an electron in the initial state running into a vertex
carrying a Dirac label at on this line, include a facto r
( 2,g )31'
For each line for a positron in the initial state running out of a vertex
carrying a Dirac label # Kn this line, include a factor
00 (~, CT)
(8.6.8)
( 2,r)3/'
The us and vs are the four-component spinors discussed in Section S .S .
For each line for a photon in the final state connected to a vertex carrying
a spacetime label p on this line, include a factor
(27r)3/2
/i
For each line for a photon in the initial state connected to a vertex carrying
a spacetime label y on this line, include a factor
(2 n)1/2 72~jp
The eP are the photon polarization four-vectors described in the previous
section.
In ternal lines :
For each internal electron line carrying a four momentum k and running
from a vertex carrying a Dirac label P to another vertex carrying a Dirac
A matrix 0 has been extracted from the interaction in (8.6.4), so that u and v appear instead of
ufi and VT'

35 8
8 Electrodynamics
label x, include a factor
(27y)4 k 2 + rri 2 - ie
(We are here using the very convenient `Dirac slash' notation ; for any
four-vector 0`, ~ denotes For each internal photon line carrying
a four-momentum q that runs between two vertices carrying spacetime
labels y and v include a factor
-i
qs
i
V
(8,6. 1 2)
{2 7r }4 q'- - ie
(iii) Integrate the product of all these factors over the four-momenta
carried by the internal lines, and sum over all Dirac and spacetime indices .
(iv) Add up the results obtained in this way from each Feynman diagram .
Additional combinatoric factors and fermionic signs may need to be
included, as described in parts (v) and (vi) of Section 6 .1 .
The difficulty of evaluating Feynman diagrams increases rapidly with
the number of internal lines and vertices, so it is important to have some
idea of what numerical factors tend to suppress the contributions of the
more complicated diagrams . We shall estimate these numerical factors
including not only the factors of the electronic charge e associated with
vertices, but also the factors of 2 and it from vertices, propagators, and
momentum space integrals.
Consider a connected Feynman diagram with V vertices, I internal
lines, E external lines, and L loops . These quantities are not independent,
but are subject to relations already used in Section 6.3 :
There is a factor e(27r)4 from each vertex, a factor (2 ;r )-4 from each
internal line, and a four-dimensional momentum space integral for each
loop. The volume element in four-dimensional Euclidean space in terms
of a radius parameter K is a E 2 n2 dre2, so each loop contributes a factor 7r2 .
Thus the diagram will contain a factor
e
2
L
(2 Z)4V e v (2 7, )T417r2L = (21r )4gE'-2
1 67E 2
The number E of external lines is fixed for a given process, so we see that
the expansion parameter that governs the suppression of Feynman graphs
for each additional loop is
e
~X
16~2 - ~ =
5.81 x 10-~
.

8.6 Teynmun Rules for Spinor Electrodynamics
359
Fortunately this is small enough that good accuracy can usually be ob-
tained from Feynman diagrams with at most a few loops .
We must say a little more about the spin states of photons and electrons
in realistic experiments, where not every particle in the initial and final
states has a definite known helicity or spin z-component. This consid-
eration is especially important for photons, which in practice are often
characterized by a state of transverse or elliptical polarization rather than
helicity. As we saw in the previous section, for photons of helicity ± 1 , the
polarization vectors are
1/ .,/2-
e(p,±l) _ R(P)
±i 1
0
0
where 2i(p) is the standard rotation that takes the z-axis to the p direction.
These are not the only possible photon states ; in general, a photon state
can be a linear combination of helicity states `gy'p,± l
~X+Tp,+ l + oc-Tpa 1
which is properly normalized if
1 ,7+12+1~~-12 = 1
.
(8 .6. 13)
(8 .6.14)
To calculate the S-matrix element for absorbing or emitting such a photon,
we simply replace e,,,(p,±l ) in the Feynman rules wit h
eu(P) = x+ ey( p, +1) + U _ el'(p, -1) . (8 .6.15 )
The polarization vectors for definite helicity satisfy the normalization
condition
e,t(P, A') e ~` (p a
and therefore in general
(8.6.16)
(8 .6.17 )
The two extreme cases are circular polarization, for which o(_ = 0 or
ac+ = 0, and linear polariza tion, for which 1 ,,c+l = Ja-l = 1/,12-. For linear
polarization, by an adjustment of the overall phase of the state {$ .6.13},
we can make x+ and 7 _ complex conjugates, so that they can be expressed
as
cc+ = exp~+iO)/,,,[2_ ,
(8.6.15 )

36(]
8 Electrodynamics
Then in the Feynman rules we should use a polarization vecto r
cas r~
elt( P) = R(P) sin
0
0
(8.6.19 )
That is, 0 is the azimuthal ang le of the photon polarization in the p lane
perpendicular to p. Note that the photon polarization vector here is real,
which is only possible for linear polarization. In between the extremes of
circular and linear polarization are the states of elliptic polarization, for
which la+l and lac_I are non-zero and unequal .
More generally, an initial photon may be prepared in a statistical
mixture of spin states. In the most general case, an initial photon may have
any number of possible polarization vectors e~')( p), each with probability
P, The rate for absorbing such a photon in a given process will then be
of the form
where p is the density matrix
(8.6.20)
(8.6.21 )
Since p is obviously a Hermitian positive matrix of unit trace (because
Y:,. P, = 1) with puo = Poi = 0 and p,,,,p" = PUpe = 0, it may be written
as
s= 1,2
where e,, (p ; s) are the two orthonormal eigenvectors of p with
ea (p ; s) = eu (P ; s)pJ` = 0
and
A' S are the corresponding eigenvalues, wit h
s=1,2
We may then wr ite the rate for the photon absorption process as
(8 .6.2 )
(8 .6.23)
(8.6.24 )
Thus any statistical mixture of initial photon states is always equivalent
to having just two orthonormal polarizations e,(p ; s) with probabilities A,
In particular, if we know nothing whatever about the initial photon
polarization, then the two probabilities
As for the polarization vectors

8.6 F'eynman Rules for Spinor Electrodynamics
36 1
ev (p ; s) are equal, so that ).1 = A2 = ~, and the density matrix (and hence
the absorption rate) is an average over initial polarization s
Pq
(
fp (8.6.25)
.c= 1,2
Fortunately, this result does not depend on the particular pair of polar-
ization vectors ei(p ; s) over which we average ; for unpolarized photons we
can average the absorption rate over any pair of orthonormal polarization
vectors. Similarly, if we make no attempt to measure the polarization of
a photon in the final state, then the rate may be calculated by summing
over any pair of orthonarmal final photon polarization vectors .
The same remarks apply to electrons and positrons ; if (as is usually the
case) we make no attempt to prepare an electron or positron so that some
spin states are more likely than others, then the rate is to be calculated
by averaging over any two orthonormal initial spin states, such as those
with spin z-component a = ± 21 ; if we make no attempt to measure a final
electron's or positron's spin state, then we must sum the rate over any
two orthonormal initial spin states, such as those with spin z-component
a - ±~ . Such sums may be performed using the relations (5 .5.37) and
(5 .5 .38) :
-i P + m
Cr P
x
0
or P
Xfl
where e T p + rn . For instance, if the initial state contains an
electron with momentum p and spin z-component a, and a positron with
momentum p' and spin z-component d', then the S-matrix element for
the process will be of the form ( T,(P', a') ,# up (p, a)}. Hence if neither
electron nor positron spins are observed, the rate will be proportional t o
C" d
ITr
2pa
(_14,+rn) }
Techniques for the calculation of such traces are described in the Appendix
to this chapter.

362
8 Electrodynamics
re
f?
6
-~ f t
k, e
~ .
,
P ,
CY
-~+
t
k,e
Figure 8 .1. The two lowest-order Feynrnan diagrams for Compton scattering .
Straight lines are electrons ; wavy lines are photons .
8.7
Compton Scattering
As an example of the methods described in this chapter, we shall consider
here the scattering of a photon by an electron (or other particle of spin
and charge -e), to lowest order in e. We label the initial and final photon
momenta and polarization vectors by V, eM and 0`, e"', where k° = kI
and k4f = jkf y . Also, the initial and final electron momenta and spin
z-camponents are labelled p ", a and pry,
a', where p° = p 2
-+m Z and
p'() - + rrz2, with m the electron mass . The lowest order Feynman
diagrams for this process are shown in Figure S .1 . Using the rules outlined
in the previous section, the corresponding S-matrix element i s
(27T)3/2 (27)3 ~22k0+
(2 7E)3/ 2
(27r)3~2 20
+ in
* J'd4q
2
ic
L7r
] ~ IX f
?(
[e(2i4y~4(q - p' - k { )j [e(2r)4y~4(q - p - k)]
[e(2)4y4
.q
_-)r r
f) . 0

8.7 Compton Scattering
363
Performing the (trivia]) q-integral, collecting factors of i and fin, and
rewriting the resu lt in matrix notation, we have more simply
-iA54(p, + k' - p - k)
~
.1)
~"' (-i( j +
+
2n)2
2k~' • 2kO
(p + k)2 -f- ~~
~
( (p - kI)2 + Vn2
U(p, a)
(8 .7.2)
(Here means e~y,, not (~)*. Also, we drop the -ie, because the
denominators here do not vanish.) Because p2 = -M2 and k2 = 0 = 0,
the denominators can b e simplified
(p+k)-'gym` -2p - k ,
(8 .7.3 )
Also, the `Feynman amplitude' M is defined in general by Eq . (3 .3.2),
which (because some scattering is assumed to take place) here reads
so
2 ii(P'U')
~*'[ - 4 j + 0) + rn] ~lp - k
Ik-OkO '
- ~[ - i( j - g) + m] ~*'lp - k' I "(p, cr)
(8 .7.5 )
(8 . 7 . 6 )
The differential cross-section is given in terms of M by Eq . (3.4.15), which
here reads
AT= (2a r )a U-1 IM1264(p{ + k' - p - k}d3p'd 3 V .
(8.7.7 )
Since one of the particles here is massless, Eq . (3.4.17) for the initial
velocity gives
u = p ' ki p°k°. (8.7.$ )
To go further, it will be convenient to adopt a specific coordinate frame .
Since electrons in atoms move non-relativistically, the laboratory frame for
high-energy (X ray or gamma ray) photon-electron scattering experiments
is usually (though not always) one in which the initial electron can be
taken to be at rest, We will adopt this frame here, so tha t
p =0, p°=rn .
The velocity (8 .7.8) is then simply
(8.7 .9 )
u T 1. ( 8. 7. 10 )

364
8 Electrodynamics
To save writing, we denote the photon energies b y
co' = k C ' = I W1 = -p - k' /M .
(8.7 .12)
The three-momentum delta function in Eq . (8.7 .7) just serves to eliminate
the differential dip', setting p' = k - W. This leaves the remaining energy
delta function
M p'O + 0 - p° - 0°) = 6 (/_ k'}2 + m.2
m - cck (8.7.1 3 )
This fixes co' to satisfy
where fi is the angle between k and V. Squaring both sides and cancelling
0 2 terms gives*
f
M
{o = (0 m + c)~ 1 ~- cos 6) = r~'~{B) . ~~.? . t4}
The energy delta function ($.7.13) can be written
~ a f
cap - 2(9a)' cos 0 + ro'2 + m.2 + cj '] /00),
I(a)' - cOcosB )f P'0 +1 1
10
f
M[[]
Also, the differential d3k' can be written
A' = (0' 2dco'dSZ ,
($.7. 16 )
where dO is the solid angle into which the final photon is scattered . The
final delta function in Eq . ( 8.7.15 ) just serves to eliminate the differential
dco' in Eq . (8 .7.16), leaving us with a differential cross-section
do- = {? z }a 1MIz ~ 00"' dn
(8.7.17)
mcD
with p'fl = m + co - co', and co' given by Eq. (8.7. 14).
Equivalently, there is an increase in wavelength
1 1
1 - cose
rt~t
W
M
The verification of this formula in the scattering of X rays by elect rons by A.H. Compton in
1922--3 played a key role in confirming Einstein's 19(] 5 proposal of a quantum of light, which
soon after C'nmpton's experiments came to be known as the photon.

8.7 Compton Scattering 36 5
Usually we do not measure the spin z-component of the initial or final
electron. In such cases, we must sum over a' and average over a, or in
other words take half the sum over a and a' :
da (p + k, e --.). p' + k', er}
~ E da(p, a + k, e --+ p', a' + k', e') .
To calculate this, we use the standard formula
Ua (P, 6)fig(p, a) fax i 4 M)x~ (8.7.19)
f
and likewise for the sum over c'. It follows that for an arbitrary 4x4
matrix A
5(Pr, u')Au(p, 6)12
E(R(p', d')Au(p, d )) (u{P5 cT}flA1fi u(p', cr' ))
6df
~,a'
= Tr A (_i ~ ~ M #At fl
~ ~ M
( 8.7.20 )
P
p(')}
Recalling that flyf,# = Eq . (8.7 .6) gives now
e4
E
~
12
~(2n) 6~~i p0p 'O
,Qf
O
(8 .7 .21 )
p ~ k
p k
p
•k p
k
(Recall again that ~` means e;y,, not (e,,y")", and likewise for ~ * . ) We
work in a'gauge' in which
e , p = e'
- p = e'
- p = of* - p = 0 (8.7.22 )
such as for instance Coulomb gauge in the laboratory frame, where
e° = e'O = 0 and p = 0. This implies that
and likewise for ~r*, ~', and (. Eq. (8 .7.21 can therefore be written in

366
the greatly simplified form
8 Electrodynamics
4
p1 g, '
*
C
T
a
f
k J
~.Y1
~y4( i~ )6 Wli /'Y {~Li7 1
p
fY
P
+V t
a
p ' k P
' V
(8 . 7.23 )
The trace of any product of an odd number of gamma matrices vanishes,
so this breaks up into terms of zeroth and second order in m :
2
=
e4
T1 TZ
T3
a 'a,
64(2g)1ft)w1p1P'1
P
T4 lrl2t 1 riYry t2
Yll2 t3 Y1z2 t4
where
Tj
Tr
T~i Tr
Tr~
T4 Tr
tj
Tr
t4 = Tr
(8.7.2s)
(8.7.2G )
(8.7.27)
(8.7.28)
(8.7.29)
(8 .7.30)
(8 .7.31)
X8.7. 32)
The Appendix to this chapter shows how to calculate any trace
Tr~ 0 0 V ~ . . .~ as a sum of products of scalar products of the four-vectors
a, b, c, d, . . .. I n general, traces of products of 6 or 8 gamma matrices like
the tk or Tk would be given by a sum of 15 or 105 terms, respectively, but
fortunately here most scalar products vanish ; in addition to Eq . (8 .7.22),
we also have k - k = k'-k' = 0. (Furthermore, e • e* = e'- e'* - 1 .) To simplify
the calculation further, let us specialize to the case of linear polarization,
where eP and e+P are real . Dropping the asterisks in Eqs. (8.7.25)-(8 .7.32),
we have then
T1 = T r ~f g ~ i ~ ~ ~f ij

8.7 Compton Scatter ing 3 6 7
Since e~'p,, = 0 and e~'ef, = 1, we have
so
T, = -Tr I ~' g i g ~' ij
Also, kPk,, = 0, so
and hence
T1 = -2p - k Tr ~ ~f ~' i
Using Eq . ( .A .6), this is
It is convenient to make the substitution s
S o
T~ ~ - 16 p • k(e'
• k)2 + S p - k p • k` .
(8.7.33 )
A similar
though more lengthy) calc ulation gives
T2 = ?'3 = -8(e • k' )2( p ' k) + 16 (e . e')2p • k'p
- k + 8(e - er)2 k - k'pra2
T4 = -lb p - k'(e
k')2 + 8(P ' k)(p k) (8.7.35 )
Combining all these terms in Eq. {8.7.24} gives
1 =
ea
8(k
. k')'
~~ G4(2~)bc) cc~'p°p'°
(k ' p)(k{ ' p)
+ 32{e
- e'}~
(5 .7.35}
6, dr
All this applies in any Lorentz frame . In the laboratory frame, we have
the special results
CL] f1~ ~

3 68
8 Electrodynamics
Combining Eq .
(8 .7.38) with Eq. (8 .7 .1 7), the laboratory frame cross-
section is
64ac m vO
x
+
2 + 4(e
- ef )2]
eJ'
OJ
(8 .7.39)
This is the celebrated formula derived (using old-fashioned perturbation
theory) by O. Klein and Y. Nishina4 in 1929 .
As discussed in section $.f, if the incoming photon is (as usual) not
prepared in a state with any particular polarization, then we must average
over two orthonormal values of e . This average give s
2
2
and the differential cross-section is then
~ ~ da(pa u + k, e ~ p', o + k, e')
64~2rra2cn2 [WI + ~ - 2(k ' e) 1 .
(8.7.40)
We see that the scattered photon is preferentially polarized in a direction
perpendicular to the incident as well as the final photon direction, i.e.,
perpendicular to the plane in which the scattering takes place. This is a
well-known result, responsible among other things for the polarization of
light from eclipsing binary stays ."
To calculate the cross-section for experiments in which the final photon
polarization is not measured, we must surn Eq. ($. 7.44) over e', usin g
This gives
e4 2 f
L
where 0 is the angle between k and W. In the non-relativistic case, w << rn,
The light from one of the stars is po larized when it is scattered by free electrons in the outer
atmosphere of the ot her, cooler, star when both are along the same line of sight. This polarization
is normally undetectable beca use it cance l s when the astronomer adds up light from all parts of
the star's disk. The polarization has been observed in eclipsing bi nary stars at times w hen the
coo ler star blocks the light from jus t one side of the hotter star.

S.& Generalization p -form Gauge Fields
369
Eq. (8 .7 .41) gives
a
da =
e
^~ ~D
M2
( 1 + coS2 B) ,
(8.7.42)
The solid angle integral is
sin B dB -
1
6[[1+cos2e]dQ=f2df1+cos21
,
3
giving a total cross-section for cry < m :
UT =
6~~
m2
(8.7.43)
This is often written UT = 8grQ/3, where ra = e2 J47cm = 2.818 x 10-13
Cm is known as the c lassical electron radius. Expression (5.7.4 ) is called
the Thomson cross-section, after J. J. Thomson, the discoverer of the
electron. Eqs. (8.7.42) and ( 8,7.43) were originally derived using classical
mechanics and electrodynamics, by calculating the xeradlatian of light by
a non-relativistic point charge in a plane wave electromagnetic field .
8.8
Generalization : p4arm Gauge Fields`
The antisymmetric field strength tensor F,,V of electromagnetism is a
special ca se of a general class of tensors of special importance in physics
and mathematics. A p f orrn is an antisymmetric covariant tensor of rank
p. From a p-form t Y, ,Pz, . .. UP one may construct a (p + 1)-farm called the
exterior derivative" dt by taking the derivative and then antisymmetrizing
with respect to all indices :
Jai rP2~Z3_AP+ 1
~Z 2 t U 1 u3 _'_,UP+ i ~
. . . + (-1)PO PP+1 tA1u 2 . . .AP
with square brackets indicating antisymmetrization with respect to the in-
dices within the brackets. Because derivatives commute, repeated exterior
derivatives vanish
d(dt) = 0 .
(8 .8.2 )
A p-form whose exterior derivative vanishes is called closed, while a p-
form that is itself an exterior derivative is called exact . From Eq. (8 .8.2 )
' This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading .
Exterior derivatives and p-forms play a special role in genera l relativity, in part because the
exterior derivative of a tenso r transforms like a tensor even though it is calculated using ordinary
rather than covariant derivatives .5

370
8 Electrodynamics
it follows that any exact p-form is closed ; a famous theorem6 of Foincare
states that in a simply connected region, any closed p-form is exacta
For instance, the homogeneous Maxwell equations ( 8. 1 . 16) tell us that the
electromagnetic field strength two-form F,,,, is closed ; Pairtcare's theorem
then shows that it is also exact, so that it can be written as an exterior
derivative, i.e., as F,,v = apAw - o .A.. Again using Eq . ($ .8.2), we see that
the two-form F,,,, is invariant if A,, is changed by an exterior derivative,
i.e., by a gauge transformation 6A,, =
The formalism of p-forms and exterior derivatives makes it natural t o
consider the possibility of massless particles described by p-form field
gauge Melds with an invariance under gauge transformation s
6A== dS2
or in more detail
(8 .8.3)
where is an arbitrary (p - 1)-form. From such a p-form gauge
field, we can construct a gauge-invariant field strength tensor given b y
F = dA
or in detail
(8 .8.4)
(Alternatively, we can start with a (p + I )-form F, and from an assumed
condition dF = 0 infer the existence of a p-form A with F - dA.)
By
analogy with electrodynamics, we might expect the Lagrangian density
for A to take the form
2(p
1 )
where J is an antisyrnrnetric tensor current (either a c;-cumber, or a
function of fields other than A) that in order to make the action gauge-
invariant must satisfy the conservation conditio n
0
(8 .8 .7)
t In multiply connected spaces closed forms are not necessarily exact ; although it is possible to
write a closed p-form as an exterior derivative locally, this cannot in general be done smoothly
throughout the space . The set of closed p-forms, modulo exact p-forms, makes up what is called
the p th de Rham cohomology group of the space. There is a deep relation between the de Rham
cohorrlplogy groups of a space and its topology, which will be discussed further in Volume li .
$ We are speaking loosely in calling Aug-u,, a p-form, because for F = dA to be a tensor it is
only necessary for A to be a tensor up to a gauge transformation. In fact, we have already seen
that in four spacelime dimensions, it is not possible to construct afour-veckof field from the
creation and annihilation operators of physical massless particles of helicity ±1, so we have to
deal with an AP(x) that according to Eq . (8.1,2) transforms as a four-vector only up to a gauge
transformation .

8. 8 Generalization p form Gauge Fields
The Euler-Lagrange equations are then
37 1
(8.8.8)
These p-fflrm gauge fields play an important role in theories with more
than four spacetime dimensions . For instance, in the simplest string
theories in 26 spacetime dimensions, there is a normal mode of the string
represented at low energies by a two-form gauge field A
. But in four
spacetime dimensions, p-forms offer no new possibilities.
To see this, note first that in D spacetime dimensions there are no
antisymmetric tensors with more than D indices, so in general we must
take p + 1 ~ D. Like any other (p + l)-form with p + 1 ~ D, the field
strength F may be expressed in terms of a dual (D - p - I)-form 30F , as
(8.5.9)
Likewise, the p-form current J may be expressed in terms of a dual
(D - p)-form current J, as
'i juF- , ., . ~4ft .
(8 .8. 10 )
The field equation (8 .8 .8) and conservation condition (8.8.7) then read
simply
&F = f ,
df =4
( 8.8. 11 )
Because the dual current is closed, it may be written in terms of a
(D - p - 1)-form Y as
Eqs. ($ .8.11 ) and (8 .8.12) tell us that the difference of ~F and 9' is closed,
and therefore according to PQincare's theorem, may be written as
F=52 +d o ,
( 8 .8.13 )
with 0 a (D - p - 2)-form. There is an exception for the case p = D - 1,
where JF and Y are zero-forms, Le, scalars, and the condition d F =cat
simply tells us that ~F and Y difl ( r only by a constant. In this case the
gauge field describes no degrees
)f freedom at all . We may therefore
concern ourselves only with the cases p ~ D - 2 .
For p :::~ D - 2, the homogeneous `Maxwell' equations dF - 0 read
which with Eq . (8.8.13) yields the field equation for 0
(8 .8 .14)
(8 . 8 .15)
This is invariant under a new set of gauge transformations 0 -+ 0 + dw,
except that where D - p - 2 = 0 the gauge transformation that leaves F

372
8 Electrodynamics
invariant is 0 --o- 0 + c, where c is an arbitrary constant . We see that in D
spacetime dimensions, the theory of a p -form gauge field A with current J
is equivalent to the theory oJ a (D - P - 2)-form gaugefield 0, with current
We can now understand why p-form gauge fields offer no new possibili-
ties in four spacetime dimensions. As we have seen, we need only consider
the cases p ~ D - 2, or p = Q, 1, or 2. A zero-form gauge field is a scalar
5, for which Eq. (8.8.5 ) reads F,, = 0,,5, and the field equations ($.8.5)
read simply OS = -J . The gauge invariance here is invariance under a
shift S --~ S + c, with c a constant. This is just the theory of a massless
scalar field with only derivative interactions . A one-form gauge field is a
four-vector AI(x) coupled to a conserved four-vector current, just as in
electrodynamics. Finally, according to the general result quoted above,
a two-form gauge field in four spacetime dimensions is equivalent to a
zero-form gauge field, which as we have seen is equivalent to a massless
derivatively coupled scalar field .
Appendix Traces
In calculating S-matrix elements and transition rates for processes in-
volving particles of spin 1 , we often encounter traces of products of Dirac
gamma matrices. It will therefore be useful to give formulas for these
traces that can be used in all such calculations .
For products of even numbers of gamma matrices, the trace is given by
Tr fY, E Yea
. . . yuax 1 —: 4 E
6p 11 17 paired
M s •
(8.A .1)
pa i rings pairs
Here the sum is over all different ways of pairing the indices { .i1, - • - {~2iv . A
pairing can be regarded as a permutation of the integers 1, 2,- • • 2N into
some order P1, P2,- - • P • (2N), in which we pair upr with µP2, MP3 With
Yp4, and so on. Permuting pairs or permuting ps within a pair yields the
same pairing, so the number of different pairings is
(2N) ?/N !2N _ (211- 1 ) (2N - 3) . . . 1 = (2N ._ 1 ) ! !, (8.A.2)
We can avoid summing over equivalent pairings by requiring that
P 1 < P 2, P3 < P4, . . . , P • (2N - 1) < P - {2N} (8 .A.3 )
and
P1 < P3 < PS < . .. (8.A,4)
With this convention, the factor bp is +1 or -1 according to whether the
pairing involves an even or odd permutation of indices . The product in Eq .

Appendix
Traces 37 3
(8.4.1) is over all N pairs, the nth pair contributing a factor q0P(2n_I) Pp,(2n
) For instance (writing
y, v, p, ff, . . . in place of P l, µ2> P3, [4, . . .), for N =
1, 2, and 3 we have `
Tr {Y,,Y,} = 4 q'U u
Tr jy,,y,,ypy,, I = 4 [qp, qpa- - q'UPq"C' + qyqqP] I
(S.A .S)
(8.A .6)
Tr {YpY,,TpyaYk?'n ~ = 4
q'VV 11pa111Cq -
q,V07pk qaj + q'Uu qPqq6 K
+
11PF~~1'Kq(Tq - qfUptj4nfjrrx + i7KqwPtjx~ T qpdj~wqPq
+~P6MVOpK - q'U rc 1Vpqa q +
*+P11'7V ff 1 fPTC + ' t 'Uq ' f V 1 C' fPQJ
.
q' aK~ V':Mpq - ~'UKq V 1qPv + qPn '7vAaK
(S.A .7)
For an odd number of gamma matrices, the result is much simple r
TrI ppi "lug
. . . y92N+I I _ 0
(8.A.8 )
The proof of Eq. (8.A.1) is by mathematical induction. First note that
so 'fi'r ~ 7,,YV l = 4q,,,, in agreement with Eq. (8 .A.1). Next, suppose that
Eq. (8 .A.1) is true for N ~ M - 1 . We then have
Tr{yA, Y~U2 . . .
7~12M
2 quIPzTrf Y,,3
. . . yu2 .'W I -Tr U.2 YA, YP3 . . . y YzM
2 '1ul jja Tr~7,,,, . . . ypa ,►f ~ 2'7u~~j .j Tr fY,U2 Yea
. . . yPM
~ Tr t7427u 3Yui YN
. . .
i42 M
2 171UIP2 Tr~,/,,3 . . . ypam I - 2 ql,, p3 Tr ~i'uz Yu¢
. . .
7~i2M
+ 2 q,,, ,a Tr l 1.2 Y113 Yes ' - - Yu2u } -
. . .
+ 2?IP i Mz.u Tr {Y1,z . . . yPanr-i I- Tr ~7,12 • . . yAzM Yu I
All commutators have zero trace, so the last term subtracted here is the
same as the left-hand side, and s o
Tr~^~~I YM
. . . f'MM
q p 1 ~z Tr{Yu~ . . . yp2m
If we assume that Eq . ( 8.A.1) correctly gives the trace of any product
of 2N - 2 Dirac matrices, then Eq . (8.A.9) shows that Eq. ( $.A.1 ) also
correctly gives the trace of any product of 2N Dirac matrices.
The easiest way to see that the trace of an odd number of Dirac
matrices
Kanishes is to note that -y. is related to y,, by a similarity
transformation, -t,, = ysy,(ys) yl . Traces are unaffected by such similarit y
There are now computer programs? available for the calculation of traces of products of large
numbers of Dirac matrices .

374
8 Electrodynamics
transformations, so the trace of an odd number of Dirac matrices is equal
to minus itself, and hence vanishes .
One occasionally encounters another class of traces, of the for m
Tr I YsYjt, 7~42 . . . y1jn }
This van i shes for odd n for the same reason as given above for traces
without a y5 . It also vanishes for n - 0 and n = 2 :
fi't' i fj5 1 =0 (8 . A. 1 0)
(To see this just recall that 's = iYoY17273, and note that there is no way
of pairing the indices in Tr 17o,'M Y3 ; or in Tr {yoT11/2fey°pYv ; so that the
spacetime indices in each pair are equal .) For n = 4 it is possible to
pair the indices in Try^1or'rY2Y3ToYY7P"1di so that the spacetime indices in
each pair are equal, but only if y, v, p, a are some permutation of 0, 1, 2, 3 .
Furthermore this trace must be odd under permutations of p, v, p, a since
gamma matrices with different indices anticommute. Thus the trace
Tr ~Y5Y,ayvY.Yd } must be proportional to the totally antisymmetric tensor
61tvf,cr. The constant of proportionality may be worked out by letting
,u, v, p, a take the values 0, 1, 2, 3, and recalling that 6o1 23 = -1, In this way
we find
Tr ~ ~~s ~'{,i'}Yp ~'.J = 4ic~Vpj . (8.A.12)
The trace of products of y 5 with six, eight, or more Dirac matrices may
be calculated by the same methods used above to verify Eq . (8.A .1) ,
Problems
1. Calculate the differential and total cross-sections for the process
e+e - -_?. eµ- to lowest order in e . Assume that electron and
muffin spins are not observed. Use the simplest Lagrangian for the
electrodynamics of electrons and moans .
2. Carry out the canonical quantization of the theory of a charged scalar
field 0 and its interaction with electromagnetism, with Lagrangian
density :
where
D ~d~ d~ - igA~d} ,
F~V = r'PA4, - r~V A Y -
Use Coulomb gauge. Express the Hamiltonian in terms of the fields
A, 0, and V and their canonical conjugates. Evaluate the interaction

Rafarences 37 S
V(t) in the interaction-picture in terms of the interaction picture fields
and their derivatives .
3. Use the results of Problem 2 to calculate the differential and total
cross-sections for photon scattering by a massive charged scalar
particle to lowest order in e.
4. Write a gauge-invariant Lagrangian for a charged massive vector
field interacting with the electromagnetic field.
5. Calculate the differential cross-section for electron-electron scattering
to lowest order in e. Assume that final and initial spins are not
measured .
References
1. See, e.g., M . B. Green, J. H . Schwarz, and E. Witten, Superstring
Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987) : Section 2.2.
1a . V. Fock, Z. f PhyS. 39, 226 (1927); H. Weyl, Z. Phys . 56, 330
(1929). The term `gauge invariance' derives from an analogy wit h
earlier speculations about scale invariance by H . Weyl, in Raum ,
Veit, Materie, 3rd ed. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1920) . Also see F.
London, Z. f. Phy°s . 42, 375 (1927). This history has been reviewed
by C. N. Yang, talk at City College (unpublished) .
2. The use of Coulomb gauge in electrodynamics was strongly advo -
cated by Schwinger on pretty much the same grounds as here : that
we ought not to introduce photons with helicities other than ±1 .
See J. Schwinger, Phys . .Rev. 78, 1439 (1948) ; 1 27, 324 (1962) ; Nuovo
Cimen to 30, 278 (1963).
3. R . F. Feynman, Phyts. Rev. lUl, 769 (1949) : Section 8.
4. 0 . Klein and Y. Nishina, Z. f: P hys. 52, 853 (1929) ; Y. Nishina, shad.,
869 (1929) ; also see I . Tamm, Z . ./: P hys. 62, 545 (1930).
5. See, e.g., S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New York,
1972) : Section 4.11.
6. For a readable general introduction to the geometry and topology of
p-farms, see H . Flanders, Differential Forms (Academic Press, New
York, 1963).
7. T. West, Comput . Pays . Commun . 77, 286 (1993) .

Path-Integral Methods
In Chapters 7 and 8 we applied the canonical quantization operator for-
malism to derive the Feynman rules for a variety of theories. In many
cases, such as the scalar field with derivative coupling or the vector field
with zero or non-zero mass, the procedure though straightforward was
rather awkward. The interaction Hamiltonian tumed out to contain a
covariant term, equal to the negative of the interaction term in the La-
grangian, plus aeon-covariant term, which served to cancel non-covariant
terms in the propagator. I n the case of electrodynamics this non-covariant
term (the Coulomb energy) turned out to be not even spatially local,
though it is local in time. Yet the final results are quite simple : the Feyn-
tnan rules are just those we should obtain with covariant propagators, and
using the negative of the interaction term in the Lagrangian to calculate
vertex contributions. The awkwardness in obtaining these simple results,
which was bad enough for the theories considered in Chapters 7 and 8,
becomes unbearable for more complicated theories, like the non-Abelian
gauge theories to be discussed in volume II, and also general relativity.
One would very much prefer a method of calculation that goes directly
from the Lagrangian to the Feynman rules in their final, Lorentz-covariant
form.
Fortunately, such a method does exist. It is provided by the path-
integral approach to quantum mechanics. This was first presented in the
context of non-relativistic quantum mechanics in Feynman's Princeton Ph .
D. thesis,1 as a means of working directly with a Lagrangian rather than a
Hamiltonian. In this respect, it was inspired by earlier work of Dirac .' The
path-integral approach played a part (along with inspired guesswork) in
Feynman's later derivation of his diagrammatic rules. However, although
Feynman diagrams became widely used in the 1950s, most physicists
(including myself) tended to derive them using the operator methods of
Schwinger and Tomonaga, which were shown by Dyson in 1949 to lead
to the same diagrammatic rules that had been obtained by Feynman by
his own methods.
The path-integral approach was revived in the late 1960s, when Faddee v
376

Path-integral Methods 377
and Popov 4 and De Witt5 showed how to apply it to non-Abelian gauge
theories and general relativity. For most theorists, the turning point
came in 1971, when 't Hooft6 used path-integral methods to derive the
Feynman rules for spontaneously broken gauge theories (discussed in
Volume iI ), including in particular the theory of weak and electromagnetic
interactions, in a gauge that made the high energy behavior of these
theories transparent. Soon after, as also discussed in Volume II, it was
discovered that the path-integral method allows us to take account of
contributions to the S'-matrix that have an essential singularity at zero
coupling constant and therefore cannot be discovered in any finite order
of perturbation theory. Since then, the path-integral methods described
here have become an indispensable part of the equipment of all physicists
who make use of quantum field theory.
At this point the reader may be wondering why if the path-integral
method is so convenient we bothered in chapter 7 to introduce the
canonical formalism. Indeed, Feynman seems at first to have thought
of his path-integral approach as a substitute for the ordinary canonical
formulation of quantum mechanics. There are two reasons for starting
with the canonical formalism. The first is a point of principle : although
the path-integral formalism provides us with manifestly Lorentz-invariant
diagrammatic rules, it does not make clear why the 5-matrix calculated
in this way is unitary. As far as I know, the only way to show that the
bath-integral formalism yields a unitary S-matrix is to use it to reconstruct
the canonical formalism, in which unitarity is obvious . There is a kind
of conservation of trouble here ; we can use the canonical approach, in
which unitarity is obvious and Lorentz invariance obscure, or the path-
integral approach, which is manifestly Lorentz-invariant but far from
manifestly unitary. Since the path-integral approach is here derived from
the canonical approach, we know that the two approaches yield the same
S-matrix, so that the S-matrix must indeed be both Lorentz-invariant and
unitary.
The second reason for introducing the canonical formalism first is
more practical : there are important theories in which the simplest ver-
sion of the Feynmari path-integral method, in which propagators and
interaction vertices are taken directly from the Lagrangian, is simply
wrong. One example is the non-linear Q-model, with Lagrangian density
_T = -1 gk~~r~ )~,u0'0'*. In such theories, using the naive Feynman rules
derived directly from the Lagrangian density would yield an S-matrix that
is not only wrong but even non-unitary, and that also depends on the
way in which we define the scalar field.7 In this chapter we shall derive
the path-integral formalism from the canonical formalism, and in this way
we will see what additional sorts of vertices are needed to supplement the
simplest version of the Feynman path-integral method .

3 78
9 Path-integral Methods
9.1 The General Path-Integral Formul a
We start with a general quantum mechanical system, with Hermitian
operator `coordinates' Q,, and conjugate `momenta' Pb, satisfying the
canonical commutation relations *
[ C3a, Pb] = i ~ab ,
~~~~ QbJ = [Pa, PbJ = 0 . (9.1 .2 )
(We shall restrict ourselves in this and the next three sections to bosonic
operators, which satisfy commutation rather than anticommutation rela-
tions. Our results will be generalized to include fermianic operators in
Section 9.5.) In a field theory, the index a consists of a position x and a
discrete Lorentz and species index m, and we conventionally write
P"', = PmW
(9 .1 .4)
Also, the Kronecker delta in Eq . (9. 1 .1 ) is interpreted in a field theory a s
6x.
m
Y
,
n ~_ 63 (X - Y)6,,►, -
(9 .1 .5 )
However, for the present it will be convenient to use the more compact
notation of Eqs. ( 9. 1.1) and (9 .1 .2) . These are `Schrodinger-picture' oper-
ators, taken at a fixed time (say, t = 0 ). The time-dependent operators in
the Heisenberg picture will be considered a little later.
Since the Qa all commute, we can find a simultaneous eigenstate
1q},
with elgenvalues q,, :
(We are using lower case qs and ps here to denote eigenvalues rather than
to denote operators in the interaction picture as in Chapter 7, but since
we will not be using the interaction picture in this chapter no confusion
should arise .) The eigenvectors can be taken to be orthonormal,
so that the completeness relation read s
t = JHdqa ~q~ ~ql
11
(9 .1 .7 )
(9 .1 . 8 )
We are tacitly assuming here that any first class constraints are eliminated by choosing a gauge,
and any remaining second class constraints are `salved" by writing the constrained degrees of
freedom in terms of the unconstrained Q,, and P,,, as in Section 7 .5 . The direct application c7f
path-iniegral methods lo constrained systems is described by Faddecv.9

9.1
The General Path-Integral Formula
379
Similarly, we can find a complete oxthonormal set of eigenstates of the
PU =
pal P~ = Fa P)
u
(9.1 .9)
(9,1,10)
(9 .1 .11 )
As usual, it follows from Eq. (9.1 .1) that these two complete sets of
eigenstates have the scalar product"
(
. l .12 )
In the Heisenberg picture, the Q and P operators are given a time-
dependence
Q,,( t ) = exp(iHt) Q,, exp(-aHt )
P, (t)
exp( tH t) F,, exp{-iHt} ,
( 9 .1 .13 )
(9 .1 .14)
where H is the total Hamiltonian. These have eigenstates jq ; t~ and gyp ; t}
Pa{t)I P ; 0 = Pal~ ; 0
3 1
given by
1q ; t~ = exp(ifi t) l q ~
I p ; t} = e xp( ixt)I p)
(9 .1 .15)
(9.1 .16 )
(Note that ~q ; t) is the eigenstate of Qa(t) with eigenvalue q, and not the
result of letting the state 1q) evolve for a time t. This is why its time-
dependence is given by a factor exp(M) rather than exp(--tHt)-) These
states obviously satisfy the completeness and orthonormality condition s
~ ~qc, I4 ; t~ ~q ; tI - ~ ,
(9.1 .19)
(9.1 .20)
(9.1 .21 )
(9.1 .22 )
The proof' l'ctillow•s the same Iines as in tic quantum mechanics of point part icles. From Eq. (9.1 .
I we gee that P1, a,cic as -•ie'je'gy, on wave functions
in a q-basis . The right-hand s ide of Eq. (9,1.12 1
is then seen to be the w&ve function i n this basis of an eigensiate of P . The factor ~ 1 f ~+'2rr is
fi xed by the normal i7,atinn requirement, Eq. (9 . 1 . 1 0} .

38 0
and also
9 Path-Integral Method s
(q ; t1 P } t~ = 11 1
exp(iqaPa )
a ~~
(9 . 1 .23 )
If, by measurements at time t, we find that our system is in a definite
state
1 q ; t}, then the probability amplitude for measurements at time t' to
give a state
Iq'; t`} is the scalar product (q' ; tf l q ; t) . Our central dynamical
problem is to calculate this scalar product .
This is easy when t' and t are infinitesimally close, say t' = z + dz and
t =,r. Using Eq. (9 .1 .17), we have
The Hamiltonian H is given as a function H (
, P), but since (9.1.13) and
(9.1. 14) are similarity transformations, and H commutes with itself, it can
equally well be written as the same function of Q(t) and P(t )
H =_ H (Q, P) = eW'H(Q, p)e-iHt =-- H (Q(t), P (t)) . (9.1 .25 )
This function can be written in various different forms, with different
constant coefficients, by using the commutation relations (9.1 .1) and (9 . 1 .2)
to move the Qs and Ps past each other. It will be convenient to adopt a
standard form, in which all Qs appear to the left of all Ps. For instance,
given a term in the Hamiltonian of form PaQbP,, we would rewrite it
as Pa QbPc = QbP~Pe - i rSab P,. With this convention, the Qa(t)s in the
Hamiltonian in Eq. (9. Z.24) may be replacedl with their eigenvalues q .' .
To deal with the P(t), we use Eq. (9. 1 .23) to expand ~q ; -c } in P-eigenstates
Ip ; -r), and find
(q' ; z + dT
I
q a -r~ {q' ; -r I exp ~ - ilY (Q(T), P(r)}dT) IP A T)
a
with each pa integrated from -00 to +00.
Now let's return to the more general case of a finite time-interval. To
calculate ~q' ; tr 14 > t), with t < t', we break up the time-interval from t to t'
into steps t, T1, T2, . . . TN, t', with
(9.t.2 7)
~ This is only possible because with dz infinitcsirnal, exp(- iH dr) is linear in H .

9. 1
The General Guth-Integra l Formula
and sum over a complete set of states Jq ; Tk} at each time Tk :
381
(qr ; tfl q ;~~ =
J dql . . . dqN 1qr - tr l qN ; -cv~ (qN> r N I qlV-1r TN-1~
. . .~q l i -r i Iq 3 t) .
(9.1 .28 )
Inserting Eq . {9. 1.2}, this become s
(q' ; (I q ; t) =I LII II
u
dq J[,A
~ ~ dYIC,Q/ L7r
-~
a
TV+i
X exp d (qk,a - qk-1 ,a)Pk-1,a - H(qka Pk-1 )d'r
k= 1
a
1 1
whe re
(9 . 1 .2 )
(9 .1 .30)
Our result, Eq. (9.1.29), can be put in a much more elega nt fora. Define
smooth interpolating functions, q(z) and p(r), such that
qd(rk) = qk.a
Pa(rk) = Pk,a •
(9.1 .31 )
In the limit dz -~, 0 ( i.e., N --+ oa), the argument of the exponen tial in
Eq. (9.1 .29) becomes just an integral over x
N+J
1: 1 (qk,a - qk- 1 ,a )Pk- La - H(qk , Pk-1)d
k=1
N+t
E4a(Tk)Va(Tk)-H(q(Tk),P(rk)) d r + 0(dT2)
k~l
a
t'
E4a(T)Pa(0-H(q(r),P(T))
dr .
a
Further, we may define integrals over the functions q(r),p(T) by
2 7r
d~~U
~C }Q
k,b
, C~
~ ,p
r,b 27t
Eq. (9 .1 .29) then becomes a constrained path integral
(q' ; t'l q ;
fl dqa(T) fl dPb(T)
f,a i,b
271
x exp t d~
4a (T )Pa(z) -H(9~(r) , P( ~))
(9.1.34)
'
~
This is called a path in tegral, because we integrate over all paths that
take q(T) from q at T = t to q' at r = t', as well as over all p (r). The

382
9 Path-Integral Methods
great advantage of writ ing matrix elements in this way is that, as shown
in section 9.3, the path integral s are easy to calculate when expanded in
powers of the coupling constants in H .
The path-integral formal ism allows us to calculate not only transition
probability amplitudes like (q' ; t' jq ; t) , but also the matrix elements be-
tween states {q' ; t' l and
1 q , t) of time-ordered products of general operators
C{P( t),Q ( t)) . It will be convenient to define these operators with (unlike
H ) all Ps. moved to the deft and all Qs to the right. Then by ins erting any
s uch operator e:' [P(t), Q( t)] in Eq. (9 . 1 .26), we have
~q' ;,r + d-c iC (P (t), Q(t))
~q ;,r)
f fj dp,
X 4 ;-[1eXp(_iH(Q('r),P(,r))dr)
2n
,, exp [-_iH(P)dr + ~ ~(~~ ~ q,,)P,,
C(F, q) .
(9 .1 .35)
In order to calculate the matrix element of a product
CA POA Q01)) G` ll (P .t), Q(tB))
. . . of operators with tA t J3 > . . .a eve
can insert the L--operators between the appropriate states in Eq . (9.1 .2$),
and use Eq. (9.1 .35). For instance, if the time tA falls between -rk and zk+l,
then insert (-rA(P(t,,), Q(r,)) between {qk+r ; 4+1
1 and lqk ; Tk). Note that
in Eq . (9.1 .28) each successive sum over states is at a later time, so this is
only possible because of our assumption that tA >' t fl >
. . . . Following
the same steps as before, we now find the general path-integral formula
(q', 60A (P(tA, Q(W) 6"'-B (P (W, Q(tB))
. . . 1q, t)
11 dq.(,r) IT'P' (-0 6111A (POA qh) OB (P(tB), q (tB)) - - -
T,a T'h
fi r:( 1f ) = Ra
l ~
x exp i r d1c
4~ (-r)P~(-r) - H (q(T), P(T)
(9.1 .3 6 )
This resu lt is only valid if the times are ordered, wit h
However, nothing on the right-hand side of Eq. (9 .1 .3 6) refers to the order
of time-arguments. Hence if we are presented with a path rtntegra] like
the right-hand side of Eq. (9.1 .36), with tA , t13 , . . . in arbitrary order (all
between t and t', with t < t'), then this path integral will equal a matrix
element like the left-hand side of Eq. (9.1 .36), but with the operators
arranged in order (from left to right) of decreasing time . That is, for

9.1
The General Path-Integral Formula
tA , tB , . . . in arbitrary order, we have
(q', t'l T (6A(P(tA),Q(tA)), 611(P(tB),Q(tB)),'- I 1q,t )
rl dq,(T) 11 'P'
CA (AW, q(W) OR (P(tB), q(tB)) . . .
2a
qu(tr ) - qu
383
r.'
x exp
i
d r
~Ia (`~ )I~~(z) - H (q(Thpr))
(9. 1.38)
.
~
where T denotes the usual time-ordered product .
It should perhaps be stressed that the c-number functions qa{ r), pa(y)
in Eq . (9.1 .38) are mere variables of integration, and in particular are
not constrained to obey the equations of motion of classical Harniltonian
dynamics
jqa(T)
(9. x .39 )
(9.1 .40)
(For this reason, the Hamiltonian aH(q (z),P(T)) in Eq . (9. 1 ,35 ) is not con-
stant in T.) Nevertheless, there is a limited sense in which path integrals
do respect these equations of motion. Suppose that one of the functions
in Eq . (9.1 .38), say G'A (pt .41, R (tA)) , happens to be the left-hand side of
either Eq . (9.1 .39) or Eq. (9.1,40) . We note that (for t < tA
t')
aPa (W
aH ( R(tA), P(tA))
Oqa(W
exp (iI[qp]) T i exp (u[q,p]),
6p"(-tA )
exp (iiqp]) = i~
Cxp (i1[qp]),
qa ( tA )
where tI is the argument of the exponential in Eq . (9.1.38) :
I [q, p] d-r
(-c)p.(-r) - H (q(z), p(T))
As long as tA does not approach t or t', the integrations over q ,, (tA) and
P, (t,4) are unconstrained, and so with reasonable assumptions about the
convergence Kf these integrals, the integral of such variational derivatives
must vanish. Hence the path integral (9 .1 .38) vanishes if CA (P, q) is taken
to be the left-hand side of either of the equations of motion (9.1.39) or
(9 .1 .40).
This simple rule applies only if the integration variables qa(W , P,(tA )
are independent of any of the variables q~(W, P,,(ta), etc. appearing
in any of the other functions 61,R, Cc, etc. in Eq . (9.1 .38), and hence

384 9 Path-Integral Methods
only if we prohibit tA from approaching tB, tc, etc. as well as t or tf .
When to approaches, say, t$, the path integral will be found to involve
a non-zero term proportional to M tA - tB } or its derivatives. These delta
functions are the same as would be found in the operator formalism
from time derivatives of the step functions implicit in the definition of the
time-ordered product.
In evaluating the path integrals (9 .1.34) and (9.1.38), we only need to
know the classical Hamiltonian, the c-number function H(q,p) . If we were
to define a theory by the path integrals, the question would naturally
arise, which of many possible quantum mechanical Hamiltonians H( Q, P )
(differing is the order of Qs and Ps) governed the quantum theory that
corresponds to these path integrals. Our derivation has provided an
answer : the quantum Hamiltonian is to be taken with all Qs on the left,
all Ps on the right. But it would be a mistake to give this prescription
too much significance. There are a great many ways of interpreting
the measure fl dqa (T) II dph(z) appearing in path integrals like (9.1 .34)
or (9.1 .38). Our prescription, of putting all Qs to the left of all Ps, is
appropriate only if the measure is interpreted according to Eqs . (91 .31)-
(9.1,33) . Other measures would lead to other prescriptions for operator
ordering. The question is not an urgent one, because different prescriptions
for ordering operators in the Hamiltonian just correspond to different
choices of the constants that appear as coefficients of the various terms in
the Hamiltonian, and we generally formulate theories with these constants
left as arbitrary parameters anyway .
It is difficult to use the general path integral in Eq . (9. 1.38) for numerical
calculations or as a source of rigorous theorems. For these purposes
it is better to use the path-integral method to calculate amplitudes in
Euclidean space, where t is replaced with an imaginary quantity -ix4, and
the argument of the exponential in Eq . (9.1 .38) is a negative real quantity.
In this way, instead of jagged paths producing rapid oscillations of the
integrand from one path to another, all jagged paths are exponentially
suppressed. Though we shall not go into it here, quantum field theory
may be formulated from the beginning in terms of Feynman amplitudes in
Euclidean spacetime.84 Under certain plausible assumptions, it is possible
to reconstruct the Feynman amplitudes in Minkowskian spacetime from
their Euclidean counterparts, 8b But we may as well stick to the Minkowski
space formulation of the path integral if we are only going to use it to
calculate Feynman amplitudes in perturbation theory .

9.2 Transition to the S-Matrix
9.2
Transition to the S-Matrix
38 5
As already mentioned, we can easily convert the general quantum me-
chanical results of section 9.1 to a notation appropriate to quantum field
theory, by letting the index a run over points x in space and over a
spin-and-species index in, and replacing Q,(t) and fa(t) with Q,, (x, t) and
P,,(x, t), respectively. Eq. (9-1 .38) then reads *
T (CA [P 4A OtA , &B [P (tB), Q0 01 1 q, t)
dp,(xf -r)
(X~ q.(x)
q," (x,
q' (x)
M
1
dq
m
t
x} ~) 11 2
1r
z,x ,m
r,x'm
]C CAA [is.tA,q .tA )J 6, D [p(tB)q(tB)] . . .
c'
x exp i dr dux q~(x, ~)Pm(x, t)
it
(9 .2.1 )
- H [q (,r), P(,O] 11
.
However, in field theory Eq. (9.11) is not exactly what we want. Exper-
imentalists do not measure probability amplitudes for transitions between
eigenstates ~q', tfl and
1q, r~ of the quantum field Q, but rather S-matrix
elements, the probability amplitudes for transitions between states that at
t -} -oo or t --4. +ca contain definite numbers of particles of various types .
These are called `in' and `out' states, lac, in) and
fl, out), where oc and fl
denote sets of particles characterized by the various particles' momenta,
spin a-component (or helicity), and species. To calculate a matrix element
of a time-ordered product (perhaps empty) between such states, we need
to multiply Eq. (9.2. 1) by the `wive functions" (fl, autlq', t'~ and ~q, tf a, in}
at any fixed times t and t', taken for convenience here to be -oo and
+oc, respectively, and then perform an integral over the `arguments' qm(x)
and q;,( ) of these wave functions. But instead of constraining the path
integral over q,,(x,,r) by the conditions
and then integrating over
q' (x) and q~(x), we can just as well do
an unconstrained integral over q,,(x, T) (and also over p,,(x, T)), and
set the arguments of the wave functions equal to the values given by
Eq . {9.2.2}
We are now writing H and the Os with square brackets, to remind us that H[q(t ).p(t)] and
6'[p(t), 4(t}] are fuvtivMais of q,,(x, i) and p,(x, t) at a fixed time f .

38 6
9 Path-integral methods
(fls out ~T {&' .4 [P(tA) ~ ~(W], G$ [P 00, Q(t$ ) ], . . .I X} in k
f dqm (~,,c) 11 (dpm(x, -r)/2n )
i,x,m
a,x ,m
* CA [P(tA ), q (tA )] C"B [At B ), q (tB
N
k
x {ft , nut~q(+oo) ;+o~} (q(-cam) ; -aa l x, in} .
(9 .2 .3 )
Incidentally, this result leads immediately** to Eq . (6.4.3), a theorem that
we use repeatedly to relate sums of off-shell Feynman graphs to matrix
elements of Heisenberg-picture operators between exact energy eigenstates .
It is necessary now to consider how to calculate the wave functions
appearing as the final pair of factors in Eq . ( 9.2.3 ). Let's first consider the
simplest and most important case, the vacuum. (We saw in Section 6 .4 that
S-matrix elements may be easily calculated from the vacuum expectation
values of time-ordered products .) We assume as usual that for t ---~ ±oc,
matrix elements may be calculated as if there were no interactions . The
`in' and `out' vacua may thus be defined by the conditions
.2.4}
Qo„c(P, a, r~) k~TAC, out =(] (
9
where a;n and aa,,r are the operators appearing in the coefficients of
exp(ip
- x - iEt} in the plane-wave expansion of the operator Q,,,(x, t) at
t -~, -oc and t -~ +oo, respectively. For instance, for the real scalar field
of a neutral spinless particle, we have in effec t
r~+raa
cb(x, t) -~
( 27c )-3/2
d 3 p (2E)-il'
Iu
o~A (P )~~~ _x + H .c.]
(9 .2 .5 )
I i is only necessary to vo le that, for a Hamiltonian H [Pft}, Q(t}] +1: f d3x EA (x,t)CA(x,t), the
S-ma tri)L i~i given by Ey . (9,2.3) as
outla, In), = j 11 dq. (x, r) 11 (dp.(x. T j / 2 2z)
r,x,m r,x, m
~
x exp i
f dx x, p(xt - H [q(tLr() ]
f d3X C-AX, 00AW, 0
A
x
ou L q (+(f-!) 5 ~,Y-)F (q
- oo Ia y i fl )
The left-hand side of Eq- (6-4 .3) is the derivative of this expression with respect to Fa, eb„ etc., at
e = 0, which yie l ds the right-hand s ide of Eq. (9.2 .3), and us ing Eq. (9,2.3) again then immediately
give5 the right-hand side c) I` F.q. (6.4.3).

9.2 Transition to the S-Matrix.
~1(271)-3/2
d3
F (E/2) 112
~a Out
(P)erp ~h - ~I.c ~I
387
(9.2.6 )
where po = E - p + W, and we here use the conventional q) and 1-1
rather than Q and P for a scalar field , and drop the unnecessary labels
m, Q, n. Inverting the Fourier transforms and taking a linear combination
of the result ing expressions, we have
e'E t
Oul
(27r)3/2
02
rM
(9.2.7 )
As mentioned in Section 9.1, the 'momentum' II(x, t) acts on wave-
functions in a 0-basis as the variational derivative -ib/jO(x, t), so in
this basis the conditions (9.2.4) read
o = Jd3x ~~'"'
6
+ E(P)O(x)] (O(x); +oc vac, ~us
.
(9,~..s )
[50(x )
The analogous ordinary differential equation has a well-known Gaussian
solution, so let's try a Gaussian ansatz here :
(O(X)a +a; IVA, ~~t 4~' exp - ~
d~x dl Y r'(x7 Y)O(x)O(Y)
(9 .2.9)
with kernel and constant 1V to be determined . Substituting this in
Eq . (9 .2.8), we see that the functional differential equation for the vacuum
wave functional is satisfied if for all 0
0 = f
dux e-dP'x
d3y' (,6,(x, y)~(y) - E (P)O(x)
or, in other words, if
d'x e-gyp x(qxs y) = E(P ) 8-*y ,
The solution is easily found by inverting the Fourier transform
(9.2 .1 1 )
(9.1 12)
(Recall that E(p) =
pZ_+m2). This is actually the most useful represen-
tation for the kernel ', but we may note in passing that for x =~- y, 4' may
also be written in terms of a Hankel function of negative order
M
d ( '
&(X} Y) - 2~ r dr
r
(!K_i(i.nr))
( 9.2.1 3 )
z

388
9 Path-Integral Methods
where r ~ I x -y l . The constant ~V' in Eq . (9. 2.9) may be formally obtained
from the normalization condition for the vacuum state, but we will not
need this result.
According to Eq . (9.2 .9), in calculating vacuum expectation values in
the theory of a scalar field, the product of the last two factors in Eq . (9.2.3 )
is
(VAC, outs ( ) ; +oa} (4(-'.-i5) ; -r-GIVAC, in }
[O(X, +OC)O(Y, +00 )
+O(X~ _COO(Y' _C)0)D (9 .2,14)
= 1'4~- 12 exp
lef d'xd3Y
dr 9(x, y)o(x, T)O(y,,r)e-1jT j
(_ 2 f 7or- ) 1
1
Where e is a positive infinitesimal . To obtain the final expression, we have
used the fact that for any reasonably smooth function f (T) ,
00
d-cf ( r) e-f ITI ,
(9.2.15)
,f(+oc} + f(-co) - Ali m e
1_)C
0+ f-
Inserting Eq. (9.2,I4} in Eq. (9,2.3) now gives
KVAC, aut I T (CA [r1t4itAJ .
COB [II0B), OOR }J ,
-I +VAC , in)
IA-11 j fj dO(x, -r) fj(d'g(x, T)/27E)
6A [70A O(W]
T,x z,x
X CB [m(tB), 0(tB)]
. . • eXp i f dZ If d3 JC ~ (
Xr _r),g(
x
' T )
---H [O(T)} 7Z(T)] + ~ i6
r~3 x day c (xa Y)e-67
O(X, z~~{Y~ z} (9 .2 .1 6)
We shall see in Section 9.4 that the whole effect of the last term in
the argument of the exponential in Eq. (9.2.16) is to provide the -ie
in the denominator of the scalar field propagator in momentum space,
[p2 + m2 _ ie]-1. We will not go into the corresponding details for fields
of general spin, but will simply state that in general
VAC, out~ T i ID.4 [FA {tAb Q [W] , C'B [PB (tH) r Q(tB)] , . . .~ ~VAC, in
~P ►~ ~, ~)
1'+'-'i1 ri dq,,(x,,r)j [ 11
27r
CA [POA q(tA)l
z.x,m T,x,m
c~a
X OB [P(tB), q(tB)j exp i
d-c d3X E 4.(X"r)PM(X' -0
M
-H [q(r.), p(r)] + ic terms (9 .2.17)

9.3 Lagrangian Version of tie bath-Integral Formula
389
where the `ic terms' just have the effect of putting the correct -ie in the
denominators of all propagators .
This is a good place to mention that field-independent factors in
Eq. (9.2.17), like the constant 1~/V12, are not important. This is because
such factors contribute also to the matrix element (VAC, outs AC, in) .
In calculating the connected part of vacuum expectation values of time-
ordered products (or the S-matrix) we eliminate the contribution of discon-
nected vacuum fluctuation subgraphs by dividing by (VAC, outIAC, in),
and any constant factors in the vacuum expectation values cancel in this
ratio.
We could go on and calculate matrix elements between multi-particle
states, by inserting the appropriate `wave functionals' in Eq . (9.2.3). These
can be calculated by applying the adjoints of annihilation operators
such as (9.2.7 to the vacuum state ; just as for the harmonic oscilla-
tor, these wave functionals turn out to be Hermite polynomials in the
field times the vacuum Gaussian. We do not need to work all this
out here, because as shown in Section 6.4, the vacuum expectation val-
ues (9 .2.1 7) are all we need in order to be able to calculate S-matrix
elements ,
9.3 Lagrangian Version of the Path-Integral Formula
The integrand in the exponential in Eqs . (9.1.38) or (9 .2 .17) looks like
the Lagrangian L associated with the Hamiltonian H. This appear-
ance is somewhat misleading because here the `rnornenta' Pa(t) or p,,(x, t )
are independent variables, not yet related to qjt) or q,(x, t) or their
derivatives. However, there is a large and important class of theories
in which the integral over the `momenta' can be done by just replac-
ing them with the values dictated by the canonical formalism, in which
case the integrand in the exponential in the path integrals really is the
Lagrangian .
These are theories with a Hamiltonian that is quadratic in the `momenta'
- in the language of field theory
J
"M
+E f d'x B., [Q] P.(x) + C [Q]
(9-3-1)
n
with a `matrix' A that is real, symmetric, positive, and non-singular . The

390
9 Path- Integral Methods
argument of the exponential in Eq. ( 9 . 2.17) is then quadratic in the ps :
f
dT if d
3 _X
P', (X, 04,; (X, -0 - H [q (-r), p(T)]
; dux d'y dz d r' t ;/,x n .gym [4] Pn ( ~,'r) Pm(YJ' )
nm
where
.5/xXn,r 'y}ri[q] Axn ,}'nl [q(T )J ~ (-c - Zr )
fxn[q]
&xn ~~ (-01 - 4n ~~, -0
'[q] = f dT C Lq (T)l
(9.3.2)
(9.3.3)
(9.3.4)
(9.3. 5 )
Now, in general the integral of the exponential of a quadratic expression
like (9. 3.2) will be proportional to the exponential evaluated at the sta-
tionary point of its argument. For a finite number of real variables
this formula reads
~~' S
Sr
5
_ (Det [i,Q//27r] exp i
I Y V _3r~,5~r - i
's 5 - a
(9.3.6)
~t
s
where ~ is the stationary poin t
~s = - 4v- I 1 ,sr
r
x
(9.3.7)
(For a proof of this formula, see the Appendix to this chapter. Hence, as
long as the G~'A , Lea, etc. in Eq. (9 .2.17) are independent of the ps, for such a
Hamiltonian we can evaluate the path integral over the ps in Eq . (9.2.17) by
setting these variables at the stationary point of the quadratic expression
in the argument of the exponential. But the variational derivative of this
quadratic is
b
Lf_!
--~
d-T
d3x 4, (x, -r)F,(x , ,c) - H [9'(r), p( c)] + ic terms
P, (X, T)
(X,-0 -
6 H [q(-r), p(,r)]
P,, (X,
)
(The it- terms depend only on the qs.) Thus the stationary `point' p„(x,t)
where this vanishes is just the value of p,(x, t) dictated by the canonical

9.3 Lagrangian Version qf the Path-integral Formula
39 1
formula
6 I~ [q(~ ),P(~ )]
qn~x' ~) = a~~{~~ ~)
(9.3.8 )
P-p
with pn(x, t) set equal to this value, the argument of the exponential in
Eq. (9.117) is the ordinary Lagrangia n
L [q~~~,
(T)] = /3x
qn(X, T)Pn (X, t) - ~ ~~ (,c) , ~(-r)] (9.3.9 )
and we can write Eq. (9 .2.17) as
(VAC, o ut T ~OA [Q(tA)],(('.B [Q4$}] , . . .~ VAC. in
1/2
A'-11f fl dq,,(x,'r) (Det[2inv/ [q]
i,x,n
X CA[q(tA COB [q(tB)]
. . .
Or-
{L[q(v)jj(t)] + ie ter ms (9 .3 .10)
x ex p if '
(We have combined the 1/27r factors in the integrals over the p, with the
determinant coming from Eq, {9,3 .6},) This is the desired Lagrangian form
of the path-integral formula.
In deriving Eq . (93.10), it was necessary to assume that the operators
GA, CB, . , . were independent of the canonical `rnomenta'. This is not as
restrictive as it may seem. For instance, in a scalar field theory for which
the canonical conjugate to (D is IT = 4), it is possible to calculate the
matrix element of a time-ordered product of operators, one of which is
6(t), by taking the difference of matrix elements in which this operator is
replaced with (D(t + dz) and cD(z), and then dividing by dz, with di --1' 0.
Equivalently, as long as t is not equal to any of the other time-arguments
of the operator in Eq . (9.3.10), we can simply differentiate Eq . (9 .3 .14)
with respect to t .
The one serious remaining complication in E q . (9.3.10) is the deter-
minant of -2/ [q]. If ~vl [g] is field-independent, then this is no problem ;
we have already noted that overall constants make no contribution to
the connected parts of vacuum expectation values, in which we divide by
a vacuum-vacuum amplitude proportional to the same constant factor .
This is the case for instance for the theory of a set of scalar fields din
with non-derivative coupling to each other and/or derivative coupling to
external currents J, The Lagr2tngian density here is

392
9 Path-integral Methods
An obvious extension of the results of Section 7 .5 from one to sev-
eral derivatively coupled scalars shows that this Lagrangian implies the
Hamiltonian
H = dux 1: [ ~i 1~ + ~ (V~n)2
n
+in, vin + JnO nn + t (in0 }2 + ]d3x V (chi) .
(The (Dn are taken to be real scalars, but complex scalars can be accom-
modated by separating them into real and imaginary parts.) In general
there is a non-trivial term that is linear in the III,, but the coefficient of
the quadratic term is a constant, just the unit `matrix' .
f
in Eq. ( 9.3.10 is here afield -independent
The factor (Det[4ic1[q]])1 2
constant, and therefore is without effect .
However, matters are not always so simple. As a second example, let
us consider the so-called nan-linear or-model, with Lagrangian densit y
2 E cla(DnO (Dm 16nm + UnOD)l - V((D)
1d1ii
A straightforward calculation gives the Hamiltonian a s
1
= f
1
2
) II Ri
)nm
Here ~~/ is the field-dependent quantity
i
nm
In cases of this sort, the determinant may be reexpressed as a contribution
to the effective Lagrangian, using the relation Det,d = exp It In ,71 . By
replacing the continuum of spacetime positions with a discrete lattice of
points surrounded by separate regions of very small spacetime volume Q,
we may interpret the delta function in as 6 4(x - y) - S2-1 6"Y , so
that
(In ~~ } ►~.x,rrry •= Jx,v ~ In (1 + ~((D(x))) - 1 • In 0
L nm
with the logarithm of a matrix defined now by its power series expansion
z
3
2
3
To evaluate the trace, we note that 1: ,, . . . ;-- Q- ' ~ d4x , . . The determi-

9.3 Lagranglun Version of the Path-Integral Formula
Kant factor here is then
Det
oc exp -Q-1
d4X # r In I I + U((D(x))] ,
393
where `tr' is to be understood as the trace in an ordinary matrix sense .
The constant of proportionality (which arises from the - In 0 term) is
field-independent and therefore of no present interest . We can regard this
determinant as providing a correction to the effective Lagrangian density
AY
!,?'Q-1tr In
I I I + U((D(x))]
The factor Sl-1 may be written as an ultraviolet divergent integral
f2-1 = 64 (x - x
) = (21r )-4
dip
-
1
We shall not show this here, but the extra terms in the Feynman diagrams
for this theory contributed by d .,P could also have been derived in the
canonical formalism by taking account of the equal-time-commutator
terms in the propagator of time-derivatives of the scalar field .7 Ignoring
this correction would lead to a spurious dependence of the S-matrix on the
way that the scalar field is defined, and would also be inconsistent with
any symmetries of the Lagrangian under transformations of the scalar
fields .
Even where the factor (Detd)-1~2 in the path-integral formula (9 .3.10)
is field-independent, the Lagrangian in this formula may not be the same
as the one with which we started. As an example, let's consider the theory
of a set of real vector fields, with Lagrangian density
1 ~a Api, - O,An~j) (-PA MA~j A'
f t
+
MH AnAn
in AnAl
-1
where the currents JnP are either externally produced c-number quantities
or depend on other fields (in which case terms describing these Kther fields
are to be added to the Lagrangian). By a simple extension of the results
of Section 7.5, we see that the Hamiltonian is
3-, 1: 1
1
1 1
7
2m2
2 fl
2
again with the understanding that other terms must be added involving
any fields that appear in J
. Here the coefficient of the quadratic term is

394
9 Path-Integral Methods
somewhat more complicated than in our first example :
but it is field-i ndependent, so that the factor (Det .4 }-
1 ~2 has no effect. On
the other hand, the Lagrangian (9 .3.9) is here not the one with which we
started ; it is expressed entirely i n terms of A and its spacetime derivatives,
with no dependence on any time-component A° .
For this reason, the
Lorentz invariance of Eq. (9 .3 .10) is far from obvious .
To remedy this, we may reintroduce the auxiliary field . Suppose we add
to the Hamiltonian a term
KH = - ~ ~ rn~
du x ~A" - rr~,~ ' K - 11r, + mn J4
and integrate over the AD as well as the A,, and H . This can only
introduce a field-independent overall factor, since dH is a quadratic in A°
( with afield- independent coefficient in the term of second order in AO)
whose stationary value vanishes . However, suppose that we now integrate
over the III before integrating over the AO . The Hamiltonian in the path
integral (9.2.17) is here replaced with
, U2
(V x A,, )2 +
1M2An2
H+AH=fd'_xE~f
n
~M~(A°)' + Jn ' An - J~ A° + And • il~I
.
This is still quadratic in II, with a field-independent (and somewhat
simpler) coefficient of the quadratic term, so the integral over the H,s can
be done by just replacing II, with its value at the stat ionary point of the
functional E,, f d' x II ' A, - H - K H
17~ - A, + VA °
With II„ eliminated in this way, En f d3x III • A . - H - KH is just the
Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian with which we started.
In order to take account of the possible need to introduce auxiliary
fields like A0., from now on we shall write the path-integral formula after
elimination of the canonical conjugates in terms of fields w,, that include
both canonical fields qn and auxiliary fields c,
;
VAC, aut T
oc fl d~i, (x, r) CA [W(tA)l 61B ~V)(tB)] . . .
ti,x , n
if
(x.3. 1 1)
x exp i ~ d r I L ['W'(r), ~) (~)] + ie term s

9.4 Path-Integral Derivation of Feynman Rules
395
it now being understood that L includes any terms arising from a possible
field-dependent factor (Det ,9/)-l/'
9.4
Path-Integral De rivation of Feynman Rules
We are now ready to use the path-integral formalism to derive the Feyn-
man rules in a wide class of theories . We will concentrate here on the
vacuum expectation values of time-ordered products of field operators
(and their adjoints),
{SAC, gut J T I '~`~.~ (X,~ ), T,,, (XB ) . . . ~ ~ VAS, ink
~~~$ ~~~~~ . . .} - {SAC, autjVAC,in}
(9 .4.1 }
from which S-matrix elements may be obtained (as shown in Section 6 .4)
by stripping off the final propagators associated with each field, replacing
them with the coefficient functions that multiply creation or annihilation
operators in the corresponding free fields, and summing over the indices
on these coefficient functions .
For the simpler theories whose Hamiltonian is quadratic in the III,
Ey . (9-3 .11) gives
I-IdWt(X)]T1A(XA)WfB(XB)_
e'llq)]
~.~
(9 .4.2)
where I [y7j is the action
I [W] = dT ~ L [it, (c), ~,,(r)] + ie termsI
(9 .4. 3 )
with L now including any terms that may arise from afield-dependent
determinant in Eq . (9 .3.10) .
Let us now suppose that the Lagrangian is the integral of a Lagrangian
density, consisting of a quadratic term
O which would be present in the
absence of interactions, plus a Lagrangian interaction density I'1
:
L [V (r), ~i (T)]
d'x [Y~ (w (5~, z), aplp('~' 7) )
X
0 X 'r))
+YI(W( '-C), "Utto,
(9.4.4)
That is, the action (9.4.3) is

396
9 Path-Integral Methods
I [V7] = 1o[0 +[1 IV] ,
1010 =
d'x Yo (Y)(A e"m W
+ ic terms ,
I I lip] ;--
dx
i (ip(x), 0, q) (X)) -
(9.4. 5 )
(9.4.6 )
(9.4.7)
Since
c, and the `ie terms' are quadratic in the fields, we may always
write 10 in the generalized quadratic form
lolwj
1 .
f
(9.4 .8 )
For instance, for a real scalar field of mass m, thunperturbed Lagrangian
is
YO 10 00 IMW
and the ie terms in 10 are given by Eq. (9.2.16 ), as
so here
(9 .4. 9)
lie f
dtf
dux dux'
(x, x') 0 (xTt)0(x', t}
( 9.4.10)
(X _
1 ti
(We are now dropping the factor e £Il in the if term, since it produces a
correction of higher order in c.) To deal with interactions, we will expand
the exponential in powers of 11,
(I, IV]
.
N=O
{9. 4. 12}
and then expand Ii in powers of the fields. The general integrals that we
encounter in the numerator and the denominator of Eq . (9 .4.2) are of the
form
(flui.+ )
x)
eifa [v) l
(X 1 ) W,(X2)
. . .
,
(9.4. 1 3 )
where the field factors W, (xi )M~2{x2}, etc . arise from I1 [tp] and/or
from the field factors Y7( :, (xA) etc . originally present in the numerator of
Eq. (9.4.2). With [()IV,,] of the form (9.4.8), the integral (9.4.13) is of the
same form as the integral evaluated in the Appendix to this chapter, with
the discrete index s replaced with the pair of labels e, x. We can therefore

9.4 Path-Integral Derivation qf'Feynman Rule s
use Eqs. (9.A.12) and (9 .A.15 ), which give here
,. . ( .xl x-) . . . )
a z
[Det()f"
27r
pairings of
fields
397
111
paired fields
pairs
(9.4.14)
This just amounts to the coordinate-space Feynman rules for calculating
the numerator of Eq. (9.4.2) in their covariant form : we expand in the
interaction 11 , and then sum over the ways of pairing the fields in the I1 s
with each other and with the fields ZPe ,, (xA etc., with the contribution of
each pairing being given by the spacetime integral of the product of the
coefficients of the fields in I, [W] and the product of the 'propagators' -iA,
where
Kr.iry(X i , X2 ) = (9: - 1)r 1 x 1 ,e2-x2 .
(9.4.15 )
(The factor [Det(i /2-g)]-1/2 in Eq . (9.4.14) actually represents the con-
tribution of graphs with unlimited numbers of single loops unattached to
any other lines, but in any case this factor cancels in the ratio (9 .4.2) . )
It remains to calculate the propagators (9.4.15). We interpret Eq. (9.4.15)
as an integral equation
Jd4x.2 9e1 X1 /2x2A1r2MX2, X3 ) = 64 (XI - ~3A, , 6 .
(9.4. 16 )
In the absence of external
fields, translation invariance will make ~'
necessarily a function only 0f xl - x2. which can be written as a Fourier
in tegral
L~~L,~~J,t2X2 =_ (2-g )-4
f
The soluti on of Eq . (9.4. 1 G} is then
J
PI~2(p)
(9.4.18 )
where - 1 is the ordinary inverse of the matrix , As we will see, the ic
terms have the effect of making the inverse well-defined for all real values
Kf p. We have thus reduced the problem of calculating the propagator to
that of taking the inverse of a finite matrix .
First consider a massive scalar field, for which the kernel 9 takes the
form (9.4.11) . We can write this as a Fourier integra l
I (P ) I
so the propagator is
d(x, y ) - (2~r )-4
d4p eip-(x-y) (p2 + M2 - icE (P))
l

398 9 Path-Integral Methods
We recognize this as the same scalar propagator previously obtained by
operator methods. (The difference between e and e E(p) is immaterial,
since both are just positive infinitesimals .)
For a second example, consider a real massive vector field . The unper-
turbed Lagrangian is
4
2
We can again write IO[V] in the form (9.4.8), with kernel
r~
)
px,rr}' ~ ~p~ ~ i
+ M
2qpT1 64(x - Y) + iE' terms
(2 7E ) -4
P e
dp.(-r-y ) 1?7PCP 2 = ppPa + M2~1r.,~ + i,- terms]
We will not bother to show it here, but the `+ ic terms' here take the
simple form -1E E{P)~p, The vector field propagator is then given by
simply inverting the 4x4 matrix in the integrand
d4p dip-(x-u)
pppt7
Apa(xj) = (21r
f P ( p
(Terms proportional to e are dropped in the numerator. They are impor-
tant in the denominator in defining how the integrand is to be treated
near the mass shell, p2 = _M2.) This is the same as the propagator derived
by operator methods, except that the non-covariant terms proportional
to 6 (x4 - yc}) are now absent. These non-covariant terms were previously
needed to cancel non-covariant terms in the interaction Hamiltonian, but
the vertex contributions in the Feynman rules are now obtained directly
by inspection of the covariant Lagrangian, and no such cancellation is
needed.
Theories with derivative coupling are equally simple. The factor arising
from the pairing of a field derivative c'~,We(x) with any other field V),& }
(perhaps itself a field derivative) is
[ii dqv.(x)]
(~) W.(y) cif [V~ ~
(x)] eillyll
x.~
WAX) VMW) - (9A.19)
OXY
Such propagators have no non-covariant pieces . For instance, for a
real scalar field, the pairing of c7.0 with 0,0 gives a momentum space
propagator k,,kV 1(k'- + M2 - ie). Also, as we saw in the previous section,
vertices in the theory of a scalar field with derivative couplings to other
fields may be read off from the Lagrangian, and are separately covariant .

9.5 Path Integrals for Fermions
9.5 Path Integrals for Fermions
399
We now turn to the problem of extending the path-integral formalism to
cover theories containing fermions as well as bosons . It would be easy
to proceed in a purely formal way, by analogy with the bosonic case,
with the justification that this gives the `right' Feynman rules . Instead, we
will here derive the path-integral formalism for fermyons directly from the
principles of quantum mechanics, as we did for bosans . 9
As before, we will start with a general quantum mechanical system, with
'coordinates' Q, and canonical conjugate `momenta' P, but now satisfying
anticomrnutation rather than commutation relations :
{Qa.Pi} = ib,h a
JC)05 Q4 = JP., PbJ = 0
(9J. 1 )
(9. . )
(These are Schrodinger-picture operators, or in other words Heisenberg-
picture operators at time t = 0.) Later we will replace the discrete index a
with a spatial position x and a field index m .
We wish first to construct a complete basis for the states ari which the
Qs and Ps act. Note that for any given a, we hav e
It follows that there will always be a `ket' state
I (]) annihilated by all Q,,-
al0) = 0 ,
and a `bra' state {01 annihilated (from the right) by all P,, :
A PO = 0 .
(9.5.4)
(9.5.5 )
For instance, we can tak e
0) ~ (HQa)
I.f ) ,
(0 1 0C (g I
(
Pa
where f ) and ~g l are and kets and bras for which these expressions do
not vanish. (They cannot vanish for all I f ) and (g I unless the operators
jl a Q,, and fl,, P, vanish, which we assume not to be the case .) These
states satisfy Eqs. (9 .5.4) and (9.5.5) by virtue of Eq . (9.5,3 ). They are not
in general unique, because there may be other bosonic degrees of freedom
that distinguish the various possible 10~ and {0 1, but for simplicity we will
limit ourselves here to the case where the only degrees of freedom are
those described by the fermionic operators Q, and Pu, and will assume
that the states satisfying Eqs. (9 . .4) and (9.5.5) are unique up to constant
factors, which we choose so that
(0 10 ) =
1 . (9.5 .6 )

SOD
9 Path-Integral Methods
(Note that this normalization convention could not be imposed if we had
defined ~01 as the left-eigenstate of the Q a with eigenvalue zero, because in
this case (O {QPb ~ 1O} would vanish, which with Eq. (9.5.1) would imply
that (010~ = 0. )
As we saw in Section 7.5, in the Dirac theory Q,, is not Hermitian, but
instead has an adjoint -W, in which case ~0 1 can be regarded as simply
the adjoint of ~D} . However, there are fermianic operators (such as the
`ghost' fields to be introduced in Volume II) for which P,, is unrelated to
the adjoint of Q, In what follows we will not need to assume anything
about the adjoints of Q ,, or P,,, or about any relation between ~~) and (01 .
A complete basis for the states of this system is provided by 10) and the
states (antisymmetric in indices a, b, . . . )
ai b, . . . ~ - Pa Pb . . . A (9 .5 .7)
with any number of different Ps acting on
10}, That is, the result of
acting on these states with any operator function of the Ps and Qs can
be written as a linear combination of the same set of states . In par#icular,
if an index a is unequal to any of the indices appearing in ~ b, c, _~, the n
Q u i b7 ~, . . .~ - 0 , (9.5.8)
pal?t.~ . . .~ ~ I a, b
a c . . .~ - (9.5.9)
On the other hand, if a is equal to one of the indices in the sequence,
b, c, - - , we can always rewrite the state (possibly changing its sign) so that
a is the first of these indices, in which case we hav e
Qa l a, b, e, . . .~ = a { b,e . . .~
(9.5.10)
(9.5.11 )
Simiiariy, we may define a complete dual basis, consisting of (01 and
the states (also antisymmetric in the indices)
(9.5. 1 2 )
Using Eqs. (9 .5.4)-(9.5 .6) and the anticommutation relation (x .5 .1), we see
that the scalar products of these states take the value s
0
if {c, d, ., .1 ~a, b , ., .1
1 if c=u, d = b, etc.
(9.s . 1 3)
where ~• • • 1 here denotes the set of indices within the brackets, irrespective
of order.
In deriving the Feynman rules, we would like to be able to rewrite
sums over intermediate states like (9 .5.7) as integrals over eigenstates of
the Q,, or the P, However, it is not possible for these operators to have

9.5 Path Integrals for Fermions
40 1
eigenvalues (other than zero) in the usual sense . Suppose we try to find a
state
~ q } that satisfies (for all a )
Qu jq ~ = qu lq f
From Eq. (9.5 .2) we see that
(9.5 .14)
(9-5-1 5 )
which is impossible for ordinary numbers. However, nothing can stop us
from introducing an algebra of `variables' (known as Grassmann variables)
qa, which act like c-numbers as far as the physical Hilbert space is
concerned, but which still satisfy the anticammutation relations (9.5 .15 ) .
We will require further that
tqaa qb}={qa, Qh~= fRaaFh }=d,
( 9.5. 1 6 )
where q and q ' denote any two `values' of these variables. We can now
construct eigenstates
~ q } satisfying Eq. (9.5.1
) :
~q~ = exp -iEpa qa
(9.5.17 )
with the exponential defined as usual by its power series expansion . (To
verify Eq. (9.5.14), use the fact that all P,, q,, commute with one another
and have zero square, so that
h:~a
b¢a
-t ~ ~~~b A=0
bra
as required by Eq. (9 .5.14).) We can also define left-eigenstates
(q j
~ not
the adjoints of 1q)), as
a u u
a
(9.5.18)
where fl, is the product in whatever order we take as standard . By the
same argument as for Eq. (9.5.14), we see that

402
9 Path-Integral Methods
These eigenstates have the scalar produc t
0 fl 11
1
(
QO
(1 + iPb(qb -
qb))
Moving each Qa to the right (starting with the rightmost) yields factors
i2( q,
a - q}, which we move to the right out of the scalar product, so
(9. 5.20 )
We shall see that Eq. (9 .5 .20) plays the role of a delta function in integrals
over the qs .
In the same way, we can construct right- and left-eigenstates of the P, ,
P, Ip~ = Pa 1F)
a
(PI Pa = (PIPa r
(9 .5 .21)
(9 .5 .22 )
where the pa are l ike q,, anticommuting c-numbers (taken for convenience
to anticommute with the q,, and all fermionic operators as well as each
other), and
I p~ = exp i Q aI~~
ri Pb
I 0)
a
exp (_i>I: Pa QO
with scalar product (now derived by moving the Ps to the left)
~Pr I P~ = 11(p
a
-
Pa )
(9.5 .23 )
(9.5.25)
The scalar products of these two sorts of eigenstate with each other ar e
a
= (iIexP(_iaPa)) (q f
r1p.
W
a (4
(flexP-_iaPa)) ~ ~ ~ (llQa)
rl Pa 1 0)
a
and so
~q Ip) = Irv eXP - ~
quPa) = Irv eXp (i
.Pqa) (9.5.26

9. 5 Path Integrals .far Fermions
40 3
where XN is a phase that depends only on the num ber N of Q,, operator's :
Somewhat more simply, we also find
It is easy to see that the states
1 q) are in a sense a complete set (and
so also are the
l p~ .) From the definitions (9.5.17), we see that the state
l a, b, . . .} in the general basis is (up to a phase) just the coefficient of
the product q,, q b . . . in an expansion of
1q} in a sum of products of qs.
Therefore we can write any state If) in the form
If) - fO Iq) O +
fa lq) a + I: Jab lq) ab + '
R
ash
(9 . 5 . 27)
where the f s are numerical coefficients, and a subscript a, b,
on 1q)
denotes the coefficient of gaqh . . . in I q) •
In summing over states, it will be very convenient to introduce a sort of
integration over fermionic variables, known as Berezin integrutinn,10 that
is designed to pick out the coefficients of such products of anticommuting
c-numbers. For any set of such variables ~n (either ps or qs or both
together), the most general function f (~ ) (either a c-number or a state-
vector like
1 q )} can be put in the form
f G)
+ terms with fewer ~ factors
(9.5,2 8 )
and the integral over the ~s is defined simply by
d~n
(9.5.29 )
with the tilde in Eq. (9.5.29) indicating that we use the convenient con-
vention that the differentials are written in an order opposite to that of
the product of integration variables in Eq . (9 .5 .28) . Since this product is
antisymmetric under the interchange of any two ~ s, the integral is likewise
antisymmetric under the interchange of any two d s, so these `differentials'
effectively anticommute
Also, the coefficient c may itself depend on other unintegrated c-number
variables that anticommute with the ~ s over which we integrate, in which
case it is important to standardize the definition of c by moving all ~s to
the left of c before integrating over them, as we have done in Eq. (9 .5 .28).

404 9 Path-Integral Methods
For instance, the most general function of a pair of anticommuting
c-numbers ~1 and ~2 takes the for m
because the squares and all higher powers of
j and 2 vanish. This
function has the integral s
f d' i .f (fir, s2) = ~2 Ciz + el ,
d~a f (~ I > ~2)
j d~2 41 f (~ 1, (';2) = C 12 -
Note that the multiple integral is the same as a repeated integral :
jd~2 [f d~j f (~I, ~2)]
1
a result that can easily be extended to integra]s over any number of
fermionic variables. (It was in order to obtain this result without extra
sign factors that we took the product of differentials in Eq . (9 .5.29) to be in
the opposite order to the product of variables in Eq . (9.5.28).) Indeed, we
could have first defined the integral over a single anticommuting c-number
~ 1, and then defined multiple integrals in the usual way by iteration . The
most general function of anticommuting c-numbers is linear in any one
of them
,f(~ 1 , ~2 a . . . ) = b( t2
. . . ) + pl 4~ 2 • . . )
(because i = 0), and its integral over ~ j is defined as
'i d~jf(~I, ~2, - - I = CG2, - - -) -
Repeating this process leads to the same multiple integral as defined by
Eqs . (9.5 .28) and (9 .5 .29) .
This definition of integration shares some other properties with multiple
integrals (from -oa to +oo) over ordinary real variables, but there are
significant differences .
Obviously, Berezin integration is linear, in the sense that
I ( - - -
rl d~,) [f w + ooi d-.) f (~) + f (11 d~n
g(~) (9.5.3 1)
n n
and also
f ( -
fjd~n)
d
f (ol
(9.5 .32)
where a(~') is any function (including a constant) of any anticommuting
c-numbers ~;M over which we are not integrating . However, linearity with

9.5 Path Integrals fir F'ermions 405
respect to left-multiplication is not so obvious. If we are integrating over
v variables, then since is assumed to anticommute with all fin, we hav e
a((-)%')
11 ~n ri
a(V)
( n
) = ( n
and so
d
v~')f
a(~ 1) j fj d~n
f (0
(9 . 5.33 )
It is therefore very convenient (though not strictly necessary) to take
the differentials d~, to anticommute with all anticommuting variables
(including the fin) ;
in which case Eq. (9.5.33) reads more simply
a(~') fj d~n f(D = aW) f
d'n
( ?I C ) f (0
(9-5 .34)
X9.5.35)
Another similarity with ordinary integration is that, for an arbitrary
anticommuting c-number V independent of ~ ,
I
(9. 5, 36)
since shifting ~ by a constant only affects the terms in f with fewer than
the total number of ~-variables .
On the other hand, consider a change of variables
(9.5.37)
where is an arbitrary non-singular matrix of ordinary numbers. The
product of the new variables is
n ~ ~
1: ((ll9nmrtin )
„
But H, ~., here is just the same as the product (in the original order)
fin fin, except for a sign c [m] whi ch is + 1 or - 1 according to whether the
permutation n --> mn is an even or odd permutation Kf the original order :
H
Ynm,) e lm]
H ~n = (Det -
11
11!I 1?2 2 . ..
n
n 1t
This applies whatever order we take for the
,, as long as we take the ~ n'
in the same order, It follows that the coefficient of Hn ~;~ in and function

406
9 Path-Integral Methods
f( ~ ) is just (Det }' times the coefficient of a statement we write
as
j(~a
)
~
f = (met ,s 2)-'
I ~ d~n f .
( 9.53s)
This is the usual rule for changing variables of integration, except that
(Det Y) appears to the power -1 instead of +1 . We shall use Eq. (9.5 .38)
and the linearity properties ( 9.5 .3 1), (9.5.32), and (9.5 .35) later to evaluate
the integrals encountered in deriving the Feynman rules for theories with
fermions.
We can now use this definition of integration to write the completeness
condition as a formula for an integral over eigenvalues . As already men-
tioned, any state
If }can be expanded in a series of the states I0 }, 1a) ,
I a, h},
etc. and these states are (up to a phase) the coefficients of the products
1,
qu, quqb, etc. in the Q-eigenstate
1q}. According to the definition of
integration here, we can pick out the coefficient of any product qbq,qd . . .
in the state Iq} by integrating the product of q} with all q ,, with a not
equal to b, c, d, - . . . Thus, by choosing a function f (q) as a suitable sum of
such products of q s, we can write any state
If } as an integral :
(ri dq.)
(9. 5 . 39 )
(We can move
I q ) to the left of the differentials without any sign changes
because the exponential in Eq. {9.5.17} used to define
1q} involves only
even numbers of fermionic quantities .) To find the function f (q) for a
given state-vector
If }, take the scalar product of Eq . (9 .5 .39) with some
bra {R' I (with q' any fixed Q-eigenvalue) . According to Eye . (9 .5 .35) and
(9.5.20), this is
~q'jf (II(qa - q,,
fl dqb
I) )
f(q)
a
) ( b
Moving every factor (R,, - q' ) to the right past every differential dq b yields
a sign factor where N is now the total number of q,,
variables, so
= (_)N
I ( -
(q'If ) 11 dqh (qu - q'.)) f (q)
M
a
We can rewrite f(q) as f (q'+ (q - q')) and expand in powers of q -- q '. All
terms beyond the lowest order vanish when multiplied with the product

9. 5 Path Integrals for Fermions
fl(q. - 4')a so
~~~~ = (iia - qu
)
f (q)
(J]j(qi " q )
L7 it
40 7
(9.5.40 )
which partly justifies our earlier remark that Eq . (9.5 .20) plays the role of
a delta function for integrals over the qs . Using Eq. {9.5.30, we now have
f 11 dqh
JI(qa - qO f (q'
h ) ( a
The term in the i ntegrand proportional to JJ rya has coefficient
,f(q ' ), so
according to our definition of integration (q'If) = (-) Nf(qf ) . Inserting
this back in Eq . (9.5 .39) gives our completene ss relation
if) = (_)N f 1q) dqb ~qjf)
b
or as an operator equation
J'lq) (fi -dqa (q ~
In exactly the same way, we can also show that
fP) lj dpa
~p I
a
(9.5 .41 )
(9.s .42 )
We are now in a position to calculate transition matrix elements. As
before, we define time-dependent operator s
Q,( r)
exp(iHt) Q,, exp(-iHt)
Pi (t) exp(iHt) F, exp(-iHt)
and their right- and left-eigenstates
(9.5.43)
(9.5 .44)
Iq a ~~ =- e xp( iHt) + q} , IPA t) = exp(iHt)~P~ a (9.5.45)
{q a tj = (ql e x p(-iH t )
(P 7 0 = (A exp(-iHt) . (9. 5 .46)
The scalar product between q-eigenstates defined at infinitesimally close
times is then
Now insert Eq . (9.5.42) to the left of the operator exp(-iHdT). It is
convenient here to define the Hamiltonian operator H(P, Q) with all P s
to the left of all Qs, so that (for & infinitesimal )
(A exp ( - iH(P s Q)dr) l 9 ~ = (F jq} exp ( - W( P, q)dT)
.

408
9 Path-Integral Methods
(We could move the c-number H (p, q) to either side of the matrix element
without any sign changes because each terrain the Hamiltonian is assumed
to contain an even number of fermionic operators.) This gives
.~
~q% r + dTlq ; Pq'jp~ dpa ~pj exp(-iHdr)jq )
(pjq~ exp
iH(p, q)d-c )
Using Eqs. (9.5.26) and (9 .5.27), and noting that the products paq. and
p.q. commute with all anticommuting c-numbers, we find
f (_
! - qa) - iH(p, q)d r
The rest of the derivation follows the same lines as in section 9 . 1. To
calculate the matrix element (R' ; t' QA(P (W) Q B (P(tB ), Q (tB ) ) . . . 1q ; t) of a
product of operators (with t' > tA > tB > . . . > t), divide the time-interval
from t to t' into a large number of very close time steps; at each time step
insert the completeness relation (9.5.41 ); use Eq . (9 .5. 7) to evaluate the
resulting matrix elements (with C' A > (91?, etc, inserted where appropriate) ;
move all differentials to the left (this introduces no sign changes, because
at each step we have an equal number of dps and dq s) ; and then introduce
functions q a(t) and pa(t) that interpolate between the values of q,, and p,,
at each step. We then find
(q~ ; t' I T f(nA(P(tA),Q(tA)), 1T"B(P(tB), Q00) , - - - I lq ; t)
r} i}
~ti
f
, (
q Rl j 1-q il,q{Flj'1-q {F
X &4 ( l (tA) 7 q(tA))C I] ( l (t lJ ) 7 q(t lJ ))
.
.
.
L +
x exp
i
d-c - (9.5 .45 )
f
a
The symbol
T here denotes the ordinary product if the times are in
the order originally assumed, t A > t $ > - - - .
However, the right-hand
side is totall y symmetric in the
(except for minus signs where
anticommuting c-numbers are interchanged) so this formula holds for
general times (between t and t'), provided T is interpreted as the time-
ordered product, with an overall minus sign if t ime-ordering the operators
involves an odd number of permutations of fermionic operators.
Up to this point we have kept track of the overall phase factor (A ^'ZN •

9. 5 Path Integrals for Fermions
409
But in fact these phases contribute only to the vacuum-vacuum transition
amplitude, and hence will not be of importance to us.
The transition to quantum field theory follows along the same lines as
described for Masonic fields in Section 9 .2. The vacuum expectation value
of a time-ordered product of operators is given by a formula dust like
Eq. (9.2.17) .
(VACI out ~ T I CA [P(tA Q(tA)], C-B [P(tB), Q40], "'I IVAC, ID )
OC I [ 1I dq,, (x, T)] [ 11 dp,,, (x, -c)]
('01 A ~p(tA), q (ti)]
z,x,m
z,x,m
[p(tfl .q(tB)
m
H [q('r), p(T)J + ie terms
(9.5.49 )
where the proportionality constant is the same for all operators CA, OB,
etc., and the `fe terms' again arise from the wave function of the vacuum .
As before, we have replaced each discrete index like a with a space position
x and a field index m. We are also dropping the tilde on the product of
differentials, since it only affects the constant phase in the path integral.
A major difference between the fermionic and bosonic cases is that here
we will not want to integrate out the ps before the qs. Indeed, in the
standard model of electroweak interactions (and in other theories, such
as the older Fermi theory of beta decay) the canonical conjugates p,,, are
auxiliary fields unrelated to the q,,, and the Lagrangian is linear in the
q., so that the quantity f dux E. pm qm - H in Eq. (9.5.49) as it stands
is the Lagrangian L Each term in the Hamiltonian for a fermionic
field that carries a non-vanishing quantum number (like the electron field
in quantum electrodynamics) generally contains an equal number of ps
(proportional to q) and res . In particular, the free-particle term HO in the
Hamiltonian is bilinear in p and q, so that
dr
d'x
P~(~,,r)4,(xa z) - Ho [q(t). p(r)] + fe terms
. "~ rr ¢
= - ~ c~x day na,,11~ pm(x) R n(y )
(9 . 5,50)
Mn
with 2 some numerical `matrix'. The interaction Hamiltonian V = H -
HO is a sum of products of equal numbers of fermianic q s and ps
(with coefficients that may depend on bosonic fields) so when we expand
Eq . (9.5.49) in powers of the V we encounter a sum of fermionic integrals

4 10 9 Path- In tegral Methods
of the form
'3rn041 M 2m2 . ..n ,VM .v (X I r Y1, X2, Y2
.
.
.
XN, YN )
fj dq i1i (X, r)J
T.x ,m
X [ 11 dp.(X, T)] q., (x 1) pn, (yj ) qm2 (X2) Pn2 (Y2)
qMN (XN) PnN' (YN)
T,X,M
x exp ~ - i
dux day
nY P~~~~ q,,(1') ~
(9 .5.51 )
one such term for each possible set of vertices in the Feynman diagram,
with coefficients contributed by each vertex given b y i times the coefficient
of the product of fields in the corresponding term in the interaction .
To calculate this sort of integral, first consider a generating function for
all these integral :
g) =_ I [ 11 dq,,(x, r) dp,,,(x, -r)]
X,T,M
x exp ( - i E f d'x d'y ~Ymx,ny pm(x) q,(y)
mn
--i
d4X PM (X) fin W - i
dy g , (y) qn (y)) , (9 .5.52 )
where f,,(x) and gjY) are arbitrary anticommuting c-number functions.
We shift to new variables of integratio n
qn (Y ) = 4M (Y) + f dux
(.9-1
)
ny ,tnx f?n(x)
,n
Using the translation invariance condition ( 9.5,36), we then find
J(J',g) = exp ( i
d4x d4}' fi r:-t)ny,, ve gn(Y) f.(x))
►HN
x, r ,m
,~
Mn
The integral is a constant (i .e., independent of the functions f and g )
which can be shown using Eq. (9.5.38) to be proportional to Det ~2. Of
more importance to us is the first factor. Expanding this factor in powers

9.5 Path Integrats for Fermions
41 1
of gf'and comparing with the direct expansion of Eq . (9. 5 .52), we see that
pairing r ~ - i
-~
paired mx,ny
pairings
pairs
(9.5 .54)
with a proportionality constant that is independent of the x, y, m , or n,
and also independent of the number of these variables . The sum is over
all different ways of pairing ps with qs, not counting as different pairings
that only differ in the order of the pairs. I n other words, we sum over the
N! permutations either of the ps or the q s . The sign factor 6pair2ng is + 1
if this permutation is even ; -1
if it is vdd.
This sign factor and sum over pairings are just the same as we encoun-
tered in our earlier derivation of the Feynman rules, with the sum over
pairings corresponding to the sum over ways of connecting the lines asso-
ciated with vertices in the Feynman diagrams, and the factors (
playing the role of the propagator for the pairing of q,, (x) with p,(Y). In
the Dirac formalism for spin
-1, the free-particle action i s
dr f d'xE Pm (Y-, T)4M (X, T)
J71
f
4X q)(X) ryp -
HO [q(T), P (T)] I
where in the usual notation the canonical variables here are
(9 .5 .55 )
with m a four-valued Dirac index. Comparing this with Eq . (9.5.50) , we
find here
0
mx,~ry~
Y
G XP
Mn
(y°FiTu k~j + in - ie]) etk•(x~y)
.
(9.5.57)
irk
. ~ Mn
{ 2~}
(Though we shall not work it out in detail, the i e term here arises in much
the same way as for the scalar field in Section 9.2.) The propagator is the n
)?nn
just as we found in the operator formalism. The extra factor - YO
arises because this propagator
is the vacuum expectation value
of
'{l~r~ j a -not ~'l~~~l~Js ~'~rl~l~ •
~~~m4~~, - l~l~'I ^7
As one example of a problem that is easier to solve by path-integral
than by operator methods, let us calculate the field dependence of the

412
9 Path-Integral Methods
vacuum vacuum amplitude for a Dirac field that interacts only with an
external fiield. Take the Lagrangian as
(9.5.59)
where r(x) is an x-dependent matrix representing the interaction of the
fermion with the external field . According to Eq. (9.5.49), the vacuum
persistence amplitude in the presence of this external field i s
{VAC, out sVAS, i n)r- oc
[ H dq,,,(x, r )] [ Tj dP. (X} T)]
r,x,m r,x,m
X exp
ijdlx pT .111[~,oo~' + m + IF - ic] qj
(9.5.60)
with a proportionality constant that is independent of I,{x) . We write this
as
VAC, ou t IVAG, i n ~r, cc
C 11 d4,,(x } -c)] [ rj dF.( X} T)]
T,x,m
z, x,m
x exp
- i~
dux d'y Pn,(?~ ) qn( Y)
[rlntx ,ny (9.5.61)
Mn
where
a
4
T, XT
I)Mn
To evaluate this, we change the variables of integration qn(x) to
(9. 5 . 62 )
(9.5 .63)
The remaining integral is now T'-independent, so the whole dependence of
the vacuum persistence amplitude is contained in the determinant arising
according to Eq. (9.5.35 ) from the change of variables :
{ AC, outIVAC, in) r- oc Det -*-[F]
.
To recover the results of perturbation theory, let us writ e
and expand in powers of ~[f] . Eq. (9.5.64) gives the n
(VAC, aut I VAC , in)r oc Det ( .[1 + ~'-1
[I"]] )
(9.5 .64)
(9.s . 6s )
(9 .5 .66)
(9 .5 .67)

9.6 Path-Integral Formulation qf Quantum Electrodynamics
41 3
This is Just what we should expect from the Feynman rules : the con-
tributions from internal dines and vertices in this theory are -61~R' and
the trace of the product of n factors of -~-1 [r] thus corre-
sponds to a loop with n vertices connected by n internal lines ; 1 In is the
usual combinatoric factor associated with such loops (see Section 6.1 ); the
sign factor is (-1)'+1 rather than (-1 )' because an extra minus sign is
associated with fermion loops ; and the sum over n appears as the argu-
ment of an exponential because the vacuum persistence amplitude receives
contributions from graphs with any number of disconnected loops. The
F-independent factor Det -9 is less easy to derive from the Feynman rules ;
it represents the contribution of any number of fermion loops that carry
no vertices.
More to the point, a formula like Eq. (9 .5.64) allows us to derive non-
perturbative results by using topological theorems to derive information
about the eigenvalues of kernels like A '[F]. This will be pursued further
in Volume II .
9.6
Path-Integral Formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics
The path-integral approach to quantum field theory really comes into its
own when applied to gauge theories of massless spin one particles, such
as quantum electrodynamics. The derivation of the Feynman rules for
quantum electrodynamics in the previous chapter involved a fair amount
of hand-waving, in arguing that the terms in the photon propagator AP'' ( g )
proportional to q Y or qV could be dropped, and that the purely time-like
terms would just cancel the Coulomb term in the Hamiltonian, so that
the effective photon propagator could be taken as qP V 1q2 . To give a real
justification of this result using the methods of Chapter 8 would involve
us in a complicated analysis of Feynman diagrams . But as we shall now
see, the path-integral approach yields the desired form of the photon
propagator, without ever having to think about the details of Feynman
diagrams.
In Chapter 8 we found that in Coulomb gauge, the Hamiltonian for
the interaction of photons with charged particles takes the form
H [A} U1} . . .~ Hm + dux ~ zII_L 2 + 1(V x A )' -A - J~ + Vc;ou
] (9 . 6.1 )
Here A is the vector potential, subject to the coulomb gauge conditio n
while IIL is the solenoidal part of its canonical conjugate, satisfying t he

41 4
same con strai nt
9 Path- Integral Methods
V_ II1 =0 .
(9. 6.3 )
Also, HM is the matter Hamiltonian and Vc,,,,1 is the Coulomb energ y
VcoUi(0 = 2 dux d'y Jo(X, t)j"(Y, t) 47rlx - Y! - (9.6.4 )
Just as for any other Hamiltonian system, we can calculate vacuum
expectation values of time-ordered products as path integrals"
x ,i a,i
_x/
X exp i
d4x[n . a - ;n '- ~ (V x a) 2 + a • J +~° ~
1
x [llo(v .ax)]
6 (
[Hv . .x]
(9 .6 .5 )
where yaj(x) are generic matter fields. In writing Eq. (9,6 . 5) in terms
of a matter Lagrangian density, we are assuming that HM is local and
either linear in the matter ors (as in spinor electrodynamics) or quadratic
with field-independent coefficients (as in scalar electrodynamics) . We have
inserted delta functions** in Eq. (9.6.5) to enforce the constraints ( 9.6.2)
and (9.6.3).
The argument of the exponential in Eq. (9 . 6. 5) is evidently quadratic in
the independent components of n (say, al and n2), with field-independent
coefficients in the term of second order in n . Thus, according to Eq-
(9 .A,9), the integral over ir can be done (up to a constant factor) by
setting a equal to the stationary point of the argument of the exponential ,
` Note that YE(x) is the interpolating c-Wernher field for the quantum operator R L, whose com-
mutation relations with each other and with A are the same as those of R, but which unlike i 1
commutes with all canonical matter variables .
This is not strictly accurate . I f we take the canonical variables to be, spy7 ut, u~ and ~1, ~2, with
a3 and n3 regarded as functianals of these variables given by Lqs . (9.5.2) and (9.6.3), then we
should insert the delta function s
4 (al(x)+0z'
-1 (a In I fWl+6z1R2[x)
f1
X
d
dt VCou l
H oweve r, this d iffers from th e product of delta functions in F.,q. (9,6.5 ) o nly by a factor llet c?
which although infini te is field-independent and hence cancels in ratios like (9 .4.1) .

9.6 Path-Integral Formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics
It = a :
x.i x,&"
X CA (rl'B
exp i dux ['2 - ~( V x a )2 + a
• j
i dt V(
.
+ ie terms [llv .ax. ]
))
_~
4 1 5
(9.6G)
To bring out the essential covariance of this result, we use a trick . Intro-
duce a new variable of integration ao(x), and replace the Coulomb term
- f d t VC,,j in the action wit h
f
d4X [__a0(xj(x) +
21 (Va°w)
2
(9.6.7)
Since (9 .6.7) is quadratic in a°, the integral over a' can be done (up to a
constant factor) by setting u°(x) equal to the stationary point of (9 .6.7),
i.e., to the solution of
or in Kther words, to
a
a
(X
}
t)
Y
d
3
Y
j
c~
(Y~ t~
47r x - yl
(9.6.8 )
Using this in Eq . (9.6.7 just gives the Coulomb action - J' dt V~,,,, 1 . Hence
we can rewrite the argument of the exponential in Eq. (9. 6.6) as
[j,2_
1
11jI
0)2
- ¢ fjl,, f1u'' + a,, jO + Y
+ total derivative s
with ~',,,, = OUaL, -- 0, a,,, and integrate over a° as well as over a and matter
fields. That is, the path integral (9 . 6,6) is now
1
))VAC
dap(x)
A"(W
X OA ((",g . . . eXP (i I [a, y 1)
6 (V - aw)
where I is the original action
I [a, Y' ] _
d 4x [--- ~
.~ ~ftti~,fI" + a, ~,7~` +
M] + ic terms .
OA9)
(9 .6.10)
Now everything is manifestly Lorentz- and gauge-invariant, except for
the final product of delta functions which enforce the Coulomb gauge

416 9 Path-Integral Methods
condition.`* To make further progress, we shall use a simple version of
a trick4t1 that in Volume II will be used to treat the more difficult case
of non-Abelian gauge theories. For simplicity, we shall deal here with
the case where the operators GA [A, TI, 0,3 [A, TI, . . . as well as the action
I [a, W] and measure [jj dal [jj d] are gauge-invariant .
First, replace the field variables of integration a,,(x) and W(x) everywhere
in Eq . (9.6.9) with the new variable s
WAN =_ exp (i q,,,,A(x)) w W
(9.6.11 )
(9.6.12 )
with arbitrary finite fi(x). This step is mathematical triviality, like
changing an integral fT, f (x)dx to read f!"_', f (Y)dy, and does not require
use of the postulated gauge invariance of the theory. Next, use gauge
invariance to replace apn(x) and t~1,,n( .x) in the action, measure, and 61-
functions with the original fields a,,(x) and ip?(x), respectively. Eq . (9.6.9)
then becomes
60, [A,, T],
[A, qq, I
) VAC_
x,Y
x,C
X exp (i I [a, Wj) fj 5 (V - a(x) + V'A(x))
(9-6,13)
X
Now, the function A(x) was chosen at random, so despite appearances the
right-hand side of Eq . (9.6. 13) cannot depend on this function . We shall
exploit this fact to put the path integral in a much more convenient form .
Multiply Eq . (9.6.13) by the functiona l
B [11, a] = ex p - lis dux (00a' -- K'A z
(9.6. 14 )
(where a is an arbitrary constant), and integrate over A(x) . By shifting
the integration variable la(x), and noting the actual A-independence of
(9.6.13 ), we see that the effect is simply to multiply Eq . (9.6,13 ) with the
field-independent constant
exp -
~
2 A) 2)
[Hciix]
(9.6.15 )
Note that now o" ( _r) is not e ual to the value (9_6_8), but is an independent variable of integration-
Wt will not i ntegrate over (x) first, which would lead back to Eq. (9.6.6), but in stead will treat
it in tandem with a (x] .

9.6 Path-Integral Formulation of 'Quantum Electrodynamics 41 7
This factor cancels out in the connected part of the vacuum expectation
value, and thus has no physical effect . But {9.6.13} is only A-independent
after we i ntegrate over ay (x) and tt7 (x ) . We can j ust as well integrate over
A(x) before we i ntegrate over &`(x) and zki {x} , in which case the factor
11,6 (V • a( x ) + V'A
in Eq. (9-6,13) i s replaced with
dA(x) exp - 'la
ex (Ooa0 - v2 A)2) 6 (V • a(x) + V'11
Oc exp ioc
d4x (09 },ali)2 ) 1
(9.6.1 6)
~
where again means proportional with a field-independent factor .
Dropping constant factors, Eq . (9. 6.9 ) now becomes
X ,p X,JV I
(9.6.17 )
where
lei~~~ , Y)l
[a, W1 - HOC (0 ~Q~`)2 C~4~C
.
(9 .6.18)
This is now manifestly Lorentz-invariant.
We consider the new term in (9 . 6 .18 ) as a contribution to the unper-
turbed part of the action, whose photonic part now reads
Io [ CI] =
dx L- ~ ( (Cx,, -
f~'al') ~" 7)2 + iE' teI' iY1SJ
y~ L
(9.6.19)
whe re
2
2
9wc,VY ~x~c_ ( 1 -
~~ ox~ c
~ ~, 64(X - Y
) + ie terms
Yp
Y
The photon propagator is then found immediately by inverting the 4 x 4
matrix in the integrand of E q . (9 .6.20)
~a
v
Axx by = {2rt}-4 j
d4q
tl~"_ i~ + ~
q
(9-6.21 )
q
(q2 - i,-)2
We are free to choose a as seems most convenient. Two common choices
are ac.- 1, which yields the propagator in FeynnEan gauge :
~.u
A~~y man = l
f2n ) -4 L~4 ~'
(9.~.22)
~ ~~

418 9 Path-In tegral Methods
or oc = oo, in which case the factor (9 .6.14) acts as a delta function, and we
obtain the propagator in Landau gauge (often also called Lorentz gauge) :
PXjY ,f lq2 - ic
(q2 - ic)2
Practical calculations are made far more convenient by worki ng with such
manifestly Lore n tz- invariant interactions and propagators.
9.7 Varieties of Statistics *
We can now take up a question raised in Chapter 4 : what are the
possibilities for the change of state-vectors when we interchange identical
particles ?
For this purpose, we will consider the preparation of the initial or final
states in a scattering process . Suppose that a set of indistinguishable
particles in either of these states is brought to a particular configuration
with momenta p7, p2, etc. from a standard configuration with momenta
k1, k2, etc., by some sort of slowly varying external fields, keeping the
particles far enough apart in the process to justify the use of non-relativistic
quantum mechanics. (Spin indices are not shown explicitly here ; they
should be understood to accompany momentum labels .) To calculate
the amplitude for this process we can use the path-integral method,"`
taking the qs and ps of Section 9.1 as particle positions and momenta,
rather than fields and their canonical conjugates. These always satisfy
canonical commutation rather than anticommutation relations, whether
or not the particles are bosons or fermions or something else, so at this
point we are not committing ourselves to any particular statistics. The
path-integral formula (9.1.34) gives an amplitude ( AI, p2, . . . Iki,k2,
.)D as
an integral over paths in which one particle is brought continuously from
momentum k, to momentum p1, another identical particle is brought
continuously from momentum k,) to momentum p2, and so on. The
subscript "U' indicates that this is the amplitude we would calculate for
distinguishable particles. In particular, this amplitude is symmetric under
permutations of the ps and simultaneous permutations of the ks, but has
no particular symmetry under separate permutations of the ps or ks. But
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading .
Here I am following the discussion of Laidlaw and C . De itl,11 except that they apply the
path-integral method to the whole scattering process, rather than just the preparation of initial
or final slates, to a relativistic theory the possibility of particle creation and annihilation makes
it necessary to apply the path-integral method to fields rather than particle orbits . For us, this
is not a problem, because we limit such calculations to sulficiertily early or late times, when the
particles participating in a scattering process are all far apart .

9.7 Varieties rrf Statistics
41 9
if the particles are really indistinguishable, then there are othe r paths
that are topologically distinct, but that yield the same final configuration .
For space dimensionality d L 3, the only such pathst are those that take
k l, k2, . . . into some non-trivial permutation of p i, R2, ' ' --
Hence the
true amplitude should be written
(P z, A2,
. . . k 1a k, , . . .~
QP
~PYI > pJA2}
. . . I ki>kz,--'}n (9.x .1 )
the sum running over all N t permutations of the N indistinguishable
particles in the state, and C a set of complex constants. These amplitudes
must satisfy a composition rule appropriate for indistinguishable particles :
1
~
*42,- kj,k2,-
f d'ql d'q2
. . . ~Pl, P2, lql, q2 ,
Using Eq. (9-7-1), this is the requirement
CP
P
ia P;Yza
. . . k I ,k2,
.) D =
C: F
d3q
i d 3q2 • . .
Applying a permutation 29" to both the initial and final states in the first
amplitude on the right , this i s
X (Py +r:~F1, py'r~+2,' Iq:y, +>> q9W + 2,
. . )n (9 orr~, q,
`2, ki, k2, . . .}D
But the amplitudes {P1, p2, ' . . l kl, k2, . . .}D satisfy the composition rule for
distinguishable particles
(PI, P2,
Jkl, k,),
-)D= f d
3 q, d3q2 . . . * 7 V . . . Iql~ (125 . . . ) D
x ~q1, q2,' . . Ik1,k2t
. . .~D s (9 .7.3 )
so the composition rule for the physical amplitudes may be written
r~A
f
~'~pr ~ err
~ This is expressed formally in the statement that the first hmmotopy group of Configtiration space
in d ~ 3 is the permutation group.12 By 'configuration space' for N distinguishable particles is
meant the space of N d-vectors, excluding d-vectors that coincide with (or are within an arbitrary
limiting distance of) each other, and identifying configurations that differ only by a permutation
of the vectors .

420
9 Path-Integral Methods
which will be satisfied if and only i f
QT r . T ff
CYr Q
+
(9.7.4)
That is, the coefficients Cy must furnish aone-dimenaianal representation
of the permutation group. But the permutation group has only two such
representations : one is the identity, with C,y = +1 for all permutations,
and the other is the alternating representation, with Cq = +1 or Cg = -1
according to whether
_~?,
is an even or odd permutation. These two
possibilities correspond to Bose or Fermi statistics, respectively J
The nice feature of this argument is that it makes it clear why the case
of two space dimensions is an exception . In this case there i a much richer
variety of topologically distinct paths,1 For instance, a path in which one
particle circles another a definite number of times cannot be deformed
into a path where it does not . In consequence, in two space dimensions
it is possible to have anyoras,is particles with more general permutation
properties than just Fermi or Bose statistics .8a
Appendix Gaussian Mul tiple Integrals
We wish first to calculate the multiple integral, over a finite number of
real variables ~,, of the exponential of a general quadratic function of
rl d~fi exP
rs r
(9,x.1 )
(9 .A.2)
where K,.,, Lr, and M are arbitrary constants, except that the matrix K is
required to be symmetric and non-singular . For this purpose, we begin
by considering the case where If s, L , and M are all real, with ors also
positive. The result in the general case can then be obtained by analytic
continuation.
Any real symmetric matrix can be diagonalized by an orthogonal matrix .
Therefore, there is a matrix 9' with transpose yT = 9`1 such that
( 5rTK,9"
= ~rsKr
-
(9.A.3 )
'T'here has been much discussion in the literature of possibilities other than Rose or Fermi
statistics, often under the label parasratistics . It has been shown" that parastatislics theories in
d ~ 3 space dimensions are equivalent to theories in which all particles arc ordinary fermions
or bosons, but carrying an extra quantum number, so that wave functions could have unusual
properties under permutations of momenta and spins .
This is expressed in the statement that the first hornatapy group of configuration space in two
space dimensions is not the permulation group, buy a larger group known as the braid group. 14

Appendix
Gaussian Multiple Integrals 421
Because K is assumed positive and non-singular, the eigenvalues Kr are
positive-definite. We can use the matrix Y to perform a change of
variables :
Y{
(9 .A.4)
The Jacobian
JDet Yj of this transformation is unity, so the multiple
integral (9 .A.1) is now given by a product of ordinary integrals :
e-' ~
d~' ex p
e - M
- M
exp
~
12K,
But the determinant and the reciprocal of Eq. (9 .A.3) give
DetK = ri Kp
r
i ~ - I
so Eq. (9.A.5) may be writte n
Det ~
i'S
(9.A.5)
(9.A. 6)
Eq. (9 .A.1) defines a function of K ,.,, L,., and M that is analytic in Kr; in
a finite region around the surface where Krs is real and positive, where
the integral converges, and for such K, is analytic everywhere in L, and
M. Since (9.A .6) equals {9.A. 1} for K, L,., and M all real, with K,S also
positive, Eq. (9.A.6) provides an analytic continuation of Eq. (9.A.1) to
the whole complex plane, with a cut required by the square root. The sign
of the square root is fixed by this analytic continuation . In field theory
Kra is actually imaginary, except for a small real part due to the `ic term' .
It is useful to express Eq . (9.A. 6) in terms of the stationary point of the
function (9 .A.2) :
~r - - Es K-' Ls
as
(9,A .7 )
(9.A .8 )
()y12exP{_Q()}
271
This is the result to remember : Gaussian integrals can be evaluated up to
a determi n ant factor by setting the integration variable equal to the point
where the argument of the exponential is starionury.

422
9 Path-Integral Methods
We next wish to use this result to c alculate the integrals
I ~.l . ..r2,ro
fl d~r
6- r i LIZ
.
. . ~ r?N ex~] {-
~~ r S
10)
(9.A.
2 1: Kr~~r ~ 5
(Integrals of this sort with an odd number of ~-factors in the integrand
obviously vanish.) From the power-series expression of exp ~- ~ L r ~r)
in Eq. (9 .A.1), we have the sum rul e
N=O rirv-rz,%r
- 11 &';r
exp
-
Lr ~r
'"'_
K rs~r ~5
~
r
r rs
K()]'
12
2n 2
r s
Det (K )I
(Y L,L,K _'
. (9 . A . 11)
N=0 +'N
Comparing the coefficients of L, ., L,2 , . . L,,,
Kn both sides, we see that
I,', ,2---,2N must be proportional to a sum of products of elements of K-1,
which symmetry requires to take the form
pairin&s
of ri , . .r:n'
(K-' )paired indices
pairs
(9 .A .12 )
Here the sum is over all ways of pairing the indices r'1 • • r ZN, with two
pairings being considered the same if they differ only by the order of the
pairs, or by the order of indices within a pair. To calculate the constant
factor Cr, awe note that the number vN of terms in the sum over pairings in
Eq . (9 .A.12) is equal to the number (2N)? of permutations of the indices,
divided by the number of ways N ! of permuting index pairs and by the
number 2' of permutations within index pair s
(2N) f
v~ = N!2N
Therefore, Eq. (9 .A. 1 2) gives
Lrj Lr,
Lr2,Jrj r2---r2,V ~ VNCN (E
rS
(9 .A. 13 )
{9 . A . 14}
Comparing this with Eq. (9.A. 11) shows that the factors (2N) ! and 1V!2N
are cancelled by VN , leaving us with
K
Cr =
Det
2
(9.A.15 )

References
For instance,
Ir
i
r2 = 1 a (K - l )rj r2
[(K_1 .)rjr2(K_l)r3r 4
+ (K-
l )r j t.j(K - 1 )r2r4
+
(K -')r 1r4(K _ 1 )rzr3
1
r
and so on, where 10 is the integral with no indices
~ r r s
)]-112
= {Det(-) ]
2a
Problems
42 3
(9.A.16 )
(9.A.17)
(9.A. 18)
1. Consider a non-relativistic particle of mass
in, moving along the
x-axis in a potential V(x) = fnc_)'x2/2. Use path-integral methods to
find the probability that if' the particle is at x, at time ti, then it is
between x and x + dx at time t.
2. Find the wave function in field space of a state consisting of a single
spinless particle of mass in D . Use the result to derive the Feynman
rules for emission or absorption of such a particle .
3. Find the wave function in field space of the vacuum in the theory
of a neutral vector field of mass m zf- 0. Use the result to derive the
form of the ie terms in the propagator of this field .
4. The Lagrangian density of the free spin 3/2 Rarita-Schwinger field
Y ±p is
ap }fir + 3~
- MW ipV-
Use path-integral methods to find the propagator of this field .
References
I . R, P. Feynman, The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanic s
(Princeton University, 1942 ; University Microfilms Publication No .
2948, inn Arbor). Also see R. P. Feynman and A. R . Hibbs, Quantum
Mechanics and Path Integrals (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965). Fo r
a general reference, see J. Cxlimrn and A . Jaffe, Quantum Physics-A
Functional Integral Point of View, 2nd edn (Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1987) .

424
9 Path-Integral Methods
Z. P. A. M . Dirac, Fhys. Zeits. Sowjetuniora 3, 62 (1933) .
3. R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod . Phys. 20, 367 (1948) ; Pays. Rev., 74, 939,
1430 (1948) ; 76, 749, 769 (1949) ; 80, 440 (1950).
4. L. D. Faddeev and N. Popov, Pays . Lett . B25, 29 (1967). Also see
R. P. Feynman, Acta Phys. Pol. 24, 697 (1963) ; S. Mandelstam, Phys .
Rev . 1 75, 1580, 1 604 (1968) .
5 . B . De Witt, Phy,s. Rev. Lett. 12, 742 (1964) .
6. G. 't Hooft, IUucl. Pays. B35, 167 (1971) .
7. I. S . Gerstein, R. Jackiw, B. W. Lee, and S.Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D3,
2486 (1971) .
S. L. D. Faddeev, Teor. Mat. Fizika, 1, 3 (1969) ; translation in Theor .
Math. Phys. 1 , 1 (1970).
8a. J. Schwinger, Prac, Nat . Acad . Sci. 44, 956 (1958) .
8b. K. Osterwalder and R. Schrader, Pays. Rev. Lett. 29, 1423 (1972) ;
Commun. Math . Phys. 31, 83 (1973) ; Commun. Math. Phys. 42, 28 1
(1975 ). The ester alder-Schrader axioms require smoothness, Eu-
clidean covariance, `reflection positivity,' permutation symmetry, and
cluster decomposition .
9. This section was largely inspired by discussions with J . Polchinski .
10. F. A . Berezin, the Method of Second Quantization (Academic Press,
New York, 1966).
11 . M. G . G. Laidlaw and C . M. De Witt, Whys. Re v. D 3, f375 (1970).
12. J. M. Leinaas and J . 1Vlyrheim, Nuovo Cimenra 37 B, 1 (1977).
13. Y. Ohnuki and S . Kamefuchi, Phys. Rev. 170, 1279 (1968) ; Ann. Phys.
51, 337 (1969) ; K. Driihl, R. Haag, and J . E. Roberts, C'vmmun. Math.
Phys . 1$, 204 (1970) .
14. The braid group was
Papers of E. Artin, ed.
Reading, MA, 1965) .
introduced by E. Artie. See The Collected
by S . Lang and J. E. Tate (Addison-Wesley ,
15. F. Wilczek, Fhys. Rev. Lett. 49, 957 (1982); K, Fredenhagen, M .
R. GaberdieL and S. M. Riiger, Cambridge preprint ATP-94-90
(1994) . Also see J . M. Leinaas and J . Myrheim, Ref. 12.

1 0
Non-Perturbative Methods
We are now going to begin our study of higher-order contributions to
physical processes, corresponding to Feynman diagrams involving one or
more loops. It will be very useful in this work to have available a method
of deriving results valid to all orders in perturbation theory (and in some
cases beyond perturbation theory). In this chapter we will exploit the
field equations and commutation relations of the interacting fields in the
Heisenberg picture for this purpose. The essential bridge between the
Heisenberg picture and the Feynman diagrams of perturbation theory is
provided by the theorem proved in Section G .4 : the sum of all diagrams for
a process oc --+ (3 with extra vertices inserted corresponding to operators
a,(x), oh(y), etc. is given by the matrix element of the time-ordered product
of the corresponding Heisenberg-picture operators
(T~ -, T I - i0aW, -WAY) . . . ) Tu+ )
As a special case, where the operators D,(x), Ob(x), etc. are elementary
particle fields, this matrix element equals the sum of all Feynman dia-
grams with incoming lines on the mass shell corresponding to the state x,
outgoing lines on the mass shell corresponding to the state fl, and lines
off the mass shell (including propagators) corresponding to the operators
0a(x), D&}, etc. After exploring some of the non-perturbative results
that can be obtained in this way we will be in a good position to take up
the perturbative calculation of radiative corrections .
10. 1
Symmetries
one obvious but important use of the theorem quoted above is to extend
the application of symmetry principles from 5-matrix elements, where all
external lines have four-momenta on the mass shell, to parts of Feynman
diagrams, with some or all external lines off the mass shell .
For instance, consider the symmetry of spacetime translational invari-
ance. This symmetry has as a consequence the existence of a Hermitia n
425

426
1 0 Nan-Perturbative Methods
four-vector operator PP, with the property that, for any local function
O(x) of field operators and their canonical conjugates ,
[P,.(X), 0 wl = i
OW -
(10 .1 .1 )
(See Eqs. (7.3 .28) and (7 . 3 .29)-) Also, the states i and # are usually chosen
to be eigenstates of the four-momentum :
p~'Tj+ =
T~c4 , PI'TflT = pPTO_ . (10.1 .2)
It follows that for any set of local functions O(x), Ob{x}, etc . of fields
and/or field derivative s
-Past) (q'1- , Tf 0,,(x,), Ob(X2)
. . . JT~+)
(T~-, [P,, TjO,,(x,), Ob(.X2) + '' 1] qVl+)
~,~ + fix; ~
. . .
(i'- T ~ 0,(x , ), Ob (X2 ), . . .
Ta +
j
This has the solution
(Tfl-, T I OAXO' Ob(XI), - - - I xya+
)
= exp (i (Ffl - P.) ' X) F.b .. .(xi - Xza
. . .~ a
where x is any sort of average spacetime coordinate
(10.1 .3 )
( 1 0.1 .4)
and F depends only Kn differences among the xs. (In particular, a vacuum
expectation value can depend only on the coordinate differences .) We can
Fourier transform Eq. (10 .1 .4) by integrating separately over xA and the
coordinate differences, with the result tha t
f d'xj d4X2 - '' (To-, TI Oa (X 1), Oh (X2), - - - I kPU -1 )
x exp(-iki • x1 - iJc2 • x2 - • ~ ~} oc 64(P# - Pa-kl - k? -- ' . -) •
( 10.1 . 6)
We saw in Section 6.4 that the matrix element of the time-ordered product
is given by applying the usual coordinate-space Feynman rules to the sum
of all graphs with incoming particles corresponding to particles in x,
outgoing particles in fl, and external lines that simply terminate in vertices
at x1,x2, . . .. The Fourier transform
( 10.1 .6) is correspondingly given
b y applying the momentum-space Feynman rules to the same sum of
Feynman diagrams, with off-shell external lines carrying four-momenta
kl, k2, . . . into the diagrams. Eq. ( 10,1 .6) is then just the statement that
this sum of Feynman graphs conserves four-momentum . The result is
obvious in perturbation theory, because four-momentum is conserved at

10.1 Symmetries
427
every vertex, so it is not surprising to see the same result emerging without
having to rely on perturbation theory .
With somewhat more effort, one can use the Lorentz transformation
properties of the Heisenberg-picture fields and the `in' and `out' states to
show that the sum of all graphs with a given set of on- and ofd-stye]] lines
satisfies the same Lorentz transformation conditions as the lowest-order
terms.
Similar arguments apply to the conservation of internal quantum num-
bers, like electric charge . As shown in section 7.3, a field or other operator
0,, (x) that destroys a charge q,, (or creates a charge -qu) will satisfy
in the Heisenberg and interaction pictures alike. Also, if the free-particle
states a and 0 have charges q, and qfl, then so do the corresponding `in'
and `out' states. We then have
(qp - qx) (T#-, T~O,(x), Oh(y), - - Ta 1
= (Tp -, [Q, T 10. (x), Ob (y), - - -
T,+)
= -(qu + qh + - - -) (Tp-
, T 10OW, 04y), - - - I Tx+)
.
Thus the amplitude
(Tp-, Tj D, (x ), Oh(Y), vanishes unless
charge is conserved
(10.1 .7)
A somewhat less trivial example is provided by the symmetry of charge-
conjugation invariance. As we saw in Chapter 5, there is an operator C
that interchanges electron and positron operator s
with ~ a phase factor. For the free electron field W{x}, this give s
where f3C is a 4 x 4 matrix, which (for the Dirac matrix representation
we have been using, with y5 diagonal) takes the farm
0 0 0 1
C
0 0 ---1
0
0 ,--1 0 0
1 0
0
0
Applied to the free-particle electric current in spi nor elect rodynamics, this

428
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
give s
If C is to be conserved in elect rodynarnics, it must then also be defined to
anticommute with the free photon field
C(&' )C=1 = --&'
In theories like electrodynamics for which C commutes with the interaction
as well as H0, it also commutes with the similarity transformation Q(t)
between the Heisenberg and interaction pictures, and so it anticommutes
with the electric current of the interacting field s
C(W^11~`T)C-1 = -TyuT { 10. 1 .8}
and the electromagnetic field in the Heisenb erg-picture
C(Ail)C-1 - -Au .
{10.1 .9}
It follows then that the vacuum expectation value of the time-ordered
product of any odd number of electromagnetic currents and/or fields
vanishes. Therefore the sum of all Feynman graphs with an odd number
of external photon lines (off or on the photon mass shell) and no other
external lines vanishes .
This result is known as Furry :s theorem.' It can be proved perturbatively
by noting that a graph consisting of electron loops e, to each of which
are attached ne photon lines, must have numbers I and E of internal and
external photon lines related by an analog of Eq . (6.3.11) :
21 -}- E ~- ne
Hence if E is odd at least one of the loops must have attached an
odd number of photon lines. For any such loop there is a cancellation
between the two diagrams in which the electron arrows circulate around
the loop in opposite directions. Hence Furry's theorem is a somewhat less
trivial consequence of a symmetry principle than translation or Lorentz
invariance ; it is not true of individual diagrams, but rather of certain sums
of diagrams. Figure 1 0.1 illustrates the application of Furry's theorem that
was historically most important, its use to show that the scattering of a
photon by an external electromagnetic field receives no contributions of
first order (or any odd order) in the external field .
10.2
Polology
one of the most important uses of the non-perturbative methods described
in this chapter is to clarify the pole structure of Feynman amplitudes as

1 0.2 Polology
429
Figure 10.1 . The lowest-order diagrams for the scattering of a photon by an
electromagnetic field. Here straight lines represent virtual electrons ; wavy lines
represent real and virtual photons; and the double line represents a heavy particle
like an atomic nucleus that serves as a source of an electromagnetic field . The
contributions of these two diagrams cancel, as required by charge-conjugation
invariance.
functions of the momenta carried by external lines. Often the S-matrix
for a physical process can be well approximated by the contribution of a
single pole. Also, an understanding of this pole structure will help us later
in dealing with radiative corrections to particle propagators .
Consider the momentum-space amplitud e
I
d4xi . . . d'x, e-~q`xl
.
. . e-iq,,-x,. ~ Tf AI(xi) . . . A, (x,,) ~)
4

430
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
The As are Heisenberg-picture operators of arbitrary Lorentz type, and
~. . . }~ denotes the expectation value in the true vacuum 'Yo+ = To- = To.
As discussed in Section 6,4, if A1, - - ' A, are ordinary fields appearing in
the Lagrangian, then (10.2 . 1 ) is a sum of the terms calculated using the
ordinary Feynman rules, for all graphs with external lines corresponding
to the fields Al,,
A, carrying off-shell four-momenta qt . . . qn into the
graph. However, we will not be limited to this case ; the Ai may be
arbitrary local functions of fields and field derivatives .
We are interested in poles of G at certain values of the invariant squares
of the total four-momenta carried by various subsets of the external lines .
To be definite, let's consider G as a function of q', where
with 1 r ::~ n-1 . We will show that G has a pole at q2 = - M2, where m is
the mass of any one-particle state that has non-vanishing matrix elements
with the states At . . .1q~ 4fo and A ,+ l
. . . A,,To, and that the residue at this
pole is given by
-2 i
+ W (2 7Z) ~
~ a (q 1
q2 ~ Yi1~' --
Zc
+ . , . ~ ~ r~ ~
where the Ms are defined by *
X i
.
.
. ~~~ e-q I 'x E , . . e- !qr ',Y r (To, T IA l(x l ) .
. . Ar (Xr)) TP,U
= (2n)' r54(41 + ' - - + q, - P)
o jp,~ (q2 . . . qr ) , (10.2.4)
f d
4Xr+1 , , , d4x, e-qr+j'~Cr+1 . . . e-iq,IX,
x (Tp,aa T fAr+l (X r+ 1) - . . A n (Xn ) T
Q
with pP =_
p 2 + m2), and the sum is over all spin (or other) states of the
particle of mass rn.
Before proceeding to the proof, it will help to clarify the significance o f
Recall that in the absence of lime-varying exter n al fields, there is no distinction betwee n `in' and
out' one- particle states, so that Tp,ff -4 _ Tp,M = "~Pff•

1 0.2 Polology.
( 1 0.2.3 ) if we wn'te it in the somewhat long-winded for m
G(q, - • - fin) --+ A
43 1
1,2
x
(2-n )464(q, + + q, - k) (27r)"" (2Vk 2
+ M2)
M01k,A2
q,)~
- i
i
X
(27r)4
k-2-+ M2 iE7
x (2V'k2 +
M2)112
Mk,n,O( R, +z . . . qn)
(1 0.2.5)
This is just what we should expect from a Feynman diagram with a single
internal line for a particle of mass pn connecting the first r and the last
n - r external lines." However, it is not necessary that the particle of mass
m correspond to a field that appears in the Lagrangian of the theory.
Eqs. (10.2.3) and (1 0.2.6) apply even if this particle is a bound state of the
so-called elementary particles whose fields do appear in the Lagrangian .
In this case, the pole arises not from single Feynman diagrams, like Figure
10.2, but rather from infinite sums of diagrams, such as the one shown
in Figure 1 0.3. This is the first place where the methods of this chapter
take us beyond results that could be derived as properties of each order
of perturbation theory.
Now to the proof. Among then? possible orderings of the times x ~ . . . xo
in Eq. (10.2.1), there are n ! /r !{n - r)! for which the first r of the x9 are
all larger than the last n -- r. Isolating the contribution of this part of the
volume of integration in Eq . (10.2.1), we have
X0
min [x° - - . x°] - max [x°+ 1 . . . x~ ~
X (To, T~Al(xl) . . . A,(X,)l T fAr+l(xr+l) . .
. An(X0 I TO)
+ OT, (10.2.7 )
where `OT' denotes the other terms arising from different time-orderings .
We can evaluate the matrix element here by inserting a complete set of
intermediate states between time-ordered products. Among these may
See Figure 10.2. The factors (2ar)1{1[2(1c 2 + nz2)] 1,'2 just serve to remove kinematic factors
associated with the mass m external line in 111{ll,, and
Mk ' , a, Also, the sum over d of the
product of coefficient-function factors from these two matrix elements yields the numerator of
the propagator associated with the internal line in Figure 10 .2 .

432
10 Non-Pertu rbative Methods
r
r + 1
Figure 10.2. A Feynman diagram with the pole structure (10.2.6) .
Here the
line carrying a momentum k represents an elementary particle, one whose field
appears in the Lagrangian ,
r
r 4- 1
+
2
Figure 10.3. Figure 10.3. A Feynman diagram of the class whose sum has the
pole structure (10.2.6). Here the pole is due to a composite particle, a bound state
of two elementary particles. The elementary particles are represented by straight
lines, and interact by the exchange of particles represented by wavy lines .
be the single-particle state Tl,,, of a definite species of mass m. Further
isolating the contribution of these one-particle intermediate states, we
have
(mmII [xo
.
.
. xr l - max [x,-+i
.
.
. X
01)
d3p
J
ET
(T0, TIA00
+ OT,
- -A. (x,)I TPG) (Tp,, T I Ar+l(xr+l)
. . . An(Xn)jTo)
( 1 0.18 )
where `QT' now denotes other terms, here arising not only from other time-
orderings, but also from other intermediate states. It will be convenien t
1 12
1
n

1 0.2 PolologY
to shift variables of integration, so tha t
and use the results of the previous section to write
43 3
lpo~ TIAi(xi) . . . A,(X,)JTp,,y)
= eip'-XI (To, TfA,(O)A2(Y2) . . . A, (y,)
(10.2.9 )
(Tp,jT5 TfAr+l (xr+ l ) . . . An
(x, ) IPO)
= e -iP'Xr+1 ('i'P a q TfAr+l (0) . . . Arz(.Yn)lTp)
(10. 2 . 1 0)
Also, the argument Kf the theta function becomes
min [x° . . . x°] - max [x°+1 . . . x°]
= x° -X0~i + min [O y~ . . . y01 - max [0 y + 1 . . . y
n ~
We also insert the Fourier representation (6.2. 1 5) of the step function
Z ~
dw e-tf
0 (r)
2~i
(,-
cca + ic
The integrals over x i and x,.+7 now just yield delta functions :
X ei R2'Y:
.
. . e-igr'Yr e- aRr+2 '}'r+2
. . . C !qn '}`n
fx ~
exp ~- ~c~ [ rt~in[D y~
. . . y~] - max[U y ~ t . . . y~
1
2~i ~ W + ae
X
d 3p (xP,, T f A, (0) . . . A,(Y),)) TP'17 )
x (Tp,,, T ~ A,+, (0) - - - A, (y.)I To )
)4
0 ~p 2 + M2 + (t)
x(27z
6'(++I+-+q,+p)6 (qr+l + - - - + qn +
+ OT (10.2.11 )
We are interested here only in the pole that arises from the vanishing Kf
the denominator ci + ie, so for our present purposes we can set t he factor
exp(-fco [train -max]) equal to unity. The integrals over both p and a) are

434
1 0 Non-Perturbative Methods
now trivial, and yield the pole
-1
+ M2 + iE]
G(ql . . . qn) --* i(2n)'~'(qj +
+ qrj) Iqo ~
q
x E Moj_q,5(q2 . qn) Mq ,5j o (4r+2 - -
- qn) + - - ~ (10.2.2)
OF
where now
q - q 1 +
. . . + qr = -fir+ l
-'-- . . . - qn
a
MOj,,.,(q2 . . . q,,) = j d'Y2 .
. . dlyr e-,qZ,y~ . . . e-'qI'YI
X (To, TfAi(O)A2(Y2)-An(Yr)I TQ,or) , (10 .2.13 )
x
T IAr+l(~)Ar+2(Yr+2 ) . . . An (Y ►~~ ITo) (10.2.14)
and the final `• • •' in Eq . { 10.2.12} denotes terms that do not exhibit this
particular pole. (The `ether terms' arising from other single-particle states
produce poles in q at different positions, while those arising from multi-
particle states produce branch points in q, and those arising from other
time-orderings produce poles and branch cuts in other variables .) Using
Eqs . ( 1 .2.9) and (10.2.10), it is easy to see that these Ms are the same as
defined by Eqs. (10.2.4) and (10.2.5). Also, near the pole we can writ e
I
-q° - 007-M7 + i6
-2
q 2-+m2
(We again redefine e by a positive factor 2/q2 + m2 , which is permissible
since - stands for any positive infinitesimal.) Eq. (10.2.12) is thus the same
as the desired result (10.2.3) .
This result has a classic application to the theory of nuclear forces . Let
(D,,,(x) be any real field or combination of fields (for instance, proportional
to aquark-arttiquark bilinear qp5,c, q ) that has a non-vanishing matrix
element between a one-pion state of isospin a and the vacuum, normalized
so that
The matrix element of c% between one-nucleon states with four-momenta
p,p' then has a pole at (p - p'}2
-m2. which 1sospin and Lorentz
invariance (including space inversion invariance) dictate must take the

10 . 2
PDlolOgY
form"
{N
',
(7r, P 'l I J4) IN, a, p) -> i( 2 ,g)- 3'G,, x
Y57a U)
f)2 + -2
(p - P
Mir
43 5
where u and u' are the initial and final nucleon spinor coefficient functions,
including the nucleon wave functions in isospin space, and T, with a =
1 , 2,3 are the 2 x 2 Pauli isospin matrices. The constant G. is known as the
pion-nucleon coupling consta nt. This pole is not actually in the physical
region for the matrix element (10.2.16), for which (p - p')2 > 0, but it can
be reached by analytic extension of this matrix element, for instance by
considering the off-shell matrix elemen t
where N and N' are appropriate components of a field operator or
product of field operators with non-vanishing matrix elements between
one-nucleon states and the vacuum . The theorem proved above in this
section shows then that exchange of a pion in the scattering of two
nucleons with initial four-momenta pi, p2, and final four-momenta Pay P~
yields a pole at (P, - Pi)I _ (p 2 - p~)1 --~ -n~~
G2
Snrinr2,nr,rv, ~ ~~(Pi + P2 - P1 - Pz)-
K
(p, - p')2
2
1
7 1
x (27r)-'( fill y
9 ,~~ ~, ) x
(27z)-' u~ ySTa u2) .
(1 0.2 . 17 )
(The easiest way to get the phases and numerical factors right in such
formulas is to use Feynman diagrams ; our theorem just says that the pole
structure is the same as would be found in a field theory in which the
Lagrangian involved an elementary pion field.) Again, this pion pole is
not actually in the physical region for scattering of nucleons on the mass
shell, for which Cpl - pr ) 2 >_ 0, but it can be reached by analytic extension
of the S-matrix element, for instance by considering the off-shell matri x
Lorentz and isospin invariance requires this matrix to take the form (u' I' ro u), where C' is a 4 x 4
matrix for which the bilinear {y' f - W} transforms as a pseudoscalar. Like any 4 x 4 matrix, F can
be expanded as a sum of terms proportional to the Dirac matrices 1 , j I„ [y+„ yw], ys~., and yc. The
coefficients must be respectively pseudoscalar, pseudavectar, pseudotensor, vetlor, and scalar .
Out of the two momenta p and p' it is possible to construct no pse ►ldo5calars or pseudovectors ;
just one pseudntcnsnr, proportional to e} "'app pQ ; two independent vectors, proportional to p~
or p" ; and a scalar proportional to unity, in each case with a proportionality factor depending on
the only independent scalar variable,
(p - p' )2 ,
By using the momentum-space Dirac equations
for u and ti, it is easy to see that the tensor and pseudovector matrices in F give contributions
proportional to y5,

436
element
10 Nora-Perturbative Methods
/d4xi dx2 d'x~d4x~ e~~Pi~ 'e-iP2 ~~1 e'~'i-x
1 e'P; -x ,
Although this pole is not in the physical region for nucleon-nucleon
scattering, the pion mass is small enough so that the pole is quite near
the physical region, and under some circumstances may dominate the
scattering amplitude, as for instance for large e' in the partial wave
expansion.
Interpreted in coordinate space, a pole like this at Cpl -- p'1 )2 = (p2 -
p~)2 -m1 implies a force of range 1/r~z,~ . For instance, in Yukawa's
original theory of nuclear force the exchange of mesons (then assumed
scalar rather than pseudoscalar) produced a local potential of the form
exp(-rrt,r)/47rr, which in the first horn approximation yields an S-matrix
for non-relativistic nucleon scattering Proportional to the Fourier trans-
form :
d3 X 1 d3X2d
3xI d3x~ e-'x I - pI ~,-ix2•P2ex1''P~ F eiX2 F'P: r
exp
-~ TitjEI X j -X2f
X1 P
X 63(X
I - Xt f )63( X1 --
41Ejxj - x2 l
1 1)2 + M2
T he factor 1JL(Pi -Pi')2 +M2] is just the non-relativistic limit of the prop-
agator I / [(pl -- p,1)2 + M~] in (1 0.2.17 ). (In ( 10.2.17) the energy transfer
p° - p'~° for IP11 ~~ MN and IPiI < MN equals [p12 -ply]/2rr~N, which is
negligible compared with the magnitude IPt - p' l of the momentum trans-
fer.) When Yukawa's theory was first proposed, it was generally supposed
that this sort of momentum-dependence arises from the appearance of
a meson field in the theory. It was not until the 1950s that it became
generally understood that the existence of a pole at (p1 - pi )2 --* -rri2
follows from the existence of a pion particle and has nothing to do with
whether this is an elementary particle with its own field in the Lagrangian .
10.3 Field and Mass Renormalization
We will now use a special case of the result of the previous section to
clarify the treatment of radiative corrections in the internal and external
line of general processes.
The special case that concerns us here is the one in which the four-

1 0.3 Field and Mass Renormalization
437
momentum of a single external line approaches the mass shell . (In the
notation of the previous section, this corresponds to taking r = 1
. ) We
will consider a function
x (To, TI 6f (x1), A2 (X2), - - ~ T,,)
(10.3.1 )
where Cj(x) is a Heisenberg-picture operator, with the Lorentz transfor-
mation properties of some sort of free field W( belonging to an irreducible
representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group (or the Lorentz group
including space inversion for theories that conserve parity), as labelled by
the subscript /', and A2, A 3 , etc. are arbitrary Heisenberg-picture oper-
ators;. Suppose there is a one-particle state T,,1iQ that has non-vanishing
matrix elements with the states 61. To and with A 2 A 3 . . . To .
Then ac-
cording to the theorem proved in the previous section, G f has a pole at
q i = _M2, with
Ge (q r q2 - . .~ ~ -2i
9j ~ + (2n)'
(i'
C~r(Q)~',,,,)
X f d4X2 . . . e-iq2'-X2
(Tql,u T I A2(X2) . .
. ITO)
We use Lorentz invariance to write
(To, ef (O)TC11,C) = (21r )-1/2 N ue(qj, a) ,
(10. 3 . 2)
(10.3.3)
where u~(9, u) is (aside from the factor (2n )- 3/2) the coefficient function*
appearing in the free field W1 with the same Lorentz transformation
properties as 0/, and N is a constant. (It was in order to obtain Eq. (10.3.3)
with a single free constant N that we had to assume that Ce transforms
irreducibly.) We also define a 'truncated" matrix element M,, by
j dX2 --- e-~q2'-X2 . . . (Tql,u TIA2(X2) . . . I TO)
E q . (10.3.2) then reads, for q2 --* -rn
G1 ---), =2f
qt } m
q~ + m2 - ie
(10.3.4
(ZU. 3. 5 )
According to Eqs . (6.2.2) and (6.2.18), the quantity multiplying ,,,+ in
(10.3.5) is the momentum space matrix propagator -id,,,p(gl) for the free
For instance, for a conventionally normalized free scalar field, W. (y i,a) = [2
qi +m~1 -1/2

438 10 Non-Perturbative Methods
field with the Lorentz transformation properties of 6~, (or at least its
limiting behavior for q~
--+ -rn2), so (10.3 .5) allows us to identify Me
as the sum of all graphs with external lines carrying momenta iq l, qz . .
corresponding to the operators 6(, A 2 , . . ., but with the final propagator for
the 01 line stripped away. Eq. (10.3.4) is then just the usual prescription for
how to calculate the matrix element for emission of a particle from the sum
of Feynman diagrams : strip away the particle propagator, and contract
with the usual external line factor (2n)-3}2U* . The only discrepancy with
the usual Feynman rules is the factor N.
The above theorem is a famous result due to Lehmann, Symanzik, and
Zimmerman,3 known as the reduction formula, which we have proved here
by a somewhat different method that has allowed us easily to generalize
this result to the case of arbitrary spin. One important aspect of this
result is that it applies to and sort of operator ; G,, need not be some field
that actually appears in the Lagrangian, and the particle it creates may
be a bound state composed of those particles whose fields do occur in the
Lagrangian. It provides an important lesson even where 6,, is some field
'PI in the Lagrangian : if we are to use the usual Feynman pules to calculate
S-matrix elements, then we should first redefine the normalization of the
fields by a factor 1/N, so that (with apologies for the multiple use of the
symbol T) :
To, T~(O)Tq,a) = (27r)-"' u,,(q, a)
(10.3.6)
A field normalized as in Eq. (10.3 .6) is called a renvrrraulized .field.
The field renormaliztion constant N shows up in another place. Sup-
pose that there is just one of the operators A2, A3 , . , . in Eq. (10.3 .1), and
take it to be the adjoint of a member of the same field multiplet as Cr~ .
Then Eq. (10.3.2) reads
f dxi
d4 X2 e"I" e-42'x2 (TO, TJ0e,(x1)(1Y'*'(X2)JY0 )
q2 + M2 - iE
(O)T41,U)
x f d4 X2 e-~q2,x,
(Tqp7,0T,(0)To
-2 d
2 ,~' +--M2
This is just the usual behavior of a propagator (the sum of all graphs with
two external lines) near its pole, except for the factor IN12 . According to
Eq. (10.3 .6), this factor is absent in the propagator of the renormalized
field Te. Thus a renormalized field is one whose propagator has the same

I 0.3 Field and Mass Renorrtsaliaataon
43 9
behavior near its pole as fir afree field, and the renormalized mass is defined
dg
by the position of the pole.
To see how this works in practice, consider the theory of a real self-
interacting scalar field 013, the subscript B being added here to remind
us that so far this is a `}pare' (i.e., unrenormalized) field. The Lagrangian
density is taken as usual a s
; 0~~~ ~~`d~$
M2 (D' - VB{(DB) .
(10.3.7)
In general there would be no reason to expect that the field cbB would
satisfy condition (10.3 .6), nor that the pole in q2 would be at -m $ , so let
u s introduce a renormalized field and mas s
ID = Z - 1~2 (DB ,
M 2 = m~ + J rra2
(103.8 )
(10.3.9)
with Z to be chosen so that 0 does satisfy Eq. (10 .3.6), an d 6rn.2 chosen
so that the pole of the propagator is at q 2 = _rra2. (The use of the symbol
Z in this context has become conventional ; there is a different Z for each
field in the Lagrangian. )
The Lagrangian density (10.3 .7) may then be
rewritten
Y =
o + -rj ,
40 2(D2
'010110- i m
where
(10.3.10)
(103 . 11 )
(10.3.12 )
In calculating the corrections to the complete momentum space propagator
of the renormalized scalar field, conventionally called S(q)> it is convenient
to consider separately the one-particle-irreducible graphs : those connected
graphs (excluding a graph consisting of a single scalar line) that cannot be
disconnected by cutting through any one internal scalar line. An example is
shown in Figure 10.4. It is conventional to write the sum of all such graphs,
with the two external line propagator factors -i(27c)-4 (q 2 + m2 - ie)- ]
omitted, as t(27r)4II*(q 2), with the asterisk to remind us that these are
one-particle-irreducible graphs. Then the corrections to the complete
propagator are given by a sum of chains of one, two, or more of these
one-particle-irreducible subgraphs connected with the usual uncorrected

440
10 Non-Perturbative methods
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.4. Figure 10.4. Diagrams that (a) are, or (b) are not, one-particle
irreducible. These diagrams are drawn for a theory with some sort of quadrilinear
interaction, like the theory of a scalar field 0 with interaction proportional to 0' .
propagator factors :
F27 j~
(27r)4 q2 +
1
+ (4 q2 + - ic
[i(2)4n*(q2)] (
2n)4 q2 + m2
~
2
+
(2 )l q2 + 2
[i(2)4H {gr ~~
(27)4 q2 + m2
ie
x
[i(27r)4rr(q2)]
2
-
-+- (103 .13)
[()4 q +
or more simply
A' (q) = [q 2 + rri2 - ie]-a + [q2 + rra2 --- ie]- 1f1*(42 ) [qz + M2 - i,,]-1
(10.3. 1 4)
Summing the geometric series, this give s
A'(q ) - [q
2 + rri2 ,- II *(~ ~ ) _ iel- i
( 10.3.15 )
In calculating II' , we encounter a tree graph arising from a single insertion
of vertices corresponding to the terms in Eq. ( 1 0.3.I2) proportional to
0,0090 and 02, plus a term FI~oap arising from loop graphs li ke that in
Figure 10.4(a) =
11'{q) == _(Z v` t)
L~
2 + M,
] + Z~ m.2 + IILOOP (q2) . ( 10.116)
The condition that m.2 is the true mass of the particle is that the pole of
the propagator should be at q 2 = --rn2, so that
II *(-rn2) = 0 , (10.3.17)
Also, the condition that the pole of the propagator at q 2 = -M2 should

1 0.3 Field and Mass RenorFrtalization
have a unit residue (like the uncorrected propagator) is tha t
d
q2=_M2
These conditions allow us to evaluate Z and brn2
;
~bM _ -rILOOP(o) ,
z = 1 +
d ~--2 TTLOO~ ~4~ )
~
q2 _-M2
44 1
( 10 .3 . 18)
( 1 0.3.19)
(103 .20)
This incidentally sh ows that ~ 6m2 and Z - I are given by a series of terms
containing one or more coupling constant factors, justifying the treatment
of the first two terms in Eq. ( 10.3.1 2) as part of the interaction
1 .
In actual calculations it is simplest just to say that from the loop terms
RiJa()p(q) we must subtract a first-order polynomial in q 2 with coefficients
chosen so that the difference satisfies Eqs. ( 10.3 .1 7 ) and ( 10. 3 .1 8). A s we
shall see, this subtraction proced ure incidentally cancels the infinities that
arise from the momentu m space integrals i n IIL00P. However, as this
discussion should make clear, the renormalization of masses and fields has
nothing d irectly to do with the presence of infinities, and would be n eeessary
even in a theory in which all mom.entum space integrals were convergent.
An important consequence of the conditions ( 10.3.17 ) and (1 0.3. 1. 8 ) is
that it is not necessary to include radiative corrections in external lines on
the mass shell. That is,
Similar remarks apply to particles of arbitrary spin . For instance, for
the `bare' Dirac field the Lagrangian is
We introduce renormalized fields and masses
Vs(Ta) -
(10.3 .22)
nz = MB +6M .
(10.3 .24)
(The subscript 2 on Z2 is conventionally used to distinguish the renor-
malization constant of a fermion field .) The Lagrangian density is then
rewritten
Y =4+ Yi,
(10.3 .25)

442
1 0 Non-Ferturbatiae Methods
Let i(27t )4 E*( k) be the sum of all connected graphs, with Kne fermian line
coming in with four-momentum k and one going out with the same four-
momentum, that cannot be disconnected by cutting through any single
internal fermio n line, and with external line propagator factors -i(27r )-4
and [i
+ m - ic] - t o mitted . {Lorentz invariance is being used to justify
writing 1* as an ordinary function of the Lorentz scalar matrix
ko"j".)
Then the complete fermion propagator is
S' (k) = [i
+m - itF]- i + [i k +rri -
+rrx-
(1Q.3.28 )
In calculating V(9 ) we take into account the tree graphs from the terms in
Eq . (10.3 .27) proportional to 'P_
' and TT as well as loop contributions :
VW - -(Z2 - 1}[i 9 + m] + Z26M + 1 L00P(9 ) . {1.4.3 .29}
The condition that the complete propagator has a pole at 1c2 = _M2 with
the same residue as the uncorrected propagator is then tha t
Y" (IM) = 0 ,
ay-*(9)
a Y Lam
=D ,
and hence
~
k
( 1 0.3.30)
Z2
ayLOOP(9)
(14.3.31)
Just as for scalars, the vanishing of [i 1 + mj-lY*(g) in the limit g ---3 im
tells us that radiative corrections may be ignored in external fermion
lines. Corresponding results for the photon propagator will be derived in
Section 10.5 .
10.4 Reno rmalized Charge and Ward Identities
The use of the commutation and conservation relations of Heisenberg-
picture operators allows us to make a connection between the charges
(or other similar quantities) in the Lagrangian density and the properties
of physical states. Recall that the invariance of the Lagrangian density

1 0. 4 Renormalized Charge and Ward Identifies
44 3
with respect to global gauge transformations T~ ~ exP(iq,,oc)Tc (with 2
an arbitrary constant phase) implies the existence of a curren t
satisfying the conservat ion condition
(10.4.1 )
( 14. 4.2)
This implies that the space-integral of the time component of J F is time-
independent
~ ~ Q = Lea Hl = 0 ,
where
Q =-I d 3X jO
(10.4.3)
(10.4.4 )
(There is a very important possible exception here, that the integral {10.4.4
may not exist if there are long-range forces due to massless scalars in the
system. We will return to this point when we consider broken symmetries
in Volume 11 .} Also, since it is a space-integral, Q is manifestly translation-
invariant
and since P is afour-vector, Q is invarian#, with respect to homogeneous
Lorentz transformations
It follows that Q acting on the true vacuum To must be another Lorentz-
invariant state of zero energy and momentum, and hence (assuming no
vacuum degeneracy) must be proportional to To itself. But the propor-
tionality constant must vanish, because Lorentz invariance requires that
(TO, J,,To) vanish . Hence
Also, Q acting on any one-particle state 'I'p,,7,n must be another state with
the same energy, momentum, and Lorentz transformation properties, and
thus (assuming no degeneracy of one-particle states) must be proportional
to the same one-particle stat e
The Lorentz invariance of Q ensures that the eigenvalue q(,) is independent
of p and u, depending only on the species of the particle . This eigenvalue is
what is known as the electric charge (or whatever other quantum number

444
1 0 Nan-Perturbutive Methods
of which P may be the current) of the one-particle state.
To relate
this to the q,,, parameters in the Lagrangian, we note that the canonical
commutation relations give
~Ja(x, t), Te [Y} t)~ = -q,,Te,(Y, r)b'(x - y) ,
(10.4.9)
or integrating over x :
[Q, Te(y)j = -qIT((Y)
( 1Q.4, 10)
The same is true of any local function F(y) of the fields and field derivatives
and their adjoints, containing definite numbers of each :
[Q, F(y)] = -qvF(y) ,
(10.4.11 )
where q F is the sum of the q, for all fields and field derivatives in F(Y),
minus the sum of the q~ for all field adjoints and their derivatives . Taking
the matrix element of this equation between a one-particle state and the
vacuum, and using Eqs. (10.4.7) and (10.4.8), we have
(TO, fly)Tp~a,n) (qF- q(n)) = 0 .
Hence we must have
%J - qF
as long as
(To, F(y) qIP'T'n) =~ 0
(10.4.12)
(10.4.14)
As we saw in the previous section, Eq . (1x.4.1 4) is the condition that
assures that momentum space Greens functions involving F have poles
corresponding to the one-particle state 'Fp,,,q. For a one-particle state
corresponding to one of the fields in the Lagrangian we could take
F =
tiYe, in which case qF = q?, but our results heTe apply to general
one-particle states, whether or not their fields appear in the Lagrangian .
This almost, but not quite, tells us that despite all the possible high-order
graphs that affect the emission and absorption of photons by charged
particles, the physical electric charge is just equal to a parameter qe
appearing in the Lagrangian (or to a sum of such parameters, like q F
•)
The qualification that has to be added here is that the requirement, that
the Lagrangian be invariant under the transformations T( -y exP(iq~a)T,,,
does nothing to fix the aver-alb scale of the quantities q~- The physical
electric charges are those that determine the response of matter fields to
a given renormalized electromagnetic field 14P . That is, the scale of the qe
is fixed by requiring that the renormalized electromagnetic field appears
in the matter 1_.agrangian
m in the linear combinations [0y - iqeA I ]Te,

1 0.4 Renormalized Charge and Ward Identities
44 5
so that the current JP is
JA _ ~ {10. 4.1 5}
But AP and qe are not the same as the `dare electromagnetic field' A$ and
`bare charges' ql3,, that appear in the Lagrangian when we write it in its
simplest form
(10.4. 16)
The renormalized electromagnetic field (defined to have a complete prop-
agator whose pole at p2 = 0 has unit residue) is conventionally written in
terms of AB as
so in order for the charge qt to characterize the response of the charged
particles to a given renormalized electromagnetic field, we should define
the renormalized charges by
qe = VZ3 qB1 .
(10.4.18 )
We see that the physical electric charge q of any particle is just propor-
tional to a parameter qB related to those appearing in the Lagrangian, with
a proportionality constant Z, 112 that is the same for all particles . This
helps us to understand how a particle like the proton, that is surrounded
by a cloud of virtual mesons and other strongly interacting particles, can
have the same charge as the positron, whose interactions are all much
wreaker. It is only necessary to assume that for some reason the charges
q1y in the Lagrangian are equal and opposite for the electron and for
those particles (two u quarks and one d quark) that make up the proton ;
the effect of higher-order corrections then appears solely in the common
factor Z3
1/2
,
In order for charge renormalization to arise only from radiative cor-
rections to the photon propagator, there must be cancellations among the
great variety of other radiative corrections to the propagators and electro-
magnetic vertices of the charged particles. We can see a little more deeply
into the nature of these cancellations by making use of the celebrated
relations between these charged particle propagators and vertices known
as the Ward identities.
For instance, consider the greens function for an electric current P(x)
together with a Heisenberg-picture Dirac field T,,(y) of charge q and its
covariant adjoint T,,,(a). We define the electromagnetic vertex function FY

446
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
Figure 10.5. Diagrams for the first corrections to the electron propagator and
vertex function in quantum electrodynamics. Here straight lines are electrons ;
wavy lines are photons .
of the charged particle by
cox day d z e'p-x e-zk-y e+V-,~
To, TI P(x) T,,{Y} Tm( 4)~ ~)
1
64(p + k
(10.4.19)
iqSna,(k)FnP,m,(k ,
wh ere
- I,~
( ~C ) d~ (~L - C~V d'Z (i', T ITn ()'Om12}IT
D) e4ik•yefi(•=
(10.4.20 )
According to the theorem of Section 6.4, Eq. (10.4.20) gives the sum of
all Feynman graphs with one incoming and one outgoing fermion line,
i.e., the complete Dirac propagator. Also, Eq. (10.4.19) gives the sum of
all such graphs with an extra photon line attached, so FP is the sum of
"vertex" graphs with one incoming Dirac line, one outgoing Dirac line,
and one photon line, but with the complete Dirac external line propagators
and the bare photon external line propagator stripped away. To make the
normalization of S' and FA perfectly clear, we mention that in the limit
of no interactions, these functions take the values
The one-loop diagrams that provide corrections to these limiting values
are shown in Figure 10 . 5.

10.4 Renorpraalized C h arge and Ward Identities
We can derive a relation between I'j' and S' by use of the identit y
a.
T~P(x)Tjy)Tm(z)~ = Tf (7,,JY(x)T,(y)T-,(z))
C1 XV
447
[J0ix ,
+ 6(x" - ?) TIIP.(Y) ljo(x), qj,,(z)]
1
(10.4.21 )
where the deita functions arise from time-derivatives of step functions .
The conservation condition (10.4.2) tells us that the first term vanishes,
while the second and third terms can be calculated using the commutation
relations (10.4.9), which here give
IJO(x, t), Tn(y, t)] = -qT,,(y, t)6'(x - y)
and its adjoint
[J"(x, 0, Tn(y, 01 = qTn(Y, t)6'(Y- - Y)
Eq. (10.4.21) then reads
(10.4.22 )
0.
TfJl'(x)T,, (y)T. -q 64(X
y) TIT,, (y)T ..(z )
G JCS
+ q 64(X - z) TfTyj(y)qjrn(z) (10.4.24 )
Inserting this in the Fourier transform (10 .4.19) gives
or in other word s
This is known as the generalized Ward identity, first derived (by these meth-
4 The original Ward identity, derived earlier by Ward'
ods) by Takahashi.
from a study of perturbation theory, can be obtained from Eq. (10A25)
by letting t approach k . In this limit, Eq. (10.4.25) gives
Oky
The fermion propagator is related to the self-energy insertion E*(*) by
Eq. (10.3.28 )
so Eq. (10.4.26) may be written
akp

448
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
For a renormalized Dirac field, Eqs. (10.3 .31) and (1 D.4.27) tell us that on
the mass shell
fik r'(k, k)Uk =;: irk k'" Uk >
(I 0.A.28 )
where [iy,k j' + m]uk =
[i^~pV + rrt]u~ = 0.
Thus the renormalization
of the fermion field ensures that the radiative corrections to the vertex
function F. cancel when a fermion on the mass shell interacts with an
electromagnetic field with zero momentum transfer, as is the case when
we set out to measure the fermion's electric charge . If we had not used
a renormalized fermian field then the corrections to the vertex function
would have just cancelled the corrections due to radiative corrections to
the external fermion lines, leaving the electric charge again unchanged ,
10.5
Gauge Invariance
The conservation of electric charge may be used to prove a useful result
for the quantities
x (T,-, Tf Jju (x), J" (x) - - , IT.+) ~ (10.5. 1 )
In theories like spinor electrodynamics in which the electromagnetic in-
teraction is linear in the field A m, this is the matrix element for emission
(and/or absorption) of on- or off-shell photons having four-momenta q ,
q`, etc. (and/or -q, -q', etc.), with external line photon coefficient func-
tions or propagators omitted, in an arbitrary transition a ---> A Our result
is that Eq. ( 10. 5 . 1) vanishes when contracted with any one of the photon
four-momenta
. . . = 0 . (10. 5.2)
Since M is defined symmetrically with respect to the photon lines, it will
be sufficient to show the vanishing of the first of these quantities .
For this purpose, note that by an integration b y parts
qp MAU ... (q, qo" .') f d4X fd4Xt . . .
0 7
x e-iq-Xe-iq?.Xt
. . . (Tb-, a
.
Tf P(x), JP'(x') . . . IT,,+)
(10,53)
axp
The electric current JP(x) is conserved, but this does not immediately
imply that Eq. (10.5.3) vanishes, because we still have to take account

1 0.5 Gauge Invaria nce 449
of the x°-dependence contained in the theta functions that appear in the
definition of the time-ordered product. For instance, for just two currents
T {J(x)J"(v}
} so, taking account of the conservation of JA(x )
a
TfP(x)J_'(y) I = 6(x" -yO)J"(x)J`(y) - 6(y) -x")J'(y)JO(x)
xy
= 6(X° - Y°) [Jo(x), PWI .
(10 .5 .4)
With more than two currents, we get an equal-time commutator like this
(inside the time-ordered product) for each current aside from PI(x) itself .
To evaluate this commutator, we recall that (as shown in the previous
section) for any product F of field operators and their adjoints and/or
derivatives
[Jo(X-, t), F(-, t)] = -qF F(X-", t) 6-1(5~ -
where qF is the sum of the qes for the fields and field derivatives in
F, minus the sum of the q(s for the field adjoints and their derivatives .
For the electric current, qj is zero ; P(y) is itself an electrically neutral
operator. It follows that
[JU( .-+, t), J"(Y, t)] = 0 (10.5.5)
and therefore Eq. (10,5.4) vanishes, so that Eq. (10.5.3) give s
qM
~~~ . . . (q , q f, ) = 0
( 10.5,6)
as was to be proved.
There is an important qualification here . In deriving Eq . ( 10.5.5) we
should take into account the fact that a pi-oduct of fields at the same
spacetime point y like the current operator J` (Y) can only be properly
defined through some regularization procedure that deals with the infinities
in such products . In many cases it turns out that there are non-vanishing
contributions to the commutator of J4(X , t) with the regulated current
Y {Y, t), known as Schwinger terms.' Where the current includes terms
arising from a charged scalar field (D, there are additional regulator-
independent Schwinger terms involving V(D . However, all these Schwinger
terms are cancelled in multi-photon amplitudes by the contribution of
additional interactions that are quadratic in the electromagnetic field,
either arising from the regulator procedure (if gauge-invariant) or, as for
charged scalars, directly from terms in the Lagrangian . We will be dealing
mostly with charged spinor fields, and will use a regularization procedure
(dimensionai regularization) that does not lead to Schwinger terms, so

450 10 Non-Perturbative Method s
in what follows we will ignore this issue and continue to use the naive
commutation relation ( 1 0.5.5) .
The same argument yields a result like Eq. (10.5.2) even if other particles
besides photons are off the mass shell, provided that all charged particles
are taken on the mass shell, i.e., kept to the states Tp- and tI',+. Otherwise,
the left-hand side of Eq. (10.5.2) receives contributions from non-vanishing
equal-time commutators, such as those we encountered in the derivation
of the Ward identity in the previous section .
One consequence of Eq . (10.5.2) is that S-matrix elements are unaffected
if we change any photon propagator ApA) by
K'UV (q) -~ ~PV (q) +au 4v + qj~flw (1 0.5.7)
or if we change any photon polarization vector by
where ko - k j , and rx~{, fl., and c are entirely arbitrary (not necessarily
constants, and not necessarily the same for all propagators or polarization
vectors.) This is (somewhat loosely) called the gauge invariance of the
S-matrix .
To prove this result it is only necessary to display the explicit dependence
of the S-matrix on photon polarization vectors and propagator s
1
4
X
1AW2. . .v 1 v~--- P1P2,
. .
T
1
'T2
, .. - kl, -kl
r{,
k2
(10.5.9 )
where MPI".` is the matrix element (10.5.1) calculated in the absence of
electromagnetic interactions.* The invariance of Eq. (10.5.9) under the
`gauge transformations' (10 .5.7) and (10.5.8) follows immediately from
the conservation conditions (10.5.2). (In Section 9.6 we used the path-
integral fo rmalism to prove a special case of this theorem, that vacuum
expectation values of time-ordered products of gauge-invariant operators
are independent of the constant oc in the propagator (9.6.21).) This result
is not as elementary as it looks, as A applies not to individual diagrams,
but only to sums of diagrams in which the current ve rtices are inserted in
all possible places in the diagrams .
There is a particularly important application of Eq . (10.5.2) to the
calculation of the photon propagator. The complete photon propagator,
The states a and h are the same as x and P , but with photons deleted. Note that the argulnen#s
of M are all taken to be incoming four-momenta, which is why we have to insert various signs
for some of the arguments of M in Eq. (10-5-9).

10.5 Gauge Invariance
conventionally called K ~~,(q ), takes the form
45 1
(10 .5.10 )
where
P' is proportional to the matrix element (10.5.1) with two currents
and a and both the vacuum state, and K., is the bare photon propagator,
written here in a general I..orentz-invariant gauge as
Z -i~
From Eq. ( 10.5. 2) we have here q1'
1,,, {q} = 0, so that
(10.5.12)
On the other hand, just as we did for scalar and spinor fields in section
10.3, we may express the complete photon propagator in terms of a
sum II* (q ) of graphs with two external photon lines that (unlike M) are
Kne-photon-irreducible
or in other words
Then in order to sati sfy Eq. (10. 5 . 12), we must have
( 1 0.5 . 1 4 )
(10.5 .15 )
This together with Lorentz invariance tells us that FI*(q) must take the
form
Then Eq. (10.5 .13) yields a complete propagator of the for m
11,Uv - ~ (R')R ~jqV lq'
where
(10 .5 .17)
(10.5 .18)
,,A) receives contributions only from one-photon-
NQUF, because n "
irreducible graphs, it is expected not to have and pole at q2 = 0. (There
is an important exception in the case of broken gauge symmetry, to be
discussed in Volume II .) In particular, the absence of poles at q 2 =Din
the q,,q,, term in CI ;,,(q) tells us that the function -g (q 2) in Eq. { 1 0.5 . 16} also
has no such pole, and so the pole in the complete propagator (10.5 .17) is

452 10 Non-Perturbative Method s
still at q2 = 0, indicating that radiative corrections do not give the photon
a mass .
For a renormalized electromagnetic field, radiative corrections should
also not alter the gauge-invariant part of the residue of the photon pole
in F_q. ( 10.5 . 1 7 ), so
This condition leads to a determination of the electromagnetic field renor-
malization constant Z3 . Recall that when expressed in terms of the renor-
malized field (10.4.17), the electrodynamic Lagrangian takes the form
The function ar(q2) in the one-photon-irreducible amplitude is the n
where 7ELpOF is the contribution of loop diagrams . It follows that
Z3 1 + ELQOP O) -
(10.5 .21 )
In practice, we just calculate the loop contributions and subtract a constant
in order to make n(0) vanish.
Incidentally, Eq. (10.5.18) shows that for q' * 0 the gauge term in the
photon propagator is altered by radiative corrections . The one exception
is the case of Landau gauge, for which
I for all q2 .
10.6 Electromagnetic Form Factors and Magnetic Moment
Suppose that we want to calculate the scattering of a particle by an
external electromagnetic field (or by the electromagnetic field of another
particle), to first order in thi s electromagnetic field, but to all orders in
all other interactions (including electromagnetic) of our particle. For this
purpose, we need to know the sung, of the contributions of all Feynman
diagrams with one incoming and one outgoing particle line, both on the
mass shell, plus a photon line, which may be on or off the mass shell .
According to the theorem of Section 6.4, this sum is g iven by the one-
particle matrix element of the electromagnetic current ,1 P (x) . Let us see
what governs the general form of this matrix e le ment .
According to spacetitne translation invariance , the one-p article matrix
element of the electromagnetic current takes the form
(XFP",,,, J"(x)TP,,) = exp(i(p - p') - x) (Tp,,,eJ"(O)Tp,,,
The current conservation condition OW}' = 0 then requires
V
Al (TV,c, , P(4) 'gy'p d) = 0 .
( 10.G . ? ]
( 10.x.2)

10.E Electromagnetic Form Factors
Also, setting kt = 0 and integrating over all x gives
(T
pra,',
QT p,a
= (2 7C)W(p -- p') (TPf,df, JII(O)T p,
Using Eq. (10.4.8), this gives
(TP'CF?' P(O)TPC) = (21r)-'q 66Y6 I
45 3
( 10.6.3 )
where q is the particle charge .
We also have at our disposal the constraints on the current matrix
elements imposed by Lorentz invariance . To explore these, we will limit
ourselves to the simplest cases: spin zero and spin A . The analysis
presented here provides an example of techniques that are useful for other
currents, such as those of the semi-leptonlc weak interactions .
Spin Zero
For spin zero, Lorentz invariance requires the one-particle matrix element
of the current to take the general form
(TV, JP(O)
p) = q(21r)l'l 2p" }-1f2 (2P0 )-if2~(p'~P)
}
(10.6.4)
1
where pa and p'o are the mass-shelf energies (pa = /p2 + m ) , and
t(p', p)
is a four-vector function of the two four -vectors p"' and py. (We have
extracted a factor of the charge q of the particle from f for future
convenience .) Ob viously, the most general such four-vector function takes
the form of a linear combination of p"' and p", or equiv alently of pr}` + p"
and pFP - e, with scalar coefficients. But the scalars p2 and pry are fixed
at the values p'- = P'2 = -M2 , so the scalar variables that can be formed
from e and p"' can be taken as functions only of p
• p', or equivalently of
Thus the function
A(p', p) must take the form
(10.6.5 )
(1o.6.6)
The fact that J P is Hermitian implies that f~`(p',p)` = f"(p,p'), so that
both F(k2) and H(k') are real .
Now (P' - P) ' (Pr + P) vanishes, while (p ' - p)2 =0 is not generally zero,
so the condition of current conservation is simply
H (k' ) = 0 .
(10.6.7 )
Also, setting p' = p and p = 0 in Eq. (10.6.4), and comparing with Eq.
(10.6.3), we find that
F(a) =1 .
(10.6.8)
The function F(k2) is called the electromagnetic form factor of the particle .

454
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
Spin
For spin 1, Lorentz invariance requires the one-particle matrix element of
the current to take the general form
(TP%U,j- P'(O)Tp,q) = iq (27r)-3 jj(PI, t7,)F,,(P,, P)U(p, a)
(10.6.9)
where F" is afour-vector 4 x 4 matrix function of p', p', and and u
is the usual Dirac coefficient function . We have extracted a factor iq to
make the normalization of FP the same as in the previous section .
Just as for any 4 x 4 matrix, we may expand Fil in the
16 covariant
matrices 1, Y O , CYp, i'aa a -5y,., and y5- The most general four-vector I,,` can
therefore be written as a linear combination of
1 p1`
, p'P
Y11
a
P11
PFD p1` i
P, pry ~f
[lip, Y al
LEI " * A
Lf}lt, ill'
L j,
~ f Jt' kl > L
T5 :
NON E
with the coefficient of each term a function of the only scalar variable in
the problem, the quantity (10 .6 .5) . This can be greatly simplified by using
the Dirac equations satisfied by u and U .
In consequence, we can drop* all but the first three entries : p", p"', and
y 1'. We conclude that, on the fermion mass shell, P may be expressed as
a linear combination of yP, pil, and p`P, which we choose to write a s
PIP
- - (p + p')"G(k') + H(k')] u(p, cr) .
(10.6.10)
2m
2m
This is obvious for the terms pu J , 0' ~, e J', and p"' 0', which may be replaced respectively
with imP+`, imp'p, imps, and irxp'u, which are the same as terms already on our 1isl . Also, we can
write
01 = 2y' j - {;°", 0? = zy1 0 - 2p " ,
which may be replaced with 2we - 2p+`, a linear combination of ierrns already on out list, The
same applies to [y O, J'] . Also,
which may be replaced with 2rn2 + 2p • p' = -0. Hence the terms [ ~, yi']p+` and [ ~ . Or]A'A give
nothing new. Finally, to deal with the last term we may use the relatio n
6 (
Contracting this with p, and p¢ and then moving all
0 factors to the right and Jr factors to the
left again gives a linear combination of p", p'~, and 514 .

10.6 Electromagnetic Farm Factor s
The hermiticity of JP(O) implies that
45 5
so that F(k '` ), G(k2), and H( k 2 ) must all be real functions of k2.
The conserv ation condition (10.6.2) is automatically satisfied by the first
two terms in Eq. (10.6.10), because
(p, - P)'UY1' = -1 [o i, + M) - (i i + M)]
and
On the other hand , (p' - p)2 does not in general vanish, so current
conservation requires the third term to vanish
H(k ' ) = 0 .
Also, letting p' -+ p in Eqs . ( 10.6.9) and (10.6.10), we find
(TP'fT4'U(0)TP'CT) == i q(2n)-3fi(p, c') ~'/ P F(0) - py G (0) U (p, 6)
Using the identity ~,P, i j + m} = 2mTY + 2ipP, we also have
Recall also that
M
and therefore
(tp
P,dr , J"(0)TPi¢
= '7 (2n) -3 (p11Y'))6d rd [F(O) + G(O)]
(10.6.13)
Comparing this with Eq . ( 10.6 .3) yields the normalization condition
F(O) + G{O} = 1
.
(10.6.14)
It may be useful to note that the electromagnetic vertex matrix FA is
commonly written in terms of two other matrices, as
fi(p', c7')F1'(p% p)u(p, a) = Ti(p', a') [Y;'Fl(k')
+ p), F2 (k')] u(p, c)
(10,6 .15 )
As already mentioned, we may rewrite the matrix appearing in the second
term in terms of those used in defining F(k2) and G{k'} :
= T'(P I (TI) Pi i'Y" + i if 7111 11 - i
+ i2 il
il I U(P' 0-)
a( Pf , d) [i(p," + I~') + 2rny uI u(p, u) .
(10 .6 .16)

456
10 Non-Perturbative Method s
Comparing Eq. (10.G,1 S) with Eq. (10.6.10), we find
The normalization condition (10.6-14) now reads
(10.6. 1 7)
(10.6.18 )
In order to evaluate the magnetic moment of our particle in terms of
its form factors, let as consider the spatial part of the vertex function in
the case of small momenta, j p , l prl << in. For this purpose, it is usefu l to
use Eq. (10,6.16) to rewrite Eq. (10.6.10) (with H = 0) in a third form :
-i_
2 LY 1, Y, i [ P`
[(p + p`}1jF(k2) + G(k'))
- p)v F(k')] u(p, cr) .
(10.6,19 )
For zero momenta the matrix elements of the commutators of Dirac
matrices are given by (5 .4. 19) and (5 .4.20) as
u(0, a') [y',,jJ] u(O, cr) = 4ieijk (J~ I ) )
,d
where P') = ~a is the angular momentum matrix for spin Hence to
first order in the small momenta,
F)U(P, C) ~ M L(P - p') x J(3)j,,r,7 F (O) . (10.6.20)
In a very weak time-independent external vector potential A(x) the matrix
element of the interaction Hamiltonian H' = - f dux J(x) - A(x) between
one-particle states of small momentum is therefor e
L P+,Q' f H~ a ~1,ff )
m(L~~~ ~ Jdx eA()
L(p - p{ )
x `~~i}J ffrf!
m(27[)3 f d
I _,, . B(X) (10.6.21 )
where B = V x A is the magnetic field. Hence in the limit of a slowly varying
weak magnetic field, the matrix elemen t of the interaction Hamiltonian is
The magnetic moment p for an arbitrary particle of general spin j is
defined by the statement that the matrix element of the interaction of the
particle with a weak static slowly varying magnetic field is

10.7 The Kal[erz-Lehmann Representation 457
Hence Eq. { 10.6,22} gives the magnetic moment of a particle of charge q,
mass m, and spin 1 as :
This contains as a special case the celebrated Dirac results y = q/2m for
a spin particle without radiative corrections .
We mention without proof that the form factors F(k2 ) and G(k2) of
the proton may be measured for k2 > 0 by comparison of experimental
data for electron-proton scattering with the Rosenbluth formula$ for the
laboratory frame differential cross-section :
dcT
e4
cos'(0/2)
f + 2EO sin'{0f2}
A2 4(4ie)2E~ sing(BJ2)
M
X
(flk) + G(k'
))2 + k
2 2
2F2(V) tan2(0/2) + G2(k)
4m ( )I
,
where EQ is the energy of the incident electron (taken here with E~ > M, ) ;
0 is the scattering angle ; and
(0/2)
k ~ =
4 E~ sin2
I + (2EOfm.) sin2(0f 2)
10.7 The W1en--Lehmann Representation`
We saw in Section 10 .2 that the presence of one-particle intermediate
states leads to poles in Fourier transforms of matrix elements of time-
ordered products, like (10.2.1). Multi-particle intermediate states lead to
more complicated singularities, which are difficult to describe in general .
But in the special case of a vacuum expectation value involving just two
operator, we have a convenient representation that explicitly displays the
analytic structure of the Fourier transform. In particular, this representa-
tion may be used for propagators, where the two operators are the fields of
elementary particles. When combined with the positivity requirements of
quantum mechanics, this representation yields interesting bounds on the
asymptotic behavior of propagators and the magnitude of renormalization
constants.
Consider a complex scalar Heisenberg-picture operator fi(x), which
may or may not be an elementary particle field. The vacuum expectation
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of devefupment, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

458
1 0 Non-Perturbative Methods
value of a product (D(x)V(y) may be expressed a s
~d'(x)(Dt(Y)~o = E#(D(x) ln) (nI(V(1')~O) , (10 .7.1)
n
where the sum runs over any complete set of states . (Here the sum over
n includes integrals over continuous labels as well as sums over discrete
labels.) Choosing these states as eigenstates of the momentum four-vector
P P, translational invariance tells us tha t
and so
(10.7.2)
(10.7.3 )
It is convenient to rewrite this in terms of a spectr al funetion. Note that
the sum n 64(p - p,)
I (0 (D(O) En} I' is a scalar function of the four-vector
pP, and therefore may depend only on p2 and (for p' < 0) on the step
function
O(p' ). In fact, the intermediate states in Eq. ( 1 0.7.3 ) all have
p2 <_ 0 and po > 0, so this sum takes the form
n
with p(-p' ) = 0 for p'
U. (The factor (2n )-' is extracted from p for
future c onvenience.) The spectral function p(-p 2) = 0 is clearly real and
positive. With this definition, we can rewrite Eq . ( 10.7 .3 ) as
= (2a E)-3
00
d4P
fa
X ku) op, + P) .
(10.7.5)
Interchanging the order of integration over p " and u 2 , this may be ex-
pressed as
~(D(x)4)'(y)~o =
fo
dy' P(P2) A+(x - y ; y')
where Q+ is the familiar function
In just the same way, we can show tha t
x
2
(1U.b)
(10.7-7)

10.7
The Killen-Lehmann Representatio n
with a second spectral function P(y2 ) defined by
459
(10.7.9)
We now make use of the causality requirement, that the commutator
[(D(x), cW (Y)] must vanish for space-like separations x - Y . The vacuum
expectation value of the commutator is
Y ; JU2)
X . JU2)
[(D(x), V(y)]) 0 o2 (p(p') A+(x
A+(y
5 ) -
(10 .7.10)
As noted in Section 5.2, for x - y space-like the function d+(x - y) doe
not vanish, but It does become even. In order for (14.7.1 Q) to vanish for
arbitrary space-like separations, it is thus necessary that
This is a special case of the CPT theorem, proved here without the use of
perturbation theory ; for whatever states with p 2 =;;-_ -P2 have the quantum
Numbers of the operator
(D, there must be corresponding states with
p2 = ,-µZ that have the quantum numbers of the operator V .
Using Eq . (10.7.11), the vacuum expectation of the time-ordered product
is
'U2 -
00
0
where KF(x -- y"U2) is the Feynman propagator for a spinless particle of
mass p
(10.7.13)
Harrowing the notation introduced in Section 1 0.3 for complete propaga-
tors, we introduce the momentum space functio n
iS(P) =_ f d4X cxp [-ip - (x - y)] (T f 4)(X)ADI(Y) P0 -
Recall that
P2 + p2 - 1 6
This yields our spectral representation :
00 P(A2)
du2
P + P2 - k-
(ZD.7.14)
(10 .7.15 )
( 14.7.1 6)
One immediate consequence of this result and the positivity of p (p2) is

460
1 0 Non- Perturbatfve Methods
that d'(p) cannot vanish for ~p~1 --~, oo faster" than the bare propagator
11(p2 + rra2 - t,-) . From time to time the suggestion is made to include
higher derivative terms in the unperturbed Lagrangian, which would make
the propagator vanish faster than 11p2 for
jp2l -+ ao, but the spectral
representation shows that this would necessarily entail a departure from
the positivity postulates of quantum mechanics.
We can use the spectral representation together with equal-time commu-
tation relations to derive an interesting sum rule for the spectral function .
If O(x) is a conventionally normalized (not renormalized) canonical field
operator, then
We note that
a(D(x , t)
} (Dt{Y} t)
at
aXO
- --ibl{x - y} .
(10.7 .17)
so the spectral representation ( 1 0.7. 10) and the commutation relations
( 1 0.7.17) together tell us that
~(p) do' = i .
4
This implies that for
lp21 -~--~ cry, the momentum space propagator (10.7.1 6)
of the unrenormalized fields has the free-field asymptotic behavio r
This result is only meaningful within a suitable scheme for regulating
ultraviolet divergences ; in perturbation theory the unrenormalized fields
have infinite matrix elements, and their propagator is ill-defined .
Now consider the possibility that there is a one-particle state
1k) of mass
m with a non-vanishing matrix element with the state {010( 0). Lorentz
In fact, it is not even certain that K'(p) vanishes for
jp~ j --~ oo at all, even though this would
seem to follow from the spectral representation . The problem arises from the interchange of
the integrals over p}' and y2. What is certain is that A'(p) is an analytic function of -p2 with
a discontinuity across the positive real axis -p2 = ju'- given by np(g2), as can be shown by the
methods of the next section . From this, it follows that tl+ (p) is given by a dispersion relation with
spectral function p(p2) and possible subtractions :
A'(p) = P(p of (P~ + P01) " P, + P, - ic-
where n is a posit ive integer, ya is an arb itrary positive constant, and p(p2) is a 4-dependent
polynomial in p2 of o rder n - l that is a bsent for n = 0.

10.7 The Kdllen-Lehmann Representatio n
invariance requires this matrix element to take the form
-
-112
(010(0)1k) = (27z )-3/2 (2vrk2
+ M2)
N
46 1
{10 .7.19 }
where N is a constant. According to the general results of Section 14.3,
the propagator d' (P) of the unrenormalized fields should have a pole at
p2 __+ -nay with residue Z = j N12 > D. That is,
(10.7.20 )
where rr(p2) ~ 0 is the contribution of multi-particle states. Together with
Eq. (10.7.18), this has the consequence that
and so
0
Z
1
(10.7.22)
with the equality reached only for a free particle, for which (0I(D(x) has
no matrix elements with multi-particle states .
Because Z is positive, Eq . (1 .7.21) can also be regarded as providing
an upper bound on the coupling of the field 4) to multi-particle states :
00
0
with the equality reached for Z = 0. The limit Z = 0 has an interesting
interpretation as a condition for a particle to be composite rather than
elementary. r° In this context, a `composite' particle may be understood to
be one whose field does not appear in the Lagrarigian. Consider such a
particle, say a neutral particle of spin zero, and suppose that its quantum
numbers allow it to be destroyed by an operator F(T) constructed out of
other fields. We can freely introduce a field (D for this particle by adding a
term to the Lagrangian density of the forms A
= ((D -- F(T))', because
the path integral over 0 can be done by setting it equal to the stationary
point cD = F(T), at which K
= D. But suppose instead we write
~,O~`d~ - ~ r~2~2 is the usual free-
AY = AY O + del, where A YO - - ~ o ~
field Lagrangian, and treat AY, = AY - K
o as an interaction. A term
~0UcDO~' D in the interaction is nothing new. We encountered such a term
in Eq. (10 .3.12), multiplied by a factor (l - Z) ; the only new thing is that
here Z = D. Instead of adjusting Z to satisfy the field renormalization
condition II"(0) = 0, here we must regard this as a condition on the
t This is known in condensed matter physics as a `Hubbard-Stratonavich transformation' . 1 1 It will
be used to introduce fields for pairs aFefectrons in our discussion of superconductivity in volume
[1 .

462 1 0 Non- Perturb ative Methods
coupling constants of the composite particle. Unfartunately, it has not
been possible to implement this procedure in quantum field theories,
because as we have seen Z = 0 means that the particle couples as strongly
as possible to its constituents, and this rules out the use of perturbation
theory. The condition Z = 0 does prove useful in non-relativistic quantum
mechanics ; for instance, it fixes the coupling of the deuteron to the neutron
and proton.1 2
Although the spectral representation has been derived here only for a
spinless field, it is easy to generalize these results to other fields . Indeed,
in the next chapter we shall show that to order e2, the Z-factor for the
electromagnetic field (conventionally called Z3) is given b y
e2
112
Z3 = i - 12 2 I
n
M2
e
(where A > rn, is an ultraviolet cutoff), in agreement with the bound
(10.7.22) .
10.8 Dispersion Relations*
The failure of early attempts to apply perturbative quantum field theory
to the strong and weak nuclear forces had led theorists by the late 1950s
to attempt the use of the analyticity and unitarily of scattering amplitudes
as a way of deriving general non-perturbative results that would not
depend on any particular field theory. This started with a revival of
interest in dispersion relations. In its original form, 3 a dispersion relation
was a formula giving the real part of the index of refraction in terms of
an integral over its imaginary part. It was derived from an analyticity
property of the index of refraction as a function of frequency, which
followed from the condition that electromagnetic signals in a medium
cannot travel faster than light in a vacuum . By expressing the index
of refraction in terms of the forward photon scattering amplitude, the
dispersion relation could be rewritten as a formula for the real part of
the forward scattering amplitude as an integral of its imaginary part,
and hence via unitarity in terms of the total cross-section . One of the
exciting things about this relation was that it provided an alternative to
conventional perturbation theory ; given the scattering amplitude to order
e2, one could calculate the cross-section and the imaginary part of the
scattering amplitude to order e4, and then use the dispersion relation t o
' This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be ornitt(d in
a first reading .

10.8 Dispersion Relations
463
calculate the real part of the forward scattering amplitude to this order,
without having ever to calculate a loop graph .
The modern approach to dispersion relations began in 1954 with the
work of Dell-Mann, Goldberger, and Thirring.14 Instead of considering
the propagation of light in a medium, they derived the analyticity of the
scattering amplitude directly from the condition of microscopic causality,
which states that commutators of field operators vanish when the points
at which the operators are evaluated are separated by a space-like interval .
This approach allowed Goldberger15 soon thereafter to derive a very useful
dispersion relation for the forward pion-nucleon scattering amplitude .
To see how to use the principle of microscopic causality, consider the
forward scattering in the laboratory frame
Kf a massless boson of any
spin on an arbitrary target x of mass rra, > 0 and p, = 0. (This has
important applications to the scattering not only of photons but also
pions in the limit m, = 0, to be discussed in volume II .) By a repeated
use of Eq. (10.3.4) or the Lehmann-Symanzik-Zimmerman theorem,3 the
S-matrix element here i s
.S ==
(2-A)
4r~c~ 3 1 ~
~ li~nkz,0 ]itn~~~~o
X j dx f d4y e-W-y e ik-x(jE1y)(iE3_,) (ij T ~A~(y), A(x)~ Y) - (10.8 .1)
IN 1
Here k and k' are the initial and final boson four-momenta , with r ) = 01
co` = k'° ; A(x) is and Heisenberg-picture operator with a non-vanishing
matrix element (CiA(x)jk) = {27r}-3/Z(2co)-1/2e`k"" between the one-
boson state
jk} and the vacuum ; and N is the constant in this matrix
element . In photon scattering A(x) would be one of the transverse com-
ponents of the electromagnetic field, while for massless pion scattering
it would be a pseudoscalar function of hadron fields . The differential
operators -iK_, and -iKy are inserted to supply factors of ik'2 and ik-'
that are needed to cancel the external line boson propagators . Letting
these operators act on At(Y) and A(x), we have
_ 1
S__ (2~)-~ 4cc~w'jNj2 limk~~~, limkfz~ ~
x dux fd4v e-W-y eik'.x(xj T~P (y ) , J{x}IJoc} + ETC ,
(10.8.2)
where J(x) - oxA(x), and `ETC' denotes the Fourier transform of equal
time commutator terms arising from the derivative acting on the step
functions in the time-ordered product. The commutators of operators like
A(x) and At(y) (or their derivatives) vanish for x° = y° unless x = Y,
so the `ETA' term is the Fourier transform of a differential operator
acting on 64(x - y), and is hence a polynomial function of the boson

464 10 Non-Perturbative Method s
four-momenta. We are concerned here with the analytic properties of the
S-matrix element, so the details of this polynomial will be irrelevant .
Using translation invariance, Eq. (10.8.2) gives the S-matrix element as
S = --21rW(k' - k )M (w ), where
M(co) ~ fa) N ~ F(~ )
II
(10.8.3 )
F(w) =_ f dx d"","-`~~xjT~P(O), J(x)~~a) + ETC ,
(10 .8.4)
it now being understood that V = cnfP, where ~ is a fixed four-vector
with 1116, = 0 and
The time-ordered product can be rewritten in terms of commutators in
two different ways :
Correspondingly, we can writ e
where
~~ ((O ) _ -
d4X o(X°)(u I LJf(O) , J(x)] I u} ~~w"x + ETC ,
F+ (0))
f
f
[~JC ( 4Cl ,~(.~ ) ,]~ (~}I~ ) eir~ t~x
1
F_~~
jd4x ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ekde,x
(10.8.5 )
(10.8.6)
(10 .8 .8 )
(10.8 .9)
( aa.s.ia)
Microscopic causality tells us that the integrands in (1 Q .8.7) and (10.8.8)
vanish unless x~` is within the light cone, and the step functions then
require that x1' is in the backward light cone in (10.8.7), so that x ' e > 0,
and in the forward light cone in Eq . (10.8 .8), so that x'~ < 0. We conclude
that FA(co) is analytic for Im w > 0 and FR(uj) is analytic for Imo) 0,
because in both cases the factor ek"I"X provides a cutoff for the integral
over xP. (Recall that the `ETA' term is a polynomial, and hence analytic
at all finite points.) We may then define a function
FA (OJ)
Im ui > 0
FR (W)
IMO) < 0

10.8 Dispersion R elations 465
which is analytic in the whole complex r.) plane, except for a gut on the
real axis.
We can now derive the dispersion relation. According to Eq. (1 0.8. 6),
the discontinuity of (cv} across the cut at any real E i s
If mo(w)/~~ vanishes as
l c.~ l --* ova in the upper or lower half-plane, then
by dividing by any polynomial P (e)) of order n we obtain a function
that vanishes for J cr~ J --~ oo and is analytic except for the cut on the real
axis and poles at the zeroes w u of P(co) . (Where flw} itself vanishe s as
~ c~ l --* co, we can take P(w) = 1 .) According to the method of residues,
we then have
w +
(z) dz
(10.8.13)
P(w)
~, (co, - (o} P
r
(c)~,] = 1
~ °
+ 2
;ri 1C (z -rte) P (z)
where r.) is any point off the real axis, and C is a contour consisting of two
segments : one running just above the real axis from -oo + if to +ao + if
and then around a large semi-circle back to -oo + ie, and the other just
below the real axis from +oc - ic to -oc - ie and then around a large
semi-circle back to +oa - ic . Because the function flz } f P (z) vanishes
for
J a J --+ ca, we can neglect the contribution from the large semi-circles .
Using Eq. (10.8.12), Eq . (10.8 .13) becomes
2ni
(
)
(E )
where Q (ej) is the (n - I)th-OTder polynomia l
y, (c ),, - (0) P '(rv,, )
A dispersion relation of this form, with P(w) and Q(co) of order n and
n --1 respectively, is said to have n subtractions . If we can take P t- 1 then
Q = 0, and the dispersion relation is said to be unsubtracted .
If we now let w approach the real axis from above, Eq . (1U.8 .1 4) gives
21r i as
E - w -t F P (E
~ )
)
Recalling Eqs. (10.8.6) and (3 . 1 . 25), this is
(E - (_o) P (E)
( 1 0.8.1 6)
with 1. J(E -ca) now interpreted as the principal value function 9/(E - c, )).

466
10 Von-Perturhativ e Methods
This result is useful because the functions F+(E ) may be expressed
in terms of measurable cross-sections, Summing over a complete set of
multi-particle intermediate states P in Eqs. (1 0.8,9) and ( 10.8 . 10) (including
integrations over the momenta of the particles in /3 ) and using translation
invariance again, we hav e
F-(-E) = (27E)'
I ( 1 I J(O) I a)
I' 64(p.)( + Elf pp) .
( 10.5 . 18)
But the matrix elements for the absorption of the massless scalar boson
B in B + oc --* or its antiparticle B" in B" + oc ~ P are
- 2i7MBI+x,# - ( 2n )-1 / 2
2EBe N
(27r) 1- 2EBN
(10.8.19)
( 10.8. 0)
Comparing with Eq . (3.4.15), we see that F+(E) may be expressed in terms
of total cross-sections" at energies T E
2
( 2 7 E ) 3
6X+ B,. (I Er
F_(E) 0 (E) 2E IN 12
(2)z )
The scattering amplitude (10.8 .3) is now, for real co
0,
2o)IN 12
2(27r) 3
(9(2~ 4 JO
[ E - r :j P (E
} ~ } )
Ua+Bf (E)
( 1D.8. 21 )
E dE . (1(}.8.23 )
It is more usual to express this dispersion
relation in terms of the
amplitude f (to) for forward scattering in the laboratory frame, defined
so that the laboratory frame differential cross-section in the forward
direction is
If (caq2 .
This amplitude is given in terms of M(w)
b y
In some cases where selection ru les allow t he transition x ~ +H and x ~ + B `, the functions
F+(E) also contain terms proportional to <5[F] arising from the contr ibution of the one-particl e
state a in the sum over intermediate states fl . This does not occur for
t ransversely po larized
photons, or for pseudosca lar pion s in the lim i t mn --+ Q .

1 0.8 Dispersion Relations
f (w) = -47r2cn M{w} - 27r2 iF(co)/ IN 12, so E q. (10.8.23) now reads
+ P(`
O)
47r2
acs
4ar 9x+B(o) )
,I~
"~' [
Ca+B(E)
(E - oj)P (E +
)
Ca+BJE)
E dE ,
(E + oj)P(-E)]
467
where R(w) -_ 2in2 Q(o))I 12 . The optical theorem (3 .6.4) tells us that the
second term on the right-hand side equals iIm f(ro), so this can just as
well be written in the more conventional form
Ref(w) = R(c) }
+ P(w )
4TE2
11 ~
ax+~~~~
(Tx+B'(E) -] E dE , (10.8 .24)
I n particular, we see that R(w) is real if we choose P(w) real.
The forward scattering amplitude also satisfies an important symmetry
condition. By changing the integration variable in Eqs. ( 10,8.7) and (10,8 .8)
from x to -x and then using the translation-invariance property
we see that for Im cca ~ 0, FA{-co) is the same as FR(ca), except for an
interchange of J with P . That is,
FA(-(o} = FR(w) for
Im cci ~ 0 ,
where a superscript c indicates that the amplitude refers to the scattering
of the antiparticle B1 on a. (We leave it to the reader to show that this
relation is not upset by the equal-time commutator terms in Eds . (10.8 .7)
and (1 0. 8.$ ).) In the same way, we find
FR(- (o} - FA(w)
for
I m w ~ 0
and for real ro
Using these relations in (10 .8.6), and recal]ing that f (c)} is proportional to
F(w), we find the crossing symmetry relation, that for real w
.f(-0j) = f`(co)•
(10.8 .25 )
We are free to take Pico} as any polynomial of sufficiently high order,
but R{oj} then depends not only on P(w) but also on the values of F(w)
at the zeroes of P(rv). For P (rj) real and of nth order, the only free
parameters in Eq. (10.8 .16) are the n real coefficients in the real (n - 1)th
order polynomial R(w) . Hence Eq. (10.8.16) contains just n unknown real
independent constants, the coefficients in the polynomial R(cq) for a given
P(w). We therefore wish to take the order n of the otherwise arbitrary
polyomial P(ca) to be as small as possible .

468
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
We might try taking P(a)) = 1, but this doesn't work . The analysis of
Section 3.7 suggests that the forward scattering amplitude should grow
like cc) or perhaps as fast as ro ln2 co . In this case for ,f(w) f P (w) to vanish
as co --+ 0, it is sufficient to take P(w) as a second order polynomial,
so that R(w) is linear in co . Choosing P(E) = E2 for convenience, Eq .
(10.8.24) then becomes
(02
a2+B,(E)] d E
.10
(E + w)
E
10. 8,26)
with a and b unknown real constants. The crossing symmetry condition
{10.8,25} tells us that the corresponding constants in the dispersion relation
for the antiparticle scattering amplitude f17(w) are
If we assume for instance that the cross-sections CT,+B(E) and a,,+,3c{E}
behave for E
--+ cc as different constants times (In E)'', then ( 1 0.8.26)
would give
Ref {w} --f [9%+ B(W) - Qa+B {'()] In u3 - w{1n c:o}" + 1
( 1 0.$.28 )
so the real part of the scattering amplitude would grow faster than the
imaginary part by a factor In u). This is implausible ; we saw in Section
3.7 that the real part of the forward scattering amplitude is expected to
become much smaller than the imaginary part for m - + oc, as confirmed
by experiment. We conclude that if a,, +$(E) and 6«+B{( E) do behave for
E --* cc as constants times (In E )l then the constants must be the same .
Because we are concerned here with the high-energy limit, this result does
not depend on the assumption that B is a massless boson, so in the same
seise, the ratio of the cross-sections of any particle and its antiparticle
on a fixed target sh ould approach unity at high energy.
This result is
a somewhat generalized version of what is known as Pomeranchuk's
thearem.16 (Pomeranchuk considered only the case r -- 0, while section
3.7 and the observed behavior of cross-sections both suggest that r = 2 is
more likely, )
Although Pomeranchuk took his estimates of the asymptotic behavior
of scattering amplitudes from arguments like those Kf section 3.7, today
high energy behavior is usually inferred from Legge pole theary.17 It
would take us too far from our subject to go into details about this ;
suffice it to say that for hadronic processes the asymptotic behavior of
f (co) as oi goes to infinity is a sum over terms proportional to where
Yn(t) are a set of `Regge trajectories", each representing the exchange of an
infinite family Kf different one-hadron states in the collision process . The
leading trajectory (actually, a complex of many trajectories) in hadron-

Problems 469
hadron scattering is the `Porneron,' for which ac(Q) is close to unity . It is
this trajectory that gives cross-sections that are approximately constant
for E -* oa. According to Pomeranchuk's theorem, the Pomeran couples
equally to any hadron and its antiparticle . We can estimate cx,(O) for
the lower Regge trajectories from the spectrum of hadronic states . A
necessary though not sufficient condition" for a mesonic resonance of
spin j to occur at a mass in is that m 2 equals the value of t where one of
trajectories ccn(t) equals j. Apart from the Pomeron, the leading trajectory
in pion-nucleon scattering is that on which we find the j = I p meson at
m = 77 0 MeV, the j = 3 g meson at in :;-- 1 694 Mel, and a j = 5 meson
at in = 23 50 MeV. Extrapolating these values of a(t) down to t = 0, we
can estimate that this trajectory has oz(O) , :e D.S. This trajectory couples
with opposite sign to 7r+ and g-, so for pion-nucleon scattering we expect
f (cry) - f '(w) to behave roughly like
For photon scattering there is no distinction between B and B", so here
Eq. (10.8.27) gives b = 0, and Eq . (10.8.26) reads
~~
(oo
(7(E )
.fM = a +
2p )cy E 2 _ OJ2dE . (1 .$.29 )
This is essentially the original Kramers-Kranigl 3 relation. As we shall see
in Section 13. 5, for a target of charge e and mass in the constant a has
the known value Re f(0) _ -e2 /m ,
Problems
1. Consider a neutral vector field v~{x} . What conditions must b e
imposed on the sum II~ti,(k) of one-particle-irreducible graphs wit h
two external vector field lines in order that the field should b e
properly renormalized and describe a particle of renormalized mass
m? How do we split the free-field and interacting terms in the
Lagrangian to achieve this ?
2. Derive the generalized Ward identity that governs the electromag-
netic vertex function of a charged scalar field .
3. What is the most general form of the matrix element *U21J~WIP161)
of the electromagnetic current J,"(x) between two spin ~ one-particle
states of different masses ml and rra2 and equal parity? What if the
parities were opposite? (Assume parity conservation throughout . )
4. Derive the spectral (Kallen -Lehmann) representation for the vacuum
expectation value
{ T f Jy{x } .I'' (Y) t~~O, where JP(x) is a complex
conserved current.

470
10 Non-Perturbative Methods
5. Drive the spectral (Ka11en-Lehmann) representation for the vacuum
expectation value (T ~Tn(x ) q), (Y )j}a, where W(x) is a Dirac field.
6. Without using any assumptions about the asymptotic behavior of
the scattering amplitude or cross-sections, show that it is impossible
for forward photon scattering amplitudes to satisfy unsubtracted
dispersion relations .
7. Derive the spectral (Kailen-Lehmann) representation for a complex
scalar field by using the methods of dispersion theory .
8. Use dispersion theory and the results of Section 8 .7 to calculate the
amplitude for forward photon-electron scattering in the electron rest
frame to order e4 .
References
1. W. H. Furry, Phys . Rev. 51, 125 (1937)-
2. H. Yukawa, Proc. Phys.-Math . Soc . Japan 1 7, 48 (1935) .
3, H. Lehmann, K. Symanzik, and W.Timmerman, Nuovo 'irnento 1,
205 (1955).
4. Y. Takahashi, Nuovo Ciento, Ser. 10, 6, 370 (1957) .
5. J. C. Ward, Pays. Rev. 78, 182 (1950) .
6. J. Schwinger, Phys . Rev. Lett. 3, 296 (1959).
7. P. A. M.Dirac, Prod . R oy. Soc. (London) A117, 610 (1928).
S. M. N. Rosenbluth, Pays. Rev. 79, 615 (1950) .
9. C. Kallen, Hedv. Pays. Acta 25, 417 (1952) - Qua nt um. Electrodynamics
(springer-Veriag, Berlin, 1972) ; H . Lehmann, Nuovo Cimento ll, 342
(1954) .
10. J. C. Howard and B. Jouvet, Nuovo Cime nto 18, 466 (1960) ; M. J.
Vaughan, R. Aaron, and R . D. Amado, Whys . Rev. 1254,1258 {1961} ;
S. Weinberg, in Proceedings of the 196 2 High-Energy Conference at
C ERN (CERN, Geneva, 1962) : p, 683.
11 . R. L. Stratonovich, Srrv. Phys. Dakt . 2, 416 (1957) ; J. Hubbard, Whys.
Rev. Lett. 3, 77 (1959) .
12. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev . 137, B672 (1965).

R~ ferences
47 1
13. H. A. Krarners, Arta Congr. Intern. Fisici, Como
Nicola Zanichel-
lli, Bologna, 1 927) ; reprinted in H. A. Kramers, Collected Scientific
Papers North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1956) ; R. de Kronig, Ned . Tyd.
Nat. Kunde 9, 402 (1942) ; Physica 12, 543 (1946) ; J. S. Toll, The
Dispersion Relation for Light and its Application to Problems
I n-
volving Electron Pairs (Princeton University Ph. D. Thesis 1952) . For
historical reviews, see J. D . Jackson in Dispersion Relations, ed. by G.
R. Screaton (Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, 1961) ; M . L. Goldberger
in Dispersion Relations and Elementary Particles, ed. by C. De Wit t
and R. Omnes (Hermann, Paris, 1960) .
14. Cell-Mann,
L. Goldberger, and Thirring, Phys. Rev . 95,
1612 (1954) . The non-perturbative nature of this result was shown
by M . L. Goldberger, PhyS. Rev . 97, 508 ( 1 955).
15. M. L. Goldberger, Pays, Rev. 99, 979 (1955).
16. 1. Ia. Pomeranchuk, J. Expo. Theor. Whys . (USSR .) 34, 725 (1958).
English version : Soviet Physics - JETP
34(7), 499 (1958). For a
generalization, see S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 124, 2049 ( 1 961).
17. See, e. g., F. D. B. Collins, An Introduction to Regge Theory and High
Energy Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambr idge, 1977). The
original references are T Regge, Nu ov o Cimento 14, 951 (1959) : 18,
947 (1960).
18, The graph of spin versus squared mass is known as a Chew-Frautschi
plot ; see G . F. Chew and S . C. Frautschi, Pays, Re v. Lett . 8, 41 (1962).

1 1
One-Loop Radiative Corrections
in quantum Electrodynamic s
In this chapter we shall proceed to carry out some of the classic one-loop
calculations in the theory of charged leptons massive spin
12 particles
that interact only with the electromagnetic field . There are three known
species or 'flavors" of leptons : the electron and moon, and the heavier,
more recently discovered tauon. For definiteness we shall refer to the
charged particles in our calculations here as `electrons,' though most of
our calculations will apply equally to muons and tauflns . After some
generalities in Section
1 1 .1, we will move on to the calculation of the
vacuum polarization in Section 11 .2, the anomalous magnetic moment of
the electron in Section 11 .3, and the electron self-energy in section 11 .4.
Along the wad, we will introduce a number of the mathematical techniques
that prove useful in such calculations, including the use of Feynman
parameters, Wick rotation, and both the dimensional regularization of
`t Hooft and Veltman and the older regularization method of Pauli and
Villars. Although we shall encounter infinities, it will be seen that the
final results are finite if expressed in terms of the renormalized charge
and mass. In the next chapter we shall extend what we have learned
here about renormalization to general theories in arbitrary orders of
perturbation theory.
11.1
Counterterms
The Lagrangian density for electrons and photons is taken in the fornn *
= - ~~'~'' FB FV - ~s I
11 m [~'~ + ieBARI + MaI Wa
where FB'' =_ CPA" -- 0~'A$ ; A$ and Wa are the bare (i.e ., unrenormalized)
fields of the photon and electron, and -eB and mB are the bare charge and
" in this chapter we will not be making transformations between Heisenberg- and ]Interactian-
picture operators, so we shall return to a conventional notation, in which the an upper case A
and a lower case tp are used to denote the photon and charged particle fields, respectively.
472

11 .2 Vacuum Polarization
473
mass of the electron. As described in the previous chapter, we introduce
renormalized fields and charge and mass :
W =Z_
1/2 Y~
B
A~ : Z~ 1/2 A~
e = Z +1/2 eB
3
( 11 . 1 .2)
(1 1 . 1 .3 )
(1 1 .1 .4)
(1 1 .1 .5 )
with the constants Z2, Z3, and bm adjusted so that the propagators of the
renormalized fields have poles in the same position and with the same
residues as the propagators of the free fields in the absence of interactions.
The Lagrangian may then b e written in terms of renormalized quantities,
as
=
p +1+2 ,
where
Yo = - 'Flu" Fu,, - fp Lys OJU + mIT ,
and 2 is a sum of `caunterterms'
(11.1.6)
( 1 1.1. 7)
(11.1.8)
4
[Yu I V
+Z26 mFP
- ie(Z2 - 1 )~~~ li"T .
(11 .1 .9)
It will turn out that all of the terms in 2 are of second order and
higher order in e, and that these terms just suffice to cancel the ultraviolet
divergences that arise from loop graphs.
11. 2
Vacuum Polarization
We now begin our first calculation of a radiative correction involving
loop graphs, the so-called vacuum polarization effect, consisting of the
corrections to the propagator associated with an internal photon line .
Vacuum polarization produces measurable shifts in the energy levels of
hydrogen, and makes an important correction to the energies of moons
bound in atomic orbits around heavy nuclei. Also, as we shall see in
Volume II, the calculation of the vacuum polarization provides a key

474
I] One-Loop Radiative Corrections
u - q
Figure l1 .2 . The one-loop diagram for the vacuum polarization in quantum elec-
trodynamics. Here wavy lines represent photons ; lines carrying arrows represent
electrons .
element in the calculation of the high energy behavior of electrodynarnics
and other gauge theories.
As i n Section 10. 5 , we define 4271 )4 II W"'(q ) as the sum of all connected
graphs with two external photon lines with polarization
indices p and
v and carrying four-momentum q into and out of the diagram, not
including photon propagators for the two external lines, and with the
asterisk indicating that we exclude diagrams that can be disconnected
by cutting through some internal photon line. The complete photon
propagator d'P4' (q) is given by Eq . (1 0.5.13 ) :
where d P'( q) is the photon propagator without radiative corrections. Our
task here is to calculate the leading contributions to fl*P'(q) .
In lowest order there is a one-loop contribution to 11.* , corresponding
to the diagram in Figure 11 .1 :
p [(,4
P2 + M2 - ie
x [(21r)4ey1]
~~~
] [(2~)4e(11 .2.2)
[ .. .
4
)
(P -q)2 + ~
ie
with the first minus sign on the right required by the presence of a fermion
loop. More simply, this is
loop
(21r)4 f
(p2 + tn' - iE) ((p - q)2 + M2
ie)
-
(1123 )
The first step in doing this integral is to use a trick introduced by
Feynman .1 We use the elementary formula
1
,
1
dx
AB -
[( 1 -
)A + xB]2

I 1 .2 Vacuum Polarization
475
to write the product of scalar p ropagators in Eq. (11 .2 .3) as
1 [(P2 + M2 _ je)(1 _ X)
+
+
Jo
1
2
+ ((p - q)' + 1Y32 - dE) XJ
dX
f [p2p .qx+q2x
1
~
1
[(p - qX)2 + m' - ic + q2X(I _ X)l ~ dx .
I
(This is a special case of a class of integrals given in the Appendix to
this chapter.) We can now shift the variable of integration in momentum
space
p -'P+ qx ,
so that Eq . (11 .2.3) becomes
2
1
*POF
(q) =
'e dx
- i-F + q2X(I _ X)]
I Loop (27z)4 /
'J d4p[p' + m'
Using the results of the Appendix to Chapter 8, the trace here can easily
be calculated a s
= 4 [ - (p + qx)P (p - q(t - x)f + (p + qx) - (p - q(1 - x))q"
Our next step is called a wick rotation.2 As long as -q2 < 4m2, the
quantity m2 + q2x(I - x) is positive for all x between 0 and 1, so the poles
in the integrand of Eq. ( 1 1 .2. 5) are at po = + p + m~ + q x{1 - x) -- ic,
i.e., just above the negative real axis and just below the positive real
axis. (See Figure 11 .2.) We can rotate the contour of integrations of pa
counterclockwise without crossing either of these poles, so that instead of
integrating 1P on the real axis from -co to +cc, we integrate it on the
imaginary axis from --ioa to +ix . That is, we can write p' = ip', with p4
integrated over real values from -cc to +ao . (If an ie instead of -ie had
appeared in the denominator of the propagator, then we would have been
setting p° = ---ip', with p~ again integrated over real values from -oo t o
Slriclly speaking, this step is only valid in convergent integrals . In principle, in order to justify
the shift of variables, we should introduce some regulator scheme to make all integrals converge,
such as the dimensional regularization scheme discussed below .

476
1 1 One-Loop Radiative Correction s
Figure 11 .2. Wick rotation of the po contour of integration . Small x's mark the
poles in the j complex plane ; the arrow indicates the direction of rotation of the
contour of integration, from the real to the imaginary p°-axes.
+
. Thy effect would be a change of sign of ni i~p( q ).) Eq. (11 .2.5) now
becomes
2
rf ]
too
(2-n)4
f
x [ - (p + qx)P(p - q(1 - x))' + (p + qx) - (p - q(1 - x)) qP"
-(p + qx )'(P - q(1 - x) )" +
m2q P¢] ,
(11 .2.7)
where
(cl'P )E = dP1 dP'dP'dp"
and all scalar products are evaluated using the Euclidean nor m
a - b = alb' + a2 b2 + a3b3 + a40
with the understanding that q4 - -fq° .Also, jqP' can be taken as either
the Kronecker delta, with the indices running over 1, 2, 3, 4, or as the
usual Minkowski tensor, with the indices running over 1, 2, 3, 0 .
The integral ( 1 1 .2.7) is badly divergent. Eventually all infinities will
cancel, but to see this it is necessary at intermediate stages of the calcula-
tion to use some sort of regularization technique that makes the integrals
finite. It would not do simply to cut off the integrals at some maximum
momentum A, integrating only over pY with p2 < A' , because this would
amount to introducing a step function O(A2 - pl) into the electron prop-
agator, and the Ward identity (10.4.25) shows that in order to maintain

11 .E Vacuum Polarization
477
gauge invariance, and modification of the electron propagator must be
accompanied with a modification of the electron-photon vertex . If fact,
with an ordinary cutoff A, radiativcorrections would induce a photon
mass, a clear violation of the requirements of gauge invariance.
Experience has shown that the most convenient method for regulating
divergent integrals without impairing gauge invariance is the dimensional
regularization technique introduced by 't Hoot and Veltman3 in 1972,
based on a continuation from four to an arbitrary number d of space#ime
dimensions . This amounts to carrying out angular averages in integrals
like (11 . 2. 7) by dropping all terms that are odd in p, and replacing the
terms that have even numbers of p-factors with* *
eP, --* F
2 q'Ur
Id ,
ep,plp, --*
(P 2)2 rnp,11p, + q,q,cF +
~ifypjld(d + 2)
(11.2.8)
(11.2.9 )
Also, after writing the integrand in this way as a function only of p2, the
volume element d4FE is to be replaced with ~dKa-l dre, where rc =_
,
and Q, is the area of a unit sphere in d d imension s
Q,j = 2.7rd/2 r(d/2). (11 .2.10)
The integral (11.2.7 now converges for complex spacetitne dimension-
ality d. We can continue the integral through complex d-values to d = 4,
the infinities then reappearing as factors (d - 4)- 1
For the integral (11 .2 .7), dimensional regularization gives
1100
(-2K2
d
qP"+2qOq'x(l-x)+ (K 2_ q2X(1-X))j7 PC + M2
17 P17 1 -
Thy integrals over can be carried out for any complex d (or for any real
d, aside from the even integers). We use the well-known formulas (given
in greater generality in the Appendix to this chapter) :
a
Jo
r~-'[K' + u'] -'d~c = z (v2) ~-' F (d/2) F (2 - d/2 )
Ka+l [K 2 + v']-'dK= 2 {v 2 }'-1F( 1 + df 2) T ( 1 - df2) ,
(1 1 .x . 11)
These expressions may most easily be derived by noting that their form i5 dictated by Lorentz
invariance and the symmetry among the indices ju, v, p, etc., while the factors may be found by
requiring that both sides give the same result when contracted with is .

478
and find
rl *"n (q )
~ _
loop
J I One-Loop Radiative Correction s
2e2S~~
(21z)a
x ['dx[(l
~/2 )
+ (2qfq'x(I _ X) _ q2qp,_X(I - X) + M2qp,7
) (M
2 + q2X(l - X))
d-2
x r (d12) r (z - d12)
The two terms in the integrand can be combined, usin g
find
*p¢ 4e2S~d
~i laap~~ ~ - (27E)4
i
If (d12) F (2 - d12) (qPq' - q2qf'
,T )
x dx x(1 - x)(
2 + q2x (t -- x)}~-2 . ( 1 1 .2 . 13
0
We note the very important result that this contribution to TI*{'1 satisfies
the relation
~~)1_11 i~0P(9) = 0
(11 .2.14)
that was derived in Section
14.5 on the basis of the conservation and
neutrality of the electric current . It was precisely to achieve this result
that we adopted the dimensional regularization scheme . The reason that
dimensional regularization gives this result is that the conservation of
current does not depend on the dimensionality of spacetime .
The gamma function F(2 - d/2) in Eq . (11 .2.13 blows up for d -+ 4.
Fortunately, as we saw in Section 11 .1, there is another term that must
be added to CiWff(q), arising from the term -'(Z3 - 1 ) F},VFP" in the
interaction Lagrangian . This term has a structure like Eq . (1 .2.13 )
so to order e2, the complete r1* has the form
q Pqq) , (11 . 2.15 )
jJ*Pa
{q} ~ (q2 qp, _ ~ ~~~ )7r(4 2),
{11 .2. 16}
with
2)
4e2nd
(21r)4
2 10
(ZI - 1 ) .
{11. 2.1 7 }

11 .2 Vacuum Polarization
479
As we saw in Section 10.5, the definiti on o f the renormalized electromag-
netic field requires that ir(0) = 0 (in order that the residue of the pole in
the complete photon propagator at q2 = 0 should be the same as for the
bare propagator , aside from gauge-dependent term s) . Therefore, to order
e2 a
(21r )
SO that, to order e2 1)
7E(q 2)
4e2Qd F
(2,g)a
(M2) 2
0
1
F (2 - a }
dx x(1 - x )
2
fo
2X(I _ X))
x [(m' + q
_ (rn2)"-2]
(11 .2.19 )
Now we can remove the regularization, allowing d to approach its
physical value d = 4. As mentioned before, there is an infinity in the
one-loop contribution, arising from the limiting behavior of the Gamma
function
F (2 - i~ -'
I
(2 _ d12 )
where y is the Euler constant, y = 0.5772157. The infinite part of Z3 - 1
is given by using 1/(2 -r d/2) for F(2 - d1 2), and replacing d everywhere
else by 4 :
4e' - 2 n2
1
V3 - 1)
e2
1
We shall see in Volume II that this result may be used to derive the leading
term in the renormalization group equation for the electric charge.
The poles at d = 4 obviously cancel in 7r{q2}, because for d = 4 both
(m2+ q 2x(l - X))'-2 and (M2)d-2 have the same limit, unity . For the same
reason, the term -7j in F(2-d/2) cancels in the total 7r(q 2), though it does
make a finite contribution to Z3-- L There are other finite contributions to
Z3 - 1, that arise from the product of the pole in I"(2-d/2) with the linear
terms in the expansion of S 2dr(d/2) around d = 4, but these also cancel
in the total n(q2). Indeed, in carrying out our dimensional regularization,
we might have replaced (2n)-' with (2 -g)-d, and the factor Tr 1 = 4 might
have been replaced with the dimensionality 2 -d/2 of gamma matrices in
arbitrary even spacetime dimensionalities d, and these too would have
contributed to the finite part of Z2- 1, but not of n(q 2). Moreover, e'
cannot be supposed to be d-independent, because as shown by inspection
of Eq. (11 .2.13 ), it has the d-dependent dimensionality [mass]4-d. If we
take e2
CC tj4-d, where µ is some quantity with the units of mass, then

480
1 1 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
there are additional finite terms in Z2 - 1, arising from the product of the
pole in F (2 - d12) with the term (4 - d) In p in the expansion of µ4-d in
powers of 4 - d, but again, these cancel between Z3 - 1 and the one-loop
contributions to iz(q2 y
The only terms that do contribute to 7r (q2) in the limit d -+ 4 are those
arising from the product of the pole in r(2 - d/2) with the linear terms
in the expansion of (m2 + qlx(l `-` x))~-~ and (M)"-2 in powers of d - 4 :
I
2
(M2+ q2X(1 _ X))' -2 _ (M2)'-l -y ~ 2 - 2} In
I+ q X(m2
X)
This gives at last
ir(q2)
e~
~72
1
f
q2.x(1 - x)
dx .
x{1--~ x} In 1 +
0
2
m
( 1 1.2.22)
The physical sign ificance of the vacuum polarization can be explored
by considering its effect on the scattering of two charged particles of
spin
11 . The Feynman diagrams o f Figure 11 .3 make contributions to the
scattering S-matrix element of the form
Sa {1} 2 --i~ lr52
f) = (27r)- 12/264(Pi + + F2' - P1 - P2) [ei2ir~ityui]
q
Sb(1} 2 --* 1 r , 2'} = (27r)-12/264(Pi' + P21 - P1 - P2 )
L
q2
[i(2,g
(q + q,,q,),n(q')] [e2(27r Y'U2]
where el and e2 are the charges of the two particles being scattered ;
7z{q2} is calculated using for e in Eq. (11 .2.22) the magnitude of the
charge of the particle circulating in the loop in Figure 1 1.3 ; and qY is the
momentum transfer q = F1-p11 = PT -p2 . Using the conservation property
q,jijryAu1 = 0 the two diagrams together yield an S-matrix element :
x C[~2yu2] .
(11 .2.23)
In the non-relativistic limit, ulFy°u1 while uj+y!uj ^~ 0, and
likewise for particle 2. Also, in this limit q0 is negligible compared with
j q j. Eq . (1 1 .2.2 3) in this limit becomes
Q+ b (l r 2 '4 1 i 2)
4712q~ Ll + ~(7 )1 34(
Y1 1 + PT
C1 a P2 )6Ci6 1 6C262

11 .2 Vacuum Polarization
48 1
This may be compared with the 5-matrix in the Born approximation due
to a local spin-independent central potential V(r) :
SBarn(i, 2 -> 1 ', 2') - -27rib(Elf + E2, - E 1 - E2)TBorn (1, 2 -' 1'? 2) .
(11 .2.25 )
TBorn(1r 2 -+ 1% 2') = 6a ~ ~ 1 60~~2f
c~'~Cl C~'JC2 V(IX 1
f
7C (27E)- 12/2e-ip1, •xi e-02''"201 'x1 e iP2 'X2
Setting xj T X2 + r, this give s
; :54(p v
5Earn
+ PT - PI - P2)6,rirrl 6d a ')
x
.#
X21 )
(1 L2.26 )
(11 .2.27 )
Comparing this with Eq. (1 1 .2.23) shows that in the non-relativistic limit
the diagrams of Figure 11 .3 yield the same S-matrix element as a potential
V(r) such that
1 +
z ( q
J
d3
r
Y (r) e
!!
q
r = el e.
2
o r, inverting the Fourier transform,
V(r) = e
1 e2
d
3q e
iy -r
.
2
(2,R)3
9
(1 1.x.28)
Eq. (11 .2.28) is to first order in the radiative correction the same potential
energy that would be produced by the electrostatic interaction of two
extended charge distributions elq{x} and e2q(Y) at a distance r
:
V(Ir1) = elezd Ix
~~~1(x )~1(Y)
J 4rlx - + rl
where
?I(r) = P(r) +
d3 q 7r(q2) e
lq.r
~(27T ~
(11 .2.30 )
Note that
J
de r rl(r) = 1 +
17t(O) = 1
,
(11 .2.3 1 )
so the total charges of particles 1 and 2, as determined from the long-
range part of the Coulomb potential, are the same constants el and e2
that govern the interactions of the renormalized electromagnetic field .
For 1rl * 0 the integral ( 11 . 2.30) can be carried out by a straightforward

482 11 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
2`
1'
x `
] '
(a) (b)
Figure 11.3 . Two diagrams for the scattering of charged particles. Here lines
carrying arrows are charged particles ; wavy lines are photons . Diagram (b) repre-
sents the lowest-order vacuum polarization correction to the tree approximation
graph (a).
contour integration :
~z ~
Mr
-m
r
8, a r
fo
I
~ TF-_X_~
This expression is negative everywhere . However, we have seen that the
integral of q(r) over all r equals + 1. Therefore, q (r) must contain a term
(1 + L)b 3(r) that is singular at r = 0, with L chosen to satisfy Eq . ( 1 1 .2.31) :
2 3
1
r L
=
87 3 ~ ~
X(1 - X) dx 1 + ~~ ~xp
-mr
Jo
xl -x
x 1
The complete expression for the charge distribution function is the n
q(r) = (1 + L)r53(r) -
e
33 10
x( 1 - x} cox
S7 r
x
l +
~r
exp -mr
( 11 .2. 33)
xx
X
The physical interpretation of this result is that a bare point charge
attracts particles of charge of opposite sign out of the vacuum, repelling
their antiparticles to infinity, so that the bare charge is partially shielded,
yielding a renormalized charge smaller by a factor I/(1 + L). As a check,
we may note that if we cut off the divergent integral {11 .x .32} by taking the
integral to extend only over r a, we find that the part that is divergent
for a ---), 0 is
e2
Lo, = 12n2 In c~-i (11 .2 . 34)
Hence if we identify the momentum space cutoff A with u ', the divergent

11 .2 Vacuum Polarizatio n
Bart of L is related to the divergent part of Z3 - 1 by
48 3
(11 .2 .35 )
because to order e' the renormalized charge (10 .4.18) is given by
3
2
(11 .2.36)
Eq. (1 .2.35) is confirmed below.
Vacuum polarization has a measurable effect on muonic atomic energy
levels . As we shall see in Chapter 14, the effect of Feynman graph (b) in
Figure 11 .3 is to shift the energy of an atomic state with wave function
yy( r) by
K E =
d3r K v(r) I W(r)l 2
where AV(r) is the perturbation in the potential (11 .2.28)-
A V
~
9
(11 .2.37 )
(1 x .2.38 )
This perturbation falls off exponentially for r > m-1 . On the other hand,
the wave function of electrons in ordinary atoms will generally be confined
within a much larger radius a > m-1 ; for instance, for hydrogenic orbits
of electrons around a nucleus of charge Ze we have a = 137/Zm (where
here rra = m,) , The energy shift will then depend only Kn the behavior of
the wave function for r < a. For orbital angular momentum ~, the wave
function behaves like r 4 for r a, so Eq. ( 11 .2 .37) gives KE proportional
to a factor (Ma)2,'13 . The effect of vacuum polarization is therefore very
much larger for e _ 0 than for higher orbital angular momenta. For /, = 0
the wave function is approximately equal to the constant y )(0) for r less
than or of the order of m -1 , so Eq. ( 1.2.37) becomes
AE =
IT(0)
I2 f d3 r K V(r)
.
(11 .2.39)
Using Eqs . (11 .2.38) and (1 1 .2.22), the integral of the shift in the potential
(for e l e., = -Ze2 ) is
J der K V (r) _ _Z e27T' (0)
_ 15trt2 .
( 11 .2.40)
Also, in states of hydrogenic atoms w ith 0 and principal quantum
number n the wave function at the origin i s
2
(ZaM)3~2
~~) =
4n
n

484
1 1 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
so the energy shift (11.2.39) is
4Z4cclm
K E _
15 nn3
(11 .2.42)
For instance, in the 2s state of hydrogen this energy shift is -x , . 122 x 10-7
eV, corresponding to a frequency shift dEJ27rh of - 37.13 MHz. This
is sometimes called the Ueh ling effect.4 As discussed in chapter 1, such
tiny energy shifts became measurable because in the absence of various
radiative corrections the pure Dirac theory would pred ict exact degeneracy
of the 2s and 2p states of hydrogen . As we shall see in chapter 14 , most
of the +1058 MHz `Lamb shift' between the 2s and the 2p states comes
from other radiative corrections, but the agreement between theory and
experiment is good enough to verify the presence of the -37.13 MHz shift
due to vacuum polarization.
Although vacuum polarization contributes only a small part of the
radiative corrections in ordinary atoms, it dominates the radiative correc-
tions in muonic atoms, in which a moon take s the place of the orbiting
electron. Th is is because m ost radiative corrections give energy shifts in
muonic atoms that on dimensional grounds are proportional to m., while
the integrated vacuum polarization energy f der AV due to an electron
loop is still proportional to rn. 2 a s in Eq. (11 .2.40), giving an energy shift
proportional to m~m~ ' z-- (210)2m~ .
However, in this case the muonic
atomic radius is not much larger than the electron Compton wavelength,
so the approximate result (1 1 .2.39 ) only gives the order of magn itude of
the energy shift due to vacuum polarization .
For the purposes of comparison with later calculations, note that if we
had cut off the integral ( 1 1 .2.7) at x = A, then in place of Eq. ( 1 1 .2.20) we
would have encountered an integral of the form
e2 n
d-5 dK
&7-r2
fi~
K
ez
P
d-4 _ Aa-a
bar2
d- 4
where y is an infrared effective cutoff of the order of the mass of the
charged particle circulating in the loop of Figure 11 .1 . (The easiest way to
find the constant factor here is to require that the limit of this expression
for d < 3 and A --* as matches Eq. (1 1 .2.20) .) With such an ultraviolet
cutoff in place, we can pass to the limit d --+ 4, and obtain
(Z3 - 16,
67r 2 ln(~/,u) • (1 1 .2.43)

11 . 3 Anomalous Magnetic Moments and C harge Radii
48 5
Figure 11 .4. One-loop diagrams for the photon-lepton vertex function P . Here
wavy lines represent photons ; other lines represent electrons or muons. Diagrams
(a) and (b) are cancelled by lepton field renormalization terms ; diagram (c) arises
from the vacuum polarization calculated in Section 11 .2 ; and (d) is the term
calculated in Section 11 .3.
11.3 Anomalous Magnetic Moments and Charge Radii
For our next example, we shall calculate the shift in the magnetic moment
and the charge radius of an electron or moan due to lowest-order radiative
corrections. The one-loop graphs and renormalization corrections for
the photon-lepton vertex are shown in Figure 11 .4.
Of these graphs,
those involving insertions in incoming or outgoing lepton lines vanish
because the lepton is on the mass shell, as discussed in Section
10.3. The
graph involving an insertion in the external photon line is the vacuum
polarization effect, discussed in the previous section . This leaves one
one-loop graph (the last in Figure 11A) that needs to be calculated here :
JFP
)41 [ - i
_i4
?_ 9) +m
I I00P(P" P)
d4 k
[eY P(2 7r
[(p.4 (p
) +
~(27r)4 (p - k)2 + MI
(2n)4 V - ic ]
(1 1 .3 . 1 )
where p' and p are the final and initial lepton four-momenta, respectively .
(The contribution of the vertex connecting the external photon line and
the internal lepton line is taken as y P , because a factor e(2 7r)4 was extracted
in defining FP . )
This integral has an obvious ultraviolet divergence, roughly like
J' d4k/(k2)2. Unlike the case of the vacuum polarization, here we do

486
1 1 One-Loop Radiative Correction s
not need a fancy regularization procedure like dimensional regulariza-
tion to maintain the structure required by gauge invariance, because the
photon is a neutral particle and so the integral may be rendered finite by
suitable modifications of the photon propagator (for instance by including
a factor M21(k2 + M2) with a large cutoff mass M), without having to
introduce modifications elsewhere to maintain gauge invariance . In any
case, as we shall see the anomalous magnetic moment and charge radii
can be calculated without encountering any ultraviolet divergences at all.
In what follows we shall leave the integrals for the vertex function in their
infinite form, with it being understood that if necessary any divergent
integrals can be expressed in terms of a cutoff mass M.
We start by combining denominators, using a repeated version of the
Feynman trick described in the Appendix to this chapter
ABC
Jo /d
v
2
Applied to the denominators in Eq. (11 .3. 1), this gives
1
1
I
1
x
2
dx
dy [ ((pl - k )2 + M2
y + ((p - k)' + M2 _ le)(X _ Y)
2
.F)
X)] -3
+ (k1 x -3
2
dx
dy [k-p'y_p(x_y))
2 + Frt2x2 + q2Y(x - y) - i
Ej
a
4
(11 .3 .3 )
where q = p - p' is the mornenturn transferred to the photon . Shifting the
variable of integration
the integral ( 1 1 .3.1) become s
2ie2
1
dx
dy I d
a k
3
1111 loop
(P!, P) =
(27E)4 f()
[k2 + M2X2 + q2y(X - Y) - iel
XTP [ - i( io - Y)- v *X - Y)) + MITP
X[-i( *1 -X+Y)- ~- fy) +MITP.
(113A)
Our next step is a Wick rotation. As explained in the previous section,

11 .3 Anomalous Magnetic Moments and Charge radii 487
the -ie in the denominator dictates that when we rotate the k° contour
of integration to the imaginary axis we must rotate counterclockwise, so
that the integral over k° from -w to +oo is replaced with an integral
over imaginary values from -ice to fiao, or equivalently over real values
of k' = -iJc° from -aa to +ac. We also exploit the rotational symmetry
of the denominator in Eq. (11 .3.4) ; we drop terms in the denominator
of odd order in k, replace k4d with q:'k2 /4, and replace the volume
element A = idkldk3dk l dk4 with 2i~' K3 dre, where K is the Euclidean
length of the four-vector k. Putting this all together, Eq . (11 .3.4) now
becomes
,47t 2e2 1
x "'a
T'A
(27r)4
+'/P
i ( io - Y)- xx - Y)) +
X X + Y)_ Y) + m Ij
14rp l
X ~K 2 + M2X2 + q'y(x - y)] -3
(113 .5 )
We are interested here only in the matrix element R'Tlu of the vertex
function between Dirac spinors that satisfy the relation s
u{ [i Mfr + m] = 0 ,
[i ~ +M]u =0 .
We can therefore simplify this expression by using the anticommutation
relations of the Dirac matrices to move all factors f to the right and all
factors fi to the left, replacing them when they arrive on the right Kr left
with im . After a straightforward but tedious calculation, Eq . { 1 1 .3.5} then
becomes
~47r2e2 L
i
.x
f r ne lanp lPf ~~t~ -
~
L~J~
d
)
o
F, I I Y p [ _ IC2 + 2M2(X2 - 4x + 2) + 2q2(Y(X
y)
X)
j
+ 4im p'~'(Y - x + xy° ) + 4im { J`(x2 - xY - y)I u
X [2+n2x2.+q2v(x_v)]_3
K
(1 1 . 3. 6)
We next exploit the symmetry of the final factor under the reflection
y --r x --- Y . Under this reflection, the functions y - x + xy and x2 - xy - y
that multiply p"' and e are interchanged, so both may be replaced with
their average :
2 (y - x + xy) + 2(x 2 _ xy -- y} -- zxG - x ) .

4$8
11 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
This gives finally
-4g2 e2
i
X 00
'
dx dy
TC dre
u tone laopW, P) " =
2g)4 fo fo
x
- K' + 2rrt2(x2 -- 4x + 2) + 2q2(Y (X - Y)
X)]
-2im (pl~' + p,)x(I - x) ) U
X [K 2 + mY + q2y(X _ Y)] -3 .
( 11 . 3 . 7 )
Note that p~ and p"' new enter only in the combination pt' + p'l`, as
required by current conservation .
There are other diagrams that need to be taken into account . Of course,
there is the zeroth-order term y " in F . The term proportional to Z2 - 1
in the correction term (11.1 .9) yields a term in I'F
Also, the effect of insertions of corrections to the external photon propa-
gator is a term :
rvac pol
~~ ~~ - -
I
F)2 - ~
fev(P
r -
~P' P) Yv (11.3 .9)
The form of each of these terms is in agreement with the general result
{10.6.10} (with H(qz) 0 )
To order e2, the form factors are
2
2
4~2e2
~ ~
f'dy
rc d~
F(q
) = Z2 + ~(q )
+ 2~)4 ,lop dX
~
X
IK
2 - 2M2(XI - 4)c + 2) - 2q2(y(X - y) + X)]
3
IK2 + Fn2XI + q2Y
(X - Y)]
{i 1 .x. 1 1 )
G{q'} = -4
71 2 2
~
1dX fXdY
~°`'
4m2x ( 1 _ x) ~c3 d~c
3
(11 .3.1 2
e Jo Jo
(27c)4 IrcI + era2 x2 + q2Y(X - Y)
]
where ar(q2) is the vacuum polarization function (11.2.22) .
The integral for the form factor G(q2) is finite as it stands :
2 2 1
x
47T Jo Jo
rya x + q2 Y(X - Y)

11 .3 Anomalous Magnetic Moments and Charge Radii 489
Figure 11 .5 . A two-loop diagram for the moon magnetic moment . Here the
heavy straight line represents a rnuon ; the light wavy lines are photons ; and the
other light lines are electrons. This diagram makes a relatively large contribution
to the fourth-order muon gyromagnetic ratio, proportional to tn(m,,/m,) .
This makes it easy to calculate the anomalous magnetic moment. As noted
in Section 10 . 6, it is only the yA term that contributes to the magnetic
moment, so the effect of radiative corrections is to multiply the Dirac
value e fZm of the magnetic moment by a factor F(O). But the definition
of e as the true lepton charge requires that
F(O) + G(O) = 1 , (11 .3 .14)
so the magnetic moment may be expressed a s
Y = ' (I
G(O))
(11 .3.15)
From Eq. (11 .3 .13), we find
G(O)
S~~ = 0.00 1 161. ( 1 1 .3 . 1 6)
This is the famous a/2n correction first calculated by Schwinger.5
Of course , this is only the first term in the radiative corrections to the
magnetic moment. Even in just the next Krder, fourth order in e, there are
so many terms that the calculations become quite complicated . However,
because of the large moan-electron mass ratio, there is one fourth-order
term in the magnetic moment of the muon that is somewhat larger than
any of the others. It arises from the insertion of an electron loop in the
virtual photon line of the second-order diagram, as shown in Figure 11 . 5 .
The effect of this electron loop is to change the photon propagator Ilk'
in Eq . (11 .3. 1 ) to (1 + 7re (k2))/kI, where 7z,(k2) is given by Eq. (11,2.22),

490
1I One-Loop Radiative Corrections
but with the mass m taken as the electron mass :
'
t
z
2
X(I - X) In ( I +
2n Jo
Inspection of Eq. (11.3.12) shows that in calculating the moan magnetic
moment the effective cutoff on the virtual photon momentum k is m. . The
ratio m./ m, is so large that for V of order rra~ we may approximate
ln( m.~/m l)
{11 . 3 .17}
7re(k 2) .-.~ 3~~
x(1 -x ) lr~(rr~~ /rn~ ) = 127E "
with the neglected terms having coefficients of order unity in place of
]n(rn~/rr~~). Since this is a constant, the change in TG(0) produced b y
adding an electron loop in the virtual photon line is simply given by
multiplying our previous result ( 11 .
. 16) for -G(O) by Eq. ( 11 .3.17), so
that now
2
4
1
Ta
Py _ 2m
s~ 2_ + ~_6~~
In
~ + 0(i)
u
1)
( 11 .3.18)
(As we shall see in volume IZ, this argument is a primitive version of
the method of the renormalization group .) The result (11 .3.18) may be
compared with the full fourth-order result- 6
e e2
e
4 2rn~ $r
r(2+97[lnEI~
25 197 7t2
9~(3 )
2
6 + 24 + 2
3n In 2 + 0
~~ ] ( 11 . 3 . 19)
It turns out that the '0(1)' terms multiplying e4/96lr2 add up to -6 .137,
which is not very much smaller than ln(m~fn~e) = 1 0. 663, so the approx-
imation (11 .3.18) gives the fourth-order terms only to a factor of order
2. The correct fourth-order result (11 .3.19) gives p,, = 1 .00116546e/2m.,
in comparison with the second-order result p,, = 1 .001161 e/2m,, and the
current experimental value, 7 jU'U = 1 .001 165923{S}e f 2rrzp .
Nom let us turn to the other form factor . The integral in Eq. (f 1 .3 .11 )
for F(q2) has an ultraviolet divergence. However, in order to satisfy the
charge-non-renormalization condition (11 .3.14), it is necessary that Z2
take the value
e2
47rze2
1 x o0
Z2 _ I +
~ dx
dy
rc3 d~c
8712
(21r)4
,
K2 - 2m2(x2 - 4x + 2)
X
~K2 + M2X2
1
(11 .3-20)

11 .3 Anomalous Magnetic Moments and Charge Radii
49 1
(Recall that 7r(0) = 0.) This is itself ultraviolet divergent, with an infinite
part
~e dK
Inserting Eq. (11 .3.20) back into Eq. (11 .3.11) gives
F(q2 Z
47r2e2 (1 x 00 3
T7 JO dX fo
X
(11 .3.21 )
[K2 + 2X2 + qly(X - y)
]
[K2 _ 7m2(x2 _ 4x+2)]
[K2 + rn2X2
] 3
The integral over K is now conve rgent :
F(q2) = i +
X
e2
21r2 e2
1
(2n)
dx Jxdy
-m2 [x2 - 4x + Z] - q2Ly(x - y) + i - x]
- In
M2 X 2
+ q2 Ax - Y)
m2x2 11
( 11 . 3 .23 )
However, we see that the integral over x and y now diverges logarith-
mically at x = 0 and y = 0, because there are two powers of x and/or
y in the denominators, and just two differentials
dx d y in the numera-
tor. This divergence can be traced to the vanishing of the denominator
[K2 + M2 xz + q2Y{x -- Y}13 in Eq. ( 11 . 3.i 1) at x = 0, y = 0, and K = 0.
Because this infinity comes from the region of small rather than large rc,
it is termed an infrared divergence rather than an ultraviolet divergence .
We shall give a comprehensive treatment of the infrared divergences
in Chapter 13 . It will be shown there that infrared divergences in the
cross-section for processes like electron-electron scattering, such as those
that are introduced by the infrared divergence in the electron form factor
F(q2), are cancelled when we include the emission of low-energy photons
as well as elastic scattering . Also, as we shall see in Chapter 14, when
we calculate radiative corrections to atomic energy levels the infrared
divergence in F (q2) is cut off because the bound electron is not exactly
on the free-particle mass shell. For the present we shall continue our
calculation by simply introducing a fictitious photon mass y to cut off the
+x'--4x+2
X2

492
1 1 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
infrared divergence in F(q 2), leaving it for Chapter 14 to see how to use
this result.
With a photon mass p, the denominator k2 - ie in Eq. (11 .3 .1) would
be replaced with k2 + p2 - le. The effect would than be to add a term
P2(1 - x) to the cubed quantity in the denominators of Eqs . (11 .3.3)-
(11 .3.7), (11 .3 .20), and (11 .3 .22). Eq. ( 11 .3.23) then is replaced
with
(27r)4
o
-rn2 [x2 - 4x +2] -- q
2 [y(x - y) + 1 - x]
in 2 [x2 - 4x +21
- In
~~~~ + q2y(x - y) + p2{1 - x}
m 2x~ + JU2 (1 - x)
(11 .3 .24)
This integral is now completely convergent . It can be expressed in terms
of Spence functions, but the result is not particularly illuminating . For
our purposes in Chapter 14, it will be sufficient to calculate the behavior
of F(q') for small q'. We already know from the Ward identity that
F(O) = 1 - G(O) = 1 + e'/8 7r', so let us consider the first derivative F'(q2)
at q2 = 0. According to Eq. (11.3.24), this is
Y(0) = n '{4} + 2
(2
1r2 ~
J01
cox
fo
X
dy
~ ~
The vacuum polarization contribution is given by Eq. (11 .2.22) as
e2
(0) = fDac2m2
( 1 1 . 3.2F)
Dropping all terms proportional to powers of ju/m i n Eq. (11 .3.25), we
then have'
2
(y2)
F'(0) ~ Z4~2m2 [ln
2
+ 5 + 4
1]
(11.3.27)
with the term ~ the contribution of vacuum polarization. On the other
hand, Eq. (11 .3.13) shows that G(q') has a finite derivative at q2 = 0,
G'(0) z-
e
48ir2m2
( 11.3.28)
The y-integral is trivial. The x-integral is most easily calculated in the limi t 'U m by dividing
the range of integration into two parts, one from 0 to s, w here p/m < s < 1, and the second
from s to 1 .

1 1 .4 Electron Self-Energy
493
These results are most conveniently expressed in terms of the charge form
factor Fi(q2 ), defined by the alter-native representation ( 1 0.6.15) of the
vertex functio n
~(P " U' )Fl (P {7 Y )U(PS a)
- ii(p r7 (T) [yFj (q2) +
~ i[ I ~}
~~y' 7 (rf
Y )4i
`L (q L)]u {p}Q) . ( 1 1 . 3 .29)
According to Eqs. ( 1 0.6.1.7) and ( 10.6. 18),
(11 .3.30)
For jq~ ~ < M2, this form factor is approximately
F1 (~
2) ~_ I
+
e2
24~~
1]
4~
In
~1
+ 2 +
M2 M2
S
4
(11 .3.31 )
This may be expressed in terms of a charge radius a, defined by the limiting
behavior of the charge form factor for q2 --~- 0 :
Fi (q2 ) -_~. 1 -- q 2Q2/6 . (11 .3.32)
(This definition is motivated by the fact that the average of exp(iq ' x) over
a spherical shell of radius a goes as f - q2a2f b for q2a2 < 1.) We see that
the charge radius of the electron is given by
2
(1~) 2
1 ]
a2
~~~~~
to
~
# ~-
5
4
(11.3. 33 )
We will see in Chapter 14 that for electrons in atoms the role of the
photon mass is played by an effective infrared cutoff that is much less
than m, so the logarithm here is large and negative, yielding a positive
value for a2
11,4
Electron Self-Energy
We conclude this chapter with a calculation of the electron self-energy
function. This by itself does not have any direct experimental implications,
but some of the results here will be useful in chapter 14 and volume II .
As in Section 10.3, we define i(2g)2 [£`(P)] fl," as the sum of all graphs
with one incoming and one outgoing electron line carrying momenta p
and Dirac indices oc and (3 respectively, with the asterisk indicating that
we exclude diagrams that can be disconnected by cutting through some
internal electron line, and with propagators omitted for the two external
lines. The complete electron propagator is then given by the sum

494
11 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
Figure 11 .6. The one-loop diagram for the electron self-energy function . As
usual, the straight line represents an electron ; the wavy line is a photon .
where
S(P )
The sum is trivial, and gives
-r ~ + M,
(1L4 .2)
(11 .4.3)
In lowest order there is a one-loop contribution to 1', given by Figure
11 .6 :
i(2,g
I J.P(P)
f d k [
(21T)4k2 - le
~ (27r)4 (p - k)l + m,' - ic I
or more simply
2
1i loop (P) =
~.7~ 4 ~~~ [ k2 -
x
t
+ i 9 + m e)rP
(1 t .4.4)
(This is in Feynman gauge ; amplitudes with charged particles off the mass
shell are not gauge-invariant .) For use in our calculation Kf the Lamb
shift, it will be convenient to use a method of regularization introduced
by Pauli and Villars.8 We replace the photon propagator (k ' - i,-)-' with
1
1
k2 + M2
so that the electron self-energy function i s
1
ie2
A
(27C)4 )12 - 14F
x
[ YPH i + i 9 + MJ~P
(p - k)2 + m~ - to
(11 .4 .5 )
Later we can drop the regulator by letting the regulator mass y go to
infinity. In chapter 14 we will also be interested in the case where ,u < M,.
We again use the Feynman trick to combine denominators, and recall

1 1.4 Electron Self-Energy
495
that y P y'y,, = --21' and yp7p = 4. This gives
2
P
X
dx
fo ({k - px}l + pl(l - x) + M~x - ie} 2
- - 1 11 .4.6)
C
Shifting the variable of integration k --* k + px and rotating the contour
Kf integration gives
loop (P) =
2
(27r)4
f
dd
x [2i( 1
x)
+ 4r~]
K Ka
1 1
x - -
{~c2 + p2x(1 - x) + ~n~ X}~
(K2 + p2x(1 - x) + M2x + µi(1 - x))2
( 11 .x.7 )
The x- integral is trivial :
_7r'e2
l'i loop
(P)
fo
x In ~2~( 1 ~-~ x) + r~~x + #~~ ( 1 - ~~ 11 .4.8
P
2 X(I - JiC ) + FIZ
e
X
The interaction {1.1 19} also contributes a renormalization counterterm
-(Z2 - 1)0 j + Me ) + Z26rra, in V{p}, with Z2 and 6m, determined by the
condition that the complete propagator S'(p) regarded as a function of ij
should have a pole at i j - -rn, with residue unity. (As we shall see in the
next chapter, this makes V finite as µ --.j, oo to all orders in e.) In lowest
order, this gives
bme
11 loop
2rr~,7r2e2
1
( rn2x2 + Pz (1 - X )
(7T )4
JO
dx [1 + act In
M2 X2
(11 .4.9)
Z2 - i ~ _~ G~~ loop
2 1z2e ['dx
(1 - x) In
(27E)4
'~
X2
+ ~
I
~
I -
X)
m x
--- 2p2(
1---
X)2(
1 +
X)
(11 .4.10)

496 11 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
(To this order, we do not distinguish between Mme and Z25rn,.) Dropping
terms that vanish for p2 --* oo, Eqs. (11 .4.8)-(11 .4.10) yield
2e2f
1
P 2(
X
) -7
1 1
i loop~P) = ( 2~)4
dx t2i(1 - x) j + 4m'] In ( P2x( 1
X-) + M2 x
(11 .4.11 )
61~.e _
Z2 -1 =
2m,7z2 e2
(27z)4
-27r 2e2
(27r)l
dx 11 + x] In
YI(
2 2
X)
Ine X
)
I
jo
dx
(i - .x) In
P
2(1 -
X )
2x2
e
( 11 . 4. 1 2 )
2( 1
X2 )
Inspection then shows that in the complete self energy function the In p 2
terms cancel, leaving us with
order eAF) - Vi lnap(P) - V2 - Ni i + me) + Z26M,
z 2 ~( }
2rr ~
ax
[i(1 - x) ~ + 2m,j In
1
( Jo
(p2X(1x 1
-m, [ l + x] In
x
2
X
-(i j + me) [(I
~ -
-
x) In x2 x
X
There is still a divergence from the behavior of the last term as x --+ 0,
which can be traced to the singular behavior of the integral over the
photon momentum k in Eq. (1 t .4.5) at k2 = 0, when we take p2 at the
point p2 = -m2 where we evaluated Z2 - I. Such infrared divergences
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 13 . For the present, the point that
concerns us is that the ultraviolet divergence has cancelled .
The result (11 .4.9) for bm, is of some interest in itself. Note that
bm,/m, > 0, as we would expect for the electromagnetic self energy
due to the interaction of a charge with its own field . But unlike the
classical estimates of electromagnetic self-energy by Poirtcare, Abraham,
and others,
Eq. ( 1 1 .4.9) is only logarithmically divergent in the limit
p --+ ao where the cutoff is removed . In this limit
e (21r) 4
In ~ (11 .4.15 )
In our calculation of the Lamb shift in section 14 .3 we will be interested

Appendix Assorted In tegrals
in t he opposite limit, y C rra, Here Eq. (11.4.9) gives
e2P 1- P
$,g 2,gm,
Appendix
Assorted Integrals
497
(11 .4.16)
In order to combine the denominators of N propagators, we need to
replace a product like DI rD2 r . . .D,yi with an integral of a function that
involves a linear combination of D1, D 2, . . . D N. For this purpose it is
often convenient to make use of the formul a
D I D2 .
. l7 N - (N - 1 )?
dx1
dx2 . . .
dxnr_ 1
.
10
fo
. fo
In this chapter we have used special cases of this formula for
= 2 and
ITT = 3 .
After combining denominators, sbiffing the four-momentum variable of
integration, wick rotating, and using four-dimensional rotational invari-
ance, we commonly encounter integrals of the for m
A
(k 2)n
(k2 +v 2)
with (k2 + v 2),n coming from the combined propagator denominators,
and (k2), coming from the propagator numerators and vertex momentum
factors. This is divergent for 2n + 4 > 2m, but the integral can be given a
finite value by analytically continuing the spacetime dimensionality from
4 to a complex value d. To evaluate the resulting integral, we use the
well-known formula
( ~ }
+ V
2 r(~.
where e = d + 2 n. We used this formula in the special cases n = 0, m = 2
and n = I'm = 2 in Section 11.2 .
Ultraviolet divergences manifest themselves in Eq. (1 1 .A.2) as poles in
the factor I`{m - (/
) = r (rrz - n - d/2) as d --- ~. 4 with fixed integer n. For
2 + n = m, this factor goes as
4-d 2
2.
~d-4 + Y
( 11 .A.3 )
where y = 0 .5772157 • - - is the Euler constant. The limiting behavior for
2 + n m can be obtained from (I 1 .A,3} and the recursion relation for
mamma functions.

498 1 1 One-Loop Radiative Corrections
Problems
1 . Calculate the contributions to the vacuum polarization function 7r (q2 )
and to Z3 of one-loop graphs involving a charged spinless particle
of mass m, . What effect does this have on the energy shift of the 2s
state of hydrogen, if m5 >> Zac
.e ?
2. Suppose that a neutral scalar field 0 of mass mo has an interaction
goW ip with the electron field . To one-loop order, what effect does
this have on the magnetic moment of the electron? On Z2 ?
3. Consider a neutral scalar field 0 with mass mo and self-interaction
g 03 f 6. To one-loop order, calculate the S-matrix element for scalar-
scalar scattering .
4. To one-loop order, calculate the effect of the neutral scalar field of
Problem 2 on the mass shift 6m, of the electron.
References
1. R. P. Feyntnan, Phys . Rev. 76, 769 (1949).
2. G. C. Wi ck, Phys . Rev. 80, 2 68 (1950) .
3. G. 't Hooft and M . Veltman, Nucl. Fhys. B44, 189 (1 972) .
4. E. A. Uehling, Phys. Rev. 48, 55 (1935 . The one-loop function 7c(q2)
was first given for q 2 * 0 by J. Schwinger, Phys, Rev. 75, 651 (1949).
5 . 1 Schwinger, Whys. Rev . 73, 416 (1948) .
6. This is calculated (including terms that vanish for m, { my) by H .
Suura and E. Wichmann, Phys . Rev. 105, 1930 (1967) ; A. Petermann ,
Pays. Rev. 105, 1931 (1957) ; H. H. Elend, Phys. Lett . 20, 682 (1966) ;
21, 720 (1966) ; G. W. Erickson and H. H. T. Liu, UCD-CN L-$ 1
report (1968).
7. J. Bailey e t al. (CERN-Mainz--Daresbury Collaboration), Nu cl. Phys .
B150, I (1979). These experiments are done by observing the p reces-
sion of the moon spin in a storage ring.
8, Pauli and F. Villars, Rev. Mod. Pays . 21, 434 (1949). Also see J .
R ayski, Phys. Rev. 75, 1961 (1949) .
9. See, e .g., A . I. Miller, Theory of Relativity
Emergence (1905) and
Early Interpretation (1905-191 1) (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA,
1981) : Chapter 1 .

12
General l enormaliz tion Theory
We saw in the previous chapter that calculations in quantum electrody-
namics involving one-loop graphs yield divergent integrals over momen-
tum space, but that these infinities cancel when we express all parameters
of the theory in terms of `renormalized' quantities, such as the masses
and charges that are actually measured. In 1949 Dyson] sketched a proof
that this cancellation would take place to all orders in quantum electrody-
namics. It was immediately apparent (and will be shown here in Sections
12.1 and 12.2) that Dyson's arguments apply to a larger class of theories
with finite numbers of relatively simple interactions, the so-called renar-
malizabte theories, of which quantum electrodynamics is just one simple
example .
For some years it was widely thought that any sensible physical theory
would have to take the form of a renormalizable quantum field theory .
The requirement of renormalizability played a crucial role in the devel-
opment of the modern `standard model' of weak, electromagnetic, and
strong interactions . But as we shall see here, the cancellation of ultravi-
olet divergences does not really depend on renormalizability ; as long as
we include every one of the infinite number of interactions allowed by
symmetries, the so-called non-renormalizable theories are actually just as
renormalixable as renormalizahle theories.
It is generally believed today that the realistic theories that we use
to describe physics at accessible energies are what are known as `effec-
tive field theories.' As discussed in Section 12.3, these are low-energy
approximations to a more fundamental theory that may not be a field
theory at all. Any effective field theory necessarily includes an infinite
number of non-renormalizable interactians . Ncvertheless, as discussed in
Sections 12.3 and 12.x, we expect that at sufficiently low energy all the
non-renormalizable interactions in such effective field theories are highly
suppressed. Renormalixable theories like quantum electrodynamics and
the standard model thus retain their special status in physics, though for
reasons that are somewhat different from those that originally motivated
the assumption of renormalizability in these theories .
499

500
1 2 General Renoralizatian Theory
12.1 Degrees of Divergence
Let us consider a very general sort of theory, containing interactions of
varying types labelled i. Each interaction may be characterized by the
number n;f of fields of each type f, and by the number di of derivatives
acting on these fields .
We will start by calculating the
`superficial degree of divergence' D of
an arbitrary connected one-particle irreducible Feynman diagram in such
a theory. This is the number of factors of momentum in the numerator
minus the number in the denominator of the integrand, plus four for every
independent four-momentum over which we integrate.
The superficial
divergence is the actual degree of divergence of the integration over the
region of momentum space in which the momenta of all inte rnal lines
go to infinity together. That is, if D
0, then the part of the amplitude
where all internal momenta go to infin ity with a common factor K --* ova
will diverge like
x
rcD-' dre .
In the same sense, an integral with degree of divergence D = 0 is loga-
rithmically divergent, and an integral with D < 0 is convergent, at least
as far as this region of momentum space is concerned . We will come back
later to the problem posed b y subintegrations that behave worse than the
integral over this region.
To calculate D, we will need to know the following about the diagram :
If
number of internal lines of field type f ,
Ef
number of external lines of field type f ,
Ni
number of vertices of interaction type i .
We will write the asymptotic behavior of the propagator d f(k) of a field
of type f in the form
Af (k) - k-' + -"f
( 12.1 .2 )
Looking back at Chapter 6, we see that sf = 0 for scalar fields, sf =
for Dirac fields, and sf = 1 for massive vector fields. More generally,
it can be shown that for massive fields of Lorentz transformation type
(A, B), we have sf = A + B . Speaking loosely, we may call sf the `spin.'
However, dropping terms that because of gauge invariance have no effect,
the effective photon propagator r~,,,/k 2 has sf = 0. A similar result applies
to a massive vector field coupled to a conserved current, provided the
current does not depend on the vector field. It can also be shown that, in
the same sense, the graviton field g,,,, has propagator also with sf = D.

12.1 Degrees of Divergence
50 1
According to (12.1.2), the propagators make a total contribution to D
equal to
Y: If (2 sf - 2)
f
(12 . 1 .3
Also, the derivatives in each interaction of type i introduce di momentum
factors into the integrand, yielding a total contribution to D equal t o
Nj di .
(12 .1 .4)
Finally, we need the total number of independent momentum variables
of integration. Each internal line can be labelled with afour-momentum,
but these are not all independent; the delta function associated with
each vertex imposes a linear relation among these internal momenta,
except that one delta function only serves to enforce conservation
of
the external momenta. Thus, the momentum space integration volume
elements contribute to D a term
4 If -
Nj - 1 (12. 1 . 5)
f
which, of course, is just four times the number of independent loops in
the diagram. Adding the contributions (1 2. 1 .3), (12.1.4), and (12.1.5), we
find
f
Eq. (111 .6) is not very convenient as it stands, because it gives a value
for D that seems to depend on the internal details of the Feynman diagram .
Fortunately, it can be simplified b y using the topological identities
2If + Ef Nj nif ,
(12.1 .7)
(Each internal line contributes two of the lines attached to vertices, while
each external line contributes only one .) Using Eq. (12.1.7) to eliminate
If, we see that Eq. ( 1 2.1.6) become s
f
i
where d; is a parameter characterizing interactions of type i
(12.1 .8 )
(12.1 .9)
This result could have been obtained by simple dimensional analysis,
without considering the structure of Feynman diagrams. The propagator

502
12 General Renormalization Theory
of a field is a four-dimensional Fourier transform of the vacuum ex-
pectation value of a time-ordered product of a pair of free fields, so a
conventionally normalized field f whose dimensionality* in powers of mo-
mentum is
'f will have a propagator of d i mensionality -4 -}- 2-9f, Hence
if the propagator behaves like k-2+2,f when k is much larger than the
mass, then the field must have a dimensionality with -4+2-qj = -2+ 2 sf,
or 9f = 1 + s f . An interaction i with nif such fields and di derivatives will
then have dimensionality dd+l:f raif (I +sf ) . But the action mu st be dimen-
sionless, so each term in the Lagrangian density must have dimensionality
+4 to cancel the dimensionality -4 of d4x. Hence the interaction must
have a coupling constant Kf dimensionality 4 - d, - Ef nif (1 + sf ), which is
just the parameter Kj. The momentum space amplitude corresponding to
a connected Feynman graph with Ef exter nal lines of type f is the Fourier
transform over 4 X:f Ef coordinates of a vacuum expectation value of the
time-ordered product of fields with a total dimensionality J:f Ef ( 1 + sf ),
so it has d imensionality
f Ef (-3 + sf ). Of this dimens i onality, -4 comes
from a momentum space delta function, and Ef Ef(-2 + 2sf) is the
dimensionality of the propagators for the external lines , so the momen-
tum space i ntegral
itself together with all coupling constant factors has
dimensionality
I:Ef(-3 + sf) - (-4) - 1:-Ef(-2 + 2,5f) = 4 - EEf(sf + 1)
f f
J
The coupling constants for a given Feynman graph have total dimension-
ality i Ni Aia leaving the momentum space integral with dimensionality
4 - Ef Ef (sf + 1) -
j NA . As long as we are interested in the region
of integration where all momenta go to infinity together, the degree of
divergence of the momentum space integral is its dimensionality, thus
justifying Eq. (12.1 .8).
If all interactions have d j ~!: 0, then Eq . (12. 1.8) provides an upper
bound on D that depends only on the numbers of external lines of each
type, i.e., on the physical process whose amplitude is being calculate d
D :< 4 - Ef(sf + 1 ) . (12 .1 .10)
f
For example, in the simple version of quantum electrodynamics studied in
the previous chapter, the Lagrangian included terms of the types shown
in Table 12.1 . All interactions here have d;
0, and hence a Feynman
diagram with E, external photon lines and E, external Dirac lines wil l
In this chapter, `dimensionality' will always refer In the dimensionality in powers of mass or
momentum, in units with h = c = 1 . We are using fields that are conventionally normalized, in
the sense that the term in the free-field [,agrangian with the largest number of derivatives (which
determines the asymptotic behavior of the propagator) has a dimensionless coefficient .

12.1 Degrees of Divergence
503
Table 12.1 . Terms in the Lagrangian density for quantum electrodynamics . Here
di, nr_,, and nj,, are the numbers of derivatives, photon fields, and electron fields
in the interaction, and d i is the dimensionality of the corresponding coefficient .
(Recall that sr -= 4, S' ° ~ .~
Interaction
ie ip-,Ay_a
V3
I)FpvFPv
-(Z2 -- 1)iPk
di
ni~
ni e
0 1 2
2 2
0
1
0
2
0
0
2
K i
4-1 - 3= U
4-2-2 0
4 -
1 -3 = 0
4-3= I
have superficial degree of divergence bounded by Eq. (12.1 .10) :
D ::~ 4 -T ~ Ee - EY
( 1 2.1 . 11 )
Only a finite number of sets of external lines can yield superficially
divergent integrals, these will be enumerated in Section 12 .2. We are going
to show that the limited number of divergences that appear in theories
with Ki
0 for all interactions are automatically removed by a redefinition
of a finite number of physical constants and a renormalization of fields .
For this reason, such theories are called renormah zable . In Section 12 .3 we
will catalog all the renormalizable theories, and discuss the significance of
renormalizability as a criterion for physical theories .
The term `renormaliza6le' is also applied to individual interactions .
Renormali7able interactions are those with dz 0, whose coupling con-
stants have positive or zero dimensionality. Sometimes one distinguishes
between interactions with dj = 0, called simply renormalizable, and those
with Al > 0, called superrenarmalizahle. Since adding additional fields
or derivatives always lowers Az, there can only be a finite number of
renormalizable interactions involving fields of any given types . We have
seen that all the interactions in the simplest version of quantum electro-
dynamics are renormalizable, with the tip terms superrenormalizable .
On the other hand, if any interaction has
Aj
0, the degree of di-
vergence (12 .1 .8) becomes larger and larger the more such vertices we
include. No matter how large we take the various Ef, eventually with
enough vertices of type i for which d j < 0, Eq. ( 12.1 .8) will become positive
(or zero), and the integral will diverge. Such interactions, whose couplings
have negative-definite dimensionality, are called non-retzormaliZable ;" the-
[in perturbative statistical mechanics, non-renol`mali7ahlc interactions are called irrelevant, because
they become less important in the limit of low energies . Renormalirahle and super-renormalixable
interactions are cared marginal and relevant, respectively .

504
12 General Renarmalxzation Theory
Figure 12 .1 . Some two-loop graphs for Compton scattering. Here straight lines
are electrons ; wavy lines are photons. The momentum space integra] for diagram
(a) is convergent, while for (b) and (c) it is divergent, due to the subintegration
associated with the subgraphs surrounded by dotted lines .
cries with any non-renormalizable interactions are also known as non-
renormali7able . But this does not mean that such theories are hopeless ; we
shall see that these divergences may also be absorbed into a redefinition
of the parameters of the theory, but here we need an infinite number of
couplings.
It should be kept in mind that we have here calculated the degree of
divergence of Feynman diagrams arising on ly from regions of momentum,
space in which all internal four-momenta go to infinity together. Diver-
gences can also arise from regions in which only the four-momenta of
lines belonging to some subgraph go to infinity. For instance, in quantum
electrodynamics Eq. (12 . 1A Z) gives D ~ - 1 for Co mpton scatte ring (where
Ee - 2, ET = 2 ), and indeed graphs like Figure 12 .1(a) are convergent, but
a graph like Figure 12.1(b) or 1 2.1 (c) is logarithmically di vergent, because
these graphs contain subgraphs (indicated by dotted boxes) with D ~ 0.
We can think of the divergence of these graphs as being due to an anoma-
lously bad asymptotic behavior that occurs when the eight components of
the two independent internal four-momenta of these graphs go to infinity
on a particular four-dimensional subspace, namely, that subspace in which
the only four-momentum actually going to infin ity is the one circulating
in the loops that are inserted in the internal lines or at an electron-photon
vertex.
,It has been shown that the requirement for the actual convergence of

12.2 Cancellation of Divergences
505
the amplitude corresponding to any graph is that power-counting should
give D < 0 not only for the complete multiple integral for the whole
amplitude, but also for any subintegration defined by holding any one
or more linear combinations of the loop momenta fixed . (The graphs
shown in Figures 12. 1(b) and 12.1(c) fail this test because D
0 for the
subintegrations in which only the momenta for the loops within the dotted
squares are integrated.) We will not repeat the rather long proof here,
because it is well treated in earlier books,3 and in any case the method
of proof has little to do with how we actually do calculations . The next
section will describe how this requirement is fulfilled.
12.2 Cancellation of Divergences
Consider a Feynman diagram, or part of a Feynman diagram, with positive
superficial degree of divergence, D ~ 0. The part of the momentum space
integral where all internal momenta go to infinity together will then
diverge, like F'°V-1 dk. If we differentiate D + 1 times with respect to
any external momentum, we lower the net number of momentum factors
in the integrand b y D + 1,' and hence render this part Kf the momentum
space integral convergent. There may still be divergences arising from
subgraphs, like those in Figures 12.1 (b) and 12.1(c); for the moment we
will ignore this possibility, returning to it later in this section . Since
differentiation D + 1 times renders the integral finite, it follows that the
contribution of such a graph or subgraph can be written as a polynomial
of order D in external momenta, with divergent coefficients, plus a finite
remainder.
To see how this works without irrelevant complications, consider the
logarithmically divergent one-dirnensional integra l
j
dk
with D = I - I = 0. Differentiating once gives
dk 1
(k + q)2
q
so
_0~(q ) = -Ing+c .
' For instance, if an internal scalar field line carries a momentum k + p, where p is a linear
combination of external four-momenta and k is a fou r-momentum variable of integration . then the
derivative of the propagator [(k+p)3 + m 2]-1 with respect to p+` givc1 -2 (kj, +p") L(k+p)' + M,
which goes as k-3 rather than k-2 for k ---> oo .

506 12 General Renormalization Theory
The constant c is obviously divergent, but the rest of the integral is
perfectly finite . In exactly the same way, we can evaluate the D = 1
integral
k dk - a+bq+q In q
a k+ q
with divergent constants a and b.
Now, a polynomial term in external momenta is just what would be
produced by adding suitable terms to the Lagrangian : if a graph with Ef
external lines of type f has degree of divergence D ~ 0, then the ultraviolet
divergent polynomial is the same as would be produced by adding various
interactions i with nif = Ef fields of type f and d; :!9 D derivatives. If
there already are such interactions in the Lagrangian, then the ultraviolet
divergences simply add corrections to the coupling constants of these
interactions. Hence these infinities can be cancelled by including suitable
infinite terms in these coupling constants. All that we ever measure is
the sum of the bare coupling constant and the corresponding coefficient
from one of the divergent polynomials, so if we demand that the sum
equals the (presumably finite) measured value, then the bare coupling
must automatically contain an infinity that cancels the infinity from the
divergent integral over internal momenta, (One qualification : where the
divergence occurs in a graph or subgraph with just two external lines,
which appears as a radiative correction to a particle propagator, we must
demand not that some effective coupling constant equals its measured
value, but rather that the complete propagator has a pole at the same
position and with the same residue as for free particles.) In this way, all
infinities are absorbed into a redefinition of couplings constants, masses,
and fields.
For this renormalization program to work, it is essential that the La-
grangian include all interactions that correspond to the ultraviolet diver-
gent parts of Feynman amplitudes . (There are exceptions to this rule
in supersymmetric theories.4) The interactions in the Lagrangian are, of
course, limited by various symmetry principles, such as Lorentz invari-
ance, gauge invariance, etc., but these constrain the ultraviolet divergences
in the same way. (It takes some work to prove that non-Abelian gauge
symmetries constrain infinities in the same way that they constrain inter-
actions. This will be shown in Volume II . ) In the general case, there are
no other limitations on the ultraviolet divergences, so the Lagrangian must
include every possible term consistent with symmetry principles.
But there is an important class of theories with only a finite number
of interactions, where the renormalization program also works . These are
the so-called renormalizable theories, whose interactions all have K j L: 0.

12.2 Cancellation of Divergences
507
Eq. ( l x..1 .8) then gives
~~~ ~
Ef (5f + 1) ,
so divergent polynomials arise in only a limited number of Feynman
graphs or subgraphs : those with few enough external lines so that D ~ 0.
The contribution of such divergent polynomials is just the same as would
be produced by replacing the divergent graph or subgraph with a single
vertex arising from a term in the Lagrangian with Ef fields of type f and
0,1,. . . D derivatives. But, comparing with Eq . (12 .1 .9), we see that these
are precisely the same as the interactions that satisfy the rertormalizubality.
requirement ~j ~ 0, or in other words ,
f
In order for all infinities to cancel in a renormalizable theory, it is
usually necessary that all renormalizable interactions that are allowed by
symmetries must actually appear in the Lagrangian ." For instance, if there
is a scalar (or pseudoscalar) field 0 and fermion field yi with interactions
ip-WO (or V,'Ys~k* then we cannot exclude an interaction 04 ; otherwise there
would be no counterterm to cancel the logarithmic divergence arising from
fermion loops with four attached scalar or pseudoscalar lines .
Let's see in more detail how the cancellation of infinities works in the
simplest version of quantum electrodynamics . Eq. (12.1.11 ) shows that the
only graphs or subgraphs that could possibly yield divergent integrals are
the following
Ee = 2 ,Ey= 1
This is the electron-photon vertex T'~~)(p',P)- {The superscript ( indicates
that this includes only contributions from graphs with loops.) It has D = 0,
so its divergent part is momentum-independent . Lorentz invariance then
only allows this divergent constant to be proportional to ~., so
VA() + I'~`[f 1 (12.2.1 )
with L a logarithmically divergent constant, and r(f ~ finite . This does not
uniquely define the constant L, since we can always move a finite ter m
In xddi#ian, interactions and mass terms that are not allowcd by global symmetries may appear
in the Lagrangian, as long as they are super renormaliaable, that is, with d ; > 0. This is
because the presence of a superrenormalizable coupling lowers the degree of divergence, so
that the symmetry breaking does not affect those divergences that are cancelled by the strictly
rennrrnalizahle couplings with d~ = D . Note that it is the bare strictly rennrmalixabJc couplings
that would exhibit the symmetry ; renarmaliaed couplings that are defined in terms of mass-shell
matrix elements generally show the effect of symmetry breaking .

508
12 General Renormalization Theory
6L y,, from T~f) to Lys. To complete the definition, we may note that as
shown in Section 9.7, the mass-shell matrix element of I`A(p, p) and hence
of F(J)(p,P) between mass-shell Dirac spinors is proportional to the same
matrix element of ,41, so we may define L by the prescription tha t
for p2 + m~ = 0 .
This is the electron self-energy insertion V(p). It has D = 1, so its
divergent part is linear in the momentum carried by the incoming and
outgoing fermion. Lorentz invariance (including parity conservation) will
only allow it to be a function of ~, so we may write the loop contribution
as
11"(P) = A - {i j + rra}B + E(.f)( J ) s
(12 .23
where A and B are divergent constants, and F-W is finite. Again, this does
not uniquely define the constants A and B, because we can always shift
E[f} by a finite first-order polynomial in J. We will define A and B by
the prescription that
Z(f]
=0 for i ~ _ -m .
(12.2.4)
Actually, B is not a new divergent constant . As long as we use a
regularization procedure that respects current conservation, F. and E will
be related by the Ward identity (10,4.27)
pj,
and therefore
Op
Taking the matrix element of this equation between i~(p, or') and u(p, a)
and using Eqs. (12.2.2) and (12.2.4), we find
L= B ,
Ey -2, E~=0
(12.2.6)
This is the photon self-energy insertion II~, (q ). It has D -- 2, so its
divergent part is a second-order polynomial in q . Lorentz invariance only
allows I];, to take the form of a linear combination of q,,, and q,, qy with

12.2 Cancellation of Divergences
509
coefficients depending only on q 2, so the loop contributions take the form
= C11p + C2 1pv q2 + C3quqv + finite terms ,
where C 1 , C2, and C3 are divergent constants. As long as we use a
regularization technique that respects current conservation, we must hav e
q111141(q) == 0 .
The same must then be true for the divergent terms, so CIgV+(C2+C3)ql q,
must be finite for all q . It follows that Ci and C2 + C3 must be finite, and
can therefore be lumped into the finite part of II~;) (q ). Thus
where g(q2) is finite and C is the sole remaining divergence in To
pin down the definition of C, we may move any finite constant g(O) into
C, so that
7r(D) = 0 .
Ey = 4, E, = 0
(12.2.8 )
This is the amplitude for scattering of ligh t by light. It has D = 0,
so using Lorentz invariance and Bose statistics, it may be written (there
is no non-loop contribution )
M~vpfT - K (qjuu qpy + qjupqjg + npTqwp) + finite terms
with K a potentia lly divergent constant . However, current conservation
gives
and so K (qvqpd + qpqwa + q,tjUp) is finite. In order for this to be true
for q * 0, K must itself be finite. This is a nice example of the role of
symmetry principles in the renorrnalixatian program ; if K had turned out
to be infinite it could not be removed by renormalization of the coupling
constant for an interaction (A y Ag)3, because no such interaction is allowed
by gauge invariance, but K is finite because of current conservation
conditions that are imposed by gauge invariance.
E7 = l., E, = 0 and E, = 1, Fy = D, 1, 2
These have D = 3 and D = 5 , 3 and z, respectively, but Lorentz invariance
makes all such graphs vanish ,
E? = 3, Ee _ 0
This has D = 1, but vanishes because of charge-conjugation invariance .

51 0
12 Genera l Rsrtarrnalizatinn Theory
The reader will perhaps have noticed that the independent divergent
constants A, B, C are in one-to-one correspondence with the independent
parameters Z2, Z1, and 6m in the counterterm part (11 .1.9) of the La-
grangian for quantum electrodynamics . These counterterms make a direct
contribution Z;brn - (Z2 - i )(i # + m) to E" (P ). The requirement that
the position and residue of the one-particle pole be the same as in the
free-field propagator means we must choose Z2 and bm so that the total
V (P) satisfies Eq. (12.2.4), i.e.,
~~ 6M = -A, {12.2. 9 }
so that the complete electron self-energy insertion is just the finite function
W(P)
I(P ) = If.fl(F)
.
(12 .2.11 )
Also, Y2 makes a direct contribution to I",, equal to V2 - 1)Y,,. Using
Eq. (12 .2.6), we see that the full vertex is
This is not only finite, but satisfies the condition
a(P, a {) Fi{ (P?P)U(R, CT) = F1 (P, C') 7p U (As 6f ) a
(12.2 .12)
as can also be seen from Eqs. (10.6. Z 3) and (10.6.14). Finally, Y7 makes a
contribution -(Z3 - 1)(R2r~~jv -R,,gti, ) to II~,, (q)- In order that the photon
propagator should have a pole with the same residue as for free fields we
need the coefficient of q2 ~pu - q,, vq, in the total II,..,(q) to vanish, so
Z3 = I + C
and the photon propagator is then finite :
( 1 2.2. 1 4)
(12.2.15)
So far, we have only checked that the divergences, arising from the re-
gion of momentum space in which all internal momenta are large (and with
generic ratios), are polynomials in external momenta that are cancelled
by suitable counterterms. Such graphs are called superficially convergent .
Before we conclude that all ultraviolet divergences actually are removed
by renormalization, we need to consider the ultraviolet divergences aris-
ing in higher-order graphs when some subset of the momentum space
integration variables rather than all of them go to infinity . For instance,
in quantum electrodynamics the superficial divergences in subintegrations
come from subgraphs that are either photon self-energy parts II', or elec-
tron self-energy parts 1', or electron-electron-photon vertices I'4. The

1 2. 2 Cancellation of Divergences
( ZZ -1 )2
(~~-~) a
( Z3 - 1 )overlap
51 1
Figure 12.2. Some fourth-order graphs for the photon self-energy in quantum
electrodynamics that involve overlapping divergences. Lines carrying arrows are
electrons; wavy lines photons. The crosses mark the contribution of counterterms .
problem with such divergences is that they cannot be removed by dif-
ferentiation with respect to external momenta ; we are left with terms
where the derivatives act only on internal lines in the parts of the graph
which are not in the divergent subgraphs, and therefore do not reduce the
degree of divergence of these subgraphs . As mentioned in the previous
section, a graph or sum of graphs is actually convergent only if it and all
its subintegrations are superficially convergent , in the sense of counting
powers of momentum. But wherever such a divergent subgraph appears ,
it always comes accompanied with an infinite count e rterm. In clectrody-
namics, these are the terms in Eq. X11 .1 .9 : a term -(Z3 -1)( q2rj~" - q{jq u )
,V (q) ; a term Z26m, - V2 - 00 j + rte) for each V(p) ; and
for each I-I*
a term (Z2 --- 1)7,' for each I'P. Just as for the graph as a whole, these
counterterms cancel the infinities from the divergent subgraph s. 1
Unfortunately, there is a flaw in this simple argument - the possibility
of overlapping divergences .
That is, it is possible that two divergent
subgraphs may share an internal l ine, so that we cannot regard them as
i ndependent divergent integrals . In quantum electrodynamics this happens
only when two electron-electron-photon vertices overlap inside a photon
or an electron self-energy insertion, as shown in Figures 12.2 and 12. 3.
A complete treatment of renormalization that takes account of overlap-
t The sharing of a line in two self-energy insertions or in a self-energy insertion and a vertex
part would not leave enough external lines to attach such a subgraph to the rest of the
diagram . Nistoricaliy, the Ward identity (10.4.26) was used to by-pass the problem of overlapping
divergences in the electron self-energy, by expressing the electron self-energy in terms of the
vertex function, where overlapping divergences do not occur . This approach will not be followed
here, as it is unnecessary, and in any case does not solve the problem for the self-energy of the
photon or other neutral particles .

5 1 2
12 General Rertarmalizattorz t'heor'y
{2z -02
---~
(2 2 - ] )Z
Z3 -1 ) overlap
Figure 12 .3. Some fourth-order graphs for the electron self-energy in quantum
electrodynamics that involve overlapping divergences . Wavy lines are photons,
other lines are electrons . The crosses mark the contribution of counterterms .
ping divergences should include a prescription for eliminating superficial
ultraviolet divergences, not only in the overall integration but in all subin-
tegrations as well, together with a proof that this prescription is (at least
formally) implemented by renormalization of masses, fields, and coupling
constants. The theorem of Ref. 2 then ensures that all Green's functions
of renormalized fields are finite when expressed in terms of renormalized
masses and couplings. The first proof that the renormalization of fields,
couplings, and masses renders the whole integration and all its subinte-
grations superficially divergent was offered by 5alatn .' A more specific
prescription for eliminating ultra-violet divergences was given by Bogali-
ubov and Farasiuk,6 and corrected by Hepp, 7 and shown by them to be
equivalent to a renormalization of fields, masses, and coupling constants .
Finally, Zimmerman8 proved that this prescription does eliminate all su-
perficial divergences in the whole integration and all its subintegrations,
and used the theorem of Ref. 2 to conclude from this that the renormalized
Feynman momentum-space integrals are convergent .
Briefly, the `HPHZ' prescription for eliminating superficial divergences
requires that we consider all possible ways (called 'forests') of surrounding
a whole graph and/or its subgraphs with boxes that may be nested within
each other but do not overlap. (An example is given below.) For each
forest we define a subtraction term by replacing the integrand for any
subgraph of superficial divergence D within a box (starting with the
innermost boxes and working outwards) with the first D + 1 terms of its
Taylor series expansion in the momenta flowing into or out of that bvx, T
As described here, this prescription applies to unrenormalixable as well as renorrnalixable theories .
In renormalizable theories it implies that there is no subtraction unless the box contains one of
the limited number of graphs corresponding to renorrnalicabZe terms in the Lagrangian .

1 2. 2 Cancellation of Divergences
51 3
The subtracted Feynman amplitude is given by the original graph, minus
all these subtraction terms, including the subtraction term for a forest
consisting of a single box surrounding the whole graph.
It is fairly easy to see that the subtracted Feynman amplitude that is
calculated in this way is the same as would be obtained by replacing
all fields, coupling constants, and masses in the original Lagrangian by
their renormalized caunterparts. The difference between this procedure
and the sort of renormalization we carried out in Chapter 11 is that the
renormalized fields, coupling constants, and masses are defined in terms
of amplitudes at a unconventional renormalization point, where all four-
momenta vanish. (In this respect, the any-dimensional divergent integrals
discussed at the start of this section provide an elementary example of the
BPHZ method of separating divergent terms .) But there is nothing special
about this renormalization point ; Knce a Feynman amplitude is made
convergent by expressing it in terms of these unconventional renormalized
quantities, it can be rewritten in terms of conventionally renormalized
fields, couplings, and masses without introducing new infinities .
It is not necessary to use the BPHZ subtraction prescription in practice .
Replacing fields, masses, and couplings with their renormalized counter-
parts (defined using any convenient renormalization points) automatically
provides counterterms that cancel all infinities . Instead of proving that the
BPHZ subtraction prescription really does make all integrals converge,
we shall just look at one example that shows how renormalization works,
even in the presence of overlapping divergences .
Consider the fourth-order contribution to the photon self-energy inser-
',M} shown in Figure 12.2. (The forests here consist of the whole
tion W
integral over p and p', the subintegration over p alone, and the subinte-
gration over p' alone .) Including the corresponding counterterms for the
vertex parts and photon field renormalization, this has the valu e
2~r (P -T p')
, x T
r {S (pr) Yv S (Pr + q) x'P S (p + q) Yp S (F} Yp
e' d4p Tr ~y, S(p + q),ip S(p)
-2 V2 - 02 (27C )
-(Z3 - I)overiap (q 2qfu}' - qtjq v ) ,
( 1 2.2. 1 6)
where S(p) - j-i j + M] 1 Ip2 + M2 - a,_] ; ~ ZZ - 02 is the term in Z2 - 1
of second order in e ; and V3 - 1)Qveflap is a logarithmically divergent
constant of fourth order in e that cancels the terms in [II *jiu(q)]overlap of
second order in qf.. The factor 2 in the second term arises because there is
a renormalization counterterm Z2 - 1 for each of the two vertices in the
second-order photon self-energy. Note, however, that the first term here

514
12 General Renormalization Theory
can be thought of either as the insertion of a vertex correction given by
the p'-integral into a photon self-energy given by the p-integral, or as the
insertion of a vertex correction given by the p-integral into a photon self-
energy given by the p'-integral, but not as the insertion of two independent
vertex corrections, because there is only one photon propagator .
To see how to handle the infinities in Eq. ( 1 2 ,21 6), note that
ie2
RZ2 - 02 + ,R21 '~"P -
~2_g)4
Pr2
ic "r'~ S W) ,'ft S(p')71 ,
(12.2.17)
where R2 is a finite remainder. (Lorentz invariance tells us that the integral
on the right is proportional to y~,. The difference between this integral and
(Z2. - 021. equals the complete renormalized electron-electron-photon
vertex to second order in e at zero electron and photon momenta, and is
therefore finite.) This allows us to rewrite Eq. (1 2 .2 . 16) in the form
e~
[ri
*Pv (q)] overlap - -
(2 Tt g
d4p j d'p l
x _
' ~ i ~~Tr {S (P'} "~~ S(Pf + q) yP S(p + q) f' u S(p) ~p }
(P PT
12 i ie Tr f S(P' ) Yv S(Pf ) f'P S (P + q) 7'jj S ( P ) Yp I
P
P2
ie
(
S(P)Y'US(P)TP~
]
ie
-2 R2
1
(27C)4
-V3 - i }averlap(R2qk
cv - qu ql,). (12.2.8 )
First consider integration over p' alone. Each of the first two terms is
logarithmically divergent, but their difference is finite . The third term is
also logarithmically divergent (with a gauge-invariant regulator), but the
divergence in this term (unlike the first two terms) takes the form of a
second-order polynomial in q, with the remainder finite . This remaining
divergence is cancelled by the term -(Z3 - 1 )(q2 - ql`q") that cancels all
second-order terms in the expansion of I1* u(q}• So the p'-subintegration
gives a finite result. The symmetry of Eq. ( 1 2.2. 1 +5) shows that in exactly
the same way the p subintegration also gives a finite result. Generic
subintegrations over p and p' with ap + bp' held fixed (where a and
h are arbitrary non-zero constants) are manifestly convergent, and the
integration over p and p' together is made finite by the counterterm
-(Z3 - t)(q' -- q l `q'). Thus Eq . (12.2.18) and any of its subintegrations
satisfy the power-counting requirements for convergence, and therefore

12.2 Cancellation of Divergences 5 1 5
according to the theorem quoted in the previous section, the whole
expression actually converges .
** ~
In electrodynamics there is a natural definition of renormalized cou-
plings as well as renormalized masses and fields. This is not always the
case. For example, consider the theory of a single reai scalar field 4 (x)
with Lagrangian density
1
im W_
g
(12.2.19)
2
2
To one-loop order, the S-matrix for scalar-scalar scattering is given by
the Feynman rules as
( 1 2.2.20)
where
2 2
_42,E)4 F(q I q2 --3, q'q') = -i(27c)'g + i(27r)4gj (27r)4
x j A
[(qi + k)2 + M2 _ ie] [(q, - k )2 + M2 - je]
-ql
and qt, q2 and q' , q~ are the incoming and outgoing four-momenta. Com-
bining denominators and rotating the k°-integration contour as usual, this
is
F = g -- 1
672 ,/k3dk
die Ck2 + rra2 - x( 1
x)
} J
O
+ [k2 + M 2 _ tX(I - X)] -2 + [k2 + M2 _ UX(I
X)] -2 (12.2 .22)
where s, t, and u are the Mandelstam variables
}
2 ' )2'
( 1 2.2 . 23)
related by s + t + u = 4m2 ; also, x is the Feynman parameter introduced
in combining denominators. With an ultraviolet cutoff at k T A, this gives

516
12 General Renormalization Theory
the result (for A > m)
2
1
A2
~ g ~ 32~Z ~ dx
In
m2 - sx(I - x)
~ A2
. (12.2.24
+ n m2 - tx(j - x )
+ In m2 - ux(1 - x) ~ ~
We can define the renormalized coupling gx as the value of F at any point
s, t, u we like, provided we stay in the region where F is real. For instance,
suppose that in order t o maintain the symmetry among the scalars, we
choose to renorm alize at the off-mass-shell pointl pi = p~ =pig = p~ 2
~2, s - t = u = -4~.2J3. Defining the renorrrralized coupling gR as the
value of F at this point, we have
3g2
2) j
In ~ ~ 1 -- i ~~x In ~~( 1
3
- .X)
+
M
2
+
A it
The cutoff dependence then cancels in Eq . (12 .224) to order g~, leaving a
finite formula for F in terms of gR
F = gA _
9~~
~ ~ d. In
nay + 4x(1 ` x
)
~
2
/3
3 2 K J o n~ sx I X )
+ In ('"
2 + 4x(I - x)'U2/3
+ In ( in2 + 4x(1 - x),u'13
+
m2 - t
( l - x)
m2 - ux(1 - x)
(12.2.26)
Here y~ may be taken to be and real quantity greater than -3m2, in which
range gR is real. The explicit {u-dependence in Eq. (12.2,25) is, of course,
cancelled by the p-dependence of the renormalized coupling. This freedom
to change the renormalization prescription (which of course exists also in
electrodynamics and other realistic theories will be of great importance
to us when we come to the renormalization group method in Volume 11.
12.3 Is Renormalizability Necessary?
In the previous section we found a special class of theories having only
a finite number Kf terms in the Lagrangian, to which the renormaliza-
tian program is nevertheless applicable. These are theories in which all
~ Going back over the derivation of Eq. (12 .2 ,25), one may check that in this derivation we have
not used the conditions p~ = p~ = p'i 2 = pz2 = -m2, so F-q, (12.2.24) is valid whatever we take
for the external line masses.

1 2.3 Is Reraorrnalazabilixy Necessary?
51 7
interactions satisfy the renormalizability condition
f
where di and nif are the numbers of derivatives and fields of type f in
interactions of type i, and sf is (with some qualifications) the spin of
fields of type f. For renormalization to work in such theories, it is also
usually necessary that all renormalizable interactions that are allowed by
symmetry principles should actually appear in the Lagrangian .
It is important that there are only a limited number of such interaction
types.
Ki becomes negative if we have too many fields or derivatives,
or fields of too high spin. Barring special cancellations, there are no
renorinalizable interactions at all involving fields with s f ~ 1, because the
only possible term in the Lagrangian with Kj ~ 0 that involves such a field
along with two or more other fields would involve a single sf = 1 field
along with two scalars and no derivatives, which would not be Lorentz-
invariant. We shall see in volume II that general, massless, spin one gauge
fields in a suitable gauge effectively have s f = 0, like the photon. Also,
in Volume II we shall see that even massive gauge fields may effectively
have sf = 0, depending on where their mass comes from. Leaving aside
these special cases, Table 12.2 gives a list of all renormalizable terms in
the Lagrangian density that are allowed by Lorentz invariance and gauge
invariance involving scalars (s = 0), photons (s = 0), and spin 21 fermions
{5 _ 21}•
We see that the requirement of renormalizability puts severe restrictions
on the variety of physical theories that we may consider. Such restrictions
provide a valuable key to the structure of physical theories. For instance,
Lorentz and gauge invariance by themselves would allow the introduc-
tion of a `Pauli' term proportional to in the Lagrangian
of quantum electrodynamics, which would make the magnetic moment
of the electron an adjustable parameter, but we exclude such terms be-
cause they are not renarmalizable . The successful predictions of quantum
electrodynamics, such as the calculation of the magnetic moment of the
electron outlined in Section 11 .3, may be regarded as validations of the
principle of renormalizabilit .Thy same applies to the standard model of
weak, electromagnetic, and strong interactions, to be discussed in Volume
II ; there are and number of terms that might be added to this theory,
such as four-fermion interactions among quarks and leptons, that would
invalidate all the predictions of the standard model, and are excluded only
because they are non-renormalizahle .
Must we believe that the Lagrangian is restricted to contain only
renormalizable interactions? As we saw in the previous section, if we
include in the Lagrangian all of the infinite number of interactions allowed

5 18
1 2 General Renormalization Theory
Table 12.2. Allowed renormalizable terms in a Lagrangian density involving
scalars 0, Dirac fields p,and photon fields AP. Here nr f and di are the number
of fields of type f and the number of derivatives in an interaction of type i, and
dj is the dimensionality of the associated coefficient ,
Scalars
1
3
4
1
0
0
0
0
by symmetries, then there will be a counterterm available to cancel every
ultraviolet divergence. In this sense, as said earlier, non-renormalizable
theories are just as renormalizable as renormalzzable theories, as long as
we include all possible terms in the Lagrangian .
In recent years it has become increasingly apparent that renormaliz-
ability is not a fundamental physical requirement, and that in fact any
realistic quantum field theory will contain non-renormalizable as well as
renormalizable terms. This change in point of view can be traced in part
to the continued failure to find a renormalizable theory of gravitation . In
the general class of metric theories of gravitation governed by Einstein's
principle of equivalence there are no renormalizable interactions at all -
generally covariant interactions must be constructed from the curvature
tensor and its generally covariant derivatives, and hence, even in a `gauge '
nif
Photons
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
i
Spin 2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
L
2
di
Ki
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
3
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
o2
01100-11 0
03
04
00POAlt
o2 A u~ ~~
OVY
Fj! VFla
'f' Y`
ollo,MW
q)r"Amv

1 2 .3 Is Renarmal azQhility Necessary?
51 9
where the graviton propagator goes as k-2, these interactions involve too
many derivatives of the metric for renorrnaliz bility. In particular, we can
easily see that genera] relativity is non-renormalizable from the fact that
its coupling constant 87~Gv = (2.43 x 1Q1 8 GeV)-2 has negative dimen-
sionality. Even if nothing else did, the cancellation of divergences due to
virtual gravitons would require that the Lagrangian contain all interac-
tions allowed by symmetries -not only interactions involving gravitons,
but involving any particles .
But if renormalizability is not a fundamental physical principle, then
how do we explain the success of renormalizable theories like quantum
electrodynamics and the standard model? The answer can
be seen by
simple dimensional analysis. We have already noted that the coupling
constant of an interaction of type i has dimensionalit y
when Kd is the index (12.1 .9). Non-renormalizable interactions are just
those whose coupling constants have the dimensionality of negative powers
of mass. Now, it is not unreasonable to guess from (1 2.3 . 1) that the
coupling constants not only have dimensionalities governed by K;, but are
roughly of orde r
where M is some common mass. (This is found to be actually the
case in the effective field theories discussed below and in more detail in
Volume II.) I n calculating physical processes at a characteristic momentum
scale k M, the inclusion of a non-renormalizable interaction of type
i with Ki < 0 will introduce a factor gj NIA,, which on dimensional
grounds must be accompan ied by a factor k-A!, and so the e ffect of
such an interaction is suppressed* for k < Nf by a factor (k/!I{I}-°j < 1 .
(This argument will be made more carefully using the method of the
renormalization group in Volume II.) The success of the renormalizable
theories of electroweak and strong energies shows only that is very
much larger than the ene rgy scale at which these theories have been
tested .
'ft is essential at this point to assume that the ultraviolet divergences have been removed
by rcnnrmaliaalion, so that there are no factors of an ultraviolet cutoff A to miss up our
dimensional analysis . Otherwise, dimensional analysis tells us that for A -+ oc, each additional
non-renormalizable coupling constant factor g, with Ai < 0 would be accompanied with a gxowing
factor A- •'~ . This dimensional argument led Heisenberg, very early to c l assify interactions
according to the dimensionality of their coupling canstants, and to suggest . .. that new effects
might arise at energies of order gas for instance at the energy G f 1 ` 2 .. 300 GeV, where GF.
is the four-fermion coupling constant of the Fermi beta decay lheary . After the development of
renormaliration theory it was noted by Sokoto et al . 1 3 that the non-renarmaliza6le theories are
those whose coupling constants have negative dimensionality .

520
1 2 General R enorma liaatiorz Theory
For instance, the leading non-renormalizable corrections to the conven-
tional electrodynamics of electrons or moons would be those interactions
of dimension 5, which are suppressed by only one factor of 11M. There is
just one such interaction allowed by Lorentz, gauge, and CP invariance,
a Pauli term of Krder (ie/ 2M) i~ [yp, MW F
. According to Eqs . (10,6.24),
( 10.6. 17), and (1 0.6 .19), such a term would contribute an amount of order
4elM to the magnetic moment of the electron or muon . The calculated
value of the magnetic moment of the electron agrees with experiment
to within terms of order 10-"4eJ2rra,, so M must be greater than about
8x101°m, =4x107 GeV.
This limit may be weakened if other symmetries restrict the form
of the non-renormalizable interaction. For instance, the conventional
Lagrangian of quantum electrodynamics is invariant under a chiral trans-
formation V -+ y 5ya, except for a change Kf sign of the fermion mass term
-rrt~;ip . If we assume that the full Lagrangian is invariant under a formal
symmetry W --+ 7s 1P, M " -rra, then a Pauli term in the Lagranglan would
have to appear with an extra factor m f , so that its contribution to the
magnetic moment would be only of order 4em/ 2 . Because of the extra
factor of in, here it is the moan rather than the electron that provides the
most useful limit on M . The calculated value of the magnetic moment of
the moon agrees with experiment to within terms of order
10-$e/2m, so
M must be greater than about $ x I 01 nai, = 3 x 103 GeV. In any case, if
M is anywhere near as large as 10" GeV, then we are certainly justified
in neglecting any non-renormalizable interactions that might appear in
quantum electrodynamics .
These considerations help us to cope with some of the puzzles associated
with higher-derivative terms in the Lagrangian. For instance, in the
general theory of a real scalar field 0, we would expect to find terms in
the Lagrangian density of the form 0O110. Any one such term would make
a direct contribution to the scalar self-energy function II*(q') proportional
to (q')n. If we were to include this contribution to all orders, but ignore
all other effects of non-renormalizabie interactions, then the propagator
K'(q ') = 11 ( q' + m' - II*(q2)) would not have the simple pole in q2 at
negative q2 expected from the general arguments of Section
10.7, but n
such poles (some of which may coincide), generally at complex values of
q2. But if the non-renormalizable term 0 K n0 has a coefficient of order
-2(n-l), where M m, then the extra poles are at q2 of order M2, where
it is illegitimate to ignore the infinite number of other non-renormalizable
interactions that must also appear in the Lagrangian . Thus the appearance
of higher-derivative terms in a general non-renormalizable Lagrangian is
not in conflict with the general principles underlying quantum field theory
that were used in Section 1 0.7. But by the same token, we also cannot
use higher-derivative terms to avoid ultraviolet divergences altogether, as

1 2.3 Is Reraormaliaabitity Necessary?
52 1
has been repeatedly proposed . A term f-2(',-1)00n0 in the Lagrangian
density provides a cutoff at momenta q2 M2, but at these momenta we
cannot ignore all the other non-renarmalizable interactions that must be
present.
Although highly suppressed, non-renormalizable interactions may be
detectable if they have effects that would otherwise be forbidden . For
instance, we will see in section 12.5 that the symmetries of charge-con-
jugation and space-inve rsion invariance are an automatic consequence of
the structure of the electromagnetic interactions that is imposed by gauge
invariance, Lorentz invariance, and renormalizabi lity, but we can easily
imagine non-renormalizable terms that would violate these symmetries,
such as an electron electric dipole moment term
FpTs t7p, Yw] tpF~'', or
the Fermi xnteractivn Ys~~VTpY,uW. It is widely believed today that the
conservation of baryon and lepton number is violated by very small effects
of highly suppressed non-renormalizable interactions. Another example
of a detectable non-renormalizable interac tion is provided by gravitation .
As mentioned before, gravitons have no renarmalizable interactions at all .
But, of course, we detect gravi tation, because it has the special property
that the gravitational fields of all the particles in a macroscopic body add
up coherently.
Although non-renormalizable theories involve an infinite number of
free parameters, they retain considerable predictive power : 12 they allow
us to calculate the non-analytic parts of Feynman amplitudes, like the In q
and q In q terms in the one-dimensional examples at the beginn ing of the
previous section. Such calculations just reproduce the results required by
the axiom of S-matrix theory, that the S-matrix has Knly those singularities
required by unitarity.
Paradoxically, it is just in the case where symmetry principles forbid
renormalizable interactions that non- renarrnalizable quantum field theo-
ries prove the most useful. In such cases we can derive a useful perturba-
tion theory by expanding in powers of k1M . This has been worked out
in detail for the theory of low-energy pions,12,13 to be discussed in detail
in volume II, and the theory of low-energy gravitons.14 For a simpler
example, consider the theory of a real scalar field, satisfying the principle
of invariance under the field translation
OW -f
(x} + e
with iF an arbitrary constant. This symmetry forbids and renormalizable
interactions or scalar mass, but it allows an infinite number of non-
renQt-amalizable derivative interactions

522 12 General Renormalization Theory
M-4, and ` . . .' denotes terms with more derivatives or fields .
where g ~
(For simplicity, it is assumed here that the theory also has a symmetry
under the reflection According to the above dimensional anal-
ysis, the graph for a general reaction in which all energies and momenta
are of order k < M is suppressed by a factor (k/ 1) ' , where
i
i
with rt; and di the numbers of scalar fields and derivatives in an interaction
of type i, and Vj the number of vertices for these interactions in our graph .
For k
1, the dominant contributions to any process are those with the
smallest value of v. The formula for v can be put in a more useful form
by using the familiar topological identities for a connected graph :
Yt = I - L. + 1 , Vjnj = 21 + E ,
where 1, E, and L are the numbers of internal lines, external lines, and
loops in our graph. Combining these relations gives
Now, the field translation symmetry requires that every field must be
accompanied with at least one derivative, so the quantity d i -ray as well
as L is non-negative for all interactions. Thus for a given process (that
is, a fixed Kumber E of external lines) the dominant terms will be those
constructed solely from tree graphs (i.e., L = 0), and interactions with
the minimum number di = nj of derivatives. That is, in leading, order we
can take the Lagrangian density to depend only on . rst derivatives of the
field. Higher-order corrections may involve loops and/or interactions with
more derivatives on some fields . But to any given order v in k f FYI, we need
only consider a finite number of graphs, those with L < (4 - 2E + v) /4,
and only a finite number of interaction types .
For instance, scalar scalar scattering is given in leading order by the
one-vertex tree graph calculated using the interaction --g( O-yOa'10)2 in first
order. According to our formula for v, the leading correction, suppressed
at low energy by a factor (k IM)2, arises from another single-vertex tree
graph, produced by an interaction with two additional derivatives of the
farm** Op c?,0 0P6 406~O . The next corrections, suppressed at low en-
ergy by two further factors of k f 11rI, arise both from the one-loop diagram
of Figure 12.4 (including permutations of external lines), calculated us-
ing only the interaction -g (Op Ocpo)2, and also from tree graphs with
In accordance with the remarks of Section 7.7, we are excluding interactions involving 00,
because the field equation for 0 can be used to express such interactions in terms of the oihers .

12.3 Is R enorrraalizabil i ty Necessary "
523
\ { F
\ J
1 ! ti
f ~` xf
r ~
r
ti
{ t
i
Figure 12.4. One-l oop diagram for scalar-scalar scat tering in the theory with
derivative quad rili-near interactions .
a single vertex arising from a quartic interaction with eight derivatives,
whose couplings contain infinite parts that cancel the ultraviolet diver-
gence from the loop graph.t The loop graph also yields finite terms in
the scattering amplitude proportional to terms like S4 In s + t4 In t + U4 In u,
s2t2 It, u + t2u2 In s + U' S2 In t, etc., with calculable coefficients proportional
to g 2. These finite terms simply represent the correction to the lowest-order
scattering amplitude needed to ensure the unitarity of the S-matrix, but
perturbative quantum field theory is by far the easiest way of calculating
them .
Although non-renorrnalizable theories can provide useful expansions in
powers of energy, they inevitably lose all predictive power at energies of
the order of the common mass scale M that characterizes the various
couplings. If eve were to take these expansions literally, the results for
S-matrix elements would violate unitarity bounds for E
There
seem to be just two possibilities about what happens at such energies .
One is that the growing strength of the effects of the non-renormalizable
couplings somehow saturates, avoiding any conflict with unitarity .15 The
other is that new physics of some sort enters at the scale M . In this case,
the non-renormalizable theories that describe nature at energies E < Al
are just e ffective ,field theories rather than truly fundamental theories .
Probably the earliest example of an effective field theory was derived
in the 1930s by Euler et al.,16 as a theory of low-energy photon-photon
interactions . {fee Section ] .3. ) In effect, they calculated the contribution
to photon-photon scattering of Feynman diagrams such as Figure 12 .5,
and found that at energies much less than in, the scattering of light by
light was the same as would be calculated with an effective Lagrangia n
2.2
2 4 [(E
2 - B2)2 + 7(E ~ B)2
e
eE eB
+ higher orders in 2 &
me
me
These are the only ultraviolet divergences encountered in one-loop graphs if we ase dimensional
regularization. For other methods of regularization there are also qUiICtYC and quadratic di-
vergences, which are cancelled by counterterms in the four-scalar interac tions with four or six
d erivatives .

524
1 2 General Rennrmal azation Theory
Figure 12.5. Diagram for photon-photon scattering, whose effect at low energy
can be calculated from the effective Lagrangian of Euler et a1." Straight lines are
electrons ; wavy lines are photons.
Euler et u!. used this effective La rangian only in the tree approximation,
to calculate the leading terms in photon interaction matrix elements . It was
not until much liter that such Lagrangians, though non-renormalizable,
were used beyond the tree appraximation.12,1 7
In modern jargon, we say that in deriving this Lagrangian the electron
is `integrated out', because in the one-loop approximation we hav e
exp i
,.,(E, B)d4X)
11 dy,(x) exp (i
YQEn (We, A)d x
A more general procedure is simply to write down the most general non-
renormalizable effective Lagrangian, use it to calculate various amplitudes
as an expansion in energies and momenta, and then choose the constants
in the effective Lagrangian by matching the results it gives for these
amplitudes to those derived from the underlying theory .
We will encounter effective field theories again, especially in considering
broken symmetries in Volume II. As we shall see, effective field theories
are useful even where they cannot be derived from an underlying theory,
either because the theory is unknown, or because its interactions are
too strong to allow the use of perturbation theory. Indeed, even if we
knew nothing about the properties of charged particles, the scattering
of photons at sufficiently low energy would have to be described by an
effective Lagrangian consisting of the terms ( E2 -B 2)2 and (E • B)2, because
these are the unique quartic Lorentz- and gauge-invariant terms with no
derivatives acting on E and B . Terms with such derivatives would be
suppressed at low photon energies E by additional factors of E/M, wher e
f is some typical mass of the charged particles that are being integrated
out. We can go further : we shall see that effective field theories are
useful even where the light particles they describe are not present in the
underlying theory at all, but composites of the heavy particles that are

1 2.4 The Floating Cutoff
525
integrated out . The underlying theory might not even be a field theory at
all - the problem of incorporating gravitation has led many t heorists to
believe that, in fact, it is a string theory. But wherever an effective field
theory comes from, it is inevitably a non-renormalizable theory.
12.4 The Floating Cutoff`
Before closing this chapter, it is worth commenting on the relation be-
tween conventional renarmalization theory and an approach pioneered
by Wilson? In Wilson's method one imposes a 'floating' finite ultraviolet
cut-off (either sharp or smooth) at momenta with components of order A,
and instead of taking A -y ao, one requires that the bare constants of the
theory (those appearing in the Lagrangian) depend on A in such a way
that all observable quantities are 11-independent .
It is convenient to work with dimensionless parameters . If a bare
coupling or mass parameter gt(11) has dimensionality [mays]°j, we define
the corresponding dimensionless parameter j by
Ordinary dimensional analysis tells us that the value of Sd at one value
At of the cutoff can be expressed as a function of the values of the
j at
another value A of the cutoff, and the dimensionless ratio A' /11 :
,~#j(A') = Fj (§(A), A/A)
.
(12.4.2)
Na dimensional parameters other than A' and A can appear in F, because
no ultraviolet or infrared divergences can enter here ; the difference be-
tween the constants at A and at A' arises from diagrams whose internal
lines are restricted to have momenta between A and A'. Differentiating
Eq. (12.4.2) with respect to A' and then setting A' equal to A yields a
differential equation for
~~
i(A) = fliff(A)) 7 (12.4.3 )
where flr(g) = [a/az F& , z)],=j . The functions fl;() may be calculated
for small couplings in perturbation theory. This is Wilson's version of the
`renormalization group' equation, which will be discussed in somewhat
different terms in Volume H .
The Lagrangian for and finite value of the cutoff defines an effective
field theory, in which instead of (or in addition to) integrating out `heavy '
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

526
12 General Renormalization Theory
particles like the electron in the work of Euler et al., one integrates out all
particles with momenta greater than A. Even if one starts with a theory
with a finite number of coupling parameters lr~' at some cutoff A 0, at any
other value of the cutoff the differential equation (12 .4,3) will generally
yield non-zero values for all couplings allowed by symmetry principle .*'
We now distinguish between the renormalizable and unrenormalizable
couplings, labelled
,, and respectively, with a running over the finite
number N of couplings (including masses) for which Ka >_ 0, and n running
over the infinite number of couplings with dimensionalities A, < 0. We
want to show that if the couplings 1a(Ao) and
,(Ao) at some initial
cutoff'value A0 lie on a generic N-dimensional initial surface Yo, then
(with some qualifications) for A < A0 they will approach a fixed surface
51" that is independent of both A0 and the initial surface .' This fixed
surface is stable, in the sense that from and point on the surface, the
trajectory generated by Eq. (12 .4.3) stays on the surface. Such a stable
surface defines a finite-parameter set of theories whose physical content is
cutoff-independent, which as argued in the previous section, is the essential
property of renormalizable theories . Furthermore, this construction shows
that a generic theory defined with cutoff A0 will look for A A0 like a
renormalizable theary.4
To prove these results, consider and small perturbation &'0i(A) in the
values of the 1j{ }satisfying Eq. (12.4.3). It will satisfy the differentia l
equation
where
a fliff)
Mjj0v) =_ awj
(12 .4.4)
( 12.4.5
This equation couples the re nortnalizable and unrenormalizable couplings,
making it difficult to see the difference in their behavior . To decouple them ,
we introduce the linear combinations
(12.4.6)
"The only known exceptions lcti this rule are in theories based au supeFSymmetry ¢
t This theorem is due to Palchinski.19 What follows here is a shortened and less rigorous version .
In Polchinski's proof, the initial surface is taken to he that with all non-renormalicablc couplings
vanishing. As we shall we here, the couplings approach the same fixed surface for generic initial
surfaces .)
Of course some theories have symmetries and a field content that do not allow any renormalizable
interactions. This is the case for theories containing only fermion fields, or only the gravitational
field. Such theories lor A ~ R0 look like free-field theories.

12.4 The Floating Cutqff
52 7
where S° are the values of the renormalizable couplings at cutoff 11O,
which we shall use as coordinates for the initial surface, and IV, are the
values of the non-renormalizable couplings at cutoff A derived from the
differential equation (12.4.3), with initial value for Ao at the point on
the initial surface with coordinates rya. To calculate the derivative of ~„
with respect to A, we note that the derivatives 04~10-S satisfy the same
differential equation (12.4.4) as the It is an elementary exercise then
to show that
where
d
~,: NMI ~m
Wn JG
- i
0170
ab
01§a (aoo MhM -
(12 .4.7 )
(12 .4.8 )
Now we must estimate the elements of
,,,. For a free-field theory no
cutoff is needed, so for very small coupling all bare parameters gi(A)
become A-independent. Hence for small couplings the dimensionless
parameters ~#z simply scale as A-A~, and the matrix Mj.j is given by
It follows that the matrix 1V., is given approximately by --d ,6 ,.... The
defining characteristic of the non-renormalizable couplings is that K, < 0,
so Eq. (12.4.7) tells us that, at least for couplings in some finite range,
where Nnm is positive-definite, the
, decay for A < AO like positive
powers of A /11o . In this limit, then, the perturbations are related by
ab u
b
~'`•~~ ~~
(12.4.10)
I n particular, if we make a small change in the initial surface Yo and/or
the starting point on that surface and/or the initial cutoff AO, such that the
perturbations M%,, in the renormalizable couplings vanish at some cutoff
A < A0, then the perturbations in all the other couplings at cutoff
A also vanish . Thus the non-renormalizable couplings n (11 ) for A < 11o
can depend only on the renormalizable couplings
Wa{ A}, not separately
on the initial surface or the starting point on that surface or the initial
cutoff A0 .
At cutoff A
AO all the couplings therefore approach an
N-dimensional surface Y, with coordinates a(A), which is independent
of both the initial surface and of A0 . Note that the non-renormalizable
couplings S„ are not generally small on Y ; the important point is that
they become functions of the renormalizable couplings. Changes in A
with A remaining much less than A O will change the couplings, but the
couplings will remain close to Y (at least as long as the couplings do not

528
1 2 General Renormalizattan Theory
become so large that 21T,,, is no longer a positive-definite matrix). Hence
Y is a stable surface, as was to b e proved.
We have seen that all physical quantities may be expressed in terms of
A and the '%,,(A), and are A-inde pendent. This is true in part icular of
the N conventional re-normalized couplings and masses, like e and m, in
quantum electrodynamics. But we can then invert this relation, and express
the §n(A) in terms of the conventional parameters and A.
In this way
we can justify the usual renormalization program : all physical quantities
are expressed in acutoff-independent way in terms of the conventional
renormalized couplings and masses.
The Wilson approach has some advantages in practice. One does not
have to worry about subintegrations and overlapping divergences
; the
momentum cutoff applies to all internal lines . Also, some of the non-
renormalization theorems of supersymmetry theory, which tell us that
certain couplings are not affected by radiative corrections, work only for
the cutoff-dependent bare couplings. 20
On the other hand , there are disadvantages to the Wilson approach.
One must give up the special simplicities of work ing with renormalizable
theories like guantum, electrodynamics ; once one starts integrating out
particle s with momenta above some scale A, the resulting effective field
theory will contain all Lorentz- and gauge-invariant interactions , with
A-dependent couplings .
(Nevertheless, in physical processes at energies
E < A, the dominant couplings will still be the renormalizable ones.)
Also, the cutoff generally des troys man ifest gauge invariance, and either
manifest Lorentz invariance or unitarity.
None of this is a problem
in condensed matter physics, the original context of Wilson's approach,
because no one would expect a realistic condensed matter theory to be
strictly xenormalizab ie, and there are no fundamental physical principles
that are necessarily violated by a cutoff. In fact, in crystals there is a
cutoff on phonon momenta, provided by the inverse lattice spacing.
At bottom, the difference between the conventional and the Wilson
approach is one of m athematical conve nience rather than Kf physical
interpretation. Indeed, conventional renormalization already provides a
sort of adj ustable cutoff ; w he n we express our answer in terms of coupling
constants that are defined as the values of physical amplitudes at some
momenta of order M (as for the scalar field theory di scussed in the previous
section), the cancellations that make integrals converge begin to operate
at virtual momenta of order
,u. Conversely, the A-dependent coupling
constants of the Wilson approach must ultimately b e expressed in terms
of observable masses and charges, and when this is done the results are,
of course, the same as those obtained by conventional means .

1 2.5 Accidental Symmetries
529
12.5
Accidental Symrnetries*
In Section 12.3 we saw that there are good reasons to adopt renormaliz-
a61e field theories as approximate descriptions of nature at sufficiently low
energy. It often happens that condition of renormalizability is so stringent
that the effective Lagrangian automatically obeys one or more symmetries,
which are not symmetries of the underlying theory, and may therefore
violated by the suppressed non-renarmalizable terms in the effective La-
grangian. Indeed, most of the experimentally discovered symmetries of
elementary particle physics are `accidental symmetries' of this sort .
A classic example is provided by the inversions and flavor conservation
in the electrodynamics of charged leptons. The most general renormal-
izable and gauge- and Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian density for photons
and fields tpi of spin ~ and charge -e takes the form
R f ~~
E 1
~t i
~.f (12 . 5 .1)
- ~
ij~ ,~IW x,~ -
where i, j are summed over the three lepton flavors (e, p, and T), ~iL and
~i,R are the left- and right-handed parts of the field Wj, defined by
V !-a =
2 G + YSh)i , 1PRi =
120 - Y5 )Vi
n
(12 .5 .2)
and ZL, ZR, and M are numerical matrices. We are not assuming anything
about lepton flavor conservation, so the matrices ZLij, ZRij and Mij need
not be diagonal. Also we are not assuming anything about invariance
under P, C, or T invariance, so there is no necessary relation between ZL
and ZR, or between M and Mt . The only constraints on these matrices
come from the reality of the Lagrangian density, which requires that
ZLjj and ZRj} are Hermitian, and from the canonical anticommutation
relations, which require that ZL;j and ZRj are positive-definite .
Now suppose we replace the lepton fields yap,, ~Rwith new fields VL',
~~ defined by
TL = SLWi j tPR = SRTx a (12.5.3 )
where SL,R are non-singular matrices that can be chosen a s we like. The
Lagrangian density when expressed in terms of these new fields then takes
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be om itted in
a first reading.

530
1 2 General Renormalization weary
the same form as in Eq . (12.5 .1), but with new matrices
We can choose SL and SR so that Z~, = Z~ = 1 . (Take ~'~,,~ _ ~TL,RD~,, R >
where UL,Rare the unitary matrices that diagonalize the positive-definite
Hermitian matrices ZL R, and the DLY are the diagonal matrices whose
elements are the inverse square roots of the eigenvalues of ZL,R .)
Now make another transformation, to lepton fields w' defined b y
(12.5.5 )
The Lagrangian density again takes the same form when expressed in
terms of these new fields, with new matrice s
zL = S~f S~ ,
Z~ = ~ s~ , f" = S~ ~ . {12. 5.6}
This time we take S{. R unitary, so that again ZL' = Z~ - 1. We choose
these unitary matrices so that M" is real and diagonal.
(By the polar
decomposition principle, M' like any square matrix may be put in the
form
' = VH, where V is unitary and H is Hermitian. Take S~, = S~ Vt
and choose SR'
as the unitary matrix that diagonalizes H .) Dropping
primes, the Lagrangian density now takes the form
iz3Fvj1" -I:
iV~LiVRf
N-RiWLr
i i
( I 2 .J . 7 )
where rtai are real numbers, the eigenvalues of the Hermitian matrix H .
Finally, this can be put in the more familiar form
r
i
With the Lagrangian taking this form, it is now apparent that any renor-
maliza6le Lagrangian for lepton electrodynamics automatically conserves
P, C, and T, as well as the numbers of leptons (minus the numbers of
antileptons) of each flavor : electron, muon, and tauon .*` In particular,
despite the appearance of Eq. (12 .5.1), this theory does not allow such
processes as it -} e +y. The reader may perhaps worry whether it is correct
to identify the lepton fields as the ipr (previously called W") appearing in
Eq, (12.5,8 ), which obviously conserves lepton flavor, rather than the
V)j
appearing in Eq . (12.5 . 1), which seems to allow processes like p --* e + y .
This was first shown by Feinberg, Kabir, and myself 21 F'einberg2= had earlier noted that weak
interaction effects in a theory with only one neutrino species would give rise to an observable
rate for the pr[rcecs p - e + y, a difficulty that was only resolved by the discovery of a second
neulrint) species .

Problems
53 1
Such worries may be put aside ; as stressed in Section 10 . 3, there is no one
field that can be identified as the field of the electron or muon. In fact,
although Eq. (12 .5 .1) yields a nnn-vanishing matrix element for radiative
decay of lepton 1 into lepton 2 off the lepton mass shell, by taking the
lepton momenta on the mass shell we find a vanishing S-matrix for all
such processes even when calculated using Eq . (12.5 .1) .
It was essential in deriving these results that the same electric charge
appeared in Eq. (12 .5.1) for both the left- and right-handed parts of the
lepton fields or, in other words, that both left- and right-handed parts of
the lepton fields transform in the same way under electromagnetic gauge
transformations. As we shall see in Volume II, for similar reasons the
modern renormalizable theory of strong interactions known as quantum
chromodynamics automatically conserves C, and (aside from certain non-
perturbative effects) P and T, as well as the numbers of quarks (minus
the numbers of antiquarks) of each quark flavor. We shall also see in
Volume 11 that the simplest version of the renormalizable standard model
of weak and electromagnetic interactions automatically conserves lepton
flavor (though not C and P) for reasons similar to those described here for
electrodynamics. It remains an open possibility that non-renormalizable
interactions arising from higher mass scales may violate any of these
conservation iaws .
Problems
1 . List all the renorrnalizable (or superrenorrnalizable) Lorentz-
invariant terms in the Lagrangian of a single scalar field for space-
time dimensionalities 2, 3, and 6.
2. Show how t he ove rl apping divergence in the electron self-energy is
cance lled in quantum electrodynamics .
3 . C onsider the theory of a scalar field 0 and spinor field tp, with
interaction Ham iltonian g V)yr . Write the one-loop part of the scalar
self-energy function II' (q) as a divergent polynomial in p + , plus an
explicit convergent integral .
4. Suppose that the quantum electrodynamics of electrons and photon s
is actually an effective field theory, derived by integrating out un -
known particles of mass M > m, Assume gauge invariance and
Lorentz invariance, but not invariance under C, P, or T. What are
the non-renormalizable terms in the Lagrangian of leading order i n
11M ? Of next to leading order''

532
1 2 General Renormalizarion Theory
References
1. F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 75, 4$6, 1736 (1949). A historical perspective is
provided by Renormalizarion, ed. by L. M. Brow(Springer-Verlag,
New York,
1993). For a comprehensive modern treatment, see J.
Collins, Renormalization (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1984) .
2. S. Weinberg Pays. Rep. 118, 838 (1959). This proof relied only on
general asymptotic properties of the integrands of Feynman graph s
in Euclidean momentum space, obtained by dick rotation of all
integration contours. The proof was simplified through the use of
more detailed properties of the integrand, by Y. Hahn and W. Zim-
merman, Commun. Math. Pays. 1 0, 330 (1968), and then extended to
Minkowskjan momentum space by W. Zimmerman, Commun. Math.
Phys. 11, 1 (068).
3. J. D . Bjorken and S. D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Fields (McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1965) : Sections
10 and 19.11 .
4. See, e.g,, J. Ness and J. Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravity
(Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1 953), and original references
quoted therein.
5. A. Salam, Phys. Rev. 82, 217 ( X951 ) ; Phys. Rev. 84, 426 ( 1951 ).; R T.
Matthews and A . Salam, Phys . Rev. 94, 185 (1954).
6. N. N. Bogoliubov and D. Parasluk, Arta Math. 97, 227 (1957)
7. K. Hepp, Comm . Math. Ph i. 2, 301 ( 19 66), Hepp remarks that `it is
difficult to find two theorists whose understanding of the essential
steps of the proof [of Bogoliubov and Parasiuk] is isomorphic,' but
Hepp's paper is itself not easy to read .
S. W. Zimmerman, Comm. Math. Phys. 15, 2 08 ( 1969). Also see
Timmerman, in lectures on Elementary Particles and Quantum Field
Theory - Brandeis University Summer Institute in Theoretical Physics
(
.I.'F. Press, Cambridge, 1 970).
9. W. Heisenberg, Z. Physik 11 0, 251 (1938).
10. W. HeisenbergRef. 6 and Z. Physik 113, 61 ( 1939).
11. S. Takata, H. Umezawa, and S. Kamefuchi, Prog, Theor. Pays, 7, 327
(1952) .
12 . S. Weinberg, Physica 96A, 327 (1979)

R~f8re 1ZCBS
533
1 3. J. Gasser and H. I,eutwyler, Ann. Whys. (NY) 158, 142 (1984) ; Nucl.
Pays. B250, 465 (1985).
1 4. J. F. Donoghue, Pays. Rev. D 50, 3874 (1994).
15. One possible way that this can happen is through the phenomenon
of 'asymptotic safety' ; see S. Weinberg, in General Relativity - An
Einstein Cente nary Survey, ed. by S. Hawking and W. Israel
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979) : Section 16.3.
16. H. Euler and B. Kockel, Na turwiss . 23, 246 (1935) ; W. Heisenberg
and H. Euler, Z. Physik 98, 714 (1936) .
17. The Euier et al. effective Lagrangian has been used in one-loop
calculations by J. Halter, Phys. Lett. B 316,
1 55 (1993).
18. K. G. Wilson, Pays. Rev. B4, 3174, 3184 (1971) ; Rev. Mod. Phys. 47,
773 (1975) .
19. J. Polchinski, Nucl. Whys. B231, 269 (1984) ; lecture in Recent Direc-
tions in Particle Theory - Proceedings of the 1 992 TASI Conference,
ed. by J. Harvey and J. Polchinski (World Scientific, Singapore, 1993) :
p. 235 .
20. Novikov, A. Shifman, A. I. Vainshtein, and V I . Zakharov,
Nuc2. Pays. B229, 381 (1983) ; Y . A. Shifman and A. I . Vainshtein,
Nucl. Phys. B277, 456 (1986) ; and references quoted therein. See also
M. A. Shifman and A . I. Vainshtein, Nucl. Fhys. B359 , 571 (1991).
21 . G. Feinberg, P. Kabir, and S. Wein berg, Phys. R ev. Lett. 3, 527 ( 1959).
22. G. Feinberg, Whys. Rev . 11 0, 1482 (1958).

13
Infrared Effects
In the study of radiative corrections a special role is played by those
corrections due to "soft' photons : photons whose energy and momentum
are much less than the masses and energies characteristic of the process
in question. Not only are these corrections often so large that they must
be summed to all orders of perturbation theory ; they are so simple that
this summation is not difficult. The contribution of photons of infinitely
long wavelength takes the form of divergent integrals, but as we shall see
these `infrared divergences' all cancel. '
In most of this chapter we will deal with photons interacting with
charged particles of arbitrary type and spin, including particles like atomic
nuclei that have strong as well as electromagnetic interactions . But it is not
difficult to adapt the calculations presented here to the infrared effects of
other massless particles, such as the gluons of quantum chromodynamics .
In Section 13 .4 we shall explicitly consider very general theories of massless
particles, and will show the cancellation of infrared divergences on general
grounds .
After these generalities, we shall return to photons, and take up two
topics of practical impor#ance : the scattering of soft photons by charged
particles with arbitrary non-electromagnetic interactions and arbitrary
spin, and the treatment of heavy charged particles like atomic nuclei as a
source of an external electromagnetic field .
13. 1
Soft Photon Amplitudes
In this section we shall derive a universal formula that gives the amplitude
for emission of any number of very-low-energy photons in a process -i
involving any number of higher-energy charged particles of any types .
Let us start with the amplitude for emission of just one soft photon . If we
attach the sift photon line with outgoing momentum q and polarization
index it to an outgoing charged-particle line that leaves some connected
Feynman diagram for the process a -~ P, as in Figure 13.1(a), then we
534

13.1 Soft Photon Amplitudes
53 5
must multiply the S-matrix element for ac with an additional charged-
particle propagator carrying the momentum p + q that the charged particle
had before emitting the photon, together with the contribution of the new
charged-particle-photon vertex . For charged particles of spin zero, mass
m, and charge +e, these factors are
[i(27t )4 e(2pu + qu)] [ -i
i
which in the limit q --i~ 0 becomes
e pp
p
• q - ie
(13.1 .1 )
We are freely redefining the scale of the positive infinitesimal e, being
careful only to keep track of its sign.) This resul t is actually true for
charged particles of any spin. For instance, for a particle of spin ~ and
charge +e, we must replace the coefficient function u( p, u) for the outgoing
charged particle with
ii(p, a) [-Qn)4e.~jl~
[ _i
-iq + 4) + M
In the lim it q --* 0 the numerator of the propagator is given by a sum of
dyads :
aF
so we have a sum of equal-momentum matrix elements of YP, given by
and again the effect again is to multiply the matrix element for the
process g -+ P by the factor (13 .1 .1).
More generally, for any spin in
the limit q --* 0 the four-momentum p + q of the new internal charged
particle line approaches the mass shell, so the numerator of the propagator
approaches a sum of dyads of coefficient functions which convert the new
vertex matrix into a factor proportional to p ' and a unit matrix in helicity
indices, leading again to the factor (13 .1 .1) . Furthermore, as we saw in
Chapter 10, higher-order corrections do not affect either the residue of the
mass-shell poles in the propagators or the matrix element of the electric
current between sates of the same particle at equal momentum, so (B .1 .1)
gives the correct factor associated with the emission of a soft photon from
an outgoing charged-particle line to all orders of perturbation theory .
The same reasoning applies to a photon emitted from an incoming
charged-particle line of the process x except that after the incoming
particle emits a photon of four-momentum q the charged-particle line has

536
13 Infrared Effects
R ~
q
U
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.1 . Dominant graphs for the emission of soft photons in an arbitrary
process oc ---~ P . Straight lines are particles in the states cc and # (including possible
hard photons) ; wavy lines are soft photons.
four-momentum p - q, so in place of (13 . 1 . 1) we find a factor
epp
p • q - ie
( ~312)
The photon can also, of course, be emitted from an internal line of the
process a c -+ fl , but in this case there is no factor that goes as (p ' q)-1
for q --*
Q. The amplitude MIA) (the S-matrix without the energy-
momentum conservation delta function) for em itting a single soft photon
with four-momentum q and polarization index u in the process a --+ P is
therefore given in the lim it q -+ 0 by multiplying the matrix element
ifla
for x --* # with a sum of terms tike (13.1 .1 ) and (13 .1 .2), one for each
outgoing or incoming charged particle :
where p, and +e, are the four-momentum and charge of the nth particle
in the initial and final states, and q, is a sign factor with the value +1 for
particles in the final state fl and -1 for particles in the initial state a .
Before going on to consider the emission of more than one soft photon,
it is worth mentioning an important feature2 of the formula (13.1 .3). To

13.1 Soft Photon Amplitudes
537
calculate the amplitude for emission of a photon of definite helicity, we
must contract this expression with the corresponding photon polarization
vector e,,(q, ±). But as we saw in Section 5 .9, e,'(9, ±) is not a four-vector ;
under a Lorentz transformation A;',„ the polarization vector is transformed
into 11 Ve° (q, ±) plus a term propo rtional to q~`. In order for this last term
not to spoil Lorentz invariance, it is therefore necessary that ~a (q) should
vanish when contracted with q .. But for q --* 0, (13.1.3) gives
q MI (q) --+ M~. 1: qn en
(13.1 .4)
M
The coefficient of M#a on the right-hand side is just the total charge in the
final state minus the total charge in the initial state, so the condition that
it vanishes is just the condition that charge is conserved . Thus without any
independent assumptions about gauge invariance, we see that for particles
of spin one and mass zero, Lorentz invariance requires the conservation of
whatever coupling constant like electric charge governs the interaction Qf
these particles at low energies.
Incidentally, the amplitude for emitting a soft graviton of four-momen-
turn gand tensor indices u, v in a process a is given by a formula 3
analogous to (13.1 .3) :
fl~x
Pn * q
lln
where f, is the coupling constant of the soft graviton to particles of type
n. Lorentz invariance here requires that this vanish when contracted with
q,,. But
q.
~,~ (q) ~ M#a
qn.fq p~ , (13 .1 . 6)
so the sum f pv is conserved . However, the only linear combinat i on
of the four-momenta that can be conserved without forbidding all no n-
trivial scattering processes is the total four-momentum, so in order for
(13.1.6) to vanish, the fn must all be equal. (The common value of
all f,, may be identified as
8 n G N, where G_N is Newton's constant of
gravitation.) Thus Lorentz invariance requires the result that low-energy
massless particle s of spin two couple in the same way to all forms of energy
and momentum. This goes a long way toward showing that Einstein's
principle of equivalence is a necessary consequence of Lorentz invariance
as applied to massles s particles of spin two. Likewise, the amplitude for
emitting a soft massle ss particle of four-momentum q and spin j
3 in a
process a -> # is of the form

538
13 Inf~ared Efjectti
Lorentz invariance here requires that the sum ): g,p; pNO, . • . must be con-
served. But no such quantity can be conserved without prohibiting all
non-trivial scattering processes, so the g ,, must all vanish. Massless parti-
cles of spin j ~ 3 may exist, but they cannot have couplings that survive
in the limit of low energy, and in particular they cannot mediate inverse
square law forces.
Now let us consider the emission of two soft photons. The contribution
to the matrix element from a graph in which the two photons are emitted
from different external lines of the process a --+ ft is given by multiplying
the matrix element for ~ -~ fl by a product of factors like (1 3 .1 . 1) or
(13 .1 .2). Perhaps surprisingly, the same is true even if the two photons are
emitted from the same external line. For example, if photon
I is emitted
from an external line of charge +e and energy-momentum four-vector p
after photon 2 we get a factor
)7 e po,
q e pl'
n
p - qj - i~el ~P - W2 + ql) - iqEl
while if photon 2 is emitted after photon I the factor i s
p - q2 - iqel ~p - (q, + q2) - iqe l
(See Figure 13 .2. Again, n is +1 or -1 according to whether the charged-
particle line is outgoing or incoming .) These two factors add up to
q e P"' ~ e P11`
P - q i - iqe
p•g 2 - aq E
which is dust a product of the same factors encountered in the emission
of a single photnn.
More generally, in emitting an arbitrary number of photons from a
single external line we encounter a sum of the form
This identity may be proved by mathematical induction. We have already seen that it is true for
two photons . Suppose that it is true for N - I photons. For N photons we may then write the
Qum over permutations as a sum over the choice of the first photon to be emitted together with
a sum over permutations of the remaining photons :
[F' q I - ixj,-]-1 [p ' (RL + q~) -
[p ' (R j + q2 + . . . + R ,,w ) - ire]-1 + permutations
N
N
I - iqe] 11[p, q, - ine]-'
I: I:
~
S i r
h' ~4' -1 Syr
r=1 ct l
) - I a-1
N
a _
r
- [p • qy - i1e ]
q-, - ir e] fj
5= 1
as was to be proved .

13.E Virtual Soft Photons
539
n
q,
Figure 13 .2 . Graphs for the emission of two soft photons from the same outgoing
charged particle. Straight lines are hard particles ; wavy lines are soft photons.
+ permutation s
[p . q1 - iqeJ- i [p . q2 - 1~1_-]- 'tp
. q3 - ~~-EF
1
. .. ( 13 . 1 . 7 )
It follows then that the amplitude
11f1{~~ -~'~`` (q1
. . . q~) for emitting N
very soft photons with polarization indices µt, . µ,?v and four-momenta
qi, .
. . qN in the process oc is given in the limit q -i 0 by multiplying
the matrix element Mfl, for a by a product of factors like that in
(13.1 .3 ), one for each photon :
J%r
~
r }7
M
e, P~ii'
r=1 n
pn q, - iqn6 )
13,2 Vi rtual Soft P hotons
We shall now use the results of the previous section to calculate the
effect to all orders of radiative corrections involving virtual soft photons
exchanged among the charged particle lines of a process x -+ fl, as in
Figure 1 3.3. By a `soft' photon we mean one that carries momentum less
than A, where A is some convenient dividing point chosen low enough
to justify the approximations made in the previous section. We shall find
that these soft photons introduce infrared divergences, so as a stop-gap

540
13 Infrared Effects
a
Figure 13.3. A typical dominant graph for the radiative corrections due to virtual
soft photons to the S-matrix for the process a -i~ P. Straight lines are particles in
the states x and # (including possible hard photons) ; wavy lines are soft photons .
we will have to introduce also a lower bound ~ on the photon momenta.
It is important to recognize the difference between these two limits on the
soft photon momenta. The upper cutoff A just serves to define what we
mean by `soft' photons ; the A-dependence of the soft-photon radiative
corrections is cancelled by the A-dependence of the rest of the amplitude,
which is calculated including only virtual photons with momenta greater
than A. On the other hand, the lower cutoff ). must eventually be removed
by taking A, -4 0; as we shall see, the infrared divergences in this limit will
be cancelled by the effects of real soft photon emission .
For each virtual soft photon we must supply a propagator facto r
~~ ~
,,,g
{13 .2 . 1 }
(2n)4 q2 - iE
then multiply the amplitude (13 .1,8) with the product of these propagators,
contract photon polarization indices, and in tegrate over photon four-
momenta. In addition for N virtual photons we must divide by a factor
2N N!, because the sum over all places to which we may attach the
two ends of the soft photon lines includes spurious sums over the N!
permutations of the photon lines and over interchanges of the two ends
of these lines. The effect of radiative corrections involving N soft photons

13.E Virtual Soft Photons
541
is then to multiply the matrix element
1#,, for the process without such
radiative corrections by a facto r
1 1
E
eyL ,~~nq m Jnm
(13.2.2)
where
,I,,,,, = -On
•
PM) 1!~ lqls n W - i6] [pM - q - jq n-,] [-pm
, q - iqm 61 . (13.2.3 )
Note that we have changed the sign of p,, -q in the denominator in (13.2.3),
because if we define q as the momentum emitted by line n then -q Is the
momentum emitted by line m .
Summing over N, we conclude that the matrix element for a process
including radiative corrections due to any number of soft photons with
momenta 19~ ~ A is given by
2(27r)4 E e. em qn?lm Jnm
(1 3.14)
nm
where Ma is the amplitude including virtual photons only with momenta
greater In A.
The integral over q° in (13 .2.3) may be done by the method of residues .
The integrand is analytic in q0 except for four poles, at
q° =
19 1 - q° _ -1 91 + ie ,
where v,, P,/pt and likewise for vim. If particle n is outgoing and
particle m is incoming, then q, = +1, q. = -1, so by closing the qo
contour in the upper half-plane we avoid the contributions from the pokes
at q0 -- v, ' q - xqn6 or q° = v, • q + in,, e. Similarly, if n is incoming and m is
outgoing we can avoid these two poles by closing the contour in the tower
half-plane. In these two cases it is only one of the poles at q" = ±(j91- ;E")
that contributes, and we find a purely real integral :
d3q
brim = - 7r Pry ' Pm
~ ~.
A
L141sA 1 9 1 (En - q - pn)(Em q ' pm)
(far qn ---i?in = ± 1 )
(13 .2.5)
On the other hand, if particles n and gyn . are both outgoing or both
incoming, then the poles at vn - q - itj,c and v,, ' q + iqnc lie on opposite
sides of the real qo-axis, and we cannot avoid a contribution from one of

542
13 Inftared Effects
them whichever way we close the contour :
1~~
~n En - L'
Iql
IC I ~
q
~~)(
m
4 - Pm )
~iiP In (A)
(for q ,, = q,, _ ± Z ),
(13.2,b)
where fln,, is the relative velocity of particles n and m in the rest frame of
either :
m2m2
p, PM 2
( ] 3 .
.7 )
The imaginary term in Eq . ( 1 3.2.6) leads to an infrared-divergent phase
factor in Eq. (1 3 .2.4) , which drops out when we take the absolute value of
the matrix element to calculate the rate for the process a ---> fl. (This infinite
phase factor is the relativistic counterpart of the well-known feature of
non-relativistic Coulomb scattering, that the outgoing wave part of the
Sch rodinger wave function has a dependence on the radial coordinate r of
the form exp(ipr - iv In r)/r instead of exp(ipr)/r, where v is the product
of charges divided by the relative velocity. 5) The reaction rate is affected
by the real part of J,,,, which for all q, and q,, takes the value
Re )
d3q
f~q~i
I
I CI (
q
Pn)(
?n
q
Pm )
An elementary calculation gives
Re Jmn - 2n? In
I + finm
In (A)
&m
(I - Nnm
(13 .2.8 )
(13 .2.9)
Using this in the absolute value squared of Eq. (13 .2.4) gives the effect of
soft virtual photons on the rates for the process 1711, a s
~
r~~ = ~ T`~Lflex , ( 13 .2 . 10)
where i,~~ and I~~~ are the rates for the process a including radiative
corrections of soft photons only with momenta greater than
A or l1,
respectively, and A is the exponen t
8~r ,~
P'O
flotol
-I - &M
Note that this makes sense only because the correction factor ( ~f A)'
has turned out to be the ratio of a function of 1. to the same function

13.2
Virtual Sqft Photons
543
of A, since the two rates in Eq . (1 3.2.10) can only depend on ;, and A,
respectively.
The exponent A is always positive. For instance, in the scattering of a
single charged particle by a neutral particle or an external potential, we
must add terms in Eq. (1 3 . 2. 1 i } where both n and in are the initial or
the final charged particle (in which case qnq, = +1 and #,,, = 0), or rt i s
the initial or final charged particle and m is the other one (in which case
r107M = -1 and &„, = P, where 1 > fi > 0.) This gives
2
e
A 4 ~ I
n which is positive for all
I > ft > D. Because A is positive the effect of th e
infrared divergences introduced by soft virtual photons when summed to
all orders is to make the rate for any given charged particle process ac
vanish in the limit 0 .
Before we go on to consider how soft real photon emission cancels
these infrared divergences, we should pause to note a technicality in the
above calculation which as far as [know has always been ignored in
the literature . In calculating these radiative corrections we have included
diagrams in which the virtual photon is absorbed and emitted at the same
external charged-particle line, as well as those in which it is emitted and
absorbed at different lines. But as we learned in Chapter 10, in calculating
the S-matrix we are not supposed to include radiative corrections arising
from insertions of self-energy subgraphs in external lines . This might
suggest that we should drop the terms n = m in Eq . (13.2.11), but then the
cancellation of infrared divergences we will find in the next section would
not be complete .
The resolution of this problem can be found in the observation that soft
virtual photons produce infrared divergences not only directly, but also
through their effect on the renormalization constants Z, of the charged
particle fields. The renormalization constant Z,z is the one usually called
Z-Y in theories like quantum electrodynamics with a single charged field
of spin
1 .)
It is the counterterms proportional to Z, - 1 that cancel
the effect of radiative corrections in external lines. To be specific, the
renormalized field of a charged particle of type n is a factor Z, 1/2
times the unrenormalized field, so when we calculate the S-matrix using
renormalized fields (corresponding to the omission of radiative corrections
in external lines) we are introducing an extra factor fl,, Z,1 ''~~, the product
running over all charged particles in the initial and final states, ( O f
course there are also factors Z ._1 /2 for neutral particles, but these are not

544
1 3 ItZfrared Effects
i nfrared-divergent.) In a slightly different notation, this factor is
~~k/2
f
where Zf is the field renormalization constant for fields of type f, Ef is
the number of external lines of type f, and the product now runs over all
charged field types . However, these field renormalization constants also
appear in the interiors of diagrams ; expressing an interaction of type i
that involves lVif charged-particle fields of type f in terms of renormalized
fields introduces an infrared-divergent facto r
rj(Zf )N
F
f / 2.
(For instance, the caunterterm -ie(Z2 -1 )A,tp °
111
in Eq. (1 1 .1 .9) together
with the ordinary electromagnetic interaction -fet~~Pzp yields a total in-
teraction -iZ2eFpyPy), It was the infrared divergence in this Z2 factor that
was responsible for the infrared divergence arising from the second term
in the brackets in Eq. (11 .3 .23), and the last term in Eq. {11 .4,14} .) There is
also an infrared divergence in the propagators of the renormalized fields ;
the propagator of a renormalized charged field of type f when expressed
in terms of the propagator of the unrenormalized field introduces a factor
Zf 11 Putting this all together, the total number of factors of Zf for each
charged field type f, introduced by the counterterms to interactions and
to radiative corrections on internal as well as external lines, i s
where If and Ef are the numbers of internal and external lines of type
f, and Vi is the number of vertices for interactions of type i . We have
already noted in Section 6.3 that this quantity vanishes for each f . Thus
the counterterms which cancelled the radiative corrections on external
lines are themselves cancelled by the Zf factors arising from internal lines
and vertices. Eq. (13.2-11) is therefore correct as it stands, including the
terms with n = m.
13.3
Real Soft Photons; Cancellation of Divergences
The resolution of the infrared divergence problem encountered in the
previous section is found in the observation that it is not really possible
to measure the rate r#, for a reaction ot --+ P involvang definite numbers
of photons and charged particles, because photons of very low energy can
always escape undetected . What can be measured is the rate I'pa(E, E?)

1 3.3 Real Soft Photons ; Cancellation of Divergences
545
for such a reaction to take place with no unobserved photon having an
energy greater than some small quantity E, and with not more than some
small total energy E T going into any number of unobserved photons. (Of
course, E S ET. In an experiment without soft photon detectors, one
can rely on measurements of the energies of the `hard' particles in oc and
P to put a limit E T on the total energy going into soft photons, and
in this case we just set E = E T,) We now turn to a calculation of this
rate.
The S-matrix for emitting N real soft photons in a process oc --* fi
is obtained by contracting each of the N photon polarization indices
91, Y2, on the amplitude (13.1 .8) with the appropriate coefficient func-
tion
e~(9a h)
where q is the photon momentum, h = ±1 is its helicity, and c" is the
corresponding photon polarization 'vector'! This gives a photon emission
matrix element (the S-matrix element with delta function omitted) a s
PIZ
11
Pn qr
,r=t
n
(The superscript ~ is to remind us that these amplitudes are to be calcu lated
with an infrared cutoff A" on the momenta of virtual photons. Eventually
we shall take ~ -+ 0. The presence of soft virtual photons does not
interfere with the result (13 .3.1) because of the factorization discussed
in Section 13 .1.) The differential rate for emitting N soft photons into
a volume fl, d3qr of momentum space is given by squaring this matrix
element, summing over helicities, and multiplying with jlF d3q,, . We recall
from Eq. (8.5.7) that for q' = 0, the helicity sums take the form
61`(q, ~)_,V* ( 9, h) = q,~v + q,,c, + q. c., ( 13 . 3 .2
h=tl
where c = -gl 2 lql2 and cO = 1I2I Q I• The charge conservation co ndition
E,, qne, = 0 allows us to drop the terms in Eq. (13 .3 .2) invol ving q. or q,, ,
We are using e" instead of eP for ph oton polarization vectors, to avoid confusion wit h our use
here of e„ for e lectric cha rges .

546
13 10rared Effects
yielding a differential rate'*
3qe
_ E 770menem(P ' PM)
d JF~,(qi,
V) = FIX
N
d
r= l
To calcu late the differential rate for the emission of N soft
with definite energies co, = J q,J we must integrate Eq. (1
.x .3)
directions of the photon momenta qr, These integrals are the
those we encountered in the integrals (13.2.8) ,
~~
27r 2 In 1 ~~~
- 77(Pn 'per ) f (En - q" ,
q~, -
=
+
1
- fl
(13-3 .3 )
pho tons
over the
same as
(13.3.x )
Integrating Eq . (13 .3.3) over photon directions thus gives the differential
rate for photons of energy c01 , . . . cf)N
a
N d"N
dF, (a) I . . . O)N)
A(a --* P) ( 13 .3.5)
fl
0,
(ON
whe re A(a ~ P) is t he same constant encountered in the p revious section :
~(!x
Onom qOm to 1 + fln'n
2
87r
r Irn
XIm ~ - Nrrx
We see from Eq. ( 13 . 3 .5) that an unrestricted integral over the energies
of the emitted photons would introduce another infrared divergence .
However, unitarity demands that if we use an infrared cutoff for the
momenta of the virtual photons (as implied b y the superscript A) then we
must use the same infrared cutoff for the real photons . To calculate the
rate r~,(E, E T) for the reaction oc with not more than energy E going
into and one unobserved photon and not more than energy E T wing
into any number of unobserved photons (with E and E T chosen small
enough to justify the approximations used in deriving Eq. (13.3 .1)), we
must integrate Eq. ( 1 3.3 . 5) over all photon energies, subject to the limits
E ~ cc~~ ~ A and E. r.~r ~ E r, then divide by N! because this integral
includes configurations that differ only by permutations of the N soft
photons, and finally sum over N. This gives
wr
N=O
N!
E'7o3r7~ .
r[t]rCF{ r=1
(13-3 - 6)
This integral would factor into the product of N integrals over the indi-
vidual oi, were it not for the restriction ~:, r~), ~ E . This restriction may
»• The result for qJdl p{q}lI'p in the case N = 1 cnrre5ponds to the distribution of energy
emitted classically by a discontinuously changing current density Fctiur-nectar P(x) = Ell (°) cS3{v-
V, t} p;;e„fEn, with the sum here run ning only over particles in tie in itial state for r < 0 and in
the final state for t > 0 .

1 3.3 Real Hof i Photons ; Cancellation qf Divergences
547
be implemented by including as a factor in the integrand a step function
f)(~T -- c~r) = 1
du sin ~- U exp iu
r
r~)r
( 13.3 .7)
a~
. :x u
r
Eq. ( 1 3 . 3.6) then becomes
170 (E, Er ) = 1 ~ du yin Eau exp A(a
jE dcj er{ou
n -~
(13.3 .8)
The integral in the exponent can b e done in the limit A < E T by writing
it as the sum of the integral of (ehou - w o), in which we can set ~ = 0,
and the integral of i/o), which is trivia] . Resealing the u and w variables,
this gives for A < E :
F)., (E, ET)__*,~W EIETAO~--*fl))
i-A
(13.3-9)
sin u
-x dro W- 1))
where f-
.I)r-.
U 0 0)
.flx ; A)
du
A 2O(x - ~) r d x
. . . .
( 13.3 .10)
= 1 - In -~
+
2
. .. x m 1 -- r.~
For E and E T of the same order and A < 1 the factor
. F,
( E f E T , A ) in
Eq . (13 .3 .9) is close to unity ; for instance ,
Because A(ac ---~ ~}
0, the factor in Eq. (13.3 .9) becomes
infinite in the limit D. However, Eq . ( 13 .2.10) shows that the rate 171
vanishes in this limit :
)A( x~~1
~
r~IX ~ rn
#~X .
Using this in Eq . ( 13.3.9) shows that the infrared cutoff ~ drops out in the
limit ;.
E :
FA ,,(E, E
F (EIET ; A(u
A
(13 .3,11)
fl
T) --*
A) Fflge
We remind the reader that the energy A is just a convenient dividing
point between 'soft* photons which are taken into account explicitly in
Eq . (13.3.11) and `hard' photons whose effects are buried in T-'A The
right-hand side
Kf Eq. { ] 3 .3 . l 1 ) is independent of A because I'~x ~
AA. However, in theories with a small coupling constant like quantum
electrodynamics it is frequently a good strategy to take A to be sufficiently

548
1 3 Infrared Effects
small compared with the typical energies involved in the collision so
that the approximations made here apply for photon energies less than A,
but large enough so that A(ac ln(W/A) < 1. Then it may be a good
approximation to calculate T'~~ in lowest-order perturbation theory, with
the dominant radiative corrections for E
A given by the factor (EfA)l
in Eq. ( 13.3.11).
*~ *
The same cancellation of infrared divergences occurs for soft gravitons .3
The rate for any process ac --* #, with not more than an energy E going
into soft gravitons, turns Kut to be proportional to EB, where
G
1 + fl~
B = r~nr7,~m.,~rra,~
In
(1 3 .3.12)
2 7C nrtt
#2 i ~ f~nm
13.4
General Infrared Divergences
The infrared divergence due to soft photons that we have been considering
up to now in this chapter is just one example of a variety of infrared
divergences that are encountered in various physical theories . Another
example is provided by quantum electrodynamics with massless charged
particles. Here even after the cancellation of infrared divergences due
to soft photons, we find a logarithmic divergence in the exponent A in
Eq. (13.3.11). According to Eqs . (13 .2.11) and (13.2.7), for a process in
which all charged particles are electrons, in the limit m, --+ 0 the exponent
goes as
1
2_ 1 1
:
1 2 CFn ' Pml
In m,
2
A
enemqn)lm I
n 4
7,2 Ee. 47~
M 2n
n
n#M
e
2
~
(In the last step we have used the charge conservation condition , , e„r~,~ _
0.) The infrared divergence in this formula arises from soft photons that
are emitted in a direction parallel to the momentum of one of the `lard'
electrons in the initial or final state, but it occurs also even if the photon
like the electron is not soft, because the propagator denominator (p„ ± q)'
vanishes for pn q2 = 0 if p, is parallel to q . To be a little more specific,
for pn = q2 = 0 the integral of this factor' over photon directions takes
This factor is not squared, because the divergence occurs only in the interference between this
term in the S-matrix element and terms in which the photon is emitted from some other charged
particle line m :A n. For m = n the integral (13.2.$) is proportional to m2n .

13.4 General Infrared Divergences
549
the form
271
sink d0
q
P2q
where 0 is the angle between the momenta of the photon and the charged
particle. This integral diverges logarithmically at 0 = 0.
O f course, in the real world the re are no massless electrically charged
particles, but in reactions in which the typical value E 2 of the scalar
products
gyp„
- p,,l is much larger than rn,2, it is Of interest to identify
t he places where large ln(m,f E ) factors appear. The dominant radiativ e
2
correction in this case is often given by the term - ln(me/E) E,, e2,,/27r
in A. More importantly, in quantum chromodynamics there are massless
particles, the gluons , that carry a conserved quantum number known as
color that is analogo us to electric charge, so that infrared divergences
arise from the emission of parallel hard gluons from hard gluons or other
hard colored parti cles in the initial or final states.
These infrared divergences are not, in general, elim inated by summing
over suitable sets of final states. However, Lee and Nauenberg6 have
pointed out that the infrared divergences can be made to cancel if we
not only sum over suitable final states, but also assume a certain prob-
abilistic distribution of initial states. What follows is a modified version
of their argument, which will immediately make clear why in the case of
electrodynamics with massive electrons it was sufficient t o sum over final
states.
For these purposes it is convenient to return to `old-fashioned' pertur-
bation theory, in which the S-matrix is given by Eq. (3 .2.7) and Eq . (15 .3)
as
Shy - 6 {b - a) - 2a7r6 {E,, - Eb} Tb,,, ( 13 .4. 1 )
where
00
E, - Eci ,f iE) (Ea -Eft + iE)
.
(
(13.4.2)
(The integrals over c l • - - c, should be understood to include sums over
the spins and types of particles in these states as well as integrals over the
three-momenta of these particles.) Infrared divergences arise from (and
only from) the vanishing of one or more of the energy denominators in
this expression .
However, not all vanishing energy denominators give rise to infrared
divergences . A general intermediate state c may have EG = E,, , but usually
this is just one point in the interior of the range of integration, and the
integral over this range is rendered convergent by the prescription implied

550
13 Infrared Eftets
by the k in the denominator .
In order for an intermediate state
c to
produce an infrared divergence, it is necessary that the energy E . = E a
be reached at the endpoint of the range of integration. This happens
for instance if the first intermediate state c , in Eq. (13 .4.2) consists of
the particles in the initial state a, with any of the massless particles in
this state replaced with jets, consisting of any number of nearly parallel
mastless particles with a total momentum equal to that of the particle
the het replaces. In this case, the endpoint at which Eel = EQ is the point
in momentum space at which all of the massless particles in each jet
are parallel. More generally, we can have any number of the massless
particles in a replaced with jets of nearly parallel massless particles, plus
any number of additional soft massless particles . The set of all such states
will be called D(u). (To be precise, we need to introduce a small angle 0
as well as a small energy A to define what we mean by `nearly parallel'
and `soft'. We will not bother to show the dependence of the set D ( a ) on 0
and A. ) The states in D(a) are `dangerous', in the sense that the vanishing
Kf the energy denominator E. - E., at the endpoint can introduce an
infrared divergence ; the endpoint at which Et;, = Ea is the point at which
all massless particles in each jet are parallel, and all soft massless particles
have zero energy ,
Furthermore, if cr, c,, are each in the set D(u ), then an intermediate
state c,+i in D (a) is also dangerous in the same sense. On the other hand,
if some intermediate state c. is not in D{a}, then a later state c k with k > m
would not be dangerous even if it belonged to the set D(a), because the
configuration of hard particles or jets with three-momenta equal to those
of particles in the state a would be just an ordinary point inside the range
of integration. In exactly the same way, we may define a set of states D(b)
in which one or more of the massless particles in the state b are replaced
with jets of nearly parallel massless particles, each having the same total
three-momentum as the particle it replaces, and we add any number of
soft massless particles. An intermediate state c„z is dangerous if it belongs
to the set D(h) and if the later states ck with k > m all belong to D(b).
To isolate the effects of these dangerous states we rewrite Eq . (13.4.2
in the form
Tba = VbU + E ( V [1~90 + Yb + Y'~ a,b V]
(13.4.3)
where
~Pb , a nd are the projection operators respectively on D (a),
D(b), and on all other states. (It is assumed here that none of the charged
particles in h have momenta close to that of some charged particle in a, so
that the sets D(a) and D(b) do not overlap.) Now, for A --3, 0 and D --+ 0,
the dangerous intermediate states occupy so little phase space that they
may be neglected wherever they do not lead to infrared divergences . The

13 . 4 General Infrared Divergences
power series (13.4.3) therefore become s
~a x of,
Thu -
r=0 s~0 ►~=0
X
Ea - HO iel
Ya
-
VI')
[Ea -- H4 + ic
ba
va,b
55 1
(13.4.4)
This mould be exact if all of the projection operators 4,,,b between the
leftmost and the rightmost were replaced with
+
b +
and if
h
and YQ on the left and right were replaced with
b +,~41Q, but as remarked
above this would have a negligible effect on the final result when A and
0 are sufficiently small .
Eq . (13.4.4) may be written in a more compact form :
Tha = (Q I TS '20ha ,
where, for future use, we define S2x and S2fl for general states v and # as ,
(016
r=0
~
~
and Ts is the `safe' operator"
( T5 )dc
"~
,qa
Ed --- HO -{- i~ ~
.7a
r
V [
"'J
( t 3.4,b)
Eh - H-0 -- ic V
db
') .-
(13.4.7)
(13.4.8 )
All of the infrared divergences have now been isolated in the two operator
factors flh and S2~ .
To eliminate these infrared divergences it is now only necessary to note
that if it were not for the projection operators on the dangerous states, the
operators f2b and SSA would be just the unitary operators that according to
Eq . ( 3.1 .16 convert free-particle states into `cut' or `in' states, respectively .
These operators are therefore unitary if confined to the subspaces D(fl)
and D(a) of states that would be dangerous for some given final state fl
and some given initial state or. That is, for general a and f3
(13.4.9)
(13 .4.10)
'• In (92h )db we are using the fact that Tr,a is calculated with Fb = Eu, and in (Tv)d,we are using
the fact that the projection operators make ( QA ),.,, vanish unless E, is very' close to E. . Also,
the factors SZb
+ and i~~ in Lq. (13 .4,5) make ~V,.d = :YO, ,,y .

5 52
13 Infrared Effects
The transition rate is theref~re free of i~frared divergences of summed over
the subspaces of states that would be dangerous for any given final and
initia l states P and ac :
S
ar=D (a) bED(fl)
Tr f9p Ts Y~, Tf I(Ts)bai2 (13 .4.11 )
aED(a) bED({3)
In order to be satisfied that this really does solve the general problem
of infrared divergences, it is necessary to argue that it is only sums like
that in Eq. (13.4.11) that are experimentally measurable. It is plausible
that we should have to sum over dangerous final states in order to have
a measurable transition rate, since it is not possible experimentally to
distinguish an outgoing charged (or colored) massless particle from a jet
of massless particles with nearly parallel momenta and the same total
energy,7 together with an arbitrary number of very soft quanta, all with
the same total charge (or color) . The sum over initial states is more
problematic. Presumably one may argue that truly massless particles are
always produced as jets accompanied by an ensemble of soft quanta that
is uniform within some volume of momentum space . However, to the best
of my knowledge no one has given a complete demonstration that the
sums of transition rates that are free of infrared divergences are the only
ones that are experimentally measurable .
This problem does not arise in quantum electrodynamics (with massive
charged particles), where as we have seen it is only necessary to sum
over final states in order to eliminate infrared divergences . The reason
for this difference can be traced to the fact that in electrodynamics the
states a, b, c, . . - are direct products of states (labelled with Greek letters)
with fixed numbers of charged particles and hard photons, times states
containing only soft photons having energy less than some small quantity
A. Then for a reaction in which some set of soft photons f is produced in
a reaction or among charged particles and hard photons, Eq . (13.4.5)
simplifies to
Tflf,.x = (n-(Valoo)fo (TS)PU
(13.4.12)
where 0 denotes the soft photon vacuum, and 92± are calculated as before,
but in the reduced Hilbert space consisting only of soft photons, and with
the interactions of these photons taken as the interaction Hamiltonian
with all charged particles in the fixed states indicated by the arguments P
or cc. Just as before, these operators are unitary in the `dangerous' Hilbert

1 3.5 Soft Photon Scattering
553
space 9 of soft photons, sod
~C_Q
= RTs)flyl, (c+(tc+())00 = I( Ts
)
~
,X
l
2
(13 .4.13)
without having to sum over initial states .
13.5 Soft Photon Scattering"
In our treatment in this chapter of soft photon interactions, we have up
to now considered only processes in which the soft photons are emitted
or absorbed in a process x --* fl which was going on anyway. It is also
possible to make useful general statements about processes in which the
process a -} fl is trivial, and the soft photons play an essential part in
producing an interesting reaction .
We will consider here the simplest
and most important example of this sort, the scattering of a soft photon
from a massive particle of arbitrary type and spin, where at and # are
single-part icle states. The complication here is that the leading term in the
soft photon scattering amplitude does not come from the pole term, but
from non-pole terms that are related to the pole terms by the condition
of current conservation.
The S-matrix for photon scattering may be put in the form
(2,g )I
'~
q
where q and q' are the in itial and final photon four-momenta, p and p'
are the initial and final target four-momenta, i and ~' are the initial and
final photon helicities, cj9', Ar ) and F,, (q, ~) are the corresponding photon
polarization vectors, and a and a' are the initial and final target spin
z-components. According to the theorem of Section 6 .4, the amplitude
M'',' may be expressed as
CF
)
.~
[Z ~ . ~ .~}
~ The reason that we are now not encountering any factor ~EJA) A like that in Eq . ( 13.3,11) is that
we are here identifying the maximum energy E of the real soft photon states over which we are
summing with the maximum energy h of the `dangerous' soft photon slates over which we sum
in calculating
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

554
13 Inftared Effects
where P(x) is the electromagnetic current, and the dots indicate possible
seagull' terms such as those in the theory of charged scalar fields in
which the two photons interact at a single vertex instead of with separate
currents. We now repeat the standard polology arguments described
in Chapter 10 and already used in Section 13 .1 .
Inserting a complete
set of intermediate states between the current operators in
Eq. ( 1 3 . 5.2 ),
integrating over x and isolating the one-particle intermediate states gives
GP (P'a p' - q)G}' (P' - q, p)
E ( g' -- q) - E(p' ) + qQ - ie + Nv" ( q ; p', p) , (13 .5.3 )
where G~ is the one-particle matrix element of the curren t
l T
and N" represents the contribution of states other than the one-particle
state itself, plus any seagull terms. (Eq. (13 .5.3) is to be understood in
the sense of matrix multiplication, with spin indices not shown explicitly .)
About IV''~ we know very little, except that it does not have the singularity
at qP --+ 0 exhibited by the first two terms, and therefore may be expanded
in powers of q Y.
We now use the current conservation (or gauge invariance) conditions :
( 1 3 .5 .5)
(115 .6)
(13 .5 .7 )
Applied to Eq. (3.5.3), these conditions yield the condition we need on
Nv ;t
{i 3.s.}
We also note that M'M satisfies the `crossing sytnmetry° condition
`" (q ; p', P) = M " ►' (p' - p - q ; p', p) (13.5,9)
and since the pole terms in Eq, (13 .5.3) evidently satisfy this condition, so
also does NVy :
N"(q ~ P', p) = N1v (P{ - P - q ; P{a p) .
(13 .5.10)
We will use these conditions to determine the first terms in the expansion
of N'P in powers of momenta .
First we need to say something about the expansion of the one-particle
current matrix elements GP( P', P) in powers of the momenta p' and p.

13.5 Soft Photon Scattering 555
Space inversion invariance (to the extent that it is applicable) tells us that
the expansion of G° and GI (with i =1,2,3) contain terms respectively of
only even and odd order in the momenta. According to Eq. (10 .6.3), the
term in 47~ +,ff of zeroth order in momenta is where e is the particle
charge. The current conservation cond ition then tells us that to second
order in momenta,
fp
f 2
2
2m 2m
The terms in G of fi rst order in momenta are thus given by e(p'+p)JQ!,, /2rrz,
plus a possible first-order term orthogonal to p' - p, which rotational
invariance tells us must be proportional to (p' - p) x J,f,,, where J is the
familiar spin matrix of the charged particle . Summarizing these resu lts,
we have the expansions
G4{p', p) = el + quadratic ,
r
e1 ~
~ G(
P
a R) = 2m (p'+ R) + J x (p' - p) + cubic ,
(1 3.5 . 11 )
( 1 3.5 .1 2 )
where ` 1' is the unit spin matrix , and `quadratic' a nd `cubic' refer to the
order of the neglected terms in powers of the small momenta p and p'. The
coefficient y1j in Eq. (13.5 .12) is real because the current is Hermitian.
With the coefficient written in this way (with j the spin of the charged
particle), µ is the quantity known a s the magnetic moment of the particle.
Now let us return to N"p , and consider the expansion of Eq. (13.5.8) in
powers of the small momenta q ~I, p and p'. Taking v = 0 in Eq. ( 1 3 . 5 . 5)
shows that q,N'P is at least quadratic in these small quantities. There is
no c onstant vector orthogonal to q I`, so NOP must be at least of first order
in small momenta. The crossing symmetry co ndition (13 . 5 . 1 D) then tells
us that
10 must also be at least of first order in small momenta. Taking
y = i i n Eq . ( 1 3.5 .8) and using Eq. (13 . 3 . 12) then telly us that
and hence
2i
qkN `k = _ e
+ quadratic
z
IV's = -
e b;k + linear .
in
(13.5 .13 )
Since G I is at least of first order in the small momenta, so are the pole
terms in Eq. (13.5 .3) for 0k , leaving us in zero order with only the non-pole
term 0
2
6
(13.5 .14)

556
13 Infrared Effects
From this we can calculate the soft photon scattering cross-section . But
there is no need for this calculation ; now that we know that the photon
scattering amplitude in the limit of zero momentum depends only on the
target particle mass and charge, and is of second order in the charge,
we can immediately use the results of any second-order calculation of the
photon scattering cross-section for target particles of any given spin, such
as our result (8.7.42 ) for the differential photon scattering cross-section in
quantum electrodynamics
da
4
dQ ~ 32ar1raa2( 1 + case 0) .
( 13 .5, 1 5 )
We now see that this is a universal formula, valid in the low-energy limit
for target particles of mass m and charge e and of arbitrary type and
spin, even if these particles are composite and strongly interacting, li ke
atomic nuclei. Drell-Mann and Goldberger and Low8 have shown that
these results may be extended to give the next-to-leading term in the soft
photon scattering amplitude in terms of the target particle's mass, charge,
and magnetic moment.
13.6 The External Field Approximation *
It is intuitively obvious that a heavy charged particle like the nucleus of
an atom acts approximately like the source of a classical external field . In
this section we will see how to justify this approximation, and will gain
some idea of its limitations .
Consider a Feynman diagram or a part of a Feynman diagram in which
a heavy charged particle passing through the diagram from the initial to
the final state emits N off-shell photons with four-momenta ql> q2, . . . qrr
and polarization indices [11 , P 2,
',UN .
The sum of all such graphs or
subgraphs (not including the N photon propagators) yields an amplitud e
f d4xid4 X2 - d4XNe~qj,xj e`q2`2 --- e -qN `jv
x (p', cT' I T ~J" (X 1 )x J" (X2)} . . . JP~~ (XN) I IP, (,T )
~§u1jux . . .
i1
,v(q 1 ,q2 5 . . . q 1v ; P)
,C
( 13.G.1 )
with the matrix element calculated including all interactions in which
the heavy particle may participate, including strong nuclear forces . This
amplitude has a multiple pole at q j , q2 , . . . qN --* 0, arising from terms in
This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
a first reading.

13.6 The External Field Approximation
557
the matrix elements of the product of currents in which the intermediate
states consist of just the same heavy particle as in the initial and final states .
This multiple pole dominates (13 .6.1 ) when all components of qi, q2,, - - q1v
are small compared with all energies and momenta associated with the
dynamics of the (perhaps composite) heavy particle . In this case the
methods of Section 10.2 give.'
N- 1
X 64(1 + q1 + q 2+
.
. .+ qN - F)
ff~ Q ~ . ..Qh~-l
l ff2 ~~~
.
.
~~, ff
b-l a~ (P)
X Cr
d I
Q
+ permutations (13 .6.2)
where
f," (F )
2p°(2~}~ ~P'ff'IJ~{O} J P, C)
(13 .5.3)
and `+ permutations' indicates that we are to sum over all permutations
of the N photons. For applications to atomic systems it is important
to recognize that ( 13.6.1 ) applies for particles of arbitrary spin that have
strong as well as electromagnetic interactions, like atomic nuclei .
We also note that for particles of arbitrary spin and charge fie, the
matrix elements of the electric current between states of equal four-
momenta aret
PO(27z) 3
so that
,1, 1Y! LZ 8 pl ~~fff
( 1 3.6.5 )
The important thing about Eq. (13.6 .5) is that these matrices all commute ,
" IIn perturbation theory, the de nominators come from the denominators of the propagators :
{P+i` Rl + . . . Rr}2 + m2 -tE -r 2p' ' (41 +--• 9t)-!e -~ 2A'{41 + . . . qr ) - ie ,
while the numerators of the propagators provide factors uuT that together with the photon
emission vertex matrices yield the matrix elements ( 13.6.3). The matrix 10 differs from the matrix
G" of the previous section by a facto
r This is most easily proved by first noting that in the Lorentz frame in which the particle is a t
rest, rotational invariance requires that the matrix elements of the current have vanishing space
components and a time component proportional to with no other dependence on a or 0 r .
The constant of proportionality is supplied by Eq . (10.6.3), and a Lorentz transformation then
gives Eq, (13.6.4) .

558
13 Infrared Eft~cts
so their product can be factored out of the sum over permutations :
P~ (2,g)l
(27E )
4 6 4(P
, + q, + q2 + . . . + Irv - F)6rY',rT
x
+ permutations
(1 3 .6. 6)
To leading order in the q s the delta function here may be written
( 13 . 6 . 7)
Fortunately, it turns out that the result of summing over permutations
here is much simpler than the individual terms. For p ` {qj + . . . + qrv} = 0,
we have
1
+ permutations = (2irz)nr- ',J (p ' R 1) 6 (p ' q2 )
. . . 6 (P ' qN-i)
(13 .6. 8)
For instance, for N = 2 this reads :
The genera] result (13 .6 .8 ) can b e obtained most easily as the Fourier
transform of the identity
B(x, - 12) O(T2 - -13)
. . . O(IN-1 -TN) + permutations = 1
.
Inserting Eq . ( 13 . 6 .$) in Eq. (13.6.6) gives our final result for the amplitude
( 13.G. 1 ) :
x 63(P
I +q i + q2+ . . .+ 9N -P)J(F ' 4i) 6(P .q2) . . . 6 (P ' qN) .
(13 .6.9)
This result applies to relativistic as well as slowly moving heavy particles,
and can be used to derive the `Weizsacker- ilfiams' approximation9 for
charged-particle scattering . In the special case of a non -relativistic heavy
charged particle, with CA S < p°, Eq . (13.6.9) further simplifies to
S~f'} 2
. . - I~
i,ti 1~1a q2 1
. . . [~N } P1 ~ (Z f' )N(2?Z) ~r 18P 1 n F 12 . . . hF~ ~ti
x63(P { + q, + q2 + . . . +qN - P}6(
Ri
) 6 (q ° ) . . . J (q~, ) 6,+,~ (13.6. 10)

13.6 The Exter nal Field Approximation
where n is a unit time-like vector
Now suppose that a single heavy non-relativistic particle of charge Ze
with normalized momentum space wave Function Q( P) appears in both
the initial and final states. Using the Fourier representation of the delta
function in Eq. (13.6.9), the matrix element of W in this state i s
d3Fd'P{ ~~+ (P ') X, (P )
~; ~'
. ._~w (q I , q2y . . . qtr ; P)
N
j
r= 1
where y)( X) is the coordinate space wave function .
Because of the factorization in Eq. (1 3.6.11 ), the effect of including a
heavy charged particle in this state is then the same as that of adding
any numbers of a new kind of vertex in the momentum space Feynman
rules, in which light Dirac particles of charge -e such as electrons interact
with an external field, with each such vertex contributing to the overall
amplitude a fa tarp (now including the photon propagator and electron-
photon vertex}
-i
I
l
[(27T) .ei
i'l d4q
~ (21r)4 q2
( 13 . .13)
where k and k' are the initial and final electron four-momenta. The
complete scattering amplitude must then be averaged over the heavy
particle position X, with weight function J:, I W, (X) I2 . The factor (13 .6.13)
is the same as would be produced by a new term in the interaction
Lagrangian
cxt(x) = '4"{-~~ ~el"W ,
(13 .6.14)
559
( 13 . 6. 11 )
(13.6.12 )
where Je = -ae'I'},P"Y is the electric current of the electrons, and VP is an
external vector potential
.~ (~ )
I I d4 eiq,
27rZe nYb(q')e-'T'
(2?1)4
q
, q - 8 e
I -
(13 .6-15)
The first factor here is the usual factor of i accompanying
the constants
in the interaction
Lagrangian of the heavy charged particle in the Feynman ru les .

560
13 Infrared Effects
This, of course, is just the usual Coulomb potential :
( 1 3.6. 16)
If there is more than one heavy charged particle (as in a molecule) we
must express P'(x) as a sum of terms like ( 13 .6.1 6), each with its own
charge Ze and position X ,
It is useful to keep in mind what diagrams we are summing in using the
external field approximation . Consider the interaction of a singe electron
(relativistic or non-relativistic) with a single heavy charged particle such
as a proton or deuteron .
If we ignore all other interactions, then the
Feynman diagrams for the scattering of the electron due to its interaction
with the external field are just those with any number of insertions of
the electron-external field vertex (13 .6.14) in the electron line. (See Figure
13.4,) But as shown by the sum over permutations in Eq. ( 1 3 . 6.2), these
diagrams in the external field approximation come from diagrams in the
underlying theory in which the photons attached to the electron line are
attached to the heavy charged particle line in all possible orders . (See
Figure
13.5.)
The `uncrossed ladder' diagrams (labelled L) of Figure
13 .5 do not dominate this sum unless the electron as well as the heavy
charged particle is non-relativistic . (These diagrams include contributions
from terms in old-fashioned perturbation theory whose intermediate states
contain the same particles as the initial and final states, leading to small
energy denominators when the electron and heavy charged particle are
both non-relativistic, while all other diagrams of Figure 13.5 correspond
to intermediate states with either extra photons, electron-positron pairs,
or heavy particle-antiparticle pairs, which are suppressed by large energy
denominators.) The uncrossed ladders can be summed by solving an
integral equation, known as the Bethe-Salpeter equation,"D but there is no
rationale for selecting out this subset of diagrams unless both particles are
non-relativistic, in which case the Bethe-Salpe#er equation just reduces
to the ordinary non-relativistic Schrodinger equation, plus relativistic
corrections associated with the spin-orbit coupling that can be treated as
small perturbations. It must be said that the theory of relativistic effects
and radiative corrections in bound states is not yet in entirely satisfactory
shape.
In the derivation of the external field ( 13 . 6. 16) we evaluated the inter-
action Kf the heavy charged particle with the electromagnetic field only to
leading order in the photon momentum . There are corrections of higher
order in the photon momentum arising from the heavy particle's magnetic
dipole moment, electric quadrupole moment, etc. Also, of course, there
are radiative corrections arising from Feynman diagrams beyond those of
Figure 13.4, such as diagrams in which photons are emitted and absorbed

13.6 The External Field Approximation
+ •-~
56 1
Figure 13.4. Diagrams for the scattering of an electron by an external electro-
magnetic field. Here straight lines represent the electron ; wavy lines ending in
crosses represent its interaction with an external field .
L
L
L
Figure 13 .5. Diagrams for the scatteriDg of an electron by a heavy, charged
target particle, which in the limit of large target mass yield the same result as the
diagrams of Figure 13.4. Here the single straight line is the electron ; the double
straight line is the heavy target particle ; and wavy lines are virtual photons.
Diagrams marked `L' are called uncrossed ladder graphs ; they dominate the sum
when the electron as well as the target particle is non-relativistic .

562
13 Infrared E
L{'ts
from the electron line or electron loops are inserted into photon lines. We
shall see in the next chapter that in bound states the diagrams of Figure
13.4 must be included to all orders, but all other corrections of higher
order in photon momenta or e may be included as perturbations to these
diagrams .
Problems
1. Consider the process e+ + e- --} art + 7r R in the center-of-mass fram e
at an energy of k GeV and scattering angle of 90° . Suppose that
by measuring the energies of the final pions we determine that a n
energy of not more than E T
!Gel is emitted in soft photons .
How does the reaction rate depend on ET ?
2. Consider a massless spinless particle described by a scalar field
,
whose interaction Lagrangian density is of the form O( x)J(x), where
J(x) involves only massive particle fields. Derive a formula for th e
rate of emission of arbitrary numbers of soft scalar particles in a
process oc --* fl, with these soft scalars having a total energy less tha n
some small quantity Er . Include radiative corrections due to soft
scalars with energy less than some small quantity A.
3. Derive a formula for the next term beyond Eq. (13 .5.14) for low-
energy photon scattering on an arbitrary target.
4. Suppose that a spin one particle of very small mass m is described b y
a vector field Ve(x), which couples only to a much heavier fermio n
described by a Dirac field fi(x), with an interaction Lagrangia n
density of the form g V g~p7,t~p .
Suppose that the heavy fermion
normally decays into other particles that have no interaction wit h
Yu, releasing an energy W much greater than m. Consider such a
decay process, but where an additional VP particle is emitted alon g
with the other decay products, with the vector particle energy less
than an upper limit E, in the range E m. How does the rate
of this process depend on E and m? Ignore radiative corrections .
5. Prove that Eq. (13.6.8) holds when p - {qt + . . .gar} = 0.
References
1 . F. Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Phys. Re v. 37, 54 (1937) ; D. R. Bennie,
S . C. Frautschi, and H. Suura, Ann. Phys. (NY) 1 3, 379 (1955).

Re f erertces
563
2. S. Feinberg, Phyrs. Lett . 9, 357 (1964) ; Phys. Rev. 135, B1049 (1964).
3. S. Weinberg, Fhys. Rev. 140, B515 (1965).
4. This phase was encountered in the perturbation series for non-
relativistic coulomb scattering, by R. H. Dalitz, Proc. Roy. Soc.
London 206, 509 (1951) .
5. See, e.g., L. 1. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York,
1949) : Section 20.
6. T. D. Lee and Nauenberg, Pays. Rev. 133, B1549 (1964). Also
see T. Kinoshita, J. Math. Whys. 3, 650 ( 1962) ; G. Sterman and S.
Weinberg, Whys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1416 (1977) .
7. Cr. Sterman and S. Weinberg, Ref G .
S. F. E. Low, Pays . Re v. 96, 1428 (1954) ; dell-Mann and M . L.
Goldberger, Phys. Rev . 9G, 1433 (1954). Also see S. Weinberg, in
Lectures on Elementary P articles and Quantum Field Theory - 1 9 70
Brandeis Summer Institute in Theoretical Physics, ed. by S. Weser, M.
Grisaru, and H, Pendleton (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 197 0) .
9. E. J. Williams, Kgl. Dan. Vi d. Sel, Mat.-fys. Medd. XIII, No. 4 (1935).
10. H. A. Bethe and E. E . Salpeter, Phys. R ev. 82, 309 ( 195 1 ) ; 84, 1232
(1951).

14
Bound States in External Fields
In our calculations of radiative corrections in Chapter 11 we went just
one step beyond the lowest order in pertur bation theory . However, there
is a very important class of problems where even the simplest calculation
requires that from the beginning we consider classes of Feyn nian diagrams
of arbitrarily high order in coupling constants like e. These problems are
those involving bound states - in electrodynamics, either ordinary atoms
and mo lecule s, or such exotic atoms as positronium or muonium .
It is easy to see that such problems necessaril y involve a breakdown
of ordinary perturbation theory. Consider for instance the amplitude for
electron-proton scattering as a function of the center-of-mass energy E .
As shown in Section 10.3, the existence of a bound state like the ground
state of hydrogen implies the ex istence of a pole in this amplitude at
E = m.~ + rn,-13.6 eV. However, no single term in the perturbation series
for electron-proton scattering has such a pole. The pole therefore can only
arise from a di vergence of the sum over all diagrams at center-of-mass
energies near m.p + tee .
The reason for this divergence of the perturbation series is also ea sy to
see, especially if for the moment we consider the time-ordered diagrams of
old-fashioned perturbation theory instead of Feynman diagrams. Suppose
that in the center-of-mass system the electron and proton both have
momenta of magnitude q < me, and consider an intermediate state in
which the electron and proton moment a are different but also of order q .
The energy denominator factor contributed by this state will be of order
[q~1mJ-' . Each such state will also contribute a matrix element of the
Coulomb interaction of order e2l q2 the Fouri er transform of e2/r), and
the corresponding momentum space integration will contribute a factor
of order q3. Putting this together , we see that each additional Coulomb
interaction contributes an overall factor Kf order
[q~~m,.]-' [e'lq2l tq-'] = e'mel q
Thus the perturbation theory should break down when q is less than or
of the order of e2 m,, or in other words when the kinetic and potential
564

1 4.1 e Dirac Equation
56 5
energies, which are of order q11M., are no larger than about m,, which,
of course, is of the order of the binding energy of hydrogen .
Our problem here is to learn how to use perturbation theory to evaluate
radiative corrections in bound-state problems, summing to all orders those
diagrams that need to be summed to all orders, and keeping only a finite
number of those that don't ,
14.1 The Dirac Equation
We shall limit ourselves in this chapter to problems in which bound states
arise because of the Coulomb interaction of electrons (or muons) with
heavy charged particles such as atomic nuclei. As shown in Section 13 .6,
this interaction may be taken into account by adding to the interaction
Lagrangian a term' representing the effects of a c-number external vector
potential P(x) :
-iC(Z2 - ~ ~~~ TY uXF i
(14.1 .1 )
which is obtained by replacing the quantum vector potential A` with
At + && in the interaction part of Eq. ( I 1,1 .6). For instance, for a single
heavy particle of charge Ze at the origin ,
I
I
(f4,1 .2)
It is the interaction ( 1 4.1 . 1 ) that must be taken into account to all orders .
In this section we will cons ider the theory with only this interaction,
leaving radiative corrections to subsequent sections.
Physicists learn in kindergarten to approach this sort of problem by
solving the wave equation of Dirac in the presence of the external field. It
might seem unnecessary to derive this equation here, but as emphasized
in Chapter 1, Dirac's original motivation for this equation as a sort of
relativist ic Schr6dinger equation does not stand up to inspection . Also, in
the course of our derivation we will discover the normalization conditions
that have to be imposed K n the solut ions of the Dirac equation, whi ch
seemed somewhat ad hoc in Dirac's approach. The solutions of the D irac
equation discussed here will be important ingredients in our treatment of
radiative corrections in the next section .
-- avtwyqllAv -- OwAO
' In this chapter we return to the use of an upper case T to denote the electron field in the
Heisenberg picture, reserving a lower case W for the Dirac field with time-dependence governed
solely by the c-num ber external field

566
14 Bound States in External Fields
We will work here in a version of the Heisenberg picture, in which the
time-dependence of operators is determined by a Hamiltonian including
the external field interaction (14.1.1), but no other interactions. The
electron field W(x) in this picture satisfies the field equation
-
c?
f'ax; + M + iery1~`~~1~~) W(x) = 0 .
(14.1. 3 )
This is not the Dirac equation in the original sense of Dirac, because
~)(.x) here is not a c-number wave function but a quantum operator . The
c-number Dirac wave functions are defined by
UN W
((DO, Y) WON )
VN (X)
(ON, T000)
(14.1.4)
{1 4.f . 5}
where ON are a complete orthonormal set of state-vectors , wi th q)() the
vacuum .
It follows immediately from Eq. (14.1 .3) that these functions
satisfy the homogeneous Dirac equation
~~ + tn + iey
-(X)j UN(X) = [Y ex~ I
VNM
- 0 .
( 1 4.1 .6)
We can also derive a normalization condition from the equal-tune anti-
commutation relations for the Dirac field. These are unaffected by the
interaction (14.1.1), and therefore take the same form as for the free
fields :
MX# ~~, IN 3~, 0 = iY°61(X - Y) . (14 .1 .7 )
Taking the vacuum expectation value and inserting a sum over the states
ON , we find
UN (X y OUN l~ ~ 0 +
VN (Xk t)V11j (y} 0 = 6' (aC
Y) (14.1 .8)
N
! Y
it being understood that the sum over N includes an integral over contin-
uum states as well as a sum over any discrete bound states .
We are chiefly interested in the case of a time-independent external
field, like (14.1 .2). In such cases, the states ON may be taken as eigenstates
of the Hamiltonian (including the interaction (1
.1.1)} with energies EN .
Time-translation invariance then tells us that the UN(x) and i N(x) have
the time-dependence :
UN X,
~} = e-iE,y [UN 4lX) a
V~1+ (x, t) = e+iE j,~f ~,
1V~ 3~C) .
(14. 1 . 9)
E
f
The homogeneous Dirac equations (14.1 .6) then become

1 4.1 the Dirac Equation
iyo [y - V + m + iej~,2/1(x)]
UN (X) = EN UN W ,
i'l' [T - V + m + ielj~&/A(x)] VN(X)= -ENVN(X)
56 7
(14.1 .11 )
The minus sign on the right-hand side of Eq . (14.1 .1 1) shows that the
uN are the famous `negative-energy' solutions of Dirac. As shown by
Eq. (14.1.8), these negative-energy solutions are needed to make up a
complete set of wave functions.
Of course, for moderate external fields
there are no negative-energy states in the theory, so all E N are positive,
but there is still an important difference between the states with non-
vanishing UN or VN : the definitions ( l 4. 1 .4) and (1 4.1 .5) show that a state
can have UN * 0 or VN 7~ 0 only if it has charge -e or +e, respectively.
It is in this sense that negative-energy solutions of the Dirac equation
have something to do with the existence of antiparticles . However, this
argument has nothing to do with the details of the Dirac equation, or
even with the spin of the electron .
From the Dirac wave equations (14.1.10) and (14.1 .1 1) we can easily see
that wave functions of different energy are orthogonal . That is,
) = V - (Ul i'l
N N N YUM)
sa if Ix12 (u~ iy°yUM) remains bounded as JxJ ~ 0 and xJ ~ oo, then
X x (
= 0
if
EN ~ E~ . (14.1 .12)
With similar boundary conditions for the U .N. we find in the same way that
J d3X
J d'x
(4(X)vM(X))
UN(X)V-?If(X))
= D if
= 0
if
EN* EL ,
EN :~ -E*M .
(14 .1.13)
Taking N = M, Eqs. ( 14. 1 .1 2) and (14.1 . 1 3 ) tell us that the energies are all
real. Dropping the complex conjugation of EV in Eqs . (14.1.12)-(14.1 .14),
we see that u s of different energy are orthogonal , v s of different energy are
orthogonal , and (as long as the potential is not strong enough to produce
negative energy states) all us are orthogonal to all v s. By a suitable choice
of the di screte quantum numbers that characterize the states along with
the energy, we can then always arrange that
fdux (i(X•i(X)) = 0
if
N 7~- M ,
dux (4(x)VM(x)) = 0
if
N =~ M ,
dux (4(x)i(x)) =0
.
(14.1 .15)
(14, 1 . 16)
( 1 4. 1 . 1 7)

568
14 Bound States in External Fields
Multiplying Eq. (14.1.8) on the right with um(y) or vm(Y), we find then
that these wave functions must satisfy the normalization condition s
(14.1 .18)
fd3y (ui1(y)uY)) _ jd3y (4(y)VM(y)) = 6uM -,
where 6NM is a product of Kronecker deltas and momentum space delta
functions, with normalization adapted to that used in defining Ejv, in such
a way that
N 6NM = 1 . These normalization conditions have nothing
directly to do with any probabilistic interpretation of the Dirac wave
functions, but arise instead from the anticommutation relations (14 .1 .7)
for the fields .
Let us now specialize to the case of a pure electrostatic external field
with A = 0. In our standard representation of the Dirac matrices, we hav e
0 -6 ~ 0
1
1'=~
or
0
1
0
where a is the usual three-vector of 2 x 2 Pauli matrices, and `1' and `D'
here are the 2 x 2 unit and zero matrices . We introduce two-component
wave functions f v and gNby setting
UN -
1
( fN + i9N
The energy eigenvalue condition (1
. 1.10) then takes the farm :
{U ' V) gN = -(EN + e ° - rn.) Irv
(14.1.19)
(14.1 .20)
(14.1 .2 1 )
In the non-relativistic case where ed4r
Zoc < 1 the binding energy
EN is of order Z2 ac2rn, while the gradient operator is of the orde r
of Z aM, so gN is smaller than f N by a factor of order Z
. (To find the
positron wave functions v N we replace EN everywhere by -E N, sn in this
case fN is smaller than gN by the same factor.) We shall return to this
non-relativistic case at the end of this section .
Physical states may be classified as even or odd under space inversion :
P(DN - qNON,
( 1 4.1 .22 )
where qN is a sign factor, +1. Recall that with the intrinsic parity of the
electron defined to be +1, the Dirac field has the space-inversion propert y
P W {x, t} P-l = 0 V(-xa t)
so Eqs. {14 .1.4} and (14 .1.22) show that the Dirac wave functions satisfy
the parity condition

14 .1 The Dirac Equation
or equivalently
fN(X) = t1rrfN (-X) ~
9N (X) = - nn~gN(-X)
569
Note that the parity of the state is the same as the parity of fi(x), not
9N (~),
Where the potential ~4`) is rotationally invariant, the solutions of the
wave equations here may be classified according to their total angular
momentum j and parity q. For a given j, the components ff and g
may be expanded in spherical harmonics with orbital angular momentum
/ = ,j+ l and ~ -j-_', but for a definite parity I -- Eqs. (14.1 .24)
show that we can only have e = j + ~ in f and j ± ~ in g . The
usual rules of angular-momentum addition then show that for a state of
total angular momentum j, total angular-momentum z-component P, and
parity the `large' two-component wave function f has the for m
{ 14.i . 2 }
where C and Y are the usual Clebsch-Gordan coefficients and spherical
harmonics.2 Also, given any wave function of definite total angular mo-
mentum and parity we can construct another wave function with the same
j and u but opposite parity by applying the operator or • x, so the `small'
components may be put in the form
f
C17
(j
+
Y .-F
It is conventional to define the orbital angular momentum e of the state
as the orbital angular momentum of the `large' components f (x) ,
/'0 = i :~ 12 ,
( 14. 1 .27)
so that the parity is always (-1)'.
Inserting Eqs. (14. 1.25) and (1 4. 1 .26) in Eqs . (14 .1 .20) and (14. 1 .21)
yields the coupled differential equations
d F
k - 1
dr
r
where for parity q = ~-1 3,
(14.1 .29 )
(14.1 .30)

570
14 Bound States in External Fields
Let us now concentrate on the simple Coulomb field (14 .1.2), for which
e.~v'l° = Zoc/r. The treatment of the Dirac equation in this case is familiar,
so it will be summarized briefly here just for completeness . It is easy to
see that the solutions near the origin go as r", with s 2 = k2 -- ~2a2 .
(Note that k 2 > 1, so the exponent s is real for Za 1.) We must reject
the solutions with s
0 as being inconsistent with the normalization
condition (14.1.15). The condition that the wave functions do not blow
up for r -> ao then fixes the allowed values of the energy eigenvalues :
~ ~a~
E~,J = gyn
I +
n
_
j
_ ~ +
~~ + 1 ~
~ _ Z 2,, 2
where n is a `principal quantum number' wit h
j+ 1 < n .
( 14. 1 .32 )
It is noteworthy that these energies do not depend on the parity or e, but
only on n and j. For each n and j there are two solutions, corresponding to
the two signs of k or the two possible parities, except that for n = j + ~ we
only have k > 0 and parity (- I)j-;, so that j - ~ . With Eq . (1 4.1 .32),
this is the same as the familiar non-relativistic restriction that n - 1 .
For light atoms with Z a < 1, Eq. (X4.1 .31) yields the power series
z 2 a2
E = »x 1
2n2
Z 4x4
3
~
n4
(8 -
1
2j+ 1 + . . .
( 14. 1 . 33}
The first two terms, of course, just represent the rest energy and the
binding energy as given by the non-relativistic Schrodinger equation . The
leading term that depends on j as well as n is the third term, the first
relativistic correction. For n = 1 there is only one value of the total
angular momentum, j
and since here n _ j + 1 there is also only one
parity, (-1)J- 7
1, corresponding to
0 . It is therefore difficult to
see the effects of the relativistic corrections in Eq. (14.1.33) in the n = I
states of hydrogenic atoms, though as we shall see in section 14.3, this
has recently become possible. On the other hand, for n = 2 we have a
state with both parities (i .e ., 2s112 and 2P,/2 } as well as a 2P3/2 state
with j and negative parity. Eq. (14.1 .33) gives the splitting between
the p states in hydrogen as
aMe
- 4.5283 x 10-5 eV (14 .1,34)
32
Such relativistic line splitting is known as the .fine structure of the atomic
state. From the beginning it was known that this prediction is in good
agreement with the observed fine structure. On the other hand, the Dirac

14. 1 The Dirac Equation
57 1
equation does not yield and energy difference in the 2s112 and 2pl/2 states,
so this is a good place to look for the effects of further corrections, to be
considered in Section 14.3 .
Before closing this section we shall consider the approximate forms for
the wave functions and matrix elements in the no-n-relativistic case for a
general electrostatic potential
.
o. (For a Coulomb potential, this is the
limit Zoc < 1 .) Since here EN + m ^f 2m > ~e.i~101 , the `small' components
of the electron wave function are given approximately in terms of the
large components by
9N :,' (or ' V).fN/ 2 me .
(14.1 .35)
Eq. (14.1.21) then becomes just the non-relativistic Schrodinger equatio n
v2
- - etd{'
A ~~ (E N - M)frr
Z m,
( 14.1 .36 )
Since there is no longer any coupling between spin and orbital degrees of
freedom in the equation for fN, we may find a complete set of solutions
of this equation in the form
fN = Z IV VW W
where XN is a two-component constant spinor, and IPN(x) is an ordinary
one-component solution of the Schrodinger equation. However, we often
work with states that have definite values of the total angular momentum
j, for which , f N is (for non-vanishing orbital angular momentum) a sum
of such terms .
In the non-relativistic approximation, the four-component Dirac wave
function takes the form
1
( 1 + is
V/2m) f N
~~
2--
(1 - is
V/2m) fN
and Eq. (14.1 .18) gives the normalization conditio n
where
d3, f
e
(14.1 .37)
In relating matrix elements in an external field to free-particle matrix
elements, It is useful to note that the momentum space wave function in
an energy eigenstate N may be written
UN( P) = Qiz)-"2
d 3 p e--~~ ~~~~(~) ~ U (P~ 0 VN (P)1d a (14.1 .39)

572
14 Bound States in Exterrta! Fields
where u(p, a-) is the free-particle Dirac spinor
72 (1 + p • or/2m,) Za
1 0
X+2
0
and NR) is the Fourier transform of the two-cornponent Schrodinger
wave function
fN(p) --(27r)-"' f d3p
e _iP.XA W ,
In closing, as an aid in calculating the effects of various perturbations,
we note that the leading terms in the electron matrix elements of the
sixteen independent 4 x 4 matrices ar e
(UM UN) (J M' fN ) ~ 4773 (Vf~ ff ff
VfN )
e
( um [;'0, y] Irv) ^' ~ [(v,f ~
T iffiv ) + (f~a a - v fnr )]
14.2 Radiative Corrections in External Fields
(14.1 .40)
(14.1,41)
(14.1 .42)
( 14 . 1 .43)
(1 4 . 1 .44)
(14 .1 .45)
(1 4. 1 .4?)
We now consider radiative corrections to the results of the previous section,
due to the interaction of electrons with the quantum electromagnetic field
as well as the external field of the heavy charged particles . These radiative
corrections can be calculated using Feynman diagrams of the usual sort,
with the whole effect of the external field being to modify the propagator
of the electron field in the presence of the external electromagnetic field
(and to supply the external-field-dependent renormalization counterterms
shown in Eq. (14.1 .1)). To he specific, the effect of inserting any number

1 4.2 Radiative Corrections in External Fields
573
of vertices corresponding to the first term of the interaction (14. 1.1) in an
internal electron line of any graph is to replace the bare coordinate space
propagator -iS(x - Y) with a corrected propagator
-iS,,t (X, Y) =-= - is (X - Y) + (-i), f d
4Z, S(x - zj)ey1'.4,,(z1)s(z1 - A
+(-i),
d42l
d4z2 S(x - zl) eYPcl,{zi}S(zl - z2)e"° J~/V (a 2)S(a2 --T Y)
+ . . . t
where as usual
S(X - A
~ ~ P + m e
i
P
' (xl k~)
(Z~ )
+ M2 - iE
P~
(14.2.1 )
(We must write S, v as a function of x and y rather than of x - Y, because
the external field invalidates translation invariance .) The theorem proved
in Section 6.4 tells us that Eq. (14 .2.1) is the same as
with the subscript sl on the right indicating that the vacuum state (Do
and electron field W(x) are to be defined in a Heisenberg picture in which
the only interaction taken into account is the interaction (14 .1.1) with
the external field. Inserting a complete set of intermediate states ON in
Eq. (14.2.2) yields an expression for the propagator in terms of the Dirac
wave functions UN and VN introduced in the previous sectio n
N
M
It is also possible to obtain the propagator (14 .2.2) as the solution of the
inhomogeneous Dirac equation :
which follows from the field equations (14 .1.3) and anticommutation re-
lations (14.1.7), or formally from the perturbation series (14 .2.1). Also
Eq. (14.2.3) tells us that the propagator satisfies boundary conditions-,
its Fourier decomposition contains only `positive frequency terms' pro-
portional to exp{-iE(x° -- y O )} with E > 0 for x° - y° -# oo, and only
`negative frequency terms' proportional to exp{+iE(x° - y° )) with E > 0
for x'o-° --* -oo. The inhomogeneous Dirac equation with these bound-
ary conditions may be used to obtain a numerical solution 4 for this
propagator even in cases where the external field is too strong to allow the
use of the perturbation series (14 .2.1). Once the propagator 5.,,,(x,Y) has

574
14 Bound States in External Fields
been calculated, the amplitudes for scattering in an external field can be
calculated using ordinary Feynman diagrams, but with S,,~(x, Y) in place
of S{x - y} (and with .sit-dependent renormalization counterterms inserted
where appropriate) .
Now let us see how to use the perturbation series with this corrected
propagator to calculate the shifts of bound-state energy levels. Consider
the full electron propagator S 'W(x, y}, involving interactions of the electron
with the quantum electromagnetic field as well as the external field :
with T(x) the electron field in a Heisenberg picture including all inter-
actions, and Q() the vacuum eigenstate of the full Hamiltonian . For a
time-independent external potential we can find a complete orthonormal
set ON of eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian with energies E
. Inserting
a sum over these states in the operator product in Eq. (14 .2.5), we find
N
where
N
(
N, ''(xs t)Qo) =_ e+~E'NryNM
(14.x .$ )
(The sum includes an integral over continuum states as well as a sum over
discrete bound states. As before, UV and VNare non-zero only if the state
ON has charge -e or +e, respectively.) We can redefine the propagator as
a function of energy rather than time
fco
{
(Time-translation invariance dictates that S I(x, y) is a function of x0 - yo
but not of x° and y' separately.) From Eq. (14.2.6) we see that
UjV W UN (Y)
E ~; -E-a~
VN W 11'N(r)
E' +E-le
(14.2.10 )
In particular, S,~(x, Y ; E) has a pole at any electron bound-state energy,
and also at the negative of any positron bound-state energy. Of course,
positrons do not have bound states in the coulomb field of an ordinary
positively charged nucleus .)

14.E Radiative Corrections in External Fields 57 5
Let us now consider the lowest-order radiative corrections to the corm-
plete propagator. The Feynman rules here give the complete propagator
to this order as S, = S,~ + 6S.,f, with a correction term
~5.d (X, Y) _ d42d4w 5~,v (x, z) Y.*
w) St,j (w, y),
{14.2.11 }
where iE* is the sum Kf all one-loop diagrams with one incoming and
one outgoing electron line (excluding final electron propagators) calculated
using
W (x, y) in place of S (x - Y) for internal electron lines, plus second-
order renormalization counterterms. Using energy variables in place of
time variables, this is
where
Y~(z? ~'a E) = J d
{14.2.3 }
The effect of these radiative corrections is to change the wave functions
to UN = UN + 6UN and VN = VN + 6 z: N and the bound-state energies to
E~ = EN + 6 EN, so that the complete propagator is
6Ul Y ~~~U 7 A' ( J ) + i~i 1~ ( r7)b L6N(Y )
+ EN - E
1:
6VAXPAY) + VN(X)JV'IV(Y)
N
EN + E
(EN - ~ )~
1:
VAXPA Y} 6Erv (14.2.14)
N
( kN + E)~
(We are dropping the ic terms because we are now not taking E to lie in the
continuum of scattering states.) We see that the shift JEj,r of an electron
bound-state energy is given by the coefficient of -uN(xYiN(Y)1(EN - E)2
in the complete propagator. To calculate this, we note that Eq . (14.2.3)
gives
1:
UN(XA 1'v (Y )
N EN - E - i6
Inserting this in Eq. (14.2.12) gives
VN(XPN(Y)
1:'EN + E - ie
N
6S.Ax, y- E) = 1:
U nF~~~RM ( Y)
11
NM (EN - E)(Em - E )
X d32 dew uN(z) 2:*W( z, w ; E )u~w(w) + . .
(14.2.15)
(14 .2.16)

5 76
14 Bound States in Exter nal Fields
Figure 14.1 . Lowest-order Feynrnan diagrams for the electron self-energy func-
tion 2:~(x,y) in the presence of an external field. Here double straight lines
represent electron propagators S ,,, that include effects of the external field ; single
straight lines are the incoming and outgoing electron lines ; wavy lines are virtual
photons ; the cross represents renormalization counterterms .
where the dots denote additional terms involving at least one negative-
energy pole. Comparing the coefficients of (EN - E )-2 here and in
Eq. (14.2.14), we find
6EN = - dux day jj, (x) 1:~a(X, y
; Irv) UN(Y) . (14.2 .17)
The UN are solutions of the homogeneous Dirac equation satisfying the
normalization condition (14 .1.8), so this is very much like ordinary first-
order perturbation theory, but with - 2:* in place of a perturbation to the
Hamiltonian .
Generally 6EN turns out to be complex. This is simply a consequence
of the instability of atomic energy levels to radiative decay to lower levels ;
we saw in chapter 3 that an unstable state of energy E and decay rate
F produces poles in various amplitudes at the complex energy E - d'/2.
The imaginary part of Eq . (14.2. Z7) therefore equals -17/ 2, while its real
part gives the energy shift.
The Feynman diagrams for V are shown in Figure 14.1 . (Note that
there are new photon tadpole diagrams here because the external field
breaks the Lorentz invariance and charge-conjuga#ion invariance that
forbids such diagrams in the Krdinary Feynman rules.) Application of the

1 4.2 Radiative Corrections in External Fields
position space Feynman rules to these diagrams give s
- ley ,64(X _ Y)] jd4z [-iD(x - z)] Tr~[-iSAz,z)] [ey,])
-V2 - 1)(y,011 +
)64(X - Y) + ism 64 (X - J')
577
with the renormalization constants V2 - 1 ), V3 - 1}, and bm calculated
to second order in e. The minus sign in the second term is the usual one
that accompanies closed fermion loops.)
For strong external fields with Za of order unity it is necessary to
calculate the configuration space electron propagator Sa and the integrals
in Eqs. (14.2.17) and (14.2.18) numerically.4 However, for weak fields we
can use the first few terms of the series (14.2. 1) in Eq. (14.2.18) and
calculate these integrals in closed form.
For this purpose, it is more
convenient to work in momentum space, defining :
S,~(xj) = (21t)-4 f d4p~ d4p dl~'xe-P'y S,,,((P,,, P) ,
UN(X)= (2-K) -112
f d
3 p eip-X UN(P)
(14.2.19)
(f 4.2.2U)
(14.2.21 )
(We are here committing the impropriety of using the same symbol for a
function and its Fourier transform, leaving it to the displayed arguments
of the functions to indicate which is which .) Then Eqs. (14.2.1) and
(14.2. 1S) become
-t O + M

578
and
1 4 Bound States in External Fields
ie2
A
(p'
(27r)4 jk2 - i6-
+
2
1 Ai
(21r)4 (p
'p,)2
+
ie(Z3 - 1 )
[(P
f 2
r r
+
, - P)]
( 4.2.24)
Because the external field is time-independent , S,I (x, y ) and Y,,'{ x, y } can
depend on x0 and y° only through the difference x° - Y 0, SOS',,I (p', p) and
E~ {p', p} as well as ,ss~P(p' -p) must be proportional to d (p'~) - p0 )
The energy shift is then given by Eqs. (14.2.17) and (14-2.13) as
6EN= -f d' pj X p
(pt
I
( 14.2.2 5 )
(14.2.26)
(14.2.28 )
with 1~(P', p; E~r ) given by Eqs. (14.2.23), (14 .2.24), and (14.2.27'). This
is the master formula we shall use in the next section to calculate energy
shifts in weak external fields.
14.E The La mb Shift in Light Atoms
Let us now consider radiative corrections to the energy levels of a non-
relativistic electron in a general electrostatic field, such as an electron
in the Coulomb field of a light nucleus with Zx < 1. It is natural in
this limit to treat the Coulomb field as a weak perturbation, but we will
see that this would lead to an infrared divergence, re lated to that found
in Section 11 .3. The infrared divergence is really fictitious, because the
four-momenta p, EN and p', EN are not on the electron mass shell, but it
does force us to proceed with some care .
Usually this problem is dealt with by dividing the integral over virtual
photon energies into aloes-energy range, within which we can treat the
electrons non-relativistica.lly but must include effects to all orders in the

14.3 The Lamb Shift in Light A toms
579
external field, and a high-energy range, within which we have to include
relativistic effects but may include only effects of lowest order in the
external field . Instead, we shall here introduce a fictitious photon mass
U,
chosen to be much larger than typical electron kinetic energies, but much
less than typical electron momenta. For a Coulomb field, this amounts to
the requirement that
(h oc)'Mg P C ZIm"
( 14.3 .1 )
We write the photon propagator in the first two terms of Eq . (14.2 .24)
(including the formulas for the counterterms Z2 - 1 and Z26 rra) in the
form
V
i,
[k2 +,U2 - ie ]
~P - ic
k2 +4"2
i6i
-
The energy shift is correspondingly a sum of two terms, a `high-energy'
and a `low-energy' term : The high-energy term is calculated by using the
first term in the photon propagator (14.3.2 in the first three terms in
Eq . (14.2.24), and adding the result to the last two terms (the vacuum
polarization terms) in Eq. (14.2.24) which are not infrared divergent
anyway ; the low-energy term is calculated using the second term in
Eq. (14.3.2) in the first three terms of Eq. (14.2.24). One advantage of
this procedure is that we shall be able to use the results of the relativistic
calculations of Sections 11 .3 and 11 .4 directly, without the rather tricky
conversion from a photon mass to an infrared energy cutoff . Of course, in
the end we shall have to check that the dependence on the photon mass p
in the high-energy and low-energy contributions to the energy shift cancel,
leaving the total energy shift u-independent .
A Nigh-Energy Term
Because y is taken much larger than the atomic binding energies we can
here keep only terms of lowest order in the external field. The one-loop ra-
diative correction to atomic energy levels in a general time -independent ex-
ternal vector potential v,/P(x) is given in momentum space by Eq . (14.2.28),
with the self energy insertion Z (F', p) given by Eqs. (14.2.24) and ( 14.2.23) .
The terms of zeroth order in the external field simply cancel : the 6m term
cancels the first term with V = 0; the Z3 - 1 term cancels the third term
with W = 0; and the Z2 - i terms vanish because u(p) satisfies the Dirac
equation. The term in 1.w (P', p) that is of first order in tdA may be put in
the form
1, 1
(14.13)

580
with
14 Bound States in External Fields
ie'
A
(27r)4 k2 +y
+ me
+ tn.
(p' - k)2 + m~ ---~ i~
~
(P - k)2 + M~ - iF
+ (Z2
ae2
1
X
A Tr
i I+Me
'U [-i I - i P! + i fi + me]
VI
12 + rn ~ ~ + ' ~--- p)2 + M2
j ~ I
[
~
-
Z3 - I
[(p _ PI)2quv P)'u(Pf - V .
(1~ - p)
Comparison of the first two terms with Eqs . (11.3 .1) and (11 .3.8) and
the second two terms with Eqs . (1 1 .3 .9), (11 .2.3), and (11 .2.15) reveals
that Vi (p', p) is the complete one-loop vertex function, including vacuum
polarization and all counterterms, whose mass-shell matrix elements we
have already calculated in Section 1 1 .3. Using Eqs. (14.2.26) and (14.2.25),
this contribution to the energy shift (14.2.28) is given by
[~ENl hrgr,eriergy = ie dap' dip (ux (P') ri (P', EN, P, EN) UrrW}
x 1{P' - p) . (14 .3.5)
(This coul d have been guessed at, by simply replacing the ,~P in the
interaction of the electron with the external field with I,, .) As discussed
in Section 1 4.1, because Zoc I we can approximate
the Dirac wave
funct ion uIv in Eq . (14.3.5) as
[Urr(P }lay _
Ua(P, 6 ) [fN (R)I,
( 14 . 3. 6)
where fiv is the non-relativistic two-component wave function of an
electron in the external Coulomb field, and u(P, a) is the four-component
normalized solution of the momentum space Dirac equation
(14.3.7 )
for spin z-component ar. Since uN( P) approximately satisfies the free-
particle Dirac equation, Eq . (10.6.15) gives the general form of the matrix
element of 1-111, as
FIMW ) LYE` + ri(P% P)IUrv (R)

1 4.3 The Lamb Shiji in Light Atoms 58 1
where q - p' - p. The wave functions uN(p) fall off very rapidly for
Zam,, so we only need F I (92 ) and F2(q2) in the limit Jq21
C rra2 . In
this limit, Eqs . (11 .3 .31), (1 0.6.18 ), and ( 1 1 .3.1 6) give
2
e2
q~
(!~)
2
3
~l {4 ~ ~ 24a~2
nay In
2
+
5 -f- 4
,
e me
2)
e2
02(q
1 6rr~,7r2
2
2
~'
In m..2e~
+ 5 + 4 1
]
Lit us first consider the contribution of the F'1 term in Eq. (14,x.8),
which makes by far the largest contribution to the energy shift, and raises
the most interesting problems in its calculation. For a pure electrostatic
field with V = 0, Eqs. (14.3 .5), (14.3.8), and {1
.3 .9} give
2 2
[6ENI Fi =` l 24Tr2M2
In
2
2
+ 5 ~ 4
e
e
x I d'pl f d'p UN (P)
- ildo ('t -
P)) 7 11(1 _ p)2 UN(P)
(14.3 .11 )
To calculate this contributtnn, we may use the leading term in the non-
relativistic matrix element (1 4.1.41), and find
r e2
L6ENJ F~ ~"247~2YTZe
X
J ~3P1
or in position space
(14.3.9)
(14.3.10)
J
d3p f ' (e) eQe"(p' - p) [p' _ pl 2fN(p)
(14.3.12)
16ENIF
e
In (EI) +
2 +
3
d3X fNI(X) [eV2_Q111(X)1fN(X)
.
2 2
2
24n me
me
5
4
In particular, for the Coulomb potential (14 .1.2), we have e~2S/°(x) =
-Ze263(x), and the label N consists of a principal quantum number n
and angular-momentum quantum numbers j, era, while (11 .2.41) gives
[f`nj,v(4)]6 = 2(ZO(Mofn}~~26e,46,," J
4~. The energy shift (14.3.11) is then
2Z4~X5me
3~n3
In
?n2
e
2 3
5
4
(14.3.1.4)
(The lack of dependence of 6E on the total angular momentum z-
component m is guaranteed by rotational invariance.) The term ~ in
the brackets in Eqs. (14.3.12) and {14.3. 3} arises from vacuum polariza-
tion, and yields just the energy shift calculated somewhat heuristically in
Section 11 .2.

5$2
1 4 Bound States in External Fields
Before going on to calculate the magnetic and low-energy contributions
to the energy shift, it is worth noting that the result we have K6tained so
far yields a fair order-of- magnitude estimate of the Lamb shift without
further work . We can anticipate that the low-energy terms will contain a
term proportional to ln(ulft with a coefficient such as to cancel the ~-
dependence in Eq . (14 .3 .12). The constant B here is an energy which must
be included to make the argument of the logarithm dimensionless ; since it
is the binding of the electron in the atom that will eventually provide our
infrared cutoff, we may guess that B is a typical atomic binding energy,
of order B - (Za)'rri, The total energy shift in a state N with principal
quantum number n and orbital angular momentum Z7 is therefore of the
form
6EN
2Z'!Xsmc'
~In (Z414) 6,., + O(l)]
For the 2s state of hydrogen, the logarithmic term alone gives
(14.3.15)
s
1 me
dE2, ^• - 12~ In lacy
= 5. 5 x 10-' eV = 1300 MHz x 2~~t .
As we shall see, the `0( 1)' terms in Eq. (14 .3.15) will lower the total energy
shift by about 25 % .
Now let us consider the contribution of the F2 term in the matrix
element of ri, which as we saw in Section 10.6 may be interpreted as
a radiative correction to the magnetic moment of the electron . Using
Eqs. (14.3 .10), (14.3.8), and (14.3.6) in Eq. (14.3.5), we find that this term
gives an energy shift
[j E~Ta~~ ~2.r~2~~ J dip' r~' p (~ tv(Pf ~ [Y', ~'L~IU~r(P) )
X e..CV'U (A, - P) (P, - P)v U4.3 .16 )
or in position s p ace
ie2
I d3x ON (X)
71 UN (X)) e,~Fp, (X)
whe re
For a pure electrostatic field with V - Q, this is
W ie2
3
L6El1 I f .2
~ ~ ( lY rirOI #~{~r (JiL)~ • K [L''~~(~C)]
32a~ rn~
(14.3.17 )
(14.3.18 )
(14.3.19 )
In the non-relativistic limit L i < 1, we can use the approximate result

1 4.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atoms
(14.1.43), which here reads
58 3
M.f.~vfN) - i( V fN'
X ( ) f'N - if
(CT x vf1 )]
-
(1 4.3 .20)
Using this in Eq. (1 .3.5) and integrating by parts, this part of the energy
shift is
2
327[2 M~ 2
E
+2if~ (x) a - (V(eWO(x)) x VfN(x))] (14.3.21 )
Combining Eqs. (14.3.12) and (143.21) gives the total high-energy contri-
bution to the energy shift in an arbitrary electrostatic potential sa~ ~
[MN]high energy =
e2
(j~2 ) + 21
3X f1t
2
2
r~~e
me
5
24;T
ie2
(14.3 .22 )
B
Low-Energy Term
The low-energy contribution to the energy shift is obtained from the
first three terms in Eq. (14 .2.24), making the replacement in the photon
propagator
0--ie k2 + M
This substitution will eventually serve to cut off the integral over com-
ponents of the photon four-momentum k at values of order p, but it is
not possible to see this until we carefully take mass renormalization into
account, so we shall defer making any non-relativistic approximations
until then. Also, we are now including photon momenta as small or
smaller than the binding energies of the atomic states, so we must treat
the electrostatic forces responsible for this binding to all orders .
Instead of working with the momentum space formula (14 .2.24), it will
be convenient to return to the configuration space formula (142 .1$). This
gives the low- energy contribution to the electron self-energy function a s
X.F11X, A low energy :--- d8'T'S,si(xf y)~p Dlx + 6lYl, (P) 64(X ` )
f

584 14 Bound States in External Fields
where Dix - Y ; fir) is the modified photon propagator
1 f
f](x - Y ; p) - 2~~ d4 k e"")
k 2 1 ie ~ 1' - IF
(14.3.25)
()
~
and the counterterms Z2(Y)-I and Srn(u) are calculated using this modified
propagator. Converting from time to energy variables, the low-energy
contribution to the function (14.2.13) is then
ie2
[V,st(x, y ; E)j low energy 2
TZ 4 f A 1'P SAx, y ; E - ko) yj,
1 ~ 1
e
(Z2(A) - 1) (y - V + iyOE + iey',91, + m,) AX - Y)
The low-energy contribution to the energy shift is then given by
Eq. (14.2.17) as
I~EN]iowetter
d'xI d3
.Y Rx W [Y_~(x, y ; EA lowenergy UN(Y)
_ -ie2
d4k d3x
day uN(x),IP S.a(x,y; err - V ) y~ UN (Y)
( 27r )4 I
~ik.(x-Y)
- bm' (p)
dux FIN(X)UN(X)
(14.3 .27)
Note that the terms proportional to Z2 ( {U) - 1 have dropped out because
the Dirac wave function u.NW satisfies the Dirac equation Eq . (14.1 .10) .
For the electron propagator in the presence of the coulomb field, we use
Eq. (14.2.15) :
UM ~XAM(Y)
VM ~~~VM(Y)
S~q
y ; E )
with the sums in the first and second terms running over all one-electro n
and one-positron states, respectively. The k° integrals can be done most
easily by closing the contour of integration with a large semi-circle in the
lower half plans in the first term and in the upper half-plane in the second
term :
f dko (k2 +
1
(
EN1±koi- )
i7t
1

14.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atoms
58 5
and likewise if p is replaced with zero. The energy shift (14.3.27) now
becomes
e2 3
[6 EN] low ene rgy
2(2~~
-3
d k
M
I
MN(k)*FpMN(k) ( Jkl(EM - EN + iC)
Z
kl + ~ (EM - EN + k
+Y2 - i6)
1
-r
N (k)`
`~)Mrv (k) (Ikl(Em + Ear + I ke - ie}
-bm,(P) f d3X ONMUNM ,
where
MN(k) f d y e- RM(Y)Y'UN(Y)
(14.3.28)
( 14.3.29)
rPm,v(k) = [dy ~~~k~y N(3')Y~ UN(Y) . (14.3.30)
(Of course, the `sum' over M in Eq. (14.3.28) receives contributions only
from electron states in the first term and positron states in the second
term.) Eq. (14 .3.28) could have been derived more directly from old-
fashioned perturbation theory ; the energy denominators EM - EN + (0
and EM + EN+ co are the result of subtracting the energy E N of the
initial state from the energy of an intermediate state consisting of either
an electron of energy EM and a photon of energy co, or else a positron
of energy EM, a photon of energy c), and both the final and the initial
electron. (See Figure 14.2. )
Before making any approximations to Eq. (14.3.28), it will be convenient
to express the time components of the matrix elements ~'~~y and N N
in terms of the corresponding space components, using relations' derived
To de rive Eq. [1 4.3.31 ) , note that
,vf.,v(k)
j d3X e
W (X),/ UN
),O=4
Eq. (I43,32) is derived in the same way .

586
14 Bound States in Extern al Fields
. . .
. . . . ' N --- ---------
Figure 14.2. Old-fashioned perturbation theory diagrams for the low-energy part
of the electron energy shift. Here solid lines are electrons ; wavy lines are photons ;
the dashed line cuts through particle lines corresponding to the immediate states
appearing in the first two terms in (14.3 .28)
from the conservation of the electric current
ki fiMv( k) = (EN + Em)r.°~~v (k) .
(14.3.32 )
Furthermore, by using the completeness relation (14 .1.8) it is straightfor-
ward to show that
E [~r'
(k)l' +
and
E [11WN(k)~'(Em - EN)
M
roMN {k } 12] = 1
r°~rr (k)12(Em + EN)1
~-Fo*,Y(k) k - rMN(k)- r olw*N(k) k - rMN(k)
-ik • dux RN(X) Y U v (X) = 0,
( 14.3 .34)
the last step following from the parity condition (14.1 .23). In this way,

14.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atom, 58 7
Eq. (14.3.28) can be rewritten
[6E1V1low energy =
e2
(IrMN(k) 13 - I~ - IFMN(k)R21k2
2(
)
M
!I (
m
N
II
)
(FMN(k)1' - Ik - rApv(k) 12/(k' + y'))
( ~ I I (M
N
I I )
(IuNk2 --
Jk ' r.WN ( k) I
z1(k2 + p2 ))--
Vk-F+-y-7 (EM + EN + V"k~+W)
e2
2 ( ' I
( 2 , z}
M
+
6 me(P)
dux uN(x)UN(x) , (14.3.35)
In the next-to-last term, we have used the elementary integra l
d
3k I I ) = 2y712
.
(if -
So far, this has been an exact rewriting of Eq . (14.3.28) . We must now
invoke several approximations . First, consider mass renormalization. We
have already calculated 6m,(,u) to order a in Section 11 .4 ; it is
2
bme(y) =
2m, 7r2 e2
J
dX [I + x] In
2 +
(1 - X) i 4.3 .36
rra2x2
(
)
F
Although in Section 11 .4 we regarded y as a regulator mass, to be taken
much larger than m, we can just as well use Eq . (14.3.36) to provide a
vale for bm, (M) in the case that interests us here, y < m, In this limit
Eq. (t4.3.36) gives
6mAU }
2
ow [1 2
1rm + . .. {14.3 .37}
We also recall that for Z a
1, UN(X) is given by Eq . (14.1.37) as
I [ (I - a . v/2 + . . . )f N(X)
(14.3,38)
where dots indicate terms of higher order in hoc ; v is the non-relativistic
velocity operator -aV/rn, ; and fi(x) is a two-component spinor solution

5 88
14 Bound States in External Fields
of the non- relativistic Schrodinger equation, normalized according to
Eq. (14.1 .8) so that
f
I.frr( X ) IZ ~ ~ --- ~(v')NN + . . . (14.3 .39)
This gives the coefficient of 6 me(y) in Eq. (14.3.35) as
We note immediately that the leading term in -- 6m, (p) f dux uNUN cancels
the term ap/2 in Eq. (14,3,35), Indeed, we could have anticipated this
cancellation, because the term ocpJ2 in Eq. (14.3.35) survives in the limit
hoc --+ 0, and the definition of m,(M) as the renormalized electron mass
implies that there must be no energy shift in this limit. By the same
argument we can anticipate that the term of order ap 2/me in 5m~(y)
(which is larger than of order a(Z!X]4M" and therefore cannot simply
be neglected) cancels the second and third terms in Eq . (14.3.35), which
are also of this vrder,'« On the other hand, the product of the ocp 2 Ime
The cancellation can be shown a s follows. We anticipate that the second and third terms in
Eq. ( 14.13 5) are small enough so that we they can be evaluated using the extreme nonrelativistic
approximation fluN (x) = uN{x) for the Dirac equation satisfied by uN{x). On the other hand,
although the Coulomb force may be neglected in the positron wave fun ctions zm (x), the sum
over M in the third term receives important contributions from relativistic positrons , so we use
the approximation v p,ff{x} 2~ (2n)-3~2 a (P, cr)eW'
where a (p,ff) is the positron spinor introduced
in section 5 .5, normalised so that v (P, d+ )v(P, ¢)
Thus the sums over M in the second and
third terms of Eq. (14.3.35) are approximately given by
Ef'~M*N(k)f"
,
+ m e
M
2 Vfk
+ me
6ij (
1#! e
~ifil,-
('
: )
M
2 kf +
e To leading order in p{mr, the second and third terms in Eq. (14335) are then, respectively ,
4me(2n)3 k
ka +i 2 2
k2 + ml 4gm"
and
e2 -1
k2 + mP - me 2
207P ki k2 + P1
(Eq. ( 14.3,32) n.sles out t he possibility that a relativistic correction to the lat ter expression might
not be suppressed by the factor k2/M1, that appears in this expression for IkI 2 < Mv•} These two
terms are cancelled by the term +3g2f4nine in -bmr(p) f d'xiiv(x)u1V(x). Finally, we note tha t
relativistic corrections to
the above estimates for the sums over positron states would involve
additional factors of r,,fcl sz (Za)" yielding contributions of order a(Z x)2p2 fine < o!(Zx)¢m"
which jus tifies the non-rela tivistic approximations used here .

1 4.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atoms
58 9
term in ~me with the second term in the matrix element (14 .3.40) is of
order (Za)25cP2f Frt' < x(ZY)4,, and may therefore be neglected. To order
a(Zoc)4m" the only remaining effect of mass renormalization is to leave
us with the product of the leading term in 6m.,(p) with the term of order
(Z Oc)2 in f dux uNUN
871
2
1 G ,7r
(This is the effect of mass renormalization on the electron kinetic energy,
mentioned in Section 1 .3.) It turns out that this is oust the negative of
what the first term in Eq . (14.3.35) would he if we neglected the difference
between energy levels. To see this, note that the integral in this term
is effectively cut off at J k~ - p < Z arn, so we can evaluate the matrix
element I'MN(k) in the limit k -+ 0. To lowest order in Za, Eq. (14.1 .42)
gives
r~~~~~ ~ (V)
IV
(14.3.41)
and using the completeness of the solutions fN of the non-relativistic
Schradinger equation, we then have
so to this order
e2
2(27r ~~
r~MN (k)FMN (k)r' ~~i ONN
M
A
(~][MN(k)12 - Ik - rMN(k)12/k2)
k2
I-- Ik - IFMN(k) I'l(k'+ u2 ))
k2
+
M2
e2
2
(1
..-k2/3(k2+/12,)
Y(
)
f
3kz
k2
'+'02
16ar
(14.3.42)
Thus after mass renormalization we are left with just the first term in
Eq. (14.3.35), less the same with energy differences EN - Em dropped :

590
PENhow energy
14 Bound Sta tes in Externa l Fields
e
2(2ar)3
M
x
(jrMN(k)j' - Ik - FMN(k)ll/(k2 + [j1))_-
Again using Eq. (14.3-41), this i s
-e
2
[6EN1lowencrgy = 2(Z7c)~ ~(~~
EN) l VMrvl2
X
A
~
3(
)
(14.3 .44)
though typical values of the electron momentum are much larger
Even
than typical atomic energy differences, this is not true of typical values
of j k j in this integral, because the integral would be infrared divergent if
we did not keep the EM - EN terms in the denominators . The i ntegral in
Eq. (14 . 3. 4) may be evaluated in the limit u >> j Em - EN ~ "-' (Z oc)2 rrae by
dividing the range of integration of
J k l into two segments, from zero to
A and from ). to infinity, with ~ c hosen so th at I Em - EN ~ ~, <
c but
otherwise arbitrary. In this way we find
1
C*
0
k' dk
2
[ 3k2EA1 - E N + k) - iiF
~ --~ k2 1 3 (k2 + 1U2 )
2t
2 [in
y
- ) + I + inB(EN - E
)
3
21EM - EN l
6
The imaginary term here reflects the possibility of decay of the atom in
state N to states M Kf lower energy. This term contributes to the decay
rate, given by the imaginary part of the energy shift. We are interested
here in the real part of the energy shift, and so will drop this imaginary
term in what follows . Eq. (14.3.44) now gives
eY
'
I6ENllowenergy - ~7
72
(Em - EN Y ►' MN 1' In
21E~v ~ EMI
+ 6

14.3 The Lamb Sh ift in Light Atom s
C
Total Energy Shift
59 1
We need to make a connection between the sum in Eq. (4.3.45) and the
matrix element in the high-energy term (14 .3.22). For this purpose, let's
first see what value the sum in Eq . (14.3.45) would have if we could ignore
the logarithm. We note that (EM - EN)VNM = [v, H]rr , so
j:(EM - EN)IVMN
12 = ' E ([v', HI jvM VMiN + VNi M [H, v ~] my)
Al Mi
2
[p', [p', HI
2m, (
) NN
The only term in the non-relativistic Hamiltonian H that does not com-
mute with the momentum operator p is the potential term, -ev/°(x), so
this gives
T (EM - EN) f V nrrrvl ' = -
e
2~ (V2dx))~v~r (14 .3.46)
Inspection of Eqs . (14.3. 5) and (14.3.22 now shows that the term propor-
tional to In g in the high-energy term is cancelled by the term proportional
to In g in the low-energy term :
6 EN = P EN] high energy + [~ EN] 1aw energy
2
2 J:(Em - EN) ~ VMN
In
me
- +
5 - ii
M
(21E_N-Em~)
e2
(
(14.3 .47 )
So far, this has been for a general electrostatic field .4°(x). Let us now
specialize to a pure Coulomb field, with
.sad°(x) = Z e/ fix
(14.3 .48)
In this case, Eq. (14.3.46) reads
2
2m2 (61(x)))NN
e
Af
_ ~~
2
(f(O)fNw)) .
(1 4.3 .49)
e
This is non-vanishing only for ~, = 0. Also, the matrix element in the last
term in Eq . (f 4,3 .47) has the valu e
V(e,w° (x)) X P)NN
-Z e ( ~ ~
~ ~)NN ' ( 14.3 .50)
which is non-vanishing only for ~ =# 0, It is therefore useful at this point
to divide our consideration between the two cases, e = 0 and ~'* 0 .

59 2
i.
e =0
1 4 Bound States in External Fields
It is convenient here to define a mean excitation energy KEN
IVMrrl 2 (Em - EN) In I rv - Em l =1n dEN
I VMN l
2 (Em - Irv )
M
M
~~2 1n AEN (f(O)fO) . (14.3.51)
For s-wave hydrogenic states, the label
N consists of a principal
quantum number n and spin z-component
rrt,
and [f'nm(O)l,
_
2(ZocmQ/n)~~'&,m/ ~4a, S o
(Zm) 3
(fO)fz(O)) = 1 a
e
7r
n
(14.3.52)
Using Eqs. (14.3.51) and (14 .3.52) in Eq. {14.3.47} gives the energy shift in
these states a s
[6Ej n,(=o = 4a(
3 n3
me
In
2dE
me
LL
+ 30
M,~~.a
ii.
f *D
For non-vanishing orbital angular momentum the sum (14 .3.49) van-
ishes, so the definition (14 .3.51) is inappropriate. Instead, it is conventional
here to define a mean excitation energy KEN by
' In I EN - Em I =_
2(Z 17)4M,
2AEN
n (Z20(2me )
(Because Eq . (14.3.49) vanishes, it makes no difference what units are used
to measure EN - E M in Eq. (14.3.54).} Also, in a state of total angular
momentum j and orbital angular momentum ?, the scalar product a
- L
has the familiar value j(j + 1) - ~(e + 1) - ~, and for principal quantum
number n the operator 1 /r3 has the expectation value
2Z3a3m3
(
](
)
Putting this all together in Eq. (14.3-47), we have for 0 :
4OG~Z OL )41~i3e
~~~~~'~ ~ 37rrt3
In
z2 LX 2 me
It only remains to use these results to give numerical
energy shifts . The mean excitation energies here mus t
(14 .3.53 )
( 14.3.55 )
value for the
be calculated

1 4.3 The Lamb Shift in Light Atoms 593
numerically ; using non-relativistic hydrogen wave functions, they have the
values
KE2V = 0.9704293186(3) Ry ,
where I Ry = m,acZ /2 = 13.6057 eV. Eq. (14.3.53) then give s
PE] is
tbEl2s =
4a~ ~ In
Me + 19
= 3 .3612 x 10-5 eV
3 7r
(2
)
AE1$ 30
_ 27rh x 81Z7.4114Hz ,
(14.3.57)
asm
In
me
+ ~9 - 4.2982 x 10-5 e V
67r
2AE2s
TO
= 27,h x
1039.31 MHz,
( 1 4.3.58)
while Eq . (14.3.56) give s
-
In
- -
_ - 5. 32G 1 X lu
e
Oc 5 me CCU ~e 1
-.8
61c
2dE2p
8
2,ah x - 12.88 MHz .
(14.3 .59)
The classic Lamb shift is the energy difference between the 2s and
2pi states of the hydrogen atom, states that would be degenerate in the
absence of radiative corrections. Our calculation has given
[bE] 2s. - [6E] 2p, {z = 4.35152 x 10-5 eV = 2,gh x
1 052. 19 MHz .
This is numerically close (though analytically not identical) to the old
result of Kroll and Lamb and French and Weisskopf,7 which they ob-
tained using the techniques of old-fashioned perturbation theory . Earlier
in this section we made a crude estimate of 1300 MHz by considering
only the high-energy contribution to the 2s energy shift, with an infrared
cutoff guessed to be of order a2 me = 2 Ry. We can now see that this was
an overestimate, arising mostly from the fact that the true value of the
effective infrared cutoff KE25 = 16 .64 Ry is considerably larger than we
had guessed . On the other hand, as described in section 1 3, in 1947 Hans
Bethe8 was able to make a rather good estimate of the Lamb shift, 1040
MHz, by considering only the low-energy contribution to the 2s energy
shift, with an ultraviolet cutoff guessed to be m, (Bethe made the first
estimate of the excitation energy, A E2S C-- 17.8 Ry. )
The calculation of the Lamb shift described here has been improved
by the inclusion of higher-order radiative corrections and nuclear size

594
14 Bound States in Exterraa! Fields
and recoil effects. At present the greatest uncertainty is due to a doubt
about the correct value of the rms charge radius rp of the proton . For
rp = 0.862 x 10-13 cm or rp = 0.$05 x 10-1 1 cm, one calculation' gives
a Lamb shift of either 1057.87 MHz or 1057.8 5 MHz, while anotherla
gives either 105 7.83 MHz or 10 5 7.865 MHz. Given the uncertainty in
proton radius, the agreement is excellent with the present experimental
value,"
1 057 .845(9 ) MHz. The accuracy of this experimental value is
limited chiefly by the -
100 MHz natural line width of the 2p state in
hydrogen, so further improvements here will be very difficult .
In the last few years there has been an important improvement in
measurements of the energy shift of the Is ground state itself, by direct
comparison of the frequency of the is-2s resonance with four times
the frequencies of the 2s-4.y and 2s-4d two-photon resonances . These s
and d states are much narrower than the 2p state, so these frequency
differences can be measured more accurately than the classic Lamb shift .
For a brief while it seemed that there was a discrepancy here between
theory and experiment . Calculationsla,1 3 showed that for a proton radius
rp = 0.$62(1 l.) x 10- 13 cm or 0.805(l 1) x 10-1 3 cm, the inclusion of proton
size and other corrections increases the theoretical is energy shift from
the above result of 8127.4 MHz to 8173 .12(6) MHz or 8172 .94(9) MHz,
respectively. This result for a proton radius r. = 0,862{i 1} x 10- 1-1 cm,
which is believed to be more reliable, was not quite in agreement with the
measured value13 of 8172,86{5} MHz. But a later calculation14 that adopts
this proton radius and includes terms of order Y2 (~ .!X )5 yields energy shifts
for the Is, 2s, and 4s states in agreement with experiment . So apparently
quantum electrodynamics wins again .
Problems
I . Consider a charged scalar particle of mass m 0, described by a
field O(x) whose only interaction is with an external time-independen t
electromagnetic field _Q/A(x). Let TN be a complete set of normalized
one-boson or one-antiboson states with energies Fes, and defin e
UN(X)e-;ENt =(00,0(X, tK N) and VN(x)e~ ENr = ON, 0 (X, 00o), where
(Da is the vacuum. Show that the
UN and v.N together form a
complete set, and give formulas for the coefficients of u N and VN in
the expansion of a general function f (x).
2. Suppose we include radiative corrections in the theory of Problem
1. Let iCi' (x, y ) be the sum of all diagrams with one incoming and
one outgoing charged scalar line (excluding final scalar propagators)
to order a. Derive a formula for the shift in the energies E N of the

References
595
one-boson states due to these radiative corrections, in terms o€' UNW
and II *(x,y) .
3. Use the results of Section 14.3 to calculate the radiative decay rate
K f the 2p states of hydrogen .
4. Suppose that the electron has an interaction with a light scalar field
0, of the form gOVW, . Suppose that the scalar mass rrao is in the
range (ZI)2M, < rn'O < Zarn'. Calculate the change in the energy
of the 1 s state of hydrogenic atoms due to this interaction .
5. Carry out the calculation of Problem 4 for rno - 0.
References
1. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A117, 610 (1928) .
2. See, e.g., A. R . Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quanturn Mechanics,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957) ; M, E. Rose, Elementary
Theory ofAngular Momentum (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1957 ) .
3. See, e .g., L . I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, (McGraw-Hill, New York,
1949) : Section 43 . The original references are C. G. Darwin, Procy.
Roy, Soc. (London) A118, 654 (1928) ; ibid., A124, 621 (1928) ; W.
Gordon, Zeit. f Phys. 48, 11 ( 1 928 ).
4. G. E. Brown, J. S. Langer, and G . W. Schaefer, Proc. Roy. Soc.
(London) A 251, 92 (1959); E. Brown and D. F. Mayers, Prat.
Roy. Soc. (London) A 251, 105 (1959) ; A. M. Desiderio and W. R.
Johnson, Phy5. Rev. A3, 1267 (1971) .
S. R. W. Huff, Phys. Rev. 186, 1367 ( 1 969 ).
6. N. M. Kroland W E . Lamb, Whys . Rev. 75, 388 (1949 )
7 . J. B. Fre nch and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev. 75, 1 240 (1949)
S. H. A. Bete, Phys. Rev. 72, 339 (1947) .
9. J. R. Sapirstein and D. R . Bennie, in Quanturn Electrodynamics, e d .
by I Kinoshita (World Scientific, Singapore, 1990) : p. 575, and
references quoted therein .
1 0. H. Grotch, Foundations of Physics 24, 249 (1994) .

596
14 Bound States in External Field s
11 . S. R. Lundeen and F. M. Pipkin, Whys. Rev. Lett. 46, 232 (198 1 ) ; S.
R. Lundeen and F. M. Pipkin, Metrologia 22, 9 (1986). For a review,
see F. M. Pipkin, in Quantum Electrodynamics, ed. by I Kinoshita
(World scientific, Singapore, 1990) : p. 697.
12. M. Weitz, A. Huber, F. Schmidt-Kaleir, D . Lei fried, and T. W.
Hanschs Whys. Rev. Lett. 72, 328 (1994) .
13. M. Weitz, F. Schmidt-Kaler, and T. W. Hansch, Phys . Rev. Lett . C$,
1120 (1992), and Ref 11
14. K. Pachucki, Pays . Rev. Lett. 72, 3154 (1994) .

Author Index
Where page numbers are given in italics, they refer to
publications cited in bibliographies and lists of references .
Aaron, R. 470
Aharony, A. 168
Aitken, A. C. 106
Amado, R. D . 470
Anderson, C. D. 12, 30, 4 3, 45
Ararnaki, S. 3 9
Argyres, P. C. 257
Artie, E . 424
Bagger, J . .338, 532
Bailey, J . 498
Bakamijian, B. 189
Borgmann, V. 106
Be linfante, F. J. 44, 3 16, 338
Herein , F. A. 403, 404, 4 24
Bergmann, P. G. 338
Bethe, H. 29, 33, 36, 45, 47, 560 , 563,
593,596
Beyer, R. T. 3 9 , 43
Bhabha, H. J . 29, 45
Bloch, F. 33, 46, 562
Bjorken, J. D. 532
Blackett, P. M . 1 3
Bagoliuhav, N. N. 5 12, 532
Bohr, N. 3, 11, 19, 32, 42, 44, 168, 198,
256
Born, M. 3,
1 5, 16, 17,
1 8, 19, 23, 25,
40, 4 2, 43, 46, 11 5, 1 66, 292
Breit, G. 3 6, 48, 162, 167, 1 68
de Broglie, L. 3, 40
Brown, G . E . 596
Brown, L. 39, 40 , 45, 46, I 6 7, 532
Burgoyne, N . 25 7
Butler, C. C. 30, 45, 1 23, 1 6 7
Coo, T. Y. 39
Carlson, J . F. 29, 30, 32, 45
Cartan, E. 256
Casimir, H. B . G. 338
Cassen, B . 167
Chadwick, J . 45
Chew, G. 47, 471
Chinowsky, Vii 1 67
Christenson, J. H. 106, 16 1
Cohen, R. S_ 44, 256
Collins, P. D . B . 471, 532
Compton, A. H. 41, 362, 364, 504
Condon, E. U. 16 7
Conversi, M . 30,45
Crichton, J. 14. 189
Cronin, J . W. 1 06, 132,167
curie-Joliat, I . 45
Dalitz, R. H . 141, 1 68, 563
Dancoff, S. M. 33, 34, 46
Darwin, C . G. 10, 41 , 42, 596
Davissan, C. J . 3, 40
De Witt, C. M . 377, 418, 424, 471
Deans, W. M. 4 1
Dedijer, S. 257
Deser, S. 563
Desiderio, A. M . 596
DeWitt, B. S . 39, 424
Dirac, P. A. M . 4, 5, 6, 7, S, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28,
29, 32, 33, 34, 39, 4 0 , 41 , 42, 43, 44,
46> 47, 49, 105, 200, 213, 218, 256,
292, 325, 328, 329, 330, 338, 345,
376, 424, 457, 470, 489, 5 65, 566,
567, 596
Donoghue, J . F. 53 3
597

598
Author Index
Drell, S . D. 532
Dresden, M . 167
Drinkwater, J . W. 4 7
Drixhl, K . 424
Dyson, F. J. 37, 48 , 106, 1 44, 168, 258,
259, 287, 291, 376, 499, 532
Eckert, 153, 156, 1 62, 165
Edmonds, A. R. 106 . 1 67, 168, 257, 596
Ehrenfest, P.
1 5, 29, 43, 45
Einstein, A . 12 ,
1 3, 18, 19, 43, 55, 518
Elsasser, W 3, 40
Ep stein, S . 46
Erickson, G. W. 498
Euler, H . 32, 46, 523, 524, 526, 53 3
Fabri, E. 168
Faddeev, L . D. 190, 376, 378, 424
Feenberg, E. 1 6 7, 16$
Feinberg, G . 1 67, 530, 533
Feinberg, J . 338
Fermi, E. 1 1 , 1 9, 23, 39, 42, 4 3, 44, 292
Ferretti, B. 167
Feynman, R. P. 33, 36, 37, 38, 47, 48,
259, 2 7 6, 280, 28 6, 353, 354, 355,
364, 375, 376, 377, 440, 411, 413,
417, 423, 424, 426, 430, 459, 472,
474, 48 6, 495, 559, 572
Fierz, M . 20, 40, 44, 46, 47, 257
Fitch, V. L . 106, 133, 167
Flanders, H . 1 06, 375
Fock, V, 22, 23, 4 1, 44, 375
Foley, H . M . 48
Frautschi, S . C . 471, 562
Fredenhagen, K. 424
French, J. S. 35, 39, 47, 593, 596
Friedman, J . 1. 106, 1 67
Frohlich, H. 48
Froissart, M . 1 68
Fukuda, H . 47
Furry, W. H. 23, 27, 28, 32, 44, 46, 428,
$ 7Q
Gaberdiel, R. 424
Garnow, G. 7, 39, 42
Garwin, R . 106, 167
Gasser, J. 533
Ge11-Mann, M. 123, 132, 167, 291, 463,
471, 556, Sfi3
Georgi, H. 257
Gerrner, L. H. 3, 40
Gerstein, 1. S. 424
Glimm, J . 423
Goldberger, M. L. I66, 463, 471, 556 ,
563
Goldstone, J. 178, 189
Gordon, W. 4, 7, 10, 13, 25, 27, 41, 42,
200, 211, 23 9, 277, 596
Goudsmit. S . 5, 10, 41
Green, M . B . 375
Grisaru, M. 563
Grotch, H. 596
Gudehus, T. 257
Gursey, F. 1 06
Haag, R . 424
Hafstad, L. D . 167
Hahn, Y. 53?
Halter, J . 533
Hansch, T. W. 596
Harvey, J. 533
Hawing, S. W 533
Heisenberg, W 3, 4, 10, 15, 16, 17, 20,
21, 23, 24, 25, 29, 31, 32, 33, 4 0 , 41,
42, 43. 44} 45, 46, 109, 166, 272p
519, 532, 533
Heitler, W. 29, 45, 48
HePp, K. 512, 53 2
Herzberg, G. 45
Heydenberg, N . 1 67
Hibbs, A. R. 423
Harking, J . G. I06
Hoddeson, L. 39, 40, 46, 167
Howard, J. C. 470
Hubbard, J, 461, 470
Huber, A. 59 6
Huff, R. W 596
Hugenholtz, N . M . 178,190
Infield, L. 46
Inonii, E. 62, 105
Inoue, T. 45
Israel, W. 533
1 to, D. 48

Author index
J acki, R . 40, 424
Jackson, J. D . 47 1
Jaffe, A . 423
Jarnnier, M. 39
Bauch, J . M . 257
Johnson, W. R. 596
J Q11O Li F 45
Jordan, P. 3, 1 0, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23,
25, 4 0, 41 , 43, 44, 292
Joos, H. 25 7
Jost, R. 258
Jouvet, B. 470
Julian, R. S . 48
Kabir, P. 530, 532
Kahn , B. 48
Kaiser, G. 257
K a11en, G. 457, 470
I{amefuchi, S . 424, 532
K anesawa, S. 48
Kemmer, N. 31 , 46
Kinoshita, T. 563, 59 6
Klein, 0. 4, 7,
1 3, 25, 27, 29 , 41, 44,
200, 21 1 , 239, 277, 368, 375
Kola, Z . 46, 48
Kockel, B. 31 , 46, 533
Koll ath, R. 1 6$
Kramers, H. A. 35, 47, 81, 106, 1 68,
469, 4 7 1
Kroll, N. M . 38, 4 7, 593, 596
de ECronig, R. 469, 4 71
Kubo, R. 190
Kusch, P. 48
Laidlaw, M . G. G. 418, 424
Lamb, W. E. 35, 36, 38, 47, 48, 593,
596
Landau, L. U. 106, 168, 418, 452
Lande, A . 41
Lang, S. 424
Langer, J . S. 596
Latter, C . 30
Lederman, L. 1 06, 167
Lee, T. D. 106, 127, 132, 167, 178, 189,
228,424,549,563
Lehmann, H. 438, 457, 463, 470
Liebfried, D. 596
Lei naas, J . M. 424
Leutwyler, H . 533
Lewis, H . W. 46
Lifshitz, E. M. 106,168
Li ppmann, B. 11 1, 166
Li u, H. H . T. 498
London, E 375
Low, F. E. 291, 556, 563
Liiders, G. 245, 257
Ludwig, G. 40
Lundeen, S. R. 596
Lyubarski, G . Ya. 257
Mackey, G . W. 105
Mandela#am, S. 424
Marshak, R. E. 38, 45
Maskawa, T. 329, 330, 338
Matthews, P. T. 532
Mayers, D. F. 596
Mehra, J . 39, 42
Michelson, A. A. 41
Miller, A. I. 39, 44, 498
1lriiyamoto, Y. 47
Miller, C. 29, 45, 46, 1 66
1Vf yrheirn, J. 424
Nafe, J . E. 48
Nagel, D . E . 48
Nakajima, H. 329, 330, 338
Nappi, C. R. 257
Nash, C . 106
Nauenherg, M. 549, 563
Neddermeyer, S. H. 30, 45
Ne'eman, Y. 123,167
Nelson, E. S. 48
Newton, R. G . 166
Nishina, Y. 29, 44, 368, 375
Nardheim, L . 30, 45
Nardsieck, A. 33, 46, 562
Novikov, V. 533
59 9
Occhialini, G. P, S. 13, 30, 45
Dhnuki, Y. 424
Omnes, R. 471
Oppenheimer, J . R. 12, 23, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 35, 3 7 , 38, 43, 44, 45, 4 6
Osterwalder, K. 424

600
Author Index
Pachucki, K . 596
Pais, A. 39, 132, 1 67
Pancini, E . 30, 45
Parasiuk, 0. 512, 532
Paschen, F. 41
Pasternack, S. 4 7
Pauli, W 3, 11, 14,
1 9, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 26, 28, 31, 40, 42, 43 . 46, 47,
245, 257, 292, 494, 498, 51 7
Peierls, R. E. 44, 46, 47, 168
Pendleton, H. 563
Perlmutter, A .. 257
Petermann, A. 498
Piccioni, 0. 30, 4 5 , 167
Pipkin, F. M. 596
Placzek, G. 1 68
Podolsky, B. 22, 44
Polchinski, J . 424, 526, 533
Pomeranchuk, I . Ia . 468, 469, 471
Popov, V. N . 377, 424
Power, C. F. 30, 45
Present, R. S. 16 7
Rani, I. 1 . 36, 48
Racah , G. 4 5
Ramsauer, 1 65
Rarita, W. 232, 257
Rechenberg, H. 45
Regge, T. 468, 469, 471
Retherford, R. C . 47
Richardson, Q. 47
Roberts, J . E. 4 2 4
Roberts on , H . P. 42
Rocheste r, G . D. 30, 45, 1 23, 167
Rnhrlich , F. 257
Rose, M. E. 46, 106, 1 67, 168, 257, 596
Rosenbluth, M. N. 457, 470
Rosenfeld, L . 19, 44, 198, 256, 338
Riiger, S. M. 424
Sakata, S. 45, 532
Salam, A, 39, 42, 512, 532
Salpeter, E . E. 560, 563
Sapirstein, J . R. 596
Schaefer, G. W. 596
Schearer, J. F. 41
Schiff, L. I. 41, 43, 168, 563, 596
Schmidt-Kaler, F. 596
Schrader, R. 424
Schradinger, E . 3, 4, 6, 13, 27, 41, 109
Schroer, B. 257
Schubert, K. R. 167
Schur, I. 257
Schwarz, J. H . 375
Schweber, S. S . 39, 40
Schwinger, J . 14, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40,
43, 46, 47, 48, 111, 166, 232, 257,
259,
2 91, 3 75 , 37 6, 424, 470, 489,
498
Screatan, R. 471
Seiler, R. 257
den, S. 106
Berber, R . 46, 48
Shifman, M. A . 533
Skater, J. C. 4 2
Sommerfield, A. 3, 5, 6, 11, 41
Spaarnay, M. J . 338
Stachel, J . 44, 256
Steinberger, J. 1 67
Sterman, G . 563
Stevenson, E. C . 30
Stoner, E. C. 42
Stara, R. 39
Stratonovich, R. L. 461, 470
Streater, R. F. 257, 258
Street, J. C. 30
Suura, H. 498, 562
Swieca, J. A. 2 57
Syrnanzlk, K. 438, 464, 470
't Hooft, G . 377, 477, 424, 498
Takahashi, Y. 447, 4 70
Tamrn, I. 12, 43, 44, 375
Tate, J . E. 424
Tatti, T. 48
Telegdi, V. L. I 06 , 167
Thirring, W. 463, 471
Thomas, L. H. 42, 189
Thomson, J. J. 369
Titchmarsh, E. C. 1 90
Toll, J. S. 471
Tomonga, S .-I. 3 6, 37, 38, 40, 46, 47,
48, 259,376

Author Index
Townsend 165
Tung, VLF -K . 106
Turlay, R. 106, 167
Tumhull, H. 106
Tuve, M . A . 167
Uehling , E . A. 34, 46, 47, 484, 498
LThlenheck, G . E. 5, 41
Urnezawa, H. 532
Vainshtein, A. I. 533
Vaughn, M. J. 4 70
Selo, G . 257
Veltman, M. 477, 498
Villars, F. 494, 498
van der Waerden, B . 1. 40, 4 3, 257
Waller, I, 31, 45
Ward, J . C. 447, 470
Watson, K. M.130, 166, 167
Webb, N. 45
Weinberg, S. 40, 42, 47, 103, 167, 1 68,
190, 25 6, 257, 338, 375, 424, 470,
471, 532, 533, 563
Weinrich, M. 106, 167
Weisskopf, V. F. 24, 26, 28, 31, 32, 34,
35, 37, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 593,
596
Weitz, M. 596
Wentzel, G . 40, 42, 46
VVess, J. 335, 532
60 1
West, T. 375
Weyl, H. 12, 43, 375
Wheeler, J. A. 4, 33, 46, 47, 1 66
Whittaker, E. 40
Wichmann, E. H. 159, 256, 498
Wick, G. C . 1 05, 291, 475, 486, 497,
498
9Vightinan, A. S. 1 05, 257, 258
aligner, E. P. 19, 39, 42, 43, 44, 51, 62,
68, 91, 93, 10[}, 1 03, 104, 105, 1 06,
108, 15 3, 156, 162, 1 68, 236
Wilczek, F. 424
Williams, E. J. 563
Williams, R. C. 47
Williams, E. 47
Wilson, W. 41, 525, 528, 533
Witten, E. 40, 257, 375
Wu, C. S. 106, 127, 16 7
Yang, C. N. 1 46, 127, 132, 167, 168,
178, 184, 228, 257, 375
Yang. C. P. 168
Yennie, D. R. 562, 596
Yukawa, H. 30, 45, 159, 436, 4 70
Zacharias, J . R. 48
Zakharov, V. I. 53 3
Zimmerman, 438, 463, 470, 5 1 2, 532
Zurnino, B. 25 7
Zwanziger, D . 257

Subject Index
abefian groups, defined, 55
absorption of photons, 18
accidental symmetries, 529-31
action, 299, 307
alpha decay, 160
anomalous Seeman effect, 5
annihilation and creation operators,
1 6, 19-20, 23-4, 26-8, 169, 173
7
antiparticles, 13-14, 23-8, 104, 149-50,
199,567
antiunitary and antilinear operators,
defined, 5 1
anyans, 4ZQ
auxiliary fields, 302-3, 314
axial gauge, 346
baryon number, defined, 122
Belinfante tensor, 3 1 6
Berez-in integration, defined, 403
beta decay, 23, 29, 127, 146, 228, 519
Bhabha (electron-positron) scattering,
29
Boltzmann H-theorem, 151
boasts, defined, 61
Born approximation, 115, 156
Bose-Einstein statistics, 11, 172, 418-
20
BPHZ prescription, 512-13
braid group, 420
Bettie-Saipeter equation, 560
bound states, see composite particles
Breit-Wigner formula, 1 62-3
bremstrahlung, 2 9
broken symmetry, 443, 451
canonical commutation and anticflM-
m utation relations, 16, 19-22, 293-
8, 52 9
canonical transformations, 329
Casimir effect, 29 7
causality, 145, 198, 463
center-of-mass frame, 139
central charges, 83
charge, see electric charge
charge conjugation (C)
accidental symmetry, 521, 530-1
defined, X21, 131-2
for photons, 427-8
intrinsic charge conjugation phases,
13 1
non-conservation, 132
transformation of creation operators,
177
transformation of Dirac fields, 226-7
transformation of ferminn bilinears,
229
transformation of general irreducible
fields, 241-2
transformation of scalar fields, 206
transformation of vector fields, 213
also see specific particle types
Chew-Frautschi plot, 469, 471
chiral transformation, 520
circular polarization, 359
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, 124, 152 ,
154,156,233-4,242,569
Clifford algebra, 21 4
closed p-forms, defined, 369
cluster decomposition principle, 169,
177-89, 197, 25 9
602

Subject Index
C 06° decay, 1 27, 130-1
coherent states, 199
color, 549
compact and non-compact groups, 231
composite particles, 110, 461-2
Compton (electron-photon) scattering,
29, 3 62-9
connected amplitudes, 17 8-82, 270, 282,
286,389,41 3
conservation laws
for angular momentum, 118
for charge, 119, 199, 427
for current, 212, 307, 47$, 586
for energy and momentum, 117-18,
425-7
limitations, 253, 537-8
also see specific symmetries and con-
served quantitie s
constraints, 325-3 1
in electrodynamics, 344, 346-7
cosmic rays, 29, 1 23
Coulomb gauge, 25 1 , 346r50, 365
Coulomb energy, 350, 353, 355-6, 560
C P-invariance
for degenerate rnultiplets, 104
ion-conservation in K °-k° decay,
132-3
counterterms in quantum electrody-
namics, 472-3
CPT-invariance, 104, 13 3, 244-6, 459
creation operators,
see
annihilation
and creation operators
cross sections
defined, 137-9
high energy limit, 158-9
partial wave expansions, 1 55-6
crossing symmetry, 269, 467, 554
cumulants, 178
Dalitz plot, 141
dangerous states, 550-2
decay rates, general formula, 136r7
A baryon, 165
d+ function, 202
KF function, 276
de Itham cohomology, 370
603
density matrix, 36 0
differential forms, see pµforrns
diffraction scattering, 148-9,
1 58
dimensional regularization, 449, 477-
80,49 7
dimensionality, of fields and couplings,
502,519,525-7
Dirac brackets, 329-31, 332-7
in electrodynamics, 34 7-9
Dirac equation, 1, 6-14, 225, 565- 72
Dirac matrices, 8-9, 214-1 9
slash notation, defined, 358
traces, 361, 372-4
Dirac representation of homogeneous
Lorentz group, 213-1 9
dispersion relations, 460, 462-9
distorted wave Born approximation,
146-7
dotted and undotted indices, 230
duality, 232, 37 1
Dyson series, 144, 259-60
eclipsing binaries, 368
effective field theories, 499, 523-5
electric charge, 34 1
conservation, 122, 537
renormalization, 342, 442-8, 473,
480-3
electric charge radius, defined, 493
electric dipole moments, 81, 521
electron
charge radius, 49 3
classical theory, 31, 36 9, 496
magnetic moment, 6, 14, 14, 3 6, 457,
468, 520
spin, 6-9
elliptic polarisation, 360
energy shifts of atomic states, 3 1 -2,
57
8
1s energy shifts, 59 4
also see Lamb shift, Ueh]ing effect,
Muonic atoms
energy-momentum tensor, 31 12
entropy, 15 1
equivalence principle, 537
exact p-forms, 369

604
Subject Index
excitation energies, in hydrogen, 592-3
exclusion principle, 1 1
exterior derivatives, 369
external fields, 266, 287-94, 412-13,
556-62,572-8
Euclidean path integrals, 384
Euler constant, 479, 497
Euier-Lagrange equations, 300
Faddeev equations, 188
Fermi-Dirac statistics, 12, 1 7 1-2, 267-
70,418-20
Feynman diagrams, 36-7, 259-91
for electrodynamics, 355-8
Feynman gauge, 355, 417
Feynman parameters, 474, 486, 497
fields, see quantum fields
field equations, 20{], 211-12, 239 ; also
see quantum fields
field renormalization, 331-2, 436-42,
452,461,473,479,484,543-4
field-translation-invariant scalar theory,
521-3
fine structure, 4-6, 570
fine structure constant, 2, 5
first class constraints, see constraints
flavors (of leptons), 5 29
floating cutoff, 525-8
forests, 5 1 2-1 3
form factors, 452-7, 485-93, 580-2
Froissart bound, 1 59
functionals, notation, 299
Furry's theorem, 428-9, 509
Galilean invariance, 62, 145
js, 217-1 8
Gaussian integrals, 420-3
Grossmann variables, defined, 401
gauge transformations, 251-2, 3393 ,
345,370,448-52
also see Lorentz gauge, Coulomb
gauge, temporal gauge, axial
gauge, unitarity gauge, Feynman
gauge
general relativity, 255, 31 2, 31 6, 369,
518- 1 9, 52 1
generators of symmetries, 307-14
global symmetries, defined, 307
gluons, 549
graviton, 73-4, 253, 521, 537, 548
groups, defined, 52 ; also see abelian
groups, hnrnotnpY groups, Lie
groups, little groups, representa-
tions, semi-simple groups
Hamiltonian,
for complex scalar field, 22
for Dirac equation, 8
for electradynarnics, 349-50
for free particles, 176
for interacting Dirac field, 3 2 3
for interacting scalar fields, 199, 3 02
for interacting vector field, 321
for one-dimensional scalar field, 15-
l 7
Heisenberg picture, 1 09, 288, 297, 425
helicity
defined, 72
limitations for massless particle fields,
253-4
limited to integers and half-integers,
90
Hilbert space, defined, 49
hole theory, 12, 29, 31
homotopy groups and classes, 89-90,
96-100,419-20
defined, 1U0
Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation,
46 1
hypercharge, 123
hyperons, f 23
discovered, 3 0
`in' and `out' states, 107-12, 116
induced emission of photons, 18
induced representations, 65
infinities, see ultraviolet divergences,
infrared divergences
infrared divergences, 32-3, 491, 496,
539-53
Inbnii-VVigner contraction, 62
interaction picture, 143, 287
for derivative coupling, 318-2 0
for Dirac field, 323-5

Subject Index
for electrodynamics, 35 3
for interacting scalar field, 304-5
for vector field, 320-3
internal symmetries, 121-2
invariant subgroups and subalgebras,
70, 88
irreducible representations, defined, 64
irrelevant couplings, 50 3
isospin (isotopic spin), 12 3
J/V meson, 225
Jacobi identity, 83
jets, 550, 552
K mesons, 12 3, 132-3
discovered, 30
Kallen-Lehmann representation, 457-
62
kinetic theory, 150-1
Klein-Gordon-Schr6dinger equation,
1, 13, 21
Kramers degeneracy, 81
Kramers-Kronig relation, 469
Lagrangians, 24, 297-306
for complex scalar field, 21
for interacting scalar field, 302
integration by parts, 305-6
irregular, 326
Lamb shift, 34-6, 484, 578-94
Lee-Nauenberg theorem, 549-53
Legendre transformations, 297, 301
lepton number, 122, 530
leptons, 47 2
Lie groups, 53-5
linear polarization, 359
Lippmann-Schwinger equation, 111,
142
little groups, 64-6
m 7~ 0 : 68-9
= 0 : 69-7 3
local symmetries, 342
defined, 64
for different momenta, 6 5-6
for massless particles, 248
also see gauge transformations
loops, 18 6-7, 270, 282-3, 358, 413
60 5
Lorentz (or Landau) gauge, 212, 346,
41 8
Lorentz transformation s
action on creation operators, 1 77
action on general states, 57
action on one-particle states, 62-73
defined, 55-7
homogeneous Lorentz group, defined,
57 ; general representations, 229-33
in canonical formalism, 314-1 8
in off-shell matrix elements, 427
in perturbation theory, 145, 277-9,
259
of cross-sections and decay rates, 138
of 5-matrix, 11 6-2 1
Poincare algebra, 58-61
Paincare group, defined, 5 7
proper orthochronous Lorentz group,
58
LSD theorem, see reduction formula
M-matrix, defined, 11 7
magnetic moments, of spin 1/2 par-
ticles, 456-7, 485-90, 520, 555-6
also see electron, moan
Majorana fermions, 226, 242
Mandelstam variables, 515
many time formalism, 22
marginal couplings, 50 3
mass renormalization, 4392, 473,
495, 587-9
matrix mechanics, 3-4 ,
Maxwell equations, 1, 252, 339, 342,
370
Moller (electron-electron) scattering, 29
momentum operator, 61, 310-11
moon, 38
discovered, 30
magnetic moment, 489-90, 52 0
muonic atoms, 483-4
N14 molecular spectrum, 29
negative energy `states', 10-14,
23-7,
567
neutron, 29
neutron-proton scattering, 158

606
Subject Index
neutron scattering on complex nu-
clei, 157, 160
Noether's theorem, 30 7
non-compact groups, see compact and
non-compact groups
non-linear a-model, 337, 377, 3 92-3
normal ordering, 175, 200, 262
nuclear forces, 29-3 0, 434-6
atd-fashioned perturbation theory, see
perturbation theory
w meson, 227
one-particle-irreducible, defined, 439
optical theorem, 148
QSterwalder-Sc hrader axioms, 384, 424
overlapping divergences, 5 1 1 -1 5
p-forms, 369-72
pair production, 29
paCaSti#t15tIC5, 420
parity and space inversion (P)
accidental symmetry, 521, 530- 1
defined, 58
intrinsic parities, 125-7
non-conservation in weak inter-
actions, 127
of bound electron states, 568-9, 586
transformation of creation operators,
177
transformation of Dirac fields, 221,
224-5
transformation of general irreducible
fields, 239-40
transformation of J., and P,,, 74-6-
transforrnation of one-particle states,
76r9, 10 3
transformation of scalar fields, 205-6
transformation of vector fields, 2 13
also see specific particle types
partial wave expansions, 1 51-9
path integrals, 259, 37 0r7, 524
derivation, 378-84
for derivative coupled scalars, 392-2
for fermions, 399-41 3
for massive vector fields, 393-5
for non-linear (7-model, 392-3
for quantum electrodynamics, 413
1 8
for S-matrix, 385-9
Lagrangian version, 389-95
used to derive Feynman rules, 395-8
Pauli matrices, defined, 21 7
Pauli term, 14, 517, 5 20
Pauli-pillars regulator, 486, 494
perturbation theory
old-fashioned, 142, 259, 549, 564,
585, 59 3
time-dependent, 142-5
also see Dyson series, Feynman dia-
grams, path integrals
phase shifts, 129-30, 155
phase space factors, 139-41
photon, 3
charge conjugation phase, 229
helicity and polarization, 73-4, 25{}-
1 , 359-6 1 , 368
masslessness, 343, 452, 477
photon-photon scattering, 32, 509,
523-5
propagator, 3 53-. 5
also see soft photons, quantum elec-
trodynamics,
pion-nucleon coupling constant, 435
pions, 13, 38, 435-6, 52 1
71t decay,
1 27
7C° decay, 13 1
intrinsic charge-conjugation phase of
7z", 131, 229
intrinsic parity, 127
prediction and discovery, 30
scattering on nucleons, 463, 469
Paincare group and algebra,
see
Lorentz transformations
Paincare's theorem, 99, 3 70
Poisson brackets, defined, 327
polar decomposition theorem, 88, 53 0
polarization
massive spin one particle, 2 09-- 1 4,
21 2
masslessness, 343
photon, 73-4
Polchinski's theorem, 526-8

Subject Index
poles in scattering amplitudes, 428-36,
554, 564
Pomeranchuk's theorem , 468
positivity of energy, 75-6, 302
positron, 12- 13, 567-5, 585
positronium, 227
power counting theorem , 5 05
primary constraints, see constraints
principal value function, 113
probabilities in quantum mechanics, 7,
27-8, 33, 50
projective representations, 53, $1-91 ,
9b-lOD
propagators, 262, 274r$0, 3 97-8, 506,
574-8
proton
charge, 445
charge radius, 38, 594
form factors, 457
identified as holes, 12
in nuclei, 29
PT-non- conservation, 130- 1
quantum chromodynamics, 123, 531,
549
quantum electrodynamics, 29,
31-8,
339-62, 413-18, 472-97, 503, 507-
15,529-31,564-94
also see quantum fields, electron,
photon, gauge invariance, ultra-
violet divergences, infrared diver-
gences
quantum fields,
Dirac, 23-4, 219-29
early theory, 1 5-31
free fields, 191-200
general quantum fields, 233-44
massless particles, 246-55
redefinitions, 331- 2
scalar, 21-2, 24--8, 201-6
uniqueness of irreducible fields, 238
vector, 207-12
quantum mechanics, 49-50
quarks, 217, 53 1
radiative corrections, see renormaliza-
tion, quantum electrodynamics,
607
ultraviolet divergences, infrared
divergences, self-energy functions,
vertex function, vacuum polariza-
tion, soft photon s
Ramsauer-Townsend effect, 1 65
ltarita-- chwinger field, 232, 423
rates, general formula, 134-6
rays, defined, 49-50
reduction formula, 43 6--8
redundant couplings, 331-- 2, 522-3
Regge trajectories, 468-9
relativistic wave equations, 1-14
relevant couplings, 53 0
renormalizability, 37, 499, 502-3, 516-
25
renormalization, 34-8, 506r1 6
also see electric charge, field renor-
rnalization, mass renormalization
representation s
of groups, defined, 5 3
of homogeneous Lorentz group, 229-
33
renormalization group, 490, 5 1 6, 525
resonances, 159-f5
p-mesons, 165, 225, 227, 469
Riemann-Lebesgue theorem, 181
Rosenbluth formula, 457
rotation matrices (D~rn(A)), 68
Rydberg unit (Ry), defined, 593
5-matrix, 4, 33
C. CP and CPT, 131-4
defined, 11 3
internal symmetries, 121-4
Lorentz invariance, 11 6r21
parity, 124-7
PT, 130--1, 133
S-operator, 11 4
time reversal, 127-30
unitarity, 113-14, 147-51
also see T-matrix, M-matrix
scattering amplitude (f), 148, 153-4,
466-7
scattering lengths, defined, 157
Schrodinger picture, 1 09
Schwinger action principle, 288

SuNect Index
Schwinger terms, 44 9
second class constraints, see constraints
secondary constraints, see constraints
self-energy functions (II',
E'), 439,
473-80, 493-6,
508-9,
512- 1 5,
575-9, 583
semi-simple Lie groups and algebras,
defined, 70, Sb
separable interactions, 1 65
Shelter Island Conference (1947), 34-8
simply connected spaces, defined, 84
SL(2, C) group, 87, 90
soft photons, 534--48, 553-6
space irsion, see parity and space
inversion
spectral functions, see Kallen-Lehmann
representation
spherical hamianios; 153, 569
spin matrices, defined, 23 0
spin-statistics connection, 23 8
spin sums, 210, 224, 2307, 2 52, 360-1,
365, 545
Spin(d) group, 90
spontaneous emission of photons, 17-
19, 590
standing wave states, 16 6
strangeness and strange particles, 123
see K mesons, hyperons
string theory, 1, 15, 244, 37 1 , 525
strong interactions, 30
structure constants, defined, 54
SU(2) group, 8$, 123, 130
SU(3) symmetry, 123
subtractions in dispersion relations, 460,
465
superficial divergences, 500-2, 510
superrenormalizable interactions, 50 3,
507
super selection rules, 53, 90-1
supersymmetry, 325, 506, 526
symmetries, 50-5, 91-6, 306r14, 425
also see conservation laws, groups,
Lorentz invariance, parity, charge
conjugation, time reversal, internal
symmetries, isaspirt, S U(3)
T-matrix, 111, 116, 141-2, 152, 549
'r-0 problem, 127
temporal gauge, 346
Thomson scattering, 369, 55 6
threshold behavior, 157-$
time-ordered products, defined, 143,
280
time reversal (T)
consequences for S-matrix, 127-30
defined, 58
non-conservation, 134
transformation of creation operators,
177
transformation of degenerate multi-
plets, 100-4
transformation of Dirac fields,
227-8
transformation of general irreducible
fields, 242-3
transformation of Jug and P. , 74-6
transformation of one-particle states,
77-81
transformation of scalar fields, 2 06
transformation of vector fields, 213
topology
of Lorentz and rotation groups, 86-
90
also see homotopy groups, simply
connected spaces, de Rham co-
homology
traces, see Dirac matrices
tree graphs, defined, 283
two-cocycles, defined, 8 2
Uehling effect, 34, 484, 58 1
ultraviolet divergences, 32-8, 47 6--7,
482-3, 485, 491, 497, 505
unitarity gauge, 346
unitarity of S'-matrix, 113-16,129, 147--
5 1, 155, 161, 52 1
universal covering group, 9 0
vacuum energy, 24, 26
vacuum polarization, 32, 34 , 473-85,
58 1
vacuum state, 24, 27, 176

Subject index
vertex function {I
}, 446, 488 , 507-
8, 579-80
wave function, 386r8
W± particles, 207
Ward and Ward-Takahashi identities,
445-8, 476, 50$, 51 1
Watson's theorem, 130
wave pickets, 109-10
Nick rotation, 475-6
609
Wick's theorem, 261
aligner--Eckart theorem, 153
Wigner rotation, 68-73
VVigner three- j symbols, 23 7
Wilson's renortnalizatian method, 525-
8
Z ° particle, 159-60, 207
Z2 group, $8

To Louise


