
 THE POLITICS OF CHILDHOODS 
REAL AND IMAGINED 
 The second volume of Priscilla Alderson’s popular and renowned book,  Childhoods 
Real and Imagined , relates dialectical critical realism to childhood. By demonstrating 
their relevance and value to each other, Alderson presents a practical introductory 
guide for applying critical realism to research about children and young people. 
 Each chapter summarises key themes from several academic disciplines and pol-
icy areas, ranging from climate change and social justice between generations, to 
neoliberalism, social reform and imagining utopias. Children’s and adults’ views and 
experiences are reviewed, and whereas the ﬁ rst volume deals with more personal 
and local aspects of childhood, this volume widens the scope into debates about 
global politics, which so seldom mention children. Each chapter demonstrates how 
children and young people are an integral part of the whole of society and are often 
especially affected by policies and events. 
 This book is written for everyone who is researching, studying or teaching 
about childhood, or who cares for and works with children and young people, as 
well as those interested in critical realist approaches. 
 Priscilla Alderson  is Professor Emerita of Childhood Studies at the Social Science 
Research Unit, UCL Institute of Education, London. 

 Ontological Explorations 
 Other titles in this series  :
 From One ‘Empire’ to the Next 
 Radha D’Souza 
 Science for Humanism 
 The recovery of human agency 
 Charles R. Varela 
 Philosophical Problems of 
Sustainability 
 Taking sustainability forward with 
a critical realist approach 
 Jenneth Parker 
 Dialectic and Difference 
 Dialectical critical realism and 
the grounds of justice 
 Alan Norrie 
 Interdisciplinarity and 
Climate Change 
 Transforming knowledge and 
practice for our global future 
 Edited by Roy Bhaskar, Cheryl Frank, 
Karl Georg Høyer, Petter Naess and 
Jenneth Parker 
 Conversations about 
Reﬂ exivity 
 Edited by Margaret S. Archer 
 Relational Sociology 
 A new paradigm for the social sciences 
 Pierpaolo Donati 
 Sociological Realism 
 Edited by Andrea M. Maccarini, 
Emmanuele Morandi and 
Riccardo Prandini 
 The Economics of Science: 
A Critical Realist Overview 
 Volume 1: Illustrations and 
philosophical preliminaries 
 David Tyﬁ eld 
 The Economics of Science: 
A Critical Realist Overview 
 Volume 2: Towards a synthesis of 
political economy and science and 
technology studies 
 David Tyﬁ eld 
 Ontology Revisited 
 Metaphysics in social and 
political philosophy 
 Ruth Groff 
 Childhoods Real and Imagined 
 Volume 1: An introduction to critical 
realism and childhood studies 
 Priscilla Alderson 

 Naturalizing Critical Realist 
Social Ontology 
 Tuukka Kaidesoja 
 What’s Critical about 
Critical Realism? 
 Essays in reconstructive 
social theory 
 Frederic Vandenberghe 
 Integrating Knowledge 
through Interdisciplinary 
Research 
 Problems of theory and practice 
 Dominic Holland 
 Post-Secularism, Realism 
and Utopia 
 Transcendence and immanence 
from Hegel to Bloch 
 Jolyon Agar 
 Critical Realism, Somalia and 
the Diaspora Community 
 Abdullahi Haji-Abdi 
 Reality and Self Realisation: 
Bhaskar’s Metaphilosophical 
Journey toward Non-dual 
Emancipation 
 Seo MinGyu 
 The Contradictions of Love 
 Towards a feminist–realist ontology 
of sociosexuality 
 Lena Gunnarsson 
 Capitalism, Citizenship and 
the Arts of Thinking 
 A Marxian–Aristotelian linguistic 
account 
 Kathryn Dean 
 Understanding Mental Health 
 A critical realist exploration 
 David Pilgrim 
 Indigenist Critical Realism 
 Human rights and ﬁ rst Australians’ 
wellbeing 
 Gracelyn Smallwood 
 The Denial of Nature 
 Environmental philosophy in the 
era of global capitalism 
 Arne Johan Vetlesen 
 The Politics of Childhoods 
Real and Imagined 
 Volume 2: Practical application 
of critical realism and childhood 
studies 
 Priscilla Alderson 

This page intentionally left blank

 THE POLITICS OF 
CHILDHOODS REAL 
AND IMAGINED 
 Volume 2: 
Practical application of critical 
realism and childhood studies 
 Priscilla Alderson 

 First published 2016 
 by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 and by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2016 Priscilla Alderson 
 The right of Priscilla Alderson to be identiﬁ ed as author of this work has been asserted by 
her in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers. 
 Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identiﬁ cation and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 A catalog record for this book has been requested 
 ISBN: 978-0-415-81820-9 (hbk)
 ISBN: 978-1-138-94889-1 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-66938-0 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Bembo 
 by Apex CoVantage, LLC 

 Acknowledgements 
ix
 PART III
Background 
1
 8 Introduction  
3
 PART IV
Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world  
15
 9 Ecology: human relations with nature  
17
 10  Economics: interpersonal, intergenerational 
and international relations  
53
 11 Emergence: social structures  
90
 12  Ethics and emancipation: reimagining the 
politics of childhood 
135
 Glossary  
167
 References  
176
Name index 
191
 Subject index  
193
 CONTENTS 
The Politics of Childhoods Real and Imagined
Volume 2
Practical application of critical realism
and childhood studies
Priscilla Alderson

 Childhoods Real and Imagined  
 Volume 1  
 An introduction to critical realism   and childhood studies  
 Priscilla Alderson 
 Published May 2013 
viii Contents
 Acknowledgements  
 PART I
Background  
 1 
Introduction  
 2 
Trends in research about children, childhood and youth  
 PART II
Experiencing and imagining childhoods  
 3 
Real bodies: material relations with nature  
 4 
Space: interpersonal relations  
 5 
Time: social relations and structures  
 6 
Inner being: alienation and ﬂ ourishing  
 7 
 Conclusions to Volume 1: the relevance of DCR 
to childhood studies  
 Appendix Background summaries of selected research studies  
 Notes 
 References  
 Name Index  
 Subject Index  

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 This book draws on my 30 years of social research with children and adults 
(summarised at the end of Volume 1). I would like to thank all the hundreds of 
people who have helped me, by giving interviews, by allowing me to observe and 
write about them, by advising on the research projects and by providing funds and 
much other support. 
 I am grateful to many colleagues and co-researchers, and to everyone whose 
publications have informed and challenged my work. Thank you to my doctoral 
students, and to the students from many countries who have taken part in our 
international Sociology of Childhood and Children’s Rights MA course. 
 I owe a debt of gratitude to Roy Bhaskar who commissioned this book and 
advised on the ﬁ rst volume. Sadly, he died last autumn. That was before the draft of 
this second volume was ready for him to read, and so the book lacks the consider-
able improvements that I know he would have suggested. 
 Thank you Brad Shipway, Tom Cockburn and Chris Goodey for sending your 
very useful critical comments on the draft chapters – although I am responsible for 
shortcomings in the book. 
 I would also like to thank all the students and academics from around the world 
who have attended the fortnightly post-graduate seminars on critical realism at 
UCL Institute of Education, which Roy founded in 2008 and which still continue. 
These discussions constantly inform my work. 
 I am grateful to Alan Jarvis, who agreed that Volume 1 could be expanded into 
Volume 2, with Emma Chappell at Routledge, and to Elizabeth Silas. 
 And once again, thank you my dear expert advisers on realism, my grandchil-
dren: Hari, Amy and Robbie; Chloe and Toby; and Claris and Sian. 
 

This page intentionally left blank

 PART III 
 Background 
 We do not inherit the world from our parents; we borrow it from our children. 
 (Native American saying)  

This page intentionally left blank

 8 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Rene Silva Santos lived in one of the largest of the 30 favelas (slums) in Rio 
de Janeiro. The housing shacks are crammed into tiers rising up the hills 
around the city, with open sewers and few if any public utilities or services. 
Dominated by drug cartels, the favelas are regularly raided by the police. 
 Rene described how when he was 11 years old he started a community 
newspaper in 2005.  1  ‘No one heard the children and the people who live in 
the favela and we never went into the central city. I knew then that it was 
very important that we should be heard.’ 
 In November 2010, the television was reporting a police raid with helicop-
ters and armed vehicles searching for drug dealers. ‘I started reporting on 
Twitter, correcting the media reports. I couldn’t believe it, my live tweets 
were on TV about what was happening. I had 600 followers, and suddenly 
I had 10,000. Famous people were asking, “Are you ok? We want to know 
your view? Is it true? How do you know?” I said, “I live here, not like you 
journalists who cannot get in.” . . . Next day all the media wanted to inter-
view me. I knew I had to show positive things about our favela and change 
people’s minds.’ 
 Rene’s friends contacted him, such as when the buses stopped running, so 
that he could warn commuters trying to get home. Daily protests about the 
buses started in June 2013. ‘It’s very important that we take part and ﬁ ght 
for our rights and for democracy in Brazil. The youth on social media started 
the protests about the rise in bus fares.’ 
 Rene illustrates main themes through this book: some children’s and young people’s 
experiences, awareness and active involvement in politics; their skill and conﬁ dence 
in using the media; their involvement in the ‘adult’ world; their ﬁ ghting for their 
rights and for democracy and justice. 

4 Background
 Links between Volumes 1 and 2 
 The ‘new’ international childhood studies began from around the 1980s (Mayall 
2013) and contemporary critical realism began in the 1970s (Bhaskar 2008a, ﬁ rst 
edition 1975). So far, there has been fairly little contact between the two, although 
there are studies of education and critical realism (such as Scott 2010; Shipway 
2013; Wilkinson 2015). This book aims to show how useful DCR and childhood 
can be to one another. 
 I had planned to write one volume connecting childhood studies and dialectical 
critical realism (DCR).  2  DCR is not a version of social science, but a philosophy, 
which does the groundwork and helps to illuminate and clarify theories and under-
lying assumptions, and to work through contradictions in the social and natural 
sciences. DCR also analyses connections between the many large and small aspects 
of social life, and processes of change. It is therefore highly relevant to the study 
of children’s real, complex lives that tend, very misleadingly, to be sliced into age 
groups and split away from the ‘adult’ world and from the political and economic 
structures they exist within. 
 To introduce DCR to childhood researchers and cover many relevant aspects 
of childhood became too much for one volume. Yet to separate the work across 
two volumes could undermine my aim to create an integrated whole, which 
connects the personal to the political, agency to structure, small and local levels 
to large and international ones. However, I am grateful to Routledge for agree-
ing that the book might be extended into a second volume. Volume 1 tends to 
emphasise the personal and Volume 2 the political, though I hope that readers will 
regard the volumes as a single book. The DCR concepts and the many related 
topics are reviewed in the hope that they will be of practical use to researchers 
and a resource for teaching. 
 Brieﬂ y, Volume 1 began by introducing interdisciplinary, international child-
hood studies, in contrast to the older discipline of child development psychology. 
Chapter 2 examined widely debated problems and limitations in the two, broad, 
main traditions in social science: ﬁ rst, empirical, positivist and statistical research 
with roots in natural science; second, interpretive or hermeneutic research, rang-
ing through such approaches as ethnography, social constructivism, postmodernism 
and post-structuralism. Chapter 3 summarised 12 main concepts in DCR (from 
among many useful others), which address the current splits and problems in social 
science and seek to resolve them. Rather than repeating the 12 summaries, I have 
condensed them into the glossary at the end of this volume and refer readers to 
Chapter 3, though some will be further explained later in the text. Many terms in 
the glossary are in italics the ﬁ rst time they appear. 
 Childhood researchers share problems with all social scientists, in the gaps and 
contradictions between factual, usually quantitative, research versus interpretive, 
usually qualitative, studies. Unresolved questions include what counts as valid knowl-
edge, how causes might be found in social events, whether structures or agents have 
greater power, and should social research be value-free? DCR aims to clarify and 

Introduction 5
answer these questions in ways that assist practical researchers with understanding 
and also changing the world. Childhood studies bring new insights into critical 
realist concerns, such as on the nature of childhood and human being, and how 
human social and moral agency begins. 
 The DRC concept  four planar social being  draws together all aspects of human 
life. Chapters 3 to 6 covered the four planes: real bodies and material relations with 
nature; interpersonal relations; social structures; and inner being, alienation and 
ﬂ ourishing. Volume 2 considers the four planes mainly on larger scales. Chapter 9 
reviews ecology and human relations with nature. In Chapter 10, economics within 
interpersonal, international and intergenerational relations are illustrated by differ-
ences between commercial health services and those based on social justice and on 
charity. Emergence and social structures are the themes of Chapter 11, with the 
price economy and examples about cities and crime. Finally, Chapter 12 reviews 
ethics and emancipation, the gift economy and utopias. 
 Childhoods, youth and politics 
 Childhood is generally agreed to include everyone aged under 18 years.  3  The 
terms ‘childhood’ and ‘children’ can be ambiguous, not least from uncertainty about 
when childhood ends and who can deﬁ nitely be called a ‘child’ or a ‘youth’. The 
 ontology- being of real children and young people can greatly differ from the  epistemol-
ogy  and beliefs that overload the word ‘child’. Childhood is partly a biological state, 
but also a conferred and varying social status, which has varied greatly through his-
tory in how children have been perceived, what they were allowed to do, and how 
this determined beliefs about their capacities or incapacities. Concepts of children 
(and women) as citizens have been dismissed, acknowledged or advocated, depend-
ing on dominant political, economic and philosophical structures in each age, so 
that change in children’s status depends on changes in these evolving structures 
(Cockburn 2013). As between men and women, it is hard to be certain what the 
exact differences are between children and adults. Young children with long-term 
illness, for example, may be far more informed, responsible and courageous about 
managing their daily healthcare routines than many adults are (Alderson et al. 2006). 
 Yet young children in preschool centres are too conﬁ ned to be able to show the 
skills and strengths that their majority (or ‘third world’ or ‘developing’) world peers 
who are starting to be street traders can show (Invernizzi 2008). Much research 
describes how children and adults act and react within rigidly constraining con-
texts of locally imposed childhoods. ‘Childhood’ and ‘youth’ are partly uncertain 
and contradictory terms, and children and young people live within the political 
uncertainties and  contradictions between real and imagined childhoods. 
 I have been asked, why write a book about childhood and politics? How are 
politics, economics and ecology directly or speciﬁ cally relevant to children? The 
questions echo sexist times when public affairs were seen as irrelevant to women. 
If women were to be speciﬁ cally included, they should explain why this was necessary. 

6 Background
In any case, the generic ‘Man’ was claimed to refer to everyone, and women’s con-
cerns were best managed by men. 
 Similarly, today it is often claimed that public affairs need not or should not 
relate to children for the following reasons. They are pre-citizens, under their par-
ents’ care and control. Adult-centred politics cater adequately for children. If chil-
dren are to be explicitly considered, then a special case must be made. Yet this can 
raise potential divisions between adults and children, which would disrupt families 
and schools, and therefore would not serve the public interest. Talk of children can 
trivialise and infantilise policy making. Children cannot understand politics, and 
so speculating about their supposed viewpoints and interests could risk being false 
and misleading. 
 Women, however, have shown how all public affairs are vitally important to 
women and their daily lives, and how the term ‘man’ actually excluded women 
against their best interests. Social justice and informed democracy depend on one-
sided, masculine accounts being expanded to include women and the concerns 
they share with men, besides their own concerns. 
 Sexism was part of a philosophy of ‘Man’ that deﬁ ned being human in the few 
ways in which we differ from other animals (reason, language, conscious reﬂ ection, 
using tools). This thin version of humanity was bolstered by setting aside suppos-
edly irrational, emotional women and children. Feminism promoted richer, kinder 
versions of being human, and more rounded, fulﬁ lling versions of the lives of men 
and women and potentially of children (Benhabib and Cornell 1987; Gilligan 1982; 
Kennedy and Mendus 1987; Oakley 1992, 2014). 
 The thin philosophy, which deﬁ nes a being by its different or unique features, 
still dominates childhood. Children are frequently deﬁ ned by supposedly non-
adult qualities: ‘childish’, ‘immature’, irrational, unreliable and irresponsible. Most 
research on childhood repeatedly draws on a child-centred literature, and isolates 
children into child-centred areas and concerns, away from such matters as politics, 
economics or law. Yet these matters relate to children and young people as much as to 
adults, and to split them away gives a thin, unreal understanding of childhood. Some 
young people, like Rene quoted earlier, may be highly political. Even when they 
are not politically aware, it is still possible to analyse how politics affect them. How-
ever, the words ‘people’ and ‘human beings’ often refer only to ‘men and women’. 
If policies are to be fair to the one third of people in the world aged under 20, 
they have to be explicitly considered.  4  Every government except the USA’s has 
ratiﬁ ed the United Nations’ (1989)  Convention on the Rights of the Child , and there-
fore undertaken to consider how each new policy might impact on children and 
young people. But governments seldom do so, with serious effects reviewed later. 
 The following example raises speciﬁ c reasons for researching the politics of 
childhood. In the USA, nearly 3,000 minors are serving life imprisonment with-
out parole, a death-in-prison sentence, often for non-homicidal and non-violent 
offences.  5  In many states, there is a mandatory life sentence, longer than for mur-
der, for possessing even a very small amount of marijuana (Schlosser 2004). Many 
prisoners were sentenced when they were 13 or 14 years old; some were ten or 

Introduction 7
even eight years old. Although African Americans are only 12 per cent of the 
USA population, they make up 40 per cent of prisoners.  6  The annual ﬁ nancial 
cost of the 2.3 million prisoners of all ages in the USA is estimated to be between 
$8 and $21 billion, taking into account the cost to victims of crime, costs to taxpay-
ers of the internment, costs of the young prisoners’ lost education and, for those 
who are released, their lost hope of good employment and their need for state 
assistance. There is the severe damage done to them as prisoners by violent and 
sexual assault, especially to children in adult jails, which exacerbates the effects of 
abused, neglected childhoods. There is also the high chance of reoffending for lack 
of rehabilitation. 
 The black defence lawyer Bryan Stevenson (2014) regards all young offenders 
under 18 years as children, highly anxious and emotional (one boy cried hysteri-
cally for an hour before he could speak to his lawyer). Unlike adults, they all relate 
to him as if he were their father or brother. He specialises in proving the inno-
cence of wrongly accused prisoners and winning their freedom. He persuaded the 
Supreme Court to reform the law and to pronounce that because of ‘children’s 
diminished culpability, and heightened capacity for change, we think appropriate 
occasions for sentencing juveniles to this harshest possible penalty [mandatory life 
sentence without parole] will be uncommon’.  7  
 To generalise from this example of criminal law, reasons for researching the 
broader politics of childhood include the overwhelming effects that adult-centric 
systems can have on children. Children’s ‘diminished culpability’, which is related 
to diminished responsibility and power, makes them more vulnerable, and yet their 
experiences and needs may be hardly noticed. They may be dismissed and deni-
grated in adult systems as if they are irrelevant and should not be there. Child-
hood is the most vulnerable, impressionable and formative age group, the most 
susceptible to lasting and possibly lifelong effects of beneﬁ ts and harms. Children 
and young people are often least able to speak for themselves, or to be listened to 
seriously, or to have powerful advocates. Adults who have already established their 
reputation, employment record and support contacts may more easily return to 
their former life after time in prison or mental hospital than young people, who 
must begin to create a life after such events. This is not to over-state child/adult 
differences. The difﬁ culties apply for many adults too, but on average children are 
more likely to experience them. 
 Yet the youngest generations bring hope that they will repair and redeem pres-
ent wrongs and create better societies, so that investing in their health, education 
and wellbeing is in everyone’s interests. Harming children is like damaging seed 
corn but still expecting rich future harvests. And childhoods have multiple extra 
effects through the children’s future interactions with others during their adulthood 
and on to later generations. Societies are judged and rewarded by how they treat 
their most vulnerable citizens. Understanding childhoods is also about understand-
ing adulthoods. This book is not about how children and young people are more 
special or important than adults. It is about intergenerational equity, respect and 
care, which serve everyone’s mutual interests. 

8 Background
 The Supreme Court’s second point about children’s ‘heightened capacities for 
change’ gives further reasons for researching politics from the perspective of the 
youngest generations. Crime prevention methods, support and rehabilitation are 
most likely to be effective with them, and these future-oriented concerns need to 
be far more researched and developed. Foresight can be informed by precedents 
and by strong, enduring, driving trends that are likely to continue. Since the 1970s, 
prisons in the USA have steadily expanded to 2.3 million prisoners, the highest 
number per capita in the world.  8  This century, for the ﬁ rst time, African-American 
baby boys face a one-in-three chance of a future in prison. How might the trends 
continue over the next ten and twenty years and more? What are their long-term 
effects likely to be? 
 British politicians follow USA policies. Elected in 1997, the Blair government 
doubled the numbers of young people in prison during the ﬁ rst year and cre-
ated 1,000 new offences during its ﬁ rst 1,000 days. A giant juvenile jail is being 
planned (see Chapter 11).  9  Stevenson (2014) sees the USA as a nation of fear and 
anger, partly because there was no truth and reconciliation process after centuries 
of slavery and segregation. Many white people refuse to recognise or want to repair 
the wrongs they have done, and which they are still committing and dangerously 
passing down through generations. This reconciling is essential, Stevenson believes, 
before peace and goodwill can grow between ethnic groups, and racist penal sys-
tems can be reformed. 
 Dialectic and DCR 
 This practical book on social research concentrates on introducing and applying 
DCR ideas, which are extensively analysed in the philosophical work of Bhaskar, 
Hartwig, Norrie and others. The centre of DCR,  dialectic ,  10  involves thinking and 
also being, doing, learning and, most of all, changing. 
 Over millennia, dialectic has involved the Socratic search for truth and the way 
arguments were structured. Hegel developed three formal stages: thesis (an idea 
is presented); antithesis (problems and contradictions within it are debated); syn-
thesis (a fuller resolution is achieved). Friedrich Engels (1883) believed humans 
have long thought dialectically without realising it. Engels (1877) proposed that 
Nature is dialectical, in the negation of negation: ‘A very simple process, which is 
taking place everywhere and every day, which any child can understand as soon 
as it is stripped of the veil of mystery in which it was enveloped by the old ideal-
ist philosophy’. There is dialectic between nature and society, particle and wave in 
physics, gas and ﬂ uid in chemistry, body and brain, genes and environment through 
constant evolution in biology, boom and bust in capitalism, master and slave rela-
tionships, childhood and adulthood in society. Each can only exist in and through 
the other. More than drawing together opposites, dialectic involves these opposites 
as interacting and interdependent. Hegel (1977) spoke of the struggle between the 
ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite, ‘bound together in one unity. I am not one of the ﬁ ghters 
locked in battle, but both, and I am the struggle itself’. 

Introduction 9
 Marx ([1873] 2010) described dialectical materialism (or  realism ) as the law of 
quantity into quality, the interpenetration of opposites and the  negation  of the nega-
tion, when new forms negate earlier ones and are then in turn negated. Marx was 
delighted that his work  Capital  was popular among the German working class who 
were living and doing dialectic, although it was misunderstood by academics. He 
explained that dialectical materialism was a ‘scandal’ to conventional academics 
because it is both 
 an afﬁ rmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same time, 
also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking 
up; because it regards every historically developed social form as in ﬂ uid 
movement, and therefore takes into account its transient nature not less than 
its momentary existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its 
essence critical and revolutionary. 
 Dialectical materialism draws together contradictory and interacting ideas about 
nature, society and thought, and connects thought to matter (in DCR terms  epis-
temology to  ontology , the  transitive  to the  intransitive ). Everything is in a constant state 
of ﬂ ux, and dialectic develops arguments, moves them forward and looks to the 
future. Paying tribute to Hegel’s great advances in dialectics, Marx ([1873] 2010, 15) 
explained: 
 My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, but is its direct 
opposite. To Hegel, the life process of the human brain, i.e., the process of 
thinking, which, under the name of ‘the Idea’, he even transforms into an 
independent subject, is the demiurgos [re-shaper] of the real world, and the 
real world is only the external, phenomenal form of ‘the Idea’. With me, on 
the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world reﬂ ected by the 
human mind, and translated into forms of thought. 
 In DCR, dialectic also involves the independent, material, real world; ontology, 
as well as the reasoned idea, epistemology; practical as well as theoretical change, 
through negotiation and struggle for space, control, meaning and resources, in 
physical, social, cultural and existential ways. In emphasising  absence  as well as pres-
ence, DCR can embrace transformative change. It attends to absence in empty 
spaces, in the past and future and in the inﬁ nite unfulﬁ lled possibilities.  Absence and 
negativity are so immense that the positive is ‘a tiny but important ripple on the sur-
face of a sea of negativity’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 5).  11  Absences and spaces are essential for 
real dialectical movement and change. A  monovalent  (literally ‘single value’) world 
fully packed with presence has no room for movement, alternative or imagination. 
It recognises only the present and evident, in contrast to DCR’s polyvalent absence/
presence. 
 DCR extends the dialectic from three parts into four moments in the acronym 
MELD: IM ﬁ rst moment, 2E second edge, 3L third level, 4D fourth dimension. 

10 Background
Each chapter in this volume will trace the four MELD stages in creative or malign 
versions. The stages are all complex and overlapping and can be presented and 
applied in numerous ways in many possible MELD templates. MELD aids social 
analysis through the dynamic push-pull power of absence that drives forward to 
each new stage. 
 MELD involves analysing and resolving contradictions, learning and gaining 
from dialectic’s interactive, revealing energy. IM non-identity includes carefully 
trying to identify what something is and is not, and to note absences and problems. 
2E negativity intervenes to negate the absences. 3L examines new totalities that 
emerge from 2E and their internal and inter connections. At 4D, there is radi-
cal negation of self-emancipation, with critical reﬂ ection towards theory-practice 
consistency and freedom. 4D can reﬂ ect back on previous stages, note unresolved 
problems and urge a return to 1M to restart the MELD process with the new and 
deeper insights and raised consciousness that have been gained. 
 The following example illustrates the importance of the MELD dialectic. 
 At a meeting between the presidents of the USA, Guatemala, Honduras and 
El Salvador,  12  the three Central American leaders wanted, in effect, to begin at 
1M causal analysis. They said that the billions of dollars poured into attempts 
to prevent migrant children from crossing the border into the USA would be 
better spent on addressing the root causes of the crisis in their countries: the 
illegal drugs and arms and people trades; severe poverty; ﬁ elds harvested not 
for food but to support drug addiction in the USA; pollution and waste from 
air raids when crops are sprayed with herbicides; violent armed gangs and 
drug cartels; the USA’s ‘war on drugs’ that was destabilising Central America, 
as had the legacy of decades of civil wars fuelled by the CIA. All these causes 
were driving over 57,000 unaccompanied children across the Mexico-Texas 
border in 2014. 
 The USA president was reported to avoid discussing these 1M causes. An 
ofﬁ cial stated, ‘I’m not enough of an expert on Central American politics 
to give you an assessment of that claim.’ President Obama started in effect 
at 2E, with intervening in attempts to negate the effects. He promoted pur-
suit of people smugglers and a publicity campaign to discourage ‘irregular 
migration’. In ‘great compassion for these children’, he wanted to deter their 
dangerous migration, return recent migrants, and enforce orderly migration 
law. This would allow some refugees from violence into the USA, but not 
economic migrants. He wanted $3.7 billion in emergency funding to address 
the crisis on the Texas border. The other presidents wanted ‘just ten per cent’ 
of the $20 billion, spent on border security and processing the children, to 
be invested in supporting prosperity in Central America, to remove the need 
for migration. 
 The Central American presidents’ broader analysis also recognised 3L totali-
ties: effects over generations across Central America and the USA, pointing to the 

Introduction 11
urgent need for 4D critical new insights before restarting at 1M with greater 
knowledge and determination. It is essential to start or restart at 1M to attempt to 
understand causes, rather than start at 2E, working on the effects. Insights at 1M 
powerfully open or close the direction of understanding and practice at later stages, 
and therefore the hopes of transformation. 1M holds the roots of the argument, 
where radical change has to begin. 
 Efforts towards change that start later, at 2E or 3L, may only be patched on, 
superﬁ cial and transient. The attempts also fail if at 1M they are locked into mis-
understandings and contradictions through inadequate analysis that sets inexo-
rable mis-directions. Subordinate and weaker groups (for example, children and 
adults seeking asylum from armed conﬂ ict) want to start or restart at 1M to 
search for causes of the violence and then for solutions. Dominant groups such as 
powerful states start at the active 2E stage, but omit the 1M causal analysis stage. 
At 2E they tend to meet violence with violence, for example. Not only does this 
block real change of direction and of power relations and hope of resolutions, 
it often increases the causal problems. MELD analyses virtuous progress towards 
freedom and justice. Yet MELD is equally useful in tracing how unjust misun-
derstandings and values at 1M can push forward and seem to justify oppression 
and injustice. 
 However, many sociologists avoid 1M if it seems too historical, complex and 
lengthy for short-term or tightly funded research that must yield quick results. 
Political and economic backgrounds and histories may seem too abstract, invisible 
and remote from today’s childhoods and from the currently respected ‘evidence-
based’ research. Attention to 1M may seem subversive and biased towards the con-
cerns of subordinate groups. Yet it can be just as biased and misleading to avoid 
detailed basic analysis and to claim an illusory objectivity. Social science is value-
laden and there is no neutral position, for instance, between supporting or oppos-
ing children’s rights or in attempts to control climate change.  13  
 Aims of  The Politics of Childhoods Real and Imagined  
 Like all books, this one is compromised by the author’s limited time and knowl-
edge, and there are extra challenges. Fairly few single-author books address the huge 
subject of the international politics of childhoods and range widely over such ‘adult’ 
matters as economics, employment and war. Karen Wells (2015) reviewed global 
childhoods and Cindy Katz (2004) set her case studies in New York and the Sudan 
into economic-ecological global contexts. Tom Cockburn (2013) reviewed many 
geo-historical aspects of children’s citizenship and David Oswell (2013) analysed their 
agency in widely varying contexts. Attempts to cover wide-ranging themes risk giv-
ing too many examples and leaving too little room for analysis. For this book, an 
added challenge has been to search for the missing children in mainstream ‘adult’ 
literature and debate on politics, economics and ecology. This has involved making 
connections that attempt to overcome the double exclusion of childhoods from the 

12 Background
real (adult) world and of the real world from much childhood literature and research. 
Growing numbers of authors are connecting economics and politics to ecological 
change, to be reviewed later, but they tend not to mention children and young people. 
 I have relied on academic sources combined with popular books (though many 
are by academics) along with ‘grey’ and online material such as NGO reports and 
journalism.  14 While this does not ﬁ t conventional academic standards, the mix of 
sources reveals numerous connections between children’s lives and the constant 
stream of ‘adult’ concerns and politics pouring through the mass media. Never-
theless, the wealth and diversity of data raise extra difﬁ culties in efforts to make 
accurate and reliable selections, summaries, analyses and comments. The ﬂ ow of 
new data never ends, so the research has no clear ‘saturation’ point when sampling 
and data collecting seem to be complete. A further challenge is that the politics of 
childhoods cross boundaries between many academic disciplines, and I have often 
been working as a ‘lay’ outsider, in disciplines beyond my expertise. 
 However, academic silos contribute to the present problems of fragmented, 
under-informed, divisive understanding and policy making. Separately authored 
chapters in multidisciplinary edited collections do not necessarily cross boundaries 
or examine interactions between disciplines, although such interdisciplinary work 
on the politics of childhoods is vitally needed. I have therefore aimed at the level 
of being an informed general reader in many areas addressed in this book, and of 
writing about them in terms that I hope will interest and inform readers who are 
not expert in each topic, while not offending experts. 
 The book also works between assumed divisions imposed in mainstream sociol-
ogy, between positivism and social constructionism, and between (subjective) poli-
tics, (normative) morality, (determinist) natural science and (objective) social science. 
There are also assumed divisions between adulthood and childhood, whereas my 
aim is to show how all concerns relate to childhood and how children and young 
people relate centrally into all concerns. The ﬂ aws in these divisions, and how DCR 
resolves them, were considered in Volume 1. 
 Present policies and theories are analysed to consider how and why they exert 
such power, and how change is likely to be transient unless account is taken of these 
larger powers. Long traditions in sociology and social policy have been reemphasised 
among sociologists who want to forge closer links with public debate and policy 
making (Burawoy 2005; Holmwood and Scott 2007; Levitas 2013). Dinerstein et al. 
(2014) call for more interdisciplinary and critical analysis, to examine how societies 
and dominant discourses are being refashioned along neoliberal lines, which scape-
goat certain groups and privilege others. They want to see deeper analysis of causes 
as well as effects of, for example, global economics. In DCR terms, this moves 
beyond the empirical and actual levels that dominate social research to search for 
real causes (see natural necessity in Volume 1, Chapter 3). There is growing socio-
logical analysis of global warming (Bell 2009; Giddens 2009; Shove and Spurl-
ing 2013; Urry 2011), although some question what sociologists can say that is 
new or different.  15  Interdisciplinary and DCR work on climate change open new 
approaches (Bhaskar et al. 2010; Lacey 2014; Næss 2010). 

Introduction 13
 This book might seem to give undue emphasis to problems and unhappy child-
hoods. This is partly to help to redress the imbalance, when the adversity for many 
millions of children is seldom publicised. Yet my main concern is to see how 
protest and reform emerge from adversity, processes that involve many children. 
This book also ventures into alternatives, potentials, futures and utopias, which 
especially concern the youngest generations. Chapter 12 will review critics and 
advocates of utopian future-thinking in sociology. My aim is to connect disparate 
but related topics into maps of constantly changing childhoods real and imagined. 
 Guiding questions through the book include: Where are the missing children in 
public debate? How might they be affected? How do they react and contribute? 
How can diverse childhoods inform debates about present and future societies? 
The concern from a childhood perspective is not only  what  changes might be 
made, but  how changes are made,  why  they are resisted and  how resistance might 
be overcome. 
 Chapter 8, Introduction
 Dates denote time of publication. All websites were checked for access 21 March 
2015 unless stated otherwise. 
  1 .  Notes of a translated interview with by Matthew Bannister on Outlook, BBC World 
Service, 30 September 2013. 
 2 .  Although DCR developed later out of critical realism, as mentioned in Volume 1, I have 
called all the concepts ‘DCR’ when they are vital to that philosophy.  
 3 .  UNCRC (1989) Article 1, which adds ‘unless under the law applicable to the child, 
majority is attained earlier’.  
  4 .  ‘Children’ usually means legal minors aged under 18 years, UNCRC (1989), whereas 
age-based population statistics tend to measure under 19 or 20 years. In 1970, 48% of 
the world’s population was younger than 20, 47% was aged 20 to 64, 5% was 65 and 
older. Today, as a result of lower fertility rates and longer life expectancy, the population 
aged under age 20 is about 35%, aged 20–64 is 58% and over 64 is 7%. http://www.prb.
org/Publications/Datasheets/2014/2014-world-population-data-sheet/data-sheet.aspx. 
These are guestimates since one third of births in the world are not registered.  
 5 .  www.eji.org.  
 6 .  http://news.stanford.edu/news/2014/august/prison-black-laws-080614.html. 
 7 .  Miller v.  Alabama  567, US Supreme Court, 2012. 
 8 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-echochambers-27260073 2 May 2014. 
  9 .  http://scyj.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/SCYJ-response-to-plans-for-secure-
college-rules-consultation-FINAL.pdf November 2014. 
 10 .  Some terms in the end glossary are in italics when they are ﬁ rst mentioned. 
 11 .  Also discussed in Volume 1, Chapter 3.  
 12 .  McGreal, C. (2014) Central American leaders meet Barack Obama to criticise US bor-
der policy,  Guardian,  26 July.  
 13 .  Values are extensively reviewed in Volume 1. 
 14 .  All sources, including academic ones, are partial and slanted. For news, I have mainly 
relied on primary sources and on the BBC (increasingly cautious and biased) and the 
 Guardian  and  Guardian Weekly  because they are owned by a trust, not by the billionaires 
Murdoch, Rothermere and the Barclay brothers, who control 85% of newspaper reader-
ship.  Guardian  articles are checked by many critical commentators online, so that inac-
curacies may be corrected in a kind of instant peer review. The  Telegraph , for example, 

14 Background
owned by the Barclay brothers, was criticised in February 2015 by its former chief 
political correspondent Peter Obourne for avoiding major news items (that had been 
piloted by the  Guardian ) criticising companies that advertised in the  Telegraph.  How-
ever, the  Guardian is open to criticism that the Gates Foundation took sponsorship of 
its global development coverage, ‘which now maintains a weary-but-compliant stance 
toward corporate domination of development aid’, http://blogs.edweek.org/teachers/
living-in-dialogue/2012/07/the_gates_foundations_leverage.html  4  July 2012.  
 15 .  Yearly, S. (2011) Climate change and society,  Times Higher Education. 18 June. 
 

 PART IV 
 Childhoods in the 
real ‘adult’ world 

This page intentionally left blank

 9 
 ECOLOGY 
 Human relations with nature 
 The June grass, amongst which I stood, was taller than I was, and I wept. I 
had never been so close to grass before. It towered above me and all around 
me, each blade tattooed with tiger-skins of sunlight. It was knife-edged, 
dark, and a wicked green, thick as a forest and alive with grasshoppers that 
chirped and chattered and leapt through the air like monkeys. 
 I was lost and didn’t know where to move. A tropic heat oozed up from the 
ground, rank with sharp odours of roots and nettles. Snow-clouds of elder-
blossom banked in the sky, showering upon me the fumes and ﬂ akes of their 
sweet and giddy suffocation. High overhead ran frenzied larks, screaming, as 
though the sky were tearing apart . . . 
 For the ﬁ rst time in my life I was alone in a world whose behaviour I could 
neither predict nor fathom: a world of birds that squealed, of plants that 
stank, of insects that sprang about without warning. 
 (Lee 1959, 9) 
 The poet Laurie Lee remembered when, in 1919 and he was three years old, his 
family moved to a village deep in the English countryside, which he soon came to 
love. He admitted that his recollections ‘may be distorted by time’. Yet his memo-
ries seem likely to echo the intense, embodied sensations that young children feel 
with each fresh experience. There is also the overwhelming sense of unfathomable 
nature, a sense that becomes lost in several ways. The giant forest of grass to the 
child seems tame to adults. The child’s intense awareness of novelty fades into the 
adult’s less alert familiarity. And beyond the personal, the once wild countryside has 
been turned into largely silent, over-grazed ﬁ elds and over-sheared hedges, with 
the immense loss of birds, ﬂ owers, insects and other wildlife. 
 John Clare (1793–1864), a farm labourer’s son, wandered freely over the land 
around Helpston village, where ‘Its only bondage was the circling sky’, until an 

18 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Enclosure Act in 1809 forced the people off the land. For Clare (1997, 87), the 
immense moor used to lose itself 
 In the blue mist the horizon’s edge surrounds 
 Now this sweet vision of my boyish hours 
 Free as spring clouds and wild as summer ﬂ owers 
 Is faded all – a hope that blossomed free, 
 And hath been once, no more shall be 
 Inclosure came and trampled on the grave 
 Of labour’s rights and left the poor a slave 
 Clare wrote over 3,500 poems about his childhood in that natural world. He felt 
his memories were all he had left, and he spent the last 28 years of his life in lunatic 
asylums. Today, land enclosures are one reason that over 3.5 billion people now live 
in cities, many willingly, others longing to return to rural life. 
 Chapter 3 in Volume 1 on the  ﬁ rst plane of social being  1   was about children’s 
embodied human nature. This parallel chapter considers material relations between 
humans and the natural world and how the youngest generations are especially 
affected by ecological changes. The changes will cause huge effects over coming 
decades, after the lifetime of older generations who dominate current decisions 
and activities. 
 To say we must reduce climate change ‘for the sake of our children’ can be 
unhelpful, if it seems to exclude childless adults. The phrase then risks splitting 
society into factions, when united action is most needed. The phrase also risks turn-
ing urgent global responsibilities into distant ones concerning future generations. 
There is a suggestion that parents should take personal action, rather than everyone 
including children and young people becoming involved in political action. And 
children are responsible social citizens now. People of all ages made banners and 
over half a million of them joined in the climate change marches in many cities 
around the world in September 2014. UNICEF reported that three quarters of the 
British 11- to 16-year-olds they had surveyed were ‘deeply concerned’ about how 
climate change will change the world and how it will affect them and children in 
poorer nations.  2  They wanted the government to do more to reduce the threat. 
Esha Marwaha, aged 15, delivered a 65,000-signature petition to the Department 
for Education asking them to not to remove climate change from the geography 
curriculum for children aged under 14 years. Esha said: 
 It’s not about forcing students to believe in climate change, it’s about allow-
ing them to make an informed decision based on what they learn . . . The 
proposed change to the curriculum will reduce our potential to help tackle 
climate change. It stops us from taking a stand to protect our futures . . . The 
beauty of geography is the fact that it gives us the skills to frankly express the 
problems that the Earth and humanity faces, without hiding the truth. . . . 

Ecology 19
It isn’t fair that we are causing harm to people less well off due to our own 
carelessness.  3  
 Action is needed ‘with children’ rather than ‘for children’. ‘Our children’ has a 
collective meaning when children are public, not private, goods. Everyone, childless 
or not, will depend on ‘our’ younger generations to sustain them in their depen-
dent old age, so the interests of each age group are shared among all generations. 
 ‘Save the planet from climate change’ is an inaccurate slogan. The great global 
mass of minerals will hardly be affected. Instead the concern is with the fragile bio-
sphere surrounding the globe, the gases, liquids, minerals and living species. Wade 
Davis (2007, x) adds the ‘wondrous diversity’ of the ethnosphere, ‘humanity’s great-
est legacy . . . the product of our dreams, the embodiment of our hopes, the symbol 
of all that we are and all that we have created as a wildly inquisitive and astonish-
ingly adaptive species’. To understand immensely complex interactions between 
climate change and societies, ‘socio-ecology’ combines natural and social sciences 
and the humanities. DCR especially supports interdisciplinary research (Bhaskar 
2010a; Bhaskar et al. 2010; Høyer, 2010), which overcomes single-discipline tunnel 
vision (Næss, 2010). DCR not only joins up the dots from many different disci-
plines; it also shows how joining them ‘changes the nature of the dots’ (Cornell 
and Parker 2010, 30). 
 This chapter reviews a few aspects of these many interactions, their causes 
and effects, through the four-stage MELD and a range of DCR concepts (many 
were introduced in Volume 1, and see the glossary). Nature evokes strong reac-
tions ranging from awe and reverence, to fear and disgust, to the desire to control 
and exploit. In more muted ways, there are similar attitudes towards childhood 
and the two responses will be compared to consider their inﬂ uence on policies. 
Adequate analysis at the ﬁ rst 1M stage is vital, and is the main contribution made 
by researchers, before others intervene at the practical 2E stage. Chapter 9 is the 
most dense chapter in this book, and some readers may prefer to look at later 
chapters ﬁ rst. 
 MELD and climate change 
 1M, ﬁ rst moment and six degrees of global warming 
 (Bell 2009; Bond 2012; Brown 2013; Carter 2011; Curry 2011; Giddens 2009; 
Haddad 2012; Hillman 2004; IPPC 2013; Jones 2007; Klein 2014; Lohmann 2006; 
Lohmann et al. 2013; Marshall 2014; Miller 2009; Monbiot 2007; Neale 2008; 
Oxfam International 2014; Rogers 2010; Roy 2009, 2014; Shiva 2000, 2013; 
Stephens 2009; Urry 2011).  4  
 1M begins by closely examining the non-identity and identity of chosen subjects, 
such as climate change. 1M views each subject as a seemingly ﬁ nished  product  at that 
 moment  in time. DCR’s non-identity recognises that any objects we observe are inde-
pendent of our perceptions and differ from them. The objects (beings, things, events) 

20 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
cannot wholly be reduced into how we identify them and think about them. 
Knowledge is never whole or complete and is always open to revision, while 
researchers aim to report present knowledge as accurately as possible. 
 By 2014, the annual average global temperature was 0.85 o C warmer than it 
was in 1750 before the industrial revolution, up from 13.7 o to 14.55 o . Some sci-
entists have set a rise of 2 o C from 1750 as the highest ‘safe’ level, which must not 
be exceeded, to protect life on earth. Other scientists consider that a 2 o C increase 
would be disastrous, an ‘act of extraordinary witting intergenerational injustice’. 
James Hensen and colleagues (2013) detail inevitable immediate and future effects 
and how children will suffer most. They are suing the USA government for not 
protecting the rights of young people by planning policies to reduce carbon emis-
sions. Heat waves, ﬂ oods, infections, and the insecurity of food and clean water 
that these bring, all have the most severe and life-long or lethal effects on young 
children (Oxfam International 2011). 
 When CO 2 ppm (carbon dioxide parts per million) in the atmosphere increase, 
heat also increases. If there are 450 CO 2 ppm, a rise of 2 o C will be inevitable. 
Scientists disagree over setting 350 or 450 ppm as the upper safe limit. In 2013, 
there were 400 CO 2 ppm in the atmosphere, up by 24 per cent in only the past 
55 years. The present level has been unknown for maybe the past three million 
years, reported the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2013). 
Some of the CO 2 will remain in the atmosphere for hundreds of thousands of 
years. The steady increase of CO 2 ppm is a reaction to 250 years of fossil fuel burn-
ing and changes in land use. Even if all greenhouse gas emissions stopped today, 
the global temperature would still rise by another 0.8 o C. PricewaterhouseCoopers 
(2013) estimated that with present and accelerating emission rates, we will exceed 
450 CO 2 ppm by as early as 2034. 
 The book  Six Degrees  by Mark Lynas (2008) has six chapters. Each one explains 
likely effects on the Earth’s surface if the average annual global climate temperature 
(not the local weather) warms by another degree, from one up to six degrees above 
13.7 o C. A rise of one or two degrees sounds trivial, but it can have immense effects. 
Lynas has summarised hundreds of scientiﬁ c papers that describe and explain cli-
mate change, its causes and possible effects. 
 The research draws on millions of years of geological records, on computer 
modelling informed by these records and by physicists’ and chemists’ repeated 
experiments, and on climate records since the 1880s, as well as from sources such 
as tree rings and ice layers. Lynas’s book is still useful because it is clear and com-
prehensive, and most of the predictions that he noted, made in 2007 or earlier, 
have not been refuted. Indeed, if they have been inaccurate, they have been over-
cautious and have underestimated the speed and extent of the effects of climate 
change. Arctic ice, for example, is melting far earlier than expected, shrinking to 
over a million square kilometres less than the annual average.  5  There has, however, 
been a 15-year pause in the rise of average air temperatures, but that is attributed to 
immense warming in deep oceans. That is expected soon to trigger faster increases 
in heat on the earth’s surface (Kosaka and Xie 2013). 

Ecology 21
 The IPCC (2008) concluded ‘unequivocally’ that climate change is mainly 
due to human activity, particularly burning of fossil fuels with emissions of car-
bon and other greenhouse gases. The hundreds of authors are cautious in their 
conclusions and predictions, guarding against claims about errors in their reports, 
vigorously asserted by climate sceptics, who are funded directly or indirectly by 
fossil fuel industries (Klein 2014; Monbiot 2007).  6  Scientists increasingly work 
across disciplines (led by IPCC, the Tyndale Centre and other interdisciplinary 
groups). This enables them to see new ways in which changes trigger one another 
into tipping points, which accelerate irreversible and multiple effects rather than 
simply additional ones. For example, melted ice at the poles reduces the giant 
solar mirrors of white snow that reﬂ ect back sunlight. That melting increases areas 
of black rock and dark ocean, which absorb heat. If permafrost melts, the meth-
ane trapped under it is released, and methane is a more potent greenhouse gas 
than carbon. 
 In Chapter 1, Lynas reviews a single degree average global increase. The fruitful 
Great Plains from Texas to Canada are predicted to parch away into their underly-
ing deserts, which will drown towns under sandstorms. Snow and ice caps and 
glaciers on mountains will retreat, and no longer so reliably feed the great rivers 
that keep continents fertile. From the Himalayas ﬂ ow 15,000 glaciers into rivers on 
which a billion people rely (Empson 2014, 253). Fiercer winter storms will follow 
harsher summer droughts. As the oceans warm up, monsoon rain will fall back into 
the sea before it reaches the land, resulting in more droughts. Heat is energy, so that 
hotter atmospheres generate enormously ﬁ ercer storms. Warmer oceans set many 
more typhoons and hurricanes raging across the lands. 
 At an average two degrees rise, oceans expanded by heat and by melted ice 
will become too acidic and toxic in many areas to support marine life. Countless 
creatures, which absorb half the CO 2 in air and water into their shells, will instead 
dissolve back into the water, releasing carbon in one of many chain reactions that 
multiply and speed up spirals of climate change. Coral reefs, destroyed by warming 
and marine pollution, will no longer protect shores from tidal waves (   Jones 2007), 
and the rising oceans will submerge very many more islands and low-lying coasts. 
The Mediterranean lands will begin to turn to desert and emigration will hugely 
increase from many areas where people, animals and crops cannot survive. Previ-
ously, climate change occurred gradually over thousands of years, allowing time 
for creatures to migrate or to adapt and evolve and develop resistance to heat and 
drought. Present changes, however, are taking only decades, which reduces the 
hope that species can adapt and survive. 
 By an average three degrees rise, the humid Amazon forest will have dried out 
into a tinderbox, and then to a desert, like almost all of Australia and great swathes 
of the other continents. Instead of being life-saving ‘carbon dumps’ that absorb 
carbon, forests and oceans will become carbon emitters, massively heating up the 
atmosphere. Storms and cyclones will ﬂ ood many coastal cities, where most people 
on the planet live, millions will die and millions of those who survive will have to 
migrate. Four- to six-degree rises will end most life on earth. 

22 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Six Degrees  (Lynas 2008) celebrates amazing wonders of the world, including 
human cultures and ingenuity and scientiﬁ c research. Yet it is clear that humans are 
causing climate change by greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbated by destruction, 
waste and pollution. This most harms the poorer nations, which are least responsible 
for the industry that causes climate change and brings famine, disease and war to 
water-stressed, parched countries. Global trade in food and ﬂ owers exports water 
from these countries.  7  The World Bank (2013) warned that millions of people are 
already severely affected by climate change; a rise of up to 2 o C in 20 to 30 years 
time is likely, given present lifestyles, and a further rise would be ‘catastrophic and 
irreversible’. At ‘only’ 2 o C, food shortages would leave millions more young chil-
dren irreversibly ‘stunted’ physically and mentally. The World Bank also predicted 
that climate change ‘could batter the slums more, and greatly harm the hopes 
and lives [of people] who have had little hand in raising the Earth’s temperature.’ 
It could push millions back into poverty through mass migration following droughts 
and ﬂ oods. The IPCC (2014a) pronounced that ‘catastrophic climate change’ can 
be averted only if we quickly transfer from fossil fuels to clean energy, which is emi-
nently affordable. There is just about enough knowledge, power and time to prevent 
much future ecological change, or else we can greatly accelerate it, through ‘doing 
nothing’ and continuing in today’s lifestyles. We cannot choose to have no effect. 
 1M and DCR concepts, knowing and being 
 The next three sections relate nature and climate change to DCR concepts of 
knowing and being, of alienation, and of morality. The four MELD stages illustrate 
the driving power of the dialectic and the need to begin at 1M  non-identity  with 
intense efforts to apprehend realities, to identify what things are and are not, to be 
aware of absence in errors, fallacies, illusions, omissions, contradictions, ignorance 
and misunderstanding. 
 Central to DCR is  absence (Bhaskar 2008b). There is the long ignorance and 
silence over climate change and its many effects, despite decades of warning reports. 
Scientists keep reporting absence, in the partial or total demise of living species and 
of habitats in forests and oceans. The general response illustrates a human difﬁ culty 
in thinking about absence. It is as if climate change and its effects are too complex 
or extreme, too vast or painful, remote or invisible for us to begin to under-
stand them (Hamilton 2010; Marshall 2015). To comfortable, inﬂ uential groups the 
changes can seem far-distant and absent from their lives, best forgotten. 
 Misperceptions at 1M can undermine and distort thinking and acting at all the 
later stages. DCR’s concern with absence accepts that we know almost nothing in 
comparison to all the vast absent knowledge of the past and future and elsewhere. 
However, within the limits of human knowledge there is the constant search for 
accuracy and truth as far as we can know them and attempt to avoid intended and 
unintended fallacies. 
 1M aims to avoid the  epistemic fallacy,  which collapses and absents things into 
thoughts, ontology into epistemology. Centrally, the fallacy sets human thought over 

Ecology 23
the natural world, as if we invent it instead of discovering its pre-existing reality. 
The fallacy is exploited by critics of climate change science, including many politi-
cians, journalists, lobbyists and business executives. They reduce debates about climate 
change research into epistemic arguments about the (in)validity of scientiﬁ c methods, 
ﬁ ndings, predictions and conclusions. These debates evade and at times deny the 
ontology of climate change and its real effects. Objectivity is confused with a seeming 
neutrality and balance, instead of being assessed for its accurate ontology or nearness to 
the truth. The supposedly independent, neutral BBC has been accused of ‘regarding 
truth as something to be handled, not investigated’.  8  For a range of reasons (discussed 
later), the mass media have left the general public scarcely aware of climate change. 
 This is not to suggest that ontology is somehow better than epistemology; they 
are equally important to us, but it is vital to see the difference between them. 
Although our understanding is always fallible and partial, the more accurate and just 
that 1M understanding can be, the more likely later MELD stages are to promote 
truth and justice. 1M involves searching for ontology that is partly excluded from 
consciousness, unacknowledged or incompletely known. This leads on to tracing 
how errors and omissions generate  contradictions , inconsistencies and splits, which 
produce dualisms, fragmentation and alienation. Debates on climate change are 
prime examples of these errors and contradictions, concealing truth, and claiming to 
beneﬁ t society through measures that actually threaten it with eventual destruction. 
 Bhaskar (2000, 2008b) emphasised the need to overcome  ontological monovalence 
 (the single value of the present that excludes the possibility of absence). To ignore 
absence and splits can close vital new openings. Dialectic begins with exploring 
these absences in order to work towards valid knowledge, to resolve contradictions, 
and at later MELD stages to promote integration, resolution and totality. Absence 
is central to change, both in absenting present conditions and in working towards 
countless not-yet-present future options, as Bhaskar (2008b, 48) described. 
 What is present from one perspective, at one level, in some region may be 
absent from, at or in another. Presences and absences may be recursively 
embedded and systematically intermingled in all sorts of fascinating ways 
[in time and space]. They may spiral inwards conceptually, mediate, switch, 
transﬁ gure each other relationally, perspectivally or conﬁ gurationally, struc-
turally sediment, abstract, concretise, contradict and coalesce themselves. 
 In this analysis, ‘hidden depths, tangled loops, inverted hierarchies’ become evi-
dent, as in interdisciplinary research into climate change and its interacting effects 
on every aspect of life on earth. There are also ‘non-occurrences, the undone or left 
alone . . . the failed exam . . . the monsoon that didn’t occur . . .’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 48) 
and that might be followed by so-far absent famine, war and migration. The 
‘undone’ includes the dislocation between current knowledge about dangers and 
inaction to reduce and prevent them. 
 Natural necessity  recognises the three levels of depth reality, ﬁ rst the  empirical 
level of our experiences and responses, such as to severe droughts. Children and 

24 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
adults living in the parched areas will experience and react in very different ways 
from those in other countries who only hear or view news about it. Second is the 
 actual  event, the absent rain, the wilting crops, dying animals and starving children. 
It is hard to imagine and grasp the enormity of such events. The third deeper level 
involves  causal structures  and mechanisms, including the increase of greenhouse gases 
and the political and economic causes (see Chapter 11) of the increase in burning 
fossil fuels and forests. The third level is mainly invisible and so seemingly absent, 
only seen in its effects, and easily challenged or ignored. For example, melting 
Arctic ice may be seen as something that just happens in a changing planet, for no 
known reason, and summer ice might return at any time. 
 Volume 1 reviewed how the natural sciences draw on this third level to explain 
events—for example, Newton’s concept of gravity or Darwin’s of natural selection, 
concepts that can never directly be seen or proved. If researchers are to explain 
causes and consider alternatives, not simply describe and connect observations, 
then they have to examine the third causal layer. Causal social structures will be 
reviewed later under 3L. 
 Trans-factual powers  work in both closed and open systems alike. A  closed system , 
such as one constructed in an elaborate experiment, allows only a single force to 
work, and is very unusual. Systems are usually  open  and involve competing forces. 
Gravity competes with the powers of bird ﬂ ight, jet engines and air currents, for 
example. These powers can defy gravity, but they do not disprove its overall greater 
power. Critics who deny climate change and argue that average temperatures have 
scarcely risen in the past 15 years assume a closed system in which each power 
works unimpeded. However, climate change involves numerous interacting powers 
and systems (oceans and lands store or release heat, forests absorb carbon or emit it 
when burned, coal-ﬁ red power stations open or close). The warming is bound to 
be uneven when many powers interact with it, but they do not thereby disprove it. 
Trans-factual causal powers, such as climate change, work in open systems and can-
not be reduced into their actual effects, such as melting glaciers. 
 Just as gravity constantly exerts its unseen pressures, climate change constantly 
exerts its inﬂ uences, potential or active. The real laws and physical constraints of 
nature are trans-factually efﬁ cacious (they cause effects in open and closed systems). 
They are independent of our analyses and experiments. However much we learn 
and try to intervene, we cannot alter the effects of over 250 years of increased green-
house gas emissions, which will inexorably increase through future decades.  Differ-
entiation involves analysing the trans-factual and different reactions, within closed or 
open systems, of mechanisms and structures and the events they generate. 
 Causal laws take two forms.  Counter-factual laws  are law-like universal condi-
tionals when a tendency is expected to occur inevitably, given the right condi-
tions. To refer to the earlier example, if increased greenhouse gases really are the 
condition that raises the global temperature, the temperature would keep rising 
steadily. Since this does not happen, sceptics dismiss the theory of climate change as 
false. However,  trans-factual laws  are more ﬂ exible rule-like (rather than law-like) 
mechanisms that support tendencies: climate change tends to follow increase in 

Ecology 25
greenhouse gases. The tendency is assumed to exist although it may not be steadily 
manifest or realised in open systems, such as when oceans absorb much of the 
growing heat for a while. Trans-factual laws take account of deeper, competing 
causes (Hartwig 2007, 85). This important difference reveals how counter-factual 
and trans-factual events are accurately or inaccurately represented, contrasted or 
confused. 
 Once we allow for open systems, then laws can only be universal if they 
are interpreted in a non-empirical, trans-factual way, i.e., as designating the 
activity of the generative mechanisms and structures independently of any 
particular sequence or pattern of events .
 (Bhaskar 2008a, 14)  
 However, current insistence on certain forms of evidence and proof diverts 
researchers away from unseen causes towards their effects. Both levels are vital in 
the natural and social sciences. Trans-factual laws are especially relevant to social sci-
ence, as they allow for unpredictable agency as well as powerful, underlying, causal 
trends. 
 1M non-identity examines things as  products  in time and space, partly ﬁ nished or 
complete, enduring or transient.  Alterity , otherness, involves the dialectic between 
how we, the observers, are both like and not like the entities we observe. Alter-
ity also concerns the unique features of each entity. The  concrete↔universal singular 
 recognises each entity’s shared properties and each unique identity-in-difference. 
There is absence in all that the entity is not, and all that it might or could become. 
 Over the centuries, alterity between humans and nature has increased, through 
large steps, such as the move into cities, as well as countless small steps. Human bod-
ies evolved through the use of tools, through being part of the nature they shaped and 
altered, interacting with other species when hunting, gathering, farming and ﬁ sh-
ing (Empson 2014; Foster 2000, 2002; Magdoff and Foster 2011; Marx and Engels 
1985). Polynesian sailors, for example, used to travel across oceans guided by their 
embodied knowledge of the stars, winds, waves and currents, passing on their oral 
tradition from fathers to sons through songs. Today, navigation by satnavs removes 
any need to notice or feel the natural surroundings. Protective adults’ fear of strang-
ers and trafﬁ c, with loss of open land, woods and rivers, have all set barriers between 
children and the natural world where they could roam freely only a few decades ago. 
They become separated from their kin (extended families in communities exten-
sively related by intermarriage) and their kith (literally well known, native land). 
 Alterity can mean knowing and perhaps marvelling at the distinct beauty of 
each different being. Another sense of alterity is now more dominant, the feeling 
of being removed, even estranged and alienated, from these beings. This loss of 
sensitive interacting with nature reduces awareness of the numerous small changes 
that climate change brings, such as when birds disappear or spring ﬂ owers blossom 
weeks earlier, with a fading sense of how and why all the interdependent changes 
matter. 

26 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Critical of Hume’s insistence on empirical, observable evidence,  9  Kant ([1781] 
1965) proposed  transcendental idealism.  This recognises that data are not simply 
observed and collected, as Hume asserted. Data also have to be understood and 
analysed through our ideas, memories and concepts. Kant contended that tran-
scendent truths are the condition for the possibility of our knowing and verifying 
experience. The truths include intuitions about time, space and cause, which bring 
order, sense and meaning to what would otherwise be endless chaotic impressions. 
Yet Kant’s transcendental idealism denied realism, and transferred reality into an 
abstract, ideal realm of thought (the epistemic fallacy) (Bhaskar 1998a). 
 Transcendental realism , however, combines Hume’s empirical recognition of 
realities with Kant’s transcendental understanding of them (Norris 2007). There 
is a dialectic between human transcendental thought on one side (the science of 
climate change), and a mind-and-theory-independent, objective reality and truth 
(the actual warming) on the other. Realities, such as climate change, transcend 
our understanding when they hold unknown and perhaps unknowable realities 
and truths. 
 Transcendental realism combines analyses at different levels: empirical (our 
sense of reality), ontological (real being), rational (our analysis of reality), and moral 
(values). Transcendental realism combines positivist, factual research with interpre-
tive research, but it avoids the extremes of ‘anti-naturalistic hermeneutics’ (seeing 
everything as a social construction) and also ‘hyper-naturalistic positivism’ (treating 
all knowledge as facts) (Bhaskar 1998a, 3, 1998b, xiii).  10  It accepts ontology, the 
intransitive natural world that exceeds and is independent of thought, as well as 
epistemology, our transitive perceptions and responses. In positivism, empiricism 
and hermeneutics, the epistemic fallacy is the mistaken attempt to collapse being 
into knowing. 
 Transcendental realism acknowledges  alethic truth,  the unavoidable truth that is a 
universal reality, however hard it is to discover. Falsehood and deception can only 
exist and be detected when they are deﬁ ned against the true independent reality 
they misrepresent. The concept of scientiﬁ c fraud, for example, assumes that there 
are enduring, universal, really existing, scientiﬁ c truths that can be reported more 
or less accurately. Realists see ‘a relation between knowledge claims and the real 
world . . . the truth content of any proposition or belief depends on the way the 
world is’ (Lawson 2013). To recognise climate change as a real process, not simply 
a claim, involves accepting that alethic truth and  intransitive  reality exist, partly 
understood through our  transitive perceptions. 
 Attempts to be oblivious or forgetful of the truth include claims that all beliefs 
are relative, never absolute, and therefore all beliefs have equal merit. They then 
cannot be assessed for accuracy either against one another or against any enduring 
truth, but only in their own terms. Some see truth as contingent and local, not uni-
versal,  11  but this relativism confuses perceptions with realities. Initiation ceremonies 
are an essential rite of passage to some young people, and are seen as unnecessary 
by others, but this does not alter the fact that the ceremonies occur. 

Ecology 27
 Truth is contested in the great divides between disciplines, when each has its 
own methods of verifying its work, and is critical of other disciplines. Within disci-
plines, positivists and social constructionists disagree over whether truth exists and 
can be veriﬁ ed. The important search for truth through negotiated consensus, such 
as in peer review of journal papers, or juries reaching a majority verdict, is open 
to abuse. Yet limitations in these methods do not alter the reality of the underlying 
truth being searched for. (Is the paper accurate? Is the defendant guilty?) And the 
growing consensus among climate scientists involves their interactive analyses to 
test, revise and reﬁ ne their developing conclusions against the constantly unfold-
ing natural changes. The  signiﬁ ed (the concept, such as melting of glaciers) and 
the  signiﬁ ers (words, numbers, graphs, models, measures of melting) are validated 
against the original  referent  or independent reality (the actual melting glaciers and 
the causes and processes), in DCR’s three part  semiotic triangle .  12  
 1M and DCR concepts, alienation 
 To recognise  alienation,  such as our growing alienation from the natural world, 
involves: ﬁ rst, accepting that there can be referents, true, alethic, human identities 
and relationships; second, that human beings can be estranged or alienated from 
them; third, that human beings can potentially achieve or return to these truths. 
1M non-identity involves detecting hidden or forgotten or misunderstood realities, 
and noting how they differ from the actual present. In alienation, things essential 
to well-being are removed, estranged, forgotten or misrepresented, so that splits, 
suffering and loss of ﬂ ourishing ensue. The present estranged, destructive relations 
between humans and nature suggest that many people are alienated from their 
physical human nature in different ways that need to be researched separately and 
together. 
 DCR extends Hegel’s and Marx’s concepts to emphasise alienation on four 
planes of social being (Bhaskar 2000, 2008b; Hartwig 2007, 30–36): from our 
bodies in nature and the cosmos including our labour and the materials and 
means of productive work; from our relations with others; from geo-historical 
social structures; and from the good, the possibility of ﬂ ourishing, and our core 
 concrete↔universal singularity.  There is the sense of having to be other than what 
we truly are, losing essential and intrinsic parts of our nature and identity, being 
split and estranged from our true self. The effects of alienation were evident in the 
severe ill health of children and adults in Victorian slums and factories (Engels 1844; 
Marx and Engels 1985) and are replicated today in many majority-world cities. 
Children’s bodies show less obvious evidence of alienation in wealthier countries 
today, apart from such reactions as obesity, asthma and restless ADHD (attention 
deﬁ cit and hyperactivity disorder), but rates of mental illness and self-harm are ris-
ing (LSE 2012).  13  These have been attributed not only to poverty and inequality 
(Marmot et al. 2013; Wilkinson and Pickett 2009) but also to alienation from the 
natural world (Diamond 2011; Foster 2000, 2002; Hillman 2004; Monbiot 2014).  14  

28 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Child poverty involves little access to gardens, parks, playing ﬁ elds and sports 
centres. The families of over two million children in Britain cannot even afford a 
day trip to the seaside.  15  Ancient beliefs in paradise gardens, and today’s preference 
among the wealthy to live beside green areas and water in cities (Harvey 2012; 
Minton 2012), to holiday amid beautiful scenery and have second homes in the 
countryside, demonstrate a strong human desire to enjoy nature. 
 The setting can shape children’s moral status. Children have always ‘run wild’, 
climbed trees, splashed and swum in seas and rivers, dug in mud and sand, made 
bonﬁ res, and built dams, bridges and camps wherever they could do so. That 
behaviour is generally encouraged and seen as ‘good’ and healthy in natural con-
texts, but as ‘bad’, destructive and antisocial in urban areas and spaces marked ‘no 
ball games’, code for ‘no children’. 
 Alienation from natural and physical aspects of the self leads to a chain of dualisms, 
constraints, reiﬁ cations, fears, desires, TINA (there is no alternative) formations, 
denegations (which deny and reject), gaps, errors, and inconsistent, unselfconscious 
splits between theory and practice (all reviewed later). Hegel identiﬁ ed four nega-
tive reactions to alienation: stoic indifference, sceptical denial, unhappy conscious-
ness and self-protective withdrawal (Bhaskar 2008b, 334; Norrie 2010). Climate 
change evokes these reactions, suggesting that, if global warming is to be acknowl-
edged in theory and practice, these general 1M misunderstandings and alienation 
from nature will ﬁ rst have to be resolved. Since everything is contained within 
being, to alienate or estrange anything is to split being. This incorrectly makes 
one part of being causally inexplicable or inaefﬁ catious (meaning both ineffective 
and unfeeling). Transcendental realism helps to explain and potentially overcome 
Hegel’s four fruitless responses and so to promote ﬂ ourishing (Bhaskar 2000, 33). 
 1M and DCR concepts, morality 
 Transcendental realism involves  ethical naturalism,  which recognises all-pervasive, 
universal values that prevent suffering and promote ﬂ ourishing although disagree-
ments arise over how we deﬁ ne and interpret the values (Bhaskar 1986; Sayer 2011).  16  
Ethical naturalism overcomes false separation between descriptive and normative 
research, fact and value, recognising that all research is inﬂ uenced by values. If val-
ues are not admitted, then covert concepts can distort work that is claimed to be 
scientiﬁ c and unbiased. The MELD moral dialectic aims to resolve contradictions, 
oppositions and  aporiai  (absences, ills) and to work towards the emancipated, good 
society, which involves wholesome relations with nature. 
 Moral realism  accepts that harm and beneﬁ t are universal, causal, moral realities, 
which are deﬁ ned and experienced in varied local and personal ways. To deny 
moral realism would set up  theory/practice inconsistency,  in the contradiction between 
the claim that harms and beneﬁ ts are not real and all-pervasive, versus the reality 
that they matter intensely in the denier’s own life.  17  Because humans are vulnerable, 
sensitive, social beings, able to ﬂ ourish and to suffer, moral realism is part of human 
nature and daily life, and is not artiﬁ cially introduced (Archer 2003; Bhaskar 1986; 

Ecology 29
Collier 1999; Midgley 2014; Sayer 2011; Smith 2011). From birth onwards, like 
other species, we desire and enjoy beneﬁ ts, and fear and avoid harms.  18  ‘Morally 
good objectives for us to adapt exist independently of our knowledge of them . . . 
All actions affecting others are moral. The social and moral domains essentially 
have the same referent’ (Lawson 2013). 
 1M seeks to avoid the  anthropic fallacy  that places humans at the centre of the 
purpose and meaning of the universe (Bhaskar 2000, 26). Instead, 1M sees that we 
are part of nature, one among millions of species and systems, affecting others in 
beneﬁ cial and harmful ways, and affected by them. A related problem is the adul-
tist fallacy. This sets rational adults at the apex of morality, and regards childhood 
as a slow climb up from lower, natural, pre-social, pre-moral babyhood to higher, 
socialised, moral adulthood. 
 In the three separate tiers of  natural necessity  (Table 9, column 1), the empirical 
emerges from the actual, which emerges from the real. The  unholy trinity  (column 2) 
sidelines underlying causal reality and truths, and reduces these into actual evidence. 
It denies absence, and collapses the actual up into empirical perceptions and expe-
riences in the epistemic fallacy. The  holy trinity  (column 3) accepts natural neces-
sity and that human understanding is partial and transitive in  epistemic relativism.  It 
searches for intransitive  ontological realism , and relies on human moral  judgemental 
rationality to adjudicate between the other two layers. It also accepts transcendental 
realism, interactions between underlying reality and abstract thought. Moral uncer-
tainties can be evaluated like scientiﬁ c ones, through critical empirical reasoning 
and debate, trial and error, and judgemental rationality, working through contra-
dictions towards total or partial agreement, and searching for local and material 
ways of promoting universal and abstract values of well-being. 
 Human responses to climate change and its many dangers and the potential suf-
fering for all species are unavoidably moral, whether we leave the effects to increase 
inexorably, or attempt to control and reduce them. 1M efforts to understand cli-
mate change involve dialectics between ontology and epistemology, abstract and 
concrete, fact and value, and many other dyads. The aim at 1M is to seek explana-
tions and truth about being and knowing to prepare for 2E. 
 TABLE 9.1 Natural necessity and the trinities in the natural and social sciences and morality 
Natural necessity
‘Unholy trinity’
‘Holy trinity’
↓   Empirical (our perceptions 
and experiences)
  Epistemic 
fallacy
↓  Epistemic relativism
↑↓ Actual (events and objects)
↑  Ontological and 
ﬂ at actualism, 
monovalence
↑↓  Judgemental 
rationality
↑   Real ontology (underlying 
causes)
  Primal squeeze 
ignores Reality
↑  Ontological realism

30 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 2E, second edge 
 2E, carbon and climate change 
 2E is the  edge of transition into intervention and  process in product . 2E concerns 
actively negating problems that were identiﬁ ed at 1M (Bhaskar 2008b, 97–8). This 
involves absenting aporia (contradictions and constraints, ills and untruths). There 
is a tensed, sequential absenting through time-space-cause rhythmics,  19  leading to 
emergence, change and transition in the immense complexities of climate change. 
 Urgent action is needed on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The sooner we 
act, the more of the seemingly inexorable devastation we might prevent, and the 
more choices remain open. So far (as of spring 2015), governments’ main responses 
to these problems illustrate the epistemic fallacy. There have been many meetings 
and much talk but little action. Targets for reducing emissions have been set into 
the far future, 2030 or 2050. 
 Another response has been to commission extensive multi-disciplinary research. 
There is growing sociological interest (for example, Beck 2008; Bell 2009; 
Giddens 2009; Shove and Spurling 2013;  20  Shove et al. 2012; Stripple and Bulkeley 
2013; Urry 2011). From many examples, £5.7 million were granted ‘to develop, 
integrate and apply whole system modelling of future energy supply and demand, 
with stakeholders in academia, government and industry internationally’.  21  The 
researchers examine the challenges of decarbonisation, energy security, energy 
equity and cost-effectiveness, to inform policy makers and to help energy supply 
companies with their technical and economic planning. They are also assessing the 
potential role of societal and behavioural change through ‘agent-based modelling 
to social simulation’ of energy related practices in households and innovation in 
the energy sector. 
 The complex research illustrates the need for very careful assessment and plan-
ning at many levels, if action to counteract climate change is to be well informed 
and to avoid coercive structures and resisting agents. However, might planning 
ever more research projects collude with those who delay action? To stress actual 
and empirical levels and effects, and avoid 1M inquiry into deeper political and 
economic causes, could be like rearranging the deckchairs on the Titanic while it 
heads for the iceberg. Causes may be seen as invisible and also political and there-
fore doubly contentious and outside the remit of ‘objective’, social research. Even 
when causal research is conducted and reported (such as by IPCC) the ﬁ ndings may 
be ignored by policy makers in government and industry. After years of working 
with energy companies to persuade them to commit to renewable energies, the 
environmentalist Jonathan Porritt concluded this was ‘futile’.  22  
 DCR helps to analyse complicated, interweaving, structure-agency interac-
tions, each altering the other over time through TMSA,  transformational model of 
social activity .  23  Agents’ indifference to structural climate change massively increases 
that change, until agents as citizens become sufﬁ ciently affected to choose or be 
forced to alter their beliefs and behaviours. That might be too late, and effective 
methods to promote political change are urgently needed, but they can easily be 

Ecology 31
counter-productive when (like this book) they risk either overwhelming people 
with details or else failing to explain complexities adequately. 
 DCR concepts of  change  crucially accept the continuing nature of the alter-
ing entity, whether a biosphere or a human being, which is both sustained and 
also altered over time. DCR analyses change in terms of what has been absented, 
rather than what is different. This is more profound than just  difference between 
two or more non-identical things that might be exchanged.  24  Change can involve 
resolving or increasing problems, such as when activity reduces or increases CO 2 
emissions. Predictions of social change can turn out to be wrong and foolish. Yet 
likely futures may be found in structural trends and deeper, causal tendencies. An 
example is how crises (tsunamis, earthquakes) draw out great human courage, resil-
ience and generous altruism, as well as negative reactions. 
 Ways to inﬂ uence human agency are uncertain. Can people’s conscious choices 
and behaviours be relied on? Information alone is insufﬁ cient. Do societies have 
to be cajoled and persuaded to change their use of energy, such as by ‘nudge’ 
tactics?  25  Are many potential changes so small-scale that they are futile, or would 
they become signiﬁ cant if millions of people made them? Will climate disasters 
(massive ﬂ oods or droughts or migration) transform affected people’s attitudes so 
much that current research about them becomes redundant? How will nations 
and governments decide to cooperate to pass ‘green’ global policies, laws and 
taxes: to deter or punish corporate carbon emissions; to promote renewable ener-
gies; to insulate and create ‘zero-carbon’ buildings; to promote public transport 
and many other structures that help everyone to adopt eco-friendly lives as the 
easiest, cheapest option? 
 Carbon trading was intended to reduce carbon emissions (IPCC 2008). This 
epistemic fallacy replaces reality with a symbol, a price on carbon.  26  The price may 
be on emissions, when companies that emit more than they forecast can buy credits 
from companies that emit less than their forecasts. Or the emissions may be paid for 
when high-emitters fund majority world ecological projects (Lohmann 2006, 47–8). 
As predicted, carbon trading oversaw huge increases in emissions, huge proﬁ ts 
for many companies, fraud, mismanagement, and few effective ecological projects 
(Bond 2012; Juniper 2013; Klein 2014; Lohmann et al. 2013). 
 Global stock markets and the top 200 energy companies (worth $5.5 trillion in 
2014) have continued ‘wildly over-speculating’, investing huge amounts in fossil 
fuels that still lie underground, $674 billion in 2012 alone. Scientists calculate that 
two thirds or more of these reserves must be left in the ground unburned, to avoid 
climate change of 2° to 6°C.  27  Investors insist the fuels must be mined, to prevent 
ﬁ nancial implosion.  28  Willingly or not, older generations are locked by their pen-
sion companies into this massive investment in fossil fuels, which will mainly harm 
younger generations over many future decades. ‘Peak resources’ refers to the time 
when more resources (oil, gas, coal, fresh water aquifers) are used up annually than 
are newly discovered. The new shale resources, and hopes of access to minerals 
beneath melting polar ice, support wide-spread beliefs that fossil fuel supplies will 
last indeﬁ nitely, or until scientists invent alternative sources of energy. 

32 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 A few economists take climate change seriously. Nicholas Stern warned that 
‘climate change is a result of the greatest market failure that the world has seen’, and 
the prospect is ‘too awful to contemplate’. Stock markets will soon have to realise 
that the investments in fossil fuels are ‘self-defeatingly irrational – and $4 trillion 
value could suddenly be halved . . . Contemporary capitalism faces a crisis of legiti-
macy and effectiveness’.  29  The economist Will Hutton believed the public might 
soon protest much more against failed bankers, huge inequalities, unemployment, 
hunger and pollution, which is making cities in China ‘unbearable’.  30  
 Hopeful change comes in ﬁ ts and starts. During September 2014, over half a 
million people marched in protest in 161 countries with celebrities and leading 
politicians, expressing deep concern.  31  Oxfam supported the march because: ‘In the 
past ﬁ ve years alone, 112,000 lives have been lost, 650 million people have been 
affected by climate-change-related disasters and half a trillion dollars has been lost.’  32  
The same week  Nature Geoscience  hit the headlines by stressing again the potential 
‘catastrophic and irreversible effects’ of the even higher amounts of CO 2 being 
emitted in 2014.  33  The UN gathered world leaders to an emergency meeting in 
New York to support the brieﬁ ng ‘Are you engaging responsibly in climate policy?’ 
while the Empire State Building shone green at night. Google cut its ties with a 
powerful anti-climate-change lobby group. Perhaps most signiﬁ cantly, over 800 
global investors, including churches, cities and universities, pledged to withdraw 
$50 billion from fossil fuel investments over the next ﬁ ve years. Among them was 
the multi-billion-dollar Rockefeller Brothers Fund, a fortune originally made from 
the oil that powered the American industrial revolution. They felt ‘morally bound’ 
to invest in green energies.  34  
 Like the tipping points in nature, these moves by powerful leaders could tip 
countless smaller groups into new directions. Once shares start to be divested, 
other shareholders sell quickly before all the shares become worthless. The divest-
ing companies also spoke of the fortunes to be made in the new, green, clean 
industries. And as green industries thrive, more funds will be invested in green 
science and technology to expand the industries, and bring down the costs of 
green energy and products. Yet progress is countered by the billions of dollars the 
fuel companies spend on advertising, lobbying and opposing renewable energies 
because, once renewable technologies are installed, prices fall each year, whereas 
with fossil fuels prices keep rising as the fuels become more scarce and harder to 
obtain and process. 
 In every continent, there are myriad groups working to protect environments 
and reduce carbon emissions including, among countless examples, indigenous 
peoples and millions of small farmers, green political parties, religious groups, thou-
sands of green schools and eco-schools, NGOs and other protestors,  35  and writers 
(for example, Berry 2009; Bond 2012; Chivers 2011; Curry 2011; Empson 2014; 
Hillman 2004; Klein 2014; Lacey 2004; Meyer 2000; Miller 2009; Neale 2008; 
Norton 2007; Pearce 2007, 2012; Roy 2009, 2014; Rogers 2010; Scott Cato and 
Kennett 1999; Shiva 2000; Skolimowski 1993; Stephens 2009; Wall 2010; Woodin 
and Lucas 2004; and very many more). Vast crowds gather around UN summit 

Ecology 33
meetings, to protest against delays and inaction. Activists conduct protests, block-
ades and boycotts, and some sabotage polluting industries. There are mass upris-
ings, largely by students and other young people. Occupy protests began in Tahrir 
Square in Cairo and Taksim Square in Istanbul, when the protest was partly against 
plans to turn the green parks into privately owned and policed shopping malls, 
where is it easier to stop mass protests. Young families in cramped city housing 
especially value public spaces where children and young people can meet freely, 
and where they inherit not only the commons, the public outdoor space, but also 
the citizens’ rights to socialise in freedom of association and peaceful assembly (UN 
1948, 1989). Curfews, police stop-and-search, laws against ‘youths gathering’ and 
denigration of youths ‘hanging about’ are among the measures that states use to 
prevent children’s and young people’s free access to natural public spaces (Dorling 
2011; Jones 2012; Minton 2012; Nadesan 2010; Wacquant 2009; Wainwright 2014). 
 Yet so far, the protests are often diffused, local and brief. Although NGOs such 
as Greenpeace stick to protest, other Big Green movements betray their cause 
when they invest in fossil fuel industries or are funded by wealthy donors con-
nected to these industries (Klein 2014; Rogers 2010; Stephens 2009). They then 
lend the companies a deceptive ‘greenwash’. For over a century, foundations set up 
by USA fossil fuel and arms companies have funded think tanks, generous scholar-
ships and philanthropic grants to governments, universities and the arts. They have 
thereby seduced political and ecological movements all over the world away from 
their founding aims and into supporting the companies’ policies and carbon-based 
wealth (Roy 2014, 7–47). 
 Many local governments have been more active than national governments in 
aiming to cut costs and pollution, to replace cars with public transport, and costly 
methane-emitting landﬁ ll sites with recycling. However, states vary, as shown in 
the next example about an element as vital as air: water. 
 2E, water and climate change 
 When children are asked where they would like to spend the holiday of a lifetime, 
Disney World in Florida is a highly likely reply. Disney World epitomises political 
escapism: a virtual world of an imagined, perpetual, carefree childhood for all. 
It translates nature into entertaining, proﬁ table culture, with sanitised fantasies 
and illusions of a happy, equal, work-free society. Walt Disney’s theme-park cre-
ation was dedicated to ‘the ideals, the dreams and the hard facts that have created 
America . . . a source of joy and inspiration to all the world’ (quoted in Hunt and 
Frankenberg 1997, 107). 
 One from numerous examples that epitomise inaction on climate change is 
nearby Miami, site of the world’s busiest cruise port,  36  where forests of tower blocks 
and luxury mansions line the Florida coast. Yet sea water regularly ﬂ oods into 
Miami. It soaks into the porous limestone base of the city, and surges up through 
sewage drains and past canal gates. These were designed to convey water away from 
the shopping malls and dwellings, not into them. Some $1.5 billion is being spent on 

34 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
projects to control the ﬂ oods, although scientists believe the defences will have little 
effect, and the whole city will be under water by 2200. 
 The city mayor, a professor of biology, foresees ‘all sorts of post-apocalyptic . . . 
mayhem’ long before then. He considers that a sea-level rise of only 12 inches 
will destroy the water and sewage services. Insurance for ﬂ ood damage will cease. 
Property prices will plummet. Residents will leave and then the city will not have 
the tax income needed to repair damage or to pay for police and ﬁ re services – not 
that the ﬁ re hoses would work anymore. In time, the local Turkey Point nuclear 
plant would be cut off. 
 Nevertheless, land prices, new skyscrapers and numbers of new residents in 
Miami continue to soar. Local politicians, including George Bush’s brother Jeb, are 
climate change deniers, believing that attempts to control carbon emissions will do 
no good but will simply destroy the economy. Meanwhile, the growth economy of 
tourism and leisure, air ﬂ ights and air conditioning, lavish retirement lifestyles and 
conspicuous consumption, all ensure that the average eco and water footprints  37  per 
person in Miami are among the largest in the world, contributing greatly towards 
climate change. 
 Although many areas of the world endure rising ﬂ oods and rainfall levels, oth-
ers are in growing danger from drought, and from associated increases in hun-
ger, poverty, violent conﬂ ict, ‘terror’, migration, and the extra needs of millions 
of refugees escaping into already water-stressed countries. Drought is spreading 
through the Middle East, North Africa, and into the land through eastern Paki-
stan, northern India and into Bangladesh, where 600 million people live. That is 
the most intensely irrigated land in the world. Millions of wells and aquifers are 
being over-pumped.  38  Within the next ten years, nearly 3 billion people in 48 
nations are predicted to experience chronic water scarcity.  39  In wells across Asia, 
sunk by the United Nations and aid agencies, there are very high levels of ﬂ uo-
ride and arsenic. Many millions of people are affected by ‘the world’s largest mass 
poisoning’ (Pearce 2007, 72–77). Young children are doubly affected when the 
poisons alter their development, making them misshapen and disabled, and when 
with no other drinking water supply they will continue to absorb the poisons for 
decades to come. 
 Cities and growing populations, industry, agriculture, nuclear and other power 
plants, and fracking all need hugely increasing supplies of water. Australia suffers 
massive droughts but (as of spring 2015) has no plans to conserve or replenish water 
supplies. Despite a 14-year drought in California, and an appeal by the state gover-
nor to Californians to cut their water use by one ﬁ fth, there are still over 1 million 
private swimming pools in the state, surrounded by lush lawns and golf courses.  40  
Around 80 per cent of the world’s almonds are grown there, and 400,000 more 
trees have been planted since 1996, while farmers pump out underground water at 
a rate four to ﬁ ve times greater than can be replenished.  41  
 Besides absorbing carbon, forests produce moisture and rain, so that deforesta-
tion dries up the atmosphere. The global demand for beef, leather, soy, palm, oil 
and timber has caused over 200,000 km of tropical forest to be cleared between 

Ecology 35
2000 and 2010, largely in Brazil and Indonesia.  42  This has released an estimated 
10.47 gigatonnes of carbon, while destroying for centuries to come the carbon-
absorbing capacities that the lost trees would have provided. 
 Clearance, pollution, climate change, hunting and culling have reduced wildlife 
on average to less than one half of the numbers that existed 40 years ago. Elephant 
numbers have fallen by 90 per cent, tigers by 97 per cent, and freshwater species by 
76 per cent.  43  Such losses occur on land that is becoming much hotter and drier, 
and also in the dwindling rivers, polluted and drained by human activity, and in 
oceans that are fast becoming more polluted, warm and acidic. 
 To refer brieﬂ y to herbicides and pesticides, these deprive future generations of 
many beautiful and valuable living species, and reduced biodiversity affects human 
survival in the complex interdependence of all species and food chains. Just one 
example is the great fall in numbers of bee colonies, which pollinate essential foods 
(Carson 1962; Jacobs and Dinham 2003; Simms 2008). Greater use of pesticides 
increases resistant insect strains, which are met with higher doses of chemicals. 
Although the carcinogenic pesticide chlordecone was banned in the USA in 1976, 
it was found to contaminate Martinique wildlife, but it continued to be used until 
1993 to protect bananas in Martinque. The French West Indies export 270,000 
tonnes of bananas a year to Europe. The chlordecone is expected to pollute local 
land, fresh and sea waters and ﬁ sh for the next 700 years. Families are advised which 
foods to avoid, though vision and psycho-motor impairments have been found in 
1,000 babies on the islands.  44  Pesticides also cause birth defects, and children who 
work on cotton plantations report feeling ill from contact with these over-used 
pollutants (Morrow and Vennam 2012). 
 Short-term vision that ignores the future, and inability to plan ahead or to 
postpone pleasure, are impulses stereotypically attributed to childhood. Yet these 
impulses dominate adult public policy. Politicians want to please the voters and 
funders during each short four- to ﬁ ve-year elected term. Constant demands to 
react instantly to the 24/7 news industry also concentrate politicians’ minds onto 
present problems. And when these seem insurmountable, politicians can feel driven 
to pass on to their successors whatever burdens they can. Seemingly short-term 
policies, such as to cut funding for ﬂ ood defences, have far-reaching effects, such 
as when the unrepaired levees in New Orleans failed to hold back the ﬂ ooding 
from hurricane Katrina in 2005. Present policies that increase CO 2 ppm have as-
yet-unknown effects that will affect generations for decades and centuries into the 
future. Politicians’ time games, which split present from future, may deny climate 
change, but cannot ameliorate it or its effects. 
 2E, seven orders of scale 
 Split, partitioned thinking reduces understanding of complex matters. Interdisci-
plinary DCR working between the natural and social sciences has especially been 
developed in relation to climate change (Bhaskar et al. 2010; Høyer 2010; Lacey 
2014; Næss 2010), to overcome divisive, reductive and misleadingly partial analysis. 

36 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
A seven-scale DCR framework for interdisciplinary analysis (Bhaskar and Danermark 
2006) helps to connect many themes related to climate change. The seven levels 
are physical, biological, psychological, psycho-social, socio-economic, cultural and 
normative, illustrated here beginning with a few examples of ﬂ oods. 
 The  physical  level includes present and likely future ﬂ ooding. Floods regularly 
displace thousands of people in low-lying countries such as Bangladesh. About a 
ﬁ fth of Pakistan has been ﬂ ooded several times, affecting 20 million people (Empson 
2014, 252; Pearce 2007), killing many and leaving others homeless for months on 
end. Floods contaminate freshwater, destroy infrastructure including sewage pipes 
and electric and internet cables, cause £millions worth of damage, pollute build-
ings and corrode vehicles. The  biological  level involves the damage to humans and 
all other species in the city, injury from violent ﬂ oods, disease from contaminated 
water, and privation when shops and transport and utilities close down.  Psychological 
stress, depression, fear, anxiety and desperation in the search for resources follow. 
These emotions powerfully alter the  psycho-social  relationships between citizens. 
Crises evoke generous courage but also dangerous mistrust and potentially lethal 
competition over obtaining food, safe water and dry space. 
 The hurricane Katrina and ﬂ oods in 2005, in which over 1800 people died, 
drastically showed the  socio-economic  inequalities in New Orleans. Wealthier citizens 
could load their cars, drive away, and stay in hotels or with friends and relatives. 
They were likely to be insured and to beneﬁ t from the great increase in property 
values where the city was restored. The hundreds of poor and mainly Black citizens 
had few such private resources, or public services, and little help with saving their 
possessions or with transport out of the city. Their desperate attempts to survive 
by obtaining basic necessities from the closed shops were castigated as ‘looting’. 
Up to 20,000 people were stranded in the Superdome, New Orleans’s football sta-
dium, without clean water or sanitation. When the Superdome began to ﬂ ood, the 
mayor ordered complete evacuation of the city, but there was still no public trans-
port. The rebuilding of New Orleans since 2005 has upgraded wealthier areas but 
left the poorer areas derelict. One quarter of the people left the city and many now 
live in trailer parks. In 2007, up to an estimated 47 per cent of homeless people 
in the USA were children.  45  By 2013, the child poverty rate in New Orleans was 
42 per cent, and in the USA was 23 per cent,  46  while the average (all age) poverty 
rate was 15 per cent, showing how disproportionately children are affected. House-
holds with children report well above average rates of food insecurity.  47  
 The New Orleans events are likely to be repeated many times in major cities on 
coastlines and in river estuaries. Severe inequalities increase, with many more peo-
ple excluded into the homeless, vagrant ‘under-class’ and blamed for their low status 
(Nadesan 2010; Roy 2014; Wacquant 2008, 2009). Meanwhile, climate change will 
increase the present ﬂ ow of economic migrants from Central and South America 
into Florida so that, like the sea water, migrants will ﬂ ood into already stressed 
areas. As mentioned in Chapter 8, during the summer of 2014, possibly up to 
60,000 unaccompanied children from Central America attempted to enter the 
southern USA,  48  to join their migrant parents in the USA, or they were sent by 

Ecology 37
parents who hoped to save them from violent conﬂ ict, penury and sharply rising 
food prices while grain crop yields fall in both North and South America. 
 The  socio-economic, cultural and normative  orders of the seven-part scale overlap, 
as shown in beliefs about water supplies. Normatively, the most elemental form of 
the right to life, apart from to air, is the right to clean water (implied in UN 1948, 
Article 25; stated in UN 1989, Article 24c). Yet that is denied to millions of people 
in areas without fresh springs or wells or piped clean water, and wherever water and 
land are polluted. The poor pay most when they are forced to buy water in bottles 
or buckets. Water services have increasingly been privatised, based on the view that 
this assures efﬁ ciency. However, even in prosperous countries with formal regula-
tors, private companies may overcharge and be inefﬁ cient. 
 A Kuwaiti sovereign wealth fund, a Canadian investor and a pension fund bid 
£5 billion to buy the English Severn Trent Water Company in 2013. Water and 
fuel companies work as banks rather than utilities, borrowing debts of up to 80 per 
cent of their equity, and paying £hundreds of millions in dividends to the private-
equity owners. This punishes the public in several ways. It massively reduces the 
companies’ tax bills that are needed to fund public services; it prevents the com-
panies from being able to borrow further to fund necessary large improvements; 
major leaks in ancient systems continue; and the companies insist that taxpayers 
fund essential improvements (such as the new super-sewer in London) through 
much higher water bills.  49  
 Peter Brabeck, chairman of Nestlé, defended this business system.  50  Like Disney, 
Nestlé’s sweets and ice cream represent benevolence and childhood happiness. 
Nestlé does, however, contribute to the death of many babies by aggressively mar-
keting formula milk in the majority world  51  and increases obesity in countless chil-
dren with its sugar-loaded food products. Brabeck claimed that the great human 
achievement is to resist nature’s dangerous dominance. Nestlé is the world’s biggest 
water bottling company. While Brabeck believes water is the most important of 
all raw materials, he dismisses the human right to water as a myth of ‘extremist’ 
NGOs. Water is a foodstuff and should have a market value, he considers, and pri-
vatisation is the best way to ensure fair distribution. His ‘ultimate social responsibil-
ity’ is to increase Nestlé’s proﬁ ts. 
 Notions that bottled water is more safe, healthy, clean, fresh, tasty and ethical 
than tap water are misleading (Gleick 2010). Some plastic bottles are contami-
nated. About four litres of water, and about 1,000 times more fuel than would be 
used for the same amount of tap water, are needed to produce the plastic, ﬁ lter 
the water, ﬁ ll and chill one bottle, and transport the heavy water. Then there is 
the energy used to recycle used bottles. Dry regions are drained to export bottled 
water to richer, wetter countries.  52  Many bottles are not biodegradable but break 
into micro fragments and join the ‘plastic soup’, the immense, gyrating mass of 
waste in the Paciﬁ c Ocean.  53  The soup harbours sea insects that prey on ﬁ sh eggs 
and on plankton, vital in marine food chains. Billions of tiny plastic pellets are 
eaten by sea creatures; they kill over a million seabirds and more than 100,000 
marine mammals every year.  54  

38 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 At the  cultural  level, the enduring appeal of bottled water, among countless daily 
 socio-economic  habits that increase emissions and pollution, indicate how practical 
and  normative  information alone does not alter ﬁ rmly held, embedded tastes and 
habits shaped by advertising and peers. 
 However, besides the innumerable examples of small and large activities that 
can increase climate change and associated problems, there are many examples that 
work to delay and contain destruction. 
 2E, seeds of hope 
 One creative example is Dr Debal Deb’s conserving of ancient, genetically diverse 
varieties of rice.  55  These will become ever more valuable as farmers have to adapt to 
climate change, to deep, long ﬂ oods or droughts, cyclones, extreme temperatures or 
salty, brackish water. The varieties, or landraces, have different tastes and medicinal 
values. Dr Deb cultivates 920 varieties on 2.5 acres of hilly land in Odisha, India, 
from where local people managed to drive out the giant mining company Vedanta 
in 2013. He said: ‘Fifty years ago, every Indian village would probably have grown a 
dozen or more rice varieties that grew nowhere else. Passed down from generation 
to generation and family to family, there would have been a local variety for every 
soil and taste . . . India may have had more than 100,000 landraces. Today there 
could be just 6,000, with fewer being grown every year.’ 
 Farmers bring rare seeds to Dr Deb’s living seed bank. He gives away his har-
vests in one kilogram packets to farmers who agree to bring back two kilograms to 
prove they have used the seeds; ‘2,000 farmers have received the seeds and 350 vari-
eties have been distributed’ and shared around. The range is vital for food security, 
and the crucial food sovereignty when people can control the supply and quality of 
their food (Lacey 2014), besides biodiversity and the precious knowledge of how 
to select and grow each variety. Deb found amazing, centuries-old knowledge of 
growing rice varieties among indigenous farmers in remote West Bengal, who were 
too ‘backward’ and poor to buy the agrochemicals needed to grow modern rice 
varieties. 
 Debal Deb, who has researched in the USA, contends that genetic modiﬁ cation 
has cost billions of dollars over 60 years, but has not produced one species that can 
withstand drought, ﬂ oods or sea water. The GM ‘golden rice’ that is supposed to 
beneﬁ t children especially is controversial.  56  Modern mono-agriculture, by relying 
on ever-fewer varieties, is vulnerable to widespread infections and crop losses. The 
giant corporations aim to patent sterile seeds, so that every year they can limit the 
range and charge more for their products. They have tried to buy and steal Deb’s 
seeds. He commented that among Indian farmers, ‘Seeds used to be a precious gift 
to relatives and friends [and] to the community . . . In a natural forest you can still 
ﬁ nd people who know hundreds of medicinal plants. But in a mono-cultural forest, 
people simply do not know the uses of plants. The diversity is lost. The collective 
memory is becoming eroded. People are being educated to think that anything 
traditional is bad’ (and see Roy 2014). 

Ecology 39
 He considers that India’s green revolution in the 1960–1970s, with the new 
high-yield grains that need synthetic fertilisers, pesticides and much more water, 
was ‘an ecological and cultural disaster for which we are paying now’. He sees 
‘developmentality’ as a modern mental ‘virus’, a collective mindlessness among 
India’s elite leading to the crisis in rural India. He calls for a zero-growth economy 
and new understanding of how indigenous societies around the world interact with 
nature. Despite his low income from his teaching and research, he aims ‘to set up a 
living seed bank in every state in India and to train scientists as para-conservationists, 
so we can propagate and document all the landraces’.  57  
 Global corporations such as Monsanto insist that the only hope of feeding over 
seven billion people is to rely on mega-farms that grow GM crops, genetically 
modiﬁ ed to resist the vast quantities of herbicides and pesticides needed to kill 
the pests and weeds that threaten these crops (Patel 2008). However, besides the 
giant machinery that increases soil erosion, and proﬂ igate use of water, monocul-
ture increases the need for pesticides, when evermore resistant pests spread quickly 
through the single crop. Industrial farming relies on routine use of antibiotics to 
prevent infections among livestock. But doctors are deeply concerned that this 
massive overuse of antibiotics reduces their effectiveness and increases resistant dis-
eases among animals and humans, such as resistant strains of TB that kill 1.7 million 
people a year. Global warming and global travel spread virulent tropical infections 
into new areas (Lymbery and Oakeshott 2014; Paarlberg 2010). 
 Organic multiculture reduces reliance on pesticides, such as when indigenous 
napier grass, which can be fed to cattle, is grown alongside maize, and traps the stern 
borer pest that attacks maize (Pearce 2012, 407). Yet seemingly organic solutions must 
be introduced with care when imported alien species have no natural predators to 
control their numbers. Cane toads imported into Australia to deal with pests in sugar 
plantations now number over 200 million and are poisoning indigenous wildlife.  58  
 Almost three quarters of the world’s food is grown by small farmers, but many are 
driven into debt through their dependence on agribusiness products, sterile seed, fer-
tilisers and pesticides (Lang et al. 2009; Patel 2008; Roy 2014; Shiva 2000). Over the 
past 20 years, more than 270,000 indebted Indian farmers have committed suicide.  59  
 To summarise 2E concepts in relation to conserving seeds: there is the dialectical 
 process in product  aiming to halt the loss of rice landraces and to discover how and 
where they ﬂ ourish. These processes actively aim to negate biological, chemical, 
social, cultural and economic problems that a 1M analysis of landraces loss would 
identify. They include transforming these many connected areas, to absent aporia 
and resolve the contradictions of destroying species and varieties, which we could 
increasingly need. There is a tensed, sequential absenting through time-space-
cause rhythmics, which includes working with the seasons and weather and slow 
growth of plants towards emergence and transition. Some crops will fail; others will 
react to inhospitable soil and adverse weather in unexpected ways that could aid 
future adaptations, working through opposition and reversal, surmounting limits 
and boundaries. The work is both intellectual and physical, drawing on ancient 
folklore to prepare scientiﬁ cally for the future, while respecting seeds’ and farmers’ 

40 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
and families’ interdependence. The vital, time-consuming, patient work of passing 
practical skill and indigenous knowledge on to children needs to be much more 
recognised and respected as part of today’s education. 
 Third level 3L 
 3L and the totality of climate change 
 3L reaches a new comprehensive  level , examining new  totalities,  which   emerge 
from 2E interventions. 3L is concerned with internal connections working within 
the totalities and interconnections between them,  process-in-product . There are, for 
example, the total, collective, interactive, cumulative effects of climate change and 
responses to it. Within innumerable interconnections, small separate projects for 
change may have little effect, and coordinated, multi-layered responses are also 
needed. 
 Diffraction  in optics refers to the fringes or rays of light and dark bands around 
light when it is decomposed as it passes through slits or past sharp edges. In DCR, 
diffraction draws opposites together with a central unity-in-diversity that over-
comes fracturing and splitting (Bhaskar 2008b, 370; Norrie 2010). The totality 
involves the play of absence and presence, and it links such opposite totalities as the 
physical-natural world with the social-cultural world that emerges from it. Totality 
includes the absenting of constraints, inequalities, splits and disunities and working 
towards a united whole. 
 3L connects past, present and future to illuminate how the interests of older and 
of younger generations all matter now, and are mutually constructive or destructive. 
3L’s global view recognises that continual economic growth is destroying the plan-
et’s ﬁ nite resources. ‘How climate change science is conducted, communicated and 
translated into policy must be radically transformed if “dangerous” climate change 
is to be averted,’ contend Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows (2011, 2012, 639). They 
say that far from being neutral or objective, ‘scientists appease economists’, and 
repeatedly and severely underplay the implications of their analyses: an ‘impos-
sible’ target is translated into ‘difﬁ cult but doable’, with naive, false promises that 
geo-engineering can assure low-carbon infrastructure (Levitt and Dubner 2009). 
By 2013, Anderson concluded that ‘after two decades of bluff and lies, the remain-
ing 2°C budget demands  revolutionary change to the political and economic hegemony ’.  60  
 Time lost through delays and weak climate policies has reduced our options. 
Unprecedented cuts in emissions are now essential, at around ten per cent every 
year in the richer minority (‘developed’) world, which for centuries has emitted 
most carbons, if there is to be even half a chance of limiting climate change to 
2°C. And 2°C will be hugely damaging, as noted earlier. Such drastic cuts chal-
lenge the basic logic of capitalism’s growth. And cuts above only one per cent 
per year have caused immense ‘upheaval’, stated economist Nicholas Stern (2006). 
Stern was commissioned by the UK government to translate the potential effects of 
climate change into cost-effective economics (or, in DCR terms, to connect these 

Ecology 41
very different totalities). His concern grew and by 2013 he warned of ‘even more 
devastating consequences’ from faster higher changes than predicted since 2006. 
‘I got it wrong on climate change . . . it is far, far worse’ and might rise to 4°C or 
more above 1750 levels by 2100, well within the lifetime of many of today’s chil-
dren. Even approaching 2°C higher, rising sea levels would cover ‘most great cities’ 
and cause ‘mass migration of hundreds of millions of people . . . that would lead to 
conﬂ ict and war, not peace and prosperity’.  61  
 Totality connects disparate things within and between totalities: the inﬁ ni-
tesimal (a carbon molecule) and the almost inﬁ nite (changes in the biosphere 
over millennia); the material and sacred. DCR connects ecology to ethics while 
social science is especially helpful in framing interdisciplinary research theories 
and methods that can trace such connections, with its broad range of research 
methods and topics across time and space, and through all planes of social being. 
Uniquely, sociology perceives ‘human nature and society as intrinsically moral’, 
and besides examining the gamut of secular concerns it attends to unity and 
meaning, sacred bonds of relating, and respect for human nature, wisdom and 
virtue (Nisbet 1967, 221).  62  In this view, the natural world is precious in its own 
right besides in its life-sustaining properties. Scientists Hensen, Anderson and 
Bows question whether natural science facts are always separate from values. They 
ﬁ nd they cannot accurately report the morally laden enormity of their ﬁ ndings 
and predictions if they use ‘value-free’ terms, which seem neutral but are dis-
torting under-statements. To avoid acting as appeasers who passively or inadver-
tently support current policies, they have to ‘take sides’, and Hensen has become a 
scientist-activist. Besides reporting down-stream effects of warming, they have 
to address the (1M) upstream causes too. 
 3L recognises the  concrete↔universal person: we all share the core universal 
human nature, our common humanity, and we are also all unique and ethically 
different, in concrete ways, not in Kant’s abstract, universal concepts of being. The 
 concrete↔universal is a test for consistency and wholeness (Hartwig 2007, 74). We 
are interconnected and interdependent, dialectic replaces dichotomy, ‘is’ connects 
to ‘ought’, and ‘ought’ connects to ‘can’ (Bhaskar 2010b, 146–148).  63  Scientists 
such as Hensen believe these connections leave no neutral space between knowl-
edge of climate change and political action or inaction. Each course is morally 
loaded, and inaction mis-implies that action is unnecessary. 
 Powerful trends distance us from the natural world in theory and practice, as if 
bodily needs are a base level we should strive to escape from into ‘higher’ concerns, 
from physical to abstract fulﬁ lment, from biology to culture (Maslow 1943).  64  Yet 
instead, bodies are integral to all our being. Maslow’s theory supports progress as 
the escape from nature to culture, from rural to city life. However, many rural 
adults deplore this as regress and discontent, in the loss of communities, knowledge 
and skills (Roy 2014). With his Indian village neighbours, school teacher Pawan 
Gupta (2005, 123) believed, ‘After being educated [in Western-led schools] one 
is neither here nor there, [and] becomes good for nothing’. A survey of African 
school-leavers who had failed their exams found that the main lesson they had 

42 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
learned from their years at school was shame (Serpell 1993). Schools tend to teach 
that minority world life-styles are more clean, sophisticated, successful and ful-
ﬁ lling. Indian school books depict villagers as deﬁ ling rivers when they bathe, 
whereas ‘most Indian rivers are polluted by the ﬁ lth from the towns and cities and 
not by the Indian villages’ (Gupta 2005, 136). 
 Indigenous life that is harmoniously and adventurously close to nature can be 
hard but also a most real and fulﬁ lling kind of existence, such as among Mbuti 
pygmies (Turnbull 1961); the Maasai (Monbiot 2014); for conﬁ dent, socially skilled 
children in New Guinea (Diamond 2013); in pre-civil war Sudan (Katz 2004); and 
for happy, independent babies in Amazonian rain forests (Leidloff 1976). These 
spaces and freedoms are rapidly being lost, along with the traditions, rituals and 
languages (over 1,000 languages lost in New Guinea alone) with the life-giving 
knowledge and skills they sustained, such as a girl knowing about more than 100 
local medicinal plants (Seabrook 2007). 
 Whereas Hegel’s totality was resolution and ending, Bhaskar’s totality is partial 
and open-ended. Absence is central throughout MELD, in non-identity at 1M and 
negation at 2E. At 3L, totalities have essential absences that allow for gaps within 
and between totalities, room for movement and change, and retotalising when 
absent alternatives might be realised by absenting present systems. 3L sees unity-
in-diversity, emergence and process. Dichotomies are drawn together dialectically 
though not necessarily into resolution: needs and wants, centre and periphery, 
inclusion and exclusion, global and local, present and past, structure and agency, 
universal and singular, factual and moral, abstract and concrete, objects and events. 
The patterns and complications help to analyse and assess the enormous unresolved 
problems in the totality of climate change and the many related natural and social 
reactions and interactions affecting adults and children. 
 3L, climate change and the commons 
 One totalising view is whether natural resources can and should either be shared or 
else owned privately. The British parliament’s title the House of Commons denotes 
the British as the common people who do commoning or sharing. The alleged 
‘tragedy of the commons’ regards human beings as too selﬁ sh to be trusted to share 
goods held in common fairly. Garrett Hardin (1968) argued that all herders exploit 
common grazing land, take more than their fair share and eventually destroy the 
grazing. That view justiﬁ es private ownership and the enclosures which John Clare 
lamented (see above). And yet alternatively, if everyone had shared the cattle as well 
as the land, destructive competition could be prevented. 
 Hardin’s view is refuted by the long history of careful sharing of local and indig-
enous commons, although with set rules and sanctions among agreed groups, not 
literally open commons to everyone (Ostrom 1990). People may choose to share 
through altruism or through enlightened self interest. Whereas sharing can work 
well when those involved enjoy the rewards, a much harder challenge is to preserve 
the commons that seem to belong to no one: over-ﬁ shed and polluted oceans, 

Ecology 43
Arctic wilderness, the over-heating atmosphere and outer space now strewn with 
rubbish. 
 Our beliefs about human nature inﬂ uence the ways we relate to nature. Hardin’s 
‘tragedy of the commons’ assumes (an illusion of) isolated independence, and 
human nature as selﬁ sh, hostile and competitive, except towards one’s own personal 
relations and possessions. This view can greatly restrict children’s lives if they are 
taught to fear strangers and dangers and to rely on being constantly protected from 
them. The teaching may become a self-fulﬁ lling prophecy; if the only adults who 
dare to approach children they do not know are dangerous, children will acquire 
fearful mistrust and competitive anxiety instead of being encouraged to engage in 
interdependent trust and cooperation. 
 In adult-centric societies, children have the least control or say in how the com-
mons could be shared and preserved, or else sold and enclosed. Yet the commons 
are especially valued and used during childhood, when children play on public land 
and are among the main users of the modern commons, such as public transport, 
health services and welfare states, social services, family courts, schools, libraries, 
museums and sports centres. Austerity measures to close or privatise these services 
and amenities particularly restrict children’s lives. The youngest generations will 
then have least use of the natural and also social community commons, which older 
people may have relied on and enjoyed for decades. The loss might continue long 
after the lifetime of present adults. 
 Faith either in successfully shared commons, or alternatively in private owner-
ship to prevent abuse of property, relates to beliefs about both nature and child-
hood itself. In the ﬁ rst view, the natural world and childhood are common goods 
that everyone shares in caring for and beneﬁ tting from. The welfare state that 
brought social and healthcare and pensions for all was built, like traditional societ-
ies everywhere, on a natural intergenerational cycle: the working generation care 
for children and retired people, until they in turn retire and depend on their adult 
children. It is in everyone’s interests to help to pay for the education and training 
of future workers on whom they will soon depend. Since the 1980s, the alterna-
tive mistrust of public ownership of the commons has seen the sale and privatising 
of much land and water, as well as of public services and many state resources. In 
this view of selﬁ sh human nature without natural obligations, children are a private 
good, and a cost, not a beneﬁ t, to society; the cost should largely be borne by par-
ents who can enjoy any returns on their investment in their children, or costs are 
borne by young people themselves as in student loans and debts. 
 Children are viewed by some as a curse, hordes that will overpopulate the world 
and so destroy humanity (Bell 2009, 205; Hardin 1968). Consistent with Malthu-
sian and eugenic traditions, popular television naturalist David Attenborough called 
them a ‘plague on the earth’, saying that famines naturally and inevitably control 
populations, and it is ‘barmy’ to send food aid to relieve hunger.  65  Others contend 
that wasteful over-consumption by the wealthy is a far greater threat to our col-
lective survival than growing numbers of poor children. The lifestyles of children 
who work on rubbish and recycling tips could be counted as minus-zero-carbon. 

44 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
They conserve energy and reduce carbon emissions by salvaging precious ﬁ nite 
resources for reuse, while like many city children they live destitute ‘wageless lives’ 
(Mizen and Ofosu-Kusi 2010a, 2010b, 2012). 
 Raftery et al. (2014) predicted a rise of up to 11 billion people by 2100. Some 
believe the planet could support a predicted peak of ten million people or more,  66  
and that birth rates may fall after around 2060, as women become more edu-
cated and choose to have careers rather than many children. Better healthcare that 
enables many more children to survive encourages parents to have fewer children, 
conﬁ dent that their children will live to care for their ageing parents. Offering 
women choice and family planning appears to reduce birth rates more effectively 
than notorious, enforced sterilising campaigns do (Dorling 2013; Pearce 2010). 
 Meanwhile minority world governments worry about who will care for the 
rapidly growing numbers of old and very old people. Their longevity also increases 
world populations. In many areas, birth rates have dropped and young people 
migrate away in search of work and new opportunities. Villages around the world 
are ‘dying’, as schools, shops, surgeries and public transport close down for lack of 
young families to use and regenerate these commons. 
 Millions of people are being forced off their land when their governments 
bypass them, and sell or lease their land to wealthy landgrabbers, who set up mega-
farms, or mines, or dams, or wildlife preserves for tourists (Linebaugh 2014; Oxfam 
International 2014; Pearce 2012; Roy 2009). Indian rural people marooned in city 
slums are becoming ‘ghosts’ in their own country (Roy 2014). Langrabbing is a 
major cause of the doubling between 1981 and 2008 of the number of sub-Saharan 
Africans who live on less than $2 a day (Oxfam 2014b).  67  Indigenous people, who 
have lived alongside wild species for centuries, are seen as dangers who must be 
removed to ensure the survival of lions, tigers and elephants. Yet the mutual well-
being and survival of indigenous people and endangered species are beginning to 
be understood. Some landgrabbers such as World Wildlife Fund are resettling the 
local people back on their own land to promote the animals’ survival and prevent 
their extermination by poachers (Pearce 2012, 315–317). 
 With increasing droughts, ﬂ oods and hurricanes, hardy plants, which have 
adapted for millennia, become ever more vital for human survival. As mentioned 
earlier, they offer genes for breeding new hardier species, and can increase healthy 
genetic diversity. However, enclosures that drive farmers off the land destroy their 
independent livelihood and their ancient knowledge about how to grow and use 
local plants for food and medicines. ‘Biopiracy’, the theft and patenting of seeds by 
corporations, is a form of privatising and enclosure of life, knowledge, power and 
seeds away from the common people. 3L relates the standardised ‘mono-cultural’ 
schooling that ignores indigenous learning (also mentioned in 2E) to larger scale 
threats to longer term farming methods and to general human survival, which will 
increasingly depend on rural knowledge being transferred down the generations. 
 As global warming reduces supplies of fresh water and areas of fertile land, 
which have supported communities for many centuries, armed conﬂ ict in water-
stressed countries is increasing, and each year millions more people are migrating 

Ecology 45
between these countries and away from them, such as from Africa and the Mid-
dle East towards Europe (Keenan 2013; Klein 2014), and from South to North 
America (Chapter 8). Children are disproportionately over-represented among 
the migrants, and if they survive the dangerous journeys, many will be sold into 
domestic or sex slavery.  68  3L analysis of totality clariﬁ es the great loss to the chil-
dren of all that they would have inherited, and the loss to the land and local com-
munities of all the regenerating that the children would have contributed over 
their lifetimes. 
 DCR assists interdisciplinary analysis of such complex entities as the economic-
ecological-social-cultural commons interacting with climate change and how they 
all affect children’s lives, when DCR highlights similarities between the natural 
and social sciences and the unity though not uniformity of their research methods. 
Yet Bhaskar (2008a, 155) noted four key differences between the natural and social 
sciences. The ﬁ rst is  epistemological , when social science develops and tests theories 
in order to explain rather than to predict, for example, social responses to climate 
change. Nevertheless, although prediction is a priority for natural scientists, they 
cannot predict the precise sequence and rate of climate change with its many open 
systems. Like social scientists, they therefore also work on explanatory analysis and 
qualiﬁ ed predictions. The weather next month cannot be predicted, but general 
trends of global climate change over decades may be predicted, though not the pre-
cise timing. The second difference is  causal , in that the subject matter of social science 
is interdependent with its methods (they both concern thinking, talking, relating 
and interacting), whereas the subject matter collected by natural scientists (physical 
data) differs from their methods of analysis (measuring, thinking, talking). Third, 
 explanatory critique  in social science inevitably deals with values and moral judge-
ments, and therefore overcomes the fact-value separations made in natural science. 
Here again, climate scientists increasingly connect their data to moral concerns 
about survival and suffering, responsibility and possible blame, hope and politics. 
Fourth, in  ontological differences, the objects of scientiﬁ c research have indepen-
dent ontology in that nature is self-subsistent, whereas all things social depend on 
social activity, social concepts and relations, and they are also space-time-dependent 
(Archer et al. 1998, 361). Yet although nature is self-subsistent and follows its own 
laws, humans are forcing it into innumerable new directions that nature cannot 
resist. Agents’ reasons can count as causes that explain and inﬂ uence, and global 
warming is inﬂ uenced by countless human decisions and deliberate actions. Archer’s 
(1995, 2000, 2003) theory of morphogenesis expands TMSA (see above) to study 
the structure-agency dialectic in a transfactual, stratiﬁ ed way when human agency 
is neither under-socialised nor over-socialised. Global warming offers an unusually 
clear example for tracing how human agency reproduces and transforms social and 
natural systems over space and time. 
 DCR drives towards resolving problems and contradictions of both epistemol-
ogy (ignorance, error) and also of practical ontology (injustice, constraints). Yet if 
1M began with misunderstandings and mis-identities, and if interventions at 2E 
increased problems instead of negating them, then 3L analysis shows more clearly 

46 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
how many totalities in and between the social and natural worlds are split and 
incomplete. This affects progress at 4D. 
 Fourth dimension 4D 
 4D, critical reﬂ ection and climate change 
 Human beings appear to be uniquely conscious of their consciousness, and 4D fourth 
 dimension involves this critical  reﬂ exive analysis . Intentional, embodied, human cau-
sality can bring about  transformative praxis , practical change, the  product-in-process.  At 
4D, critical reﬂ ection works towards theory-practice consistency, reconciling stated 
values and beliefs with practical action. There is reﬂ ecting back with acquired hind-
sight on previous stages, noting unresolved problems (Bhaskar 2008b). 
 The scientist Rachel Carson (1962) believed that compassion makes us more 
human and more real, aware of other presences: ‘The more clearly we can [attend to] 
the wonders and realities of the universe, the less taste we shall have for destruc-
tion . . . it is not half so important to know as to feel’.  69  John Burnside contended we 
have to avoid the dangers of ‘objective’ scientiﬁ c detachment, which can conceal 
 gross self-interest, ignorance, endless destruction of the natural world although 
our physical and spiritual endurance depend on it. We need clean air, a steady 
climate, abundant meadows, woods, oceans, rivers teeming with life. We dam-
age ourselves when we damage nature, and harm our attentiveness, care, spirit 
of inquiry and ability to feel and to imagine.  70  
 Transformative agency’s emancipation aims for the free society where each indi-
vidual’s ﬂ ourishing depends on everyone’s ﬂ ourishing. 4D works to overcome the 
false sense of the self as separate and isolated. We relate to the world and to other 
people through recognising what we share in common (Bhaskar 2002b). The key 
questions concern identity (who am I?) and agency (what am I to do?). 
 Malign MELD 
 MELD aims towards benign creative freedom. Yet the MELD schema can also analyse 
and clarify perverse processes (Bhaskar 2000, 8–9) in what could be called malign 
MELD, just as negative, coercive power 2  is the shadow side of creative, emancipating 
power 1 .  71  Malign MELD can help to explain unresolved splits in responses to climate 
change, between 1M insight into terrifying urgency and 2E review of complacent 
delay. This section summarises points from various analyses of MELD by Bhaskar 
and others that resonate with climate change and social responses to it in the DCR 
social-natural dialectic. 
 Malign MELD reveals  irrealism  (Bhaskar 2008b, 305) when monovalent phi-
losophy misunderstands and denies realism and absence, dialectic and negativity. 
At 1M, science is undermined by attending to the empirical and actual but not to 

Ecology 47
real causes and essential connections. 1M is then trapped in the epistemic fallacy 
(see Table 9.1), TINA formations, and denegation (that denies, refuses, rejects) 
(Hartwig 2007, 116). 
 2E continues by denigrating and denying change (such as climate change and 
possible social changes to address it) and by undermining geo-history (the actual 
interacting physical and social effects across the world). It perpetuates ego-ethno-
anthropo-centrism, and insists on ﬁ xed, static repression. The  demi-real  occurs 
when fallacies create real effects, such as when climate change scepticism supports 
increased carbon emissions and the sceptical belief exerts a powerful force. The 
unfair effects of global warming, mainly on the poorer majority world with its 
younger populations, may be denied in theory but are conﬁ rmed in practice. 
 Contrary to the totalities in creative MELD, 3L then denies inter/intra-action. 
It detotalises, disconnects, atomises, splits, divides and rules, and distracts attention 
away from aporiai and power 2 . Political excuses for delay have to deny realities in 
nature, and in human needs and survival. 
 Inexorably, 4D then denies human embodiment and agency, in order to dis-
empower and fragment agency, and to misunderstand free will and determinism. 
It doubts that objective morality is possible, and that freedom, self-consciousness 
and self-determination can be realised. 4D remains trapped in 1M mis-identities. 
Instead of opening up to new possibilities, 4D closes down in denial and endism 
(belief in the end of history and of change). It deagentiﬁ es (makes us feel powerless) 
and reinforces oppositions. 
 1M veils and webs of illusion at the threshold of reality both obscure but also 
protect entities, keeping them pure and intact. The veils are ‘a starting point for 
dialectical penetration or development’ a premise for critique that is immanent 
(internal, inherent, pervasive). Then ‘the critiqued theory unwittingly expresses 
and presupposes the very content it would deny’ (Bhaskar 2000, 5–6, 27). Poli-
cies founded on denial of global warming become ever more tenuous, and lead to 
chains of errors, contractions and denials that inevitably follow error and illusion. 
Global warming is then  reiﬁ ed , presented as if it is an impersonal, natural thing or 
process. This denies the unequal human relations, activities, power and conﬂ icting 
interests that produce the warming. To present global warming as a commodity to 
be priced and traded (such as in carbon trading) seems to invest it with a life and 
power and mystery of its own; it is  fetishised (Marx 1990, 165). 
 The reiﬁ ed fetish is alienated, suppressed and excluded, seemingly absent although 
it is essentially necessary to explain or afﬁ rm what is being denied in inconsisten-
cies and contradictions. These leave unﬁ nished the task at 4D to draw everything 
together in TMSA (Bhaskar 1998b, C22.7, 2000, 5). 
 Freud (1927, 147–57), through his research on infantile sexuality, associated the 
fetish with African idols, objects of superstitious dread or sorcery. He took idol 
worship to symbolise our human need to cope with our fears by concealing, mask-
ing and mystifying our deep anxieties and psychic wounds. Similarly, the fetishism 
of global warming conceals and mystiﬁ es, contains and distances its political and 
economic causes, and fearful reality.  72  

48 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 4D can be part of a recurring process (Bhaskar 2000, 8–9) rather than an ending, 
and it urges a return to 1M to restart the MELD process with the more accurate, 
deeper insights that have been gained. 
 With climate change and the interests of present and especially younger genera-
tions, the contradictions continue along with governments’ support and subsidies 
for fossil fuel industries,  73  and their denial or underestimation of global warming.  74  
The continuing confusion has two possible origins: 1M insights may be mistaken 
and misleading, or else a different 1M basis and MELD analysis inﬂ uences govern-
ments. Alternative MELDs will be reviewed in the following chapters. 
 Conclusion: childhood, nature and climate change 
 Childhood and nature overlap in symbol and in practice. They are variously seen 
as innocent and beautiful, as boring, or as dangerously wild and outside cultured 
society. The anthropic fallacy sets humans apart from nature, at the centre of the 
purpose and meaning of the cosmos, and the fallacy regards young children as 
ambiguously natural and pre-fully-human. Child development theory charts chil-
dren’s intellectual and moral growth, while socialisation theory is sociology’s version 
of this progress that climbs up from pre-social babyhood to socialised adulthood.  75  
 To change the splits in the assumption that nature is alien to the civilised, social 
person involves changing assumptions about sociology and childhood. Sociology 
would be less conﬁ ned into culture and apart from nature (Abrams 1968) and 
would study interdependent interactions between society and nature more. Chil-
dren and adults would be seen as moral-natural-social beings, each in their own 
right. This would encourage different power relations between adults and children 
(and between society and nature). 
 Ways in which children are treated reﬂ ect activities towards nature. These range 
from neglect and abuse  76  to violence  77  that wastes potential and ends the lives of mil-
lions of children.  78  In similar devaluing, natural resources are destructively exploited 
and wasted (Biel 2012; Bond 2012; IPCC 2014a, 2014b; Jacobs and Dinham 2003; 
Jones 2007). At the other extreme is undue control or pampered children (and pets 
and manicured gardens). Children and nature may be valued for the emotional 
rewards they offer (Hochschild 1983; Zelizer 2005) or as investments for future 
proﬁ ts. Heidegger (1978) contrasted  Dasein , or human beings, with things that are 
seen as ‘ready-to-hand’ objects or property: a forest is simply a source of timber. 
We reduce things into resources to use or discard, and only notice them if they fail 
to work properly, such as when a cup leaks and needs to be repaired or replaced. 
Schools treat students as ‘ready to hand’ when they have punitive ‘zero tolerance’ 
policies  79  (that evoke resistance), when they treat students uniformly (parallel to 
monoculture and the demand for the perfect standard vegetable), and value them 
only for the grades they score and when they promote the school brand. When 
schools work against human nature and children’s bodily and healthcare needs (May-
all 1996) and against their longing for adventurous, risky independence, the schools 
tend to have high failure rates  80  and students with mental health problems.  81  

Ecology 49
 Most children and adults live interdependently between these extremes. Their efforts 
to balance individuality and community, protection and care with freedom, and meet-
ing needs with justice also apply to relations between humans and the natural world. 
There is the principle of treating other people (and species) as ends in themselves, 
not simply as possessions or as means towards other people’s ends (Kant [1781] 1965). 
 Foresight is a particular concern during childhood and youth, and is equally 
relevant to public policy. Governments that combine present and future interests 
would work to reduce climate change, to stop bequeathing ecological debts, and to 
stop sowing seeds of ecological destruction, conﬂ ict and mass migration. Wealthier 
countries, generally with older populations, would pay for the extra centuries of 
industrial carbon emissions and for their present outsourcing, when countries such 
as China with generally younger populations emit the carbons and suffer the pollu-
tion produced when making goods that are consumed in post-industrial countries. 
 Governments would work now to promote peace and just cooperation over 
conserving the natural world and human societies. They would help to restore 
some of the amazing power and rampant diversity of natural settings (Greer 2014; 
Monbiot 2014) and of children’s potential and their love of natural wild places that 
Laurie Lee and John Clare celebrated. 
Chapter 9, Ecology
 Dates denote time of publication. All website addresses were checked for access on 
2 March 2015 unless noted otherwise. 
 Notes 
1.  Some DCR terms deﬁ ned in the glossary ﬁ rst appear in italics; however, not all italicized 
terms are included in the glossary.
 2 .  http://www.unicef.org.uk/Latest/News/British-Children-deeply-concerned-by-
effects-of-climate-change-/ 17 April 2013.  
 3 .  Esha Marwaha (2013) Geography taught me climate change is unjust – and inspired me 
to ﬁ ght,  Guardian,  19 March. 
 4 .  Instead of repeatedly referring to these many sources I have summarised central ideas 
which most of the authors advance in whole or in part. 
 5 .  http://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/live/2014asthma/sep/23/un-
climatechange-summit-in-new-york-live-coverage.  
 6 .  Carrington, D. (2014) Two secret funders of Nigel Lawson’s climate sceptic organisation 
revealed,  Guardian,  2 September. Despite denials, a leading climate sceptic campaign 
think tank, Global Warming Policy Foundation, was found to be funded indirectly by 
fuel corporations.  
 7 .  Blue Gold: World Water Wars,  Oxfam   2008, a ﬁ lm on stopping the ‘ corporate theft of the 
world’s water ’ (www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1a3tjqQiBI). 
 8 .  Barnett, A. (2012) Truth and the BBC, https://www.opendemocracy.net, 7 December. 
The BBC’s ‘objectivity’ includes allowing roughly equal time to selected speakers as if 
they are equally representative, such as climate change scientists versus sceptics. Inter-
viewers tend to avoid seriously informed critical questioning.  The Times, The Sun  and  Sky 
News , all owned by Rupert Murdoch, mis-report climate change. Owen Jones (2014) 
reviews serious bias at the BBC. 
 9 .  See Volume 1, pages 52–3, for an introduction to the following points. 

50 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 10 .  See Volume 1, Chapter 2. 
 11 .  See Volume 1, for example, pages 83–5. 
 12 .  See Volume 1, page 51. 
 13 .  http://www.youngminds.org.uk/training_services/policy/mental_health_statistics?gc
lid=Cj0KEQjw_IKiBRD7rPqut_OZ4qgBEiQASm4GAomj3gKd2LwXdEoPvJJR2
TQLN0MDoYedA17A3x0s2G4aAhxu8P8HAQ. 
 14 .  Wade Davis’s (2013) review of  The World until Yesterday  by Jared Diamond ( Guardian , 
9 January) warns against Diamond’s risk of pick and mix, tweaking societies by trying to 
insert features from other very different cultures. See Chapter 12.  
 15 .  www.familyholidayassociation.org.uk/.  
 16 .  See Volume 1. 
 17 .  And see later section 4D. 
 18 .  See Volume 1 on innate moral capacities. 
 19 .  See Volume 1, pages 110, 161. 
 20 .  BSA climate change study group, http://www.britsoc.co.uk/specialisms/climate.aspx.  
 21 .  The four-university project 2014–2018 http://www.wholesem.ac.uk. 
 22 .  Porritt, J. (2015) It is ‘impossible’ for today’s big oil companies to adapt to climate 
change,  Guardian , 15 January. 
 23 .  See Volume 1, pages 109–111. 
 24 .  Volume 1, pages 65–66. 
 25 .  The government’s behavioural insights team or ‘nudge unit’ was criticised for its efforts 
to inﬂ uence the public subconsciously, and for its poor record of success. In 2014 it was 
partly privatised. Dunt, I. (2014) Nudge nudge, say no more. Brits’ minds will be con-
trolled without us knowing it,  Guardian,  5 February.  
 26 .  See Chapter 11 on price. 
 27 .  Unburnable carbon 2013: Wasted capital and stranded assets http://www.carbontracker.
org/; https://www.iea.org/newsroomandevents/pressreleases/2012/november/name,
33015,en.htm 
 28 .  In 2013, $6.2 billion invested by Australian companies in coal reserves were likely to 
become worthless. Carrington, D. (2013) Australia’s coal boom built on a carbon ‘bub-
ble’,  Guardian Weekly 3 May. 
 29 .  Stern, N. (2007) Carbon emissions, Guardian, 29 November.  
 30 .  Hutton, W. (2013) Burn our planet or face ﬁ nancial meltdown.  Observer,  21 April.  
 31 .  www.avaaz.org.  
 32 .  Climate change protest, Melbourne,  Guardian,  21 September 2014. 
 33 .  Friedlingstein, P. et al. (2014) Persistent growth of CO2 emissions and implications for 
reaching climate targets,  Nature Geoscience , 21 September.  
 34 .  http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/22/rockefeller-heirs-divest-
fossil-fuels-climate-change.  
 35 .  For example, climate camps, the Transition Town Movement, The Corner House, The 
Green Economics Institute, the Centre for Alternative Technology and its Zero Carbon 
Britain project. 
 36 .  McKie, R. (2014) Miami is content to keep drowning,  Guardian Weekly,  8 August, with 
modelling maps. 
 37 .  An eco footprint is the hectares needed to provide the goods per annum used by one 
person. The average footprint in the USA was 9.5 hectares, for Europeans 4–5, and for 
most Indians and Africans, one hectare or less (Pearce 2010, 241–2). The richest bil-
lion people consume resources and produce waste at 32 times the average for the other 
six billion. Some people count as minus zero when, for example, they work on rub-
bish picking and recycling. For water footprint see http://www.waterfootprint.org/?
page=ﬁ les/GlobalWaterFootprintStandard.  
 38 .  Goldenberg, S. (2013) Why global water shortages pose threat of terror and war, 
 Observer , 9 February. 
 39 .  http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2015–02/tca-wma022215.php  

Ecology 51
 40 .  http://www.nasa.gov/press/2014/july/satellite-study-reveals-parched-us-west-using-
up-underground-water/, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/06/drought-
california-swimming-pools.  
 41 .  Rankin, J. (2014) Almond crops drink California dry,  Guardian Weekly,  19 September.  
 42 .  Forest Trends (2014)  Consumer Goods and Deforestation . Washington DC: Forest Trends. 
 43 .  World Wildlife Fund and London Zoo (2014)  Living Planet Report 2014,  http://www.
wwf.org.uk/news_feed.cfm?7340.  
 44 .  Valo, M. (2013) Pesticide fears to French West Indies,  Guardian Weekly , 10 May. 
 45 .  The USA National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) stated that estimates of home-
lessness are vague and dated, but that  1.37 million (39%) of the total reported home-
less population were children aged under 18, and  the National Law Center (NCH) 
on Homelessness and Poverty stated in 2007 ‘that approximately 3.5 million people, 
1.35 million [47%] of them children, are likely to be homeless in a given year’. I mmense 
problems when counting homeless people include their transient, often ‘paperless’ lives, 
illegal migrant status, and need to escape and hide from violence. In September 2014, 
this  NCH site stated ‘access forbidden’, another method of removing children in need 
from public records.  
 46 .  http://keepingscore.blogs.time.com/2013/02/03/in-the-shadows-of-the-super-
bowl-new-orleans-struggles/. 
 47 .  http://feedingamerica.org/hunger-in-america/hunger-facts/hunger-and-poverty-
statistics.aspx#. 
 48 .  Gomez, Alan (2014) Obama to provide legal aid to border-crossing children,  USA 
Today , 6 June;  McGreal, C. (2014) Central American leaders meet Barack Obama to 
criticise US border policy,  Guardian,  26 July.   
 49 .  Editorial. (2013) The legacy of privatisation: dripping with cash,  Guardian,  14 May. 
 50 .  For the documentary,  We Feed the World , see http://keithpp.wordpress.com/2013/04/15/
nestle-chairman-says-water-is-not-a-human-right/.  
 51 .  And see Volume 1, 62–64. 
 52 .  White, M. (2010) No ﬁ lter,  Times Higher,  15 July, refers to Solomon, S. (2010)  Water: 
The Epic Struggle for Wealth, Power, and Civilization . New York: HarperCollins; see also 
http://thewaterblog.wordpress.com/. 
 53 .  http://news.discovery.com/earth/oceans/paciﬁ c-ocean-plastic-increase-120509.htm; 
http://education.nationalgeographic.co.uk/education/encyclopedia/great-pacific-
garbage-patch/?ar_a=1. 
 54 .  http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/green-living/the-worlds-rubbish-
dump-a-tip-that-stretches-from-hawaii-to-japan-778016.html. 
 55 .  Vidal, J. (2014) India’s rice warrior sows seeds of hope,  Guardian Weekly , 4 April. 
 56 .  Every year, an estimated 250,000 to 500,000 young children become blind for lack of 
vitamin A, and half of them die within a year. Children’s needs are cited as the main 
reason to promote golden rice, genetically modiﬁ ed (GM) with added beta-carotene 
that converts into vitamin A. Anti-GM protestors are blamed for preventing the plant-
ing of golden rice, but protestors contend that the highly priced rice will trap farmers 
into poverty, and contains far too little beta-carotene to beneﬁ t children. Advocates of 
golden rice assume that the children will eat only rice, whereas surely they would pre-
fer a varied diet of natural foods rich in vitamin A and other vitamins (Empson 2014, 
184–5). http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/vad/en/; http://www.goldenrice.org/.  
 57 .  Vidal, J. (2014) India’s rice warrior sows seeds of hope,  Guardian Weekly , 4 April. 
 58 .  http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/invasive-species/publications/factsheet-cane-
toad-bufo-marinus. 
 59 .  Shiva, V. (2013) How economic growth has become anti-life,  Guardian,  1 November.  
 60 .  http://kevinanderson.info/blog/why-carbon-prices-cant-deliver-the-2c-target/ (his 
emphasis). 
 61 .  www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/2013/01/28/nicholas-stern_n_2567259.html. 
 62 .  See Volume 1, Chapter 6. 

52 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 63 .  I might be interested in this view partly because my primary school’s originally Victo-
rian motto was ‘I am, I can, I ought, I will’. 
 64 .  See Volume 1, pages 147–8. 
 65 .  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/10313081/Sir-David-Attenborough-
I-am-the-luckiest-soul-I-can-think-of.html.  
 66 .  Pearce, F. (2014) It’s not overpopulation that causes climate change, it’s overconsumption,  
Guardian 19 September, reply to refute Raftery et al. (2014).  
 67 .  www.globaljustice.org.uk/delusions.  
 68 .  Milne, S. (2014) Europe’s sea of death for migrants is a result of war and escalating 
inequality,  Guardian,  9 October. 
 69 .  Rachel Carson quoted in John Burnside, (2013) Into the wilderness,  New Statesman, 
 12–25 April 2013, pp. 98–101. 
 70 .  Ibid.  John Burnside’s additional comments. 
 71 .  Volume 1, pages 61–2. 
 72 .  Another example is the 2014–5 Ebola epidemic, often discussed as if it were a fetish-
like natural force, a virus that swept through West African states. Thousands of orphans 
were fetishised, accused of being witches in attempts to explain how they could survive 
their families, and they were left to die. Chapter 10 looks at the political and economic 
realities. 
 73 .  Goldberg, S. (2014) Eight ways climate change is making the world more danger-
ous,  Guardian , 14 July. Globally, fuel industries receive an estimated $550 billion of 
state subsidies per year. Carrington, D. (2014) Owen Paterson to give lecture to Nigel 
Lawson’s climate-sceptic thinktank,  Guardian 18 July. 
 74 .  For example, after leaving his post, the British Environment Secretary 2010–2014 pub-
licised his scepticism about climate change. 
 75 .  Volume 1 reviewed the problems of assuming that morality is wholly learned and 
acquired, instead of being partly innate and integral to human nature. 
 76 .  Among examples of prevalent disrespect, possibly 50,000 people in England were view-
ing abusive images of children online in 2014, BBC News, 20 October 2014.  
 77 .  Across the world, violence kills a child every ﬁ ve minutes, mostly outside war, http://
www.unicef.org/violencestudy/reports.html accessed 21 October 2014. 
 78 .  Casual waste allowed the poisonous cloud to burst from the pesticide factory in 1984 
in Bhopal, India, causing an estimated 20,000 deaths so far. Ten of thousands have been 
disabled and thousands continue to be poisoned by the local water. Over 120,000 people 
are ill from the continuing effects and many children are born with severe deformities. 
The company has not paid adequate compensation (Jacobs and Dinham 2003, 264–71). 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-30205140 reported 2 December 2014. 
 79 .  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/failure-of-leadership-in-tackling-poor-behav
iour-costing-pupils 25 September 2014.  
 80 .  Almost two-thirds of children fail to achieve the basics of ﬁ ve GCSEs, including English and 
maths, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2014-report.  
 81 .  Nearly one third of young people have ‘sub-clinical’ mental health problems. During 
2013–2014, when the government demanded more rigid schooling, young peoples’ 
reports of self-harm increased by over 40 per cent and of suicidal thoughts by over 
one third. Public Health England Report (2014), http://data.parliament.uk/writtenev
idence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/health-committee/childrens-and-
adolescent-mental-health-and-camhs/written/7562.html.  
  
 

 Marion Smith was too poor to receive medical care, and in 1926 when she 
was aged 13 she died after ten years of illness. Her parents had to pawn their 
clothes to hire a cart to take her to a Yorkshire workhouse inﬁ rmary for the 
ﬁ nal weeks of her life. ‘Even though she was in extreme pain while the TB 
[tuberculosis] ate away at her spine and invaded her vital organs, she was 
silent’ (Smith 2014). She was buried in a paupers’ pit. 
 Marion’s brother, Harry Leslie Smith, wrote his book (2014) to explain the 
problems of today’s dismantling of the welfare state and the NHS, founded in 
1948. He warned about the risks of returning to the past and to the former 
grievous problems and absences epitomised in Marion’s short life. 
 To pair with Volume 1, Chapter 4 on interpersonal relations, this chapter considers 
how economics, speciﬁ cally the economies of healthcare, works through interper-
sonal, international and intergenerational relationships. The values that shape health 
economies, in the past and around the world, determine whether children like 
Marion receive the healthcare they need or not. 
 The theme continues that children are doubly excluded, when mainstream research-
ers, such as those of political economy, largely ignore children, and when child-
hood researchers ignore economics (as Bryant and Raphael 2015 contend). There 
is a sub-specialty of research on economics and children (Boyden and Bourdillon 
2012; Boyden and Dercon 2012; Bradshaw 2011; Hills 2014; Qvortrup 1985, 2005a, 
2005b; Ridge 2002; Wintersberger 2005).  1  Their main concern is to show the 
effects of economic policies speciﬁ cally on children from a social welfare perspec-
tive rather than an economic theory perspective. Their work is not all that closely 
integrated with the rest of childhood studies. However, children share most aspects 
of their lives with adults, aspects which are all profoundly shaped by economics, 
through markets and states, trade and tax, ﬁ scal and welfare policies, in national and 
 10 
 ECONOMICS 
 Interpersonal, intergenerational 
and international relations 

54 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
global economic systems. To be informed, economics has to take due account of all 
people, including the third or so of the world’s population aged under 19, who are 
all, directly or indirectly, economically active. 
 Children live at the fault-line of relations between state and market, public and 
private ﬁ nance. There are debates about whether or not states should generously 
support citizens, especially dependent ones, with beneﬁ ts and services, and whether 
children are ‘private goods’ for their own parents to invest in without state interfer-
ence, or ‘public goods’ who serve and enrich whole societies now and in future. In 
the latter view, the state supports families in protecting and providing for children 
for the mutual beneﬁ t of all generations. 
 Marion Smith lived when the British state provided little support for children, 
unless there seemed to be a worthwhile investment in society’s future workers 
and soldiers, with basic schooling and primary child health services.  2  However, 
eugenics-dominated public policy presumes that people should have children only 
if they can afford to care for them. State beneﬁ ts were thought simply to support 
the public burden of a feckless class, who would demand services unless these 
were set at a lower standard than the poorest home could offer, bitterly satirised 
by Charles Dickens in  Oliver Twist . In this view, Marion’s death would count as a 
merciful release. The same view is applied today, intentionally or through neglect, 
to millions of the world’s children (UNICEF 2014a, 2014b). 
 This chapter will review a few major features of current healthcare and need, 
followed by two MELD analyses based on contrasting values and systems: one is 
commerce and the other is social justice. The two analyses will trace how health 
care is understood (1M) and organised (2E), some of the larger effects of the two 
systems (3L), and their interpersonal and political effects (4D). 
 Healthcare and need 
 Children are among the most deeply involved and affected groups in many ‘adult’ 
concerns; the youngest and oldest age groups are the highest users of health ser-
vices. Medicine and nursing are international disciplines, with practitioners moving 
around the world, and major hospitals being run anywhere on similar lines. All 
countries can then beneﬁ t from knowledge and skill shared across global systems. 
Yet just as healthcare staff and resources can easily move into poorer countries, 
they can more easily move out, through the brain-drain of practitioners trained in 
Africa and Asia but recruited to work in the minority world. International imbal-
ances increase intergenerational ones, when staff leave countries where up to half 
the population are children and young people to work in areas where they are 
one ﬁ fth or less of the population. 
 Another imbalance is when pharmaceutical companies invest in researching 
proﬁ table medicines, such as for behavioural problems of relatively healthy, minor-
ity world children (Bakan 2012), or apply outdated single-gene and neurone theo-
ries to support questionable but £multimillion programmes intended to produce 
proﬁ table new miracle cures (Rose and Rose 2014). Yet the companies neglect 

Economics 55
research on tropical diseases that endanger millions of people, especially young 
children who lack immunity and are most likely to be disabled or to die from 
infections. The huge potential market for medicines in the majority world is largely 
closed by poverty, and global drug companies sue ﬁ rms in India that try to meet 
the great need by producing cheap versions of their medicines.  3  In cheaper, alter-
native markets, besides the beneﬁ ts, there is less regulation; thus, in many countries 
and over the internet, there are higher risks of fake, contaminated and out-of-date 
medicines, of inaccurate over-prescribing by under-trained doctors, and misuse of 
medicines by everyone who cannot read the instructions. 
 Leading British, American, Japanese and Chinese drug companies  4  have been 
accused of bribing thousands of Chinese doctors to oversubscribe and overcharge 
for drugs, especially for cancer treatments, when desperate parents will accept 
almost any medical advice for their sick child. Authorities and hospitals that rely 
on income from these ﬁ rms dare not prosecute them. The Chinese government’s 
budget, which only partly covers everyone’s healthcare costs, is about £230 billion 
annually. Over the past 15 years, life expectancy in China has risen by nearly a 
decade, and infant mortality has halved. Yet there are riots and attacks on staff 
because of the high charges for drugs; one started when doctors refused to treat a 
dying 3-year-old boy whose parents could not pay.  5  
 The 2014–2015 Ebola epidemic in West Africa revealed the fragile health ser-
vices in areas with the highest maternal and perinatal mortality rates in the world.  6  
The rates had been improving. Each year across the region, the estimated 800,000 
women who give birth were more likely to receive free care in a health centre 
assisted by skilled staff. However, areas with limited healthcare and sanitation ser-
vices tend also to lack basic resources such as clean water and soap, and common 
knowledge of how to prevent and treat diseases. Infection spreads rapidly among 
malnourished people with low resistance to disease who are living in crowded 
slums. During the epidemic, when people were afraid to touch them and they were 
afraid to go to a clinic or hospital, women had their babies unaided at home or in 
the streets.  7  Hospitals came to be feared as death houses, so that rates of untreated 
serious and fatal disease rose. Schools, markets and farms closed down. Many chil-
dren who were orphaned by Ebola were feared and isolated. The catalyst Ebola 
revealed vulnerabilities and fractures in affected societies, and in the whole unequal, 
unjust global healthcare system. This is most extreme in Africa, where in some states 
up to half the population is aged under 15 years.  8  
 From numerous examples of severe illness, an estimated 4 million people in 
Nigeria alone currently have extremely painful sickle cell disease, and each year 
over 150,000 affected children are born, while 100,000 affected children and adults 
die.  9  ‘About 100,000 individuals in the USA and millions worldwide have sickle 
cell disease, which leaves them at risk of disability or premature death. [It] is the 
most common genetic disorder affecting African-American individuals [as well as] 
those from other ethnic and racial backgrounds’ (Wang et al. 2013). They tend to 
live either in poorer countries, or in poorer communities in rich countries, yet 
they have vital and costly healthcare needs. Sickle cell is a recessive genetic disease 

56 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
(both parents have to be carriers, though they may not have the full disease or be 
aware that they are carriers), and higher numbers of affected people increase the 
chance of their intermarriage. 
 During the 1970s, the needs of people with another severe, recessive blood dis-
order, thalassaemia, were overwhelming health service budgets in southern Cyprus. 
All the authorities, including the churches, worked together on pre-conceptual pre-
vention. Individuals were tested and counselled before marriage, so that identiﬁ ed 
carriers had the informed choice to avoid marrying one another, and to avoid the 
distress of having affected children or making painful decisions about prenatal test-
ing and terminations.  10  This compassionate and cost-effective work very urgently 
needs to be organised in Nigeria and many other countries with high rates of severe 
recessive genetic disorders. 
 Surrounding the services to treat ill health are all the ways to help children by 
promoting health and preventing and reducing ill health. In Britain, pressures are 
growing on the NHS because of increasing social inequalities, poor diet and cold, 
damp homes, where one quarter of children live in poverty and many others live 
in borderline poverty.   11  
 UK’s austerity programme has disproportionately affected children, and since 
2008 child health and wellbeing have taken ‘a great leap backwards’,  12  with unprec-
edented increase in absolute child poverty. The most disadvantaged children have 
been hit the hardest (UNICEF 2014a), with dire present and future effects for 
many. Every day, more young children die in the UK than in many other Euro-
pean countries, ﬁ ve more daily than in Sweden.  13  Many health outcomes for chil-
dren and people with disabilities in the UK remain poor (Marmot et al. 2013), and 
there are striking inequalities: a baby girl in Manchester can expect to live 15 fewer 
years in good health than a baby girl in Richmond, West London.  14  
 Another growing concern is mental health problems, which affect one in ten 
British children aged under 15 years, including over 8,000 aged under 10 years, 
as well as 72 per cent of children in care, and 95 per cent of imprisoned young 
offenders.  15  One in every 12 to 15 young people deliberately self-harms, with 
a steep rise in hospital admissions and reported suicide attempts over the past 
decade. More than half of all adults with mental health problems were diagnosed 
in childhood, when less than half were treated appropriately. ‘The most common 
personality disorders are performance anxiety and social phobia’, yet funding for 
CAMHS, Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services, has been frozen or cut.  16  
Cuts that delay and withhold treatment do not save money when problems quickly 
become more serious and expensive to treat. The loss of 3,300 mental health nurses 
in the period 2010–2014 has reduced early and preventative care, with ‘many 
personal tragedies’ and much greater need for long-term and expensive hospital 
care.  17  The cuts range from less support for mothers with perinatal distress, which 
can so seriously affect their babies, to lost mental health beds for young people. 
Those showing disturbed behaviour, who might harm themselves or others, may be 
detained in police cells ‘as a place of safety’.  18  They may be sent hundreds of miles 
away to where a hospital bed can be found, and many stay in wards for adults, with 

Economics 57
experiences that would greatly distress ‘normal’ young people, let alone ones who 
are already disturbed. The government considers that good CAMHS services ‘are 
possible only if there is a strong economy backing a strong NHS.’ Schools will be helped 
‘to effectively teach pupils about mental health and to banish the stigma’, and to 
give counselling and advice.  19  
 Even allowing for greatly increased medicalising and reporting of behaviours 
(American Psychiatric Association 2013), there appears to be the growing, lonely, 
anxious fear of other people. This raises questions about the kinds of interpersonal, 
intergenerational and commercial relationships that are being fostered in children’s 
and adults’ daily lives. The dominant disciplines of economics and psychology 
favour dealing with individuals rather than societies, and economics takes health 
care to be a commodity that is measured, bought and sold. This involves attempts 
to measure immeasurable health and need, and to present vague estimates as if they 
are facts. (Lord) Richard Layard  20  claimed, 
 One-third of all households in Britain include someone who is mentally 
ill . . . Nearly 40 per cent of all illness in this country is mental illness, most of 
it is untreated . . . The greatest source of misery in our country is . . . mental 
illness. 
 However, mental illness is not the source of misery, it  is  misery, and it emerges 
from other unnamed causes, including stress and poverty. Yet economic causes are 
excluded by the economist Layard, who insists we need the ‘evidence-based sci-
ence’ of mass, standardised, cheap, fast CBT (cognitive behaviour therapy). Think-
ing of adults, he contends that CBT costs ‘nothing’ when 50 per cent success rates 
pay for themselves in returns to employment. And ‘because depression and anxiety 
are also bad for your physical health . . . it follows that [more CBT] would [pro-
duce] huge savings’ on the costs of physical illness. CBT is the retelling of inner 
stories, the method of advertising. It attends to anomie in helping distressed people 
to adjust to social norms, but it ignores how society could be alienating people 
away from their true self and authentic anxieties. CBT takes health and illness 
to be private and internal. Happiness is ‘feeling good, enjoying life and feeling 
it is wonderful’, Layard believes. Unhappiness is ‘feeling bad and wishing things 
were different’. However, ‘wishing things were different’ is the ﬁ rst step in aspir-
ing towards new freedoms and ﬂ ourishing. Layard’s views demonstrate the vital 
need to unravel or at last to identify basic contradictions (at 1M) before moving 
to intervene (at 2E). 
 Social structures and services interact with beliefs about human nature as either 
selﬁ sh or altruistic, and human relationships as ones of either competitive indepen-
dence or of mutual, interdependent obligations. These assumptions form values and 
aims, which shape social structures. Yet connections between beliefs and activities, 
agency and outcomes may be tenuous, mixed or largely unconscious or inadvertent. 
 This chapter reviews two contrasting systems of values and relationships under-
lying health services. One is commerce and the other, shown in Harry Smith’s 

58 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
response to his sister Marion’s illness, is social justice. These complex, contradictory 
concepts have been simpliﬁ ed into some of their core tenets, partly deﬁ ned through 
contrasting examples. Both systems greatly value respect and rights, responsibility, 
privacy and dignity, but these are understood in contrasting and often contradic-
tory ways. 
 First moment 1M, commerce and social justice 
 1M, commerce 
 (Bello 2013; Chang 2011; Dean 2009; Elliott and Atkinson 2009; Hamm 2005; 
Harvey 2007, 2011; Kempf 2008; Klein 2007, 2014; Mason 2009, 2012; Mills 1956; 
Mirowski and Plehwe 2008; Peston 2008; Pollock 2005; Shaxson 2011; Wacquant 
2008)  21  
 The commercial view of healthcare starts from values of cost-effectiveness, and 
from interpersonal relationships that respect individual independence, responsibil-
ity, privacy and property. The following summary of commercial values may look 
extreme, but the values powerfully inﬂ uence the lives and health of children today, 
by default, or neglect, or deliberately, such as through national and global poli-
cies. At 1M, commerce separates private life and adults’ care of their own family 
and children from public life. Interpersonal relations in public life are expected 
to be wholly commercial, detached and mediated through money, competitive 
exchange and self-interest. Sympathy in terms of identifying and feeling with oth-
ers comes to be dismissed as dangerously subjective; it undermines rational, calcu-
lating, ‘adult’ exchange. Children become invisible in public life when they are not 
seen as economic agents but merely as private dependents and costs. Everything, 
even people and their labour, can become commodities that are counted, costed 
and exchanged. 
 Commercial justice involves protecting private property; wealth is a token of 
individuals’ worth and merit; poverty signiﬁ es failure and laziness; anyone can suc-
ceed if they try hard enough. Like the display of a divine blessing, wealth ﬂ ows to 
the deserving and away from the undeserving. Adults should strive to ensure that 
in private life their own children have every chance to be more prosperous than 
their parents, and in public life at school children train to become productive future 
workers, with rewards and punishments for their own good. 
 Free markets are assumed to oversee the correct distribution of just rewards. 
They prevent the weak from being unfairly assisted, and the strong from being 
unfairly constrained. Free markets are the purging discipline, and guarantee that 
inefﬁ cient businesses will fail and cost-effective ones will succeed. Children are 
taught to believe and compete in free market forces. 
 Commerce sees taxes as theft, removing deserved income and investment, and 
they especially penalise the wealthy. They thereby break the founding justice in free 
markets, by attempting to assist the weak but discourage entrepreneurs. Taxes are 
inevitably wasteful, when bureaucrats casually spend other people’s money without 

Economics 59
knowing the hard graft and skill that went into earning it. And taxes are squan-
dered on schools, healthcare and other services, teaching children to depend on 
the state instead of to realise that everything must be directly paid for. Businesses 
must exploit all reasonable ways to avoid paying tax to prove their efﬁ ciency and 
serve their shareholders. Governments should spend tax income on infrastructure 
to support business (transport, police), not on welfare services. All services are most 
cost effective when run by private companies, not by the monopoly state. Privately 
run schools and other services have the added advantage of setting efﬁ cient business 
examples for children to follow. Payment by results based on targets rewards each 
excellent worker and encourages less successful ones to work harder. 
 Commerce is a highly moral system, claim its advocates, in being the only way to 
generate wealth that eventually beneﬁ ts everyone. Adam Smith’s ([1776] 2012) clas-
sical text  The Wealth of Nations  was accompanied by his  Theory of Moral Sentiments . 
His ‘hidden hand’ referred to an underlying sympathy, or enlightened self-interest, 
that bound people together in a sympathetic society. Modern ‘neo-classical’ eco-
nomics replaced this morality of sympathy with one of self-interest. 
 It is claimed that because the wealthy are the most talented group, they know 
best how to spend their wealth and also how to organise society. They rightly 
inﬂ uence public opinion and policy through owning the mass media, lobbying 
and funding political parties, and running think tanks and other powerful inﬂ u-
ences that endorse free markets and reward entrepreneurs. Stable, secure societies 
are believed to depend on commercial policies being conserved and strengthened. 
 Commerce promotes philanthropy as true, moral, autonomous charity, unlike 
enforced taxes. Benefactors exercise their right and freedom to choose the causes 
they prefer to support; charities for innocent victims are popular, such as for sick 
children. Philanthropy proves the moral worth of the wealthy when their social 
events raise funds for charities to rescue victims. An example was given during 
a radio debate about piped water in Detroit. The USA city has been left largely 
derelict after the car industry collapsed, and water services are cut off from many 
households that cannot pay their water bills. One speaker mentioned girls being 
ill and too ashamed to go to school because they could not wash. To reassure her, 
another speaker replied that other individuals kindly pay some families’ water bills 
for them, because the USA is such a generous society. 
 Commerce tends to assume all these views and moves swiftly on to 2E inter-
ventions. However, IM scrutiny of commerce reveals non-identity, gaps between 
real entities and how they are understood and analysed, misreadings of real human 
identity and relationships and wellbeing, which raise problems and contradictions. 
Commerce tends to atomise, divide and alienate people from one another and 
from their social contexts. The successful are then praised and rewarded, and the 
disadvantaged are blamed and punished, as if they owe their lot wholly to their 
own efforts or non-efforts, with no external aids or barriers. Philanthropic charity 
(both words originated from love) is framed as a commercial relationship between 
the donor and the disadvantaged, each identiﬁ ed by the difference and distance 
between them. The commercial vision contradicts its values of cost-effectiveness 

60 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
when it separates children from the public sphere and the state, and undermines the 
public services on which they depend. The misunderstandings at 1M commerce are 
further revealed by the contrasting 1M of social justice. 
 1M, social justice 
 (Brady 2009; Children’s Society 2014; Dean 2012; Dorling 2011; Harvey 2011, 
2014; Jones 2014; Lanchester 2014; Marmot 2010; Marmot et al. 2013; Mount 
2012; Seabrook 2007; Seery and Caistor-Arendar 2014; Wilkinson and Pickett 2009) 
 Basic 1M insights into social justice identify underlying relationships of connec-
tion, concern and responsibility for others, equal rights and equal respect for all. 
C. Wright Mills (1959, 5–6) contended that the sociological imagination connects 
history to biography and inner life to external career. The sociological imagination 
enables us to take account of when we are falsely conscious and lost in mislead-
ing non-identity. We are then uneasy about ‘personal troubles’ but indifferent to 
‘public issues’, as when Layard prescribed CBT. 
 However, the sociological imagination transforms our indifference into involve-
ment. We learn the ‘terrible’ but also ‘magniﬁ cent’ lesson that we can only under-
stand our own lives by setting them within our social contexts and the lives of all 
those around us. We contribute, ‘however minutely, to the shaping of this society 
and to the course of its history, even as [we are] made by society and its histori-
cal push and shove’. From this view, efforts to promote each child’s happiness and 
‘good childhood’ (Layard and Dunn 2009) through, for example, psychological 
techniques of CBT or mindfulness,  22  have to be complemented with encourag-
ing children’s active involvement in society through understanding and beneﬁ tting 
others. Academia’s ‘mannerism of the non-committed’ reserved objectivity shows 
a liberal fear of any passionate commitment that avoids making value judgements 
and denies the reality that social science is inevitably value-laden (Mills 1959, 79) 
(Bhaskar 2000, 2008b; Sayer 2011). 
 At 1M, social justice is seen to connect private care of one’s own family and 
children to public life and concern for others. Personal experiences of joy and pain 
imaginatively inform relations with others, by identifying and feeling with them. 
Instead of being separated yet connected through money and competition, as in the 
model of commerce, people directly relate through cooperative activities of social 
justice. Children are central as major beneﬁ ciaries learning how to value and sus-
tain social justice through future decades. People, values, health and caring services 
are among precious assets that cannot be measured and commodiﬁ ed. Healthcare 
is one of the few remaining social sites where children and adults of many differ-
ent abilities and ethnic, cultural and class backgrounds share intimate physical and 
emotional working relationships. 
 Social justice involves protecting public common property, and equity that 
avoids blatant inequalities of wealth and health. Everyone can then enjoy at least 
moderate prosperity and wellbeing. Justice expects that workers have the resources 
they need to achieve high standards, with fair pay, conditions and working hours. 

Economics 61
Before child labour is reduced or banned, the ﬁ rst stage would ensure that all adult 
workers have an adequate income to support their children. 
 Taxes are assumed to support reasonable social equity through redistribution. 
Taxes promote the health and wellbeing of every child and adult for the common 
good, by supporting well-designed, efﬁ cient reliable services. Optimal decisions 
about social policies and expenditure are made by democratic, transparent govern-
ments, accountable to informed, active electorates. Just governments are indepen-
dent from undue lobbying and funding by private interests. 
 1M analysis that highlights key differences between the viewpoints of com-
merce and of social justice is illustrated by Marion Smith’s brief life. Commerce’s 
underlying values and structures are assumed to be given, natural and apoliti-
cal,  23  so that 1M critical questioning is dismissed as the unnecessary ‘politics of 
envy’. Nothing could be done for Marion except by her parents or philanthropy, 
and these remedies are found in practical 2E interventions, not in time-wasting 
1M debates. 
 In social justice, critical analysis of commerce has to begin at 1M non-identity 
if there is to be real understanding and hope of change. This involves address-
ing causes of suffering before moving to prevent or treat them at 2E. Otherwise, 
2E may merely palliate symptoms of social distress, and thereby mask and per-
petuate them. An example is tax avoidance by the wealthy, which is endorsed by 
commerce. Social justice critics campaign for taxes to be paid so that, for example, 
resources can be directed into public services, to meet enormous need by helping 
to prevent and treat childhood illness.  24  On TB, the disease that killed Marion, ‘in 
2013, an estimated 550,000 children became ill with TB and 80,000 HIV-negative 
children died of TB.’  25  Some ten million children are orphaned each year by the 
death of a parent from TB.  26  There is great concern that strains have developed 
resistance to the present drugs, so that new treatments are urgently needed. 
 To summarise 1M on interpersonal relationships: commerce can atomise, divide 
and alienate people from one another and from their social contexts. Children are 
doubly excluded from formal commercial relationships and from the public sphere 
when it is mainly reduced into the ‘adult’ market. Ignoring child workers and 
consigning children wholly to their parents’ care increases inequalities. Although 
philanthropy can relieve a few of these problems, it can also exacerbate them, as 
considered later. By contrast, social justice promotes human relationships of equity 
between all children and adults, with extra support for disadvantaged children. 
 Second edge 2E, commerce and social justice 
 (Davis and Tallis 2013; Davis et al. 2015; Hunter 2013; Leys and Player 2011; Lister 
2012; Manson 2012; Pollock 2005; Pollock et al. 2013; Wainwright 2003, 2014) 
 This section will contrast active interventions intended to negate or absent prob-
lems and absences noted at 1M, negations that start from either commercial values 
or social justice. Versions of the following example are likely to be repeated many 
times in the future, unless policies change dramatically. The example illustrates how 

62 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
health services exist through interpersonal relations, and through contradictions 
between commerce and social justice. 
 After a brief period of social justice (1940s to 1970s), English health services, like 
those in most other countries, are increasingly being turned towards commercial 
values and private services.  27  These especially beneﬁ t the healthiest group, middle to 
upper income working adults, when health insurance is one of their employment 
perks. Private services especially disadvantage children, low paid and unpaid work-
ers, and old people, groups who most depend on healthcare. 
 English public healthcare was reformed in the 1940s. Aneurin Bevan, Minister 
of Health and Housing 1945–1951, was a former miner, with a background like 
that of Marion and Harry Smith. He planned the NHS on social justice and ‘prin-
ciples of collective action and public initiative against the commercial principle 
of proﬁ t and greed’ (Bevan 1952). There was support for everyone from ‘cradle to 
grave’. Children’s health beneﬁ tted from better primary healthcare, better schools, 
free school milk (ended in 1971 by Margaret Thatcher when she was education 
secretary), council houses with gardens, public transport, libraries, sports centres, 
parks and playing ﬁ elds, child beneﬁ t and other family support. Until the 1980s, 
one adult wage usually supported a whole family whereas today two full-time 
wage earners can hardly support the average household. Mel Bartley and col-
leagues (2010) observed reluctantly that, while they endorse women’s rights to 
full employment, in southern Europe where more women now stay at home with 
time to care for families and cook cheap, nutritious food, epidemiologists report 
that children appear to be healthier. Full-time employment for both parents leaves 
gaps and absences in family life that have not yet been ﬁ lled and many women do 
a ‘double shift’ at work and at home.  28  
 Bevan believed the NHS would live as long as there were people with the cour-
age to defend it. There was collective political concern for every child’s health, by 
a benevolent if somewhat paternalist nation. This set the context for countless car-
ing interactions between healthcare staff and children. In time, the NHS produced 
national networks, which collected uniquely large, detailed and longitudinal data-
bases, used to inform and improve services and research. 
 Plans for the new NHS developed during World War II while the whole nation 
worked together to defeat Nazism. There had been unprecedented interpersonal 
contact and a sense of British national unity between people of all ages and classes, 
through the armed forces, through many civilian agencies supporting the war 
effort, and the evacuations of ‘slum’ city children into middle class, rural homes. 
Children, too, were highly involved in public work. The potato harvest doubled 
when they started working on farms (Mayall and Morrow 2011). The vision of 
together vanquishing the giant evils of squalor, want, idleness, ignorance and dis-
ease (in William Beveridge’s 1942 report) with a coalition government perhaps 
had a uniquely unanimous public resonance, which is now lost. Today there are 
growing problems not foreseen in the 1940s, such as the greatly ageing, healthcare-
dependent population. 
 Although current governments talk of ‘transparency, honesty, regulation and 
accountability’, they pass complex laws on healthcare that few people, including MPs, 

Economics 63
understand (Lucas 2015).  29  All three main political parties have shared in privatis-
ing the NHS since the 1990s, so that any opposition they voice is weak and seems 
inconsistent if not hypocritical. Many MPs, and, in the unelected House of Lords, 
over 170 peers, were paid by private healthcare companies and were keen to see 
private healthcare expand.  30  Sections of the NHS are being sold to inefﬁ cient and 
even fraudulent companies.  31  
 The British NHS is (was) one of the largest employers in the world. Opened 
on 5 July 1948, during extreme post-war austerity and debt, the NHS replaced a 
patchwork of local authority, commercial and charitable health services. Women 
and children were most likely to fall through the large holes in the patchwork, 
designed mainly to support working men. There are stories of a GP (general prac-
titioner or family doctor) prescribing cough medicine for a child on 4th July. The 
next day he visited the family home and heard severe coughing. ‘Did the medicine 
not work?’ he asked. ‘Yes it did,’ replied the mother, ‘but his brother has caught the 
cough and I cannot afford more medicine.’ ‘You can now,’ said the doctor, and hap-
pily explained the new NHS. My parents were doctors and always remembered 
the joy and excitement about the new free service. Before 1948 and for some years 
afterwards as NHS services were gradually established, my father spent much time 
surgically repairing injuries to women who had been unable to afford adequate 
care when giving birth. The injuries could so adversely affect the mother’s health, 
her care for her children, and any subsequent births. The devastating effects are still 
seen in many countries.  32  
 Along with better treatments for their illness, children in the new NHS beneﬁ t-
ted from earlier referral, and detection, and prevention of problems, which poten-
tially could prevent lasting illness or disability. Children stand to gain more than any 
other age group from good healthcare, when they are freed from preventable and 
treatable illness and disability over their whole future lifetime, and also in the ben-
eﬁ ts they may pass on to their children and grandchildren (Morgan et al. 2010).  33  
Early treatments of cleft lip or club foot and a host of other congenital problems 
transform children’s lives from disabled into ‘normal’. 
 After 1948, funds ﬂ owing into children’s services encouraged many kinds of 
new research, new specialties and departments and staff training. From the 1960s, 
neonatal intensive care units developed towards enabling babies to survive who 
were born months earlier than used to be a viable age. From the 1970s, children’s 
heart surgery rapidly developed so that ‘blue babies’ were no longer left to languish 
and die. Whereas adult heart specialists treat normal but failing hearts, the very dif-
ferent children’s specialty researches and treats congenitally abnormal hearts. 
 Since 1948, Britain’s NHS has been based on four interpersonal principles that 
beneﬁ t children and adults alike: 
 1.  to be universal and open to everyone in need; 
 2.  to be free at the point of delivery and funded through taxes; 
 3.  to have the Secretary of State for Health responsible for providing the NHS 
and democratically accountable to Parliament for its performance; 
 4.  to be an integrated, cooperating and equitable whole service. 

64 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 The 2012 Health and Social Care Act ended these principles in England in the 
following ways. First, instead of healthcare being universal, ‘non-Britons’ are to 
be charged for treatment. And patients get hospital care only if they are registered 
with a GP. Doctors protest that they do not want to be like border police check-
ing everyone’s nationality.  34  The new policy was claimed to save up to £33m a 
year, 0.03 per cent of the £109 billion NHS budget.  35  Many vulnerable people no 
longer have the right to free health care: those who are asylum seekers, homeless, 
or not accepted onto a GP register. Around 12,000 asylum seekers aged under 18 
arrived in Britain in 2012, often alone, escaping from violence through extremely 
dangerous journeys.  36  An estimated 120,000 undocumented migrant children 
would be denied access to NHS healthcare,  37  despite their extra needs. Some have 
severe physical and mental trauma, some have infections such as HIV or TB, which 
set others at risk too. 
 The second lost principle is that the law no longer requires that healthcare 
services are free for those in need. This move can speed up the transfer towards 
charging for services in several ways. Private companies are providing, commission-
ing and monitoring more and more services. Health authorities are forced to com-
mission a percentage of private contracts, and have to pay them in full, even when 
private services treat less than two thirds of the contracted cases. Sales of NHS 
contracts to private companies are increasing.  38  Public services are being down-
graded so that waiting times and staff stress and public dissatisfaction increase. This 
persuades or forces people towards using more private services, which take trained 
staff away from the NHS, further hurting NHS services. Double standards then 
widen between the lower public care levels and the higher private care ones, adding 
to pressures on those who can to resort to private services. Wealthier people resent 
paying taxes to fund public services they do not use, whereas the NHS depended 
on everyone owning, sharing, using and paying for it. And massive PFI (Private 
Finance Initiative) and PPP (Public–Private Partnerships) debts to companies that 
build and run hospitals absorb funds needed to pay for patients’ services. When the 
inevitable debts drive hospitals towards bankruptcy, they are deemed inefﬁ cient 
failures that need to be taken over and ‘improved’ by private companies. 
 Thirdly, the government is no longer responsible or accountable for NHS stan-
dards.  39  Instead, appointed quangos,  40  dominated by business representatives, review 
cost-effectiveness and contracts. 
 The fourth lost principle is that the NHS is being split into many competing, 
private services, with secret, ‘commercially conﬁ dential’ contracts so that the united 
cohesive service is lost. This especially harms children with multiple needs. Those 
with diabetes  41  need care from endocrinologists, specialist nurses, psychologists and 
dieticians, extra care for their eyes, hands, feet, and other parts of the body, which 
are vital to prevent new problems and to treat these urgently if they arise. Children 
with heart defects rely on a web of close, swift referral services between GPs, local 
hospitals and the few regional specialist centres. The children’s lives and wellbeing 
depend on smooth working relations and information transfers between many parts 
of the health services, so that local doctors know how to detect, refer and manage 

Economics 65
the complex conditions. These are broken when each service is separately priced 
and divided by commercial competition instead of coordinated for clinical need. 
 A national  health  service would promote healthy living through all proven 
means, and one way is to tax unhealthy foods, but British governments avoid this 
move. Young children’s different metabolism increases the risks to them of pro-
cessed foods. For example, corn syrup sweetener routinely added to baby milks and 
foods sets up biochemical and life-long sugar addiction and weight gain that are 
extra hard to resist (Lustig 2014). However, the more illness there is, the higher the 
potential proﬁ ts. When Big Food and Big Drinks corporations advise governments 
on healthy living, they recommend few changes, and continue to earn £billions 
from selling addictive, high-sugar products. They pass many new customers on to 
their allies in Big Pharma, who market remedies for the resulting hyperactivity, 
obesity and diabetes. 
 2E, commerce and competition 
 (Coote and Penny 2014; Davis and Tallis 2013; Davis et al. 2015; Lister 2013; 
Manson 2012; Meek 2014; Pollock 2005; Pollock et al. 2013; Wainwright 2014) 
 In theory, when businesses compete, such as to provide health services, they raise 
standards. In practice, after taking over another business, they tend to strip out assets, 
sack staff, cut spending and wages, increase proﬁ ts for managers and shareholders, 
raise charges to patients and other users, and often sell on the business at a proﬁ t to 
another company. When many companies are bought up and merged into larger 
ones, this reduces competition, and ends with a few global companies in control 
and liable to collude over price-ﬁ xing, as shown by the big energy companies and 
banks.  42  Despite much public protest, healthcare services in England and many 
other countries are being forced into the USA model.  43  Yet the USA has by far 
the most expensive system in the world, and consistently comes last in evaluations 
of effectiveness in rich countries’ healthcare, whereas the UK NHS comes ﬁ rst 
(Commonwealth Fund 2014).  44  Nevertheless, the false mantra persists that private 
services are efﬁ cient and public ones are monopolies and thus must be inefﬁ cient 
and wasteful. 
 Private companies ‘cherry pick’ patients, and reject expensive, long-term and 
complicated cases including the most disabled and needy children. One example is 
cataract eye surgery, proﬁ table work the NHS needs in order to be able to subsidise 
more costly eye cases, such as emergency care for injuries, and complicated care 
for the cancer retinoblastoma that mainly affects children aged under 5 years. Yet 
the NHS not only has to refer cataract surgery to private companies, but has also 
to provide intensive and corrective care if the private surgery is unsuccessful, and 
to pay compensation if patients sue the private companies after failed treatment.  45  
This can leach away many extra £millions in legal fees and staff time to produce 
billions of emails and other records for the lawyers.  46  All the NHS cases suffer if the 
proﬁ t-making cataract contracts are removed. Without that income and steady ﬂ ow 
of cases, eye units are closing, there are fewer staff, less staff training and so fewer 

66 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
trained staff, and children and adults have to travel further to get care. This is typical 
of many medical specialities. 
 The NHS subsidises other private services, such as IVF (in vitro fertilisation). 
About two thirds of the very costly IVF treatment cycles occur in private clinics, 
and less than one third of all cycles result in a live birth.  47  Many IVF babies need 
weeks or months of neonatal care provided by the NHS, which often with much 
difﬁ culty increases the ‘take-home live baby rate’ that IVF services report. 
 Between 2003 and 2014, over £5 billion of NHS services were sold to private 
companies, despite protests from the medical Royal Colleges.  48  Companies do not 
want to buy up all the health services, but to take easy-to-treat, low-cost patients, 
who boost their success rates and proﬁ ts and attract more custom. Without income 
from these patients, the NHS has fewer resources for the hard-to-treat, high-cost 
patients, with complex, long-term needs, so that their services become more run 
down. They have huge extra costs of staff training and research, of commissioning 
out health services, and repaying PFI debts, so NHS bids cannot compete evenly 
with bids from private companies. 
 Even with state funding, in the inverse healthcare law those with the greatest 
needs tend to receive the least care. The inversion is still greater within commercial 
systems. When healthcare becomes a commodity, it is ‘distributed just like cham-
pagne. That is, rich people get lots of it. Poor people don’t get any of it’ (Tudor Hart 
1971) or at least much less, although they have greatest need. This exactly contra-
dicts the social justice morality (discussed later) of ‘to each according to need’. 
 As with PFI contracts, private companies hire far more expensive and skilled 
lawyers than the NHS can afford. And the multimillion-pound contracts awarded 
to companies such as Care UK are conﬁ dential and rarely audited. Doctors and 
nurses earn much more as agency staff and many more are switching to these 
contracts, while the NHS loses £millions every week in the much higher costs, 
inconvenience, dangerous discontinuities and risks of employing agency staff. The 
staff may not speak English ﬂ uently, or have adequate training. The private sector 
does not conduct research or develop new treatments, but relies on the NHS to 
provide these costly assets freely. 
 Private services have built-in incentives to charge for extra, unnecessary but 
proﬁ t-making tests and treatments. There is pressure on doctors to alter the heal-
ing relationship from one of trust to one of commercial proﬁ t, and the demands 
to make proﬁ ts easily merge into fraud (Pollock 2012). Low-level corruption is 
‘disturbingly common’ when pharmaceutical companies pay academics to con-
duct clinical studies and when they offer them consultancy fees, stock options, 
or endowed chairs to give keynote speeches at major conferences or to add their 
names to papers written by the company for leading journals.  49  Drug companies 
withhold research ﬁ ndings about adverse effects, and they generally only publish 
results that support their products – and proﬁ ts.  50  If all trials had to be on a central 
register before they could begin, that could raise ethical and scientiﬁ c standards, 
prevent duplication and ensure better recording of the safety and efﬁ cacy of drugs 
as well as recording those that are useless or have dangerous ‘side-effects’. However 

Economics 67
well-intentioned clinicians may be, they are drawn into fraud when they can only 
offer misleading information from misreported research to patients, and to health 
care colleagues and students. The proﬁ t motive drives many healthcare and phar-
maceutical companies to tax avoidance and tax havens, thereby further cutting 
the essential taxation that funds them.  51  The companies also cream off much state 
funding into proﬁ ts for shareholders, and bonuses and high payments for the most 
senior staff. They lower wages and working conditions for junior staff, adding to the 
burden on the state when it tops up low wages with beneﬁ ts, besides losing income 
tax on unpaid higher salaries. Unless staff have enough time, respect and support, it 
is very hard for them to relate personally to patients and to care adequately, espe-
cially for the neediest groups, such as very sick or disabled children. And children 
are least likely to be able to complain formally, or to have their complaints heard 
and taken seriously. Private providers by claiming commercial conﬁ dentiality can 
escape public scrutiny as well as the (very weak, inadequate) NHS duty of openness 
and freedom for whistleblowers, although alarming news breaks through.  52  
 By autumn 2013, the ‘reformed’ NHS was becoming chaotic. Its new head, 
Simon Stevens, fresh from being European head of the discredited USA giant 
United Healthcare that wanted to buy sections of the NHS,  53  had advised the 
government in the 1990s on breaking up the NHS. He was against ‘top-down con-
trol’ (the only way to ensure a national equitable service) and without that control 
the service was disintegrating. The claim to promote ‘choice and competition’, and 
the promise that patients could insist ‘no decision will be made about me without 
me’ were not working, while popular services were closing. Services were forced 
to compete ﬁ nancially with one another, but this could increase costs. The 2012 
Act, section 75, was supposed to stop monopolies, mergers and ‘unfair trading’. 
However, it prevented two hospitals from merging their costly and not fully used 
Accident & Emergency (A&E) services, which would help them to economise, to 
survive ﬁ nancially and improve standards of care.  54  The 2012 Act allows private ser-
vices to sue the NHS for not referring enough patients to them, even when patients 
can be treated more cheaply by NHS hospitals, or at home by GPs. The govern-
ment wants to promote such cheaper alternatives, but the systems sabotage them. 
 By autumn 2013, NHS services, including ten per cent of GP surgeries, were 
swiftly being sold to private companies.  55  There were warnings that parts of the 
NHS would no longer be ‘free at the point of use’.  56  The 211 new Clinical Com-
missioning Groups (CCGs) had to put services out for tender,  57  and private com-
panies were winning bids across the English regions. Part of the sheep’s clothing of 
the new wolf regime that is running the NHS is that CCGs are said to be run by 
GPs for patients, whereas increasingly CCGs are run by private interests for proﬁ t. 
Over a quarter of CCG members have links with private healthcare.  58  Companies 
such as Virgin, with no previous experience of healthcare, win bids on terms that 
favour the companies’ interests. 
 The CCGs have to compete commercially against one another, instead of coop-
erating to strengthen services, reduce costs or coordinate care. Over half the hospi-
tal trusts in England ‘announced a deﬁ cit’ although ‘by 2017 the NHS must “save” 

68 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
£30bn’.  59  Hospitals are inspected by the Care Quality Commission, which said in 
2013 that one in four was a safety risk to patients. But the CQC regulator may not 
count numbers of staff or many other vital facts, which are ‘commercially conﬁ den-
tial’. This means that the CQC is unlikely to be able to advise on ways to improve 
services, only on ways to enforce closures and takeovers. 
 2E, local, interpersonal services 
 Within the government’s commercially dominated policies, local communities’ 
reactions of social justice are shown in the following example. The English govern-
ment decided to close parts of a London hospital: the children’s, neonatal, maternity, 
intensive care, accident & emergency (A&E) and some surgery and medical depart-
ments (SLHT 2012).  60  The plan was to disperse patients around four already over-
burdened hospitals in adjacent boroughs. These hospitals were reached by long, slow 
journeys by bus or car or ambulance along crowded streets. 
 Over 22,000 local people of all ages held a protest march,  61  with banners ﬁ xed 
to pushchairs and carried by young children, including triplets, proclaiming, ‘I was 
born at Lewisham Hospital’, ‘Lewisham Hospital saved my life!’ Later the people 
held an Inquiry  62  and then won their case in the High Court. At the inquiry day, 
doctors reported that over the past few years they had built up recognised centres 
of excellence for the neonatal and children’s units, for training doctors, and for 
intensive care. Their outstanding safeguarding children service had a cross-agency 
approach long before this was recommended by the Victoria Climbié inquiry. The 
delicate—tough yet fragile—webs of relationships through which the NHS works 
became very clear during the Inquiry. 
 In this ‘young’ borough, the population has a low average age. Over 30,000 
children per year attended the children’s A&E, one of the busiest in London. Many 
were carried in by their parents. One mother described how she would rush into 
the hospital with her 9-year-old daughter, who has sickle cell with its high risk of 
disabling strokes, during her child’s sudden bouts of intense pain. Her daughter has 
often had to stay in the hospital, where she would be treated immediately. She has 
needed blood transfusions besides surgery to remove her spleen and gall bladder. 
 The mother said she could not face driving to a distant hospital, when her 
daughter was in such extreme need, and she would have to call an ambulance, but 
she would expect a long, agonising wait before the ambulance even arrived at her 
house.  63  
 Throughout the Inquiry day, the importance of webs of interpersonal and inter-
generational relationships in healthcare systems was emphasised. Every speaker 
directly or indirectly mentioned interpersonal trust, among patients, carers and 
healthcare staff, and among the staff in the hospital and in the community health, 
mental health, social and other services.  64  Coterminous services across the borough 
were vital, meaning that they all serve the same area and population. Junior doctors 
take the risk of sending sick children home earlier if a senior doctor will support 
their decision and if there are personal contacts with community health care staff. 

Economics 69
These ties may be stronger when staff choose to work loyally with speciﬁ c popula-
tions. Lewisham, for example, has ethnically mixed communities, and is the most 
deprived borough in south-east London, with 55 per cent of children living in 
poverty.  65  
 The personal networks among staff and patients are especially vital for people 
with long-term illness, such as sickle cell, who become expert in their own case. 
They rely on continuing care and mutual trust and understanding shared with 
practitioners who know them well. It can be distressing and dangerous for patients 
and families to have to keep meeting and explaining their needs to new staff with 
new views about them and their treatment, especially during crises and emergen-
cies. However, in the plan to disperse care across at least ﬁ ve different boroughs, the 
continuing contacts would be lost and never replaced. One paediatrician explained 
that she personally knew local social workers, but she could never get to know 
teams of them across ﬁ ve boroughs. Similarly, GPs know the local hospital con-
sultants, but not necessarily those in all the surrounding hospitals. Hospital and 
community teams would not be able to rely on close, mutually respectful ties of 
trust if they had only transient, occasional contact when referring patients from 
different boroughs. Such vague contacts could set abused and neglected children, 
with others in great need, at extra risk of being forgotten and lost in care and health 
systems. When potentially life or death decisions about a child are being made, 
interdependence is vital. This is not to say that all local relations are harmonious. 
Yet differences are likely to be resolved more easily with the help of teams of col-
leagues who have worked together for years and who believe that cohesion is in 
all their interests. 
 There are human rights to available, accessible, affordable and acceptable health-
care (UN 1966b). Children’s health care is especially complicated in that the patient–
doctor dyad becomes a triad when parents and other carers are involved. Accessible 
healthcare therefore involves close contacts and also efﬁ cient, cheap transport links 
(in Lewisham 42 per cent of households have no car or van). These links beneﬁ t 
not only the patients, but also the families when visiting and staying with their child 
in hospital, and when arranging with the staff the earliest possible discharge date.  66  
Parents who share in caring for their child in hospital are more ready to continue 
that care at home. And the nearer the family home is to the hospital, the sooner are 
children likely to be sent home.  67  
 Hospitals are paid per patient treated. All the departments threatened with clo-
sure were entry points for patients coming into the hospital for care. Without these 
entry points, the whole hospital and its vital services would soon fail, with too few 
patients ﬂ owing in to make them economically viable. Skilled staff would move to 
higher-grade hospitals. Medical and nurse training would no longer be possible. 
The training ensures that sufﬁ cient staff are always on duty, essential for patient 
safety. The end of training would severely harm not only the one hospital, but the 
health services over future years for loss of those potential staff. Hospitals work as a 
united whole; parts cannot be cut away without damaging the rest of the hospital, 
and the regional and potentially national services. Many staff who train and work in 

70 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Britain return to their country of origin and so beneﬁ t patients all over the world. 
The ethnic diversity in Lewisham broadened the relevant experience of trainee staff 
who would return to work in Africa or Asia for decades to come. 
 2E, contradictions 
 The economics of the Lewisham Hospital closure plan seemed odd and contradic-
tory. First, the government aims to save funds by replacing hospital admissions with 
cheaper care in the community. However, the closure plan would destroy many 
delicate local networks, essential to support care at home and to prevent and reduce 
admissions and the demand for hospital beds. 
 Second, risks would increase for patients, especially during labour, and for 
newborn babies and other young children, when more serious and even lethal 
complications could rapidly develop if they had to make the slow journey during 
emergencies to another hospital. And the complications would likely require longer 
and more expensive inpatient and other care. 
 Third, the area plans involved closing 600 beds but opening almost 200 new 
beds in the other hospitals. Costly new and extra departments would have to be 
built, while two thirds of Lewisham hospital, which had recently had expensive 
upgrades, including a £12 million high grade children’s unit, were planned to be 
demolished. Demolition alone would cost an estimated £56 million. There would 
also be many high-cost staff redundancy and recruitment payments. The NHS had 
recently made redundancy payments of £95 million to senior managers, many of 
whom were then re-employed.  68  
 A fourth odd feature of the closure plan was that Lewisham was unusual in 
being well-run and solvent, unlike neighbouring hospitals, which faced chaos and 
bankruptcy because of huge PFI repayments. Two of the neighbouring hospitals 
cost a total of £214 million to build in 1998. However, to ‘lease’ the buildings 
and pay for non-clinical services provided by PFI companies, over 30 years the 
NHS will pay an estimated £2.574 billion, around 12 times the original cost. The 
charge grows annually (Lister 2012, 23). For nearly two decades, instead of building 
hospitals and schools on more cheaply borrowed government funding, health and 
education authorities have been forced to sign contracts with private companies to 
build and run services. Even after repayments are completed, the buildings will still 
belong to the companies. Interest rates are between six and 15 per cent. Massive 
‘running costs’ may involve the PFI companies charging around £300 to replace 
a light bulb. PFI school contracts can mean paying for daily school meals for all 
the children, even for years after a Local Authority had decided to close the school 
(Ball 2007; Pollock 2005). The conditions look ludicrous, but they are drawn up 
by lawyers and accountants whom large ﬁ nancial companies can afford to employ 
to outwit local government staff, and ‘conﬁ dential’ contracts cannot be challenged. 
In the agreed terms, any attempt to alter or end a contract could cost even more 
than the repayments, which devour funds desperately needed for clinical care and 
staff salaries. 

Economics 71
 It would seem prudent to close the indebted hospitals, instead of parts of the 
well-run, solvent hospital in Lewisham, though by 2037 Lewisham will have to 
have paid a smaller but still large £314 million for a £58 million building, plus 
further inﬂ ation costs. And it seems odd to close non-PFI beds but replace them 
with new PFI beds, thus increasing the debts. The NHS is further squeezed by 
the steeply rising costs of demographic changes, including the rising birth rate 
and the ageing population, the costs of huge reorganisation, and new epidem-
ics such as diabetes and obesity. Type II diabetes, once a disease of older people, 
now afﬂ icts children as young as 8 years. The South London area was further hit 
by massive new cuts, 16 per cent of total NHS budget over three years, to come 
out of clinical care funds. That would require 140 doctors and over 400 nurses to 
be sacked, nursing posts to be down-graded to assistant posts, and another 90 to 
100 beds to be closed, although their PFI repayment must still be made, without 
the income from the missing patients. Vital services such as the 24-hour blood 
bank would go. 
 Other services in nearby boroughs, including a whole children’s hospital and a 
large children’s department, had been closed, leaving the rest already over-burdened. 
Yet a ﬁ fth oddity of the plan was the lack of funding and planning to help other 
hospitals to cope with transfers from Lewisham. An estimated 70 very urgent cases 
attended A&E each day (25,000 a year) and there were around 2,500 highest-
risk and complicated births each year, all too serious to be treated at a down-
graded Lewisham Hospital, and none helped by slow journeys to other hospitals. 
The 274,000 Lewisham residents have high rates of deprivation associated with 
diabetes, bleeding in pregnancy, childhood illness, sickle cell crises and higher mor-
tality rates. Lewisham has the highest birth rate and disability levels, and numbers 
of children aged under ﬁ ve and under 16, in southeast London, besides the joint 
third highest teenage pregnancy rate in England. It is not clear where the annual 
18,400 A&E cases would get help, or the 6,000 plus rapid treatment admissions, 
or the 1,500 short stay children (30 children per week), or many of the 35,000 
elective inpatients, or the 31,000 annual urgent referrals by GPs. GPs would not 
refer patients to a downgraded hospital staffed by other GPs, when they needed to 
see an expert specialist. With their highly trained specialist staff, Lewisham’s chil-
dren’s, neonatal and fetal medicine departments received patients from other hos-
pitals. Yet nothing was said of children’s needs in the report about the closure plans 
(Lister 2012, 16; SLHT 2012). 
 Finally, if governments were so convinced that their privatising plans would 
improve healthcare, why were they silent during the past 25 years and during elec-
tions about the privatising changes they were making? David Cameron promised 
that ‘the NHS is safe in our hands’, adding he would not make any major reforms, 
and he poignantly praised the NHS care for his disabled son who later died. Yet 
when elected in 2010, his government immediately began the greatest upheaval 
since 1948. The Labour party continued the pretence that they supported the NHS 
based on social justice, while passing policies that allowed it to be taken over by 
commerce.  69  

72 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 2E, relationships of care 
 Healing work involves relationships of care and mutual trust, which require time. 
The relationships highlight differences between healthcare time that is allocated 
to speedy commercial targets, or is allocated by respectful social justice. In the fol-
lowing example, 10-year-old disabled Katy described nurses moving beyond cost-
effective, mechanical work and giving her personal respect; extra time beyond the 
necessary minimum; assurance that she could have some control, conﬁ dence and 
trust; physical and emotional nurturing; highly skilled care informed by scientiﬁ c 
research and by emotional rapport; and the hope of better health and mobility. The 
personal interactions as well as the nursing techniques became therapeutic when 
Katy’s pain, which could be increased by fear, was reduced by trust. The example 
might seem insigniﬁ cant, even trivial, but one aspect of social justice is respect for 
the ‘dignity and worth’ of every person (UN 1948, 1989). This exists through innu-
merable personal relationships and daily interactions, when each person’s own small 
concerns are valued. 
 Katy took part in a study of 120 young patients, aged 8 to 15 years, about when 
they and the adults caring for them thought they were old enough to consent 
to major surgery. During her interviews with me, Katy described having stitches 
removed some days after her major orthopaedic surgery. She showed how patient’s 
consent could entail much more than the operation, an easier part when they were 
unconscious. This is why she wanted the stitches to be removed, as she said, ‘in the 
anaesthetic’, when she was unconscious. Many smaller necessary procedures could 
feel even more invasive than surgery. 
 I was ﬁ ne up till then. Then I had two stitches taken out and I screamed the 
place down because I didn’t want it done. But they said I’d be in absolute pain 
if they were left in, so next day I decided to have it done. It took 35 minutes. 
Well, it could have took less than that but they had to keep stopping for me 
to have a drink. It made them frustrated a bit. They were so good. It didn’t 
hurt at all . . . I thought it was going to be so horrible . . . I was going to kill 
myself [but] in the end it was lovely 
 (Alderson 1993, 179–180)   70  
 While respecting Katy’s willing consent, the nurses gave encouragement and 
slight pressure on her to realise how brave she could be. This is not to suggest that 
precious healthcare and time should be squandered, but that the staff had to balance 
the demands of a commercial system, social justice for every patient and excel-
lent care for each one. Commercial structures of healthcare interact with and exist 
through these interpersonal relationships. Katy stoically endured the surgery and 
the following painful days, but then suddenly she protested against the seemingly 
small matter of having stitches removed. It may be that as she was recovering she 
felt more able to express her views strongly about the whole daunting experience. 
She might have felt that, ﬁ nally, she could not cope with one more intervention, 

Economics 73
and she had had more than enough. The young people especially dreaded needles, 
while they lay quite helplessly under the adults’ control, with the violating piercing 
of their skin, a shield everyone can usually rely on unthinkingly to seal them safely 
off from the outer world. At any age, if they fear being ignored, not listened to, 
overwhelmed, people can feel forced to protest loudly as Katy did, especially if they 
cannot resort physically to ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight. Most vitally, Katy felt in some control. 
Three times she told me, ‘I decided to have it done’. 
 At the second plane of social being, human relationships range from the domi-
nation of power 2  when the staff could have made Katy submit, but could have 
harmed her and increased her fear and resistance, across to the shared emancipation 
of power 1,  which felt ‘lovely’ to Katy as she realised she could overcome her fear 
and gain more conﬁ dence and trust in the nurses and in herself. Commercial pres-
sures on nursing assistants giving care at home allow them 15 or 20 minutes per 
visit but no payment for the time they spend driving between visits. They say they 
cannot give adequate care in the time allowed. On those terms, Katy’s nurses in the 
hospital would have to act quickly, by force if necessary, and would not have time 
for respectful relationships. 
 2E interventions raise puzzling contradictions when policy makers claim to 
be beneﬁ tting the NHS, but are actually dismantling it. Can larger analysis at 3L 
explain and perhaps resolve these contradictions? 
 Third level 3L, totalities, commerce and social justice 
 Commerce helps to explain government policies. John Lister (2012, 32–3) con-
cluded his review of the government’s report on closing Lewisham hospital (SLHT 
2012) saying that the ‘bogus’, ‘fantasy’ healthcare plans were based on inaccurate 
and missing data. The data were mainly supplied by the business consultancies 
McKinseys and Deloitte, which serve private health and PFI companies. Their plans 
would not beneﬁ t the deprived borough of Lewisham, but instead ‘the two disastrous 
PFI contracts [in neighbouring boroughs’ hospitals, which] are left intact [while] 
proﬁ ts stream to the shareholders . . . hundreds of millions in taxpayers’ money are 
to be pumped in to subsidise the contracts, while vital NHS services are cut’, partly 
by closing most of Lewisham Hospital and selling off two thirds of the site. 
 Transport to some of the other hospitals was so difﬁ cult because their prime 
town centre sites had been sold. The hospitals had been rebuilt on cheaper rural 
land, remote from town centres and main transport links and with exorbitant park-
ing fees. Lewisham hospital, however, still stretched along a large, long, high street 
site, so that the sale could command an immense price. But the people of Lewisham 
would then lose many easily accessed services, as well as any income from the sale of 
the hospital site, and they would end up paying huge PFI debts for any new build-
ings at Lewisham besides, as mentioned, £millions on building-clearance costs and 
staff redundancies. 
 PFIs involve intergenerational injustice in that older generations have enjoyed 
the precious amenities (hospitals, schools) all their lives, as common goods paid for 

74 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
by taxes or by charitable donations from the communities, sometimes given over 
centuries. Public shared ownership is being sold off, leaving younger generations 
with poorer services and higher debt repayments. PFIs drain away funds needed in 
future: to pay for staff salaries and clinical care; to repair and replace ageing struc-
tures; to alter services in order to ﬁ t new, not yet known needs, and provide new 
treatments in new ways. Instead of planning for the future, tomorrow’s health ser-
vices are being burdened with past decisions and debts. Governments resort to PFIs 
partly because they ‘cook the books’. They provide massive, quickly won beneﬁ ts 
of new buildings and resources, schools and hospitals, which ministers can open to 
public applause, without needing to appear in the annual reports of government 
spending and debts. However, the debts exist, and at an immensely greater level 
than they would if governments had borrowed and directly granted funds for the 
new services, since governments borrow at much lower interest rates than com-
mercial companies can. 
 A much larger, more serious intergenerational deﬁ cit has arisen through dif-
ferent miscalculations by governments and ﬁ nancial services from around 1990 to 
2008. They expected that proﬁ ts and property prices would carry on rising, and 
so would cancel out debts through increasing income and inﬂ ation. In 2008, the 
opposite occurred and property prices and banks collapsed. It is ever clearer that 
the years  1950–2008 were probably the most prosperous for many in the whole of 
human history, although globally relatively few people enjoyed the immense wealth 
then, and fewer still do subsequently. Each year, despite the increase in millionaires, 
a diminishing number of people in the top 0.001 per cent possess more of the 
global wealth. During the prosperous years, states, companies and individuals spent 
stupendous amounts, yet borrowed (from the future) to spend even more. Property 
prices rose again from around 2010, though they are likely to form another bubble 
that will inevitably burst. PFIs extract wealth from the public and the commons to 
concentrate it into ever fewer hands. 
 Although they massively increase inequalities between rich and poor, PFIs 
are used in over 134 disadvantaged countries (Hildyard 2014). Around 2 million 
people live in Lesotho, an extremely poor, landlocked state within South Africa. 
An estimated one third of the population is aged under 15 years, and more than 
one half is aged under 25 years.  71  Although 99 per cent of the costs of the new PFI 
hospital in Lesotho were paid from government funds, all proﬁ ts go to the private 
sector that paid only one per cent. The hospital is a conduit through which desper-
ately needed public money ﬂ ows abroad into tax havens. The people need primary 
healthcare staff more than trophy buildings. PFIs impose the further costs of many 
highly paid agents: private equity, hedge fund and venture capitalists; private banks 
and pension funds; lawyers who back private against state interests by designing 
legally binding, decades-long contracts. PFI contracts are planned to defeat any 
attempts by future governments to change laws and free their people from this 
bondage. ‘Incentives’ for state ofﬁ cials to cooperate with PFIs add to the costs, while 
governments increasingly serve private, not public, interests (Hildyard 2014) and 
commerce, not social justice. 

Economics 75
 PFIs are only part of the sale of the whole NHS.  72  Buildings, staff and services 
are increasingly being bought up by private companies, though they are still mainly 
run with funds from taxpayers. The difference is that instead of taxes through the 
NHS going wholly into healthcare, taxes now also pay for companies’ expen-
sive layers of managers, accountants, lawyers, PR, advertising, shareholders and 
reorganisation. Every transaction and item of care expensively has to be priced 
and recorded in the NHS ‘internal market’, and there are the huge added costs of 
setting targets, monitoring and inspection. The secret price of administering the 
privatisations and contracts is estimated to be between £4 billion and £30 billion 
per annum.  73  They are pushing hospitals to ‘breaking point’.  74  
 One of the ﬁ rst NHS sales was of the services for vulnerable adults and children 
in Surrey and Devon, bought by Virgin for £630 million (Pollock 2012). Not only 
is Virgin hardly a well-known healthcare provider, but in addition, the company’s 
long-term record on buying up another former nationally owned asset, railways, 
disadvantages the public in four ways: Virgin rail is accused of milking taxpayers, 
overly rewarding shareholders, avoiding taxes and providing a poorer service than 
state-owned European railways provide.  75  Serco is another company venturing into 
healthcare with a record of fraud convictions.  76  
 The mass media publish many criticisms of the NHS alongside burgeoning 
advertising for private health insurance for adults rather than children. Whereas the 
NHS aims for everyone to have access to the best care according to clinical need, 
insurance companies for private healthcare rely on a two-tier service based on abil-
ity to pay. Adults will only pay for a ﬁ rst-rate, private, insured care if they feel that 
they need to escape from a second-rate public care service. It was estimated that 
in the USA in 2006 (before the 2008 ﬁ nancial crisis) over one quarter of children, 
23.7 million, had no healthcare cover, or only partial cover, or else their families 
could not afford the transport fares to access the healthcare.  77  The average total 
price charged for pregnancy, normal birth and newborn care in the USA in 2013 
was about $30,000 and, for a caesarean section, $50,000.  78  Commercial insurers 
paid an average of $18,329, and for caesareans $27,866, leaving families to meet the 
difference, which bankrupted many of them. Over 40 per cent of new mothers had 
access only to unpaid maternity leave so that, if they wished to take any leave at 
all, many had to resign from work, losing their salary and health insurance. Despite 
having the most expensive care, 50 per cent more babies die during their ﬁ rst day 
in the USA than in any other industrialized nation surveyed.  79  Obamacare might 
improve matters, but that is uncertain.  80  
 3L, the gift relationship 
 Nevertheless, the English NHS is being moved inexorably towards the USA 
model. One example is when the NHS-owned company that supplied safe blood 
plasma for transfusions on which thousands of patients depend, including children 
with thalassaemia who need monthly transfusions, was sold to Bain Capital. This 
American private equity ﬁ rm is known for aggressive asset-stripping: sacking staff 

76 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
and selling every spare asset, ‘siphoning off’ any former public wealth into private 
interests, then selling the much reduced company at a proﬁ t. The ﬁ rm owns the 
(hardly healthy) Burger King, Domino’s Pizza, Dunkin’ Donuts and much else. Mitt 
Romney’s efforts in 2012 to be the elected USA President failed partly because he 
was ‘accused of massive Medicare fraud’ and tax evasion through Bain Capital.  81  
Democratic, accountable government oversight of the plasma services is vital, when 
the risks of spreading infection through donated plasma are so high. In the 1990s, 
many children with haemophilia were infected by blood transfusions contaminated 
with HIV/AIDS, before the government agreed, under public pressure, to screen all 
donated blood for that infection. 
 The sale is highly symbolic. The British blood transfusion service epitomises the 
gift relationship, when donors freely give their own blood for strangers to receive, 
not knowing if one day they and those they love might in turn need to receive 
such an anonymous gift (Titmuss 1971). Donors also give organs, other tissue and 
eggs.  82  The win-win of donation is that donated blood tends to be of better qual-
ity and more trustworthy than when it is bought, as in the USA. Payments attract 
destitute people who are likely to have HIV/AIDS, hepatitis and other blood-
borne diseases, some of which can be screened for, others not. Another advantage of 
blood donation (versus sale) is the formal system of altruism that literally binds the 
nation together through interdependent blood ties. There are around 2 million 
blood donors in England and Wales, and the service needs 10,000 units per day.  83  
However, when the service turns into a business run to proﬁ t the shareholders, this 
will not encourage donors or advantage the highly expensive and expert systems 
necessary to run the service. 
 Before 1948, illness and death rates among poor children like Marion Smith were 
as high as is now assumed only to occur in the poorest countries. Immense advances 
in medical science and care helped to reduce this suffering, but the NHS crucially 
helped to promote these advances. Through the present loss of welfare services and 
beneﬁ ts that vitally protect health, England risks returning to its pre-1948 state, 
which is like healthcare in many majority world countries (Smith 2014). In South 
Africa, for instance, half the healthcare goes to only 16 per cent of the people, and is 
provided by world leading private companies.  84  Among poor young South Africans, 
HIV/AIDS rates are soaring. It was estimated that even small government child sup-
port grants could help to cut HIV infection rates among 77,000 teenage girls, who 
would not need to start relationships with older men in order to pay for their food 
and school fees. Deaths among 10- to 19-year-olds have doubled, and two thirds of 
them are of young women. Although 40 per cent of new infections in Malawi are 
among teenagers, a cash beneﬁ t scheme has lowered their HIV infection rates.  85  The 
examples illustrate how healthcare services and support confer gifts of health and life. 
 3L, sale by stealth 
 (Davis and Tallis 2013; Davis and Wrigley 2013; Davis et al. 2015; Hunter 2013; 
Leys and Player 2011; Lister 2013; Manson 2012; Meek 2014; Pollock et al. 2013; 
Wainwright 2014) 

Economics 77
 Given that the NHS has generally been so successful and popular, why is it being 
broken up in England? Some, like Harry Smith, say that too few people remem-
ber the huge relief in 1948 when the harsh times of mainly private care ended. 
If the initial plans to privatise around 1990 had been made public, protests might 
have prevented the changes. Others mention the vast sums spent by healthcare 
industries on lobbying the government and controlling the mass media. There is 
the open door through which politicians, civil servants and business directors and 
advisers constantly change places.  86  Well-paid editors and journalists want to please 
those who own and advertise in their newspapers; they may personally use private 
healthcare and no longer identify with the ‘99 per cent’ of people. Like other radio 
and television services, the BBC rarely mentions or explains the privatisation. The 
medical professional associations were partly silenced and bribed into believing that 
GPs would lead the new health services, realising far too late that private companies 
would sooner or later take over that work. GPs have always had independent con-
tracts, and many of them adopt a business model of healthcare. 
 Opinion-leaders, with politicians in all main parties, deny the detailed plans 
to privatise, or they conceal their support for the plans. They aim to soften public 
opinion by claiming the NHS (like all public services) is a luxury the nation cannot 
afford, or that it can only be efﬁ cient in private hands. They foment the resentment 
of taxpayers who can afford private care by blaming service users as undeserving 
‘scroungers and skivers’. 
 To summarise the opposite views, NHS supporters reply that the NHS opened 
in 1948 at a time of extreme debt and austerity. It is the most cost-effective, coordi-
nated health service in the world, whereas the planned model copied from the USA 
is far more expensive and far less effective. Everyone beneﬁ ts when inequalities, 
including health inequalities and their very costly effects, are reduced, which the 
NHS has done much to achieve. The dogma that private services work best is often 
refuted in reality.  87  The main remedies for the reported NHS deﬁ ciencies include 
training, employing, supporting and paying more staff adequately, and improving 
their working conditions and the time they can give to patients, in order to help all 
services to be as good as the many best ones. 
 Yet if these remedies are mentioned, they are quickly dismissed as commercially 
unviable. The adult-centric debate is moving between totalities, turning national 
consensus away from cooperative social justice towards competitive commerce. 
 3L, the proﬁ t motive 
 By renaming, and seeming to champion, patients and other service users such as 
students as ‘consumers’, the government can appear to give them more power and 
choice, while actually reducing these. Collini (2012, 2013) noted changes in higher 
education which are like the NHS reforms: inability of the main organising quangos 
(HEFCE for universities and Monitor for healthcare) to organise services within 
contradictory new laws; growing micromanagement by ministers; crude, inappro-
priate assessments of services; the government blaming education (and NHS) ser-
vices and staff for the government’s own failings; fragmented, disorganised systems 

78 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
and resulting chaos for service users; drive towards a two-tier service separating the 
elite from the masses; absence of democratic information or debate about policies; 
massive increases in public spending channelled towards private providers, despite 
claims to reduce public costs; insistence, against international evidence, that educa-
tion (and health) are best supplied through the market, not the state. 
 Collini (2013) summarised present policy: ‘Proﬁ t is the only indefeasible goal, 
competition the only effective mechanism.’ He asked why British businesses are 
proposed as the model for all national agencies, despite the very mixed records of 
many businesses, their gigantic losses, their failures by international comparison 
and their limited beneﬁ t to weaker, needier groups. Contested business methods 
are being forced onto the successful working models set by the present free entry 
(social justice) museums and galleries, the BBC, the universities, the NHS, all with 
their universally acknowledged creativity, ‘streets ahead of most of their interna-
tional peers, positive forces for human development and social cohesion’. This por-
tends a great loss for everyone in future, Collini argues. He regards education (like 
health), not as a consumer good, but a positional good, in that its full value may 
not be fully appreciated in advance by its cost, but only after years of enjoying its 
beneﬁ ts. He criticises the fallacy and ‘the breathtaking conﬁ dence . . .  that price is the 
single best indicator  of quality’ (my emphasis; price will be reviewed in Chapter 11). 
 In the 1940s, Aneurin Bevan wanted to ensure universal services and beneﬁ ts, 
so that everyone knew they could fall back on a strong safety net if need be, and 
therefore they would all be willing to pay taxes. This addresses the main problem 
that those who contribute least include those in greatest need, such as people with 
long-term illness or disability, including children who have never had the chance to 
pay income tax. Justice includes some interpersonal altruism, knowing that every-
one’s best interests are shared when they all help to reduce costly illness, infection, 
disability and suffering and to regenerate the greatest wealth – the health and well-
being of the people. Universal health care free at the point of need promotes the 
happiness and the freedom from fear of illness and penury that are the grounds of 
just societies. 
 To commercialise health services for proﬁ t sets groups into alienating opposition. 
Immigrants, failed asylum seekers and non-European students, for example, have 
been accused of ‘health tourism’ and of ‘stealing’ health services funded by taxpayers 
by up to £200 million (though ofﬁ cial ﬁ gures put the cost at £33 million).  88  Ironi-
cally, for decades the continued existence of the NHS has depended on immigrant 
staff, including numerous trained practitioners recruited from countries with far 
greater needs than Britain has and from which many immigrants arrive. 
 One totality sees commerce as the only effective way to generate the wealth and 
proﬁ t that fund health services. The other totality of social justice sees the high costs 
and inequalities of the commercial world as among the causes of ill health when it 
arises from the poverty and debt of those who do not have clean water, nutritious 
food, adequate housing or safe, rewarding work. Many healthcare staff feel called 
to their vocation for its challenges and satisfactions rather than its salaries, for its 
complex therapeutic relationships when healing bodies, minds and spirits, helping 

Economics 79
children and adults to overcome the constraints of illness and disability. Like 1M, 
3L is a stage of pre-active reﬂ ection, when national debates need to attend to large 
questions about contradictions, priorities and how to balance commerce and jus-
tice, proﬁ t and care. 
 3L, philanthropy 
 Healthcare and children’s charities, through the churches, philanthropists and pub-
lic donations, founded healthcare services and orphanages in Britain centuries ago, 
and they continue to provide vital services. For example, they organise the hospice 
movement and much of the support given to the estimated 49,000 children and 
young people in the UK who live with a life-threatening or life-limiting condi-
tion.  89  Charities and NGOs do much good in identifying and meeting serious 
needs, ﬁ lling gaps left by other services, and initiating new services, such as when 
charities in eighteenth and nineteenth century England began to rescue aban-
doned and abused children.  90  NGOs’ highly specialised expertise is shown, for 
instance, by the dedicated support and rescue services they swiftly supply during 
emergencies. 
 Charities help to maintain high standards in state services when they offer inde-
pendent evaluations and advice, train staff, and when they demonstrate excellence 
by example in their own services. Their most important work may be organised 
political advocacy when they highlight gaps and failings in state services and cam-
paign for improvements, such as the Child Poverty Action Group. The Children’s 
Rights Alliance for England monitors every year how well (or not) the government 
is implementing the UN (1989)  Convention on the Rights of the Child  (CRAE 2014). 
Campaigns in the past have included pressure on all hospitals to allow parents to 
visit and stay with their sick children (Alderson 2015; Platt 1959) and to close the 
giant, isolated ‘sub-normality’ hospitals where children with learning difﬁ culties 
were conﬁ ned for life (Jay 1979; Oswin 1973). 
 However, charities can hold an awkward position between social justice and 
commerce. They seem to be on the side of social justice, but they set up contra-
dictions if they undermine or replace vital services that the state could or should 
provide. Politicians soften news about privatising the NHS, when they stress that 
voluntary organisations may apply to run the services, as if this will improve and 
humanise them. Governments silence NGOs’ vital campaigning work when they 
deny the criticisms, or tighten the law that prevents charities from being ‘political’,  91  
or pay charities to supplement state services, as Barnardo’s, NSPCC, the Children’s 
Society and many others do. The NGOs then may be kept too busy with fundrais-
ing and providing services to have time for protests. If they have contracts, funding 
and an enhanced reputation for their government commissioned work, they do not 
want to risk forfeiting these by criticising government policies, even if these poli-
cies harm the drug-dependent or asylum-seeking children and young people they 
care for.  92  There is also now a ‘purdah’ or silence imposed on NGOs in the weeks 
before elections to ban any campaigning and political public statements.  93  

80 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 The charities’ dilemma, either to supplement inadequate state services, or to cam-
paign and pressure the state to provide adequate services, was crystallised by Florence 
Nightingale and Henry Dunant (Polman 2011). During the Crimean War from 1854, 
Florence Nightingale believed that governments should be forced to take practical 
responsibility for the health of the men and the many boys (Honwana 2006) in their 
armies and navies, who were far more likely to die from the unhealthy conditions 
in camps and on ships than during battles. She worked for decades with the govern-
ment to reform military healthcare, to found the nursing profession, to collect health 
statistics, design efﬁ cient hospitals, hold Royal Commissions and achieve sanitary 
reforms. In 1859, Henri Dunant witnessed the suffering where 23,000 soldiers lay 
wounded, dying or dead after the battle at Solferino. He founded the International 
Committee of the Red Cross in 1863, believing that independent philanthropy was 
the only way to ensure the fair medical treatment of all the military, whereas govern-
ments would favour their own forces and neglect the enemy wounded. 
 In 2014, the NGOs Save the Children,  94  Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) and 
others showed the great beneﬁ ts of Dunant’s legacy of rapidly delivered aid during the 
Ebola crisis in West Africa. Yet MSF complained that they should not have to be the 
sole leaders of prompt care, with governments and the rundown UN World Health 
Organisation being so tardy.  95  The governments had presided over decades of lethally 
mismanaged health services. NGOs are needed that campaign for justice and reform in 
national and global policies, rather than trying to subsidise and prop up these regimes. 
 NGOs provide immense beneﬁ ts, but there are also serious disadvantages when 
they compete to raise funds and duplicate one another’s services (Polman 2011). 
Many larger NGOs are run on big business lines, on commercial rather than social 
justice values. They tend to care for groups that are likely to appeal to donors, but 
to neglect less popular though very needy groups. Research into the ‘white’ blood 
cells of children’s cancer is very generously funded, but research into the ‘black’ 
blood cells of sickle cell disease is not. NGOs’ services may be reshaped and re-
presented in terms that please the donors, but which might not help the photogenic 
children displayed in the appeals. Disabled people have long argued that they do 
not want to be portrayed as objects of pity and charity. Instead they need reliable, 
accountable, and fairly planned and coordinated state services as their right, whereas 
philanthropic services can be arbitrary and unreliable, and funds might be with-
drawn at any time (Oliver 1990). When NGOs hold lavish fundraising events with 
celebrities and wealthy elites, alongside the generous donations is celebration of the 
wealth and inequality, which create much disadvantage and need that force children 
and adults to depend on charity. The events can increase complacence among the 
rich and the illusion that they are personally kind and generous, which disregards 
the harshly unjust political systems they sustain. 
 The Millennium Development Goals (MDG) were chosen by leading policy 
makers and NGOs, but not by those who were supposed to beneﬁ t, and they 
have had mixed effects (Seabrook 2007; Wilson 2014). MDG 4 is to reduce by 
two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the mortality rate of children aged under ﬁ ve 
years. The goal has not been met, though great progress has been made, especially 
in Rwanda, where it is estimated 509,000 children’s lives have been saved since 

Economics 81
2000. Agnes Binagwaho, the Minister of Health and a former paediatrician, set up 
a national system of 45,000 community health workers, three per village. They 
record all their contacts, healthcare activities and the outcomes on their mobile 
phones, and are paid by results. Unlike most countries, Rwandan policy concen-
trated on reaching every child and family, however hard it was to make contact 
with them, when working to reduce the four main causes of child death: malaria, 
pneumonia, TB and diarrhoea.  96  The example shows how essential taking health 
care out to the people through government planning and authority can be to create 
and sustain such far-reaching change. 
 Vague NGO slogans such as ‘make poverty history’ have proved to be empty,  97  
and falsely optimistic reports  by  unaccountable NGOs may seriously weaken gov-
ernments and democracy and struggles for justice and reform. After the earthquake 
in Haiti in 2010 killed over 250,000 people, billions of dollars were pledged in aid, 
but hundreds of thousands of children and adults still live in tent cities.  98  Numerous 
NGOs in Africa work within oppressive and fraudulent systems (Davis 2007, 75f). 
In Asia, ‘their effort is constantly to divert people’s attention from the larger political 
evils of imperialism to merely local issues’ (Das 1995). That turns the political into 
the personal, and attends to commercial remedies instead of to causal social injustice. 
 There are over 164,000 registered charities of all kinds in Britain.  99  Many for 
medical care and research are set up by bereaved parents in memory of their child, 
before they realise the time, the very high costs, and the administrative and fund-
raising skills needed to run a charity. Advances in care owe much to these charities. 
The charities claim to speak for patients, but they can be used by their commercial 
sponsors. Pharmaceutical and other corporations planned to use charities to lobby 
against the much-needed public register of drug trials, alleging that open records 
might be misinterpreted and cause a health scare or violate patients’ privacy.  100  Even 
NGOs who saw through that deception could be loath to protest and to risk losing 
the companies’ funding. 
 In Britain, thousands of healthcare charities have been almost silent about the 
privatising of the NHS (Huitson 2013), and some actively promote privatising.  101  
Charities publicise sad personal stories, which complain that patients are neglected, 
or denied costly treatments, and they plead for better care. These accounts generally 
increase public unease about the state-run NHS and they call for ‘reform’, code for 
‘privatise’ the NHS, as the sponsors intend. NGO pressures led to a special NHS 
fund for cancer patients being set up, which pushed up cancer medication prices.  102  
Yet the special fund erodes the extremely complicated social justice of aiming to 
share NHS resources fairly. 
 How can limited funds and resources best be shared among all the British chil-
dren in need (let alone internationally) to promote their health and to reduce and 
prevent suffering? A few extra weeks of life on painful chemotherapy is not always 
what dying children would desire. And the £100,000s for one child might be spent 
on effective care or modest research to beneﬁ t hundreds of children in great need. 
The debates are complicated by heart-rending accounts of children’s brave suffer-
ing, such as ﬁ ve-year-old Ashya King. After surgery to remove his brain tumour, 
Ashya’s parents wanted him to have proton treatment, which his English doctors 

82 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
did not advise, and so they took him abroad to obtain the treatment. The media 
glossed over the complications and ethics of the treatment decision, and reported 
a heroic ﬁ ght with the NHS. ‘This is the incredible moment brave brain tumour 
patient Ashya King took his ﬁ rst steps on the road to recovery after his parents’ long 
battle for pioneering therapy. Five-year-old Ashya managed to raise his arm and 
give a wave.’  103  The English hospital was pressured into paying for Ashya’s treatment 
abroad and purchasing proton beam equipment.  104  
 Venture philanthropy merges still more into commerce. It aims to invest dona-
tions in projects that will yield proﬁ ts and promote economic growth. The British 
Department for International Development (DfID) gives ‘aid’ to build shopping 
malls in Ethiopia, for example, or to buy British arms to ‘donate’ to majority world 
countries.  105  The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation joined Save the Children 
and other NGOs to devise more effective ways ‘to market international develop-
ment to an increasingly sceptical public’.  106  Gates promotes privatised water ser-
vices as the solution for the 2.5 billion people without sanitation and to prevent 
the 700,000 child deaths each year from diarrhoea.  107  The foundation promotes 
PFIs and partners with GlaxoSmithKlein  108  to centralise control of the world public 
health market of vaccines, believing they beneﬁ t the majority world, despite the 
much higher prices they charge to UNICEF. Gates makes grants for healthcare 
and research largely to USA and UK companies, and gives direct grants to Africa 
only on condition that related public health services are sold and privatised.  109  
Bill Gates is proud of his record of forming policy and inﬂ uencing governments 
and UN agencies, such as enforcing the privatising of schools (Bakan 2012; Ball 
2013). Besides overriding democracy, the policies fund high technology, which are 
expensive, minority world remedies for majority world problems, driving the latter 
into further debt and dependence. 
 Commercial philanthropy, supported by the wealthy elite, treats poverty as a 
problem to solve with aid. Yet for 35 years poverty has steadily increased. The Gateses 
are among the 67 people in the world (in 2015) who had more wealth between 
them than the poorest 50 per cent, over 3.5 billion people. If the poverty line were 
set at £2.40 a day, about 3.5 billion people would be living in poverty, and there 
would be 500 million more of them living in extreme poverty than there were in 
1981.  110  Global poverty and associated ill health are largely problems of social injus-
tice after long histories of slavery, colonialism, war, debt, neoliberalism and globalisa-
tion. They require new political and economic remedies (see Chapter 12), including 
Florence Nightingale’s aims to make governments accountable and responsible for 
reducing and preventing their own harmful systems. The 3L global view of open 
totalities of health and ill health interacting with public, private and NGO services 
indicates looming problems, to be reviewed at 4D. 
 Fourth dimension, 4D, commerce and social justice 
 Fourth dimension, 4D, involves critical reﬂ exive analysis, praxis in self-transformative 
agency that moves from power 2 to power 1  on personal and political levels towards 

Economics 83
freedom, solidarity and justice. However, these moves at 4D depend on the prior 1M 
insights, 2E negations and the totalities surveyed at 3L. Commerce and social justice 
are partly complementary and partly conﬂ icting, so to begin at 1M with either of 
them can lead to entirely different 4D insights. The health and wellbeing of the 
most vulnerable children and adults are caught within contradictions and alienat-
ing splits between the alternative systems. The claim to save taxpayers’ hard-earned 
income from being wasted by the state-funded NHS denies the much higher costs 
of private services. ‘Market-style reforms are remarkable in that they consistently 
serve neither to cut costs nor to improve efﬁ ciency. [Those systems] most depen-
dent on private competing providers have the highest overhead costs and waste 
billions while excluding millions [of people] from proper access to health care’ 
(Lister 2013). 
 Social justice seeks connections, unities and interacting open totalities that pro-
mote health through social equality, real change and ﬂ ourishing. Commercially 
dominated healthcare involves dividing individuals and groups by competition and 
inequality. Since the divisions can increase ill health, they set up unresolved theory/
practice inconsistencies and contradictions between claims to promote health and 
actions that jeopardise it. Health becomes a fetish when it is treated as a commod-
ity for sale, and when the social relations that cause illness and suffering are masked 
and denied. Social relations within healthcare are also denied, whereas social justice 
respects them as part of healing care. 
 The question remains: why do present governments serve the wealthy few 
against the many, while professing to serve everyone’s interests? Motives may 
include: self-interest and personal proﬁ t; loyalty to (wealthy) friends and allies; the 
belief that governments rightly serve the successful and therefore deserving elite, 
and that this is the best way to generate wealth that eventually trickles down to 
beneﬁ t all. However, advocates of social justice allege: ‘In the absence of supporting 
evidence, we can only conclude that today’s NHS reforms are driven by ideology’ 
that favours competitive markets over the public interest. Politicians seem to know 
how unpopular their ideology is (Coote and Penny 2014, 46). Policy is driven by 
a small political and academic elite funded by the private sector desiring to access 
over $5 trillion spent annually on global healthcare, mainly from taxed state funds 
(Lister 2013). 
 Reﬂ ecting back to earlier MELD stages highlights contradictions between such 
examples as Marion’s short life and attempts to close hospitals and inter-related 
local services, versus the inclusive NHS and experiences such as Katy’s of inter-
personal care. Health service users are encouraged to set their own and their 
children’s interests ﬁ rst. Yet rational individual decisions can add up to chaotic 
policies and practices. C. Wright Mills (1959, 7, 11–12) warned against reducing 
the political and public into the personal and private. The sociological imagina-
tion is the 
 capacity to range from the most impersonal and remote transformations 
to the most intimate features of the human self [and to] see the relations 

84 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
between the two . . . [Without this insight and uneasiness] many decisions of 
enormous structural relevance never become public issues . . . [and indiffer-
ence] itself is the trouble . . . It is now the social scientist’s foremost political 
and intellectual task to make clear the elements of contemporary uneasiness 
and indifference [in the unruly forces in society] with its alienating methods 
of production . . . political domination, its international anarchy . . . its perva-
sive transformations of the very ‘nature’ of man [sic] and the conditions and 
aims of life. 
 Similarly, Henry Giroux contended that market-driven systems ‘appear to 
remove economic and political decisions, critical thought and social responsibil-
ity’ from social costs. A depoliticization ‘works its way through the social order, 
removing social relations from the conﬁ gurations of power that shape them’ turn-
ing problems and solutions from political into emotional and personal ones. Giroux 
believed that it is hard 
 for young people too often bereft of a critical education to translate private 
troubles into public concerns. As private interests trump the public good, 
public spaces are corroded, and short-term personal advantage replaces any 
larger notion of civic engagement and social responsibility.  111  
 That can block the self-aware, shared, conscious work for change needed at 4D. 
 Differences between alienating commerce and connecting relations of social 
justice and the arguments that support each may be plain. So too are the poten-
tially extreme differences for most children’s lives and wellbeing, epitomised in the 
contrasting experiences of Marion and Katy described earlier. Yet the deeper causes 
and ideologies that lead individuals to adopt one course and reject the other, with 
Mills’s ‘unruly force’, are less obvious. The next chapter will examine the powerful 
appeal of the different value systems, with structures and processes that lead to the 
dominance of one or other system. 
 Chapter 10, Economics 
 Dates denote time of publication. All website addresses were checked for access on 
2 March 2015 unless noted otherwise.  
Notes 
1.  And see Joseph Rowntree Foundation (www.jrf.org.uk) and Child Poverty Action Group 
(www.cpag.org.uk). 
 2 .  Public child health services were set up after the army was shocked at the unhealthy state 
of the nation’s young men when recruiting soldiers for the Boer War in 1902. 
 3 .  India Drug-makers Launch Coalition to Stop Big Pharma from Trashing Generics, 
26 June 2014, http://www.pharmamanufacturing.com/industrynews/2014/india-drug
makers-launch-coalition-generics-rep/. 

Economics 85
 4 .  Kaiman, J. (2013) Healthcare in China: GSK claims prompt crackdown on corruption, 
 Observer , 21 July. 
 5 .  Watts, J. (2006) Boy’s death sparks riots over China health costs,  Guardian Weekly, 
 13 November. 
 6 .  https://www.opendemocracy.net/5050/amber-huff/ebola-exposing-failure-of-
international-development. 
 7 .  Boseley, S. (2014) Fears that maternal death rates in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea 
could increase 20-fold as health facilities collapse,  Guardian , 10 November; www.dec.
org.uk. 
 8 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-25869838.  
 9 .  http://sicklecellsociety.org/. 
 10 .  Angastiniotis, M., Kyriakidou, S. Hadjiminas, M. (1986) How thalassaemia was controlled 
in Cyprus,  World Health Forum,  291–97. 
 11 .  The Department of Public Health and Policy, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 
3GB, UK. 
 12 .  Taylor-Robinson, D., Whitehead, M. and Barr, B. (2014) Great leap backwards,  Brit-
ish Medical Journal , 349, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7350. See also www.cpag.
org.uk; www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2014-report; www.
unicef-irc.org/publications/733. 
 13 .  Taylor-Robinson, D., Bowles, J., Barr, B. and Whitehead, M. (2014) Child mortality in 
the UK,  Lancet , 384: 1923. 
 14 .  www.cles.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Due-North-Report-of-the-Inquiry-on-
Health-Equity-in-the-North-ﬁ nal1.pdf. 
 15 .  There is concern about inadequate services and incomplete, out-of-date records. By 
2014, the most recent national report was still Costello, J. et al. (2003) Prevalence and 
development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence,  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 
 837–44; House of Commons Health Committee (2014) Third Report:  Children’s and 
Adolescents’ Mental Health and CAMHS.  London: House of Commons. http://www.
publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmhealth/342/34202.htm.  
 16 .  http://www.youngminds.org.uk/news/blog. 
 17 .  Royal College of Nursing, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-30150747, 10 February 
2015. 
 18 .  House of Commons Health Committee (2014) Third Report:  Children’s and Adolescents’ 
Mental Health and CAMHS.  London: House of Commons. http://www.publications.
parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmhealth/342/34202.htm. Although the Home 
Secretary banned this practice in December 2014, without alternative refuge it is not 
clear where the young people will go when they might harm themselves or others. 
 19 .  Hansard , 5 November 2014, Prime Minister’s Question Time, and response from Depart-
ment of Education. 
 20 .  Layard, R. (2014) Mental illness treatment needs massive investment. The case is over-
whelming,  Guardian , 1 July. 
 21 .  Instead of repeatedly referring to these many sources, I have summarised central ideas 
which most of the authors advance in whole or in part. 
 22 .  ‘Mindfulness for children’ found about 18 million results on Google, and ‘children CBT’ 
over 38 million.  
 23 .  Even divinely ordained, as in Alexander’s children’s hymn, 1848: ‘The rich man in his 
castle/ the poor man at his gate/ God made them high and lowly/ and ordered their 
estate’.  
 24 .  http://www.oxfam.org.uk/get-involved/campaign-with-us/ﬁ nd-an-action/even-
it-up?pscid=ps_ggl_Campaigns_EvenItUp&gclid=Cj0KEQiAs6GjBRCy2My09a
n6uNIBEiQANfY4zF_Z0FFXpsIRfqPLMJzAvz-VLcgvCvjYlAkAIbYkJ4caAvL
78P8HAQ,. 
 25 .  http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/.  
 26 .  http://www.stoptb.org/assets/documents/news/ChildhoodTB_report_singles.pdf.  
 27 .  http://www.politics.co.uk/comment-analysis/2014/02/24/comment-the-eu-us-
treaty-which-enforces-privatisation.  

86 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 28 .  This contentious point will be discussed in Chapter 12. 
 29 .  Much of this chapter is based on daily news and detailed analysis from the open access 
Politics of Health Group, www.pohg.org.uk. On ‘understanding’, MPs vote for amend-
ments when they know the number but not the content of each clause of a Bill (Lucas 
2015).  
 30 .  Revealed: The 21 private ﬁ rms from India, Japan and America targeting £1 billion 
NHS contracts to manage patient medical records, http://www.mirror.co.uk/
news/uk-news/revealed-21-private-ﬁ rms-india-4664573 ;  Private ﬁ rms on course 
to net £9bn of NHS contracts, https://www.facebook.com/Cost.of.Living.net/
posts/557947747643551; http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/19/pri
vate-ﬁ rms-nhs-contracts-circle-healthcare-bupa-virgin-care-care-uk; International 
arms ﬁ rm Lockheed Martin in the frame for £1bn NHS contract, http://www.inde
pendent.co.uk/news/business/news/international-arms-ﬁ rm-lockheed-martin-in-the-
frame-for-1bn-nhs-contract-9871247.html. 
 31 .  UnitedHealth Ranked One of Ten Worst Insurance Companies in America www.law.
freeadvice.com/insurance_law/.  
 32 .  www.ﬁ stulafoundation.org.  
 33 .  Marcus Pembrey et al. (2006) found that when children starved, decades later their 
children and grandchildren appeared to inherit related health problems (see Volume 1, 
Chapter 2). Bartley et al. (2010) argued that investing in the youngest age groups for 
health and all other care beneﬁ ts them and their successors over their lifetimes.  
 34 .  http://www.gponline.com/News/article/1181633/GPs-cannot-NHS-border-agency/. 
 35 .  Metro C ity newspaper, 1 July 2013. Next to this report was an item on inequalities, not-
ing the £100,000 spent on upgrading two toilets in the House of Lords.  
 36 .  Gentleman, A. (2013) Asylum seekers, nowhere boys,  Guardian,  22 June.  
 37 .  CRAE (2014) Children’s rights in the small places close to home, 10 December, www.
crae.org.uk.  
 38 .  During April to October 2013 they amounted to £11 billion. 
 39 .  Helm, T. (2014) NHS is out of control, says Tory health minister,  Observer,  21 June. 
 40 .  Quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations, funded and mainly appointed by 
the government but appearing to give independent policy advice. 
 41 .  The UK has a high rate of children aged 0–14 years with type I diabetes, http://
www.diabetes.org.uk/About_us/News_Landing_Page/UK-has-worlds-5th-highest-
rate-of-Type-1-diabetes-in-children/List-of-countries-by-incidence-of-Type-1-dia
betes-ages-0-to-14/. Fit, slim children can develop type 1 and it is not related to life 
style, unlike type II. Type II rates are also rising in children, although that form used 
to only affect adults.  
 42 .  For example, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-20307412; Treanor, J. (2014) Banks 
ﬁ ned record £2bn over foreign exchange rigging,  Guardian , 12 November.  
 43 .  Reynolds, L. (2014) The inconveniently excellent Beveridge NHS model: made redun-
dant for being too good, 12 August. 
 44 .  www.oecd.org 10 November 2014. 
 45 .  ‘Dozens of people have been left with impaired vision, pain and discomfort’ after private cat-
aract surgery, http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/14/nhs-eye-operations-
private-provider-musgrove.  
 46 .  Toynbee, P. (2013) Competition is killing the NHS, for no good reason but ideology, 
 Guardian , 15 November.  
 47 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-24652639. 
 48 .  Pollock, A. (2014) NHS privatisation keeps on failing patients – despite a decade of 
warnings,  Guardian , 15 August. 
 49 .  https://gmandchemicalindustry9.wordpress.com/2015/01/30/low-level-corruption-
disturbingly-common-in-health-and-medicine/. 
 50 .  www.cochrane.org has long campaigned for all trials to be registered. On 23 February 
2015, there were 3114 entries of reports about searching for unpublished research in 
efforts to overcome the present biased records.  

Economics 87
 51 .  They include Virgin, Serco and Boots.  
 52 .  Such as abuse of disabled children at Winterbourne View care home, June 2011 (http://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-13548222) and grossly substandard care in privately run children’s 
homes, June 2013 (http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22960037), although contracts 
continue to be awarded to the ﬁ rms concerned.  
 53 .  Toynbee, P (2013) Simon Stevens, new head of NHS England, is in for a rude awakening , 
Guardian , 25 October. United HealthCare was being sued for fraud. Stevens said he would 
resign from United HealthCare on becoming the new head of the NHS in 2013, although 
that was likely to clear the way for the Company to buy up even more of the NHS. 
 54 .  Bournemouth and Poole hospitals in southwest England hoped to merge to save costs 
and improve services, but they were forced to remain separate and to start to compete, 
in order to preserve ‘patient choice’. 
 55 .  http://www.nhsforsale.info/. 
 56 .  http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/an-nhs-
free-at-the-point-of-use-could-soon-be-a-thing-of-the-past-ofﬁ cials-warn-8876505.
html. 
 57 .  Health and Social Care Act 2012, section 75. 
 58 .  http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/over-a-
quarter-of-board-members-on-new-bodies-commissioning-nhs-care-have-links-to-
the-private-health-sector-10109809.html?origin=internalSearch 18 March 2015. 
 59 .  Ibid . 
 60 .  Pollock, A. (2013) Lewisham hospital being sacriﬁ ced to the bankers; de Larrabeiti, M. 
(2013) ‘People will die’ hears Michael Mansﬁ eld QC-chaired enquiry, www.pohg.
org.uk.  
 61 .  http://www.standard.co.uk/news/health/25000-protesters-march-over-crazy-lewisham-
hospital-ae-plans-8468135.html. 
 62 .  Lewisham People’s Commission of Inquiry, 29 June 2013, 9.30–5.30, chaired by Michael 
Mansﬁ eld QC with Mary Warnock, Blake Morrison, and teams of barristers and expert 
witnesses.  
 63 .  On the day this page was written, the House of Lords, where over 170 of the lords are 
involved in private health services, passed an amendment allowing the government to 
override the High Court and close any hospital they choose (BBC News 22 October 
2013); analysis in Molloy, M. (2013) UK Government to make it easier to shut hospitals 
without full consultation, Opendemocracy.net 16 October 2013). However, when the 
Secretary of State went to the Court of Appeal to overrule the High Court judgement 
(at great public expense) he lost again, and Lewisham seemed to be saved for a while 
(BBC news 29 October 2013). 
 64 .  Coterminous services, which all share the same borough, city or county boundary, 
are known to be more effective than services that cut differently across different 
areas.  
 65 .  http://www.endchildpoverty.org.uk/london/child-poverty-in-london-the-facts/
lewisham-36/. 
 66 .  This is not possible in many areas, especially rural ones, but that is no reason to close 
services that are accessible.  
 67 .  All these ﬁ rst sections are based on the  Save Lewisham Hospital Campaign’s Response to the 
Trust Special Administrator’s Draft Report into the Failures of South London Healthcare Trust as 
Required under S18 Health Act 2009.  Lewisham: SLHC.  
 68 .  http://www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f4471 9 November 2013. 
 69 .  Keep our NHS Public (www.konp.com) and daily emails from the Politics of Health 
Group (www.pohg.org.uk) document in detail over the years politicians’ claims versus 
the stark reality of the laws they supported and the dire effects on the NHS.  
 70 .  Volume 1, Appendix 1.2. 
 71 .  http://www.indexmundi.com/lesotho/demographics_proﬁ le.html.  
 72 .  Sales over past years have been documented in detail by www.pohg.org.uk, and see www.
keepourNHSpubilc.com, www.lewishamkonp.org and www.occupylondon.org.uk.  

88 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 73 .  https://www.opendemocracy.net/ournhs/caroline-molloy/billions-of-wasted-nhs-
cash-noone-wants-to-mention 10 October 2014; https://www.opendemocracy.net/
ournhs/charles-west/liberal-democrats-health-policy-who-is-rebel-0.  
 74 .  https://opendemocracy.net/ournhs/matt-dykes/death-by-thousand-tariff-cuts April 2015. 
 75 .  Chakrabortty, A. (2013) Don’t be fooled by Richard Branson’s defence of Virgin 
trains,  Guardian , 24 June.  
 76 .  https://www.opendemocracy.net/ournhs/caroline-molloy/what-is-g4s-doing-in-en
glands-nhs 15 July 2013. Head of Virgin Richard Branson is the twentieth richest man 
in the 2015  Sunday Times  British rich list, which recorded that the wealth of the top 
1,000 richest people has doubled since 2008,  Sunday Times,  19 April 2015.  
 77 .  http://www.childrenshealthfund.org/sites/default/files/WhitePaper-May2007-
FINAL.pdf.  
 78 .  Symons, X. (2013) Outcry in America over prohibitive cost of birth ,  report from data 
analytics company Truven, bioedge@aweber.com.  
 79 .  US Top of List for First-Day Deaths in Rich Nations, http://news.nationalgeographic.
co.uk/news/2013/13/130508-united-states-babies-newborn-mothers-infant-
mortality-save-the-children/.  
 80 .  President Obama’s moves to increase insurance and health coverage with an   online reg-
istration appeared, in late 2013, to be chaotic; people were being forced to pay private 
insurance who could not afford it, insurance did not cover all costs, and provision and 
access in different states varied greatly (http://rall.com/2013/10/07/obamacare-i-have-
the-dish). However, results are mixed (http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/2013/11/08/
obamacare-states_n_4234441.html?utm_hp_ref=obamacare).  
 81 .  Toynbee, P. (2013) While dubious mortality rates grab headlines, NHS privatisation 
gallops on,  Guardian , 18 July; http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2012/
jul/17/fact-checking-attacks-about-bain-romney/.  
 82 .  There are debates about whether ‘expenses’ or fees should be paid for ‘donated’ human 
organs and eggs. ‘Donation’ is an inaccurate term when organs are taken from deceased 
people who are no longer able to make gifts, or when women ‘give’ their eggs in return 
for receiving costly infertility services. While organ transplants save many lives and much 
suffering, the dark side is the trade in organs from desperately poor and trafﬁ cked adults 
and children and from executed prisoners (Scheper-Hughes 2008).  
 83 .  One complication is that white blood cells are removed because of concerns about CJD 
(mad cow disease); another is that much frozen plasma is imported.  
 84 .  http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/84-of-South-Africans-get-2nd-rate-
healthcare-Motsoaledi-20130912.  
 85 .  Reports by WHO and UNICEF quoted by Ford, L. (2013) Aids deaths soar among 
young due to inadequate health services,  Guardian , 26 November.  
 86 .  Labour health ministers Alan Milburn and Patricia Hewitt moved to work for pri-
vate healthcare companies. Senior civil servants moved to companies such as Care UK, 
Roche and Eli Lilly; PWC and McKinsey advise companies on buying up the NHS and 
governments on selling it. 
 87 .  Chang, H.-J. (2014) To ﬁ ght Britain’s privatisation dogma, Labour should look to the US 
military,  Guardian,  31 July; Hutton, W. (2014) Stop picking passengers’ pockets and bring 
trains back under public control,  Observer,  24 August. 
 88 .  The timing of the announcement in the  Daily Express  (2 July 2013) suggested a pos-
sible aim to deﬂ ect public anger away from news of NHS cuts. Jeremy Hunt, like David 
Cameron, used to work in PR, and faced criticisms for supporting Rupert Murdoch’s 
business interests, Mason, R. (2013) Crackdown on NHS ‘health tourists’,  Daily Telegraph , 
30 June. 
 89 .  http://www.togetherforshortlives.org.uk/.  
 90 .  http://www.coram.org.uk/about-us/our-heritage-foundling-hospital; www.nspcc.
org.uk.  
 91 .  ‘A charity cannot have political activity as any of its charitable purposes. A charitable 
purpose must fall within the description of purposes set out in the Charities Act 2006. 

Economics 89
However, political activity can be carried out by a charity to support the delivery 
of its charitable purposes.’ http://www.charitycommission.gov.uk/detailed-guidance/
managing-your-charity/speaking-out-guidance-on-campaigning-and-political-activity-
by-charities-cc9/#11.  
 92 .  An example is Kids Company, whose founder protests about poverty and neglect but 
the website is wholly about service, www.kidsco.org.uk.  
  93 .  http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/brieﬁ ng-papers/SN05262/
election-purdah-or-the-preelection-period 3 February 2015. This also applies to state-
funded academic research.  
 94 .  http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/about-us/emergencies/ebola-crisis?  
  95 .  Ebola: Frontline,  BBC Panorama,  17 November 2014. 
 96 .  Inquiry , BBC World Service, 26 April 2015.  
 97 .  Nick Dearden and colleagues (2015) ‘The end of poverty’, special issue of  Red Pepper , 
issue 200. 
 98 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-19548810.  
  99 .  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/charity-register-statistics/recent-cha
rity-register-statistics-charity-commission.  
 100 .  Health Action International reports how charities are used and medical practitioners 
and students are intensely (mis) informed by the companies http://www.haiweb.org/ 
accessed 20 December 2014; Sample, I. (2013) Big pharma mobilising patients in battle 
over drugs trials data,  Observer , 21 July.  
 101 .  Macmillan cancer charity was criticised for working on the project to privatise cancer 
services in Stafford, http://www.signal1.co.uk/news/local/bid-to-thwart-plans-to-
privatise-cancer-and-end-of-life-care/, July 2014. 
 102 .  McKie, R. (2015) David Cameron’s ﬂ agship Cancer Drugs Fund ‘is a waste of NHS 
cash’,  Observer,  10 January. 
 103 .  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2808312/Brave-cancer-boy-Ashya-takes-
steps-road-recovery-parents-ﬁ ght-pioneering-therapy.html.  
 104 .  Macmillan cancer charity helps children with brain tumours and also ‘supports work 
with its corporate partners . . . to promote products and build brand loyalty through 
sponsorship or product alignment’, http://www.macmillan.org.uk/Aboutus/OurCor
poratePartners/OurPartners.aspx.  
 105 .  Mintz, A. and Heo, U. (2014) Triads in International Relations: The Effect of Super-
power Aid, Trade, and Arms Transfers on Conﬂ ict in the Middle East,  Peace Economics, 
Peace Science and Public Policy,  20, 3, http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/peps.2014.20.
issue-3/peps-2014–0019/peps-2014–0019.xml  
 106 .  http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Media-Center/Press-Releases/2000/03/Save-
The-Children. 
 107 .  http://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Water-
Sanitation-and-Hygiene.  
 108 .  GSK has been convicted of fraud and paid $3 billion ﬁ nes in July 2012, http://www.
bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-18673220.  
 109 .  http://blogs.edweek.org/teachers/living-in-dialogue/2012/07/the_gates_founda
tions_leverage.html 4 July 2012 . 
 110 .  Hickel, J. (2015) The death of international development,  Red Pepper,  2000, 22–5. 
 111 .  http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/19654-public-intellectuals-against-the-
neoliberal-university 29 October 2013.  

 Young people describing difﬁ culties in ﬁ nding work in Accra, Ghana. 
 Richard (aged 14): . . . especially along the street. Once you are a child and 
you get there, you will be driven away by the older boys. 
 Steven (13): You have to pay heed to them sometimes if you don’t want any 
trouble. 
 Isaac (16): They come along with canes, they beat us and sack us because they 
want to be the only ones working there. 
 Justus (age unknown): . . . the older ones amongst us, if they tell you not to 
work at a particular place and you do, they will batter you. 
 Koﬁ  (14): You see, the big boys beat and shove and prevent us from compet-
ing with them. So normally, the small ones will be at the fringes of life in 
the streets here and we have to wait until about midday when the big boys 
have earned enough and are tired . . . That is the time we, the small ones, go 
in and try to earn something reasonable . . . The thing is that we, the small 
ones . . . the loads the big boys will charge . . . but we charge about 30 pesewas 
because we are usually desperate for the money, so they get annoyed when 
they see that. They say we are destroying the market for porters. They would 
beat you, sometimes squeeze your hands for whatever money you have . . . 
 Mary (13): I can’t work, not at this place. Here it’s the boys who work as 
porters, so if I wanted to [do the same] they wouldn’t allow me. I wouldn’t 
be able to get any work to do. There are no Kayayoos [girls and women who 
carry loads on their head] at Circle. 
 Adapted from Mizen and Ofosu-Kusi (2012)  1  
 Accounts and photographs by children on crowded city streets in the majority 
world offer mixed messages, showing their determination, strength and self-reliance, 
 11 
 EMERGENCE 
 Social structures 

Emergence 91
their hardship and also shared happy events and kindness (Mizen and Ofosu-Kusi 
2010a, 2010b, 2012). Children and young people comment on how actively they 
are involved in the ‘adult’ world of work, through resilience, reworking and resis-
tance (Katz 2004). Far from having extra support, the younger, smaller children 
and especially girls face extra barriers while they try to earn a living on the 
Accra streets (or in Kenya, Omolo 2015). Disadvantages of age, body size and 
strength, gender, ethnicity, disability, class, and caste in India, intersect and multiply 
(Crivello et al. 2012). Child workers are especially liable to be low-paid or unpaid 
on the pretext that they are still learning and practising, however competent they 
may be (André and Hilgers 2015; Hanson and Nieuwenhuys 2013; Heesterman 
2005; Nieuwenhuys 2011; Morrow and Vennam 2012). 
 Another main impact on children’s lives is migration from rural to urban areas 
and, for many, city life is more stressful. Chinese children aged 10 to 11 years 
described moving to join their parents in the city. They often had to leave their 
rural life without warning or time to say goodbye to their family and friends. It was 
as if, for some children, there was no recognition of how their local areas, activities 
and relationships very much matter to them. 
 LE-LE:  When I was in my [rural] hometown I miss my parents so much, but 
after coming to the city I miss Liu Chang as well. He is my cousin and best 
friend. 
 XIU JI-CHUAN: I spent lots of time with my parents when we were at home, but 
now [that we are in the city] they are too busy to talk and play with me. Now 
I spend most of my time watching boring TV programmes. I’m unhappy! 
 LI WEN:  What my parents know now is only how to make money. 
 LI-JUN: Once my parents got into a ﬁ ght . . . Before then I’d never seen them ﬁ ght 
or even argue. 
 DI-JIA: My father never beat me before then. 
 MAIJILI: I need something to do to kill time. However, when I was at my old home 
I had lots of things to do with my friends. We could climb trees and explore 
the mountain, which is just several minutes walk from my home . . . [In the 
future] I want to have my own company and car. I want to give my parents 
happiness in future. 
 ANON: The city in my imagination was full of skyscrapers, wider streets, busy 
people and expensive cars . . . After moving here I learnt mandarin and had 
lots of new friends from all over the country. And we have a big TV, which we 
had not in my ‘old home’. 
 Adapted from Han (2007) 
 The United Nations are concerned that cities pose immense problems, but they 
celebrated the news when more people began to live within cities than outside 
them (UN Habitat 2008). The cover of the UN report depicted four boys racing 
down a muddy path towards shining skyscrapers, as if drawn to a bright future from 

92 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
a dingy past. The relatively few mentions of children in the report mainly detail 
their problems with schools, illness and poverty, but economists dominate the UN, 
and they value cities as the major engines of wealth creation. 
 Economics is so central to childhood that it is the topic of two chapters. Chap-
ter 10 ended with questioning why commercial ways of relating are so dominant, 
despite the many injustices and contradictions they raise. This chapter considers 
deeper, causal, social structures from which policies emerge. The structures relate 
to the dominant ideology, here termed the  price economy  or  price ethic , which is one 
way of deﬁ ning complex concepts of neoliberalism. Instead of giving a brief deﬁ -
nition of neoliberalism, this chapter reviews a range of interpretations. Neoliberal 
claims and policies differ on relations between state and market. 
 Marx separated the inherent  use value  of things (food, tools) from their attributed 
 exchange value  or price when they are bought and sold. Crucially, exchange value 
includes the often-concealed  surplus value  siphoned off for proﬁ t. However, Friedrich 
Hayek concentrated on exchange value or price. This will be reviewed in the 1M sec-
tion, with possible reasons for the powerful appeal of the price ethic. Activities based 
on the price ethic and some of their human costs are considered at 2E, particularly 
in relation to cities and criminal justice and how they involve children and young 
people. 3L will reﬂ ect on the larger, related global structures. The 4D section will 
question how the contradictions of the price ethic might be explained. This chapter 
is mainly about problems whereas the ﬁ nal chapter will look at possible remedies. 
 Social structures 
 In DCR, structures are generative, explanatory, causal powers. These can be 
determinist with inevitable effects. For example, all emeralds may seem to be 
green, but they can only be proved to be so, not by collecting endless exam-
ples, but through analysis of their physical structure that ensures they inevitably 
look green. In social science, when structures are exercised, they are shown in 
tendencies, not inevitabilities. A person can be understood as a uniquely lami-
nated/layered structure, shaped by genetics, nurture and culture, so that each 
person has strong and partly predictable tendencies. These tendencies inﬂ uence 
individuals’ actions, but do not wholly determine them, and they interact with 
free will and agency (Bhaskar 2008b). 
 The critical realist Douglas Porpora (1998, 2007)  2  identiﬁ ed four theories of 
social structure. First there are (agency-dominated) patterns of aggregate behav-
iour stable over time by atomised individuals, the model used in economics. Sec-
ond, positivist law-like regularities govern, determine and explain the somewhat 
mechanistic behaviour of social facts. DCR accepts neither the ﬁ rst over-free vol-
untarism nor the second over-determining structures. Third, structures are seen as 
rules and resources, such as in Giddens’s (1979) structuration theory. Archer and 
colleagues (1998) criticise this as too virtual, static and hermeneutic. While they 
accept that social structures, unlike natural ones, can only operate through human 
agency, they believe that structures cannot be reduced into agents’ conscious 

Emergence 93
conceptions of them, or into agents’ activities, their use of rules and resources, or 
into the effects of agency. 
 Finally, Porpora’s and Archer’s preferred model is social structures seen as tensed 
systems of human relations among social positions. It is based on the  transformational 
model of social activity, TMSA  (Bhaskar 1998a, 2008b, 154–60),  3  and the  morphoge-
netic social process (Archer 1995, 2003). Rather than simply being underlying or 
external rules to be invoked, structures are powerful and enduring systems and 
positions in and through emergent material and social relations. Over time, struc-
tures far precede and outlast individual agents. Structures may work to exploit or 
oppress agents, and they include modes of production, domination, competition, 
and unequal social positions between classes and age groups. This broad concept of 
powerful structures allows for agents’ widely varying individual reactions, interac-
tions and resistance. And it also recognises tensions between structures within open 
social systems of many competing structural forces. Like gravity, social structures 
may be active, or unexercised when they are still latent and potential forces. For 
these reasons, social effects cannot be directly attributed to a single, determining, 
structural cause. Instead, social causes are multiple, complex, interacting and emer-
gent. Social structure is a necessary condition for, and medium of, the reproduc-
tion or transformation of social forms. DCR sees individual and collective agency 
as neither too free and voluntary nor too determined and mechanical. Instead, 
structure and agency are seen to interact dialectically over time: agents draw on a 
range of pre-existing structures in open systems; structures may cause but do not 
determine agency; and agents shape and reshape structures in tensed sequences. 
 Similarly, Wacquant (2009) asserted that vast, recent economic and urban changes 
were caused neither by individual agents nor by mysterious, forceful social struc-
tures. Instead they emerged from numerous interacting inﬂ uences and struggles 
(in DCR terms,  dialectics ). Many combined forces work as if to open certain doors 
and close others. The forces expand the power, momentum and hegemony of some 
policies, while they restrict and deter others. Alternatives do not become impossible, 
but they become much harder to imagine or achieve. Like Bourdieu and colleagues 
(2006), Wacquant stressed material and symbolic levels (intransitive and transitive). 
Police power, for example, is material-embodied and also a cultural performance, 
supported by symbolic courtroom drama and prison ritual. Symbolism serves to 
warn, intimidate or terrify the public, whether they keep the law or not. The shoot-
ing of black men and youths in the USA, such as Tamir Rice, aged 12, and Michael 
Brown, aged 18, which happens on average twice a day,  4  was followed by outraged 
public protests, when the police reacted with further ritualised violence, drawing 
the actors into the multimedia drama of penal power. 
 The price ethic and ﬁ rst moment 1M: 
freedom, science and religion 
 (Bello 2013; Brummer 2014; Chang 2011; Crouch 2011; Dean 2009; Elliott and 
Atkinson 2009; Hamm 2005; Harvey 2007, 2011; Kempf 2008; Klein 2007, 2014; 

94 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Mason 2009, 2012; Mills 1956; Mirowski 2014; Mirowski and Plehwe 2008; New 
Economics Foundation 2014; Peston 2008; Pollock 2005; Shaxson 2011; Wacquant 
2009, 287–314)  5  
 The price ethic as a powerful structure will be summarised brieﬂ y in schematic 
terms to highlight selected features. This ‘pure’ version of price may sound too 
extreme to be credible. Yet despite its being complex and contested, many analysts 
agree that it dominates present global values, policies and methods.  6  
 At the basic 1M level, Friedrich Hayek (1945) believed that ‘the wisdom of 
price’ resolved critical problems in economics. He envisaged the agreed correct 
price in any economic exchange as rising above subjective human agency in two 
Platonic, Kantian ways. First, impersonal objective price is above the contaminat-
ing inﬂ uences of human emotions and relationships. Secondly, omniscient price 
is superior to everyone’s limited, contingent, fallible, tacit and largely inexplicable 
knowledge, which makes individual and collective decisions contradictory and 
unbalanced. 
 Price somehow has unique superhuman powers that can account for all 
knowns and unknowns. It is the objective arbiter and also the means of exchange. 
It constantly measures rising and falling markets, and subtly alters human behav-
iour as millions of people buy more or less of each commodity. ‘The marvel is,’ 
believed Hayek, there is therefore no need for coercive states to try to change 
behaviours when prices freely react within the ‘benign’ (meaning ‘free’), fair, 
rationally coordinated market. Hayek was concerned that (in DCR terms) tran-
sitive knowledge and values predominate over intransitive values, but the price 
mechanism can counteract this. ‘Prices act to co-ordinate the separate actions 
of different [ignorant] people’ to enable free individuals in free markets ‘to take 
the right action’ (Bronk 2013; Hayek 1945, 84–86). This echoes Adam Smith’s 
([1776] 2012, 442) faith in the benevolent ‘invisible hand’ that sets prices and 
wages, supply and demand, and turns individual self-interest and passions into 
general beneﬁ t.  7  
 These most powerful claims about price and its compelling, causal, natural 
necessity invoke concepts of science and of religion. Price’s objective, pristine sci-
entiﬁ c methods validate its causal effects and refute rival theories. The market is 
neutral, disinterested and efﬁ cient. Many neoliberals, though not Hayek (Gane 
2014), compare the market to evolution (not necessarily Darwin’s versions, Rose 
and Rose 2001) when it promotes survival of the ﬁ ttest and failure of the weakest. 
It is a purging kind of Malthusian eugenic but natural force, an immutable scientiﬁ c 
law. TINA, there is no alternative, was claimed by Thatcher, a chemist, to support 
this very principle. 
 In quasi-religious terms, price is superhuman, omniscient and omnipotent; 
its godlike status cannot be challenged or disputed. Powerful priests (economists, 
ﬁ nanciers) perform elaborate rituals and attract millions of worshipping believers 
to their ideology. Like all religions, the price economy has a theory of human 
nature (competitive, self-interested individualism) and a theory of the purpose and 

Emergence 95
meaning of life (proﬁ t). There are echoes of evolutionary theories of human nature 
and selﬁ sh genes, whose purpose or function is to proﬁ t by surviving, reproduc-
ing and multiplying. Hayek, an exiled refugee, equated socialism and communism 
with Nazi fascism and saw the only strong defence against them as neoliberal free 
markets. 
 Another father of neoliberalism, Ludwig von Mises, believed in excluding 
states and any form of socialism or solidarity from interfering with the market 
and with private property (Gane 2014). He aimed to free individuals’ rational 
action, which he thought was wholly based in all matters on economic calcula-
tion. Mises contrasted Darwinian biological competition with human struggle 
and competition over price, which he thought involved cooperation, integration 
and agreement. Mises’s conviction that the market relates to all human choices and 
values inﬂ uenced Milton Friedman and the Chicago School’s international domi-
nance. Foucault (2008, 268) noted how they sought to apply economic analy-
sis to everything, ‘to marriage, the education of children and criminality, for 
example’. 
 Yet Gane analysed how Hayek disagreed with some of Mises’s libertarian ideas, 
including his view of rational, informed individuals. To Hayek, only the ‘marvel’ 
of the free market can process all relevant knowledge into the single form of the 
price. Hayek (1945, 110) believed that governments and states should work in the 
service of the market (far from dominating it) ‘to make competition more effective 
and more beneﬁ cent’. He was against solidarity and any form of social or politi-
cal constraint on the free market. Hayek supported economic egoism, which he 
called ‘ﬁ nancial gain’, because while it ‘it may have unpleasant consequences for 
individual others it is the cause for an increase in general wealth so that everyone 
ultimately beneﬁ ts’ (Gane 2014, 1101). 
 To continue brieﬂ y on the theme of the price ethic and religion, these are closely 
entwined and share key terms and precepts such as sin being like debt (Graeber 
2011; Lundskow 2008; Nisbet 1967; Weber [1905] 1998). Many young people in 
the USA call on religion as an individualist self-help device or commodity (Smith 
and Denton 2005). Certain churches endorse the religion of proﬁ t and consumer-
ism and celebrate wealth as God’s blessing and reward for the righteous. Success 
may be displayed in conspicuous consumption. ‘As long as we are free to buy as 
much as we want of whatever we want  at the lowest price,  we are happy . . . McWorld 
is a reign in which we are encouraged to identify our very souls with market seg-
ments’ (Porpora’s 2007, 309 ironic comment, my emphasis). Porpora names the 
obsession with trivia, which is confused with religious faith but which blanks out 
authentic reality, meaning and human dignity, as ‘McWorld’ or the Hindu concept 
 avidya (and see Bhaskar 2000). Paradoxically, the worship of wealth, when it implies 
that poverty is a sign of divine disapproval, contradicts the ancient religions’ edicts 
on poverty and justice. 
 The varying neoliberal views on optimal relations between markets and states 
have grown over decades to dominate world policies, with layers of inﬁ ltration of 

96 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
government by business, mentioned in Chapter 10. There are economics and busi-
ness courses in universities and schools worldwide. Academic economics depart-
ments, courses, research and leading journals are almost wholly neoliberal (Chang 
2011; Lawson 2009). They favour abstract mathematical modelling and veto men-
tion of ‘heterodox’ or other alternative economics, and of real world crises, although 
young economics students are beginning to protest.  8  School economics courses 
teach the mantra ‘monopolies (such as the NHS) cannot work’. Many politicians 
in all parties, along with economists and journalists, who also lead public informa-
tion and opinion, have studied PPE (philosophy, politics and economics) or similar 
courses as impressionable young students and seem to be converted for life and to 
have ‘an almost religious mentality’.  9  On the ﬁ rst ‘p’ in PPE, linguistic philosophy 
departments collude with the price ethic by denying the existence of independent 
truth or justice (for example, Blackburn 1999). They thereby remove the logical 
grounds from which students can challenge the economics courses (Bhaskar 1998a, 
2008a; Sayer 2011). The neoliberal creed at 1M deﬁ nes justice as the defence of 
private property and of individual freedom to make and keep proﬁ ts. 
 The price ethic explains how externalities are deﬁ ned and dismissed. Externali-
ties   are costs or beneﬁ ts incurred by agents who did not choose to incur them. 
‘Externalities are indirect effects of consumption or production activity . . . which 
do not work through the price system’ (Laffont 2008). The price ethic is based on 
free choice, and therefore imposed or unchosen costs and beneﬁ ts are dealt with 
by externalising them. They do not appear in annual accounts of companies, for 
example. 
 Externalities may be unwanted costs such as pollution, when companies deny 
responsibility because they did not intentionally choose to emit pollutants. Or 
externalities may be beneﬁ ts, which companies use but do not choose to pay for. 
Around two decades of care and education before young people are ready to join 
the work force are useful—indeed, essential—to companies. Yet they are seen as 
costs for parents to incur, since parents are assumed to choose to have the children, 
whereas businesses choose only to have productive workers. Childhood becomes a 
1M invisible non-identity, externalised to the private world of the family, outside 
the market. Childhood is preferably outside the state too, since the state relies on 
taxes, which are an externality to be avoided, as enforced and not chosen. One 
problem of attributing non-identity or externality to childhood is to skew cost-
beneﬁ t calculations, when one third of people in the world are ignored. 
 The price ethic and second edge 2E 
 1M identiﬁ es beliefs, needs, problems and absences that 2E second edge aims to 
negate. Need and absence drive each MELD moment on to the next one. 2E sees 
real, determinate, causal absence in the need to negate all ‘constraints, absences, 
oppressive power 2  relations, inequities, structures’ (Bhaskar 2008b: 282). In the 
price ethic, this means absenting all constraints that could distort the pure price 
process. A second absence to remedy is to bring into the market all the aspects of 

Emergence 97
life that ought to be priced and traded but so far are missing. Gradually childcare 
and early education have been drawn into the market as commodities, in the view 
that paid and managed professionals provide the highest quality of care, which 
enables parents to work full time and for the many extra hours needed to pay for 
the childcare. 
 Extensive, well-known debates will be summarised here in order to illustrate 
the MELD analysis and the often-overlooked impact of the price ethic on chil-
dren and young people. This section reviews cities as markets, crime, and then 
aspects of the price ethic to consider: how it is ‘free and fair’, how it respects price 
at all costs, how it sets a price on everything, and how the ethic affects childhood 
poverty. 
 Capitalism has created amazing cities where many children and young people 
and adults prefer to live. The aim of this chapter is to consider negative as well 
as positive aspects of the price system that affect billions of people. Although the 
examples might seem unrepresentative of the many satisﬁ ed citizens, my aim is to 
consider the majority who are disadvantaged by the price system as opposed to 
the relative few who very much beneﬁ t. The idea here is not to correlate happi-
ness or wellbeing with income. Instead my aim is to try to redress an imbalance of 
attention, when so much public debate and policy glosses over the experiences of 
disadvantaged groups and younger generations, and to examine their lives, in order 
to prepare for Chapter 12, which considers ways of promoting better ways of liv-
ing for all. 
 2E, cities as markets 
 (Banerjee-Guha 2010; Das 1995; Fujita 2013; Goffman 2014; Harvey 2012; 
Hodkinson et al. 2013; Kampfner 2014; Lin and Mele 2012; Meek 2014; Minton 
2012; Nadesan 2010; Wacquant 2008, 2009; Ward 1988) 
 The young people quoted at the head of this chapter starkly revealed adversity 
in the inexorable social and physical city structures. The challenges of living in 
an Accra slum (Mizen and Ofosu-Kusi 2010a, 2010b) violently confront street 
children with the social structures of gross poverty and inequality, and the many 
absences of unmet needs in unplanned city spaces, unregulated employment and 
trafﬁ c, precarious housing with constant evictions and demolitions. In contrast, in 
well-organized, wealthy city spaces, the same social structures are concealed and 
smoothly managed, efﬁ ciently servicing citizens who need hardly to be aware of 
them. These range from piped utilities, to assiduous police protection, to massive 
discrete systems for delivering goods and removing unwanted waste. 
 Although they might seem to be static structures, cities are in constant ﬂ ux 
through the changing, driving demands of the price ethic, and they work as mar-
kets. Each city area may be priced and re-priced repeatedly, by the rising cost of 
housing, the reputation of schools and local businesses and amenities. This leads to 
repeated selling and reselling, which rewards the investors but comes at great social 
cost to many citizens, including children. 

98 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Local governments work to raise the price of local property, and therefore 
increase the taxes they can charge besides gaining support from landlords and busi-
nesses. This can involve gerrymandering and ‘social cleansing’,  10  attracting wealth-
ier residents and businesses into local areas and moving away poorer people. The 
latter group relies most heavily on council social services, but pays relatively low 
taxes, while children inevitably count as costs and not contributors, unless wealthy 
parents support the kinds of schools, shops, cafes, and leisure centres that raise prop-
erty prices. Councils’ priorities are changing from being a public service into mak-
ing proﬁ t. Frequent rebuilding and re-pricing of areas create immense upheaval in 
children’s lives, their homes and schools and social networks. They also disrupt the 
public services children rely on, which largely employ lower-paid staff, and which 
become run down when the workers and needy families move away. 
 As businesses open and close, and transport links expand and contract, hous-
ing and amenities around them prosper or decay. Local birth rates rise and fall and 
bring changing needs for housing and schools. Universities attract thousands of 
students who need housing, shops and leisure centres. When schools gain or lose 
their high reputation, house prices around them rise or fall accordingly, attracting 
different residents. A school’s success draws a ‘cluster of privilege’ (Sutton Trust 
2013) around it, when wealthier families move in and ‘gentrify’ run-down neigh-
bourhoods, out-pricing other residents who move away. Children affect house 
prices by their school performance, just as disadvantaged neighbourhoods decay 
further when youths are blamed for grafﬁ ti, or gangs, or other disruption. 
 For decades the price ethic has forced councils to sell two million council homes 
at subsidised low prices. The fewer remaining social housing estates in Britain are 
reserved for families with the greatest needs and problems. They become concen-
trated into run-down areas with ‘failing’ families and schools so that those who can 
afford to do so move away, reinforcing market solutions to their social problems. 
Politicians expect schools to solve problems of social immobility, inequality and 
poverty, although these arise through social and political structures into which 
schools are also trapped. Wealthy enclaves with gated housing, high class shops, 
over-subscribed schools and green parks are increasingly being separated from 
crowded estates with cramped, low-grade housing falling into disrepair. 
 While many people prefer urban life, the rewards and hardships of city life for 
adults tend to be reported, with far less attention given to children’s experiences. 
Perhaps children’s wellbeing and life style (exciting, active and fulﬁ lling or dull, 
frustrating and conﬁ ned) depend more on family income than on whether they 
live urban or rural lives (or both, for children with second homes). Rather than 
judge which is best, I will review some little-mentioned factors that affect children. 
 In disadvantaged families, parents are likely to have to work long hours, child 
care is expensive, and babies in majority world cities may have to be left untended. 
In rural areas babies are more likely to be with their parents while they work at 
home or on the land, and to have several carers in close communities and larger 
intergenerational households. Attentive carers are vital wherever there is risk of chil-
dren being kidnapped and trafﬁ cked, which could be more likely in crowded cities. 

Emergence 99
Girls are more likely to be trafﬁ cked than boys, and most commonly in South East 
Asia, West Africa and Eastern Europe.  11  There were 549 estimated cases of poten-
tially trafﬁ cked children in Britain in 2012, though there may be very many more 
given the hidden nature of this crime. Each year in China, an estimated 70,000 
children are kidnapped, where boys are at high risk, though unwanted girls may be 
abandoned or sold. The one-child policy creates scarcity that sends up the ‘price’ 
of children. Yet the more frequently crimes are committed, the more resigned and 
inactive many authorities may be, despite the government’s efforts to investigate the 
trafﬁ cking rings that quickly pass children over thousands of miles. Many Chinese 
couples prefer to buy a son rather than risk giving birth to an unwanted daughter.  12  
Kidnapping is also linked to slavery and, globally each year since 2005, an estimated 
5.5 million child slaves have been born or sold into lifelong bondage, forced labour, 
forced marriage, debt bondage or sex work.  13  Among an estimated total of 35 million 
slaves worldwide, there were possibly up to 30,000 slaves in Britain in 2013, who 
would be less noticed in cities of strangers. 
 Crowded slums at times ﬂ ood with rubbish and sewage pouring into housing 
off the streets. There may be few safe, clean places to cook, to boil water, to store 
things, let alone places for babies to crawl and play and sleep. Babies are most likely 
to pick up infections and parasites and to be very seriously affected by them; infec-
tions such as typhoid spread most rapidly in cities. Noise, stench and heat in cities 
especially affect babies who can easily become dehydrated, feverish, asthmatic and 
exhausted. Food is seldom eaten fresh from the ﬁ eld, but is stored, transported and 
marketed while it starts to decay and rot, with the poorest children likely to have 
the worst leftovers. In rural areas, and in city parks and gardens, babies may be able 
rest in cool, shady, fresh air, with rustling trees to watch. Rural children are likely, 
though not assuredly, to have more free, open, green spaces and unpolluted air and 
water than urban children can enjoy. 
 Worldwide, millions of people are moving, or being moved, from rural into 
urban areas (see Chapter 9), and many are crammed into precarious slum dwellings 
that developers frequently bulldoze and then patch together again or replace with 
higher-priced buildings (Davis 2006). Over time, disadvantaged citizens, especially 
black and ethnic minority groups, are herded into US inner city ghettos or evicted 
to bleak, French outer suburbs (Nadesan 2010; Wacquant 2008). The most serious 
difference that moving to the city can make is that urban families are unlikely to 
own land and the means of production and subsistence; therefore, they have to join 
the price economy and hire out their labour to pay for their rent, food, water, fuel 
and goods and services that may be free for rural families. The price system underlies 
the land-grabs that expel families from the land and into cities where they have to 
become consumers (Empson 2014; Linebaugh 2014; Pearce 2012; Seabrook 2007). 
 Major catalysts of city change are sports and arts events, such as the Olympics. 
Politicians compete to win sports contracts, hoping to reap huge proﬁ ts and pres-
tige for their city, increased tourism and business, upgraded housing, and a sporting 
‘legacy’ to enjoy. However, cities subsidise the sports events, and tend to be left 
with huge debts and underfunded or closed sports centres (Harvey 2012; Minton 

100 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
2012). Thousands of labourers swarm into the cities during the building years 
with their housing and other needs (and massive disruption to the families migrant 
workers leave behind). Later the young athletes arrive and tourists attend the events 
and ﬁ ll hotels, and then structures are changed again to adapt cities to future uses. 
 Since the early 1980s, English councils have been forced to sell affordable hous-
ing stock but could not use the funds to build more social housing. They have to 
rely on investors, developers and construction companies to build and then sell or let 
the housing.  14  In one typical example, a block of 1100 affordable ﬂ ats in a deprived 
area of London was left empty for years, scattering the intergenerational community, 
until the last few tenants ﬁ nally left or died. Although experts recommended that 
the ﬂ ats could be renovated, they were destroyed and replaced with 2400 unafford-
able small ﬂ ats.  15  Advertising boards displayed a ‘stylish’ lifestyle for smart, dual-
earning (seemingly childless) young couples gazing at the London city towers. 
 Housing is so expensive partly because land is so expensive. The price of land 
rose from two per cent of the house price in the 1930s, to 70 per cent or more 
today.  16  Despite all their beneﬁ ts, reserved green belts around cities squeeze the 
urban space available for housing and send house prices soaring. About 70 per 
cent of the people in Britain own a little land, such as a housing plot, but together 
they own less than ﬁ ve per cent of the total land, and housing takes up less than 
ten per cent of that total. A few landowners possess most of the other 95 per cent.  17  
The ethic of the fair price, which deplores state ‘hand-outs’ to poor families, does 
not apply to subsidies for landowners and rentiers; the largest landowners receive 
the largest subsidies. £14 billion was paid in Britain in 2014 to private landlords 
in housing beneﬁ t and expenses.  18  It costs the state immensely much more to top 
up the very high rents of tenants on low wages in private housing than to build 
and rent out social housing, where families can enjoy lower rents in secure, well-
maintained housing. 
 Another spur to prices is when housing becomes a commodity, bought for 
proﬁ t through buy-to-rent, or for investment through buy-to-leave-empty while 
prices rise. The London mayor promoted around Asia sales of London housing 
and land with building permission. This opening to a global market aims to maxi-
mise the bargaining that will produce the highest price. The mayor promised that 
foreign investment ‘unlocks’ housing projects that are waiting to be funded and 
will raise property values still further, bringing wealth and business, tourism and 
cultural assets to beneﬁ t everyone in the ‘world-class’ city. Foreign investors have 
bought sites to build tens of thousands of homes in London in super-tower blocks, 
but they avoid building ‘affordable’ homes, and many ﬂ ats cost £1 million or much 
more.  19  During the 1970s, research showing how tower blocks damaged families, 
communities and especially children’s lives inﬂ uenced housing policies, but this has 
been forgotten. 
 In the minority world mobile city, the whole lives of many children can be 
disrupted, not so very unlike the experiences that the Chinese children explained 
earlier. They all risk losing close contacts with family and friends, their schools and 
neighbourhood and perhaps play areas they have enjoyed. After they have moved 
away, younger children have few options to travel or phone freely and keep in touch 

Emergence 101
with their former contacts. Some miss weeks or months of school or preschool 
before ﬁ nding a new place where they have to develop new friendships, which is 
easy for some children, hard for others. Many families in Britain are moved hun-
dreds of miles away from their home city, such as to run-down seaside towns. Refu-
gee and ethnic minority children ﬁ nd much less support from rural neighbours and 
services than from inner city ones (Pinson et al. 2010). In the USA, thousands of 
displaced families live in trailer parks. And for refugee families in many majority 
world countries, tents and makeshift huts in massive refugee camps create new cities. 
 Frequent moves reduce contact between trusted neighbours and tear up the 
social fabric. Cities change from being collections of village-type communities 
into being sites for passing strangers. Reasonable or exaggerated fear of strangers 
especially restricts children’s play, their informal social contacts, and their freedom 
to roam and explore in their neighbourhood. When few children walk or play on 
the streets, the ones who do can seem even more exposed, vulnerable and ‘out of 
place’. After being moved into cheaper housing areas, adults can ﬁ nd it harder to 
ﬁ nd work near their new home, and longer journeys to work mean higher fares, 
less time for families to be together, and higher childcare costs. 
 Housing costs increase the double bind of parents needing to work full time or 
longer, often on two or more jobs. The steep rise in precarious employment and 
zero-contract hours, involving up to one in twelve of all workers,  20  complicates 
childcare. This may have to be arranged at the last minute; care might be arranged 
and paid for but then not needed; parents and children may be uncertain when and 
where children will be from one hour to the next, especially in school holidays. 
Precarious work can be doubly or trebly hard to manage when children are affected. 
 The price of housing harms looked-after children in local authority care. Com-
panies that run privatised children’s homes prefer housing in cheaper areas, often 
long distances from the children’s and young people’s own homes. To break their 
fragile social ties damages for many their hopes of sustaining any present and future 
trusting relationships, so crucial to their wellbeing. Scandals about girls being 
groomed by sexual predators involve many girls in local authority care, includ-
ing ones collected from children’s homes by taxis paid for on the local authority 
account (Jay 2014). The scandals illustrate gross negligence, which was repeated 
routinely when police and social services staff dismissed the girls’ appeals for help.  21  
The usual cost-effective remedy is to propose punishing staff for negligence,  22  but 
this can compound the problems (discussed later). Young girls on dangerous streets 
at night and caught in abusive sexual relations are seen as ‘matter out of place,’ like 
dirt (Douglas 1966). They are neither innocent children, nor independent women, 
but nobodies who should not be seen or heard. 
 2E, cities and crime 
 Besides the rising cost of living and housing, another major adverse inﬂ uence of 
city life on children and young people is crime. Lucrative sports events, such as the 
Olympics, bring a claimed need for extra security and more fully armed police, who 
continue to patrol after the Games. The notional price of each city street is affected 

102 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
by reported crime rates and police presence. Wacquant (2009, 243–69) derided 
‘scholarly myths’ mis-promoted by academics, which direct price-conscious city 
crime policies. The myths include claims of an ‘explosion of crime’ (crime rates 
have fallen), which must be controlled through a constant police presence, ‘stop and 
search’ even of young children,  23  and ‘zero-tolerance’ of petty crime such as ‘broken 
windows’. This is supposed to prevent more serious crime from developing, and 
to make crime melt away. Politicians on every continent avidly apply the policies, 
and many sociologists misquote them (for example, Giddens 1999). Minton (2012) 
and Wacquant detail the lack of supportive evidence, besides extensive contrary 
evidence from expert sources. For instance, Wesley Skogan (1990) actually said pov-
erty and racism were the main sources of crime in inner cities, not ‘urban disorder’ 
or ‘broken windows’. Jack Maple (1999) stopped advising the police to concentrate 
on trivial disorder after he saw they had less time to tackle serious crime. 
 Yet the pseudo-academic claims continue to peddle ‘penal management of the 
social insecurity that is everywhere being generated by the social and economic 
disengagement of the state’ (Wacquant 2009, 269). The police presence is much 
concerned with trivial disorder on the street, where young people are most likely 
to want to meet friends and join in events, and when many of them have nowhere 
else to go. Young people are also most likely to be stopped and searched, scores of 
times for each young black man. In England and Wales about one million people 
are stopped and searched each year; in one quarter of cases, police action may have 
been illegal because of insufﬁ cient grounds to suspect the person.  24  Very few of the 
people stopped have committed a serious offence and, with growing public resent-
ment, the government has revised the rules.  25  Numerous young people aged over 
ten years have been drawn into the penal system after they were given an ASBO  26  
on slight pretexts in civil law. But to break the ASBO is a criminal offence that 
can lead to imprisonment and thereby severely lower a person’s future prospects.  27  
 In the USA, micro-policing binds black young men into the penal system. Alice 
Goffman (2014) researched for six years in a poor neighbourhood in Philadelphia. 
She found that young black men avoided going to hospital even when they had 
severe injuries. This was because police waited at hospitals, hoping to meet their 
targets by making many arrests. Citizens are surrounded by TV cameras, with reg-
ular police helicopter surveillance, raids and assaults. Drivers (in the USA aged 
14–16 years and up) are stopped for minor trafﬁ c offences. Police ofﬁ cers patrol 
African American schools to enforce rigid school rules, and impose curfews, parole 
and probation. Young men are set up to fail the terms of probation when these for-
bid them to visit their own homes and neighbourhoods. One boy got three years’ 
probation after he accepted a lift in a car, not knowing that it had been stolen. An 
old black man asked Goffman: what is the use of raising a boy if he will most likely 
end up in prison and tear your life apart? 
 As mentioned in Chapter 8, seven million black men in the USA are now on 
parole or in prison. Since 1990, numbers of prisoners have increased ﬁ vefold, and 
‘corrective administration’ is the third largest employer in the USA, while employ-
ment and beneﬁ ts for working people fall and push many more into debt and 

Emergence 103
petty crime.  28  Friendships and families, schools and workplaces become dangerous 
when anyone might betray you to the police, and when contact with anyone on 
the police records draws you into the forensic net. Women are pressured to inform 
on their partners with threats that their children will be taken away if they stay 
silent. In graphic detail, Alice Goffman showed the splitting and alienating wrought 
by police surveillance. Attempts at community, loyalty and trust are replaced with 
the new social fabric of suspicion, fear and panic. Courts protect the mainly white 
police force after they shoot and kill young black men, and this racial injustice 
attracts growing public protest.  29  
 Neoliberalism and the price economy are said to favour small states. However, 
Wacquant contrasts the shrinking welfare state, revamped as the workfare state, with 
the ballooning prisonfare state and the massive increase in penal systems. Prisonfare 
reasserts and bolsters state authority, which might otherwise seem to be reduced by 
the dwindling welfare state (Wacquant 2009, xvi–xviii). Harsh control is demanded 
to deal with the ‘unruly poor’ and the social disorder that increases with growing 
social insecurity and inequality. The penal state hounds petty crime in the lowest, 
precarious groups, but rarely touches the upper classes and their multimillion-dollar 
tax and other fraud. Prisons warehouse the surplus dispossessed and rebellious 
masses and so are too vast and crowded to attempt to reform inmates, but instead 
administer vengeful punishment. Tentacle penal systems reach into the poor areas 
of cities. They ordain who belongs to the ‘deserving poor’ subject to workfare, or 
to the ‘undeserving poor’ managed by prisonfare. States claim to be unable to fund 
welfare, while they pour vast sums into surveillance and prisons. 
 The English Universal Credit  30  is supposed to make great savings by cutting 
beneﬁ ts, but it has cost £billions, such as when giant corporations win contracts to 
vet applicants, or to provide elaborate computer systems which fail and have to be 
scrapped.  31  Projects are stymied by their immense complexity, when ministers dream 
of micro-recording and managing patients’ and claimants’ and school children’s lives, 
and then hiring out the data to corporations. The poor may be blamed for ofﬁ cials’ 
waste of public funds. It was alleged that the 120,000 ‘most troubled families’ in 
England cost taxpayers £9 billion (in 2012).  32  However, there were serious ﬂ aws in 
deﬁ ning and counting the families; ‘troubled’ is not necessarily ‘troublesome’;  33  and 
these sums went largely into services and salaries of practitioners working to ‘turn 
them around’ with advice, not into the families’ own weekly budgets. 
 States have three options in how they treat ‘conducts that they deem undesir-
able, offensive, or threatening’ (Wacquant 2009, xxi–xxii). 
 1.   They can socialise people, such as by housing the homeless, or guaranteeing 
them work and income. 
 2.   They can medicalise them and treat problems as if these are caused by personal 
distress, pathologies or addictions. Yet prescribed psychiatric drugs often lead 
on to use of illicit drugs and then the third option. 
 3.   States can also penalise the poor, such as delinquent youth, those on low 
incomes, the destitute and, directly or indirectly, their children. 

104 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Overwhelmingly, the third option appears to be chosen, although it is not cost 
effective. 
 Most prisoners have children aged under 18, including prisoners who are aged 
under 18 themselves. There are well over ﬁ ve million children of prisoners in the 
USA, nearly one million children in Europe, and 200,000 in England and Wales.  34  
Prisoners’ sons are highly likely in future also to serve a prison sentence. When 
mothers are in prison, children usually have to leave their own home and may go 
into care. If they can visit their mother, they may have to travel hundreds to miles 
to do so since there are few women’s prisons. 
 Prisoners are split away on all four planes of social being: from their freedom to 
enjoy the natural world; from their relationships with family, friends, neighbours 
and other social supports; from their social contexts and hope of future employ-
ment, and their normal life as citizens, as well as from being able to assume the 
state is a safeguard and support for them as citizens with rights; and from their pre-
prison personal sense of identity, their potential and hope of fulﬁ lment. Wacquant 
criticised academics who support neoliberal states by promoting the twin myths of 
the efﬁ cient police and the free market, in a discourse that saturates current politics 
and journalism. He questioned how they can assert that prison is the optimal eco-
nomic and moral choice when there is such colossal social cost and loss of freedom 
and equality. 
 Wacquant’s (2009) title  Punishing the Poor  especially applies to most prisoners 
who have had, or are having, extremely hard childhoods. Disadvantaged childhoods 
tend to lead on to disadvantaged adulthood. Two thirds of prisoners in one survey 
had been in local authority care as children, 40 per cent had been homeless, over 
half had learning difﬁ culties.  35  Overwhelmingly, prisoners have histories of child-
hood neglect and abuse, self-harm and suicide attempts and mental illness (Goldson 
and Muncie 2015; Willow 2015). Over 2,000 mental health beds in England were 
closed during 2011–2014, so that many young people who showed disturbed 
behaviour in public were taken into police cells as ‘a place of safety’ and into pris-
ons instead of hospitals.  36  Black teenagers are most likely to be treated as criminals 
instead of as patients. During 2011/2012, there were 1,963 children in custody in 
the UK, though by 2014 numbers had fallen to just over 1,000.  37  Carolyne Willow 
(2015) researched young prisoners who reported being very hungry, suffering from 
unhealthy life styles, and enduring abusive strip searches, severely painful handling 
by the guards, bullying and severe intimidation. Since 1990, 33 imprisoned chil-
dren have died in England, but there has never been a formal inquiry. 
 Like looked-after children, young prisoners are affected by high property prices 
and running costs. It is assumed that a few large centres are cheaper than several 
smaller local ones. Britain is following the USA model with plans for an £85 mil-
lion ‘pathﬁ nder secure college’, a prison school designed for 320 girls and boys 
aged 12 to 17 years, against warnings by experts.  38  The government hoped that 
the current average annual cost of £100,000 per place would be reduced in future. 
Yet there is regular evidence that cutting costs and stafﬁ ng in British prisons is 
markedly sending up self-harm and suicide rates.  39  Problems include the large size 

Emergence 105
of the college, girls and younger boys being very vulnerable to abuse, and the long 
distance from most residents’ homes and thus likely difﬁ culties for them with set-
tling back afterwards into their families, schools and neighbourhoods. The ‘college’ 
plans and standards were criticised for being left vague to suit the private company 
that would run the prison. The plan neglected education and care standards and 
emphasised punishment regulations. This would scarcely help to support or reform 
vulnerable young people. However, secure colleges in the USA greatly help many 
young people with their education, and have an average reoffending rate of 30 per 
cent, whereas in the UK the rate is 70 per cent.  40  
 In Britain in 2014, 2.5 million children lived in families that owed £4.8 bil-
lion in loans, debts and household bills (Children’s Society 2014). Reports of fall-
ing incomes, rising costs and debts and serious insecurity among poor families 
all indicate increased tensions (Chase and Walker 2013) and risk of violence. Yet 
women’s refuges and legal aid for mothers and children are closing down. There 
were protests that over 6,000 accused young people would have no legal support at 
all to defend their case in court.  41  Legal aid is also being withdrawn from children 
who need to defend themselves from abuse and neglect in institutions or at home, 
or are at risk of homelessness, or are young immigrants and asylum seekers.  42  On 
average each week in British homes, one to two children die because of abuse or 
neglect,  43  and two women are killed by domestic violence, which causes three 
more women each week to take their own life.  44  Their bereaved children wit-
ness and often endure violence and are likely to suffer lasting feelings of fear, loss 
and guilt (Miller 1983). Men in the UK are three times more likely than women 
to commit suicide,  45  which is associated with trauma during their childhood 
(Shiner et al. 2009). These indicators of stress, distress and feelings of helpless lone-
liness suggest children’s crucial needs for comfortable, affordable housing, long-
term residence in supportive neighbourhoods and schools, and secure, reasonably 
paid employment for their parents. However, the city as a churning market has 
other concerns, such as ensuring that price is ‘free and fair’. 
 2E, ‘price is free and fair’ 
 In the price ethic, price mechanisms must be free, without constraints that would 
unbalance natural justice. Ideally, no laws or rules restrict banks and businesses, 
and there are no imposed standards such as for health and safety. Preferably, there 
are few or no state supports and beneﬁ ts to tamper with the pure competition 
that should exist between businesses, consumers, employers and workers and that 
ensures excellence. State beneﬁ ts risk giving unfair advantage and free handouts to 
the weak and feckless who ought to pay a fair price. Beneﬁ ts tend to help most 
those who have contributed least but are in greatest need, such as children,  46  but the 
price ethic considers that beneﬁ t systems ‘pilfer’ workers’ hard-earned income; they 
tax the most successful workers most highly, and thereby impose false disincentives 
and hold back success. They lack the spur and rightful rigour of real businesses; in 
all these ways, taxes encourage waste of funds and resources. 

106 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Instead of inefﬁ cient state services acting as a break or drag on the market, these 
should be taken over by the market. Free market competition and the ‘wisdom of 
price’ improve every service possible. The state should therefore merely commis-
sion and inspect services, and even this work is best performed by the market—
meaning private companies. Professional associations and trade unions that set stan-
dards and support their members meddle unfairly with the price economy. 
 In theory, the price ethic works to negate inefﬁ ciency and to increase cost 
effectiveness, wealth and growth. Since the 1940s its inﬂ uence has spread to all 
continents (Harvey 2007; Klein 2007; Mirowski and Plehwe 2008) through struc-
tures promoted in free trade, aid and loan treaties and by agencies such as the World 
Bank and IMF. The  restructuring  of states and  globalisation  remove state controls and 
supports, privatise services and utilities, and cut taxes. They promote the free ﬂ ow 
of money, goods, trade and labour. Work may be exported and outsourced glob-
ally from richer to poorer areas, while migrant labour is brought into richer areas 
to lower wages and working conditions, as price dictates. Poorer countries lose 
their best workers, such as qualiﬁ ed healthcare staff, in brain drains when they can 
command a higher salary elsewhere. The third and overlapping neoliberal struc-
ture,  ﬁ nancialisation , involves reinvesting money into money, into hedge funds, PFIs 
and ﬁ nancial speculation. The global search of ‘hot money’ for quick, high proﬁ t 
attracts lenders into countries with the lowest wages and taxes, the cheapest sources 
of raw materials, and the least state regulation. There is then pressure on all other 
countries to adopt these freer and lower standards.  47  Money also ﬂ ows into areas 
where property prices are rising rapidly. 
 Reverence for freedom in the price ethic extends to regarding everyone as freely 
responsible for their own and their children’s wellbeing, for their health and health-
care, and for causes of their ill health, such as poor diet or damp, cold housing. 
It is assumed to be essential to promote ‘free’ bargaining between individual buyers 
and sellers, producers and consumers, employers and employees, as if they are all 
equal players who mutually and freely agree on their price. In the logic of a ‘fair 
price’, like a ‘fair ﬁ ght’, the best protagonist rightly wins, rewarded by incentives, 
while the loser is disciplined by penalties. The young people in Accra (see above) 
described how these pressures ﬁ lter onto the streets. 
 2E, respect price at all costs 
 Scarcity adds to the price of housing and rents. For decades, British governments 
have built and repaired far too few houses, in the belief that the market does this 
better. Yet the market does not supply housing for the poor, who are bereft when 
neither state nor market helps them. Whereas many European countries have well-
regulated, long-term, rental housing as a preferred option, British tenants face great 
insecurity in short leases and high rents. In inner London, on average over 40 per 
cent of family income goes on rent, often much higher than monthly mortgage 
repayments would be. Landlords need not repair damaged homes or insulate them 
to reduce heating bills. Nearly one third of privately rented homes in London are 

Emergence 107
below the ‘decent homes’ standard.  48  It is expensive to move house, and still more 
so if tenants can only cover the costs by high-interest loans. Without secure hous-
ing, families risk being evicted at any time and having to move into a hostel, or 
shared housing, or onto the street. It is not worthwhile for families to buy a sofa or 
a washing machine if they might have to dump these anytime, along with clothes 
and toys, if they have too little space in the next place where they will stay. Each 
year in London, one in three families with private landlords moves house. 
 Young families move so frequently in a ‘churning’, often precipitated when a 
new baby arrives, when families come together or break apart, when older children 
leave home, when rents rise and housing beneﬁ ts are capped, and when the tax on 
‘spare’ bedrooms in social housing affects them.  49  The idea of unnecessary ‘spare’ 
rooms ignores the many ways children fully use all the rooms: for play and music 
and other hobbies, for quiet study, to have their own bedroom, to be with friends, 
and to have space to stay with both their parents if they live apart. Homes with 
fewer bedrooms have fewer, smaller reception rooms, further reducing family liv-
ing space. Most ‘spare’ rooms are in elderly people’s homes, but they were exempt 
from the bedroom tax. New homes in the UK are 40 per cent smaller than those in 
similar European countries, and housing in London is now the most expensive in 
the world except for Monaco,  50  a triumph for price and a disaster for young people 
in disadvantaged families. 
 The values of the price system ignore social and emotional costs. The high price 
of housing, a main cause of growing child poverty and families’ debt, privation 
and stress,  51  is an instance of how price has little to do with real ﬁ nancial or social 
cost. High rents and mortgages heighten the cost implications of other aspects of 
life. They force couples to calculate the price of a child. Can they afford to have a 
baby and a large enough home, time off work and childcare? If they delay having 
children, after their mid-30s women are likely to risk unwanted infertility and may 
need IVF services (in vitro fertilisation). There are glowing accounts of ‘miracle’ 
IVF babies, but this is not ideal for parents or children. Most attempts at IVF fail 
and are very expensive; babies born after IVF are more likely to be disabled and to 
need neonatal special or intensive care (Rennie and Kendall 2013). 
 The free market increases chaos in housing provision, as already mentioned 
when housing is available far away from employment. An alternative would be to 
move industry and other work into areas with many households and low employ-
ment, but the free market would not allow such regional, coordinated planning. 
Attempts to cut the costs of building new homes have included ‘compulsory pur-
chase orders’ and ‘pathﬁ nder’ projects. These enable councils to evict house own-
ers, demolish thousands of buildings, and clear great tracts of land. They hope to 
attract developers who will build on a large enough scale (thousands of homes) 
to make worthwhile proﬁ ts. Since the 1990s, much valuable housing has been 
destroyed to be replaced by poor quality, cheap housing, or by nothing, leaving 
empty wastes when the funding ran out and contractors withdrew (Minton 2012). 
 ‘Secured by design’ is another price-driven policy. It produces unwanted, 
oppressive designs in housing. It is intended to reduce crime and therefore 

108 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
insurance payments, by designing high security housing, schools, hospitals, and 
other buildings (Harvey 2012; Minton 2012). There are high walls, small windows, 
fortress gating, cul-de-sacs, many CCTVs, and high-rise ﬂ ats that replace houses 
and gardens. The police, backed by insurance companies and supported by regula-
tions, dominate the planning by architects and builders, and insist on these costly, 
heavily enclosed, alienating spaces. 
 Yet ‘secured by design’ has increased crime rates when the many passersby who 
would deter burglars are kept away by the security, and away from lonely stairwells 
in blocks of ﬂ ats. The ugly buildings, with iron gates across front doors, and notices 
that ban children from playing, look both intimidating and paranoid, strange emo-
tions to promote around neighbourhoods. 
 Respect for price at all costs led to the sale and privatising of housing described 
earlier, and to the state paying subsidised rents directly to unregulated private land-
lords, however awful the buildings they let.  52  Tabloid newspapers complain about 
(very rare) cases of families with six children being subsidised by over £100,000 
a year. Driven by the price ethic, the government would not attempt to control 
rents (a market price), but tried to resolve this problem by capping the housing 
beneﬁ t payments. This penalised the families, but not the landlords, who could eas-
ily ﬁ nd new tenants. The cap was estimated to put 800,000 privately rented homes 
out of the reach of low income families, and unless they could cut other costs and 
pay the rent themselves, they had to move. However, there were thousands more 
families in need than there were available low-cost properties for them to move 
into, thereby forcing up rents still further.  53  
 2E, the axiom to price everything 
 The neoliberal view that everything has a price has many effects. One is to dismiss 
and devalue everything that cannot be measured and priced, love or human rights 
or birdsong for instance, or to banish them to the private world, and to disenchant 
the public world. Another effect is to draw every child and adult into a single mea-
sure of price, such as family income, with concern about those families living on 
‘less than one or two dollars a day’. 
 When all things are priced, the point of investing in them, as commodities, is 
to raise their price or exchange value. High test scores increase the market value 
of a child as a future worker and of the school. Public spaces such as parks and 
town-centres are sold to private companies, whose aim is to attract wealthier resi-
dents and consumers, and to scare away the rest, including young people, thereby 
increasing property values and the charges the companies can levy. This radically 
alters citizenship of the majority, denying their human rights to freedom of associa-
tion and peaceful assembly. 
 The sale and privatising of public spaces evoked huge protests in the USA but 
have scarcely been noticed or debated in Britain (Minton 2012). Hundreds of 
agencies and unelected quangos now control public spaces with complicated rules, 
all intended to promote development and growth (of prices) but not necessarily the 

Emergence 109
common good. The London Olympic village was supposed to be part of a legacy 
for the people. It is now a private housing estate, barred to the 70 per cent of local 
people, including children in low income families who live in nearby. Families in 
rented homes in East London keep being moved on in a 60 per cent ‘churn’ of 
households each year (Minton 2012, xxviii). 
 Severe cost-counting of public services, such as beneﬁ t systems, demeans staff 
and users, when the costs of their contact are cut to the minimum, mechanised and 
dehumanised. Only access by computers or telephones may be allowed, to reduce 
face-to-face contact when human pity might be felt. It is then easier for hard-
pressed staff in under-funded centres to leave calls on hold or cut them off, whether 
the calls concern missing beneﬁ t payments to a hungry family, or a decision to send 
a disabled child into a care home hundreds of miles away, or frantic anxiety about 
mistreatment of the child in that home. There are numerous accounts of beneﬁ ts 
being suddenly withdrawn for little or no reason, such as from the mother who 
missed an appointment when she was in hospital having her second baby. Families 
with children then try to survive on child beneﬁ t and debts and many are evicted 
for nonpayment of rent (O’Hara 2015). 
 If families can make formal complaints or go to court about inadequate services, 
this helps to keep up standards. Yet severe cuts to legal aid reduce this guarding of 
standards and of human rights. In 1215,  Magna Carta  stated that English justice 
would not be sold or delayed. In 2015, poor families are forced to pay for or forgo 
justice, which is severely delayed, as shown in a battle by parents to stop their young 
child from being forcibly adopted against their will.  54  Capita, an outsourcing com-
pany, has won £millions of state contracts for running all beneﬁ t call centres and 
it admits to cutting off calls when there are ‘too many’.  55  Such acts can feel enor-
mous when they are multiplied during each stressful day, when the phone is cut 
off because of unpaid bills, and shower water runs cold after the very highly priced 
electricity pay meter runs out, the washing machine breaks down and cannot be 
replaced, and stressed children wet their beds. Parents and children who are already 
cold, hungry and helplessly angry are more likely to have violent rows. These 
families know the price of everything, not as proﬁ t opportunities, but as payments 
drawn from many days of exhausting work, and also as payments that cannot be 
met for necessities that have to be foregone. 
 Children themselves are literally priced when schools have to pay the ﬁ rst 
£6,000 towards the extra costs of meeting the special needs of disabled students. 
Reluctant to pay the extra costs, many head teachers, as market forces compel 
them to do, illegally exclude disabled students or refer them to other local schools 
that are willing to accept them.  56  Yet this adds to the cost burden on the inclusive 
schools and lets off the segregating schools, which gain thrice in the school pric-
ing competition: they can put more resources into high-achieving students; their 
average school scores are not held back by students with special needs; they win 
praise for balancing their budgets. Even the extra payments above the basic £6,000 
may fall far short of the real cost of educating students with special needs, and 
there is much confusion and wasted time over how to apply for the extra funds. 

110 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Local education authorities (LEAs) used to organise schools with much extra free 
support for disabled students and coordination between schools (Alderson and 
Goodey 1998). The price-led education market since 1988 has promoted market 
competition between schools with far less LEA support for schools and for disabled 
students. 
 The price ethic turns everything into commodities to be bought and sold, 
counted and costed for proﬁ t. Children’s services increasingly treat children as costs 
or investments, and teach children to absorb and live by the price ethic. Housing is 
assessed as an investment for price, not its value as a personal dwelling space and a 
right. Education and healthcare become products to be ‘delivered’. People too are 
priced: as high- or low-skilled workers; as easy-to-treat patients who recover quickly 
or expensive patients who need long-term extra treatment (see Chapter 10); as 
bright students who learn and succeed quickly and enhance school success rates, or 
as slow or difﬁ cult students who fail exams, need extra help and lower the school’s 
scores or price. On daily score charts at some schools, young children begin each day 
on a neutral level colour and are graded by the end of the day for how their behav-
iour scores a high-value or low-value colour, with public praise or punishment.  57  
Although the aim is to promote good behaviour, the effect is to reinforce through 
daily micro-interactions the social advantage or disadvantage the children already 
have and their identities as rewarded achievers or consistent failures (Alanen et al. 
2015). Teachers are forced to insist on ‘zero tolerance’ in order to gain OFSTED’s 
approval, which attracts desirable families to the school and expands waiting lists 
from which the unwanted can be excluded. In ‘an economy of student worth’ 
and performance, education is ‘distorted by fears of measurement and comparison’ 
(Ball 2013, 3–4). 
 Putnam’s (2000) concept of social capital claims to translate the elusive social 
world into units, which the price system can process, as if every social relation 
and interaction can be treated as an asset to be banked, spent or invested for proﬁ t 
by egoistic agents. Ben Fine (2010) and David Harvey (2014) contend that this is 
a dangerous illusion in social research, which degrades and distorts every topic it 
addresses. Instead of applying social capital, they argue that social researchers should 
critically deconstruct it. However, the price ethic is so pervasive in daily life that 
it seems to govern the soul and shape the private self. These processes were cen-
tral to Nikolas Rose’s (1999) analysis of psychological, political and philosophical 
problems: how can the self and the parent-child relationship be free and autono-
mous in highly regulated societies, under intense oversight by the ‘psy’ professions 
(psychology, psychiatry, psychoanalysis, psychotherapy)? Yet Rose’s impressive anal-
ysis curiously omits economics, leaving power as a vague, sinister but purposeless force. 
In the price system, however, proﬁ t is recognised to be the cause, motive and driver 
of governments’ and societies’ liaisons with the psy complex. Psychiatric theories  58  
inform neoliberal-military plundering policies (Klein 2007, 3–21). Christopher 
Goodey (2011, 2015) critically traced continuing traditions that have justiﬁ ed attrib-
uting greater or less worth to individuals: from classical honour, through religious 
ideas of grace and an elect group destined for heaven in the afterlife, to modern, 

Emergence 111
eugenic concepts of intelligence and psychological worth. These are versions of 
individuals being judged for their ‘social capital’ or price. 
 2E, price and child poverty 
 The price ethic insists that it offers the only way to generate wealth and growth; 
wealth trickles down to beneﬁ t all; inequality provides necessary rewards and incen-
tives. Poverty affects all generations and many children live in wealthy families. How-
ever, in most countries the youngest generations are ‘the new poor’, with severe 
deprivation among many millions of children. 
 In Britain, measures of child poverty include low and falling household income, 
numbers of children living in poverty,  59  use of food banks, malnutrition and mental 
illness,  60  and the very high proportion of their low income that families have to 
spend on tax and basic living costs (CPAG 2015; IFS 2013; Meek 2014).  61  Just one 
example is two parents who had been in care as children and had all their beneﬁ ts 
and other income stopped for four months, as regularly happens to thousands of 
claimants. Their debts and rent arrears rocketed and the father attempted suicide 
again. His two young daughters sat beside him as he explained, ‘Everything just 
builds up after a while. I was walking around thinking where I was going to get 
money from, what [was] I going to do about the kids, how was I going to survive? 
I’ve been through the bins and all sorts, trying to make ends meet.’  62  
 The average weekly wage in Britain for workers aged 18 to 21 years fell by one 
ﬁ fth (£171) in real terms in the period 1998–2013, whereas for workers aged over 50 
it rose by a quarter (£444). Twenty per cent young people aged 18 to 24 who are 
not students were unemployed, whereas only four per cent of 50-year-olds were 
unemployed.  63  Neglect of young people damages the whole of society because they 
are the new and future workforce. When they are not being trained by skilled profes-
sionals, we lack the plumbers, nurses and many other essential workers we need, and 
we have to recruit them at great expense from other countries – which need them 
too. Places in UK nursing schools were being cut, while nearly three young people 
apply for each place, and nearly a quarter of new nurses were recruited from abroad.  64  
 Some British schools report that a quarter of their children arrive hungry every 
morning, but 1,500,000 children living in poverty were disqualiﬁ ed from having 
free school meals because their parents were employed, however little they earned. 
Hunger increases malnutrition and mental illness and lowers ability to concentrate. 
There were calls for more food banks, a national living wage and daily free meals 
through the holidays for children entitled to free school meals.  65  
 Two thirds of poor children in Britain have working parents on low pay, topped 
up by state beneﬁ ts, which might at any time be withdrawn. This forces many 
families into debt, when interest rates can be 6,000 per cent per annum.  66  By 2015, 
the UK public sector net debt was £1,489 billion,  67  and private household debts 
were a record £1.43 trillion.  68  Governments justify austerity cuts by claiming that 
these reduce the burden of debt that would be left to younger generations. Yet they 
make youngest generations pay now, in much lower average family income, lost 

112 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
services and amenities, and seemingly reduced future opportunities. During a time 
of huge debts in 1945, Britain set up the welfare state, which seemed reckless but 
was successful. Yet the difference now is that private and often foreign ﬁ rms beneﬁ t 
from much public spending, instead of the people. 
 Politicians boast that incomes are rising, but they mean total average incomes, 
which include billionaires. Around the world, median incomes are falling (Oxfam 
2014b). Despite ﬁ nancial crises over three decades and while low incomes have 
stagnated or fallen, high incomes, especially of the wealthiest 0.1 per cent and even 
more of the 0.01 per cent, have risen. Globally, just 80 individuals had the same net 
wealth as 3.5 billion people, half the human beings in the world (Oxfam 2014a, 
2014b) in a relentless ‘gush-up’ of wealth (Roy 2014). The ﬁ nanciers who caused 
the 2008 crisis with subprime loans especially beneﬁ tted.  69  They publicly reminisce 
about the ‘great fun and fascinating excitement’ of ‘managing’ and ‘coping with the 
crisis’ like ‘being a pilot in a cockpit’.  70  Although a few admitted ‘shocked disbelief’ 
about the 2008 crisis, and making a ‘mistake’,  71  none has been punished for the 
millions of dispossessed homes and destitute families made homeless.  72  Neoliberals 
turn every crisis to their advantage (Klein 2007; Mirowski 2014). The wealthy pay 
proportionately far less tax and other living costs, and enjoy many subsidies and 
advice on tax avoidance and evasion amounting globally to $trillions,  73  including 
secret ‘sweetheart deals’ with tax ofﬁ cers, who may move on to work for compa-
nies they beneﬁ tted.  74  Proﬁ ts multiply and so do debts, rapidly driving rich and 
poor further apart.  75  
 Wealth accumulates over the years and drifts up towards older age groups. In 
2014, of the 1,645 billionaires in the world, only 31 were aged under 40 and most 
of them worked for family ﬁ rms.  76  Wealth mainly accrues from unearned income 
in proﬁ ts and rents from formerly made investments, so that ‘the past tends to 
devour the future’ (Piketty 2014, 378)—in other words, older generations largely 
feed off payments from younger ones. Young families who pay high rents, typically 
to older landlords, and who cannot afford to buy their own homes symbolise grow-
ing intergenerational debts and gaps. 
 Poverty absents the poor themselves, making them seem invisible on small to 
large levels. Each year in Britain an estimated 100,000 children and young people 
run away or go missing,  77   and many of the over 3,000 young unaccompanied asy-
lum seekers who arrive each year in the UK are lost from systems of care.  78  They are 
barely visible in cities. Homeless people are driven off city streets by simple rede-
sign, which removes public toilets and spaces to sleep; bus stops have narrow sloping 
seats; railway stations have few seats, often partitioned to stop anyone from lying 
down; spikes are set into sheltered paved areas. In these ways, policy makers conceal 
homelessness from public awareness, concern and protest. Almost 15,000 house-
holds were accepted as statutorily homeless in London in the year 2012–2013, 
although many more homeless families are not ‘accepted’ or re-housed by councils. 
Homeless children and young people are hidden within houses occupied by many 
families, among the 69,000 ‘concealed’ families in London,  79  or when they ‘sofa surf’ 
and stay brieﬂ y with friends and keep moving on. 

Emergence 113
 Governments also absent children from adult-centred debates about ‘working 
age beneﬁ ts’ though children are often centrally involved. In a rare example of 
publicity, the Supreme Court ruled, in the case of a single mother with six chil-
dren, that the low beneﬁ t payments were not illegal but, some of the judges stated, 
they contravened the UN  Convention on the Rights of the Child  Article 27 on the 
right to an adequate standard of living. The government minister commented, 
‘I am delighted that the country’s highest court has agreed with this government 
and overwhelming public opinion that the beneﬁ t cap is right and fair.’ He claimed 
this his plan to limit child beneﬁ ts to only two children per family ‘is enormously 
popular’,  80  using rhetoric both to sway and to appeal to public opinion. In an ‘era 
of post truth’, truths and lies are mixed impartially in news reports as if they have 
equal weight. Questionable numbers about welfare cuts ﬂ oat out from the gov-
ernment ‘into the public debate like raw sewage’,  81  in unproven claims that poli-
cies have reduced ‘workless’ households. When politicians ascribe labels that split 
‘strivers’ (us) from ‘skivers’ (them), this is unrealistic. Many people in Britain move 
in and out of employment while their income rises and falls. They are not unem-
ployed by ﬁ xed identity but by changing circumstances. The welfare state does not 
mainly hand out long-term beneﬁ ts to ‘spongers’, but was designed to be ready to 
serve everyone when they are in need, such as with healthcare and pensions. Most 
parents who receive beneﬁ ts are employed, and nearly half the beneﬁ t bill goes to 
pensions (Hills 2014). 
 These are just a few examples that highlight how the price system, despite its 
rewards and merits, works against the interests of vast numbers of people, often espe-
cially the young, and in doing so increases costs and problems for society generally. 
 Price and 3L third level 
 The interventions at 2E will be reviewed on a larger 3L scale. Unlike the ﬁ nal, 
closed synthesis of the traditional dialectic, the third level of MELD totality is an 
open-ended process-in-product. It can be a great drawing together and interrelat-
ing of life and thought, of differences and dichotomies. This review of econom-
ics might raise the questions: Where are the children? How is all this relevant to 
childhood? 
 The idea of constellations sees such seemingly disparate entities as markets, 
global corporations, morality and childhood, moving like stars in relation to one 
another, each a totality within the larger connected wholes. Economics affects chil-
dren as much as adults, shaping their present and future. Totalities break ‘with our 
ordinary notions of identity, causality, space and time’, past and future, abstract and 
concrete, by making new connections. They are ‘ existentially constituted,  and perme-
ated,  by their relations with others . . .  Intra-actively changing embedded ensembles 
[are] constituted by their geo-histories . . . and their contexts in open potentially 
disjointed process’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 125, emphasis in original). 
 The 2E interventions produce new emergent wholes at 3L, which may be 
inadvertent, unintended or counterproductive. Although totality can overcome 

114 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
contradiction, incompleteness and alienation, it can also heighten them. As reviewed 
in earlier chapters, when 1M non-identity is based on ﬂ awed insights, partial illu-
sions and contradictions, these become clearer at 3L when seeming opposites are 
set into interdependent constellations. Theories of price are set within real world 
politics, markets are connected to human emotions and needs in TMSA.  82  The 
tensed interactions inevitably move forward from past to future, shaped by the past 
and by geo-history through overlapping, converging and contradictory rhythmics 
(sequences of cause-effect in time and space). 
 When 3L combines commercial, material and social aspects of the totality of 
life, then the limitations of price, the harms as well as beneﬁ ts, become clearer. 
Hayek’s justiﬁ cation of ‘ﬁ nancial gain’, that although ‘it may have unpleasant conse-
quences for individual others it is the cause for an increase in general wealth so that 
everyone ultimately beneﬁ ts’ (Gane 2014, 1101) becomes far more questionable 
when beneﬁ ts and costs are more broadly and inter-generationally deﬁ ned. Many 
children have been lifted out of extreme poverty: 500 million people in China 
alone in recent years.  83  Yet to remember an earlier point, the number living on less 
than $2 a day in sub-Saharan Africa has doubled since 1981 (Oxfam 2014a). China 
has not wholly adopted the Western price ethic, whereas it has been enforced in 
Africa with dire effects. 
 3L, cities as markets 
 Constant becoming and begoing, absenting and negating occur through the chang-
ing structures of cities. Each city at 3L can be seen as a totality of all its districts and 
citizens, and also in relation to other cities in national and international patterns. 
Hayek’s economy of price has expanded to a global reach in ways he did not neces-
sarily foresee or endorse. 
 For centuries, the docklands along London’s River Thames expanded with the 
Empire. The city centre on the river’s north side became the wealthiest square 
mile in the world, a separate state within the UK, and a world-leading tax haven 
(Shaxson 2011). The rule about ‘non-doms’ (not domestic residents), which 
allowed magnates from the Empire to live in Britain and not pay tax, was extended 
to attract millionaires from any country, and elite British schools add to the appeal. 
As the docks gradually closed, replaced by airports and other much deeper har-
bours for the new mega-shipping, the river’s south side became one of the most 
deprived areas in London. Recently, re-pricing of poor areas into rich ones took 
off. The 50-ﬂ oor Canary Wharf tower on the north side will be reﬂ ected by 
a 48-ﬂ oor tower on the south side. This is being marketed with artists’ imaginings of 
future shining malls and towers pasted over the present, depicted as dark Dickensian 
Deptford alleys. A new ‘apex of fashionability’ will mix a few historic relics and 
some local arts with the promise of massive new proﬁ table structures.  84  
 The old areas, the cheaper housing, and most of the residents are disappear-
ing. New housing, shopping, leisure and business complexes, generally hostile 
to children and other low-spending groups, will make them absent or invisible. 

Emergence 115
Prices ﬂ oat astronomically away from use value and need, and especially from the 
emotional, physical and social meaning of the homes and surrounding areas for the 
former residents. International wealth once more pours into south London as loans, 
investments, property speculation, and PPPs (Public Private Partnerships, when tax-
payers cover much of the costs but the private partners take most of the proﬁ t for 
decades to come). The UK has the most PPPs in the world (Hildyard 2014). They 
yield 13–25 per cent annual proﬁ t for decades. Public projects are planned not pri-
marily for public beneﬁ t but for mounting long-term proﬁ t from housing, water, 
energy, transport, health care, schools, communications, prisons, roads. Formerly 
provided by the state, these services are now commodities on global markets. Wealth 
therefore pours out of London again in rents and interest payments to the tax haven 
accounts of rentiers and hedge funds. British citizens, especially the youngest ones, 
miss out in many ways, while costs and debts rise, and state investments in buildings, 
roads and shops will not support sustained, productive, future employment. 
 3L, ‘price is free and fair’ 
 3L totalities add up to systems that are neither free nor fair; money may move 
freely but in ways that restrict people. The correct price does not simply emerge 
but is rigged against the already disadvantaged,  85  which erodes hopes of prosperous, 
just societies. The price system, by lowering average wages and working condi-
tions, outsourcing and exporting work, and ignoring inequalities of power and 
knowledge between buyers and sellers, stokes up the recurrent crises inherent to 
capitalism (Chang 2011). The myth of the fair, equally agreed-upon price pretends 
that workers fully accept being exploited, when they have no choice, and the myth 
thereby makes unjust systems seem ethical and justiﬁ ed (Harvey 2014, 64). 
 Price is coercive when price bargaining affects children and young people and 
the services they depend on are gauged for their cost-efﬁ ciency more than for 
their humanity. Health, education and care all risk becoming impersonal com-
modities, items to be delivered and measured, rather than interactive processes in 
which the healers, teachers and carers gain and learn mutually with the children. 
When human identity and relationships, wisdom and compassion, solidarity and 
altruism are all reserved for private life, the price ethic for the public market echoes 
Hobbes’s ‘war of all against all’. 
 Children are taught to price themselves and other people by what they own, 
and by their human capital. When the disadvantaged are blamed as failures, and the 
wealthy rewarded because they are ‘worth it’, children learn to succeed by pric-
ing and selling themselves as products, and by applying advertising, PR and self-
promotion techniques they see all around them, at school, later at work, and often 
in their personal and sexual relationships too.  86  
 Instead of the state drawing back from the free, fair market, workfare and prison-
fare are means of taxpayers lavishly funding privatised, outsourced services (Hamm 
2005; Harvey 2012; Klein 2007; Nadesan 2010; Wacquant 2009). This transforms all 
services. Youth services, for instance, are no longer for enjoyment and led by young 

116 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
people, but are targeted to manage youths at risk of offending (Goldson and Muncie 
2015; Jeffs and Smith 2008). As with the privatised health services in Chapter 10, 
high extra costs include inspections and inquiries after scandals break out in under-
resourced services, and the ‘fair’ price on £multibillion contracts may be agreed 
between the state and inefﬁ cient, even fraudulent companies, which lack relevant 
expertise.  87  The free and fair price ideology multiplies private proﬁ ts, while charg-
ing today’s and future generations rising fees for using services and amenities they 
once owned as commons. 
 3L, negate constraints on price 
 Hayek (1945) believed that lifting all restraints off price was the road to freedom 
and away from serfdom. The opposite is occurring in the free international ﬂ ow 
of money. Many politicians assume they serve the public interest by supporting 
secret deals to give almost unlimited power to global companies, such as TTIP, 
the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.  88  It is claimed that TTIP will 
vastly increase trade, employment and prosperity. Yet TTIP will also lower health 
and safety standards and enable companies to bid for any public service, such as 
NHS ones.  89  If their take-over bid is rejected, the companies may sue governments 
through secret courts run by commercial lawyers for the proﬁ ts they would have 
made if their bid had been approved. 
 Global corporations already have annual budgets far exceeding those of most 
nations. Of the world’s largest 100 economic entities, 51 are companies and only 
49 are states,  90  leading some to argue that multinationals rather than elected gov-
ernments control policy. 
 Corporate interests appear to have bought morality. The European Union presi-
dent Jean-Claude Juncker was prime minister of Luxembourg while it became one 
of the wealthiest countries per capita in the world. He has both denied and boasted 
that Luxembourg became a leading tax haven during those two decades, enabling 
such global giants as Amazon to pay almost no tax. It is all right for us to do this, 
one of his colleagues commented, because if we don’t, another country will, and 
companies will move there,  91  indicating the moral norm of the price ethic. The 
CEO of the tax-avoiding coffeehouse chain Starbucks believed, ‘There is nothing 
abnormal about the way we are run’.  92  
 Contrary to claims of the price ethic that free market competition drives up 
standards and excellence, corporations merge into monopolies. They also collude 
to rig prices, such as by ﬁ xing the algorithms that process trillions of computerised 
cross-currency trade exchanges per microsecond.  93  (This digital miracle might be 
taken as evidence of omnipotent, superhuman price.) The emerging global totality 
is of deregulated, disorganised capitalism. Instead of being a ‘benign’ spur to increase 
general prosperity (Bronk 2013; Hayek 1945), negating constraints on price ensures 
the constant gushing up of wealth towards the tiny pinnacle of the elite. 
 Removing constraints through deregulation increases the scope for crime in 
legitimate business, and in shadow criminal business. Tax avoidance and money 

Emergence 117
laundering by legal companies  94  merge into tax evasion, theft, fraud and black 
markets. Cheap immigrant labour expands along with people-smuggling and traf-
ﬁ cking, among the fastest growing trades, which split families, exploit millions of 
children and injure and kill countless workers. Legal industries from pornography 
to growing strawberries merge with illegal zones, such as child slave labour. Legal 
or illegal, the animal and meat trades cause immense suffering and destruction. 
Legal tourism is subsidised by illegal purloining of land and labour. Legal medi-
cations that may be overpriced, overprescribed and become addictive are mir-
rored in the illegal trade. USA armies spray farms and destroy local economies and 
food supplies (in Afghanistan and Colombia, for example) in futile efforts to stop 
the illegal drug trade, while illicit demand continues on American and European 
streets. Many experts call for reform of law that criminalises drug takers and can 
wreck their lives with prison sentences (Nutt 2012; Stevenson 2014). Meanwhile 
countless children and adults suffer agonising illnesses without the pain relief that a 
legal poppy trade could provide. 
 Bribes and subsidies in government arms deals  95  help to ﬂ ood the world with 
‘legal’ arms, but from the 7–8 million weapons sold each year for over $1.5 tril-
lion, it is estimated almost one million weapons are lost or stolen, and today’s 
lighter weapons more readily arm child soldiers (Bourck 2014; Honwana and 
De Boeck 2005). Global corruption in the defence industry is estimated to cost 
$20 billion per year.  96  Each day around 21,000 children die, many for lack of basic 
health care. Each minute on average one person is killed by a weapon. India has the 
highest number of poor children, and is the highest spender on arms. The effects 
of armed violence cost Africa an estimated $1 billion a year.  97  
 In 2012 alone, almost a trillion dollars were funnelled out of developing and 
emerging economies through crime, corruption and tax evasion. The ﬂ ow of 
money out of Africa exceeds the ﬂ ow in from trade and aid. 
 Beyond the damaging economic impact of the overall capital outﬂ ows, illicit 
ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows have a terrible, subversive impact on governments, victims of 
crime, and society. They facilitate transnational organized crime, foster cor-
ruption, undermine governance, and decrease tax revenues.  98  
 Deregulation and negating constraints on price involve a great absence of 
accounting and pricing of other costs that affect the youngest generations. There 
is their loss of present services, freedoms and opportunities (such as lost health and 
schooling) when funds that could have beneﬁ tted them are spent elsewhere. There 
are the incalculable economic, social and ecological damage and debts that will 
need to be repaired and repaid in the future. 
 3L, respect price at all costs? 
 The academic economist Ha-Joon Chang (2007, 2011) cites business views that 
respect price at all costs. They insist that ‘artiﬁ cially’ higher wages, above the 

118 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
supposedly freely-agreed-upon low ones, will increase unemployment and hurt 
business, and that employers ‘pay what they can afford to pay, depending on their 
income from consumers’.  99  Chang questions the belief that British wages must be 
low to compete with other countries, citing successful national economies that 
support higher wages. He advises breaking with the fatalism of the price ethic 
by raising wages and prices at home and abroad, and by investing in staff train-
ing, especially vital for the youngest workers, as well as research, development, and 
new technologies to increase productivity. This could end Britain being the most 
unequal OECD country in the world, paying low wages but the highest rates to 
shareholders and in directors’ salaries and bonuses. 
 Governments that respect price by leaving companies to pay whatever low 
wages they choose lose repeatedly. People in low paid and zero-contract jobs pay 
little income tax. The state subsidises and tops up their low pay, such as with 
child tax credits, even when the adults work for global corporations such as Asda/
Walmart, the world’s largest company by revenue. A further state subsidy supports 
young apprentices, including in supermarkets, where they may learn few skills 
besides stocking shelves, instead of training to be the skilled workers in so many 
other trades, crafts and services where they are now urgently needed in Britain. 
Deregulation allows supermarkets to slash food prices, which can destroy farming 
and other businesses and whole supply chains. The massive loss of dairy farms in 
Britain  100  is one example of the lost resources and skills that are no longer passed on 
to younger generations, but which we will soon desperately need given the grow-
ing world food shortage. Supermarkets turn to importing more food from suppliers 
that are cheaper because they need not observe UK standards that respect livestock 
and the environment (Curry 2011; Lymbery and Oakeshott 2014). 
 In this ruthless international undercutting of price, Olga Nieuwenhuys envis-
aged a vast pyramid of global labour, power and wealth supported by children 
at the base. Families in California who pay their Filipino nanny low wages are 
subsidised by the lower paid woman who cares for the nanny’s children in the 
Philippines. That woman’s wages in turn are subsidised by the often unpaid adults 
and other children who care for her children. Nieuwenhuys asked, can ‘attention, 
solicitude and love itself can be “displaced” from one child’ to another in an upward 
movement of wealth, power and attention? ‘Global development agencies implic-
itly acknowledge that all societies depend on children contributing to intergenera-
tional wealth exchange, but the agencies keep this wealth invisible to conceal how 
its surplus is siphoned off   ’ (Hochschild 2000; Nieuwenhuys 2005, 168). In over 
a billion households, tasks such as hauling water or pounding maize can ﬁ ll many 
exhausting hours and able children share in the hard work. To treat children’s very 
low paid or unpaid work as ‘enjoyment, socialisation or training is a ﬁ ction when 
the shoes they make for a few pence are sold for $100’ (Katz 2001). It is part of the 
pretence that children are excluded for their own protection and welfare, as women 
used to be, but which increases their oppression and exploitation. 
 Respect for the price ethic at all costs denies democracy when global corpora-
tions and regional and UN agencies such as the European Union and the World Bank 

Emergence 119
overrule policies that won majority votes in elections, sometimes following cam-
paigns led mainly by children and young people (Cockburn 2013, 204–5). Social 
media help to promote their campaigns. Yet social media are also organised by the 
price ethic and big business, and can undermine democracy and hopes of shared 
agency to change the world. Even ‘uttering the word  we ’, Jodi Dean (2009, 35) 
contends, can dwindle into fatalism about corporate power. ‘Participation’ becomes 
endless talk, virtual contacts, blogs and tweets (the epistemic fallacy). There is the 
illusion of being consulted, being heard and effective but, too often, the voices 
speak for splintered special interest groups pleading their cause, without the shared, 
engaged, practical activities that bring real change. Identity politics split groups into 
countless factions (Dean 2009, 23): 
 Rhetorics of access, participation and democracy work ideologically to 
secure the technological infrastructure of neoliberalism, an invidious and 
predatory politico-economic project that concentrates assets and power in 
the hands of the very, very rich, devastating the planet and destroying the 
lives of billions of people. 
 Mills (1956) criticised the illusion of ‘democratic public opinion’. Like a fair 
price, a supposedly fair consensus emerges ‘naturally’ and democratically after many 
differing views have been aired. And as with price, inequalities of power and wealth, 
of knowledge and expertise are ignored in the myth of the ‘level playing ﬁ eld’ of 
public debate. Everyone’s view and vote are supposed to count equally and an 
eventual consensus seems to emerge that validates the rulers’ power and respect for 
price at all costs. 
 3L, the axiom to price everything 
 In theory every service and amenity must be freed from state interference and priced 
and traded. Within 30 years, ‘the bones and sinews of the British economy’—rail, 
energy, water, postal services, social housing—have been sold to remote, unac-
countable private owners (Meek 2014). The ‘fair’ price or exchange value involves 
companies in beating down their payments while hiking up their proﬁ ts, which are 
largely paid from taxes. 
 Price forces its way into personal life and decisions: choice of which school to 
ensure children’s future ﬁ nancial success; loss of beneﬁ ts if parents live together 
instead of apart. Yet ‘money cannot buy everything and . . . what it cannot buy is 
something essential or even the essential thing’ (Gorz 1989, 116, cited in Harvey 
2014, 275; Seabrook 2007). The essential thing can get lost and destroyed when, to 
economists, if things cannot be measured they do not exist or do not matter. The 
essential things include democracy and citizenship. 
 Corporations spend billions on lobbying, bribing and inﬁ ltrating governments. 
Symbolically, the media mogul Rupert Murdoch regularly visited prime minis-
ters by entering secretly through the back door of 10 Downing Street, where his 

120 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
former editor was a chief adviser.  101  If democracy means that governments respect 
the informed will of the people, governments could be said to have sold democracy 
for Murdoch’s support and funding, and for the votes his newspapers could win for 
them by misinforming and steering public opinion (Davies 2014). 
 Price buys up democracy by distancing the majority from the small wealthi-
est elite that exists in an almost totally private world, in a global ‘class war’ 
(Harvey 2014; Wacquant 2009, 306–8). This especially occurs in the USA, which 
sets examples through elaborate networks that other nations tend to follow (Roy 
2014). At leading schools and universities, privileged children learn alongside 
their relatives and friends and their future career and marriage partners to become 
the next elite generation (Bourdieu 1998; Mills 1956). As adolescents, they listen 
to casual dinner table talk among their elder relatives who, in the USA, com-
bine careers in politics, ﬁ nance, business and the military. (Many presidents have 
been generals.) The ruling class is trained in confrontational rather than reﬂ ective 
business and military methods and applies these to politics, such as in the mili-
tary arms race (Mills 1956) and the ‘war on terror’ against the recently invented 
enemy of Islam. 
 Mills contended that the absence in the USA of a career civil service enables 
ruling politicians to ﬁ ll thousands of federal and state appointments after each elec-
tion with their own supporters. The employees’ remit is to beneﬁ t their patrons, if 
necessary against the interests of the American people. War and violence that proﬁ t 
corporations replace diplomacy and negotiation in foreign policy (Hamm 2005; 
Klein 2007). The latest expansion is into drone warfare, with routine reports of the 
unintended killing of children and adults by drones aiming for ‘militant suspects’.  102  
These routine assassinations outside ofﬁ cial war zones and inside other sovereign 
states would have been unimaginable a few years ago (Bourke 2014). 
 Economic sanctions are a form of warfare by price, which devalues life and hurts 
the poorest groups most. The slow violence of sanctions tends to precede rather 
than prevent war. A decade of sanctions against Iraq, where 45 per cent of people 
were aged under 15 years, was estimated to have killed 500,000 children.  103  In 
that highly educated and ancient civilisation, schooling and literacy rates dropped. 
Between 2003 and 2011, there were estimated to be almost one and a half mil-
lion war-related deaths in Iraq. Every day in 2011 there was still an average of one 
hundred war-related child deaths from malnutrition, lack of health services, and 
from landmines and poisons leaked from weapons. There are also high rates of child 
cancers and of malformed babies.  104  
 Britain is moving towards the USA model that sets market price power above 
the supposedly free, democratic state, with cuts to the neutral civil service. There 
is the growing unelected House of Lords, and the increase of business advisers 
to form policy, fuse market-state relations and erode fragile democracy. Instead 
of being apolitical servants of the state, some military and police leaders become 
prominent and sometimes celebrity critical spokesmen, promoting costly wars and 
surveillance and ‘homeland security’ (Hamm 2005; Klein 2007; Minkin 2014), 
backed by well-funded military think tanks, such as RAND (USA) and the 

Emergence 121
Royal United Services Institute RUSI (UK). The ‘masculine state’ of defence and law 
as punishment has overtaken the ‘feminine state’ of welfare (Bourdieu et al. 2006). 
 In the USA, the penal services are the third highest employer, largely to control 
protest and disorder that increase when proﬁ t is valued over people. A public para-
noid obsession with crime and punishment is promoted through the mass media, 
politics, ﬁ lms and entertainment and in the hounding of paedophiles (Wacquant 
2009). Contrary to former law on preserving anonymity, minors in English courts 
are being named and shamed in the media. The loosely used phrase ‘children in 
trouble with the law’, whether the child is a suspect or a convict, wrongly implies 
guilt instead of presuming innocence. British public paranoia about crime also 
works generally to exclude and conﬁ ne the innocent: almost all children are socially 
excluded when they are unable to walk freely around their neighbourhood, on the 
pretext of stranger danger, whereas children are most likely to be killed at home by 
someone they know.  105  Child neglect and abuse are unhelpfully treated primarily 
as crimes, instead of their political contexts in poverty, class, racism and inequality 
being addressed (Parton 2014), looking beyond superﬁ cial behaviourism (empiri-
cal, actual) to causes and cures for crime. 
 Wacquant (2009) contends that seeming failure of penal systems turns into suc-
cess: the more unruly the masses appear, the more noble the state’s (undemocratic) 
efforts to contain and deter them can appear to be. Crime rituals both caution and 
distract the restless middle classes, angry about their own and their children’s dimin-
ishing prospects, while neoliberal concepts of greedy, isolated human nature are 
encouraged among wealthy entrepreneurs but punished among the insolent poor. 
 Neoliberalism contradicts its 1M free ‘wisdom of price’ ethic by coercive inter-
ventions at 2E. Efforts to price everything lead to conﬂ icting totalities at 3L. Poli-
cies can be complicated by subconscious and misinformed beliefs, and Hayek’s 
dream of omniscient price was an example of the widespread human illusions that 
he hoped price would transcend. Human beings are thrown into complexities not 
of their own choosing, and live in conﬂ icting, unpredictable open social systems. 
 3L, price and alienation 
 3L explores relationships within and between totalities to make new connections. 
This section summarises the alienating effects of the price system on the four planes 
of social being. 
 On plane one, to increase proﬁ t from the land and from all ecosystems and 
living species, the price system privatises the common land and drives people into 
towns and cities, or traps them into small villages imprisoned among enclosed land 
and narrow dangerous roads. City life requires different ways of living, rewarding 
for many, but others feel alienated from the natural, diurnal, seasonal world; from 
silence, open space, peace and beauty, clean air and water; from plants and animals 
and deeply knowing about the sources of life and food and the natural, material 
basis of work. Many miss the demanding, challenging, exhausting, risky, physical 
activities, and miss living in communities that have shared their work and free time 

122 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
together for generations. Alienation from the body may be shown: in children’s 
and young people’s resistance to an imposed, sedentary, low-risk, urban life; in 
their ‘hyperactivity’, ‘attention deﬁ cit’ and their physical and mental ailments; or 
in addictions that try to capture a sense of risky excitement or escape. This is not 
to reduce psychological reactions to biochemistry. Yet part of this unease can lie in 
being alienated from nature, from one’s own embodied human nature and natural 
needs (Empson 2014; Foster 2002; Marmot et al. 2013). 
 Physical unease can exacerbate alienation on the second plane of being, inter-
personal relationships: feeling a failure, distanced, misunderstood, unacceptable, 
criticised or rejected by other people, who may be just as anxious. The price ethic 
alienates by inciting competition when inevitably most people fail. When money 
becomes the medium of human interaction, price may recreate human identity in 
its own image and children feel valued or devalued by their success or failure rather 
than for their individual self. Impersonal price bypasses personal interactions, as if 
these are dangerously irrelevant and unnecessary distortions. Direct human contact, 
equality and solidarity are blocked by the barrier of price, when exploitation and 
proﬁ t are set above concern for human wellbeing. Alienation’s legal meaning is to 
estrange, transfer or sell something. Workers, including school students, can feel 
alienated from their labour when they cannot choose or control it, it is oppressive 
and not creative or fulﬁ lling, and it serves ulterior motives and proﬁ ts. 
 Wacquant (2009, 249–50) criticised the ‘woolly and spongy terms of the 
“excluded” . . . and the “underclass” ’. They are imposed by others, and no one 
willingly owns the terms of personal shame, disgrace and failure. Wacquant consid-
ered ‘underclass’ a lazy term that blocks and blurs critical analysis and inquiry, and 
increases confusion. Such terms are accusations, metaphors, devices to cast blame 
onto individuals and to divert attention away from the social causes of extreme 
inequalities. The labels can be excuses to denigrate and control, to impose stereo-
types as if they have been earned and deserved by the individuals. 
 To name an ‘underclass’ could be seen as an effort to recognise the millions of 
people who do not ﬁ t the traditional ﬁ ve socio-economic classes, in order to take 
their social position and interests seriously. However, negative labels counteract 
positive efforts, Wacquant believed, and instead confer power on those who claim 
the expertise and authority to deﬁ ne the terms and identify excluded people. If this 
goes unrecognised and unchallenged, the labels may seem natural, normal, inevi-
table, especially to children born into these powerful routines who have known no 
alternatives. 
 Childhood involves social exclusions. A sweeping example of children’s exclu-
sion from such basic matters as human rights was the statement by the chair of the 
UK Equality and Human Rights Commission, a philosopher and expert on trust: 
‘I would trust some people to care for a young child, but not to post an important 
letter’.  106  Children seem to matter less than subhuman objects such as letters. Wac-
quant researched many people within ‘excluded’ groups who wanted to escape and 
felt alienated from their identity, their daily lives, their relatives and neighbours. 
Many children can feel extra exclusions: from adult-centred commercial worlds, 

Emergence 123
from unwanted childhood dependence and from their own seemingly hopeless 
futures. Children and young people are over-represented among very deprived 
groups, from USA black ghettos to French  banlieues,  from Brazilian favelas to 
the slums of Africa and Asia (Davis 2006; Nadesan 2010; Scheper-Hughes 1992; 
Wacquant 2008, 2009). Up to half the population in the 23 poorest states in the 
world is estimated to be aged under 19 years.  107  In Gaza, 40 per cent of the people 
are aged under 15 years.  108  By the end of 2013, Egypt’s halt on fuel imports to Gaza 
meant that the water and sewage pumps stopped working and children had to wade 
through sewage to get to school,  109  and since then there has been great further 
destruction.  110  The intensely excluded group, refugees, ﬂ ood into neighbouring 
countries, already destabilised by shortages of water, food, land and energy, and 
by high unemployment, especially among young people who had shared in lead-
ing the Arab rebellions in 2011 that by 2015 seem to have failed. Half the Syrian 
refugees are children, with one third of all Syrians aged under 15 years, and over 
one half aged under 25.  111  Present economic, political and ecological crises indicate 
that numbers of refugees will multiply in coming years and alternative policies and 
preventions are urgently needed. 
 Rather than isolating and concentrating on disadvantaged individuals, Wac-
quant in effect drew together totalities, and examined the historical, social, spatial, 
symbolic, political and economic processes that set them apart from mainstream 
society and from secure, legal employment. Wacquant (2008, 50) considered that 
‘ordinary people’ living in ghettos try to survive in ways that make sense, and 
are not ‘disorganised’ but ‘differently organised’. Alice Goffman (2014) also found 
within the bizarre conditions set for Black young men in Philadelphia, that very 
high rates of poverty and imprisonment for black adults ensure that their children 
share their present problems and future prospects. 
 Negative relationships lock in global social structures of alienation and global 
commodiﬁ cation at the third social plane. There is hostile opposition between 
classes and religious and ethnic groups, divisive markets, coercive systems of gov-
ernment, competition and war between states. The political splitting apart is 
shown when the weak United Nations cannot get members to agree on the 
most basic international laws needed to reduce global warming, or tax evasion, or 
gross poverty, or fossil fuel extraction (Marshall 2014), which would be in all their 
longer-term interests, and certainly in the younger generations’ interests. Yet these 
totalities are denied, excluded from the assumed social norms and disconnected 
through alienation, disintegration and split-off (Bhaskar 2008b, 208–9). Plane four 
of social being has similarities with MELD 4D, so it will be reviewed in that section. 
 4D, fourth dimension and price 
 4D is the zone of transformation through embodied, intentional, causal agency 
(Bhaskar 2008b, 209–10). Agency in inner subjective being includes personal con-
science, reasoned analysis, imagined better alternatives and hope of working with 
others towards the free ﬂ ourishing of all. However, the price system undermines 

124 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
conﬁ dence and trust in all this potential in oneself and others. Self-realisation has 
to recognise and overcome illusions of fetish and commodiﬁ cation, whereas to 
mystify and maintain these illusions and contradictions are central aims of the price 
ethic. In Marx’s (1990, 165) original fetish, price as exchange value is presented as 
a thing that shrouds the often oppressive and unjust relations between worker and 
employer, producer and consumer, and makes them remote and magical. 
 The commodity-form and the value-relation of the products of labour, 
within which it appears, have absolutely no connection with the physical 
nature of the commodity and the material [ dinglich ] relations arising out of 
this . . . Social relations between [people then appear to take] the fantastic 
form of a relation between things . . . endowed with a life of their own 
[like imagined gods] .
 As the single medium of exchange, the measure of all things, price brings 
unequal things into seemingly equal relationships, and exchange-value conceals 
the cost of labour and extracted proﬁ t. Price is seen as autonomous and as gov-
erning, rather than dependent on, the social division and direct relationships of 
labour. In the fetish illusion of the free market, ‘market forces which none of us 
individually control regulate us’ (like gravity). Price (and gravity) are both relations, 
not things, ‘and have to be conceptualized as immaterial but objective’ (Harvey 
2010, 42–3). 
 Marx analysed how this is not a natural or inevitable process. Yet the fetishism 
becomes a powerful objective reality, with real causal power. Critical theory can 
‘uncover the deep structure of capitalism and suggest alternative value systems based 
on radically different kinds of social and material relations’ (Fine and Saad-Filho 
2010; Harman 2009; Harvey 2010, 46; Marx 1990, 164–5; Swain 2012; Worsley 
2002). This would move away from the market that reiﬁ es all human relationships 
and experiences into commodities. 
 Freud’s theory, that the fetish mystiﬁ es and conceals a wound or deep anxi-
ety as a way of coping, indicates how price conceals hard and at times agonising 
labour, exploitation, suffering and injustice, and denies inequalities and, indeed, 
human relationships when price is imposed as the barrier and medium through 
which people relate. It brings ‘all human action into the domain of the market’ 
(Harvey 2006, 3) and away from civic and private life,  112  although many entities 
can never really be priced, controlled or sold. These include the natural world, 
which is being destroyed by the price system and by global compound growth 
and trade fuelled by petro-chemical industries; personal and group relationships 
of social justice that are being eroded by commercial values; peace, wellbeing and 
prosperity, when a tiny elite grows ever richer and everyone else grows poorer; and 
intergenerational justice, when older generations pass on a much poorer world to 
their children than the one they inherited. Self-destruction appears to be built into 
price when it wastes and destroys resources on which it depends and when its aims 
and continual growth cannot be sustained.  113  

Emergence 125
 Habermas (1984) contrasted the System (formal and economic contacts) with the 
Lifeworld (voluntary associations through families, informal groups, civil society). 
Trust is generated in the Lifeworld, and exploited by the System, which needs yet 
erodes trust. As the System (driven by the price ethic) colonises the Lifeworld, it 
reduces the means of generating trust and the other life-giving entities that are 
essential to the System but are beyond price and not for sale. 
 Some of the economic elite accept the commercial dangers of growing inequali-
ties.  114  Even the neoliberal policy drivers, the OECD, IMF and World Bank, admit 
them.  115  Yet the price ethic prevents any of them from moving ﬁ rst to change poli-
cies, because they cannot trust any others to change too, and must expect them to 
take advantage of any show of weakness. They are locked into the power structure 
that resists every challenge to their vested interests, while it relentlessly multiplies 
the problems and rewards psychopathic personality traits and ethics of fear, greed 
and mistrust (Bakan 2005). 
 4D, price and being aware of contradiction 
 4D is the dimension of self-aware, critical introspection that re-examines 1M 
insights and subsequent emerging contradictions between theories and practices, 
beliefs and behaviours. Glaring contradictions have been outlined between reality 
versus the theories of the fair, correct price and purging, cost-effective, competitive 
market. Yet most adherents still deny the contradictions and failures and reassert 
some form of TINA. Alternatively, they insist that problems arise because the price 
ethic is not followed rigorously enough. With every ﬁ nancial crisis that might raise 
doubts, they call for harsher austerity measures, but not for critical rethinking. For 
decades, neoliberals have turned challenges and crises that might have destroyed 
them greatly to their advantage and wealth-creation, while blaming their oppo-
nents (Klein 2007, 2014; Mirowski 2014). 
 Mirowski (2014, 440–6) identiﬁ ed a contradictory ‘double truth’ in neoliberal-
ism of pure theory versus different actual practice, besides conﬂ icting neoliberal 
theories and policies about optimal relations between the free market and the state 
(Mirowski 2014, 433–40; Wacquant 2009, 307). Even so, questions remain about 
how convinced politicians and ﬁ nanciers are about their own claims that workfare 
is ‘tough love’ (Bill Clinton, George Osborne)  116  or that ‘we are doing what is right 
for our future and what is best for our children’ (David Cameron)  117  or that this is 
‘progressive reform to our public services to help low-income people . . . to aspire 
to a better career, better healthcare and education’ (George Osborne).  118  
 What are the personal values of these politicians, their internal conversations 
about what really matters to them (Archer 2003; Jones 2014; Sayer 2011; Scambler 
2012)? Many politicians vow to beneﬁ t everyone, but they enrich the few at the 
cost of the many. Politician Ian Duncan Smith was deeply upset when visiting a 
deprived Scottish estate in 2002, and pledged to relieve that poverty. Yet his pro-
grammes have harmed thousands of adults and children, wasted £millions,  119  and 
led to ‘scandals’ such as about one third of families with disabled children being 

126 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
unable to afford heating and regular meals.  120  Despite failures and delays, Dun-
can Smith appeared to be startlingly conﬁ dent. How do politicians reconcile their 
claims to be benign and efﬁ cient with their harsh and failing policies? Do they 
really believe their own words? 
 Some may be misinformed, or deceived by these ﬁ ctions or by their peers, or 
they may be working under illusions. Some may be cynical and dishonest. Some 
might believe passionately in the 1M justice that only the rich can generate and 
deserve wealth, and the poor can only beneﬁ t from ‘trickle-down wealth’, and 
from being driven and punished into independence. 
 However, the historian of neoliberalism Philip Mirowski (2014, 325–66) has a 
further explanation, not found in explicit neoliberal reports (epistemology), but 
in the ontology of their driving structures and policies. These reveal a deeper 
coherence of beliefs, which could explain the contradictions as part of a powerful 
mystique. The beliefs work through three stages: 1) denial, 2) temporary solutions 
and 3) spectacular solutions. 
 In denial, the ﬁ rst stage, neoliberals see nature, societies and states as chaotic, 
complex, unpredictable and prone to crises. The greater the natural and social 
upheaval and confusion, the more the market (or price) stands out as the only 
superhuman, omniscient, reliable constant. Price may or may not bring justice and 
prosperity for all, but everyone has to rely on price, and not on such false gods as 
science, democracy, judicial review or rational debate. Everything possible must be 
done to free the market, and ward off the dangers of regulation and accountability. 
 Neoliberals’ denials promote a confusing, foggy, agnostic doubt, which distracts 
public attention away from critical understanding, and away from calls for urgent 
action on global warming and on chaotic markets. Measurements, for example, 
of collapsing ice shelves or collapsing banks, seem scarcely reliable or signiﬁ cant. 
Neoliberal denials exploit fashions for scepticism, postmodernism, nihilism, and 
they allow delay while the market works in slow, inscrutable ways. Patience is 
essential. Reasonable urgent precautions and predictions are dismissed as ‘lacking in 
evidence’ – which concerns about the future do inevitably lack. 
 At stage two, temporary solutions include agnostic diversions that encourage 
avid consumerism and allay impatient public demand for real solutions. Diversions 
include twisting public protests and demonstrations into pop, fun, social-media per-
formances, and ‘murketing’ (Mirowski 2014, 139–47; Morozov 2014). Murketing 
ﬂ atters consumers of all ages that they are cynical and savvy about advertisers’ pres-
sures, but it thereby renders them still less able to see or resist the hidden pressures on 
them to consume. ‘Alternative’ politicians such as Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage 
similarly ﬂ atter and dupe voters. They are promoted by the mass media because 
their jokey, ‘ordinary’ style turns critical politics into relaxed entertainment, which 
increases viewer and listener ratings and distracts them from reality so that they 
ﬂ irt with faux rebellion and resistance. Delays allow time for ‘the market to come 
to its own inscrutable accommodation to the crisis’ (economic or ecological). 
‘A strong state, when all standard, rule-governed activity is suspended’, is essential 
for free markets. Without ‘judicial or democratic accountability’ or ‘serious inquiry 

Emergence 127
and critical discourse’, all becomes mirages in the agnostic fog (Mirowski 2014, 
358, 365). The uniquely omnipotent market sells new loyalties and identities, new 
commodities and lifestyles to consumers’ ever-changing selves, as substitutes for 
real lived and political experience. 
 Any solution to market problems is to create new markets. For global warming 
there are carbon permit trading, cap and trade, biofuels and electric cars (mainly 
run on fossil fuel based energy). For ﬁ nancial crises there are quantitative easing, 
bank bail-outs, austerities, banks that are ‘too big to fail’ or to be reformed or regu-
lated, and (partly similar to carbon trading) sale of ‘toxic assets’ (mortgage debts) 
concealed in packages that are made to seem ‘low-risk’. When state-funded services 
fail, costly new layers of inspection are installed. The tactics all work together like 
Russian doll shells (2014, 348). The ‘solutions’ do not reduce the problems, confu-
sions or turmoil but increase them, intentionally so, Mirowski contends (2014, 340). 
 The third stage is spectacular solutions, which appear to emerge from the omni-
scient market, midwifed by entrepreneurs. For climate change, these include car-
bon capture and other geo-engineering. They distract scientists into leading almost 
everyone towards supporting, debating and funding hopeless diversions, while 
temperatures continue to rise and effective greener remedies are neglected. Even 
if the enormous funds could be found for geo-engineering, and the results could 
work, and could produce more beneﬁ ts than harms, they will almost certainly 
not develop at the speed and scale necessary to prevent global warming above 2 o 
(Klein 2014; Lohman 2006; Lohmann et al. 2013; Magdoff and Foster 2011). 
Spectacular solutions in economics include supposedly brilliant ‘ﬁ nancial innova-
tions’, privatisations, techniques and products. 
 If neoliberals really do have this extreme, irrational faith in the price system, then 
their denials and proposed solutions at least have coherence and integrity in their 
own terms. And the power elite deﬂ ect informed criticism by insisting that the price 
ethic can only be judged on its own terms. They dismiss expert knowledge as no 
better than any other opinion in democratic debate, when ‘public opinion’ like price 
somehow emerges from countless equal interactions, as noted earlier (Mills 1956). 
This is another way to rebut academic research, such as on climate change, and to 
thicken the agnostic, cynical fog. 
 Yet if Mirowski’s diagnosis is correct, the disease of extreme faith in price is far 
worse than ignorance or deliberate deception. These can be tackled through ratio-
nal, scientiﬁ c, democratic and judicial debate. Extreme faith, however, is immune 
to reasoned discussion, so that criticisms become another time-wasting diversion, 
while neoliberalism forges ahead. Mirowski concluded that somehow, if ever the 
opposition is to succeed, it has to construct new visions of markets and societies 
and new responses to crises, in the painstaking, detailed, long-term way the neo-
liberals have done since the 1930s. Chapter 12 considers this challenge. 
 So far this volume has concentrated on problems: partly to redress the imbalance 
when millions of children and adults who endure the problems are so seldom heard; 
partly to map many related problems that tend to be researched separately. Chapter 12 
will be more optimistic. 

128 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 At a recent public meeting about TTIP, protestors described the many hardships 
TTIP would cause if it became law, and the business representative described the 
many commercial beneﬁ ts TTIP promised. They argued politely but seemed to 
talk past one another. This was because they began talking at 2E, the active effects 
and negations TTIP might bring. They needed to begin at 1M and examine the 
different ways they identiﬁ ed the social wellbeing and justice that each side assumed 
they were promoting. Chapters 9 to 11 have each shown contradictory positions at 
1M (either concern or denial about climate change, either relations of commerce 
or of social justice, either faith in price or concern about its failings), which led on 
to unresolved tensions from 2E to 4D. Chapter 12 will seek more coherent views. 
Chapter 11, Emergence
 Dates denote time of publication. All website addresses were checked for access on 
30 April 2015 unless noted otherwise. 
 Notes 
 1 .  ‘. . .’ denotes either words in the original that were omitted or else words that were 
inaudible on the tape recording. 
 2 .  And see Volume 1, Chapter 5, 111–112. 
 3 .  And see Volume 1, Chapter 5, 109–111. 
 4 .  McCarthy, T. (2015) The counted: inside the search for the real number of police kill-
ings in the US,  Guardian , 21 March.  
 5 .  This selection of citations, from a large literature that is in general agreement, is listed 
here, rather than in rather arbitrary and repetitive ways through the text. The varying 
accounts help to explain the complexity of neoliberalism. The texts seldom mention 
children and young people. 
 6 .  One reason that many politicians’ claims sound empty before the May 2015 general 
election and many people feel cynical is that all the main parties more or less strongly 
follow the price ethic but believe they will lose votes if they too openly defend it.  
 7 .  Noted in Chapter 10. 
 8 .  International Student Initiative for Pluralism in Economics, open letter of protest 
requesting broader, more realistic, courses (http://www.isipe.net/press/ 13 May 2014). 
  9 .  Quoted in Milne, S. (2013) Orthodox economists have failed their own market test, 
 Guardian , 20 November. 
 10 .  Single mothers accused councils of ‘social cleansing’ when their social housing was sold 
to a company linked to an MP who planned immense rent rises. The protests led to the 
plans being changed. BBC News, December 2014.  
 11 .  www.barnardos.org.uk. 
 12 .  Custer, C. (2013) The search for China’s stolen children,  Guardian Weekly , 25 October.   
 13 .  http://www.antislavery.org/english/; https://www.gov.uk/government/ministers/min
ister-for-modern-slavery-and-organised-crime; http://www.globalslaveryindex.org/. 
 14 .  Chakraborty, A. (2014) At yacht parties in Cannes, councils have been selling our homes 
from under us,  Guardian,  14 October. The council ofﬁ cers replied that this was an exag-
geration and they were serving their electorate by ﬁ nding ways to pay for new housing.  
 15 .  The demolition example was at the Elephant & Castle London in 2014; Johnson, D. 
(2014)  Crumbs for Londoners: Why the Mayor of London’s Housing Strategy Will Do Little for 
Ordinary Londoners.  Report by London Assembly Member. 
 16 .  https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-housing-market-
and-house-prices. 

Emergence 129
 17 .  http://www.newstatesman.com/life-and-society/2011/03/million-acres-land-
ownership .
 18 .  http://www.epichousing.co.uk/files/8714/1630/7739/Fuelling_pauperism_5.pdf; 
Chakraborty, A. (2014) The story of the millionaire Tory MP and the tenants facing 
homelessness,  Guardian,  10 November. 
 19 .  Booth, R. (2014) Londoners miss out as homes built as ‘safe deposit boxes’ for foreign 
buyers,  Guardian , 26 December. 
 20 .  Roberts, Y. (2014) Special report: why can’t Britain create good jobs?  Observer, 
14 December. Low pay and zero-hours contracts rose dramatically since 2008. 
 21 .  The Rotherham Report in 2014 was followed by similar reports of mass abuse and neglect 
in other northern and midland cities (http://www.rotherham.gov.uk/downloads/ﬁ le/
1407/independent_inquiry_cse_in_rotherham).  
 22 .  The prime minister proposed ﬁ ve years in prison for staff convicted of negligence, BBC 
News, 3 March 2015.  
 23 .  Travis, A. (2014) More than 1,000 children under 10 stopped and searched in ﬁ ve years 
 Guardian , 1 July. 
 24 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-27224887 30 April 2014. 
 25 .  https://www.gov.uk/police-powers-to-stop-and-search-your-rights 12 November 2014 
(but the site was closed by April 2015).  
 26 .  ASBO – antisocial behaviour order, introduced in 1998.  
 27 .  https://www.gov.uk/asbo. ASBOs were replaced in 2014 by an Injunction (a civil offence) 
and a Criminal Behaviour Order in the Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 
2014. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-28923242 14 December 2014.  
 28 .  The low tax system in the USA leaves small local authorities (counties) to fund their 
services through ﬁ nes, especially of black drivers, who are ﬁ ned and imprisoned for 
breaking minor trafﬁ c laws, mainly through penal systems staffed by white ofﬁ cers and 
lawyers. 
 29 .  http://blacklivesmatter.com/. 
 30 .  Plans for a new simpler system of state beneﬁ ts for working-age people, published by 
the English government in 2010. Although the very complex former system needed 
to be reformed, implementing Universal Credit has been repeatedly delayed by many 
problems, and it has been very much criticised as too harsh to poor, sick and disabled 
people and their dependent children.  
 31 .  ‘Chairwoman of the Public Accounts Committee Margaret Hodge said the Universal 
Credit cost £2.4 billion before it had hardly begun’, adding that there was ‘little idea 
as to how it was actually going to work’;  New Statesman , 11 April 2014. Atos was so 
incompetent in managing the beneﬁ t claims by disabled people that it was replaced in 
March 2015 by another highly funded private company. A failed NHS computer system 
cost over £10 billion before it was scrapped in 2011. 
 32 .  BBC News, 18 July 2012. 
 33 .  Levitas, R. (2012) There may be ‘trouble’ ahead: What we know about those 120,000 
troubled families. University of Bristol: Report to ESRC. 
 34 .  USA in 2013, http://www.alternet.org/civil-liberties/27-million-children-under-age-
18-have-parent-prison-or-jail; http://childrenofprisoners.eu/the-children/; http://
www.prisonersfamilies.org.uk/uploadedFiles/2010_Publications_And_Resources/
Facts_and_ﬁ gures_about_prisoners_families_June2013.pdf. 
 35 .  www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk Brieﬁ ng, May 2010.  
 36 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-30236927 28 November 2014. The ﬁ fth annual 
report of the UK’s National Preventative Mechanism (NPM),  Monitoring places of deten-
tion (2014) examines the treatment of detainees, in accordance with the Optional Pro-
tocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT). The sub-group on detained children 
and young people led the NPM’s joint response to the Minister of Justice’s consultation, 
Transforming Youth Custody, in April 2013, which proposed the creation of secure 
colleges in England and Wales. The response set out principles in the UN  Rules for the 
Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty  (the Havana Rules) to inform the design 

130 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
and management of any custodial settings for children. They advocated more homely, 
child-centred settings. 
 
The HM Inspectorate of Prisons and Youth Justice Board report,  Children in Custody 
2013–14 , analysed surveys answered by children in STC and Young Offender Institu-
tions (YOIs), and their views about imprisonment.  
 The British Medical Association (BMA 2014) report, Young lives behind bars: the health 
and human rights of children and young people detained in the criminal justice system, warned 
of failure by individuals and agencies who ought to support the most vulnerable young 
people. They are continually let down, and the overwhelming experience of being 
detained exacerbates their mental and physical problems. Brieﬁ ng from www.crime
andjustice.org.uk. 
 37 .  Ministry of Justice, Youth custody report: August 2014. https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/youth-custody-data.  
 38 .  CRAE (2014) House of Lords Report Stage Brieﬁ ng on Criminal Justice and Courts 
Bill December 2014, http://www.crae.org.uk/media/74279/CJC-Bill-HoL-Report-
Stage-FINAL.pdf accessed 20 December 2014; Crook, F. (2014) Building a super-
prison for children is a terrible idea,  Guardian,  17 October. 
 39 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-28767360 13 August 2014. 
 40 .  Young behind bars, BBC Radio 4, 22 March 2015. 
 41 .  Children’s Society, Legal aid sentencing and punishment, 1 January 2013. 
 42 .  Children’s Society, Asylum support and immigration services, January 2012.  
 43 .  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/globalassets/documents/information-service/factsheet-child-
killings-england-wales-homicide-statistics.pdf.  
 44 .  www.refuge.org.uk.  
 45 .  http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/subnational-health4/suicides-in-the-united-king
dom/2012/stb-uk-suicides-2012.html.  
 46 .  All three main political parties in England aim to calculate people’s beneﬁ t payments 
on ‘what they have contributed’, and to cut beneﬁ ts and housing credits for those aged 
under 25. 
 47 .  As in the European-USA TTIP, Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, and 
all similar treaties. 
 48 .  http://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/ﬁ les/Housing%20in%20London%202014%
20-%20Final_1.pdf. 
 49 .  From April 2013, working-age families on housing beneﬁ t had to pay extra rent for 
‘unoccupied bedrooms’. The Treasury saved £330 million in 2013/14, £115 million 
lower than the initial forecast. http://www.jrf.org.uk/publications/housing-beneﬁ t-size-
criteria-impacts-social-sector-tenants?gclid=Cj0KEQiAzvmkBRCm3ZbV-4-hwrY-
BEiQAgLOw6_o1MGEoUgq5HO78oRY4Vmvl3BT5ZbK2qwcMpLHQzLwaA
g2U8P8HAQ.  
 50 .  Hilber, C. and Vermeulen, W. (2014) The impact of supply constraints on house prices 
in England, Economic Journal. ISSN 0013–0133 (In Press). 
 51 .  See, for example,  Taylor-Robinson, D., Whitehead, M. and Barr, B. (2014) Great 
leap backwards,  British Medical Journal ,  349   doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
g7350 ;  www.cpag.org.uk; www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-
2014-report; www.unicef-irc.org/publications/733; Unicef. (2014)  Children of the Reces-
sion. The Impact of the Economic Crisis on Child Well-being in Rich Countries. New York: 
Unicef. 
 52 .  Recently, for some weeks I lived with a young family in a static caravan in winter 
with black mould in the clothes cupboards and dripping condensation. The council has 
condemned it as uninhabitable, yet no one stops the landlord from continuing to rent 
it out, and with thousands of names on the local rural waiting list for social housing he 
always has tenants. 
 53 .  Chartered Institute of Housing Report http://www.cih.org/HBresearch, November 
2011. 

Emergence 131
 54 .  Hill, A. (2015) Parents’ legal aid wait to ﬁ ght enforced adoption of son inhumane, 
says judge. Couple initially disqualiﬁ ed from receiving aid to challenge local authority 
because father’s pay just over threshold,  Guardian , 7 January. 
 55 .  Chakraborty, A. (2014) Outsourced and unaccountable: this is the future of local gov-
ernment,  Guardian , 15 December.  
 56 .  Children’s Commission (2013)  Always Someone Else’s Problem . London: Children’s Com-
missioner; Murray, J. (2013) Head teachers left confused over SEN funding rules,  Guardian, 
3 December. 
 57 .  For example, http://www.springmeadowschool.co.uk/nursery/foundation-stage-
behaviour-management.  
 58 .  Theories of reducing the sick brain, through drugs and electro-convulsive therapy, to a 
blank, infantile state, and then rebuilding the personality (Klein 2007). 
 59 .  CPAG  ibid;  Report Card 11 by the UNICEF Ofﬁ ce of Research, November 2014; 
“Extreme Poverty in the United States, 1996 to 2011”   National Poverty Center , Febru-
ary 2012,  http://npc.umich.edu/publications/policy_briefs/brief 28/policybrief 28.pdf. 
 60 .  www.trusselltrust.org/stats. 
 61 .  On harms to the poorest groups, Social Policy in a Cold Climate, www.jrf.org.uk, www.
nufﬁ eldfoundation.org, and www.trustforlondon.org.uk. 
 62 .  Cowburn, A. (2015) Suicides highlight the grim toll of beneﬁ ts sanctions in austerity 
Britain,  Observer,  4 January. The Department for Work and Pensions has investigated 
60 claimant suicides following withdrawal of beneﬁ ts. 
 63 .  Estimates of unemployment by age, February 2014, www.ons.gov.uk. 
 64 .  Boffey, D, (2015) NHS has to recruit one in four nurses from abroad,  Guardian,  4 April.  
 65 .  Feeding Britain: A Strategy for Zero Hunger in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
The report of the All-Party Parliamentary Inquiry into Hunger in the United King-
dom. (2014); https://foodpovertyinquiry.ﬁ les.wordpress.com/2014/12/food-poverty-
feeding-britain-ﬁ nal.pdf. 
 66 .  Ibid;  BBC News, 3 December 2013. 
 67 .  http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&source=web&cd=
4&ved=0CDQQFjAD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.parliament.uk%2Fbriefing-
papers%2Fsn05745.pdf&ei=uML1VLKgCYq67ga3-YH4Dw&usg=AFQjCNHH7ItU
qUwFsYL89rXRVGo2yP7AEA&sig2=9LTrHWACRKVofeCHlb08wA&bvm=bv.872
69000,d.ZGU. 
 68 .  In November 2013, Bank of England Report www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-25152556. 
 69 .  At the end of  Inside Job,  a 2010 documentary ﬁ lm directed by Charles H. Ferguson about 
the late-2000s ﬁ nancial crisis, the bankers who orchestrated the crisis bizarrely line up as 
the new team that runs the USA economy. 
 70 .  http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02g1zmb, BBC Radio 4  Today,  29 December 
2014.  
 71 .  Alan Greenspan, http://www.nbcnews.com/id/27335454/#.UpH7Q75FDIU on 
23 October 2008.  
 72 .  Except some bankers in Iceland. 
 73 .  Websites advise on avoiding tax on private school fees, already subsidised by the schools’ 
charitable status: http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/bills/article-2558653/The-5-
sneaky-perfectly-legal-ways-Britains-richest-parents-cut-tax-bill-private-school-fees.
html 18 August 2014; https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hmrc-publishes-2012-
to-2013-tax-gap 16 October 2014 (no longer open 30 April 2015); Tax Justice Network 
(2011) The Cost of Tax Abuse: A Brieﬁ ng Paper on the Cost of Tax Evasion Worldwide, 
http://www.tackletaxhavens.com/Cost_of_Tax_Abuse_TJN_Research_23rd_Nov_
2011.pdf. 
 74 .  Syal, R. (2013) Revealed: ‘Sweetheart’ tax deals each worth over £1bn. Four corpora-
tions that reached settlements worth £4.5bn between them are among those let off 
lightly,  Guardian,  29 April; Former tax ofﬁ cer interviewed by Jacques Peretti (2015)  The 
Super-rich and Us , BBC2, 8 January. 

132 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 75 .  Whittacker, M. (2013)  Squeezed Britain.  Resolution Foundation. http://www.resolu
tionfoundation.org/publications/ August 2013. 
 76 .  http://www.forbes.com/billionaires/ 3 January 2014. 
 77 .  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
ﬁ le/307867/Statutory_Guidance_-_Missing_from_care__3_.pdf, 14 December 2014. 
 78 .  http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/what-we-do/policy-and-lobbying/
young-refugees-and-migrants/unaccompanied-children. 
 79 .  http://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Housing%20in%20London%20
2014%20-%20Final_1.pdf, 20 December 2014. 
 80 .  http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/business/budget2014/article4040099.ece 19 March 
2014. 
 81 .  Knowles, D. (2013) Fixing the ﬁ gures,  Economist,  25 April. The UK Standards Authority 
is among the critics of government’s use of statistics. 
 82 .  Figure 5.1 in Volume 1. 
 83 .  http://skollworldforum.org/2014/03/13/china-lifted-500-million-people-extreme-
poverty/.  
 84 .  http://www.cathedralgroup.com/current-projects/the-deptford-project-2/ 3 January 
2015. 
 85 .  JP Morgan Chase repaid $8 billion for mis-selling mortgages in 2008, BBC News, 
20 October 2013; the partly nationalised Royal Bank of Scotland was accused of forcing 
small businesses to fail, and then buying them at cut price through a third party, BBC 
News, 24 November 2013. 
 86 .  Young people report feeling inﬂ uenced and pressured to imitate commercial sex in the 
mass media (Hartley et al. 2014). Boys aged 12 to 17 are alleged to be among the highest 
consumers of internet pornography, in http://life.familyeducation.com/boys/sexuality/
36492.html 9 January 2015, and pornographic images that commodify children may be 
‘viewed by 11 million adults in Britain’ though the allegations are uncertain, in http://
www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.co.uk/2014/12/08/child-sexual-abuse_n_6286894.html 8.  
 87 .  Public Accounts Committee,  Twenty-third Report of Session 2014–15 on Transforming Con-
tract Management , December 2014. London: House of Commons. Circle, the ﬁ rst private 
company to run a British hospital, failed and had to end the contract. Private companies 
which own parts of British rail, which ironically include nationalised rail companies 
from other countries, can pay up to 90 per cent of their proﬁ ts to their share holders 
and then get British state subsidies. When the East Coast Mainline was run by the pub-
lic sector for ﬁ ve years it returned proﬁ ts of almost £1 billion to taxpayers, as well as 
very much increasing efﬁ ciency, passenger numbers and reducing carbon emissions. But 
then it was resold to the loss-making private sector. Transport for Quality of Life (2012) 
Rebuilding Rail, http://transportforqualityoﬂ ife.com/ Rebuilidng Rail Final Report, 
January 2015; Lucas, C. (2015) Fare rises show why British railways should be renation-
alised,  Guardian , 2 January.  
 88 .  Some MPs accused critics, like themselves, of being too ignorant to be able to com-
ment, and undemocratically tried to silence their opposition http://blog.38degrees.
org.uk/2014/11/26/ttip-angry-mps/. There are many online summaries of the mainly 
secret treaty TTIP; for example, http://sputniknews.com/radio_eco_plus/. 
 89 .  Although in spring 2015 this is being debated, it looks likely to happen, https://www.
opendemocracy.net/ournhs/john-hilary/on-ttip-and-nhs-they-are-trying-to-bamboo
zle-us 14 July 2014. 
 90 .  http://www.corporations.org/system/top100.html.  
 91 .  BBC World Service News, 27 November 2014; http://www.reuters.com/arti
cle/2014/11/27/us-eu-juncker-idUSKCN0JB13Q20141127. Juncker also presides 
over massive business deregulation plans to promote proﬁ t over health, safety and sus-
tainable communities, https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/linda-kaucher/
eu%27s-giant-and-secretive-deregulation-blitz.  

Emergence 133
  92 .  http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/starbucks-boss-ﬁ rm-wont-pay-normal-level-
of-tax-for-three-more-years-9895275.html. 
  93 .  Financial Times , 17 March 2015, http://www.ft.com/indepth/libor-scandal.  
  94 .  The London-based bank HSBC, operating in 80 countries, was convicted of promot-
ing tax evasion and of money laundering for illicit drug companies, http://www.bbc.
co.uk/news/business-18880269 11 December 2012; BBC  Panorama,  February 2015. 
  The Group Chairman was later appointed to the House of Lords and to be Minister 
for Trade and Investment 2011–2013; another instance of the price morality at the 
heart of government. Treanor, J. (2014) Foreign exchange ﬁ nes: banks handed £2bn 
in penalties for market rigging,  Guardian,  12 November. The USA and UK banks 
were RBS, HSBC, Citibank, JP Morgan and UBS.  
 95 .  https://www.caat.org.uk/resources/countries/saudi-arabia. 
 96 .  http://www.oxfam.org/en/campaigns/why-we-need-global-arms-trade-treaty; www.
caat.org.uk.  
 97 .  Ibid. 
 98 .  http://www.gﬁ ntegrity.org/issue/illicit-ﬁ nancial-ﬂ ows/.  
 99 .  Chang, H.-J. (2013) Decent wages or a breadline economy: It’s a no-brainer,  Guardian, 
 7 November.  
 100 .  http://www.dairyco.org.uk/market-information/farming-data/producer-numbers/
uk-producer-numbers/#.VUFghWd0xlY.  
 101 .  Andy Coulson before he spent time in prison. 
 102 .  US drone strike killings in Pakistan and Yemen ‘unlawful’,   BBC News ,   22 October 2013.  
 103 .  http://reason.com/archives/2002/03/01/the-politics-of-dead-children/. 
 104 .  http://www.globalresearch.ca/the-children-of-iraq-was-the-price-worth-it/30760.  
 105 .  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/globalassets/documents/information-service/factsheet-
child-killings-england-wales-homicide-statistics.pdf. 
 106 .  Onora O’Neill, BBC Radio 4 A Point of View, 7 December 2012 http://www.bbc.
co.uk/programmes/b01p457t.  
 107 .  See Volume 1, page 9. 
 108 .  http://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/proﬁ les/Gaza-Strip/People 2013.  
 109 .  http://electronicintifada.net/blogs/ali-abunimah/video-siege-stops-pumps-gaza-
children-wade-school-sewage.  
 110 .  http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/2014/07/12/israel-bombing-gaza_n_5580173.html.  
 111 .  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sy.html 22 Janu-
ary 2014. 
 112 .  Volume 1 reviewed differences between paid, priced child care and freely given care 
in families.  
 113 .  The UN estimated that the average annual rate of increase in the whole world income 
was 5.4 per cent in the 1960s, but the rate gradually fell to 2.3 per cent in the 1990s 
(Bello 2013, 6). 
 114 .  News reports of Davos World Economic Forum, January 2015. 
 115 .  For example, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2012/10/12/imf-
austerity-is-much-worse-for-the-economy-than-we-thought/.  
 116 .  http://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/30/george-osborne-jobless-beneﬁ t-
conservatives. 
 117 .  British prime minister’s New Year message for 2013, BBC Radio 4 news, 30 Decem-
ber 2012. 
 118 .  BBC Radio 4  Today,  4 July 2013; Syal, R., Wintour, P. and Stewart, H. (2013) Osborne 
shows Britain a ﬁ fth unscheduled year of austerity,  Guardian Weekly , 5 July 2015. 
 119 .  Daily Telegraph,  Iain Duncan-Smith promises not to hurt the poor, 30 October 2013. 
National Audit Ofﬁ ce report 10 December 2013, Universal Credit failed to deliver 
‘value for money’ and has ‘considerable weaknesses’; £40 million spent on IT have 
been written off, £91 million spent on software will effectively be defunct within ﬁ ve 

134 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
years, http://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/10320–001-Over-opti
mism-in-government-projects.pdf. Butler, P. (2014) Stuck in DWP limbo,  Guardian, 
24 July. Jack, I. (2014) Private companies are making a fortune out of the unemployed, 
 Guardian, 10 May. Companies are paid £14,000 for everyone they get into work for 
more than six months; Welfare cuts drive UK’s poorest families deeper into poverty, 
http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/multiple-cuts-for-the-poorest-fam
ilies-175-million-of-the-poorest-families-have-315868 22 April 2014. DWP reviewed 60 
beneﬁ ts-related suicides committee 2012–2014, http://www.disabilitynewsservice.
com/dwp-admits-investigating-60-beneﬁ t-related-deaths-since-2012/ 14 November 
2014.  
 120 .  http://www.cafamily.org.uk/media/805120/counting_the_costs_2014_uk_report.
pdf, November 2014. 
 

 12 
 ETHICS AND EMANCIPATION 
 Reimagining the politics of childhood 
 Navanethem Pillay remembers that when she was six years old she was travel-
ling on her own, taking home her bus driver father’s monthly wages of £5. A 
bus conductor stole the money. The family went to court, and she bore wit-
ness, but the family lost the case, making her deeply aware about injustice in 
apartheid South Africa. When aged 18, she planned to go to law school, but 
her parents could not afford the fees. However, her schoolteachers managed 
to collect enough money from the very poor local community to support her 
through her university studies. 
 Years later, when Nelson Mandela appointed the ﬁ rst non-white judges in South 
Africa, he said he was overjoyed to make her the ﬁ rst woman judge there. She 
represented many victims of domestic violence, and one case stood out. When a 
three year old child tried to wipe blood off her mother’s damaged face, the vio-
lent father said, ‘Leave her to die’. This example was widely publicised and awoke 
such public outrage and support that a telephone crisis helpline was set up, run 
from Pillay’s sitting room. Navanethem Pillay shared in deﬁ ning rape as a geno-
cidal war crime, and she became UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.  1  
 Navanethem showed an early sense of justice, which could be seen as partly innately 
human and not entirely learned. (Before their second birthdays, children question 
who has the biggest biscuit and ‘is it kind or fair?’) Moral human nature is central 
to the hope for a better world, reborn with every generation. Navanethem showed 
the active, informed part that children may take in working through profound 
human conﬂ icts. Despite being overlooked in accounts of civil society (for example, 
Putnam 2000), from their early years onwards, especially in areas of conﬂ ict, chil-
dren start to be informed and involved in social and political change. Young people 
are much involved in political campaigns, often with humour, costumes and elabo-
rate posters against war, injustice, fracking, or tax-evading corporations. 

136 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 There is a great resurgence of political protest on university campuses, with 
students putting pressure on their universities to ban sexism and to disinvest from 
fossil fuels.  2  Social media aid young people’s instant national and international con-
tacts, information and support. Millions of children and young people do informal 
voluntary work, and are especially involved in networks of friendships, the free 
association and peaceful assembly which are at the heart of ﬂ ourishing societies 
(Alderson 2008a, 2008b; Clark and Percy Smith 2006; Cockburn 2013; Connolly 
et al. 2009; Katz 2004; Oswell 2013; Percy-Smith and Thomas 2010; Pinson et al. 
2010; Popovic´ and Miller 2015; Wells 2015; among many examples). They are 
active citizens through thousands of formal and informal social action groups and 
clubs. Criticism of ‘gangs’ is unrealistic if it generally denigrates all young people’s 
groups. Old theories of civil society need to be updated to bridge cultural, ethnic 
and religious divisions and to account for children’s and young people’s con-
temporary inter-cultural citizenship (Cockburn 2013; Osler 2010; Starkey 2015; 
Wilkinson 2015). 
 Although they are partly inseparable, personal wellbeing was the theme in 
Volume 1, Chapter 6, and wider political concepts of the good life and the good soci-
ety are the main themes in this paired chapter. This chapter also questions: Does the 
‘good life’ differ in childhood and in adulthood, and if so how? How can we move 
beyond imagining good societies towards working to create them? Can children 
and young people take part in these processes? Do human rights offer useful maps 
of good societies and the journeys towards them, and what different rights might 
older and younger generations hold? 
 DCR places morality at the centre of hopes of creating good or at least better 
societies. Morality, from broad principles to detailed ethical codes, is often assumed 
to be invented, cultural and contingent, tied to language and epistemology and 
therefore varying in time and place. In this view, morality has to be taught to each 
new generation, and imposed on them as they become disciplined and socialised 
into becoming human. Chapter 6 considered how morality is also partly innate, 
embodied and existing in all human being and interactions. Morality is partly tran-
sitive, in being perceived, deﬁ ned, experienced and practised differently in diverse 
times and places. It also has an underlying, intransitive, universal ontology, in that it 
appears to have existed in causal powers such as justice and the desire for freedom 
through human history. 
 This chapter responds to the problems and hopes raised in earlier chapters, and 
considers the utopian search for more just and free societies. First, relations between 
sociology and utopian research and, second, practical political approaches towards 
change will be reviewed. Third, this chapter considers a range of imagined futures 
and, fourth, it looks at how DCR strengthens utopian analyses. These involve retell-
ing compelling stories, which can inform, inspire and help to generate change. The 
powerful price narrative (Chapter 11) has to be replaced with other world views, 
and in the ﬁ fth section of this chapter a potential alternative, the gift economy, 
is described. Finally, ways of remedying problems and absences noted in earlier 
chapters and of emancipating younger as well as older generations will be outlined. 

Ethics and emancipation 137
Again, in trying to draw together many major related areas integral to the immense 
topics of childhood and the future, I can only brieﬂ y summarise them. 
 Utopias and sociology 
 Utopias may be dismissed as unhelpful fantasies or disguised totalitarian dystopias. 
Since the 1830s, efforts to establish sociology as a science have emphasised objec-
tive evidence, separating fact from value and reason from emotion. Imagining and 
looking to the future were vetoed as unscientiﬁ c, lacking sound evidence and suspi-
ciously normative (Abrams 1968). However, earlier chapters have reviewed limita-
tions in these empirical and positivist paradigms, with the dangers of being locked 
into researching past evidence and neglecting the future. Even natural scientists are 
changing their reports on climate change, to include clear warnings and predictions 
related to values of future human survival and wellbeing (Anderson and Bows 2011; 
Hensen et al. 2013; IPCC 2014a, 2014b). If sociology neglects to think about future 
societies and rapidly growing social, economic and ecological problems, that leaves 
open serious absences. Public debate is mainly led by individualistic theories from 
economics and evolutionary psychology (game theory). These disciplines lack the 
informed socio-geo-historical complexity of sociology that is needed to address 
complex societies (Burawoy 2005; Holmwood 2013). 
 John Urry (2011) in  Climate Change and Society  called for sociology, not eco-
nomics, to be the expert science for organising and interpreting all the relevant 
information on global warming .  Individual agents can do little, Urry contended, 
and individualistic economics cannot advise on urgently needed social structural 
policy. He analysed likely possible, probable and preferable futures in social reac-
tions to climate change. Inter-locking social structures, such as the high-carbon 
military-industrial complex, will, sooner or later, have to give way to low-carbon 
economy- and -society. Urry’s four hypothetical future social scenarios, all more or 
less dystopian, include catastrophic barbarism if global heating is not controlled. 
Major conﬂ icts already tend to occur in water-stressed countries. Like natural sci-
entists, social scientists research diverse, detailed and interconnected multiple sys-
tems. These include social beliefs, values, behaviours, habits and potential reactions 
such as in consumerism, laws and policies, besides structures and institutions. There 
are predictions of likely costs and beneﬁ ts, and the risks and dangers of each possible 
future social transformation. 
 Social science generally could be seen as utopian. Whenever critical research 
reveals social problems and needs, then preferable alternatives are implicitly or 
explicitly suggested, aiming towards a better society. The utopian Olin Wright 
(2010) advocated ‘emancipatory social science’ to research real practical utopias: 
why we want change, where we aim for, and a theory of transformation on how we 
might get there.  3  Roberto Unger (2007) called for democratic, incremental reforms 
that are desirable, viable and achievable through shared, practical exploration. We 
might be able to act differently and more collectively in the world and open up 
new possibilities. 

138 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Ruth Levitas believed that a central, urgent task for sociology is to imagine uto-
pian future wellbeing: ‘the fact that our imaginings will fall short and will end in 
necessary failure does not excuse us from trying’. Sociology can uniquely understand 
the matrix of social interactions with socially deﬁ ned needs, wants and satisfactions. 
Levitas (2010, 545) contended that human survival demands that this matrix 
 is oriented away from material consumption and high carbon emissions . . . 
exploitative and unfair trading relations. Human happiness demands that 
we ﬁ nd ways of engaging with one another that allow less fear, more gen-
uine connection, more love [within] deeper and more satisfying human 
relationships. 
 And Levitas shares Unger’s view that, ‘above all . . .  we need to encourage in our 
children prophetic identities based on what they might become, rather than ﬁ xed 
[ascribed] identities . . . [with an] insistence on utopian ontology as processual and 
dynamic’. ‘Speculative sociology’, which is ‘explicitly normative’, is ‘desperately 
needed’: 
 the delineation of potential futures is not prediction or prescription, or even 
prophecy. Sociology as utopia, utopia as sociology must now entail multiple, 
provisional and reﬂ exive accounts of how we might live. The imagination 
of society and ourselves otherwise expands the range of possibilities . . . Our 
very silences shape utopias. 
 (Levitas 2010, 545)  
 Rather than blueprints (epistemology), there is a DCR-related emphasis on ontol-
ogy, on being and doing utopias through journeys that reach new horizons and 
understanding. Although it may be almost impossible to expect societies to be 
radically transformed, we can still imagine, think radically and critically, and work 
towards better futures through many diverse local communities all working out 
their own ways of living through practice, not through top-down central direction.  4  
Unlike off-puttingly boring visions of static, paradise-like utopias, future societies 
would encourage constant creative dissent, change and experiment. Utopian think-
ing is about process more than product, journey over arrival, and this would allow 
for the constant arrival of younger generations with their new views and needs. 
 Although future happier societies might seem to be delusions (Gray 2007), pres-
ent, ﬁ xed, dominant, dystopian policies and trends are also delusions: three per cent 
annual, compound, global growth on a ﬁ nite planet; ever-multiplying consumption, 
inequality, economic migration and armed conﬂ ict; proﬁ t reinvested into ﬁ nance 
but not into production and wages; shrinking workfare states and swelling prison-
fare states; global warming potentially to four or more degrees. Chapters 9 to 11 
mapped how these current trends seem to be both inevitable and self-destructive. 
The next section summarises a range of approaches to the future. 

Ethics and emancipation 139
 Working towards fairer futures 
 Methods of achieving change vary from transitions that are major or minor, sud-
den or gradual, violent or peaceful, destructive or incremental. Although powerful 
groups react violently to the resistance movements of oppressed majorities, there 
are vital reasons for preferring nonviolent action by the majority when at all pos-
sible. Nonviolent political change can succeed and endure (Ackerman and DuVal 
2000), as Gandhi King and Mandela have shown, although the change may be 
partial and take place while other extreme violence and inequalities continue (Roy 
2014; Schlosser 2004; Tutu 2013; Wacquant 2009). Popovic´ and Miller (2015) advise 
activists to begin with the majority of people and their main concerns, then weave 
these into broader politics and riskier change. Popovic´ drew on his experience as 
a student protest leader. His practical advice includes: explore complexity through 
theatre and the arts; appeal to cultural change; borrow ideas from the market of 
branding, logos and persuading people that they really want and need the product 
(the better society) as much as they want an iPod. One protest group awarded dif-
ferent coloured T-shirts as a badge of honour to show how often the wearer had 
been arrested. Another set up a display of Lego people holding a protest, when 
it was illegal for human beings to do so. The archetype of the small, child-like, 
hobbit-like, ordinary person who changes the world against all odds appeals to 
people who feel they are not being heard. Yet to succeed, lively and partly spon-
taneous protest movements must also be disciplined, carefully planned and led by 
charismatic ﬁ gures who symbolise oppression, such as Mandela. Dream big, but start 
small, and learn how to pick battles you can win, Popovic´ advised. Compromise 
involves bringing together disparate allies, viewing enemies as potential partners 
and using subversive (childish but powerful) humour to attract public attention, to 
broaden support and deﬂ ect danger. 
 During transitions, the means shape the ends. Nonviolent change involves devel-
oping means to negotiate, to resolve conﬂ icts and problems, and to pave the way 
for further peace. Violence, however, increases rather than resolves conﬂ icts, and sets 
up patterns of further violence and revenge that sabotage reconciliation and future 
cohesive societies. Violence especially adversely affects children, increasing the risks 
that they will be injured or killed, lost when families ﬂ ee and communities split 
apart, that they will die from hunger, disease and neglect, or be taken as slaves, child 
soldiers or sex workers. Child survivors will live for many more decades of their life 
than older generations will, with lasting harms, losses, debts and traumatic memo-
ries, although many victims and child soldiers show great powers of resilience and 
recovery (Drumbl 2012; Poulton and Bangura 2013). Fragmented, warring and 
decimated societies are held back still more in attempts at reform and progress after 
many deaths, and when many surviving children have lost their health, their chance 
of schooling, and the vital, habit-forming experiences of living in peace. Wars also 
fracture the life-sustaining constant transfer of skill and knowledge onto younger 
generations. 

140 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
 Imagining fairer societies 
 Varying models of better organised, more just societies will now be summarised in 
four broad groups.  5  First are the critical supporters of capitalism, who want reforms 
that will enhance capitalism’s strong survival, such as George Soros and Joseph 
Stiglitz (2003), Jeffrey Sachs (Wilson 2014), Amartya Sen (2009) and Martin Wolf 
(2014). Joel Bakan (2005, 2012) deplored how ‘psychopathic’ corporations oppress 
and exploit childhood, but he saw hope in better regulation by governments and in 
young people’s own good sense. Ha-Joon Chang’s (2007, 2011) powerful critiques 
of free market capitalism still conclude that well organised capitalism, like democ-
racy, is the least worst option. 
 The second group consists of academics, investigative journalists, NGOs and 
think tanks; only a few from these large groups are named here. In careful detail, 
they reveal serious failings and, in some cases, corruption in, for example, tax 
havens (Henry 2012; Shaxson 2011), the mass media (Davies 2008, 2014), charities 
(Polman 2011) and venture philanthropy (Ball 2012), health services (Davis et al. 
2015; Lister 2013; Pollock 2005), housing and cities (Minton 2012), schools, pre-
schools and colleges (Ainley and Allen 2013; Alexander 2010; Apple 2012; Fielding 
and Moss 2011; Wrigley 2006), universities (Collini 2012; Giroux 2013; Holmwood 
2011), medical research (Rose and Rose 2014), criminal youth justice (Goldson and 
Muncie 2015; Willow 2015), child rights (CRAE 2014; CRIN  6  ; Freeman 2015), 
child labour (Boyden and Bourdillon 2012), human rights and liberty (Chakrabarti 
2014), with many more examples discussed in previous chapters. Each study brieﬂ y 
or at length concentrates on recommending specialised reforms, though they may 
refer to broader political contexts. 
 Although each separate report is alarming, like pieces in a jigsaw puzzle, they 
add up to a greater whole picture of endemic national and global injustice when 
taken together. Improvements to schools and hospitals (made at 2E) provide untold 
beneﬁ ts, but they are local and transient, and they rely on individual inspired lead-
ers and workers, unless generic structural changes are also made. 2E improvements 
may simply relieve the symptoms of the underlying politics and thereby help them 
to continue. Initial 1M critical analysis of structural, causal, political problems is 
the concern of the next two groups. 
 The third group is very wide-ranging: anti-capitalists and anti-corporatists, demo-
crats, socialists, communists, anarchists, autonomists, libertarians, postmodernists. They 
all aim to reform unjust politics and economics (Callinicos 2010; Coote and Angel 
2014; Giroux 2013; Graeber 2011; Hamilton 2003; Hardt and Negri 2001; Harvey 
2006, 2011; Klein 2000, 2007; Kunkel 2014; Wainwright 2003, 2014; Wright 2010). 
Activist groups include Indignatios, Syriza, Reclaim the Streets, Occupy, UK Uncut, 
and numerous other protests by workers and unemployed groups around the world. 
They generate many theories of dissent and change, and they especially attract stu-
dents and young people. Some seriously allude to ecology, but as a secondary concern. 
 The fourth group, a broad green coalition, is reviewed in more detail because 
it takes both the economy and the ecology as central concerns and this will be 

Ethics and emancipation 141
increasingly necessary with global warming. Unlike mainstream socialists, the 
greens promote local politics that are not over-dominated from the centre. They 
also favour international ties, such as a reformed European Union (Wall 2005). 
The greens’ four main concerns are ecology, social justice, grassroots democracy 
and nonviolence (agreed in Rio in 1972; Wall 2010). They aim to reduce wasteful, 
exploitative trade, and to protect people and the fragile ecosphere by promoting 
local, healthier and sustainable trade and ways of life (Curry 2011; Douthwaite 
1999; Foster 2000; Hildyard 2014; Klein 2014; Lacey 2014; Ostrom 1990; Roy 
2009; Shiva 2000, 2013; Schumacher 1978; Scott Cato and Kennett 1999; Wall 
2012; Woodin and Lucas 2004). 
 They want to restore the land and the commons, including institutions and 
amenities (healthcare, education, housing, transport, urban spaces) to the general 
public, with users, providers and trade unions working together cooperatively. They 
intend to transform economics, government, industry and agriculture. A universal 
citizen’s income for every adult and child would enable people to work part time if 
they wish, and to have more time for private and civic life (Lord 2003).  7  In theory, a 
citizen’s income would end severe poverty, inequality and unemployment, as well as 
over-employment in dead-end jobs. In the 1930s, Keynes predicted that technolo-
gies would replace labour and reduce the working week to only 15 hours. Instead, 
countless new jobs have been invented, and many of them seem to be pointless and 
oppressive. Funds would be diverted away from arms and fossil fuel industries and 
into promoting and conserving renewable energy. Financial reforms would work 
for zero ﬁ nancial growth and redistribution of wealth. 
 One subgroup is the subsistence greens (Lacey 2014; Roy 2009, 2014; Seabrook 
2007; Shiva 2000; Wall 2012). They argue that economic growth, development aid 
and anti-poverty programmes create poverty, when they count everyone by their 
income as the World Bank and Oxfam attempt to do. Over two billion people live 
on ‘less than $2 a day’.  8  While many are hungry and destitute, many others lead ful-
ﬁ lling lives. They can rely on their own land and common land, on their herds and 
crops, for food, fuel, medicines, clothing, housing materials and much more, as well 
as on exchange between neighbours. Permaculture reduces work and promotes 
biodiversity and soil fertility. 
 Land grabs and enclosures and land hoarding create poverty by driving people 
into urban areas and ﬁ nancial networks, where they have to sell their labour to earn 
a paid income and pay for all their necessities. Microcredit also pulls many into 
debt (Rutherford and Arora 2010). A further problem in attempts to count people’s 
wealth by income is to ignore or devalue all that cannot be priced, but which 
matters most in human life: families and communities; natural and cultural worlds; 
challenging, fulﬁ lling lives (see Monbiot 2014, for example, and for subsistence 
childhoods now being lost, Diamond 2013; Katz 2004; Leidloff 1976). 
 In another green subgroup, eco-socialists campaign in William Morris’s tradition. 
They oppose capitalism’s inevitable destroying, degrading and industrialising of the 
natural world and therefore of human societies and culture (Curry 2011; Empson 
2014; Klein 2014; Marshall 2014; Rogers 2010). Marx identiﬁ ed this alienating 

142 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
‘metabolic rift’ in present relations between humanity and the rest of nature, shown 
in soil erosion and water pollution (Foster 2000; Magdoff and Foster 2011). 
 Eco-socialists regard the present great economic, ecological and personal human 
problems as all stemming from the same root, and all needing the same remedy. Excess 
consumption, demanded by capitalism, is so destructive to the biosphere that the 
dominant exchange value (price) must be replaced by use value. Without the driving 
proﬁ t motive and the associated $multibillion industries, many fewer unnecessary 
products would then be made, and many more things that are useful and beauti-
ful could be used, shared around and repaired as needed. Economics, the science of 
scarcity, could be replaced by a prosperous ‘ecotopia’, through principles of ‘usufruct’. 
This means using but not owning goods, desiring little, valuing the physical present 
instead of needing to desire, compete, possess and consume in an ‘organised madness’ 
(Wall 2005, 169). ‘To restore use value means to take things concretely and sensu-
ously . . . [but also] lightly, since things are enjoyed for themselves and not as buttresses 
for shaky egos.’ When everything becomes commodities, which ‘can be taken away 
and abstracted’ (or alienated), ‘this stimulates the [anxious, frantic] thirst for possessions 
that rages under capitalist rule. The unappeasable craving for things – and money to 
get things – is the necessary underpinning of accumulation . . . and the ecological 
crisis . . . having and excluding others from having’ (Kovel 2002, 239–40). 
 Some see the only way to prevent global injustice that brings inevitable war 
as ‘contraction and convergence’. Richer groups contract their consumption and 
their carbon footprints until their use of ﬁ nite resources converges on a global 
average. The poorest groups can increase their consumption up to that average 
(Hillman 2004; Meyer 2000). Carbon footprints represent the tons of carbon and 
methane emitted to produce all the commodities, food, transport and heating used 
per person. Although only very broad estimates can be made, the USA average 
was said to be around 20 tons per annum, the UK average 10 tons, and the global 
average four tons.  9  Extra personal emissions result mainly from ﬂ ying and driving, 
although agriculture and construction emit far more energy than the personal 
footprints. 
 Another argument for contraction and convergence is that present consump-
tion absorbs more resources than three planets can support, so that human survival 
depends on ﬁ tting demand more realistically to supply. The average, annual, global 
footprint would then be nearer to one ton a year. Massive change would have 
to work at all levels of daily life and beliefs, behaviours, values and social struc-
tures, starting, for example, at birth, when babies and children would no longer be 
showered with gifts—and anxiously come to rely on these as tokens of love and 
approval. 
 Eco-socialists support the protests of indigenous and other threatened com-
munities against enclosures of common land and theft of forests and rivers, of 
seeds and biodiversity. They ﬁ ght against fossil fuel industries, global warming and 
the endemic cruelty in global agribusiness (Bond 2012; Christie and Warburton 
2001; Empson 2009, 2014; Klein 2014; Lacey 2014; Linebaugh 2014; Lymbery and 
Oakeshott 2014; Neale 2008; Patel 2008; Pearce 2012; Rogers 2010; Roy 1999, 

Ethics and emancipation 143
2009; Shiva 2013). ‘The dominant means of communication and education are 
part of the treadmill, serving to reinforce [capitalism’s] priorities and values’ (Foster 
2002, 4–5). Patrick Curry (2011) contrasted light-green and mid-green ethics, and 
called for the move beyond anthropocentrism to ecocentric deep-green ethics. 
 An economist, Wall (2005, 177) hoped that ‘economics can be bent towards serv-
ing the needs of humanity and nature rather than its own violent abstract growth’. 
He warned utopians against nostalgia for past rural idylls, and against the dangers 
of trying to predict uncertain futures when working against neoliberalism. ‘History 
should furnish raw materials to construct alternatives rather than to legitimise deter-
minist schemes, which are often little more than myth.’ We need to reinvent entirely 
new economies, as well as ‘knitting together’ alternatives from a range of cultures, to 
be adapted locally into extremely different contexts around the world. ‘The struggle 
must . . . fulﬁ l need equitably, develop humanity, sustain ecosystems and lead to coop-
eration.’ Each step towards anti-capitalist alternatives should be ‘amphibious, half in the 
dirty water of the present’ and half raising new ideas, moving in new directions and 
building bridges to the future. 
 Radical green policies raise many questions. Are they remotely feasible? How 
can such immense transitions possibly be introduced peacefully, let alone be pro-
tected against the inevitable attacks from opponents? How can the majority, includ-
ing all those who will or will not directly beneﬁ t, ever be convinced to support a 
shrinking economy if that lowers their own living standards or aspirations? 
 One defence of green policies is that they aim to beneﬁ t the great global 
majority through informed local democracies and cooperatives. Another defence 
is given by the record of thriving green projects that protect the commons and 
have been developed by thousands of people over centuries on all continents. 
A third defence is that ideas such as the citizen’s income have been taken seri-
ously for decades in some left- and right-wing circles, and they already partly 
exist in child beneﬁ ts, tax credits and allowances, and pensions. Fourth, it will 
be extremely hard for societies to moderate and adapt to climate change as the 
greens advocate. Yet to enact democratic decisions now will be far less painful 
than having to endure the not-so-distant predicted lifestyles that uncontrolled 
global warming will enforce. 
 Fifth, although the green plans may look unrealistic, present regimes and avid 
consumption are based on delusions that cannot last. They only emerged to domi-
nate the world after the 1940s, and would hardly have been imagined 80 years ago. 
In addition, a mere 70 years ago the scarcely imaginable British welfare state was 
suddenly created amid a national debt far higher than today’s debt. 
 Unless the history is remembered of how great changes occurred, we may fear-
fully centre on what is ‘realistic’, meaning close to current policy. That would dismiss 
absence, the possible and imagined potential (Unger 2007; Wright 2010). Present 
states and markets and policies are neither natural nor inevitable, but rise and fall. 
Yet rather than use history and anthropology to prescribe new changes, or to measure 
or compare civilisations for success or failure, Wade Davis believes we should see them 
as offering ways to imagine alternatives and to be amazed at human social diversity 

144 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
and potential. Davis cites W.E.H. Stanner’s appreciation of ‘the visionary realm of the 
Aborigines’ as ‘one of the great experiments in human thought’: 
 [I]n their intellectual universe, distilled in a devotional philosophy known 
as the Dreaming, there was no notion of linear progression whatsoever, no 
idealisation of the possibility or promise of change . . . The entire purpose 
of humanity was not to improve anything; it was to engage in the ritual and 
ceremonial activities deemed to be essential for the maintenance of the world 
precisely as it was at the moment of creation.  10  
 The green policies above were not mentioned in order to explain or defend 
or evaluate them in detail. My aims are to acknowledge their place in a wide 
range of current international debates about potential futures, and to expand these 
(usually adult-centric) debates by relating them to the politics of childhoods real 
and imagined. That will be the topic of the ﬁ nal section. The next section reviews 
DCR concepts that can expand and deepen utopian thinking. 
 DCR and utopias 
 How can researchers preserve hopes of utopian or at least alternative and better 
futures, and address dystopian forebodings? How might all societies and generations 
be persuaded to adapt to climate change, before poorer societies threatened with 
droughts and ﬂ oods are decimated by ecocide (deaths from climate change that 
might have been prevented) and before wealthier nations are violently forced by 
global warming, and its social effects, such as mass migration, food shortages and 
war, to reduce their general standard of living? And how can DCR inform and 
strengthen understanding of these processes? 
 Radha D’Souza (2013) used DCR to analyse how ﬂ aws in conventional sociol-
ogy prevent analysis of social change and utopias.  11  The ﬂ aws include: listing many 
things that are wrong in society and then assuming that remedies simply lie in their 
opposites; disconnections between philosophical and sociological analysis that split 
apart theory and practice, which are really interpenetrating; confusion between the 
desirable and the possible; and ‘thin’ analysis. Instead, D’Souza (2013, 521) aims to 
relate Geertz’s (1973) ‘thick’, comprehensive analysis within each complex example 
to DCR’s totality that contains diverse, contradictory contexts, structures, actors 
and values. ‘A fact or event is the convergence of multiple facets of reality each 
with its own history and geography, trajectories and processes that come together 
at a given moment [in] the convergence of multiple domains of reality at empirical, 
structural and ontological levels’ (Bhaskar 1998b, 2008b, 2012). 
 D’Souza (2013, 520) contends that the present ‘thin’ sociology is conﬁ ned to 
Enlightenment assumptions, which ‘transform the merchant’s world view [price] 
into the [whole] human world view’. Facts and events are atomised, and nothing 
counts as relevant except the speciﬁ c transaction. Sociological facts (and multivari-
ate analysis) can be like abstracted ﬁ gures in merchants’ ledgers, extracted from their 

Ethics and emancipation 145
social context. Then only the fact is seen as authentic; events seem arbitrary and 
accidental; values, justice, absences, alternatives and all the rest are extraneous or 
simply dubious assumptions. And these assumptions are taken to ‘reify the already 
entrenched merchantile ontology and the forgetting of history and place, time and 
space’. This undermines attention to ‘ how  we can engage with social justice and 
global governance for a better future’ (D’Souza 2013, 522, emphasis in original), 
and how we can think about the necessary pre-conditions for the very different 
utopias and different political economies, learning from the past, and in the present 
and potential future. 
 Among many relevant DCR concepts, three concepts especially validate uto-
pian and other thinking (see Table 9.1). First,  ontological realism  is vital if we are to 
accept intransitive, true realities such as social suffering or climate change. Second, 
 epistemological relativism  accepts that our understanding is limited, fallible, partial, 
socially produced and transitive. Yet real, independent ontology cannot be col-
lapsed into fallible human perceptions as climate sceptics try to do. Third,  judgmen-
tal rationalism  recognises our ability to adjudicate between ontology, epistemology 
and morality. 
 In personal terms, these three concepts accept, for example, the reality of alien-
ation. Then researchers move beyond the  epistemic fallacy  of empirical or interpretive 
paradigms. They accept the difference and dialectic between  intransitive being  (the real-
ity of alienation) and  transitive thought  (how it is perceived and experienced). Alien-
ation is only understood as a real absence if transcendental realism and alethic truth 
are accepted. Transcendental realism asserts that things can have independent exis-
tence and necessary, effective power. First this contends that there can be true, alethic 
or inevitable human identities and relationships, which are both transcendent and also 
real; second, that human beings can be estranged or alienated from them; third, the 
possibility that human beings can achieve or return to these true states. 
 The same three steps can apply towards understanding whole societies that are 
alienated from the more just and free societies they might become. 1M non-identity 
therefore involves detecting hidden or forgotten or misunderstood realities, and 
noting differences between these and the actual present. There is the sense of 
being something other than what we truly might be, losing something essential 
and intrinsic to our nature and identity, being split and estranged from our true 
personal-political being. 
 The goal of the eudaimonic society is ‘concretely singularised universal human 
ﬂ ourishing’ and ‘association in which the free development of each is a condition for 
the free development of all’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 382–3; Marx and Engels [1848] 1998). 
Flourishing involves the  concrete universal ↔ singular , which respects the multiple 
common features and interests among all human beings, as well as those unique to 
each single person. That recognises, for example, each child’s shared properties and 
also each unique identity-in-difference. There is also absence in all that the child 
is not, and all that the child might or could become.  Transcendental realism  connects 
the ideal to the real, form to content. Ernst Bloch (cited in Hartwig 2007, 74–5) 
contrasted objectively real, possible, concrete utopia with merely formally possible, 

146 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
abstract utopia. ‘Concrete’ (meaning material, ﬁ t for purpose and well-rounded) 
involves all four planes of social being. This grounding in material and social real-
ism counters allegations that utopian thinking is mere fantasy. DCR’s utopia com-
bines theory with practice, following the example of William Morris’s life. Models 
of alternative ways of living and sets of resources are imagined, ‘counterbalancing 
actualism and informing hope’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 395). The emancipation of all is the 
core theme of DCR,  Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom . Bhaskar (2002a, 15–16) argued 
that many people already behave in trusting, generous, utopian ways, realising their 
true self. Beyond the personal, societies exist through default values of peace and 
justice, so that errors and failings are deﬁ ned by their falling away from the good. 
Lies only exist within larger truths; war interrupts peace, and armies rely on much 
peaceful cooperation, within armies and among armies, governments, civilians and 
industry. 
 Utopian thinking is central to DCR when it rejects hopeless endism (end-
history thinking or imagining that things can only get worse). Instead, DCR looks 
forward to societies where  power 2 oppression, hierarchy, exploitation and alien-
ation end. The free ﬂ ourishing of each person will depend on the free ﬂ ourishing 
of all. ‘A normative order informed by the values of trust, solidarity, sensitivity to 
suffering, nurturing and care in universal reciprocally recognised rights freedoms 
and duties’ is expected (Bhaskar 2008b, 296). Duty is deﬁ ned as ‘the right to be 
subject to universal rights and participate in globalised democracy’ oriented to 
concrete singularity (Bhaskar 2010b, 154). Like the green policies, DCR seeks to 
move beyond anthropism, to accept that human interests lie in living harmoniously 
within nature, instead of commodifying and controlling it. MELD offers maps for 
the gradual, pragmatic, thinking-acting, incremental, step-by-step change that some 
utopians advocate (Levitas 2010; Moss 2014; Unger 2007; Wright 2010; and others). 
Each new MELD stage brings new insights and challenges, reviews and restarts. 
It might, for example, be informed by the Native American ethic to take account 
of the wellbeing of the next seven generations. 
 It implies a society in which each is true to, of, in and for themselves and 
every other (including future generations and other species) subject to the 
constraints imposed by nature. It is absolute reason, and in this book I have 
given some grounds for hope (and the praxis hope inspires) that humanity 
might progress towards it. 
 (Bhaskar 2008b, 382)  
 While DCR works towards resolution and synthesis in new totality, it accepts 
that every totality is part of a greater whole and is also mobile, open to change and 
integration into new totalities. DCR supports utopian thinking by preparing the 
grounds for thinking and knowing about so-far-absent futures. DCR also highlights 
movement, process, ontology, open totalities and transformative  change versus more 
static  difference . This openness enables movement on to 4D and continuing cycles 
of change. Intentional, causal, transformative, human agency or praxis is essential in 

Ethics and emancipation 147
developing the freedom and justice, solidarity and trust of the ﬂ ourishing society 
through intrinsic feelings and relationships and politics. 
 Although offering many useful ideas for imagining utopias, DCR could be said 
to overlook the powerful opposition that is bound to arise, and the essential means 
to counter opposition when working to create and sustain utopias. 
 The gift economy 
 The price economy (Chapter 11) has all-pervasive, dominant, negative views of 
human nature, relationships and structures. Utopias involve retelling the foundation 
stories of societies, and this section suggests an alternative to the mercenary price 
narrative. Price and gift are both incomplete, partial economies. They co-exist, but 
gift is sidelined and desecrated, often made invisible, unrecognised and absent. New 
attention to gift could contribute a little towards the foundations of utopian think-
ing and working. 
 One morning, I hoped to ﬁ nd a large example to illustrate the breadth and 
power of the gift economy. An inter-galactic, inter-decade example was given at 
once by BBC radio, itself a panoply of gifts. 
 Chris Lintott remembered when he was 12 years old, at school around 
20 years earlier. Two teachers held school disco dances and used the funds 
they raised to build an astronomy lab with a domed roof and telescope. They 
gave the key of the lab to the boys who more or less camped there during 
school holidays. Patrick Moore, television presenter of  The Sky at Night,  vis-
ited to speak at the school. He became friends with Lintott, who took over as 
the programme presenter after Moore’s death. Lintott also became Professor 
of Astrophysics at Oxford University. 
 With a colleague at Oxford, Lintott was overwhelmed with data [literally, 
‘given things’] pouring into their computers from over a million galaxies. 
They urgently needed help with the analysis. Tentatively, they put some data 
online, wondering if any volunteers might be interested. Within a few hours, 
volunteers who had been inspired by Moore’s and Lintott’s popular intro-
ductions to astronomy were already giving over 50,000 times per hour the 
analysis work that the physicists could do. Over a million volunteers now give 
their time and skill.  12  
 One alternative to the economy of price and mistrust is an economy of gift 
and trust. Although very different from exchange and barter, gifts have always 
existed (Mauss [1924] 1954). Historically, most healthcare and childcare have 
been given, mainly by women at home or in voluntary and religious centres, and 
the work could count as gifts or, to economists, as un-priced externalities. The 
price economy would recognise such services as commodities to be regulated 
through the price mechanism. Unlike consumer goods, however, positional goods 

148 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
(healthcare and education, as Chapter 10 reviewed) are especially hard to price 
and to protect from being exploited, abused and corrupted in the market (Collini 
2013).  13  Positional goods depend on relationships of personal care and giving. 
The work goes well beyond paid contracts and is partly vocational and volun-
tary (willed, not enforced) as Katy showed (Chapter 10). Caring work combines 
labour and love and merges into an economy of open-ended, tacit gift, trust and 
cooperation, with the (unpaid) student or patient sharing in the work and gift of 
learning or healing. 
 To explain the gift economy, Lewis Hyde (2006) drew on myths, fairy tales 
and psychoanalysis, all exploring the deep human psyche. By deﬁ nition, gifts are 
donated and bestowed, and cannot be demanded or bought. Although paintings and 
music recordings may be bought and sold, they are still endowed, Hyde believes, 
with a separate power of gift. They move and delight the viewer or listener. They 
transfer and reawaken in others the gift of the artists’ creativity, in an erotic and 
uniting commerce, in contrast to the logos economies of reason and the market 
(Hyde 2006, xvii). In contrast to market exchange, gifts do not involve bargains or 
barter, cash, contracts or priced commodities. 
 The gift and giving must always move on. Before there were fridges, during a 
glut of fruit and vegetables, to avoid destroying the food neighbours had to share 
it. They did so on the informal understanding that their gifts would be consumed 
but also returned later more or less, in another form, and maybe by another person. 
 Although it may be used or eaten, the gift is not used up but remains abun-
dant, such as the continual transfer and renewal, sharing and multiplying of food 
or music, love or knowledge. For example, girls’ education is shown later to ben-
eﬁ t their children physically and educationally (Boyden and Bourdillon 2012). 
Malinowski (1922) tracked gifts of shell ornaments circulating continually around 
Paciﬁ c islands and increasing social bonds. In the gift ethic, to possess is to give, 
and giving can increase the donor’s status as well as trust and prosperity between 
small and large groups. Some gifts are practical, others ceremonial and symbolic. 
Gifts unite many aspects of society: economics, law, morality, kinship and other ties, 
aesthetics, religion and myth. 
 Gifts are to be valued but not greedily possessed. This approach has enabled 
communities to survive and ﬂ ourish when natural resources are treated as cherished 
gifts, not as possessions or commodities or externalities to be squandered. There is 
a tradition of being stewards but not masters of the world, conﬁ rmed by the great 
religions, and of preserving and passing on natural gifts received: pure water and air, 
millions of beautiful, interdependent species, abundant food in countless varieties, 
spectacular land, sky and seascapes by day and night. These are part of the afﬂ uence 
in many subsistence economies (Hyde 2006, 22–3). The light and air pollution that 
blots out starry skies is just one example of disruption to this heritage. In cities we 
have lost the salutary nightly reminder of how insigniﬁ cant human beings are in a 
cosmos of stars. 
 Secular societies lose two vital, related religious concepts: ﬁ rst, a divine giver who 
constantly cares about, recreates and exists in everything; second, gratitude for all 

Ethics and emancipation 149
the gifts around us. Without an acknowledged giver, it is harder to see things as gifts. 
One great challenge for our ecological survival is to replace current assumptions that 
humans can use and abuse, possess and sell (literally meaning ‘alienate’) everything. 
Instead, human survival might depend on a renewed sense of wonder, gratitude and 
reverence for the world. For atheists and agnostics this involves accepting natural and 
cultural worlds as quasi-sacred gifts without needing to identify a donor. 
 The gift economy sets a respectful, slight distance between the receiver and 
the gift. Gift can be enjoyed freely, like the commons, but it is beyond human 
ownership and control and it evades personal possession. It alters adult-child rela-
tions when children are received as partly independent gifts who will move on 
(Gibran 1926, 13). Reciprocal gifts beyond price, of wellbeing, health and knowl-
edge, and of mutual caring, healing and teaching-learning, are integral to child-
adult relationships. 
 Hyde believed that from the nineteenth century, anthropologists and their 
indigenous subjects were already inﬂ uenced by capitalism. Many remote areas had 
been invaded for centuries by traders, pirates, armies, civil servants or missionaries. 
It was therefore hard for almost everyone fully to appreciate lost gift knowledge 
and ancient traditions, such as the potlatch, which had degenerated. Hyde searched 
for older sources, including universal myths and stories that appear in countless 
local variations. Carl Jung (1953–1979) was similarly interested in myths and their 
archetypes, which he believed were universal expressions of a human collective 
unconscious. Resonant motifs include the son who is sacriﬁ ced (gives his life) and 
is resurrected (receives back the gift of life). Another common story follows three 
youths questing for treasure, a symbol of the true self. The unkind youths fail but, 
through giving, the third generous youth gains gifts of magical aid that assist his 
quest. These realist gift stories recognise humanity’s dark shadow side as well as 
generosity. 
 Non-identity at 1M of the gift economy appreciates absence and lack, into 
which needed gifts ﬂ ow, to meet need and to remedy want, sorrow and ignorance. 
There is also loss in giving, even death if the gift is a sacriﬁ ce. Gifts meet three 
needs at different levels, in being  material or creative objects, which strengthen  social 
bonds, and have  spiritual meaning (Hyde 2006). Formerly, when almost everything 
had sacred meaning, gifts were reverenced as partly spiritual beings, within a formal 
structure of three obligations (‘ligation’ meaning bonds and ties, as in ‘religion’): to 
give, to accept and to reciprocate. There is also agency in decisions about when, 
where and how to pass gifts around (Mauss ([1924] 1954). Gift exists in  empirical 
feelings, impulses, perceptions and bonds of generosity and gratitude, which all 
generate goodwill. It occurs in  actual events of giving, receiving, passing on, meet-
ing need and multiplying collective wealth. And giving is a  real causal mechanism, 
known in its effects. 
 Real giving is voluntary, the highest form of agency. Current research on gift 
pays most attention to modern medical ethics, which grew like the great human 
rights treaties (EC 1950; UN 1948) in response to the Holocaust. The  Nuremberg 
Code (1947) clause 1 states that, when donating to medical research: ‘the voluntary 

150 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
consent of the human subject is absolutely essential’. Mauss ([1924] 1954) identi-
ﬁ ed gift as a ‘total social phenomenon’: economic, juridical, moral, aesthetic, reli-
gious and mythological. Although theories of ancient gift societies may be invented 
myths (Graeber 2011, 62) they still celebrate potential utopian ways of living, and 
DCR helps with apprehending these many kinds of knowing and unknowing on 
all planes of social being. Much could be theorised about gift in relation to nature, 
human nature and culture. Almost everything can be perceived as gift: health and 
ﬂ ourishing, each new day, the natural, social and cultural worlds. 
 Gift concerns generous being and doing, as shown in a survey of 10,000 school 
students. Those who engaged in religious, charitable, music and arts activities out-
side school (though not sport) gave more altruistic, less self-interested replies to 
moral questions. A politician who commented on the ﬁ ndings exhorted schools to 
do more to ‘instil moral values’: ‘If our education system fails to provide young peo-
ple with these skills, we will waste, not only the talent of the next generation, but 
our opportunity for Britain to succeed in the global economy.’  14  He misunderstood 
that real giving cannot be taught, is not a skill or talent, and stands in contradiction 
to the global price economy. 
 2E is concerned with how the gift economy negates need, suffering and conﬂ ict 
through goodwill and justice. The ancient natural laws of gift include the follow-
ing: Nurture and cherish gifts. Pass gifts on unconditionally. The more you give, 
the more you receive. Greedily hoarded gifts become poisonous. Usury (charging 
interest on loans) blasphemes against the sacred gift. Gift economies work best in 
small groups of under one thousand. Usury is forbidden within the group, but is 
allowed between strangers.  15  This rule helps to strengthen the gift community, and 
to draw on outside help if large loans are needed, such as after failed harvests. 
 Graeber’s scholarly research into the ﬁ rst 5,000 years of debt has some paral-
lels with Hyde’s much shorter work. Graeber (2011) recounted respectful humane 
ways of dealing with debt in a mainly practical and not shameful system. For mil-
lennia, goods circulated freely between neighbours without money, rather like gift 
exchange. There was an occasional settling of accounts and debt forgiveness, such 
as jubilee, to maintain reasonable order and equity. People relied on credit as a kind 
of currency ( credo , ‘I believe and trust you’), whereas money originated in war as 
portable payment to wandering, looting soldiers. 
 Science exists through two main gifts: the collected data and the international 
sharing of published research ﬁ ndings. There is deep anxiety that price-economy-led 
sponsors and scientists, for the sake of lucrative patents and other contracts, suppress 
and distort research ﬁ ndings in their own proﬁ t-making interests. They thereby 
damage the freedom and integrity of science  16  and of the universities. Other large 
gifts include Tim Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web and Jimmy Wales’s Wikipedia. 
These are open to anyone in the world who wants to join the free virtual com-
munity that shares communication and knowledge, and Wikipedia is supported by 
millions of volunteers who give their ideas and time. 
 However, the histories of gift and of debt trace growing rifts between the 
sacred and the secular; between goodwill among neighbours and its gradual 

Ethics and emancipation 151
replacement by laws and contracts between strangers. In the Hobbesian view, laws 
are essential to control basically nasty, brutish, warring lives. In contrast, anarchists 
try to revive assumed ancient cohesions, and they believe that laws corrupt basi-
cally harmonious, if idealised, communities (Hyde 2006, 76–94). Hyde (2006, 86) 
regards gifts as ‘anarchist property’, and they can be seen as wild and free in the 
next examples. 
 Teachers give knowledge for students to use and pass on in unforeseen ways. 
Gifts are not only additional but also multiple. Sow seeds one year, and hundreds 
and thousands appear in following years. Gifts increase in worth as they move 
around: songs are re-sung and evoke new memories, yet remain always fresh, as do 
books when reread and quoted. Music and drama are enriched when they unite 
audiences and performers in the gift of thrilling emotions and harmony. These 
intransitive works spark countless transitive responses. 
 Gifts wither and die unless constantly given away for others to use and enjoy: 
love, kindness, hospitality, and skill as an artist, a surgeon or a footballer. Free (wild) 
gifts, such as love or inspiration, cannot be summoned and are beyond human con-
trol and understanding and beyond price. They move freely and unconditionally 
through time and space. Besides artists, many kinds of workers confer gifts. Plumb-
ers are paid to ﬁ x drains, but they really ensure the priceless gifts of hygiene, health 
and dignity in clean, dry, odourless homes. Telephone engineers enable contacts 
between millions of callers. Practical work is far more highly valued when its gift 
elements, which never appear on the invoice, are recognised. 
 The gift economy relies on, is inspired by, and reﬂ ects and reinforces our human 
nature as part of the whole natural world. Human generosity appears to be natural 
and innate, and also cultural and learned. Although nature does not consciously 
‘give’, it has evolved towards lavish profusion to support the survival and ﬂ ourishing 
of all life. Nature inundates us with gifts, beginning with our genetic heritage and 
pre-birth nurturing. After mothers ‘give birth’, and contrary to human technology, 
babies ﬁ nd that the more breast milk they take, the more milk there is. The more 
children absorb and express ideas, the more these proliferate. 
 Gifts are only authentic when freely given, not forced or faked: love, the vote, 
consent, thanks, apology and forgiveness. Gifts involve giving of oneself, in time and 
unique personal attention: in being a friend, a grandchild, an author; in care that 
involves love and labour; and in donation of blood (Titmuss 1971), tissue or organs. 
Heroic protestors, healthcare workers in war zones, ﬁ re-ﬁ ghters, builders, martyrs, 
soldiers all undertake to risk their lives and many give them. Gifts epitomise uncon-
ditional power 1.  They   cannot be recalled even if they are misused, so that givers are 
vulnerable. Yet giving expresses autonomy and it cannot be enforced or a duty, an 
unwilling sacriﬁ ce or slavery. 
 Gifts increase social inequality when the wealthy exchange them or inherit 
them. Although the social justice of gift is complicated (Heath and Calvert 2013), 
the principles of mutual beneﬁ t through the gift economy endure. Within inequali-
ties, gifts among the poor may be more costly to the giver and more precious to 
the receiver, like the widow’s mite.  17  Equal exchange is impossible when value 

152 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
does not equate with price. Tiny gifts, a few drops of medicine or vaccine, may be 
inestimably life-saving. 
 Although gifts may be used to shame, subordinate, bribe or pressure others, in 
attempts to turn the others into becoming means towards the givers’ ends, these 
are not authentic gifts but power 2 bribes, jibes or traps. Positional gifts of educa-
tion cannot simply be ‘delivered’ and may demand years of hard work before they 
awaken the receiver into becoming a brilliant pianist, scientist or designer. Similarly, 
gifts of healthcare may depend on patients gradually, painfully, changing towards 
healthier habits or giving up addiction, before the gift can really heal. Gifts may be 
an unwanted burden or a grievous loss that later reveals its true worth. 
 At 3L, emergent totalities in gift economies bring greater wellbeing, generosity 
and ﬂ ourishing across whole societies. Gifts are ‘agents of social cohesion’ through 
constant exchange. They ‘bind many wills into a shared spiritual unanimous [one-
soul] goodwill, when the whole is greater than the sum of its parts’ (Hyde 2006). 
Vulnerable people especially know the life-saving properties of giving and receiv-
ing in interdependent friendships, such as among street children in the slums of 
Accra, Ghana (Mizen and Ofosu-Kusi 2010a, 2010b), school children in Tanzania 
(Yoshida 2011) and in Ethiopia (Abebe 2009). Crucially, gifts are owned and passed 
on within a much larger context of the generally shared commons, of the natural 
and cultural heritage. Ancient prophecies warn that when wealth ceases to ﬂ ow, and 
instead is counted and hoarded, then scarcity appears, and famine haunts the land. 
One of the wealthiest of all countries, India, endured few famines until it was 
looted by British capitalist colonialists. Then famines occurred not for lack of food, 
which was rotting in warehouses, but because few people could afford the prices 
(Roy 2014; Sen 1982). 
 The price economy perceives tax as theft, which encroaches on taxpayers’ will-
ingness and ability to bestow true gifts through charity. Taxpayers have no choice 
in how their funds support work they admire or deplore (such as paciﬁ st citizens 
having to pay for wars). However, taxes can at least partly be seen as willingly com-
mitted giving, which redistributes wealth through social justice, and in carefully 
informed, planned, beneﬁ cial and democratically accountable ways. Higher tax 
paying nations beneﬁ t generally, as partial gift economies, in higher average stan-
dards of living and reported wellbeing (Dorling 2011; Wilkinson and Pickett 2009). 
Paying tax stands in contrast to tax avoidance and evasion, to dangerously undemo-
cratic venture philanthropy (Ball 2013), and to sometimes ineffectual charities run 
as big businesses (Polman 2011). Philanthropy is not real gift if beneﬁ ciaries such as 
disabled people do not wish to depend on donors’ capricious whim or pity. 
 Instead of atomising and costing health and health care as in the price economy, 
the gift economy cherishes health as part of the shared gift of universal ﬂ ourish-
ing. The aims are to promote physical and mental health, and to prevent illness 
and injury (while respecting adventurous risk taking). Far more than a physical or 
personal matter, health is also part of social justice and equality for all. Two doctors 
who respected these values found that giving can involve complicated relations 
between donors and receivers. They set up the utopian Peckham Health Centre 

Ethics and emancipation 153
during the years 1935–1939 in a moderately poor part of London. There were three 
ﬂ oors of sports and social rooms as a gift to the community. The doctors recorded: 
 Our failures during our ﬁ rst 18 months’ work have taught us [that] individu-
als,  from infants to old people , resent or fail to show any interest in anything 
initially presented to them through discipline, regulation or instruction which 
is another aspect of authority . . . We have had to learn to sit back for [the 
members’] activities to emerge. Any impatience on our part, translated into 
help has strangled their efforts. 
 (Drs Williamson and Pearse quoted in 
Gribble 2010, 163, my emphasis)  
 They found that their compulsion, initiating activities and even persuasion coun-
teracted ‘the source and origin of spontaneous action’. A staff member, Lucy Crocker, 
tried to plan a timetable with the children so that they could safely use the swimming 
pool and gym but this failed. She learnt through pressure from 4-year-old Brian to let 
the children use the pool whenever they wanted, unsupervised and safe. Brian was at 
ﬁ rst ‘a bit anti-social’ but he soon became ‘a responsible person’. Teasing, competing, 
ﬁ ghting and bullying quickly disappeared. In reciprocal giving, the autonomy of ben-
eﬁ ciaries of all ages and what they can contribute are recognised. The passing around 
of gift willingly accepts what beneﬁ ciaries of all ages offer in return. 
 The politics of childhoods real and imagined 
 Finally, themes through the two volumes will now be drawn together to consider 
the possible place of children and young people in potential, future, more utopian 
societies. The topics reviewed will be founding narratives, ecology, education, rela-
tionships, economics, work, play and democracy. 
 The DCR aim of promoting utopias is to negate alienation, which means the 
alienating or ‘removing, estranging, forgetting or misrepresenting of things that are 
essential to wellbeing’. Splits, suffering and loss of ﬂ ourishing then ensue. This leads, 
as earlier chapters reviewed, to chains of dualisms, determinations, constraints, col-
lective ‘structural sins’, reiﬁ cations, fears, desires, TINA formations, denegations 
(which deny and reject), contradictions and inconsistent, unselfconscious splits 
between theory and practice that prevent ﬂ ourishing (Bhaskar 2000, 33–30). 
 Founding narratives 
 Real change involves retelling founding narratives, such as gift and price. Child-
hood and youth are also narratives that need to be retold if change is to occur. If 
societies are to draw together in greater justice, informed by empathy and mutual 
understanding, adults would question the distancing and diminishing of children, 
and of their own earlier childhood years. Broader continuities between the age 
groups would be apparent when adulthood is more clearly seen to emerge within 

154 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
the same person who was the child, through transformational change but not dif-
ference (Bhaskar 2008b). Supposed dichotomies of the rational reliable adult and 
the unreliable, volatile child are challenged when children are able to show how 
competent they can be in more equal relationships. Children’s naive questions, play-
ful discovery and leaps of imagination are part of the  retroduction  at the heart of 
scientiﬁ c and social discovery (Bhaskar 1998a; Lawson 1998, 156–7). 
 When adults dismiss and devalue children, they split off and alienate much of 
their own integral nature, falsely labelling as ‘childlike’ such qualities as spontane-
ous, authentic emotions and relationships, being at ease in one’s body and close, 
physical relations with nature. New practices that respect and conserve the natu-
ral world will depend on new attitudes that respect and value all its inter-related 
parts, including children and adults; moving from power 2 domination to power 1 
mutual creativity; and seeing all children as gifts, not possessions or investments 
or externalities. That would involve ‘transcending or surpassing the dichotomies 
in terms of which reality is normally understood’ (Bhaskar 2002b, 51).  18  Bryan 
Stevenson (2014) reported the lethal effects of this splitting, both intergenerational 
and interracial, when white people split off unwanted and unacknowledged ‘childish’ 
(supposedly ignorant, dangerous) aspects of themselves, and err by projecting these 
onto black children and adults. 
 On the DCR concept of the ‘ground state’ or true self, Lena Gunnarsson (2013, 
112) analysed what that would mean if love between women and men existed in 
new equality and mutual respect, when doing good to the other feels good, and 
‘makes the act of giving not an expenditure but itself a gift’ to the giver. Abdullai 
Haji-Abdi (2014) researched conﬂ icts among Somalians and recorded the very high 
child mortality rates and broken health and education systems. He contended that 
political change partly depends on the leaders changing their personal ‘ground 
state’ of being, and ﬁ nding the courage to take creative right action. Hopes of peace 
and justice in all countries depend on leaders cooperating and this involves courage 
to take the risk of showing a childlike humility. Political change involves personal 
change in leaders and in everyone else (Bhaskar 2000, 2002a, 2002b; Luxemburg 
2010) and new narratives about being human. 
 Ecology 
 George Marshall (2014) considered that current myths must be retold if dominant 
attitudes towards ecology are to change. He noted that the average American teen-
ager’s understanding of the realities of human life and relationships is distorted by 
having already seen 16,000 murders on the screen. We are locked into crime sto-
ries about an enemy who intends to harm victims who is defeated by a hero who 
intends to restore the status quo.  19  However, climate change is not an intentional 
enemy, individual heroes can do little, and restoring the status quo would only make 
matters worse. Therefore, Marshall argued, the enemy stories need to be replaced by 
ones that admit that we are all responsible and involved, and we all have to co-operate 
in working towards agreed-upon solutions. For this, we have to believe that it is 

Ethics and emancipation 155
worth making personal sacriﬁ ces today for uncertain, collective beneﬁ ts tomorrow, 
if humanity is to survive. This is exactly the opposite to competitive consumerism’s 
priorities and, Marshall adds, to global economics and the plans to spend $1trillion 
a year on bringing yet more fossil fuel reserves into production. 
 Stories map social futures, such as the still-dominant Maslow (1943) theory: that 
human progress moves up from basic natural needs to the peak of self fulﬁ lment; 
that subsistence life can only be basic, empty and intolerable; that everything must 
grow and proﬁ t; and that each generation fails unless it prospers more than previous 
ones. Alternative narratives about survival on the ﬁ nite planet are essential to work 
against dominant threats and appeals to negative feelings of fear and self-interest, 
which trigger reactions of helpless anxiety, avoidance, pessimism and despair. There 
is also angry self-defence, as politicians prove when they stir up public hostility in 
fear of crime and immigration. 
 Instead, Marshall contends, people of all ages need to be informed and involved 
early in practical projects.  20  Appeals to positive values of hope and interdepen-
dence evoke greater active interest and support in tackling ecological and political 
problems. They reveal depths of concern and kindness among most people as well 
as wonder and love for nature (Monbiot 2014).  21  Examples of work on eco-cities 
show that coerced, forced and fragmented autonomy do not work, whereas citizens 
engaged in coordinated cooperatives can succeed.  22  
 Debates about reducing travel and tourism to avoid burning fossil fuels are dom-
inated by concern about loss of choice and freedom. Perhaps attention could turn 
towards the potential beneﬁ ts of fewer tourists and conferences. Public spaces such 
as beaches, local food, water and resources could be restored to the local people as 
their commons. Their low-paid service to tourists, when most proﬁ t is absorbed 
by international businesses, could be redirected into their communities. The myth 
that the only way to fund local activities is from exports or tourism is another 
story that urgently needs to be retold. 
 Less travel and trafﬁ c would return much space used for roads and car parks to 
play and sports areas, parks and gardens, and would give children greater safety and 
freedom. Local communities could rely more on local food supplies and develop 
food sovereignty. Communities could rely more on their own entertainment and 
leisure, on local services, work and employment. They would be supplemented by 
the contacts and opportunities accessed through the internet,  23  the new collabora-
tive global commons, which might ‘eclipse’ capitalism through new forms of trade, 
money and eco-energy and ‘sharable value’ (Rifkin 2014). 
 Education 
 Personal choice of a child’s school illustrates two ways forward. One is to search 
over a large area for the ‘best’ school by test results and OFSTED reports, though 
these may be tenuous, contested, transient standards. This way can entail popular 
schools being oversubscribed and over-pressured, their playgrounds covered with 
new classrooms and staff car parks, fewer families gaining entry to their ﬁ rst choice 

156 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
of school, and unpopular schools failing and closing. Individual choices that seem 
rational can end in harmful, wasteful, irrational collective effects. Although the 
government appears to be increasing parental choice of school (academies, faith 
schools, free schools, grammar schools, special schools and so on), it is also reducing 
choice by closely regulating and standardising schools’ routines. 
 Individual choice of school can destroy other choices: greater social harmony 
when all children learn together at the local multi-faith, inclusive or common 
school (Alderson and Goodey 1998; Benn 2011; Fielding and Moss 2011); social 
justice and equity and far greater equal opportunities for all children when there 
are no longer privileged ‘good’ versus ‘failing’ schools; local democracy when adults 
and children share with the staff in planning and organising their local school; 
across the country, immense savings of time and car journeys when children can 
walk to school and to see friends after school; conﬁ dence and wellbeing when 
children can stay for years with the same local friends; less stress for teachers when 
the top-heavy, time-consuming market system of competing schools with their 
targets, tests and inspections is ended; far more time and resources for real learning. 
Finnish schools that are so highly praised by the OECD do not have mandatory 
exams until young people are aged 17, indicating that these can be unnecessary and 
counterproductive.  24  
 To change from the present system of competing schools to the alternative 
of cooperating schools depends on retelling another common myth: exit and 
voice (Hirschman 1990). Exit means that dissatisﬁ ed clients leave and potentially 
sabotage and destroy the supermarket or school by all moving to a rival shop or 
school. Exit, central to price theory, is supposed to give ultimate power to con-
sumers and essential incentives to companies to perform highly. Although power 2 
exit might work with shopping, it is little use to leave a school after the student 
has failed vital exams, and those families with the most problems may be least 
able to move elsewhere. 
 In contrast, voice involves critical positive support, engaging and negotiating 
with the teachers, working with them to raise standards and prevent problems. 
It involves the most assertive families staying instead of leaving and invites them 
potentially to speak and act on behalf of many others about problems and how to 
resolve them. Voice gives students and parents more power 1 . From the ﬁ rst, children 
would learn and take part in real democratic education. Yet the present top-down 
management by government, with ‘super heads’ and management teams, would 
have to change into systems led together by the teachers, students and parents. The 
Preschool Playgroup Association showed how well this could work (Henderson 
2011). Before 1880, self-educated working people worried that when schooling 
became compulsory in England, ‘assuredly will the people degenerate into passive 
submission to injustice’ (Lovett and Collins 1840, 74). Compulsory schools, they 
felt, would ‘destroy for many the love of learning and [with sanctions] annihilate the 
individuality and integrity of teacher and student alike’ into ‘perpetual pupillage’. 
They wanted open schools for adults and children to learn together and to ‘go ﬁ rst 
and the master would follow’ (Godwin 1797, 112). 

Ethics and emancipation 157
 The artist teacher Marion Richardson believed, ‘Whenever people are sincere 
and free, art can spring up’, and unless ‘a relationship amounting to love exists 
between teacher and children, children’s art . . . is impossible’ (1938, quoted in 
Aldrich 2002, 76–8). This refers back to the earlier comment about childhood and 
free, authentic emotions and relationships. Inclusive or common schools foster soli-
darity and social justice, starting from Bertrand Russell’s (1926) reverence of every 
child having ‘something sacred, indeﬁ nable, unlimited, something individual and 
strangely precious, the growing principle of life’. Russell believed teachers should 
foster vitality, courage, emotional sensitivity and intelligence in each child’s physical, 
emotional, spiritual and intellectual growth. 
 When Michael Fielding and Peter Moss (2011; Moss 2014) write about utopian 
schools, they take radical change to involve not drastic uprooting but incremental 
working towards radical alternatives. When transformative change is organic, each 
step forward opens up new knowledge and horizons and new possibilities in how 
they might be developed. Change is then not all pre-planned, linear and mechani-
cal, but is open to branching out into new directions as these appear. 
 DCR emergence sees utopias being born not from complete breaks with the 
past (difference between the one and the many), but through growing incremen-
tally from present structures and agents (transformative change and continuity in 
the one and the other). The dialectic of real change with some order and stability 
avoids the extremes of total ﬂ ux or universal necessity and uni-linear narratives. 
To set the old real universals alongside stratiﬁ ed reality (empirical, actual and 
real) can be a way to account for chaos and ﬂ ux while maintaining deep order 
(Rutzou 2013). 
 Brad Shipway (2013) also sees schools as particularly good places for transfor-
mation, having the time, space and long-term relationships to nurture utopian 
work (Alderson [1999] 2013; Cockburn 2013; Fielding and Moss 2011; Highﬁ eld 
School 1997; Moss 2014). Shipway applies DCR concepts to explore how schools 
can liberate students and teachers. He cites Bhaskar (1986, 171) when describing 
dialectical transformation in self-emancipation by the agents concerned, ‘from  an 
unwanted and unneeded to a wanted and needed source of determination’.  This ‘can only 
be effected in practice [and] depends on the transformation of structures . . . an 
emancipatory politics of practice is necessarily both grounded in scientiﬁ c theory 
and revolutionary in objective or intent’. Shipway envisages teachers and students 
realising their ‘ground state’ or ‘most essential level’ of human being ‘upon which 
all other levels depend’. He traces the seven levels of freedom  25  (Bhaskar 2008b, 
281–4, 1986, 210–11), with the fourth stage of everyone (in the school) actively 
sharing their need and vision, imagination, courage and opportunity. Teachers need 
to avoid trying to control the processes, though they also need to guide younger 
students. DCR concepts can assist them in being reﬂ ective, self-critical and collegial 
(Shipway 2013, 186). DCR’s concrete utopian imagination is not a prescription 
for the future, but for an open society when individuals ‘decide what to do with 
their freedom’. It is ‘an inner urge that ﬂ ows universally from the logic of elemental 
absence (lack, need, want, desire) . . . wherever power 2 holds sway. It is the heartbeat 

158 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
of a positively generalised concept of freedom as ﬂ ourishing and as autonomy and 
as reason. It is irrepressible’ (Bhaskar 2008b, 299). 
 Dr Deb (Chapter 9) demonstrated the need to sow and nurture each seed in its 
best setting, to respect diversity but not uniformity and monoculture. This applies 
even more to children, who will be growing the seeds and working in diverse other 
ways to ensure that humanity survives. They need schools that are planned and 
managed by their local communities and cooperatives, to serve local needs, and to 
respect the concrete universal–singular in each child. 
 Relationships 
 Since Plato’s  Republic,  utopians have had uneasy relations with the family and mar-
riage. Some utopians see families as subversive, and want all children to be in cen-
tral state care, to ensure that they learn to be committed, dutiful, public citizens. 
Plato envisaged everyone (meaning elite men) sharing all their property, wives and 
children in common, although the men would be rewarded in a secret, eugeni-
cally designed system of extra access to the ‘wives’. Others, including feminists, see 
the family as stiﬂ ing and repressive. They hope for more open relationships, when 
women are freed from marriage, domestic chores and child care, and Shulamith 
Firestone (1970) hoped pregnancy would be replaced by machines.  26  
 Children become lost in these visions, which are adult-centric and also subcon-
sciously masculine in their avoidance of intimacy and care (Benhabib and Cornell 
1987; Gilligan 1982; Kennedy and Mendus 1987). Children may be consigned to 
full-time organised group care, with little discussion of how this restricts their lives 
and those of their carers. To dismiss the family denies young children’s unhappi-
ness when they are passed around among strangers. It also overlooks children’s (and 
everyone’s) need for close, consistent, personal relationships as well as for many 
other looser relationships. And families can be wellsprings of generous, loyal, inter-
dependent communities. Graeber (2011, 95, 102–3, 95–6, 99, 267, 385) suggests this 
view when he believes that future utopian communism ‘exists right now’ in human 
relationships and cooperation, which he contrasts with relations of exchange (see 
commerce in Chapter 10, price in Chapter 11 of this volume). 
 We are all communists with our closest friends and many others . . . a good deal 
of the time . . . beyond . . . individual or private ownership . . . Not only are no 
accounts taken [of goods or services given] but it would be considered offen-
sive, or simply bizarre, to even consider doing so . . . Communism then, is based 
neither in exchange nor in reciprocity. [Even capitalism] is built on this bed-
rock of actually existing communism . . . the foundation of all human socia-
bility . . . [and] raw material of society . . . Our mother’s love, true friendship, 
sociality, humanity, belonging . . . no calculation is necessary or even ultimately 
possible; in so far as there is give and take, they follow completely different 
principles [from exchange] transactions . . . (Mothers, and care-giving women 
in general, are a classic case in point.) . . . Communism may be the foundation 

Ethics and emancipation 159
of all human relations . . . [in daily life it] manifests itself above all in what we 
call ‘love’. 
 However, there are problems in generalising from idealised personal relation-
ships to the polity, and from seemingly sacriﬁ cial women to economic working 
relations. Ideals of equality can mask discrepant power, and dismiss protest as mean 
and petty. Communism that abolishes all private property and turns it into public 
commons is psychologically unrealistic. 
 Instead of dividing everything into either public common ownership or else 
private, proﬁ t-making property, utopias need also to respect personal, intimate life. 
Rather than spending all day on one thankless task, cooking in a utopian kitchen 
where they never see the diners, women tend to prefer to organise their own multi-
task day at home and in small informal groups with family and friends who appre-
ciate their care. Everyone needs some (though maybe only very basic) personal 
space, time, privacy and possessions. 
 Communism is summarised as the principle ‘from each according to ability, to 
each according to need’ (Marx [1848] 1998). This generous giving and taking is 
not possible if everything is already shared. These actions involve personal agency, 
choice and possessions. Hosts can freely welcome guests only if they have their own 
homes and choose who may enter. Otherwise there is the monovalence of total 
common ownership in a world of ﬁ xed, packed presence. Space and absence are 
essential, when absences of need and lack are absented by giving, which leaves the 
givers willingly lacking the possessions they once had. Children’s ﬁ rst experiences 
of relationships of personal giving and taking, the gift, are the foundations of society. 
 Economics 
 Capitalism has spread immeasurable prosperity and wellbeing, but deregulated 
capitalism is like a great hand, which grabs and squeezes everything for proﬁ t 
(surplus value): the natural world; all work and trade; all property such as land, 
housing and possessions; the former commons of public spaces, resources and 
amenities; science, research, the arts and the mass media; venture philanthropy. 
Still more invasively, the hand squeezes human needs: for welfare states and ben-
eﬁ ts; for education; for health- and social- and child-care; for justice and pro-
tections from crime, including penal systems; and for the means of respecting 
human rights. The squeeze alienates people from nature, from other people, from 
oppressive social structures and from the real self they could be. The squeeze cre-
ates untold inequality, need, anxiety, suffering, conﬂ ict and debt. These reactions 
too are squeezed to yield more proﬁ t through legal and illegal trade in services, 
consumer goods (retail therapy), drugs and alcohol to relieve stress, penal and 
military services to deal with protest and conﬂ ict. 
 Some of these measures are helpful and healing, others increase the effects of the 
squeeze, which responds with still more pressure and proﬁ t making. The more chil-
dren are forced into needy dependence, the more proﬁ t can be made from them. 

160 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Among countless examples of the effects of the tightening squeeze, in increased 
stress and suffering, and in shrinking welfare services, is domestic violence. Women’s 
( sic ) refuges are being closed in Britain, although 126 women were killed by men 
in 2012, 143 in 2013 and 150 in 2014.  27  More than 74,000 women sought help 
from Women’s Aid in 2013–14. On just one day in 2014, 112 women and 84 chil-
dren were turned away from full refuges, while over-stretched community outreach 
services had to deny help to 369 women. Childhood involves today’s cost and suf-
fering and also tomorrow’s. How will the squeezing hand increase pressure over 
the next ﬁ ve, ten, twenty or more years? And what will the effects be on children 
living with domestic violence now, and as they become adults and parents, and on 
generations to come? 
 There is an urgent need to devise alternatives to the dominant price economy, 
and to divert its immense costs and proﬁ ts into benign, creative and equitable chan-
nels. The survival of societies and the ecosphere depends on zero ﬁ nancial growth, 
redistribution, and on narratives drawn from the great religions, which accept that 
poverty and thrift can be not only virtues but also reasonable, modest, fulﬁ lling ways 
to live. Surveys of children’s wishes ﬁ nd that they would rather spend time with 
their family, friends and pets and out-of-doors than have more consumer goods. 
 Steven Pinker (2012) claims that we have developed into a more peaceful and 
benign world, that no longer sees deliberate, mass killings on the scale of World 
Wars I and II. However, as Marshall (2014) might point out, not all deaths and disas-
ters follow deliberate, conscious agency. The annual, global toll of child deaths from 
illness, violence, hunger and forced migration far exceeds the Holocaust. The two 
great differences today, compared with 70 years ago, are that, ﬁ rst, we have the med-
ical and other means to prevent many of these deaths and, second, we know about 
the deaths through mass communications. We cannot claim helpless ignorance. This 
alters our agency into degrees of conscious collusion and deliberate neglect. The 
daily news (reports today that over 5,000 people have died in the Nepal earthquake) 
perhaps inures us to unimaginable suffering and alters our moral concern, like the 
reported growing tolerance of torture for certain purposes (Bourke 2014). One of 
the most important insights from sociology, missing in so much public debate, is 
that our moral responsibility does not wholly depend on individual agency. It also 
inheres in social and economic structures and ‘structural sins’ or norms of greed and 
selﬁ sh indifference, when we have clear alternative options. Alternative economic 
imagining therefore has to attend to structures as well as to agency. 
 Work and play and democracy 
 In green utopias, the citizen’s income supports part-time work and school, with free 
time for being, doing and making, rather than earning and spending. Present dual-
ism of work and play allocates serious, useful, important activity to ‘work’, whereas 
pleasure, fun and joy as ends in themselves are ‘play’, which is not serious or use-
ful. There is no English word for activity that is interesting, satisfying, amusing, 
rewarding, maybe exciting, challenging or difﬁ cult, enjoyable and worthwhile for 
its own sake, and useful for exploring, imagining, creating and for gaining skill and 

Ethics and emancipation 161
knowledge. In an inclusive primary school, where one in ten of the children had 
severe disabilities, the school students and staff agreed that the proper word was 
missing for most of their activities and they chose to use ‘fun’ (Alderson [1999], 
2013). Real work and play are dialectics of all these rewarding activities and would 
be merged in utopian life. Work that may seem hard and dull, such as teaching 
severely disabled children, is enjoyed when the children and staff are active, valued 
members of the well-resourced school. 
 Like swimming, democracy is learned through doing, through living in a demo-
cratic school, not through the epistemic fallacy that teaches and talks theories of 
democracy while contradicting them in coercive school practices. Instead of treat-
ing children as empty slates, democratic teachers work with them in a freedom that 
is the ‘indispensible condition for the quest for human completion’, for being more 
fully human (Freire 1970, 47). Practical doing, creating and experimenting  28  are 
favoured (Dewey 1902, 1916; Donaldson 1978; Gardner 1993; Holt 1967; Wrigley 
2006) and these are too diverse and spontaneous to ﬁ t standardised tests. Students 
and teachers will share in choosing and practising new forms of learning and living 
together. 
 Since 2000, truancy from school has been a crime in England and Wales for 
which parents can be punished; each year some are imprisoned and thousands are 
ﬁ ned.  29  This is an admission of defeat by the government that schools are not all 
good enough for students to want to attend, and that the oppressive, expensive, 
top-heavy management is not working. Paradoxically, thousands of students are 
excluded each year, with very damaging effects for many. Utopian school students 
of all ages could choose which free courses and activities to attend inside and out-
side schools. 
 One rights advocacy project in London involved children and young peo-
ple, many from disadvantaged backgrounds.  30  Some had opted out of school and 
they enjoyed working in the ofﬁ ce on a wide range of children’s rights. They 
took an active, informed part in politics when they ofﬁ cially attended formal 
Greater London Assembly meetings. Short, clear versions of the Assembly papers 
were written for them, and many adult Assembly members preferred to use these 
instead of their own longer, denser papers (Alderson et al. 2002). Knowing adults 
who tended to specialise only in particular child rights that interested them, 
I asked the director how these slightly educated young people seemed to have far 
broader, deeper, generic understanding of rights and the underlying legal princi-
ples of justice and respect than many adults had. She replied that they had experi-
enced their rights being denied. Similarly, around a century ago, Rosa Luxemburg 
(2010) criticised colleagues who believed the workers needed to be educated 
into wanting change. She knew that hard experience (ontology) taught them 
far more than formal courses (epistemology) could do. Revolutionary change 
emerges from practical experiences of being exploited and alienated, as young 
people’s trade unions and other protest groups demonstrate (Liebel 2004; Shier 
and Mendez 2014). 
 If schools were non-compulsory, children would still attend because of their 
innate passion for learning, to be with their friends, and to enjoy the school’s 

162 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
resources. In voluntary and all-age classes, teachers no longer need waste time on 
crowd control and dealing with disorderly resistance, and they can concentrate on 
teaching and learning. Schools would work hard to attract and keep students, and 
to plan with them how to make the school days enjoyable and relevant. 
 A short working week would enable all generations to be more active together 
(as they are now in many countries) in work and leisure places, and in work-like 
leisure: tending crops and herds, making and mending, sports and arts, civic duties 
such as political meetings and canvassing, many kinds of voluntary and community 
work, adventure holidays. When they learn, work and make music in mixed age 
groups, young children show higher abilities (Gardner 1993).  31  Children and young 
people who do paid work, as many want to do (Morrow and Vennam 2012), rec-
ognise the importance of being literate and numerate and are keen to attend school 
too, like the working children in Rajasthan who run their own night schools (     John 
2003).  32  Learning can merge into work and play, ‘playing’ football, or the piano, or 
Hamlet, imagining a galaxy, devising a theorem, programming a computer, writing 
a poem, building a bicycle (Boal 1979; Edwards et al. 1998; Freire 1970; Gardner 
1993; Holt 1967; Meighan 1995). 
 With part-time work and school and locally centred living, there would be 
many more adults around in homes and streets through the day, as there used to 
be and still are in many parts of the world, spending time in or out of their home, 
with friends and neighbours, or on their own. When adults and older children care 
for them informally in groups, young children have more freedom to walk around, 
and need not be conﬁ ned into home or preschool. Women then also have more 
freedom. Albert Parr remembered when he was aged four in the 1900s in Stavan-
ger, Norway. He enjoyed walking to the station alone, buying a ticket, riding over 
the long bridge to the harbour, going to the museum or the shops or the park. At 
the ﬁ sh market, he would haggle for the ﬁ sh and take the supper home (Ward 1994, 
149–50). Aged over 90, Margaret remembered when she was ﬁ ve years old in 1902. 
Her mother sent her across the city of Derby, England, with a pram to fetch her 
sister Elizabeth, aged three years, home from a stay in hospital (Alderson 2008a, 15). 
The adults concerned assumed that it was natural and normal for young children 
to have these freedoms and responsibilities. The conﬁ ned young children today 
show as little of their capacities as birds do in cages, and so they are constantly 
mis-constructed as helpless infants. Their reasonable protests are taken as proof of 
immaturity and the need for tighter control. Eating, sleeping and behaviour prob-
lems, partly in reaction to conﬁ ned inactivity and lack of challenge and adventure, 
are misread as medical problems within the child. 
 William Morris ([1890] 1994) hoped that in his utopia women could be ‘less 
anxious’ about their children and ‘more maternal’. Children could 
 often make up parties, and come to play in the woods for weeks together in 
the summer time, living in tents, as you see. We rather encourage them to do 
it; they learn to do things for themselves, and get to know the wild creatures; 
and you see the less they stew inside houses the better for them. 

Ethics and emancipation 163
 To regain this freedom, public spaces that have been sold would be restored as 
commons. In cities such as Beirut, almost all the natural public spaces, the beaches and 
the one large green park, have been sold and are closed to the public. Access is now 
by ticket only, bought in advance by people aged over 30.  33  This denies many human 
rights, including to an adequate healthy standard of living, to refreshing rest and lei-
sure, to meet and assemble freely, and to hold public entertainments and protests. 
 With more equality, there is less physical and mental illness (Wilkinson and 
Pickett 2009), less crime, and less need for healthcare and monitoring and policing. 
Some utopians have expected an end to crime and poverty and to the need for law 
and prisons (More [1516] 2010; Morris [1890] 1994). Yet the 1215  Magna Carta 
 could be seen as utopian in its promise that no one would be above the law, and to 
no one would justice be sold or delayed. Realistic utopias need the law to protect 
benign policies, to arbitrate fairly over protests, to deter and prevent crime. Most 
of all, the law would ensure equality and justice, and guard against oppressive and 
abusive powers re-emerging, which history indicates they will always attempt to do. 
 Human rights would not be misunderstood as selﬁ sh individualism. There 
would be ‘recognition of the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights 
of all members of the human family [that] is the foundation of freedom, justice and 
peace in the world’ (United Nations 1948, 1989). That recognition is also the basis 
for law. Human rights are ‘the ethical architecture necessary to decent everyday life’ 
and ‘the only contemporary idea with true universal and progressive appeal’. Uni-
versal rights are one of the few post-religious ethical resources we have, when rights 
respect everyone’s dignity through structures of accountability to an independent 
rule of law, community self-government and, especially, equity (Gearty 2011b). 
Forged from extreme experiences of human cruelty and vulnerability in the 
Holocaust (European Council 1950; United Nations 1948), today’s ‘human rights 
empower the vulnerable and irritate and inconvenience the mighty’ (Chakrabarti 
2014). The Conventions, including the one for children (UNCRC 1989), set out 
the basic freedoms, protections and provisions necessary for human life. 
 After the collapse of centralised socialism in 1989, utopians have especially 
tended to favour small local democracies to complement national systems. Yet poli-
cies to address climate change and international injustice have to be formed and to 
work on every level: individual, local, national, regional and global. Democracies 
depend on informed, active citizens. The enthusiastic voters aged from 16 years in 
the 2014 Scottish referendum showed how involved they can be when they respect 
the candidates and their policies. Yet despite a decade of compulsory citizenship 
education in Britain, the youngest age groups are least likely to vote. 
 Unjust states depend on many citizens being too indifferent or ignorant, too 
wary or cynical about the political class, too cowed or despairing to question 
or protest or even to vote. These states rely on schools to produce such citizens. 
If curiosity and love of learning and critical questioning are crushed by lessons that 
seem boring and meaningless, and later by unrewarding employment, the happy 
fusion of work, learning and play is split. Work and learning feel like drudgery and, 
to be an escape, leisure, play and free time must be unserious and undemanding. 

164 Childhoods in the real ‘adult’ world
Serious matters outside work then risk being trivialised: glib, entertaining politi-
cians and newspapers are favoured over ones that challenge injustice; social media 
and advertising, online games and music, ﬁ lms and TV shows, besides stress at home 
and at work, all offer constant distraction from critical, political thinking. In a British 
survey, one in three adults said they had never talked about climate change.  34  One 
of the most important effects of part-time work and school bridging into part-time 
leisure and play could be to overcome splits between work and play, and that could 
restore active, engaged democracy. Work could be fun; play could be serious; politics 
could be fun and serious. They could all be rewarding and important for children 
and adults in an active citizenship that takes many forms in many spaces and is a 
knitting together of groups in solidarity (Cockburn 2013). 
 Concluding, connecting and opening 
 Two themes through this book have been connections and openings. On connec-
tions, there is the importance of seeing how global matters such as ecology, econom-
ics, politics, essential services, urban and rural areas, society and nature, and all related 
topics studied by separate disciplines interact and constantly inﬂ uence and change 
one another in cause-time-space structure-agency. Another main connection is 
between generations, to show how children and adults have so much in common in 
relation to these global matters and to good societies, which need to be understood 
through a life-course perspective instead of the usual adult view that sets aside child-
hood. A third connection in the two volumes is the interdependence between social 
research theory and method, and ways in which DCR can aid and clarify them. 
 On openings, many of the topics and connections and ideas in this book, 
because of their breadth, have necessarily been only brieﬂ y reviewed. These reviews 
are intended to prompt the continual repeating of the MELD process, as well as 
to encourage much deeper work by other researchers. The ﬁ nal pages of this book 
that have begun to imagine childhoods in possible utopias will also, I hope, invite 
researchers to develop these areas much further. Childhood researchers are well 
placed to work with and for children and young people towards changing the 
world to beneﬁ t all generations.
 Chapter 12, Ethics and emancipation 
 All websites were checked for access 21 March 2015 unless stated otherwise. 
 Notes 
1.  BBC World Service, Outlook , 5 April 2013. 
 2 .  http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.co.uk/2015/02/11/ucl-students-oil-orgy-protest_n_665
9324.html; http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/benjamin-franta/fossil-fuel-divestment-re_
b_6812164.html 6 March 2015. 
 3 .  http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~wright/RealUtopias.htm. 
 4 .  David Harvey (2012) Hardtalk interview, BBC World Service, 12 July, https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=zARceZS50ps. 

Ethics and emancipation 165
 5 .  This section is based on the economist Derek Wall’s (2012) review, because he covers 
social, economic, political and ecological concerns. More recent examples have been 
added. 
  6 .  www.crin.org. 
  7 .  http://www.citizensincome.org. 
 8 .  http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/overview. 
 9 .  http://www.eoearth.org/view/article/150926/ April 2013. 
 10 .  Quoted in Wade Davis’s (2013) critical review of Jared Diamond’s work,  Guardian,  
9 January. 
 11 .  Some of these ideas are drawn from the three books in D’Souza’s review. 
 12 .  The Life Scientiﬁ c, BBC Radio 4, 17 June 2014, 9.00 a.m. 
 13 .  https://gmandchemicalindustry9.wordpress.com/2015/01/30/low-level-corruption-
disturbingly-common-in-health-and-medicine/. 
 14 .  Tristram Hunt, Labour’s shadow Education Secretary, in Adams, R. (2015) Call for schools 
to have a more active role in teaching character and morality,  Guardian,  27 February. 
 15 .  Deuteronomy 23, 19–20 .
 16 .  See, for example, the Cochrane Collaboration (www.cochrane.org) critique of Big 
Pharma. 
 17 .  Mark 12: 41–44. 
 18 .  This book concentrates on explaining and applying DCR. The great complexities of 
metaReality are deliberately only mentioned very brieﬂ y, and will be the topic for later 
work on childhood. 
 19 .  See Eric Berne (1968) in Volume 1, pages 90–91, on the victim, persecutor, rescuer 
triangle. 
 20 .  http://www.foe.co.uk/news/mike_childs_practicing_citizen_participation_41315. 
 21 .  http://valuesandframes.org/initiative/nature/. 
 22 .  http://www.foe.co.uk/what_we_do/about_us/think_piece_cities_autonomy_40536. 
 23 .  http://www.inc.com/john-boitnott/40-young-people-who-became-millionaires-
before-they-were-20.html; http://www.forbes.com/sites/mfonobongnsehe/2014/02/
04/30-most-promising-young-entrepreneurs-in-africa-2014/, though they do not have 
to be capitalists. 
 24 .  Lopez, A. (2012) How Finnish schools shine,  Guardian,  9 April. However, transplanting 
ideas from schools around the world can be unhelpful. Each needs to be seen in context, 
and Finnish success is likely to result far more from exceptional social equality than from 
teaching techniques. 
 25 .  See Volume 1, pages 139–40. 
 26 .  Although she very much supported children’s as well as women’s rights. 
 27 .  www.womensaid.org.uk launch of new femicide census. 
 28 .  Plans for school A level science were criticised for being over-theoretical and for inatten-
tion to experiments and doing science, http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/
jan/09/school-science-plans-a-dangerous-experiment-says-former-ofsted-chief. 
 29 .  For example, Vasagar, J. and Gurner, R. (2011) Truancy laws caught 12,000 parents 
last year,  Guardian,  8 November. Twenty-ﬁ ve parents were jailed. 
 30 .  Ofﬁ ce of the Children’s Rights Commissioner for London 2000–2002. We conducted 
an evaluation; see Volume 1, pages 175–6. 
 31 .  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vHSDrQihDjw; https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=XHon6XAGJ3k; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vHSDrQihDjw; 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=10jrm6PxJTU, though younger children can be 
involved too. 
 32 .  Volume 1, page 116; http://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/wa08.socst.world.glob.
nightsch/night-school. 
 33 .  http://nextcity.org/daily/entry/closed-to-the-public-for-decades-beiruts-only-park-
may-re-open-this-year. 
 34 .  Freedland, J. (2015) Climate activism is doomed if it remains a left-only issue,  Guardian, 
7 March. 

This page intentionally left blank

 GLOSSARY 
 Learning about DCR involves learning a new language; words have new meanings 
and associations to express new insights. Terms in this basic glossary are explained in 
more detail through the chapters, especially Chapter 3 of Volume 1. The  Dictionary 
of Critical Realism  (Hartwig 2007) is essential reading to understand rich, complex 
DCR terms, and this summary also draws on Bhaskar (2008b, 392–406). 
 Absence as a noun and a verb is central to the DCR process of absenting absences, 
constraints, ills, contradictions, oppressive power 2  relations or inequities. Absence 
is the crucial empty physical, social and mental space that enables movement, 
imagined alternatives, process and change (see  monovalance ). 
 Actualism or  ﬂ at actualism  reduces the world to the evident and empirical 
‘what actually happened’, and ignores underlying causes (see natural necessity). 
However,  actual can mean evident, necessary, possible or universal. 
 Aefﬁ catious is both affective and inﬂ uenced by feelings and also effective or 
causing effects. Emotions can inform and drive change. 
 Agency in DCR recognises both the reality of individual embodied agents as 
the source of conscious agency and also the reality of determining but not 
determinist structures with which agents interact. 
 Alethia literally means not forgotten or not oblivious (from the root Lethe, the 
mythical river of oblivion). Alethia is real, inevitable, and based on objective 
accounts of knowledge. 
 Alethic truth The real reasons or dialectical grounds for existing things, in con-
trast to observers’ propositions about their existence. The natural necessity of 
the world makes truth possible, and scientiﬁ c methods make it attainable. 
 Alienation is to be estranged or split from essential parts of one’s nature, causal 
powers or wellbeing. Marx developed Hegel’s concepts to analyse workers’ 

168 Glossary
alienation from their labour, their product, the means and materials of repro-
duction, from each other, the social relations within which they work and, 
ultimately, from themselves. These layers of alienation explain disaffection of 
children, young people and teachers in over-controlling schools. 
 Alterity is sheer, determinate, irreducible other-being. 1M non-identity (see 
MELD) recognises the different identities of observer and observed. This pre-
vents, for example, the child being misindentiﬁ ed and reduced into the observ-
er’s assumptions and stereotyping. DCR involves the dialectic between how 
observers and observed are both not like but also like one another, each having 
shared and unique features. Alterity can mean knowing and perhaps marvel-
ling at the distinct beauty of each different being. Yet alterity can also mean the 
feeling of being removed, even estranged and alienated. 
 Anthropocentrism and the  anthropic fallacy  misplace humans into the centre of 
the purpose and meaning of the universe.   Anthroporealism   mis-deﬁ nes reality 
wholly in terms of how it is understood through human thought. It reduces 
being into human being, and observed objects into the observing subject 
(see  alterity ). This book is also concerned with  adultism   that centres social 
analysis on adults’ views, interests and assumed maturity, and overlooks children. 
 Aporiai are the collective ills of difﬁ culty, want, loss, lack, need, constraint and 
ignorance, which DCR seeks to absent. 
 Atomism is traditionally about the smallest of all units, literally without inner space. 
It is the basis of Cartesian philosophy, Newtonian physics, social individualism 
and the empirical quest for the ultimate starting point. Bhaskar (2008b, 395) 
sees atomism as a ‘reductionist demand for an autonomised or empty mind’ 
(see D’Souza’s discussion in Chapter 12). 
 Axiology is a system of accepted truths or axioms. 
 Blockism attempts to bring all things to an end in a ﬁ nal totality, in contrast to 
open-ended DCR and MELD. 
 Causal structures precede and generate effects. DCR recognises that agents’ 
intentions can be causes. The sequence and timing of tensed rhythmics recog-
nise, for example, that structures precede agents, yet structures depend on being 
realised through agency and may then be modiﬁ ed. 
 Closed systems, when a single power or force works with predictable effects, 
are rare (see  open systems ). 
 Concrete means well-rounded, ﬁ t-for-purpose, and material—in contrast to 
 abstract . 
 Concretely singularised universal human ﬂ ourishing includes physical and 
material ﬂ ourishing as well as mental and spiritual fulﬁ lment and so acknowl-
edges bodies, emotions and the social and economic rights that respect human 
needs. The phrase seeks to resolve old dichotomies between either the ‘singu-
larised’ (individual and diverse, personal, local and ﬂ uid) versus the ‘universal’ 
(uniform, impersonal, global and ﬁ xed). DCR, like human rights advocacy, can 
appreciate fruitful tensions between universal principles and rights and their 
sensitive local interpretations in order to enrich the meaning of both. 

Glossary 169
 Concrete↔universal singular recognises interactions of each entity’s shared 
universal properties with each unique identity-in-difference. 
 Constellations (literally  stars together ) ﬁ x interacting concepts, entities and 
totalities together, such as childhood within other social groups and whole 
societies. 
 Contradictions may be constraints or conﬂ icts, external or internal, which 
DCR aims to reveal and resolve. Philosophy attends mainly to logical con-
tradictions, whereas DCR is also concerned with practical contradictions and 
with resolving them to change the world. 
 Counter-factual laws are law-like universal conditionals, tendencies that are 
expected to occur inevitably given the right conditions, such as closed systems. 
 De-agentiﬁ cation involves dualisms that may deny agents’ physical bodies, 
or reduce them to helpless non-agency, by fragmenting or reifying or alienat-
ing them. 
 Demi-real is not real in itself, and is based on error, illusion and alienation, but 
it becomes half-real through having effects. The myth that all children are 
unreliable takes on demi-reality when they are so widely treated as if they 
are unreliable that adults and children believe the myth and there is a learned 
helplessness of children feeling and being unreliable. 
 Denegations deny and reject. 
 Detotalisation or split may be induced by an absence or separation. The split off 
may be shown in a projected exterior, such as when childhood appears to be 
separate from adult-centric society of which it is really an integral part. 
 Diachronic means through and across time, whereas  synchronic means at a 
concurrent time. 
 Dialectical critical realism (DCR) is summarised as the four-stage MELD 
process, including the urge to move on from absence implicit in desire and lack 
towards negating those aporiai (Bhaskar 2008b, 397). 
 Dialectical materialism asserts that the social depends on and emerges from 
biological and physical being (ontology) and that human transformative agency 
can reproduce and transform social forms. 
 Dialectics include relations and interactions between different elements, and the 
DCR process of absenting constraints, splits, absences and ills. 
 Differentiation involves analysing trans-factual and different reactions of mech-
anisms and structures and the events they generate, within closed or open 
systems. 
 Diffraction is the play of absence and presence and plurality in horizontal or 
transfactual realism (differentiation) and in vertical, theoretical or depth real-
ism (stratiﬁ cation). Diffraction in optics refers to the fringes or rays of light 
and dark bands around light when it is decomposed as it passes through slits or 
past sharp edges. In DCR, diffraction draws opposites together with a central 
unity-in-diversity and totality that overcomes fracturing and splitting. 
 Emancipation is the transition from unwanted, unnecessary or oppressive situ-
ations into wanted, needed and more ﬂ ourishing ones. 

170 Glossary
 Emergence involves one substance, property, system, entity or idea emerging 
from another, in sequence (diachronically), or else constantly or simultane-
ously (synchronically). One example is mind emerging from brain emerging 
from body, and another example is each generation emerging from previous 
ones. Later entities depend on and can react back on earlier ones, but cannot 
be reduced back into them (see  SEPM ). 
 Empiricism is the theory that knowledge comes primarily or only through 
experience and the ﬁ ve senses. Kant and others argue that idealism and knowl-
edge of time-space-cause are also essential to make sense of experience. 
 Endism is belief in the end of history and of change (see  blockism ). 
 Epistemic fallacy collapses and absents things into thoughts and ontology into 
epistemology, and it is based on anthropism. 
 Epistemology thinking and understanding; it is crucially distinguished in DCR 
from ontology, within which epistemology exists. 
 Ethical naturalism is the DCR theory and practice, which assume that the 
social and practical always include the ethical. Moral properties and claims are 
therefore central to social science research and evaluation. 
 Eudaimonic society is the goal when everyone can ﬂ ourish and when ‘the free 
development of each is a condition for the free development of all’ and ‘each 
is true to, of, in and for themselves and every other (including future genera-
tions and other species) subject to the constraints imposed by nature’ (Bhaskar 
2008b, 382). 
 Fetishism invests a reiﬁ ed thing (see  reiﬁ cation ) with a life, power and mystery 
of its own. The fetish is alienated, suppressed and excluded through inconsis-
tencies and contradictions. The fetish may mask and mystify deep anxieties and 
psychic wounds in attempts to cope with these. Idealised childhood innocence 
can be a fetish. 
 Four planar social being involves the four social levels: bodies in material 
relations with nature; interpersonal relations; social structures; inner personal-
political being. They are the basic topics of Chapters 3 to 6 and 9 to 12. 
 Generative mechanisms are causes such as gravity or social inequality. 
 Ground state is the most essential level of human being, on which all other 
levels depend. 
 Hegemony is the driving leadership of dominant powers and beliefs. 
 Hermeneutics construct and reconstruct meaning, as between a rescuing adult 
and a victim child when each keeps reinforcing the other’s ascribed role. 
 Holy trinity recognises the layers 1) intransitive ontological realism, 2) transitive 
epistemological relativism and 3) the judgemental rationality that adjudicates 
between them. In the  unholy trinity , three-level natural necessity is ﬂ at-
tened: 1) the epistemic fallacy reduces the actual into the empirical within 
2) ﬂ at actualism, and 3) the primal squeeze ignores and also collapses real-
ity into actualism (and causes into effects) within monovalence that denies 
absence and separates facts from values. 

Glossary 171
 Hypostatised concepts are treated as if they are solid realities, such as stereotypes 
of childhood as pre-social and pre-moral. 
 Immanent is integral, pervasive and emerging from (whereas  imminent  means 
ready to take place). 
 Inaefﬁ catious means both ineffective and unfeeling. 
 Interpretivism refers to hermeneutic or social constructionist, non-positivist 
research. 
 Intransitive involves the natural physical world, independent of thought. 
 Irrealism follows   Descartes’s denial of realism and his self-obsessed view that the 
human self is the only object of real knowledge or the only thing that really 
exists, the basis of irrealist philosophy. Irrealism supports actualism, monova-
lence, anthropism, adultism and social constructionism. 
 Majority world and minority world denote the larger, developing, poorer 
or third world, and the much smaller, developed, rich or ﬁ rst world, to avoid 
these loaded terms. 
 Master-slave relations, following Hegel and Marx, denote oppressive relations, 
when one person uses and treats the other as an object. They resonate with 
dominant-subordinate, adult-child relations. 
 Materialism is the biological and physical reality that underlies the social (see 
 SEPM ). 
 MELD is the acronym for the four moments or levels of DCR: 1M ﬁ rst 
moment, non-identity; 2E second edge, negativity; 3L third level, totality; 4D, 
fourth dimension, inner being and transformative agency that works through 
liberating power 1  and the dialectic that is ‘the pulse of freedom’ (Bhaskar 
2008b). 
 MetaReality concerns true, underlying reality and is sometimes referred to as 
Bhaskar’s third stage of thinking after critical realism and dialectical critical 
realism, which are the two topics of these two volumes. 
 Monovalance, ontological monovalence (literally single value) ignores absence 
to concentrate on evident presence. 
 Moral realism accepts that morality and human rights, harm and beneﬁ t are 
universal, objective, real properties, although they are deﬁ ned and experienced 
in varied, local and personal ways. 
 Morphogenesis (morph – shape, genesis – origins) studies the structure-agency 
dialectic in a transfactual, stratiﬁ ed way, and studies the origins and shaping of 
human agency between the extremes of agency being too passive and deter-
mined or too free and unconstrained (Archer 2003). 
 Naturalism accepts that the methods of natural and social research can be uni-
ﬁ ed and used partly interchangeably, but they are not uniform or identical in 
their methods or objects (as scientism and reductionism propose). 
 Natural necessity recognises the three levels of depth reality: the empirical, the 
actual, and the underlying causal real (see Table 9.1).
Negation at 2E is the intervention to negate or absent aporiai. 

172 Glossary
 Non-identity at 1M recognises our partial, limited understanding of identities, 
and great differences between our transitive perceptions and the intransitive 
realities we observe, besides almost inﬁ nite absences in the past and future that 
further limit our insights, so that our sense of ascribing identities has to be 
qualiﬁ ed by awareness also of the missing and non-identiﬁ ed. 
 One and the many distinguishes among types and species and classiﬁ es them 
into ﬁ xed, separate groups or taxonomies (Volume 1, 161–4). 
 One and the other traces causal, dynamic, transformative change when, for 
example, a child grows into an adult who is other but also the same one 
person. 
 Ontology concerns real being and doing. 
 Open systems involve two or more competing powers, as when class, race, gen-
der, ability and opportunity all differently inﬂ uence a child’s education. Open 
systems tend to have varying and only partly predictable effects, unlike closed 
systems. 
 Polyvalence or ‘many values’ recognises presence and also absence, moving 
beyond the tendency in traditional science and philosophy to ignore absence. 
 Positivism tests theories and hypotheses. The process may be inductive by form-
ing theories based on empirical observations and then searching for further 
examples to conﬁ rm or deny the theory. Alternatively, researchers devise a 
hypothesis and then through deduction attempt to verify or disprove it. 
 Power 1  is enabling, emancipating power. 
 Power 2  is coercive, repressive power. 
 PPPs are private public partnerships (also PFIs – private ﬁ nance initiatives), pro-
moted since the 1990s. National and local governments pay private companies 
to build and run hospitals, shopping centres, housing blocks and other large 
structures. The state contributes part of the initial cost, but ends up paying 
the company several times over the actual cost, for up to 60 years. Each PPP 
is enormously proﬁ table and may be sold regularly on to new speculators 
(see Chapter 10). 
 Praxis identiﬁ es ideas and also needs for practical change and works through 
transformation to realise and achieve them. 
 Realism accepts the existence of objects, beings, events, structures and causal 
powers, which are independent of human understanding of them, and which 
determine the truth value of our statements. We discover and do not invent 
reality. 
 Reiﬁ cation presents systems of unequal human relations, such as childhood, as if 
they are impersonal and natural things, processes or commodities. This denies 
the inequalities, exploitation, power and conﬂ icting interests that are really 
involved (see  fetishism ). 
 Retroduction infers underlying causes or explanations from observed effects. 
In DCR, it can have added free play of imagination or inspiration, a Eureka 
moment, as when Newton conceived of gravity or Einstein of relativity. 
Babies’ earliest learning involves such leaps of insight when no one can explain 

Glossary 173
to them, for example, that words have meaning and are not just sounds. They 
have to work this out this amazing reality for themselves through retroduction. 
 Rhythmics emphasise sequences in time-space-cause tensed processes; causes 
precede effects, structures precede agency and, in rhythmics, agents gain from 
structures and then interact with them. 
 Semiotic triangle includes the signiﬁ ed (the concept) and the signiﬁ ers (words, 
numbers, images), which are validated against the original referent or inde-
pendent reality in the three-part triangle. Much social research omits the vital 
third angle. 
 SEPM (synchronic emergent powers materialism) avoids dualism and 
reductionism and splits between philosophy and biology. It recognises, 
for example, that consciousness constantly and concurrently (synchronic) 
emerges from the material brain and interacts with it but cannot be reduced 
into it (see  emergence ). SEPM allows for neuro-scientiﬁ c explanations as 
well as psychological and possibly spiritual ones in analysis of the mystery of 
consciousness. 
 Stratiﬁ ed or layered reality consists of the empirical, actual and real (see 
Table 9.1). 
 Structural sins are alienating social relations that are untrue to the essential 
nature and goodness of human being. We are trapped into many of these sys-
tems, such as hardly being able to avoid buying clothes made by adults and 
children in coercive sweatshops. 
 Structures in DCR are generative, explanatory, causal powers. These can be 
determinist with inevitable effects, as in genetic or physical structures. In 
social science, when structures are exercised, they are shown in tendencies. 
A concretely singularised individual can be understood as a uniquely lami-
nated structure, shaped by genetics, nurture and culture, so that each person has 
strong and partly predictable tendencies. These tendencies inﬂ uence individu-
als’ actions, but do not wholly determine them, and they interact with free will 
and agency (Bhaskar 2008b). 
 Synchronic (syn – with, together; chronic – time) means at a speciﬁ c or concur-
rent time, whereas  diachronic is through and across time. 
 Tendencies are the effects of competing causal powers in open systems. Ten-
dencies are only partly predictable, in contrast to determinist laws in closed 
systems. Recognition of tendencies in complex open systems validates analysis 
of likely trends in social and natural science. 
 Tensed sequences are central to analyses of process and transformative change 
that overcome ﬁ xed, static analyses. 
 Theory/practice inconsistency occurs in constructionist and relativist 
research when researchers deny practical and moral realities on which they 
actually rely in daily life. In MELD, 4D aims to overcome contradictions and 
inconsistencies by reconciling theory with practice through self-aware, trans-
formative change along with respect for the integrity of research and its inte-
gration with everyday life. 

174 Glossary
 Thesis/antithesis are the ﬁ rst two stages of the dialectic that moves towards 
synthesis. DCR replaces these three steps with four-stage MELD. 
 Thrownness or ‘vehicular thrownness’ was Heidegger’s concept to express 
movement and how we are thrown into pre-existing, often alienating, fast-
moving social life. Thrownness tended to emphasise structures over agency, past 
over present. DCR extends Heidegger’s thrownness also to emphasise agency, 
ethics and the dynamic pulse of freedom (Bhaskar 2008b, 76, 90). 
 TINA (‘there is no alternative’) is one of the fallacies that DCR critically 
analyses. 
 Totality is vital at MELD 3L, which draws totalities together to understand their 
intra- and inter-connections (such as childhood, ecology and economics). 
MELD can also analyse malign and failing processes when instead of progress 
and unity there are splitting and detotalising contradictions and inconsistencies 
(childhood, ecology and economics are shown to be in disintegrating, destruc-
tive conﬂ ict). Either way, MELD totalities reveal present realities and future 
possibilities. 
 Transcendental idealism recognises that data are not simply observed and 
collected, as Hume asserted. Data also have to be understood and analysed 
through our ideas, memories and concepts. Kant contended that transcendent 
truths are the condition for the possibility of our knowing and verifying 
experience. The truths include intuitions about time, space and cause, which 
bring order, sense and meaning to what would otherwise be endless chaotic 
impressions. Yet Kant’s transcendental idealism denied realism (Bhaskar 1998a) 
and transferred reality into an abstract, ideal realm of thought (the epistemic 
fallacy). 
 Transcendental realism contrasts with transcendental idealism, combines 
Hume’s empiricism with Kant’s transcendental understanding. 
 Trans-factual laws, powers and causal mechanisms work across both closed and 
open systems in the natural and social sciences. Examples include the invisible 
powers of gravity or of social class, which can only be seen in the causal effects 
and tendencies they generate. The effects may be seen and unseen, continuous 
or intermittent, and the powers may be latent or active, but they continuously 
exist and cannot be reduced into their effects. Social laws and norms do not 
have to be conﬁ ned to closed systems and can easily be refuted when there 
are many exceptions (disadvantaged children tend to fail exams). Tendencies 
and majority ﬁ ndings can be explained by competing causal powers in open 
systems (social disadvantage interacts with different ability, schooling and many 
other factors). 
 Transformational model of social activity (TMSA) (Bhaskar 1998a, 2008b, 
154–60) and Archer’s morphogenesis analyse how the social emerges from the 
natural, material world (Volume 1, 109–11). 
 Transformative change is a dynamic process, in contrast to ﬁ xed  difference . 
 Transitive perceptions (epistemology) differ from  intransitive ,  independent 
reality (ontology). 

Glossary 175
 Trinity, holy and unholy (see  holy trinity ). 
 Trust and truth underlie valid research (see  semiotic triangle  and  natural 
necessity ). Trust may be abstract, mediated, concrete or personalised. 
 Unity-in-diversity involves both human, concrete singularity in each individ-
ual, unique person and also the unity of our shared, social, common humanity 
within power 1  and power 2  relations. 
 Value-free sociology is challenged by the DCR logic that social science is 
imbued with values, that human beings inevitably desire to move towards free-
dom and justice for themselves and usually also for others, and that this is or 
should be the central concern of social science (see Volume 1, Chapter 7). 

 REFERENCES 
 Abebe, T. (2009) Multiple methods, complex dilemmas: negotiating socio-ethical spaces in 
participatory research with disadvantaged children,  Children’s Geographies , 7, 4: 451–465. 
 Abrams, P. (1968)  The Origins of British Sociology: 1834–1914.  Chicago, IL: Chicago Univer-
sity Press. 
 Ackerman, P. and DuVal, J. (2000)  A Force More Powerful: A Century of Non-Violent Conﬂ ict . 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Ainley, P. and Allen, M. (2013)  The Great Reversal: Young People, Learning and Employment in a 
Declining Economy.  London: Radicaled. 
 Alanen, L., Brooker, B. and Mayall. B. (eds) (2015)  Childhood with Bourdieu . Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Alderson, P. (1993)  Children’s Consent to Surgery . Buckingham: Open University Press. 
 Alderson, P. (2008a)  Young Children’s Rights.  London: Jessica Kingsley. 
 Alderson, P. (2008b) When does citizenship begin? Economics and early childhood, in 
A. Invernizzi and J. Williams (eds)  Children and Citizenship.  London: Sage, pp. 108–119. 
 Alderson, P. (2013)  Childhoods Real and Imagined: An Introduction to Critical Realism and Child-
hood Studies . Volume 1. London: Routledge. 
 Alderson, P. (2015) Reforms to healthcare systems and policies: Inﬂ uences from children’s 
rights and childhood studies, in A. Smith (ed)  Enhancing the Rights and Well-Being of Chil-
dren: Connecting Research, Policy and Practice . Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 17–32. 
 Alderson, P., Clarke-Jones, L., Mayall, B. and Schaumberg, H. (2002)  Notes Towards an Evalua-
tion of The Ofﬁ ce of Children’s Rights Commissioner for London: Phase 1. 2000–2001. London: 
Institute of Education. 
 Alderson, P. and Goodey, C. (1998)  Enabling Education: Experiences in Special and Ordinary 
Schools . London, Tufnell Press. 
 Alderson, P. (ed) ([1999] 2013) Learning and Inclusion: The Cleves School Experience. London: 
Routledge Revivals. 
Alderson, P., Sutcliffe, K. and Curtis, K. (2006) Children’s consent to medical treatment.  
Hastings Center Report , 36: 25–34. 
 Aldrich, R. (2002)  The Institute of Education 1902–2002 A Centenary History.  London: Institute 
of Education. 

References 177
 Alexander, R. (ed) (2010)  Children, Their World, Their Education: Final Report and Recommenda-
tions of the Cambridge Review.  London: Routledge. 
 American Psychiatric Association. (2013)  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fifth Edition  (DSM-5). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association. 
 Anderson, K. and Bows, A. (2011) Beyond dangerous climate change: emission pathways 
for a new world,  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: A Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Science,  369: 20–44. 
 Anderson, K. and Bows, A. (2012) A new paradigm for climate change,  Nature Climate Change, 
 2: 639–40, http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/v2/n9/full/nclimate1646.html. 
 André, G. and Hilgers, M. (2015) Chilhdood in Africa between local power and global hier-
archies, in L. Alanen, B. Brooker, and B. Mayall. (eds)  Childhood with Bourdieu . Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 120–41. 
 Apple, M. (2012)  Can Education Change Society?  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Archer, M. (1995)  Realist Social Theory.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Archer, M. (2000)  Being Human: The Problem of Agency.  Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Archer, M. (2003)  Structure, Agency and the Internal Conversation.  Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Archer, M., Bhaskar, R., Collier, A., Lawson, T. and Norrie, A. (eds) (1998)  Critical Realism: 
Essential Readings.  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bakan, J. (2005)  The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Proﬁ t and Power . London: Robinson. 
 Bakan. J. (2012)  Childhood Under Siege.  London: Vintage. 
 Ball, S. (2007)  Education: plc.  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Ball, S. (2012)  Global Education Inc.: New Policy Networks and the Neoliberal Imaginary . London: 
Routledge. 
 Ball, S. (2013)  Education, Justice and Democracy: The Struggle over Ignorance and Opportunity . 
London: CLASS. 
 Banerjee-Guha, S. (2010) (ed)  Accumulation by Dispossession: Trans-formative Cities in the New 
Global Order . New Delhi, SAGE. 
 Bartley, M., Schoon, L., Mitchell, R. and Blane, D. (2010) Resilience as an asset for healthy 
development, in A. Morgan, M. Davies and E. Ziglio (eds)  Health Assets in a Global 
Context: Theories, Methods, Action . London: Springer, pp. 101–116. 
 Beck, U. (2008)  World at Risk.    Cambridge: Polity. 
 Bell, M. (2009)  An Invitation to Environmental Sociology.  Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press. 
 Bello, W. (2013)  Capitalism’s Last Stand? Deglobalization in the Age of Austerity . London: Zed Books. 
 Benhabib, S. and Cornell, D. (eds) (1987)  Feminism as critique . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Benn, M. (2011)  School Wars: The Battle for Britain’s Education.  London: Verso. 
 Berry, T. (2009)  The Sacred Universe: Earth, Spirituality and Religion in the Twenty-ﬁ rst Century. 
 New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Bevan, A. (1952)  In Place of Fear: A Free Health Service,  http://www.sochealth.co.uk/natio
nal-health-service/the-sma-and-the-foundation-of-the-national-health-service-dr-
leslie-hilliard-1980/aneurin-bevan-and-the-foundation-of-the-nhs/in-place-of-fear-
a-free-health-service-1952/. 
 Beveridge, W. (1942)  Social Insurance and Allied Services . London: British Library. 
 Bhaskar, R. (1986)  Scientiﬁ c Realism and Human Emancipation.  London: Verso. 
 Bhaskar, R. (1998a)  The Possibility of Naturalism.  3rd edn. Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. (1998b) The logic of scientiﬁ c discovery, in M. Archer et al. (eds)  Critical Realism: 
Essential Readings.  Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 48–103. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2000)  From East to West: Odyssey of a Soul.  Abingdon: Routledge. 

178 References
 Bhaskar, R. (2002a)  From Science to Emancipation: Alienation and Enlightenment . Abingdon; 
Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2002b)  Meta-Reality.  London: Sage. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2008a)  A Realist Theory of Science.  3rd edn. Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2008b)  Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom.  2nd edn. Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2010a) Contents of interdisciplinarity: Interdisciplinarity and climate change, 
in R. Bhaskar et al. (eds)  Interdisciplinarity and Climate Change: Transforming Knowledge and 
Practice for our Global Future.  London: Routledge, pp. 1–24. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2010b)  Plato Etc. 2nd edn. Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. (2012)  Reﬂ ections on Meta-Reality.  2nd edn.   Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bhaskar, R. and Danermark, B. (2006) Metatheory, interdisciplinarity and disability research: 
a critical realist perspective,  Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 8, 4: 278–297. 
 Bhaskar, R., Frank, C., Hoyer, K., Næss, P. and Parker, J. (eds)  Interdisciplinarity and Climate 
Change: Transforming Knowledge and Practice for our Global Future.  London: Routledge. 
 Biel, R. (2012)  The Entropy of Capitalism.  Leiden: Brill. 
 Blackburn, T. (1999)  Think: A Compelling Introduction to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 
 Boal, A. (1979)  Theatre of the Oppressed . London: Pluto. 
 Bond, P. (2012)  Politics of Climate Justice: Paralysis Above, Movement Below.  Scottsville: Univer-
sity of KwaZulu Press. 
 Bourdieu, P. (1998)  The State Nobility: Elite Schools in the Field of Power.  Stanford University 
Press. 
 Bourdieu, P., Accardo, A., Balazs, G. et al. (2006)  The Weight of the World: Social Suffering in 
Contemporary Society . Trans P. Ferguson. Cambridge: Polity. 
 Bourke, J. (2014)  Wounding the World: How Military Violence and War-Play Invade our Lives. 
 London:   Virago. 
 Boyden, J. and Bourdillon, M. (eds) (2012)  Childhood Poverty: Multidisciplinary Approaches. 
 Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Boyden, J. and Dercon, S. (2012)  Child Development and Economic Development: Lessons and 
Future Challenges . Oxford: Young Lives. 
 Bradshaw, J. (ed) (2011)  The Well-being of Children in the UK . 3rd edn. Bristol: Policy. 
 Brady, D. (2009)  Rich Democracy, Poor People: How Politics Explain Poverty.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Bronk, R. (2013) Hayek on the wisdom of prices: a reassessment,  Erasmus Journal of Philosophy 
and Economics,  6, 1: 82–107. 
 Brown, L. (2013)  World on the Edge: How to Prevent Environmental and Economic Collapse . 
Washington, DC: Earth Policy Institute. 
 Brummer, A. (2014)  Bad Banks: Greed, Incompetence and the Next Global Crisis.  London: 
Random House Business. 
 Bryant, T. and Raphael, D. (2015) Introduction to the special issue on the political economy 
of children’s health,  International Journal of Child, Youth and Family Studies,  6, 181–5. 
 Burawoy, M. (2005) For public sociology,  American Sociological Review, 70: 2–28. 
 Callinicos, A. (2010)  Bonﬁ re of Illusions.  Cambridge: Polity. 
 Carson, R. (1962)  Silent Spring.  Boston MA: Houghton Mifﬂ in. 
 Carter, D. (2011) Recognizing the role of positive emotions in fostering environmentally 
responsible behaviors,  Ecopsychology , 3: 65–69. 
 Chakrabarti, S. (2014)  On Liberty.  London: Allen Lane. 
 Chang, H.-J. (2007)  Bad Samaritans: The Guilty Secrets of Rich Nations and the Threat to Global 
Prosperity . London: Random House. 
 Chang, H.-J. (2011)  23 Things They Don’t Tell You About Capitalism. London: Penguin. 

References 179
 Chase, E. and Walker, R. (2013) The co-construction of shame in the context of poverty: 
beyond a threat to the social bond,  Sociology , 47, 4: 739–754. 
 Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG). (2015)  Welfare Beneﬁ ts and Tax Credits Handbook 
2015/16 . London: CPAG. 
 Children’s Society. (2014)  The Debt Trap: Exposing the Impact of Problem Debt on Children.  London: 
Children’s Society. 
 Chivers, D. (2011)  The No-Nonsense Guide to Climate Change: The Science, the Solutions, the Way 
Forward.  Oxford: New Internationalist. 
 Christie, I. and Warburton, D. (2001)  From Here to Sustainability: Politics in the Real World . 
London: Earthscan. 
 Clare, J. (1997) The moors,  John Clare: Everyman’s Poetry.  London: Dent. 
 Clark, A. and Percy Smith, B. (2006) Beyond consultation: participatory practices in everyday 
spaces,  Children, Youth and Environments,  16: 1–9. 
 Cockburn, T. (2013)  Rethinking Children’s Citizenship.  Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Collier, A. (1999)  Being and Worth.  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Collini, S. (2012)  What Are Universities For? London: Penguin. 
 Collini, S. (2013) Sold out,  London Review of Books, 24 October. 
 Connolly, P., Kelly, B. and Smith, A. (2009) Ethnic habitus and young children: a case study of 
Northern Ireland, European Early Childhood Research Journal, 17, 2: 217–232. 
 Coote, A. and Angel, J. (2014)  Solidarity: Why It Matters for a New Social Settlement.  London: 
New Economics Foundation. 
 Coote, A. and Penny, J. (2014)  The Wrong Medicine. London: New Economics Foundation. 
 Cornell, S. and Parker, J. (2010) Critical realist inter-disciplinarity: a research agenda to sup-
port action on global warming, in R. Bhaskar et al. (eds)  Interdisciplinarity and Climate 
Change: Transforming Knowledge and Practice for our Global Future.  London: Routledge, 
pp. 25–34. 
 CRAE (Children’s Rights Alliance for England). (2014)  State of England’s Children.  London: 
CRAE. 
 Crivello, G., Vennam, U. and Kamanduri, A. (2012) ‘Ridiculed for not having anything’: 
children’s views of poverty and inequality in rural India, in J. and M. Bourdillon (eds)  Child-
hood Poverty: Multidisciplinary Approaches.  Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 218–240. 
 Crouch, C. (2011)  The Strange Non-Death of Neoliberalism.  Cambridge: Polity. 
 Curry, P. (2011)  Ecological Ethics: An Introduction.  Cambridge: Polity.
Das, P. (1995) Manifesto of a housing activist, in S. Patel and A. Thorner (eds)  Bombay: Meta-
phor for Modern India. Bombay: Oxford University Press, pp 179–180. 
 Davies, N. (2008)  Flat Earth News.  London: Vintage. 
 Davies, N. (2014) Hack Attack: How the Truth Caught Up With Rupert Murdoch. London: 
Chatto & Windus.
Davis, J., Lister, J. and Wrigley, D. (2015)  NHS for Sale: Myths, Lies and Deception.  London: 
Merlin. 
 Davis, J. and Tallis, R. (eds) (2013)  NHS:SOS.  London: Oneworld. 
 Davis, M. (2006)  Planet of Slums.  London: Verso. 
 Davis, W. (2007)  Light at the Edge of the World: A Journey through the Realm of Vanishing Cultures . 
Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre. 
 Dean, J. (2009)  Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism and Left 
Politics.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
 Dean, M. (2012)  Democracy Under Attack: How the Media Distort Policy and Politics . Bristol: 
Policy. 
 Dewey, J. (1902)  The Child and the Curriculum.  Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. 
 Dewey, J. (1916)  Democracy and Education. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. 

180 References
 Diamond, J. (2011)  Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive. London: Penguin. 
 Diamond, J. (2013)  The World until Yesterday. London: Penguin. 
 Dinerstein, A., Schwartz, G. and Taylor, G. (2014) Sociological imagination as social critique: 
interrogating the ‘global economic crisis’,  Sociology,  48, 859–68. 
 Donaldson. M. (1978)  Children’s Minds.  Edinburgh: Fontana. 
 Dorling, D. (2011)  Injustice.  Bristol: Policy. 
 Dorling, D. (2013)  Population Billion: The Coming Demographic Crisis.  London: Constable. 
 Douglas, M. (1966)  Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo . London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
 Douthwaite, R. (1999) The need to end economic growth, in S. Cato and M. Kennett (eds) 
 Green Economics.  Aberystwyth: Green Audit Books,   pp. 27–35. 
 Drumbl, M. (2012)  Reimagining Child Soldiers in International Law and Policy.  Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 D’Souza, R. (2013) Justice and governance in dystopia,  International Journal of Critical Realism, 
 12, 518–37. 
 Edwards, C., Gandini, L. and Forman, G. (eds) (1998)  The Hundred Languages of Children. 
 London: Ablex. 
 Elliott, L. and Atkinson, D. (2009)  The Gods That Failed: How the Financial Elite Have Gambled 
Away Our Futures.  London: Vintage. 
 Empson, M. (2009)  Marxism and Ecology.  London: Socialist Worker. 
 Empson, M. (2014) Land and Labour: Marxism, Ecology and Human History. London: 
Bookmarks. 
 Engels, F. (1844)  The condition of the working class of England, in K. Marx and F. Engels 
 Collected Works . London: Lawrence and Wishart . 
 Engels, F., ([1877] 1962)  Anti-Dühring , Part I: Philosophy, XIII. Dialectics. Negation of the 
Negation. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 
 Engels, F. (1883)  Dialectics of Nature , https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1883/
don/ch01.htm. 
 European Council. (1950)  European Convention on Human Rights . Brussels. 
 Fielding, M. and Moss, P. (2011)  Radical Education and the Common School: A Democratic Alter-
native . London: Routledge. 
 Fine, B. (2010)  Theories of Social Capital: Researchers Behaving Badly.  London: Pluto. 
 Fine, B. and Saad-Filho, A. (2010)  Marx’s ‘Capital’.  London: Pluto. 
 Firestone, S. (1970)  The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution . New York: Bantam 
Books. 
 Foster, J. (2000)  Marx’s Ecology: Materialism and Nature.  New York: Monthly Review Press. 
 Foster, J. (2002)  Ecology Against Capitalism.  New York: Monthly Review Press. 
 Foucault, M. (2008)  The Birth of Biopolitics . Basingstoke: Palgrave. 
 Freeman, M. (2015) Towards a sociology of children’s rights, in A. Diduck, N. Peleg and 
H. Reece (eds) (2015)  Law In Society: Reﬂ ections on Children, Family, Culture and Philosophy. 
Essays in Honour of Michael Freeman . Leiden: Brill Nijhoff, pp. 637–252. 
 Freire, P. (1970)  Pedagogy of the Oppressed.  New York: Herder & Herder. 
 Freud, S. (1927) Fetishism, in  The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud . Vol. XXI. 
Trans   J. Strachey. London: Hogarth and Institute of Psychoanalysis. 
 Fujita, K. (2013)  Cities and Crisis: New Critical Urban Theory.  London: Sage. 
 Gane, N. (2014) Sociology and neoliberalism: a missing history,  Sociology,  48, 6: 1092–1106. 
 Gardner, H. (1993)  The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How Schools Should Teach . 
London: Fontana. 
 Gearty, C. (2011b)  The Rights Future , http://therightsfuture.com/about/. 
 Geertz, C. (1973)  The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books. 

References 181
 Gibran, K. (1926)  The Prophet.  London: Heinemann. 
 Giddens, A. (1979)  Central Problems in Social Theory.  London: Macmillan. 
 Giddens, A. (1999)  The Third Way: The Renewal of Social Democracy . Cambridge: Polity. 
 Giddens, A. (2009)  The Politics of Climate Change.  Cambridge Polity. 
 Gilligan, C. (1982)  In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development . 
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Giroux, H. (2013)  America’s Education Deﬁ cit and the War on Youth: Reform Beyond Electoral 
Politics . New York: Monthly Review Press. 
 Gleick, P. (2010)  Bottled and Sold: The Story Behind Our Obsession with Bottled Water . Washington, 
DC: Island Press. 
 Godwin, W. ([1797] 1976)  An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and Its Inﬂ uence on General 
Virtue and Happiness . Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
 Goffman, A. (2014) On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press. 
 Goldson, B. and Muncie, J. (2015)  Youth Crime and Justice . 2nd edn. London: Sage. 
 Goodey, C. (2011)  A History of Intelligence and ‘Intellectual Disability’: The Shaping of Psychology 
in Early Modern Europe . Farnham: Ashgate. 
 Goodey, C. (2015)  Learning Disability and Inclusion Phobia: Past, Present, Future . London: 
Routledge. 
 Gorz, A. (1989)  Critique of Economic Reason.  London: Verso. 
 Graeber, D. (2011)  Debt: The First Five Thousand Years . Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. 
 Gray, J. (2007)  Black Mass: Apocalyptic Religion and the Death of Utopia.  London: Allen Lane. 
 Greer, G. (2014)  White Beech: The Rain Forest Years.  London: Bloomsbury. 
 Gribble, D. (2010)  Children Don’t Start Wars. London: Peace News. 
 Gunnarsson, L. (2013)  Contradictions of Love: Towards a Feminist-Realist Ontology of Sociosexuality . 
Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Gupta, P. (2005) India, in H. Penn (ed)  Unequal Childhoods.  Abingdon: Routledge Falmer, 
pp. 119–141. 
 Habermas, J. (1984)  The Theory of Communicative Action . Vol 1.   Trans. T. McCarthy. 
Cambridge: Polity. 
 Haddad, M. (2012)  The Perfect Storm. London: Oxfam GB. 
 Haji-Abdi, A. (2014)  Critical Realism, Somalia and the Diaspora Community . Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
 Hamilton, C. (2003)  Growth Fetish.  London: Pluto. 
 Hamilton, C. (2010)  Requiem for a Species: Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change. 
London: Earthscan. 
 Hamm, B. (ed) (2005)  Devastating Society: The Neo-Conservative Assault on Democracy and 
Justice. London: Pluto. 
 Han, Xiaoli. (2007)  The Everyday Lives of Rural-Urban Migrant Workers’ Children in a Chinese 
City: How Migrant Children Rebuild Their Daily Lives After Moving from Rural Areas to a City . 
MA dissertation. London: Institute of Education. 
 Hanson, K. and Nieuwenhuys, O. (eds) (2013)  Reconceptualising Children’s Rights in Interna-
tional Development: Living Rights, Social Justice, Translations.  Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Hardin, G. (1968) The tragedy of the commons,  Science, 162, 3859: 1243–8. 
 Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2001)  Empire.  Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Harman, C. (2009)  Global Crisis and the Relevance of Marx. London: Bookmarks. 
 Hartley, J., Wight, D. and Hunt, K. (2014) Presuming the inﬂ uence of the media: teenagers’ 
constructions of gender identity through sexual/romantic relationships and alcohol con-
sumption,  Sociology of Health and Illness,  36: 772–86. 

182 References
 Hartwig, M. (ed) (2007) Dictionary of Critical Realism. Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Harvey, D. (2006)  Spaces of Global Capitalism.  London: Verso. 
 Harvey, D. (2007)  A Brief History of Neoliberalism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Harvey, D. (2010)  A Companion to Marx’s Capital.  London: Verso. 
 Harvey, D. (2011)  The Enigma of Capital and The Crises of Capitalism.  London: Proﬁ le. 
 Harvey, D. (2012)  Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution.  London: 
Verso. 
 Harvey, D. (2014)  Seventeen Contradictions and the End of Capitalism.  London: Proﬁ le. 
 Hayek, F. (1945)  Individualism and the Economic Order.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Heath, S. and Calvert, E. (2013) Gifts, loans and intergenerational support for young adults, 
 Sociology,  47: 1120–35. 
 Heesterman, W. (2005) Child labour and children’s rights, in J. Goddard, S. MacNamee, 
A. James, and A. James, (eds)  The Politics of Childhood: International Perspectives, Contemporary 
Developments . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 73–89. 
 Hegel, G. (1977)  Phenomenology of Spirit.  Trans. A. Miller. Oxford: Clarendon.  
 Heidegger, M. (1978) Being and Time. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell. 
 Henderson, A. (ed) (2011)  Insights from the Playgroup Movement: Equality and Autonomy in a 
Voluntary Organisation.  Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books. 
 Henry, J. (2012)  The Price of Off-Shore Revisited.  London: Tax Justice Network. 
 Hensen, J., Rockström, J. et al. (2013) Assessing ‘dangerous climate change’: required 
reduction of carbon emissions to protect young people, future generations and nature, 
 PLOS ONE  open access journal, December, http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3
Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0081648. 
 Highﬁ eld School. (1997)  Improving Our School: Promoting Positive Behaviour . In P. Alderon (ed) 
Plymouth: Highﬁ eld, London: Institute of Education. 
 Hildyard, N. (2014)  Public-Private Partnerships, Financial Extraction and the Growing Wealth Gap: 
Exploring the Connections . Sturminster Newton: Cornerhouse. 
 Hillman, M. (2004)  How We Can Save the Planet.  London: Penguin. 
 Hills, J. (2014) Good Times, Bad Times: The Welfare Myth of Them and Us. Bristol: Policy. 
 Hirschman, A. (1990)  Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations and 
States . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Hochschild, A. (1983)  The Managed Heart: Commercialisation of Human Feeling.  Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
 Hochschild, A. (2000) The nanny chain,  American Prospect, 11, 4: 32–6. 
 Hodkinson, S., Watt, P. and Mooney, G. (2013) Introduction: neoliberal housing policy – time 
for a critical re-appraisal,  Critical Social Policy, 33, 1: 3–16. 
 Holmwood, J. (ed) (2011)  A Manifesto for the Public University. London: Bloomsbury. 
 Holmwood, J. (2013) Public reasoning without sociology: Amartya Sen’s theory of justice, 
 Sociology,  47, 6: 1171–86. 
 Holmwood, J. and Scott, S. (2007) Sociology and its public face(s),  Sociology,  41, 779–83. 
 Holt, J. (1967)  How Children Learn.  Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
 Honwana, A. (2006)  Child Soldiers in Africa . Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
 Honwana, A. and De Boeck, F. (eds) (2005)  Makers and Breakers: Children and Youth in Postco-
lonial Africa . Oxford: James Curry. 
 Høyer, K. G. (2010) Seven theses on   CO 2 -reductionism and its interdisciplinary counterac-
tion, in R. Bhaskar et al. (eds)  Interdisciplinarity and Climate Change: Transforming Knowledge 
and Practice for our Global Future.  London: Routledge, pp. 35–53. 
 Huitson, O. (2013) Hidden in plain sight, in J. Davis and R. Tallis (eds)  NHS:SOS.  London: 
Oneworld, pp. 150–173. 

References 183
 Hunt, P. and Frankenberg, R. (1997) It’s a small world: Disneyland, the family and multiple 
representations of American childhood, in A. James and A. Prout (eds)  Constructing and 
Reconstructing Childhood: Contemporary Issues in the Sociological Study of Childhood.  2nd edn. 
Abingdon: Routledge Falmer,   pp. 107–125. 
 Hunter, D. (2013) Safe in our hands? Austerity and the health system, in C. Wood (ed)  Health 
in Austerity . London: Demos. 
 Hyde, L. (2006)  The Gift: How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World . Edinburgh: Canongate. 
 Institute of Fiscal Studies (IFS). (2013)  Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the UK: 
2013. London: IFS. 
 Invernizzi, A. (2008) Everyday lives of working children and notions of citizenship in Por-
tugal and Peru, in A. Invernizzi and J. Williams (eds)  Children and Citizenship.  London: 
Sage,   pp.131–141. 
 IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2008)  Climate Change 2007: IPCC 
Assessment Report . Geneva: UN, IPCC. 
 IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2013)  The Physical Science Basis for 
Policy Makers. Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). Geneva: UN, IPCC. 
 IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014a)  Impacts, Adaptation and Vulner-
ability. Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). Geneva: UN, IPCC. 
 IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014b)  Mitigation of Climate Change. 
Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). Geneva: UN, IPCC. 
 Jacobs, M. and Dinham, B. (2003)  Silent Invaders: Pesticides, Livelihoods and Women’s Health. 
London: Bloomsbury. 
 James, A. and Prout, A. (eds) (1997)  Constructing and Reconstructing Childhood: Contemporary 
Issues in the Sociological Study of Childhood.  2nd edn. Abingdon: Routledge Falmer. 
 Jay, A. (2014)  Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Exploitation in Rotherham (1997–2013) . 
Rotherham: City Council. 
 Jay, P. (1979)  Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Mental Handicap Nursing and Care.  London: 
HMSO. 
 Jeffs, T . and Smith, M. (2008) Valuing youth work,  Youth and Policy (100). 
 John, M. (2003)  Children’s Rights and Power . London: Jessica Kingsley. 
 Jones, O. (2012)  Chavs: The Demonization of the Working Class.  London: Verso. 
 Jones, O. (2014)  The Establishment and How They Get Away with It . London: Penguin. 
 Jones, S. (2007)  Coral: A Pessimist in Paradise.  London: Abacus. 
 Juniper, T. (2013)  What Has Nature Ever Done for Us? How Money Really Does Grow on Trees. 
 London: Proﬁ le. 
 Kampfner, J. (2014) The Rich: From Slaves to Super Yachts: A 2000-Year History. New York: 
Little, Brown. 
 Kant, I. ([1781] 1965)  Critique of Pure Reason.  Trans N. Smith. New York: St Martin’s Press. 
 Katz, C. (2001) Vagabond capitalism and the necessity of social reproduction,  Antipode , 33: 
709–28. 
 Katz, C. (2004).  Growing Up Global: Economic Restructuring and Children’s Everyday Lives . 
Minnesota: University of Minnesota. 
 Keenan, J. (2013)  The Dying Sahara: US Imperialism and Terror in Africa.  London: Pluto. 
 Kempf, H. (2008)  How the Rich Are Destroying the Earth.  Dartington: Green Books. 
 Kennedy, E. and Mendus, S. (eds) (1987)  Women in Western Political Philosophy.  Brighton: 
Wheatsheaf. 
 Klein, N. (2000)  No Space, No Choice, No Jobs, No Logo . London: Flamingo. 
 Klein, N. (2007)  The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism.  London: Penguin. 
 Klein, N. (2014)  This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate.  London: Allen Lane. 

184 References
 Kosaka, Y. and Xie, S. (2013) Recent global-warming hiatus tied to equatorial Paciﬁ c surface 
cooling,  Nature,  501 (7467): 403–7, doi:10.1038/nature12534. 
 Kovel, J. (2002)  The Enemy of Nature . London: Zed Books. 
 Kunkel, B. (ed) (2014)  Utopia or Bust: A Guide to the Present Crisis.  London: Verso. 
 Lacey, H. (2004)  Is Science Value Free? Values and Scientiﬁ c Understanding. London: Routledge. 
 Lacey, H. (2014) Food and agricultural systems for the future: science, emancipation and 
human ﬂ ourishing,  International Conference on Critical Realism.  London, July. 
 Laffont, J.-J. (2008) Externalities, in S. Durlauf and L. Blum (eds)  The New Palgrave Dictionary 
of Economics, Second Edition . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Lanchester, J. (2014) How to Speak Money: What the Money People Say – And What They Really 
Mean. London:  Faber & Faber. 
 Lang, T., Barling, D. and Caraher, M. (2009)  Food Policy: Integrating Health Environment and 
Society.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lawson, T. (1998) Economic science without experimentation/abstraction, in M. Archer 
et al. (eds)  Critical Realism: Essential Readings.  Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 144–185. 
 Lawson, T. (2009) The current economic crisis: its nature and the course of academic eco-
nomics,  Cambridge Journal of Economics , 33: 759–777. 
 Lawson, T. (2013) Ethical naturalism and forms of realism,  Symposium: Facts, Values and Social 
Science.  New York: Springer Link, online. 
 Layard, R. and Dunn, J. (2009)  A Good Childhood: Searching for Values in a Competitive Age. 
London: Penguin . 
 Lee, L. (1959)  Cider with Rosie.  Harmondsworth; Penguin. 
 Leidloff, J. (1976)  The Continuum Concept . London: Futura. 
 Levitas, R. (2010) Back to the future: Wells, sociology, utopia and method,  Sociological Review, 
 58, 530–47. 
 Levitas, R. (2013)  Utopia as Method: The Imaginary Reconstitution of Society . Basingstoke: 
Palgrave. 
 Levitt, S. and Dubner, S. (2009)  SuperFreakonomics: Global Cooling, Patriotic Prostitutes, and Why 
Suicide Bombers Should Buy Life Insurance . London: Penguin. 
 Leys, C. and Player, S. (2011)  The Plot against the NHS. Pontypool, Wales: Merlin. 
 Liebel, M. (2004).  A Will of Their Own. Cross-cultural Perspectives on Working Children. London: 
Zed Books. 
 Lin, J. and Mele, C. (2012) (eds)  The Urban Sociology Reader, Second Edition . London: Routledge. 
 Linebaugh, P. (2014)  Stop, Thief! The Commons, Enclosures, and Resistance. Oakland, CA: PM 
Press. 
 Lister, J. (2012)  Saving the Cancer and Sacriﬁ cing the Patient.  London: London Health Emergency. 
 Lister, J. (2013)  Health Policy Reform: Global Health versus Private Proﬁ t . Farringdon Oxon: 
Libri. 
 Lohmann, L. (2006) Carbon trading: a critical conversation on climate change, privatisation 
and power,  Development Dialogue,  48. 
 Lohmann, L., Hildyard, N. and Sexton, S. (2013)  Energy Alternatives: Surveying the Territory. 
 Sturminster Newton: The Corner House. 
 Lord, C. (2003)  A Citizen’s Income: A Foundation for a Sustainable World . Charlbury; Jon 
Carpenter. 
 Lovett, W. and Collins, J. ([1840] 1969)  Chartism: A New Organization of the People.  Leicester: 
Leicester University Press. 
 LSE, The Centre for Economic Performance’s Mental Health Policy Group (2012)  How 
Mental Illness Loses Out in the NHS.  London: LSE, http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/
special/cepsp26.pdf. 
 Lucas, C. (2015)  Honourable Friends? Parliament and the Fight for Change.  London: Portobello. 

References 185
 Lucas, C. and Meyer, A. (2000)  Contraction and Convergence: The Green Solution to Climate Change. 
 Totnes: Green Books. 
 Lundskow, G. (2008)  The Sociology of Religion . London: Sage. 
 Lustig, R. (2014)  Fat Chance: The Hidden Truth about Sugar, Obesity and Disease.  London: 
Fourth Estate. 
 Luxemburg, R. (2010) in P. Le Blanc and H. Scott (eds)  Socialism or Barbarism: Selected Writings 
of Rosa Luxemburg.  London: Pluto. 
 Lymbery, P. and Oakeshott, I. (2014)  Farmageddon: The True Cost of Cheap Meat.  London: 
Bloomsbury. 
 Lynas, M. (2008)  Six Degrees: Our Future on a Hotter Planet. London: Harper. 
 Magdoff, F. and Foster, J. B. (2011)  What Every Environmentalist Needs to Know about Capital-
ism.  New York: Monthly Press Review. 
 Malinowski, B. (1922)  Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁ c.  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Manson, J. (2012)  Public Service on the Brink . Exeter: Imprint-Academic. 
 Maple, J. with Mitchell, C. (1999)  The Crime Fighter: How You Can Make Your Neighbourhood 
Crime Free.  New York: Broadway. 
 Marmot, M. (2010)  Fair Society, Healthy Lives . London: Improvement and Development 
Agency. 
 Marmot, M. et al. (2013)  Review of Social Determinants and the Health Divide in the WHO 
European Region.  London: Institute of Health Equity, UCL and WHO. 
 Marshall, G. (2014)  Don’t Even Think About It: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Ignore Climate 
Change.  London: Bloomsbury. 
 Marx, K. ([1873] 2010)  Afterword to the Second German Edition, Capital . Moscow: Progress, 
10–15. 
 Marx, K. (1990)  Capital . Vol. 1. Trans B. Fowkes. London: Penguin. 
 Marx, K. and Engels, F. (1985)  Collected Works.  London: Lawrence and Wishart. 
 Marx, K. and Engels, F. ([1848] 1998)  Communist Manifesto.  London: Penguin. 
 Maslow, A. (1943). A theory of human motivation.  Psychological Review , 50: 370–396. 
 Mason, P. (2009)  Meltdown: The End of the Age of Greed.  London: Verso. 
 Mason, P. (2012)  Why It’s Kicking Off Everywhere: The New Global Revolutions.  London: Verso. 
 Mauss, M. ([1924] 1954)  The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies . Trans I. 
Cunnison. New York: Norton. 
 Mayall, B. (ed) (1994)  Children’s Childhoods Observed and Experienced.  London: Falmer. 
 Mayall, B. (1996)  Children, Health and the Social Order . Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 
 Mayall, B. (2013)  A History of the Sociology of Childhood . London: Institute of Education.
Mayall, B. and Morrow, V. (2011)  You Can Help Your Country: English Children’s Work during the 
Second World War . London: Institute of Education. 
 Meek, J. (2014)  Private Island: Why Britain Now Belongs to Someone Else . London: Verso. 
 Meighan, R. (1995)  John Holt: Personalised Education and the Reconstruction of Schooling.  
Nottingham: Educational Heretics Press. 
 Midgley, M. (2014)  Are You an Illusion? London: Verso. 
 Miller, A. (1983)  Thou Shalt Not Be Aware: Society’s Betrayal of the Child . London: Pluto. 
 Miller, N. (2009)  Environmental Politics: Stakeholders, Interests and Policymaking . Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
 Mills, C. W. (1956)  The Power Elite . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Mills, C. W. (1959)  The Sociological Imagination . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Minkin, L. (2014)  The Blair Supremacy: A Study in the Politics of Labour’s Party Management. 
 Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
 Minton, A. (2012)  Ground Control: Fear and Happiness in the Twenty-ﬁ rst-century City.  London: 
Penguin. 

186 References
 Mirowski, P. (2014)  Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism Survived the 
Financial Meltdown . London: Verso. 
 Mirowski, P. and Plehwe, D. (2008)  The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective.  Cambridge 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Mizen, P. and Ofosu-Kusi, Y. (2010a), Asking, giving, receiving: friendship as a survival 
strategy among Accra’s street children,  Childhood , 17, 4: 441–454. 
 Mizen, P. and Y. Ofosu-Kusi (2010b) Unofﬁ cial truth and everyday insight: ‘voice’ and visual 
research among Accra’s street children,  Visual Studies , 17, 4: 255–267. 
 Mizen, P. and Y. Ofosu-Kusi (2012) Engaging with a world outside of ourselves: vistas of ﬂ at-
ness, children’s work and the urban informal economy,  Sociological Research Online , 17, 2: 17, 
http://www.socresonline.org.uk/17/2/17.html 10.5153/sro.2694. 
 Monbiot, G. (2007)  Heat: How We Can Stop the Planet Burning.  London: Penguin. 
 Monbiot, G. (2014)  Feral: Rewilding the Land, Sea and Human Life.  London: Penguin. 
 More, T. ([1516] 2010)  Utopia.  London: Penguin. 
 Morgan, A., Ziglio, E., Davies, M. and Barker, R. (eds) (2010)  International Health Development: 
Investing in Assets of Individuals, Communities and Organisations . London: Springer. 
 Morozov, E. (2014)  To Save Everything, Click Here: Technology, Solutionism and the Urge to Fix 
Problems That Don’t Exist.  Philadelphia, PA: PublicAffairs. 
 Morris, W. ([1890] 1994)  News from Nowhere.  London: Penguin. 
 Morrow, V. and Vennam, U. (2012) Children’s responses to risk in agricultural work in Andra 
Pradesh, India,  Development in Practice,  22, 549–61. 
 Moss, P. (2014)  Transformative Change and Real Utopias in Early Childhood Education: A Story of 
Democracy, Experimentation and Potentiality . London: Routledge. 
 Mount, F. (2012)  The New Few: Or A Very British Oligarchy.  London: Simon & Schuster. 
 Nadesan, M. (2010)  Governing Childhood into the 21st Century: Biotechnologies of Childhood 
Management and Education.  New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Næss, P. (2010) The dangerous climate of disciplinary tunnel vision, in R. Bhaskar et al. 
(eds)  Interdisciplinarity and Climate Change: Transforming Knowledge and Practice for our Global 
Future.  London: Routledge, pp. 54–84. 
 Neale, J. (2008)  Stop Global Warming: Change the World.  London: Bookmarks. 
 New Economics Foundation (2014)  Review of the Year 2013–2014 . London: NEF. 
 Nieuwenhuys, O. (2005)   The wealth of children:  Reconsidering the child labour debate, 
in Qvortrup, J. (ed) (2005a) Studies in Modern Childhood: Society, Agency, Culture. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 167–183.
 Nieuwenhuys, O. (2011) From child labour to working children’s movements, in J. Qvortrup, 
W. Corsaro, and M. Honig (eds)  The Palgrave Handbook of Childhood Studies . Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 289–300. 
 Nisbet, R. (1967)  The Sociological Tradition. London: Heinemann. 
 Norrie, A. (2010)  Dialectic and Difference: Dialectical Critical Realism and the Grounds of Justice . 
Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Norris, C. (2007) Transcendental realism, in M. Hartwig (ed) Dictionary of Critical Realism. 
Abingdon: Routledge ,  pp. 474–81. 
 Norton, M. (2007)  The Everyday Activist.  London: Boxtree. 
 Nutt, D. (2012)  Drugs – Without the Hot Air: Minimising the Harms of Legal and Illegal Drugs. 
 Cambridge: UIT. 
 Oakley, A. (1992)  Social Support and Motherhood . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Oakley, A. (2014)  Father and Daughter: Patriarchy, Gender and Social Science . Bristol: Policy. 
 O’Hara, M. (2015)  Austerity Bites: A Journey to the Sharp End of Cuts in the UK . Bristol: Policy. 
 Oliver, M. (1990)  The Politics of Disablement. Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
 Omolo, A. (2015)  Violence against Children in Kenya: An Ecological Model of Risk Factors and 
Consequences, Responses and Projects . Münster: Waxmann. 

References 187
 Osler, A. (2010)  Teachers and Human Rights Education . Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham. 
 Ostrom, E. (1990).  Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Oswell, D. (2013)  The Agency of Children: From Family to Global Human Rights . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Oswin, M. (1973)  The Empty Hours: A Study of the Weekend Life of Handicapped Children in 
Institutions . Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
 Oxfam (2014a)  A Tale of Two Britains. Oxford: Oxfam. 
 Oxfam (2014b)  Working for the Few . Oxford: Oxfam. 
 Oxfam International (2011)  Land and Power: The Growing Scandal Surrounding the New Wave 
of Investments in Land . Oxford: Oxfam International. 
 Oxfam International (2014)  A Sign of Things to Come? Examining Four Major Climate-related 
Disasters, 2010–2013, and Their Impacts on Food Security. Oxford: Oxfam International. 
 Paarlberg, R. (2010)  Food Politics: What Everyone Needs to Know.  New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Parton, N. (2014)  The Politics of Child Protection: Contemporary Developments and Future Direc-
tions . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Patel, R. (2008)  Stuffed and Starved: From Farm to Fork, the Hidden Battle for the World Food 
System.  London: Portobello. 
 Pearce, F. (2007)  When the Rivers Run Dry: What Happens When Our Water Runs Out?  London: 
Transworld. 
 Pearce, F. (2010)  Peoplequake: Mass Migration, Ageing Nations and the Coming Population Crash. 
 London: Eden Project Books. 
 Pearce, F. (2012)  The Landgrabbers: The New Fight over Who Owns the Earth. London: Transworld. 
 Percy-Smith, B. and Thomas, N. (eds) (2010)  Handbook of Children’s Participation . London: 
Routledge. 
 Peston, R. (2008)  Who Runs Britain? And Who’s to Blame for the Economic Mess We’re In? 
 London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
 Piketty, T. (2014)  Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Trans A. Goldhammer. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
 Pinker, S. (2012)  The Better Angels of Our Nature: A History of Violence and Humanity. London: 
Penguin. 
 Pinson, H., Arnot, M. and Candappa, M. (2010).  Education, Asylum and The ‘Non-Citizen’ 
Child: The Politics of Compassion and Belonging . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Platt Report (1959)  The Welfare of Children in Hospital.  London: HMSO. 
 Pollock, A. (2005)  NHS: PLC: The Privatisation of Our Health Care.  London: Verso. 
 Pollock, A. (2012) NHS franchising: the toxic world of globalised healthcare is upon us. 
 Guardian , 27 August .  
 Pollock, A., Kondilis, E. and Price, D. (2013)  Blaming the Victims: The Trust Special Administra-
tors’ Plans for South East London.  London: Centre for Primary Care and Public Health, 
Queen Mary, University of London. 
 Polman, L. (2011)  War Games: The Story of Aid and War in Modern Times. London: Penguin. 
 Popovic´, S. and Miller, M. (2015)  Blueprint for a Revolution: How to Use Rice Pudding, Lego Men 
and Other Non-Violent Techniques to Galvanise Communities.  London: Scribe. 
 Porpora, D. (1998) Four concepts of social structure, in M. Archer et al. (eds)  Critical Realism: 
Essential Readings.  Abingdon: Routledge,   pp. 339–355. 
 Porpora, D. (2007) Social structure, in M. Hartwig (ed) Dictionary of Critical Realism. 
Abingdon: Routledge , pp. 422–425. 
 Poulton, R. and Bangura, I. (2013)  Child Soldiers – Reintegrating Boys and Girls Who AreVictims 
of War . EPES Mandala Consulting. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers  (2013)  Busting the Carbon Budget . London: PwC. 

188 References
 Putnam, R. (2000)  Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.  New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 
 Qvortrup, J. (1985) Placing children in the division of labour, in P. Close and R. Collins (eds) 
 Family and Economy in Modern Society . Basingstoke: Macmillan, pp. 129–145.
Qvortrup, J. (ed) (2005a)  Studies in Modern Childhood: Society, Agency, Culture.  Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Qvortrup, J. (2005b) Varieties of childhood, in J. Qvortrup (ed)  Studies in Modern Childhood: 
Society, Agency, Culture.  Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 1–20. 
 Raftery, A., Alkerna, L. and Gerland, P. (2014) Bayesian population projections for the 
United Nations,  Statistical Science , 29, 58–68. 
 Rennie, J. and Kendall, G. (2013)  A Manual of Neonatal Intensive Care . 5th edn. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press. 
 Ridge, T. (2002)  Childhood Poverty and Social Exclusion: From a Child’s Perspective . Bristol: 
Policy. 
 Rifkin, J. (2014)  The Zero Marginal Cost Society: The Internet of Things, the Collaborative Com-
mons and the Eclipse of Capitalism . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Rogers, H. (2010)  Green Gone Wrong: Dispatches from the Front Lines of Eco-Capitalism.  
London: Verso. 
 Rose, H. and Rose, S. (eds) (2001)  Alas Poor Darwin: Arguments against Evolutionary Psychology. 
London: Verso. 
 Rose, H. and Rose, S. (2014)  Genes, Cells and Brains: The Promethean Promise of the New 
Biology.  London: Verso. 
 Rose, N. (1999)  Governing the Soul; The Shaping of the Private Self.  London: Free Association 
Books. 
 Roy, A. (1999)  The Cost of Living.  London: Flamingo. 
 Roy, A. (2009)  Listening to Grasshoppers: Field Notes on Democracy.  London: Hamish 
Hamilton. 
 Roy, A. (2014)  Capitalism: A Ghost Story.  London: Verso. 
 Russell, B. (1926)  On Education.  Hove: Psychology Press Reprint. 
 Rutherford, S. and Arora, S. (2010)  The Poor and Their Money: Microﬁ nance from a Twenty-ﬁ rst 
Century Consumer’s Perspective . Warwickshire, UK: Practical Action. 
 Rutzou, T. (2013) The monstrosity of monovalence: paradox or progress?  Journal of Critical 
Realism , 12, 377–99. 
 Sayer, A. (2011)  Why Things Matter to People: Social Science, Values and Ethical Life.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Scambler, G. (2012) Health inequalities,  Sociology of Health & Illness , 34, 1: 130–46. 
 Scheper-Hughes, N. (1992)  Death Without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil. 
 Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 Schlosser, E. (2004)  Reefer Madness . . . and Other Tales from the American Underground . London: 
Penguin. 
 Schumacher, E. (1978)  Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered.  London: 
Abacus. 
 Scott, D. (2010)  Education, Epistemology and Critical Realism . Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Scott Cato, M. and Kennett, M. (eds) (1999)  Green Economics.  Aberystwyth: Green Audit 
Books.
Seabrook, J. (2007)  The No-Nonsense Guide to World Poverty. Oxford: New Internationalist. 
 Seery, E. and Caistor-Arendar, A. (2014)  Even It Up: Time to End Extreme Inequality.  Oxford: 
Oxfam. 
 Sen, A. (1982)  Poverty and Famine: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation.  Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

References 189
 Sen, A. (2009)  The Idea of Justice.  London: Allen Lane. 
 Serpell, R. (1993)  The Signiﬁ cance of Schooling: Life Journeys in an African Society . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Shaxson, N. (2011)  Treasure Islands and the Men Who Stole the World.  London: Bodley Head. 
 Shier, H. and Mendez, M. (2014) How children and young people inﬂ uence policy-makers: 
lessons from Nicaragua,  Children & Society , 28, 1–14. 
 Shiner, M., Scourﬂ ed, J., Fincham, B. and Langer, S. (2009) When things fall apart: gender and 
suicide across the life course,  Social Science & Medicine,  69: 738–746. 
 Shipway, B. (2013) A Critical Realist Perspective of Education. London: Routledge. 
 Shiva, V. (2000)  Tomorrow’s Biodiversity.  London: Thames and Hudson. 
 Shiva, V. (2013)  Making Peace with the Earth . London: Pluto. 
 Shove, E., Pantzar, M. and Watson, M. (2012)  The Dynamics of Social Practice.  London: Sage. 
 Shove, E. and Spurling, N. (2013)  Sustainable Practices: Social Theory and Climate Change . London: 
Routledge.
Simms, A. (2008) Nine Meals From Anarchy. London: New Economics Foundation. 
 Skogan, W. (1990)  Disorder and Decline: The Spiral of Decay in American Neighbourhoods.  Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
 Skolimowski, H. (1993)  A Sacred Place to Dwell: Living with Reverence upon the Earth . Shafts-
bury Dorset: Element Books. 
 SLHT – South London Healthcare Trust (2012)  Special Administrator Draft Plan for SE London. 
 London: SLH. 
 Smith, A. ([1776] 2012)  Wealth of Nations.  Ware, Hertfordshire: Wordsworth.
Smith, C. (2011)  What Is a Person? Rethinking Humanity, Social Life, and the Moral Good from 
the Person Up.  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
 Smith, C. and Denton, M. (2005)  Soul Searching: The Religious and Spiritual Lives of American 
Teenagers . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Smith, H. L. (2014)  Harry’s Last Stand: How the World My Generation Built Is Falling Down, and 
What We Can Do to Save It.  London: Icon. 
 Starkey, H. (2015)  Learning to Live Together: Struggles for Citizenship and Human Rights Educa-
tion.  London: UCL Institute of Education. 
 Stephens, P. (ed) (2009)  Contemporary Environmental Politics: From Margins to Mainstream . 
Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Stern, N. (2006)  Report on the Economics of Climate Change.  London: HM Treasury. 
 Stevenson, B. (2014)  Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption.  London: Random House. 
 Stiglitz, J. (2003)  Globalization and Its Discontents.  Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
 Stripple, J. and Bulkeley, H. (eds) (2013)  Governing the Climate: New Approaches to Rationality, 
Power and Politics.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Sutton Trust (2013)  Selective Comprehensives , www.suttontrust.com. 
 Swain, D. (2012)  Alienation: An Introduction to Marx’s Theory.  London: Bookmarks. 
 Titmuss, R. (1971)  The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social Policy . London: 
Pantheon. 
 Tudor Hart, J. (1971) The inverse care law,  Lancet , 297: 405–412. 
 Turnbull, C. (1961)  The Forest People.  London: Touchstone. 
 Tutu, D. (2013)  God Is Not a Christian: Speaking Truth in Times of Crisis.  London: HarperOne. 
 Unger, R. (2007)  The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound , Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
 UN Habitat (2008)  State of the World’s Cities 2008–2009: Harmonious Cities.  Nairobi: UN 
Habitat, London: Earthscan. 
 UNICEF. (2014a)  Children of the Recession. The Impact of the Economic Crisis on Child Well-being 
in Rich Countries . New York: UNICEF. 

190 References
 UNICEF. (2014b)  Every Child Counts: The State of the World’s Children 2014 in Numbers.  New 
York: UNICEF. 
 UN – United Nations. (1948)  Universal Declaration of Human Rights. New York: UN. 
 UN – United Nations. (1966b)  International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights . 
New York: UN. 
 UN – United Nations. (1989)  UNCRC – Convention on the Rights of the Child.  New York: UN.
Urry, J. (2011)  Climate Change & Society.  Cambridge: Polity. 
 Wacquant, L. (2008)  Urban Outcasts: A Comparative Sociology of Advanced Marginality.  
Cambridge: Polity. 
 Wacquant, L. (2009)  Punishing the Poor: The Neoliberal Government of Social Insecurity.  London: 
Duke University Press. 
 Wainwright, H. (2003)  Reclaim the State: Experiments in Popular Democracy.  London: Verso. 
 Wainwright, H. (2014)  The Tragedy of the Private: The Potential of the Public.  Fernay-Voltaire: 
Public Services International. 
 Wall, D. (2005)  Babylon and Beyond: The Economics of Anti-Capitalist, Anti-Globalist and Radical 
Green Movements . London: Pluto. 
 Wall, D. (2010)  No-Nonsense Guide to Green Politics.  Oxford: New Internationalist. 
 Wang, W., Oyeku, S., Luo, Z. et al. (2013) Hydroxyurea is associated with lower costs of care 
of young children with sickle cell anemia,  Pediatrics , 2 September. 
 Ward, C. (1988)  The Child in the Country.  London: Bedford Square Press. 
 Ward, C. (1994) Opportunities for childhood in late twentieth century Britain, in B. Mayall 
(ed)  Children’s Childhoods Observed and Experienced.  London: Falmer, pp. 144–52. 
 Weber, M. ([1905] 1998)  The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism . Trans T. Parsons. 
Los Angeles: Roxbury. 
 Wells, K. (2015)  Childhood in Global Perspective.  2nd edn. Cambridge: Polity. 
 Wilkinson, M. (2015)  A Fresh Look at Islam in a Multi-faith World: A Philosophy for Success 
through Education . Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2009)  The Spirit Level.  London: Penguin. 
 Willow, C. (2015)  Children Behind Bars: Why the Abuse of Child Imprisonment Must End . Bristol: 
Policy. 
 Wilson, J. (2014)  Jeffrey Sachs: The Strange Case of Dr. Shock and Mr. Aid. London: Verso. 
 Wintersberger, H. (2005) Work, welfare and generational order: towards a political economy 
of childhood, in J. Qvortrup (ed)  Studies in Modern Childhood: Society, Agency, Culture.  
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 201–220. 
 Wolf, M. (2014) The Shifts and the Shocks – What We’ve Learned and Have Still to Learn – from 
the Financial Crisis. London: Allen Lane. 
 Woodin, M. and Lucas, C. (2004)  Green Alternatives to Globalisation: A Manifesto . London: 
Pluto. 
 World Bank Report (2013)  Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts and the 
Case for Resilience . New York: World Bank. 
 Worsley, P. (2002)  Marx and Marxism.  Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Wright, E. O. (2010)  Envisioning Real Utopias.  London: Verso. 
 Wrigley, T. (2006)  Another School Is Possible . London: Bookmarks and Trentham. 
 Yoshida, T. (2011)  Corporal Punishment of Children: A Critical Realist Account of Experiences from 
Two Primary Schools in Urban Tanzania . PhD thesis. London: Institute of Education. 
 Zelizer, V. (2005) The priceless child revisited, in J. Qvortrup (ed)  Studies in Modern Childhood: 
Society, Agency, Culture.  Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 184–200. 

 Anderson, Kevin 40, 41 
 Archer, Margaret 45, 92–3, 174 
 Attenborough, David 43 
 Bakan, Joel 140 
 Bartley, Mel 62, 86 
 Berners-Lee, Tim 150 
 Bevan, Aneurin 62, 78 
 Bhaskar, Roy 8, 23, 42, 45, 46, 146, 157, 
167, 171 
 Binagwaho, Agnes 81 
 Blair, Tony 8 
 Bloch, Ernst 145 
 Bourdieu, Pierre 93 
 Bows, Alice 40, 41 
 Brabeck, Peter 37 
 Brian 153 
 Brown, Michael 93 
 Burnside, John 46 
 Bush, George 34 
 Bush, Jeb 34 
 Cameron, David 71, 88, 89, 125 
 Carson, Rachel 46, 52 
 Chang, Ha-Joon 117–18, 140 
 Chinese children: Le-le, Xiu Ji-chuan, 
Li-Wen, Li-Jun, Di-ja, Maijili 91 
 Clare, John 17–18, 42, 49 
 Cockburn, Tom 11 
 Collini, Stefan 71–8 
 Crocker, Lucy 153 
 Darwin, Charles 24, 94, 95 
 Davis, Wade 19, 50 
 Dean, Jodi 119 
 Deb, Debal 38 
 Descartes, René 171 
 Dickens, Charles 54 
 Dinerstein, Ana 12 
 D’Souza, Radha 144–5, 168 
 Dunant, Henri 80 
 Duncan Smith, Iain 125–6, 133 
 Einstein, Albert 172 
 Engels, Friedrich 8 
 Farage, Nigel 126 
 Fielding, Michael 157 
 Fine, Ben 110 
 Firestone, Shulamith 158 
 Foucault, Michel 95 
 Freud, Sigmund 47, 124 
 Friedman, Milton 95 
 Gane, Nick 95 
 Gates, Bill 82 
 Geertz, Clifford 144 
 Giroux, Henry 84 
 Goffman, Alice 102–3 
 Goodey, Christopher 110 
 Graeber, David 150, 158 
 Gunnarsson, Lena 154 
 Gupta, Pawan 41 
 Habermas, Jürgen 125 
 Haji-Abdi, Abdullai 154 
 Hanson, Philip 20, 41 
 Hardin, Garrett 42–3 
 NAME INDEX 

192 Name index
 Harvey, David 110, 164 
 Hayek, Friedrich von 92, 94–5, 114, 116, 
121 
 Hegel, Georg 8–9, 27–8, 42, 167, 171 
 Heidegger, Martin 48, 174 
 Hobbes, Thomas 115, 151 
 Hume, David 26, 174 
 Hutton, Will 32 
 Hyde, Lewis 148–52 
 Johnson, Boris 126 
 Juncker, Jean-Claude 116, 132 
 Jung, Carl 149 
 Kant, Immanuel 26, 41, 94, 170, 174 
 Katy 72–3, 83–4, 148 
 Katz, Cindy 11 
 Keynes, John Maynard 141 
 King, Ashya 81–2 
 Layard, Richard 57, 60 
 Lee, Laurie 17, 49 
 Levitas, Ruth 138 
 Lintott, Chris 147 
 Lister, John 73 
 Luxemburg, Rosa 161 
 Lynas, Mark 20–1 
 Mandela, Nelson 135, 139 
 Maple, Jack 102 
 Margaret 162 
 Marshall, George 154–5, 160 
 Marwaha, Esha 18 
 Marx, Karl 27, 92, 124, 141, 167, 171 
 Maslow, Abraham 41, 155 
 Mills, C. Wright 60, 83–4, 119–20 
 Minton, Anna 102 
 Mirowski, Philip 125–7 
 Mises, Ludwig von 95 
 Moore, Patrick 147 
 Morris, William 141, 146, 162 
 Moss, Peter 157 
 Murdoch, Rupert 13, 49, 88, 119, 120 
 Newton, Isaac 24, 168, 172 
 Nieuwenhuys, Olga 118 
 Nightingale, Florence 80, 82 
 Obama, Barack 10 
 Oliver Twist 54 
 Oswell, David 11 
 Parr, Albert 162 
 Pillay, Navanethem 135 
 Pinker, Steven 160 
 Plato 158 
 Porpora, Douglas 92–3, 95 
 Porritt, Jonathan 30 
 Putnam, Robert 110 
 Rice, Tamir 93 
 Richardson, Marion 157 
 Romney, Mitt 76 
 Rose, Nikolas 110 
 Russell, Bertrand 157 
 Sachs, Jeffrey 140 
 Santos, Rene Silva 3 
 Sen, Amartya 140 
 Shipway, Brad 157 
 Skogan, Wesley 102 
 Smith, Adam 59, 94 
 Smith, Harry Leslie 53, 57–8, 62, 77 
 Smith, Marion 53, 58, 61, 62, 76, 
83, 84 
 Soros, George 140 
 Stanner, W.E.H. 144 
 Stern, Nicholas 32, 40 
 Stevenson, Bryan 7–8, 154 
 Stiglitz, Joseph 140 
 Street children in Accra: Steven, Richard 
Isaac, Koﬁ , Mary, Justus 90 
 Thatcher, Margaret 62, 94 
 Unger, Roberto 137–8 
 Urry, John 137 
 Wacquant, Loïc 93, 102–4, 
121–3, 125 
 Wales, Jimmy 150 
 Wells, Karen 11 
 Willow, Carolyne 104 
 Wolf, Martin 140 
 Wright, Olin 137 

 SUBJECT INDEX 
 A&E accident and emergency 67, 68, 71 
 Aborigines 144 
 absence 9, 10, 22–3, 25, 28, 29, 40, 42, 
46, 53, 61, 62, 78, 83, 96–7, 117, 120, 
136, 137, 143, 145, 149, 157, 159, 167, 
169–72 
 academics 9, 66, 102, 104, 140; disciplines 
12, 19, 21, 27, 54, 57, 137, 164; silos 12 
 action 18, 19, 29, 46, 124, 153–4, 170, 171, 
173; inaction 33, 41; non-violent 139; 
personal 18, 92, 94–5, 173; political 18, 
30, 41, 45, 62, 83, 126 
 actual 12, 24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 46, 47, 121, 
125, 145, 149, 157, 167, 170, 171 
 actualism 146, 167 
 addiction 10, 65, 103, 122, 152 
 adolescents 120 
 adult-centric 6, 7, 43, 71, 113, 122, 144, 
158, 169; adultism 168, 171 
 adulthood 7, 8, 12, 29, 48, 104, 136, 153 
 advertising 32, 38, 57, 75, 77, 100, 115, 164 
 Afghanistan 117 
 Africa 34, 45, 47, 50, 52, 54, 55, 70, 74, 76, 
80, 81, 82, 99, 114, 117, 123, 135 
 African Americans 7, 8, 55 
 Africans 41, 44, 50, 76, 54, 55, 70 
 agency 4, 5, 11, 25, 30, 31, 42, 45, 46, 47, 57, 
82, 92, 93, 94, 119, 123, 146, 149, 159, 
160, 164, 167–9, 171, 173, 174 
 agriculture 34, 38, 141, 142; agri-business 
39, 142 
 aid: international 14, 34, 43, 80, 81, 82, 106, 
117, 141; legal aid 105, 109; Women’s Aid 
160;  see also  philanthropy 
 alethia 26, 167; alethic truth 27, 167 
 alienation 167–70, 173–4; from nature 
23, 25, 27–8, 47; from others 57, 59, 
61, 78, 83, 84; from social structures 
103, 108, 114, 121–3; from self and 
society 141, 142, 145, 146, 149, 
153–4, 159, 161 
 altruism 31, 42, 57, 76, 78, 115, 150 
 Amazon: company 116; forest 21, 42 
 America 32, 36, 75, 86, 117; Central 10, 
36; North 37, 45; South 36, 37, 43;  
see also USA 
 anarchists 84, 140, 151 
 anthropic fallacy 29, 47, 48 
 anthropocentrism 146, 168, 170, 171 
 anthroporealism 143 
 anti-corporatists 140 
 apartheid 135 
 aporiai 28, 30, 39, 47, 168, 169, 171 
 apprentices 118 
 archetypes 149 
 Arctic 20, 24, 43 
 armies 80, 117, 146, 149 
 arms 10, 33, 82, 117, 120, 141 
 ASBO 102, 129 
 Asda/Walmart 118 
 Asia 34, 54, 70, 81, 99, 100, 123 
 asylum seekers 11, 64, 78, 79, 105, 112 
 * Terms that appear too often for pages to be listed 

194 Subject Index
 attention deﬁ cit and hyperactivity disorder 
ADHD 27, 65, 122 
 austerity 43, 56, 63, 77, 111, 125 
 Australia 21, 34, 39, 50 
 autonomists 140, 168 
 babies 8, 29, 35, 37, 42, 48, 55, 56, 63, 66, 
70, 75, 98–9, 107, 109, 120, 142, 151, 
172 
 baby milk 65 
 Bain Capital 75, 76 
 Bangladesh 34, 36 
 banks 37, 65, 74, 105, 111, 126, 127 
 BBC British Broadcasting Company 23, 49, 
77, 78, 147 
 behaviour 28, 30, 50, 92, 94, 110, 125, 139, 
142; problems 54, 56, 57, 104, 162 
 Beirut 163 
 Bengal 38 
 Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 82 
 biodiversity 35, 38, 141, 142 
 births 13, 55, 63, 66, 71, 75, 99, 151 
 blood 135; banks 71; disorders 56, 76, 80, 
83, donation 76, 151; transfusion 68, 75, 
76 
 bodies 25, 27, 41, 78, 168–70; body 8, 64, 
91, 122, 154, 170 
 brain 8, 9, 81–2, 170, 173; drain 54, 106 
 Brazil 3, 35, 123 
 Cairo 33 
 California 34, 118 
 Canada 21, 37 
 cancer 55, 65, 80, 81, 89, 120 
 Capita 109 
 capitalism 8, 32, 40, 97, 115, 124, 140–3, 
149, 155, 158, 159; deregulated/
disorganised 116–18, 132, 159; 
venture 74 
 capitalists 74, 152 
 carbon CO 2  20–4, 30–5, 40–1, 137; capture  
 127;  dump 21; emissions 20–1, 24, 34, 
44, 47, 49, 138; trading 47, 127; 
 see also  footprint 
 care 6, 7, 46, 49, 72–3, 83–4, 96, 97, 105, 
118, 122, 146, 148, 151, 158–9, 162; 
childcare 97, 101, 107, 133, 147;  
see also  healthcare 
 causal 10, 24, 25, 28–31, 45, 46, 81, 92, 94, 
96, 113, 123, 124, 136, 140, 146, 149, 
167, 168, 171, 172, 173, 174 
 change 9, 13, 61, 83, 94, 119, 136–47, 153, 
154, 161, 164, 167, 170, 172; ecological 
17–52; incremental 146; non-violent 
139; policies 61, 65, 71, 74, 77, 81, 93, 98, 
125, 135, 139, 154, 156; practical 9, 13, 
61; radical 11, 157;  see also transform 
 Chicago 95 
 Child* 
 child and adolescent mental health services 
CAMHS 56, 57 
 child beneﬁ ts 62, 109, 113, 143 
 childcare  see  care 
 child-centred 6, 130 
 childhood studies 4, 5, 53; researchers 4, 53, 
164 
 Child Poverty Action Group CPAG 79, 111 
 children*: as burdens 109; as costs 7, 43, 58, 
96, 97, 98, 101, 104–5, 107, 109–11, 113, 
114, 117; exclusion of 11, 53, 122; as gifts 
149, 154; as private or public goods 19, 
43, 54;  see also  agency; looked-after/in 
care; rights; soldiers; street children; work 
of children 
 Children’s Rights Alliance for England 79 
 China 32, 49, 55, 91, 99, 114 
 churches 32, 56, 79, 95 
 central intelligence agency CIA 10 
 cities 5, 18, 21, 25, 27–8, 32, 34, 36, 41–2, 
81, 91–2, 97, 112, 121, 140, 148, 163; and 
crime 101–5; eco-cities 155; as markets 
97–101, 114–15 
 citizens 5, 6, 7, 11, 18, 30, 33, 36, 54, 97, 99, 
102, 104, 114–15, 136, 152, 155, 158, 
163–4 
 citizenship 11, 108, 119, 136 
 civil servants 77, 88, 120, 149 
 civil war 10, 42 
 class 9, 54, 60, 62, 91, 93, 103, 120, 121, 123, 
163, 172, 174; underclass 36, 122 
 climate change 11, 13, 18, 52, 127–8, 137, 
143–5, 154, 163–4; sceptics 21, 24, 28, 
47, 49, 52, 145;  see also global warming 
 clinical commissioning groups CCGS 67 
 cognitive behaviour therapy CBT 57 
 colonialism 82, 152 
 Columbia 117 
 commodities 58, 97, 108, 110, 115, 124, 
127, 142, 147–8, 172 
 commons 33, 74, 116, 141, 143, 149, 152, 
155, 159, 163; and climate change 42–6; 
House of Commons 42; tragedy of 
commons 42–3 
 communism 95, 158–9 
 communists 140, 158 
 competition 36, 42, 60, 65, 67, 78, 83, 93, 
95, 105–6, 109–10, 116, 122–3 
 concrete 29, 41, 42, 113, 142, 145–6, 157, 
168, 173, 175; concrete ﬂ ourishing 
145; concretely singularised 145; 

Subject Index 195
concrete↔universal 25, 27, 41, 145, 158, 
168, 169 
 congenital problems 63 
 constellations 113, 114, 169;  see also totality 
 consumers 77, 99, 105, 106, 108, 118, 
126–7, 132, 156;  see also service users 
 contraction and convergence 142 
 contradictions 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 22, 23, 28, 29, 
30, 39, 45, 47, 48, 57, 59, 62, 70–1, 73, 
79, 83, 92, 114, 124, 125–7, 153 
 cooperation 31, 43, 49, 60, 63, 67, 74, 77, 
95, 141, 143, 146, 148, 154–6, 158 
 corruption 66, 117, 140 
 cost-effective values 30, 40, 56, 58, 59, 64, 
77, 101, 115, 125 
 counter-factual 24, 25, 169 
 crime 7, 8, 97, 99, 101–5, 107–8, 116–7, 
121, 135, 154, 155, 159, 161, 163 
 Cyprus 56 
 death 52, 54, 55, 61, 76, 81, 82, 120, 139, 
144, 149, 160;  see also  mortality 
 debt 37, 39, 43, 49, 63, 78, 95, 11–12, 117, 
127, 143; national debt 64, 68, 71, 73–4, 
77, 82 
 demi-real 47, 169 
 democracy 3, 6, 81, 82, 118–20, 126, 140–1, 
146, 153, 156, 141, 150, 159, 160–4 
 demographics 71 
 denegations 28, 47, 153, 169 
 Department for Education 18 
 Department for International Development 
DfID 82 
 destruction 22, 23, 38, 46, 49, 117, 123, 124 
 Detroit 59 
 developing world  see majority world 
 Devon 75 
 diabetes 64, 65, 71 
 dialectic 4, 8–11, 22–6, 39, 41–2, 28–9, 39, 
41–2, 45–7, 92, 113, 145–6, 157, 161, 
167, 168, 169, 171 
 dialectical materialism 9, 169 
 diarrhoea 81, 82 
 difference: child-adult 5, 7; and change 31, 
146, 154, 174; and dialectic 145; and 
dichotomy 113; and identity 145, 169; 
and non-identity 145, 172 
 differentiation 24, 169 
 diffraction 40, 169 
 dignity 58, 72, 95, 151, 163 
 disabilities, disabled people 34, 55, 56, 63, 
65, 67, 68, 71, 72, 78, 79, 80, 91, 107, 
109, 110, 125, 152, 161 
 disadvantage 56, 59, 61, 62, 74, 80, 91, 97, 
98, 99, 104, 107, 110, 115, 123, 161, 174 
 disease 22, 36, 39, 55–6, 61, 62, 71, 76, 80, 
127, 139 
 Disneyworld 33 
 doctors 39, 55, 63–4, 66, 68, 81, 152–3; lack 
of 71; training 55, 68 
 domestic slavery 45 
 domestic violence 105, 135, 160 
 Dreaming 144 
 drones 120 
 droughts 21–3, 31, 34, 38, 44, 144 
 drugs: illegal 10, 79, 103, 117, 159; legal 55, 
61, 66, 81, 103, 159 
 dystopias 137, 138, 144 
 Ebola 52, 55, 80 
 ecology 5, 11–12, 17–53, 117, 123, 126, 
137, 140–2, 149, 153–5, 164–5, 174;  
see also  climate change; global warming 
 economics* 
 eco-socialists 141–2 
 education 4, 7, 40, 43, 70, 77, 78, 84, 95, 
96, 97, 105, 110, 115, 125, 141, 143, 148, 
150, 152, 153, 154, 155–8, 159, 163, 172 
 Egypt 123 
 elite 39, 78, 80, 83, 114, 116, 120, 124, 125, 
127, 158 
 El Salvador 10 
 emancipation 10, 28, 46, 73, 135–66 
 emergence 30, 39, 42, 90–134, 157, 170, 173 
 empathy 153;  see also interdependence 
 empirical: level 12, 23, 26, 29–30, 46, 121, 
144, 149, 157, 167, 168, 170, 171, 173; 
research 4, 25, 26, 29, 137, 145, 172 
 employment 7, 11, 57, 62, 97, 101, 102, 104, 
107, 113, 115, 116, 123, 141, 155, 163; 
unemployment 32, 118, 123, 141 
 enclosures 18, 42, 44, 141, 142 
 endism 47, 146, 170 
 England 64, 65, 67, 71, 76, 77, 79, 102, 103, 
104, 156, 161, 162 
 environment 8, 17–52, 118 
 epistemic fallacy 22, 26, 29, 30, 31, 47, 119, 
145, 161, 170, 174 
 epistemology 5, 9, 22, 23, 26, 29, 45, 126, 
136, 138 
 Equality and Human Rights Commission 
122 
 equity 7, 30, 37, 66, 61, 150, 156, 163; 
ﬁ nancial equity 37, 74, 75 
 ethical naturalism 28, 170 
 ethics 41, 82, 125, 135–66 
 Ethiopia 82, 152 
 ethnicity 91; diversity 70; ethnic 
disadvantage 99, 101; relations 8, 60, 69, 
123, 136 

196 Subject Index
 eudaimonic society 145, 170 
 eugenics 43, 54, 94, 111, 158 
 Europe 35, 45, 50, 56, 62, 67, 99, 104, 106, 
102, 117 
 European Union 116, 118, 141 
 evidence-base 11, 26, 29, 78, 126; in 
research 25, 57, 137; supporting 83, 102 
 evolution 8, 94, 137 
 exit and voice 156 
 externalities 96, 147, 148, 154 
 farmers 34, 38, 39; farming 25, 118; farms 
55, 62, 117; mega-farms 39, 44; small 32, 
39, 44, 51 
 favelas 3, 123 
 feminism 6 
 fetish 47, 52, 83, 124, 170, 172 
 ﬁ nance 64, 141; ﬁ nancialisation 106 
 ﬁ rst world  see minority world 
 Florida 33, 36 
 ﬂ ourishing 145 
 food 10, 22, 35, 37, 39, 43, 44, 62, 65, 76, 
78, 92, 99, 117, 121, 141, 142, 148; 
banks 111; Big Food 65; insecurity/
shortages 20, 36, 123; prices 37, 118; 
security 38, 144, 152; sovereignty 38, 
155 
 footprints: carbon 142; eco 34, 50; global 
142; water 34, 50 
 foresight 8, 49 
 forests 21, 22, 24, 34, 38, 42, 48, 142; 
deforestation 34 
 fossil fuels 20, 21, 22, 24, 31, 32, 33, 48, 123, 
127, 136, 141, 142, 155 
 founding aims 33; narratives 153–4 
 four planar social being * 
 fraud: ﬁ nancial 31, 63, 66, 75–6, 81, 87, 89, 
103, 116–17; scientiﬁ c 26, 67 
 freedom 7, 10, 11, 42, 46, 47, 49, 57, 67, 
78, 83, 101, 104, 116, 117, 136, 146–7, 
150, 155, 157–8, 161–3, 171, 174, 175; 
of association and assembly 33, 108, 136, 
163; of choice 59, 155; of markets 93–6, 
106;  see also  price 
 French city suburbs 99, 123 
 French West Indies 35 
 future: of children 7, 8, 13, 18, 20, 35, 
43, 48, 49, 54, 56, 58, 60, 63, 91, 101, 
102, 104, 108, 113, 119, 120, 123, 125, 
136–47; and dialectic 9, 22, 23, 113–14, 
157, 172, 174; of ecology 22, 24, 30–1, 
35–6, 39–40, 136–47; of societies 13, 61, 
69, 74, 78, 104, 108, 112, 114–17, 126, 
136–47, 153, 155, 158, 170 
 gangs 10, 98, 136 
 Gaza 123 
 gender 91, 172 
 general practitioners GPs/family doctors 
63–4, 67, 69, 71, 77 
 generations 19, 111, 144, 155, 164, 170; 
future 18, 35, 38, 44, 53–89, 116, 
120, 146, 150, 160; inter-generational 
relations 7, 20, 43, 53–89, 98, 100, 112, 
114, 118, 124, 154, 162, 164; older 18, 
31, 112, 124, 136, 138; younger/youngest 
7–8, 13, 18, 19, 31, 40, 43, 48, 53–89, 97, 
111, 117, 118, 123, 136, 138, 139;  see also 
 equity;  justice 
 generative mechanisms  see  cause 
 genes/genetics 8, 38–40, 44, 92, 151, 173; 
disorders 55–6; modiﬁ cation (GM) 38–9, 
51; selﬁ sh 95 
 ghetto 99, 123 
 gift 38, 88, 142, 154, 159; gift economy 136, 
147–53; gift relationship 75–6 
 glaciers 21, 24, 27 
 GlaxoSmithKline 82 
 global: childhoods 11; contexts 11, 42; 
economics/ﬁ nance/trade 12, 22, 32, 34, 
39, 40, 65, 74, 82, 99, 100, 106, 112–18, 
124, 150, 155; healthcare 54, 55, 82, 83, 
160; policies 19–22, 31, 58, 80, 94, 120, 
123, 138, 140, 142–6, 163–4 
 globalisation 82, 106 
 global warming 12, 18–22, 24, 28, 39, 44–5, 
47–8, 126–7, 137–8, 141–4 
 good life 136 
 goods: children as 19, 43, 54; in common 
42, 73, 150, 158; consumer 49, 50, 97, 99, 
106, 142, 147, 159–60; positional 147–8 
 goodwill 8, 149, 150, 152 
 government 6, 20, 30–1, 33, 44, 48, 49, 55, 
59, 61, 76, 80–3, 95–6, 98, 99, 110, 
117–21, 123, 140–1, 146, 163, 172; 
English or UK 8, 18, 40, 57, 62–77, 79, 
102, 104, 106, 108, 11, 113, 116, 156, 161 
 Greater London Assembly 161 
 green: energy 32; greenwash 33; industries 
32; policies 31–3, 39, 127, 140–6, 160; 
science and technology 
 greenhouse gas emissions 20–5, 30;  see 
 carbon; methane 
 Greenpeace 33 
 ground state 154, 157, 170 
 Guatemala 10 
 Haiti 81 
 happiness 37, 57, 60, 78, 91, 97, 138, 158 

Subject Index 197
 healthcare 5, 43–4, 48, 53–90; policies 
53–90 
 structures 90–135 
 hegemony 40, 93, 170 
 hermeneutic 4, 26, 92, 170, 171 
 HIV 61, 64, 76 
 Holocaust 149, 160, 163 
 holy/unholy trinity 29, 170, 175 
 homeless 36, 51, 64, 103, 104, 105, 112 
 Honduras 10 
 hospices 79 
 hospitals 54–6, 64, 67–75, 79, 80, 82, 83, 87, 
102, 108, 109, 132, 140, 172; mental 7, 
56, 104 
 housing 3, 33, 62, 78, 97, 101, 103, 105–10, 
112, 114–15, 119, 128, 130, 140–1, 159, 
172 
 human being 5, 6, 27, 31, 42, 46, 48, 112, 
121, 136, 139, 145, 148, 157, 168, 170, 
173, 175 
 humanity 6, 18, 19, 41, 43, 115, 142, 143–4, 
146, 149, 155, 158, 175 
 human nature 18, 27, 28, 41, 43, 48, 52, 57, 
94–5, 121, 122, 135, 147, 149, 160, 163 
 hunger 32, 34, 43, 111, 139, 160 
 hyperactivity  see  ADHD 
 identity 19, 25, 27, 46, 59, 104, 113, 115, 
119, 122, 145; non-identity 10, 19, 22, 
25, 27, 42, 59, 60, 61, 96, 114, 145, 149, 
168, 169, 11, 172 
 ideology 83, 92, 94, 116 
 idols 47, 102 
 illness 5, 53, 55, 58, 61, 65, 71, 76, 78–9, 83, 
92, 117, 152, 160; mental illness 27, 57, 
104, 111, 163 
 imagination 9, 91, 138, 154, 157, 172;  see 
also  sociological imagination 
 immanent 47, 171 
 India 34, 38–9, 41–2, 44, 50, 51, 52, 55, 91, 
117, 152 
 indigenous people 32, 38, 40, 42, 44, 142, 
149 
 individualism 94, 137, 163, 168; individual-
centred 57, 58, 92, 94–6, 106, 111, 
122–4, 140, 154, 156, 157, 160, 167, 
168, 173, 175; individuality 46, 49, 
156 
 Indonesia 35 
 inequality 27, 32, 36, 40, 56, 60–1, 74, 77, 
78, 80, 83, 97, 98, 103, 111, 115, 119, 
121, 122, 124, 125, 138, 139, 141, 151, 
159, 170, 172 
 infection 20, 38, 39, 55, 64, 76, 78, 99 
 inner being 5, 171 
 interdependence 8, 25, 35, 40, 41, 43, 45, 
48, 49, 57, 69, 76, 114, 148, 152, 155, 
158, 164 
 interdisciplinary research 4, 12, 13, 19, 21, 
23, 35, 36, 41, 45 
 intergenerational  see  generation 
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change IPPC 20, 21, 30 
 International Monetary Fund IMF 106, 
125 
 interpretivism 4, 26, 145, 171 
 intransitive 9, 26, 29, 93, 94, 136, 145, 151, 
170, 171, 172, 175 
 inverse healthcare law 66 
 Iraq 120 
 irrealism 46, 171 
 Istanbul 33 
 IVF 66, 107 
 journalism 12, 104 
 journalists 3, 23, 77, 96, 140 
 Jubliee 150 
 judgmental rationalism 145 
 justice 3, 5, 6, 11, 23, 49, 54, 58, 60–5, 
66, 68, 71–5, 77–80, 84, 124, 128, 145; 
commercial 58, 61–5, 73–5, 78–84, 95, 
96, 105, 109, 126, 128, 135, 136, 146, 
147, 150–4, 156, 157, 159, 161, 163, 175; 
criminal 92, 140; injustice 11, 20, 45, 92, 
103, 124, 135, 140, 142, 156, 163–4 
 kidnap 98, 99 
 knowledge 11, 20, 22, 25, 26, 29, 38, 40–2, 
44, 54, 55, 94, 95, 115, 119, 127, 139, 
148, 149, 150, 151, 157, 160–1, 167, 170, 
171; valid 4, 23 
 labour 18, 27, 99, 106, 117, 124, 141, 148, 
151; child 58, 61, 99, 117, 118, 140, 168 
 landgrabs 44, 99, 141 
 landlords 98, 100, 106, 107, 108, 112 
 law 6, 9, 10, 31, 105, 116, 121, 123, 128, 
135, 137, 148, 151, 163; criminal 7, 33, 
93, 102, 117, 121, 163; healthcare 62, 66, 
70, 75, 77, 79 
 legal: aid 51, 105, 109; contracts 74 
 Lesotho 74 
 Lewisham 68–73 
 libertarians 140 
 libraries 43, 62 
 life-long effects 20, 65 
 LifeWorld 125 
 lobbying 23, 32, 59, 61, 77, 81, 119 
 local authorities 63, 70, 101, 104, 129, 131 

198 Subject Index
 London 37, 56, 68–9, 71, 100, 106–7, 109, 
112, 114–15, 153, 161 
 looked-after children, in care 56, 69, 101, 
104, 111 
 Luxembourg 116 
 Maasai 42 
 Magna Carta 109, 163 
 majority world 27, 31, 37, 47, 55, 76, 82, 91, 
97, 98, 101, 139, 171 
 malaria 81 
 Malawi 76 
 malls 33, 82, 114 
 Malthusian 43, 94 
 markets 32, 37, 53–5, 61; free 58–9, 75, 78, 
82–4, 90, 92, 94, 100, 104, 106–28, 139, 
140, 143, 148, 156; stock 31 
 Martinique 35 
 master-slave relations 8, 171;  see also  slavery 
 materialism 9, 169, 171, 173 
 Mbuti pygmies 42 
 Médecins Sans Frontières 80 
 media: mass 3, 12, 23, 59, 75, 77, 82, 93, 
119, 121, 126, 140, 159; social 3, 119, 
126, 136, 164 
 Medicare 76 
 Mediterranean 21 
 MELD 1M ﬁ rst moment, 2E second edge, 
3L third level, 4D fourth dimension* 
 mental health and illness  see illness 
 metaReality 165n18, 171 
 methane 21, 47, 142 
 Mexico 10 
 Miami 33 
 microcredit 141 
 Middle East 34, 45 
 migrants 36, 45, 51, 64, 78, 100, 105, 106, 117 
 military 80, 110, 120, 137, 159 
 millennium development goals MDGs 80 
 millionaires 74, 114; billionaires 13, 112 
 mind 9, 26, 78, 168, 170 
 mindfulness 60, 85 
 minority world 42, 44, 54, 82, 100, 171 
 Monaco 107 
 money 56, 58, 60, 73, 74, 90, 91, 106, 111, 
115, 116, 117, 119 
 monoculture 38, 39, 44, 48, 158 
 monopolies 59, 65, 67, 96, 116 
 monovalance (ontological) 9, 23, 29, 46, 
159, 167, 170, 171 
 Monsanto 39 
 morality 12, 22, 26, 28–9, 32, 41, 42, 45, 47, 
59, 66, 104, 113, 116, 133, 136, 145, 148, 
150, 160, 170, 171, 173 
 moral status of child 28, 29, 48, 50, 52, 135 
 morphogenesis 45, 93, 171, 174 
 mortality 71; child 80, 154; infant 55; 
perinatal 55 
 murketing 126 
 museums 43, 78, 162 
 national health service NHS 53–89, 96, 116 
 naturalism 28, 170, 171 
 natural necessity 12, 23, 29, 94, 167, 170, 
171, 175 
 natural science 4, 12, 24, 41, 45, 137, 173 
 natural world  see nature 
 nature 5, 17–52, 104, 122, 124, 126, 141–3, 
146, 150, 151, 154, 155, 159, 164, 170; of 
childhood 5;  see also  human nature 
 Nazi 62, 95 
 needs 17, 34, 40, 41, 42, 47–9, 51, 55, 56, 
64, 66, 69, 71, 74, 78, 79, 96, 97, 98, 100, 
105, 109, 114, 122, 137, 138, 143, 149, 
155, 158, 159, 168 
 negation 8, 9, 10, 42, 61, 83, 128, 171 
 neoliberalism 12, 82, 92, 94, 95, 96, 103, 
104, 106, 108, 110, 112, 119, 121, 125, 
126, 127, 143 
 Nepal 160 
 Nestlé 37 
 neurone theories 54, 173 
 newborns/ neonates  see  babies 
 New Guinea 42 
 New Orleans 35–6 
 NGOs 32, 33, 37, 79–82, 140 
 Nigeria 55, 56 
 non-identity  see  identity 
 normative 12, 28, 36, 37, 38, 137, 138, 146 
 norms 57, 123, 160, 173 
 Norway 162 
 nurses 56, 64, 66, 69, 71–3, 111; nursing 54, 
71–3, 80, 111 
 Obamacare 75 
 obesity 27, 37, 65, 71 
 Occupy 33, 140 
 oceans 20–5, 35, 37, 42, 46 
 OFSTED 110, 155 
 Olympics 99, 101, 109 
 one and the other, one and the many 157, 
172 
 ontology 5, 9, 22, 23, 26, 29, 45, 126, 136, 
138, 144–6, 161, 169, 170, 171, 172, 175 
 open door, revolving door 77 
 oppression 11, 118, 139, 146 
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development OECD 118, 125, 156 
 orphans 52, 55, 61, 79 
 Oxfam 32, 36 

Subject Index 199
 Pakistan 34, 36 
 parents 1, 6, 18, 36–7, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55–6, 
58, 61, 62, 63, 68, 69, 79, 81–2, 91, 97, 
98, 101, 105, 107, 109, 110, 111, 113, 
119, 135, 153, 156, 160, 191 
 parks 28, 33, 62, 98, 99, 108, 155, 162, 163; 
trailer parks 36, 101 
 Parliament 63: House of Commons 42; 
House of Lords 63, 86, 87, 120, 133 
 participation 119, 146 
 peace 8, 33, 41, 49, 108, 121, 124, 136, 139, 
143, 146, 154, 160, 163 
 Peckham Health Centre 152–3 
 penal state 103;  see also  prisonfare 
 pensions 43, 113, 131, 143 
 pesticides 35, 39, 52 
 pharmaceutical companies 54, 65, 66, 67, 
81;  see also drugs 
 Philadelphia 102, 123 
 philanthropy 33, 59, 61, 79–82; venture 82, 
140, 152, 159;  see also  aid 
 Philippines 118 
 philosophy 4, 5, 6, 8, 13, 46, 96, 110, 122, 
144, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173 
 philosophy, politics and economics PPE 96 
 play 43, 91, 99, 100, 101, 108, 154, 155, 
160–4, 172 
 playing ﬁ elds 62, 28, 119 
 pneumonia 81 
 police 3, 33, 34, 56, 59, 64, 93, 97, 101–4, 
108, 120 
 politics* 
 pollution 10, 21, 22, 32, 33, 35–8, 42, 49, 
96, 99, 142, 148 
 polyvalence 9, 172 
 population 68, 69; control 43; growth 34, 
44; older 49, 62, 71; statistics 7, 13, 51; 
younger 47, 49, 54, 55, 68, 74, 123 
 pornography 117, 132 
 positional goods 78, 145–8, 152 
 positivism 4, 12, 26–7, 92, 137, 171, 172 
 postmodern 4, 126, 140 
 potlatch 149 
 poverty 10, 22, 27, 28, 34, 36, 51, 55–8, 69, 
78, 81, 82, 92, 97, 98, 102, 107, 111–13, 
114, 121, 123, 125, 141, 160, 163 
 power*; power 1 46, 47, 73, 82, 151, 154, 
156, 171, 172, 175;   power 2  46, 47, 73, 82, 
96, 146, 152, 154, 156, 157, 167, 172, 175 
 practitioners 54, 69, 78, 103 
 praxis 46, 82, 146, 172 
 predictions 20, 21, 23, 31, 41, 45, 126, 
137–8, 141, 143, 168, 172, 173 
 preschool 5, 101, 140, 156, 162 
 Preschool Playgroups Association 156 
 price: and alienation 121–3; economy/
ethic 92–128; and child poverty 111–13; 
‘free and fair’ 105–6, 115–16; of land 
34; negate constraints on 116–17; 
omniscient 94; ‘price everything’ 108–11, 
119–21; of property 34, 74; as a religion 
94–5; ‘respect at all costs’ 106–8, 117–19; 
science of 94; wisdom of 94;  see also 
 carbon; healthcare 
 PriceWaterhouseCooper 20 
 prisoners 6–8, 88, 102, 104, 123; children 
of 104 
 prisonfare state 103, 115, 138 
 prisons 6–8, 93, 102, 115, 117; juvenile jail 
104–5, 163 
 privacy 58, 81 
 private ﬁ nance initiatives PFIs, public 
private Initiatives PPPs 64, 66, 70, 71, 
73–5, 82, 106, 115, 172 
 private life 58, 115, 124 
 private services 62, 64–7, 77, 83 
 private troubles 60, 84 
 privatise services 37, 43, 44, 63, 71, 75, 77, 
79, 81–2, 101, 106, 108, 115, 116, 121, 
127 
 property 58; children as 43, 48; held in 
common/public 60, 151, 158, 159; 
prices/values of 34, 36, 74, 98, 100, 104, 
106, 108, 115; private 58, 95–6, 159 
 prosperity 10, 37, 41, 58, 60, 74, 98, 115, 
116, 124, 126, 142, 148, 155, 159 
 protest 3, 13, 32–3, 51, 64, 65, 66, 68, 72–3, 
77, 79, 81, 93, 96, 103, 105, 108, 112, 
121, 126, 128, 136, 139, 140, 142, 151, 
159, 161, 162 
 psychology 4, 36, 57, 60, 64, 110–11, 122, 
137, 159, 173 
 public debate 11, 12, 13, 23, 29, 54, 59, 78, 
79, 81, 97, 108, 113, 119, 126, 127, 137, 
144, 155, 160 
 punishment 31, 37, 58, 59, 101, 103, 104–5, 
110, 112, 121, 126, 161 
 quangos 64, 77, 108 
 race 120, 172 
 racism 102, 121 
 Rajasthan 162 
 ready-to-hand 48 
 realism 4, 9, 26, 28–9, 46, 145–6, 168, 169, 
170, 171, 172, 174 
 reform 7–8, 13, 62, 67, 71, 77, 80, 81, 83, 
103, 117, 125, 127, 139, 140, 141; of 
young people 105;  see also  transform 
 refugees 10, 34, 95, 101, 123 

200 Subject Index
 reify 28, 47, 124, 145, 153, 169, 170, 172 
 relativism 6, 29, 145, 170, 172, 173 
 religion 93–6, 148, 149, 160 
 remedies 61, 65, 77, 81, 82, 92, 96–7, 101, 
127, 136, 142, 144 
 research* 
 respect 7, 11, 39, 40, 41, 58, 60, 67, 69, 72, 
73, 83, 97, 106, 108, 117–19, 120, 145, 
149, 150, 152, 154, 158, 159, 161, 163, 
168, 173 
 responsibility 5, 7, 18, 22, 32, 37, 45, 58, 
60, 63, 64, 80, 84, 96, 106, 153, 154, 
160, 162 
 restructuring 106 
 retroduction 154, 172, 173 
 revolution 9, 20, 32, 39, 40, 95, 157, 161 
 rhythmic 30, 39, 114, 168, 173 
 rice 38–9, 51 
 rights 3, 6, 11, 79, 113, 122, 140, 161; 
children’s 18, 20, 33, 58, 60, 62, 69, 104, 
108, 109, 122, 135, 136, 140, 146, 149, 
159, 161, 163, 165, 168, 171 
 Rio de Janeiro 3 
 riots 55 
 risk 48, 53, 100, 105, 115, 116, 121, 139, 
151, 152, 154, 164; of change 122, 137, 
139; to health 55, 64–71, 76, 79, 81; 
housing 105, 107, 127; of kidnap 98–9 
 rivers 21, 25, 28, 35, 42, 46, 142 
 Rwanda 80–1 
 sacred 41, 149, 150, 157 
 sanitation 36, 55, 80, 82 
 Save the Children 80, 82 
 scarcity 32, 34, 99, 106, 142, 152 
 schooling, schools 6, 32, 41–2, 43, 44, 48, 
52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 62, 70, 73, 74, 76, 
82, 92, 95, 96, 97–8, 100–5, 108–11, 
114–17, 120, 122–3, 135, 139–40, 
147, 150, 152, 155–8, 160–4;  see also 
education 
 secured by design 107–8 
 seeds 38–40, 44, 142, 151, 158; of 
destruction 49 
 segregation 8, 109 
 self 27, 28, 32, 46, 57, 83, 110, 115, 122, 
145, 149, 151, 154, 159, 171; -aware 84, 
125, 173; -conscious 47; -critical 
157; -defence 155; -destruction 124, 
138; -determination 47; -education 
156; -emancipation 10, 157; -fulﬁ lled 
43, 155; -government 163; -harm 52, 56, 
104; -help 95; -interest 42, 46, 58, 59, 83, 
94, 150, 155; selﬁ sh 43, 57, 95, 160, 
163; -obsessed 171; -realisation 
124; -reliance 91; -subsistent 45; 
transformation 82 
 semiotic triangle 27, 173, 175 
 Serco 75, 87 
 services commercial or public 3, 34, 36, 37, 
43, 53–89, 98, 99, 101, 103, 106, 115–21, 
125, 127, 129, 140, 147, 155, 159–60, 
164 
 seven: generations to come 146; levels of 
freedom 157; orders of scale 35–8 
 sewage 33, 34, 36, 99, 113, 123 
 shareholders 32, 59, 67, 73, 75, 76, 118 
 sickle cell 55, 68, 69, 71, 80 
 slavery 8, 18, 45, 82, 99, 117, 139, 151 
 slums 3, 22, 27, 44, 55, 99, 123, 152 
 social capital 110–11 
 socialists 140, 141;  see also  green 
 social media  see  media 
 social science 4, 11, 12, 19, 25, 29, 35, 41, 
45, 60, 92, 137, 170, 171, 173, 174, 175 
 social status of childhood 5 
 social workers 69 
 socio-ecology 19, 36 
 sociological imagination 60, 83 
 sociology 12, 13, 41, 48, 136, 137–8, 160, 
175; ‘thin’ 144 
 Socratic 8 
 soldiers 54, 80, 84, 117, 139, 150, 151 
 solidarity 83, 95, 115, 122, 146, 147, 157, 164 
 South Africa 74, 76, 135 
 space* 
 species 19, 21, 22, 25, 29, 35–6, 38, 39, 44, 
121, 146, 148, 170, 172 
 speculation 6, 138; ﬁ nancial 106, 115, 172 
 sports 28, 43, 62, 99, 101, 153, 155, 162 
 Starbucks 116 
 state, states 11, 33, 43, 52–134, 138, 143, 
145, 158, 159, 163 
 stop and search 33, 102 
 street children 5, 90–1, 106, 152; children 
and streets 97, 101, 102, 107, 112, 162 
 structure* 
 students 18, 33, 48, 67, 77, 78, 96, 98, 
109–10, 111, 122, 136, 140, 150, 151, 
156, 157, 161–2 
 Sudan 11, 42 
 suffering 27–9, 45, 61, 76, 78, 80, 81, 83, 88, 
104, 117, 124, 145, 146, 150, 153, 159, 
160 
 suicide 39, 56, 104, 105, 111, 131 
 Supreme Court: UK 113; USA 7–8 
 Surrey 75 
 sympathy 58, 59;  see also interdependence 

Subject Index 201
 Syria 123 
 systems 7, 8, 29, 37, 42, 45, 54, 93, 97, 103, 
105; closed or open 24–5, 45, 93, 109, 
112, 115, 121, 123, 124, 137, 143, 154, 
156, 159, 163, 168, 169, 172, 173, 174; of 
commerce or social justice 53–89 
 take-overs 68, 116 
 Tanzania 152 
 tax 31, 34, 37, 53, 58–9, 61, 63, 64, 65, 74, 
78, 83, 96, 98, 105–7, 111, 112, 118, 119, 
129, 143, 152; avoidance 59, 61, 67, 75, 
112, 116, 131; evasion 76, 103, 117, 123, 
131, 133, 135; havens 67, 74, 114–16, 
140; payers 7, 37, 73, 75, 77, 78, 83, 103, 
115, 152 
 tendencies 24, 25, 31, 92, 169, 172, 173, 
174 
 tensed 30, 39, 93–114, 168, 173 
 terror 34, 120 
 Texas 102 
 Thalassaemia 56, 75 
 theory-practice: consistency 10, 46; 
inconsistency 28, 83, 173; synthesis 8, 
113, 146, 174 
 there is no alternative TINA 28, 47, 94, 125, 
153, 174 
 thesis/antithesis 8, 174 
 third world  see majority world 
 thrownness 174 
 tipping points 21, 32 
 totality 23, 40–2, 45, 78, 113, 114, 116, 144, 
146, 168, 169, 171, 174 
 tourism 34, 78, 99, 100, 117, 155, 169, 171, 
174 
 trade 10, 22, 47, 53, 88, 97, 106, 116–19, 
124, 127, 141, 155, 159, 161 
 trafﬁ cking 88, 98–9, 117 
 Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership TTIP 116, 128, 130, 132 
 transcendental idealism 26, 174; realism, 26, 
28, 29, 145, 174 
 trafﬁ c 25, 97, 102, 129, 155 
 trans-factual 24–5; 169 
 transform 9, 11, 31, 39–40, 45, 46, 60, 63, 
82, 83, 84, 93, 115, 123, 137–8, 141, 154, 
157, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174 
 transformational model of social activity 
TMSA 30, 45, 47, 93, 114, 174 
 transitive 9, 26, 29, 93, 94, 136, 145, 151, 
170, 172, 175 
 transport 36, 73, 75, 98, 141, 142; public 31, 
33, 36, 43, 44, 62, 69, 115 
 troubled families 103 
 trust 13, 42, 43, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72–3, 76, 
101, 103, 122, 124, 125, 146–8, 150, 167, 
175 
 truth 8, 18, 22–3, 26, 27, 29, 96, 113, 125, 
146, 168, 172, 174, 175: alethic 26, 145; 
post truth 113; and reconciliation 8; 
untruth 30 
 tuberculosis TB 39, 53, 61, 64, 81 
 Tyndale Centre 21 
 UK 40, 56, 65, 66, 79, 82, 104, 105, 107, 
111, 112, 114, 115, 118, 121, 122, 140, 
142 
 underclass  see  class 
 UNICEF 18, 82 
 United Nations UN 6, 34, 91, 123, 163; 
Convention on the Rights of the Child 
UNCRC 79, 113, 163 
 unity-in-diversity 40, 169, 175 
 universal 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 41, 42, 63–4, 78, 
136, 141, 145, 146, 149, 152, 157, 158, 
163, 167, 168, 169, 171; credit 103, 129, 
133;  see concrete↔universal 
 universities 32, 33, 77, 78, 96, 98, 120, 135, 
136, 140, 150 
 USA 6, 7–8, 10, 20, 33, 35, 38, 50, 51, 55, 
59, 65, 67, 75, 76, 77, 82, 93, 95, 101, 
102, 104, 105, 108, 117, 120–1, 123, 129, 
130, 131, 133, 142 
 use value  see  values 
 usury 150 
 usufruct 142 
 utopias 13, 136–66 
 vaccines 82, 152 
 values 9, 11, 25, 28, 29, 32, 38, 41, 43, 45, 
46, 48, 53, 54, 57, 58, 60, 61, 72, 78, 80, 
84, 94, 95, 125, 137, 142–6, 148, 150–2, 
154–5, 161, 170; commercial 58, 59, 
61, 62, 92, 94, 100, 108, 110, 121, 122, 
124; exchange value 92, 108, 119, 124, 
143; market value 37; property value 36, 
107; value-free 175; value-laden 11, 60; 
surplus value 92, 159; use value 92, 110, 
115, 142 
 villages 17, 38, 41–2, 44, 81, 109, 121 
 violence 10, 11, 48, 51, 52, 64, 93, 105, 117, 
120, 135, 139, 141, 160 
 Virgin 67, 75, 86, 87 
 voluntariness 92, 93, 125, 148, 149, 162 
 wages 62, 65, 67, 94, 100, 106, 111, 115, 
117–18, 135, 138 
 Wales 76, 102, 104, 129, 161 

202 Subject Index
 war 10–11, 22, 23, 41, 42, 62, 80, 82, 84, 
115, 120, 123, 135, 139, 142, 144, 146, 
152, 160; on drugs 10 
 waste 10, 22, 37, 43, 48, 52, 58, 65, 83, 97, 
103, 105, 107, 124, 125, 141, 150, 156, 
162 
 water 20–2, 28, 31, 33–9, 43–4, 50, 55, 
59, 78, 82, 99, 115, 118, 119, 121, 123, 
137, 142, 143, 148, 155; bottled 37–8; 
footprint 34, 50 
 wealth/wealthy 28, 33, 36, 37, 43, 44, 
58–61, 64, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82–3, 88, 
92, 95, 97, 98, 100, 106, 108, 111–12, 
114–16, 118–19, 125–6, 141, 149, 151, 
152; gush up 112, 116; trickle down 83, 
111, 126; wealthier countries 27, 49, 116, 
144, 152 
 weapons 117, 120;  see also  arms 
 welfare policies 53, 113, 118, 134; services 
59, 76, 160; state 43, 53, 103; 112–13, 
121, 143, 159 
 wellbeing 7, 44, 56–61, 64, 78, 83–4, 97–8, 
101, 106, 122, 124, 128, 136–8, 146, 149, 
152–3, 156, 159, 167 
 West Africa 52, 55, 80, 99 
 West Bengal 38 
 Wikipedia 150 
 wisdom 41, 115; of price 94, 106, 
121 
 women’s: prisons 104; refuges 105, 
160 
 work of children and young people 35, 43, 
44, 58, 61, 62, 90, 91, 96, 108, 111, 115, 
118, 122, 135–6, 139, 148, 156, 157, 158, 
160–4 
 workfare 103, 115, 125, 138 
 world wide web 150 
 World Bank 22, 106, 118, 125, 141 
 World Health Organisation 80 
 World War I and II 160 
 World Wildlife Fund 44 
 Yorkshire 53 
 youth*, young people*; services for young 
people 56–7, 79, 84, 101, 102, 107, 112, 
115, 150 
 zero: carbon 31, 43; contract hours 101, 
118; growth 39, 141, 160; tolerance 102, 
110 

