
Praise for The Art of
Work
“The Art of Work will make you think differently about what
you do and how you do it. Jeff Goins is a fresh young voice
in a field full of copycats. He challenges us to approach our
work the way we would a canvas—both delicately and with
furious discipline. People will be reading this book, and
profiting from it, for a long time.”
—STEVEN PRESSFIELD,
BEST-SELLING AUTHOR OF
THE WAR OF ART
“This is one of the most honest, direct, and generous books
about you and your life that you will read this year. It took
guts to write and it will take guts to read. Leap.”
—SETH GODIN,
BEST-SELLING AUTHOR OF
WHAT TO DO WHEN IT’S YOUR
TURN
“Today, unlike any previous time in history, we have
options about the work we do and the role it plays in our
lives. But it is precisely here that so many of us get stuck.

With so many choices, we struggle to figure out what we
really want or where to start once we do. In The Art of Work ,
Jeff Goins provides a clear framework for discerning our
calling, developing our mastery, and maximizing our
impact. This is the plan we’ve been waiting for—from a
guide we can trust.”
—MICHAEL HYATT, NEW
YORK TIMES BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR AND FORMER CEO
OF THOMAS NELSON
PUBLISHERS
“This is the real stuff. The Art of Work  is a powerful dive
into what matters, how to connect with that inside yourself,
and then how to bring it out into the world in a useful way.
This book will push some buttons you want pushed, and
from there, it will guide you toward a new level. Dig in.”
—CHRIS BROGAN, NEW YORK
TIMES BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR OF THE FREAKS
SHALL INHERIT THE EARTH
“ ‘Every story of success is, in fact, a story of community.’
Lines like that and the powerful truth behind them are why
I’m such a big fan of the books Jeff Goins writes. At times,
The Art of Work  felt like I was reading my diary. Jeff has
such a knack for clearly articulating the thoughts we’ve all
quietly wondered!”

—JON ACUFF, NEW YORK
TIMES BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR OF DO OVER AND
START
“How would it feel to go to work each day because you
wanted to—not because you had to? In The Art of Work, Jeff
Goins shows you how. This is a real-life treasure map that
can lead you to the life you were meant to live.”
—CHRIS GUILLEBEAU, NEW
YORK TIMES BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR OF THE HAPPINESS
OF PURSUIT AND THE $100
STARTUP
“I used to think hating your job was just a normal part of
every adult’s life—that is until I discovered I could build a
job I actually loved. Thank goodness for Jeff and thank
goodness for this book. Here’s to not waiting one more day
to find, build, and engage in work you love!”
—ALLISON VESTERFELT,
AUTHOR OF PACKING LIGHT
AND FOUNDER OF
YOURWRITINGVOICE.COM
“If there were just one chapter I could recommend to my
colleagues and clients from this book, it would be ‘The
Portfolio Life.’ Just this! I won’t spoil it, but I will say it

gave me a permission to be and embrace what I suspected
about myself (and apologized for) for my entire life! I’m
living a portfolio life, and you can’t make me go back to
conventional wisdom. Thanks, Jeff—this book is a must-
read for the creative spirit, the restless soul, and the lifelong
learner anxious to make things happen!”
—CARRIE WILKERSON,
AUTHOR OF THE BAREFOOT
EXECUTIVE,
CARRIEWILKERSON.COM
“Jeff Goins takes away the mystery of discovering and
mastering your true calling, all with a healthy slice of reality
thrown in. Thoroughly life inspiring.”
—CHRIS DUCKER, AUTHOR
OF VIRTUAL FREEDOM
“Our hearts crave connection to a meaningful calling. The
Art of Work shares the process for hearing that calling and
then doing the work that feels like ‘slipping into an old pair
of shoes.’ A must-read for anyone wanting to live a life that
matters—fully alive.”
—DAN MILLER, NEW YORK
TIMES BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR OF 48 DAYS TO THE
WORK YOU LOVE
“The Art of Work  accomplishes the next to impossible,

providing clear, relevant, useful guidance on finding your
calling while being enormously enjoyable to read. It is
required reading for anyone who is asking, ‘What should I
do with my life?’ ”
—PAMELA SLIM, AUTHOR OF
BODY OF WORK
“The Art of Work  is encouraging, uplifting, and meaningful.
I cannot recommend it enough. It may be one of the best
books on finding your purpose in life I’ve ever read. If
you’ve ever wondered what your life should be about, this
is a book you should pick up and read today.”
—JOSHUA BECKER, WALL
STREET JOURNAL
BEST-SELLING AUTHOR OF
SIMPLIFY
“No more excuses! The Art of Work  illuminates the path for
anyone who wants to embrace their calling and build a body
of work they can be proud of.”
—TODD HENRY, AUTHOR OF
DIE EMPTY

Reader Reviews
“The Art of Work  is a practical, yet inspiring prescription for
how to identify and nurture your true passions in life,
allowing you to turn a calling into your own beautiful
contribution to the world. It’s full of stories of regular
people who have come alive by following their vocations
and overcoming the greatest obstacle: fear. Jeff’s writing has
forever changed my outlook on chasing my dreams.”
—JENNIFER
“I have some simple criteria for enjoying and defining a
book as good: I don’t want it to end. I could and will re-read
the book. It touches my heart, and I know it will touch the
hearts of others. The Art of Work met all those criteria.”
—BRYAN
“If you’re feeling stuck in life, read this book. In it, Jeff
gently prods you to rethink the idea of a ‘calling’ while
encouraging you to recognize that you already have one.
Then he gives you practical steps to start identifying what
that calling is, which might just help to unstick you.”
—BRANDI
“The Art of Work  is chock full of inspiration that will
motivate you to live your best life. Jeff’s encouragement to

‘just take the next step’ is a roadmap that will have you
going from overwhelmed to accomplished. Looking to live
life on your terms? Permission granted!”
—KIMI



© 2015 by Jeff Goins
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, scanning, or other—except for brief
quotations in critical reviews or articles, without the prior written permission of
the publisher.
Published in Nashville, Tennessee, by Nelson Books, an imprint of Thomas
Nelson. Nelson Books and Thomas Nelson are registered trademarks of
HarperCollins Christian Publishing, Inc.
Published in association with The Youth Cartel, 8511 Victory Road, La Mesa,
California 91942.
Interior designed by Mallory Perkins.
Thomas Nelson, Inc., titles may be purchased in bulk for educational, business,
fund-raising, or sales promotional use. For information, please e-mail
SpecialMarkets@ThomasNelson.com.
Unless otherwise noted, Scripture quotations are taken from THE NEW KING
JAMES VERSION. © 1982 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Used by permission. All
rights reserved.
ISBN 978-0-7180-2208-2 (eBook)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Goins, Jeff.
The art of work : a proven path to discovering what you were meant to do /
Jeff Goins.
pages cm
ISBN 978-0-7180-2207-5 (paperback)
1. Vocation. 2. Vocational guidance. 3. Self-realization. I. Goins, Jeff. II. Title.
BL629.G65 2015

331.702--dc23
2014023732
15 16 17 18 19 RRD 6 5 4 3 2 1

For my siblings: Nikki, Marissa,
and Patrick.
May you make your mark on the
world.

Contents
Author’s Note
Introduction:
The Cancer That Couldn’t Stop a Triathlete
PART ONE: Preparation
1. Listening to Your Life:
The Call to Something Old, Not New
2. Accidental Apprenticeships:
The Teacher Appears When the Student Least Expects
3. Painful Practice:
When Trying Isn’t Good Enough

PART TWO: Action
4. Building Bridges:
The Leap That Wasn’t a Leap
5. Pivot Points:
Why Failure Is Your Friend
6. The Portfolio Life:
A New Kind of Mastery
PART THREE: Completion
7. Your Magnum Opus:
What Legacy Looks Like
Conclusion:
The Work Is Never Done
Acknowledgments

Appendix:
Your First Steps Down the Path
Notes
About the Author

Author’s Note
What’s happened to you is rare,” my friend Mark said to
me just before I made one of the most important decisions
of my life—the decision to quit my job and become a full-
time writer. My last day at work also happened to be my
thirtieth birthday, which made it a milestone in many
respects. The truth, though, is the day itself was less
significant than the process it took to get there.
When asked how I got to this point, I struggle to give an
intelligent answer. The experience of finding your calling
can be both mysterious and practical. It takes effort but also
seems to happen to you at times. What I’ve come to
understand is that finding your purpose is more of a path
than a plan: it involves twists and turns that you never
expected. Ultimately these surprises lead you to your
destiny. And once you arrive at what you thought was the
destination, you realize it’s only another leg in the journey.
This book is a description of that path, as well as the
steps it takes to navigate it.
Everyone, it seems, is searching for a purpose, for
something to satisfy their deepest desires. I believe that
“something” is a calling. What is a calling? You will hear

me use the word interchangeably with the terms vocation
and life’s work , but quite simply, it is the reason you were
born.
When I began working on this project, I thought I knew
what the process of pursuing a dream looked like, but what I
found surprised me. Discovering your calling, it turns out,
isn’t quite so simple. The journey looks different for each
person, but there are common themes that consistently
emerge. If we look at those themes, we can identify a
pattern that will help us understand our own vocations a
little better.
What if what happened to me wasn’t so rare? What if
everyone has a calling? That was the question that sent me
on my journey. The people whose stories appear in this
book, many of whom I personally interviewed, are not
extraordinary, in the sense that you’ve heard their stories
before. They are not typical case studies for success, and
that was intentional. In these seemingly ordinary accounts, I
think we understand our own stories, which often feel far
too ordinary for our liking, a little better. Some readers
might be disappointed with the subjectivity of such a book.
But this is the way we live our lives—not as research
projects and book reports—but as anecdotes and emotions.
And in each experience, we find certain truths we might
otherwise miss. My hope is these stories connect with you in
ways that plain facts cannot, and in reading them, you too
are changed.
The Art of Work was not the book I intended to write but

ended up being the one I was supposed to write. A calling is
like that too, I suppose. It is the thing that you never thought
would be, the twist in the plot that makes everything else
come together, and somehow in the end you cannot imagine
otherwise. Writing 
this 
book 
illuminated 
my 
own
understanding of how purpose and vocation work together,
and I hope it does the same for you.

Introduction
The Cancer That Couldn’t
Stop a Triathlete
Many are called, but few are chosen.
—MATTHEW 22:14

A calling is not some carefully
crafted plan. It’s what’s left
when the plan goes horribly
wrong.
One June evening in 2000, Eric Miller skipped a
company meeting to watch his five-year-old son play T-ball.
During the game, he and his wife Nancy noticed their little
Garrett was having problems placing the ball on the tee and
couldn’t seem to balance properly. Concerned, they took
him to the doctor, who immediately ordered a CT scan.
When the Millers were asked to wait in what medical
professionals call “the quiet room,” Eric knew something
was wrong. As a nurse, he was well acquainted with the
purpose of that room. It was where people went to receive
bad, sometimes horrible, news. The time was six in the
evening.1
By 11:30, Garrett was admitted to Children’s Hospital in
Denver, Colorado, and immediately sent into surgery. The
next morning, on June 24, a golf-ball-sized tumor was

removed from the back of the five-year-old boy’s head. He
was diagnosed with a medulloblastoma—a word, his dad
says, no child should ever have to know.2 After the surgery,
Garrett was left blind, mute, and paralyzed. Put on a
ventilator to help him breathe, he would have to learn how
to walk, talk, and go to the bathroom all over again. Even if
by some miracle he was able to do all that, he was still given
only a 50 percent chance of surviving the next five years.
The Millers began counting the days they had left with
their son.
One day in the middle of the cancer treatments, while
looking at his son, Eric thought about how the clock was
running out on Garrett’s life. In spite of the challenges
facing his little boy, and the worry this caused, he realized
something. It was an epiphany of sorts. Working in the
medical profession, an industry “where the clock runs out
on people all the time,” Eric realized he was wrong. It
wasn’t just Garrett’s life that could end at any second—it
was all of theirs. There was no guarantee anyone in the
Miller family would outlive Garrett.
“We needed to be living life all of the time,” Eric told
me. “Because none of us are guaranteed that we’re going to
be around an hour or two from now.” Whatever time they
had left, the Millers were going to live life to the fullest.
After Garrett was moved out of the ICU and taken off
the ventilator, his dad wondered if there was anyone out
there who knew how he was feeling. Sitting in a window
bay of the hospital, he prayed for an answer to the despair

that threatened to destroy what little hope his family had
left.3 That was around the time he discovered the story of
Matt King, an IBM engineer and world-renowned tandem
cyclist who happened to be blind.4
That fall, Eric took his son to meet Matt King at a nearby
cycling event, where Garrett got the chance to sit on a
tandem bicycle and squeeze the handlebar with his hands,
feeling the pedals beneath his feet. That was the day the
“light bulb” came on for Garrett. After that, he was
determined to ride again—which, unbeknownst to him or
his dad, was the beginning of a process that would not only
change their lives but the lives of countless others.
A few months later, Garrett told his mom he wanted to
try riding his bike. She wasn’t so sure, but he insisted. By
then some of his sight had returned, and he was able to
walk, albeit just a little. With his mother’s help, Garrett
mounted the old bike and began pedaling. At first she ran
with him as he pedaled clumsily, helping him balance. But
soon his legs took him faster than she could run, and he
escaped her grasp, if only for a moment to experience the
freedom he had known before the cancer had taken control
of his body. That same day, his dad brought home a brand-
new tandem bicycle so the two of them could ride together.
Six months later, on June 24, 2001, after a year of
radiation and chemotherapy, six-year-old Garrett crossed the
finish line of his first-ever triathlon. His dad ran behind him,
pushing his wheelchair. It was one year to the day after that

first debilitating surgery.5 For the father-and-son duo that
had endured so much, the race was a way of declaring to the
world and perhaps to themselves that they would not let one
little tumor stop them from continuing with their lives, from
celebrating life itself. Thanks to the clinical treatments his
parents had enrolled him in, Garrett’s survival rate had now
increased to 90 percent.
That was fourteen years ago.
Since that first surgery that nearly crippled him so many
years ago, Garrett has competed with his father in more than
a dozen triathlons, as well as one on his own. His eyesight,
though not fully restored, has returned to the point that he
can see blurry objects and shapes. He is still considered
legally blind but can do things the doctors said were
impossible. He is, without exaggeration, a walking miracle.
This is not a book about miracles. It is a book about finding
your calling, about how you discover what you were born to
do. A calling is that thing that you can’t not do, an answer to
the age-old question, “What should I do with my life?”
There are books that talk about how to find your dream
job or what it takes to become an expert—this just isn’t one
of them. The Art of Work is a book about vocation, a word
that has come to mean something very different from the
original definition. The word vocation comes from the Latin
root vocare, which means “to call.” It was originally used in

a religious sense, as in a call to the priesthood. And for
centuries, people thought of it as just that—something
reserved for an elite group of people, for those special few
who were lucky enough to be called.
But what if that isn’t true? What if a calling is something
everyone has?
In this book, I will try to recapture that ancient
understanding of vocation as something more than a job.
Through stories of everyday people, I will argue that much
of what we think about calling, if we think about it at all, is
wrong. The way to meaningful work doesn’t always look
like a carefully crafted plan. Sometimes the route to our
purpose is a chaotic experience, and how we respond
matters more than what happens to us.
Each chapter tells a different person’s story, illustrating a
major concept—one of seven stages of a calling. And
although the stories differ, they all share one similarity: each
person was in some way surprised by what he or she found.
This, I think, is a story we don’t hear enough of today—one
that just might help us understand our own personal
journeys better. And where do we see this more than in the
story of a five-year-old boy who beat brain cancer and went
on to race in a triathlon?
In his eighteen years of life, Garrett Rush-Miller has
completed a half Ironman, climbed Machu Picchu, and
earned the rank of Eagle Scout. When he’s not at school or
working at the local climbing gym, he spends his free time
volunteering with Wounded Warriors, a charity that supports

and encourages war veterans. At the time of this writing,
he’s getting ready to graduate high school and more than
anything would like a girlfriend.
After Eric e-mailed me with some news clippings of his
son’s story, I immediately picked up the phone and called
them. Speaking with both of them during Garrett’s lunch
break, I was struck by how positive they were and how
important perspective was in their story. Theirs wasn’t a
rags-to-riches tale or some super-spiritual experience. It was
inspiring but also quite practical. All they were doing was
trying to survive, making sense of life along the way, and
that was a story I could relate to.
I asked Garrett if he ever thought about what life would
have been like if he had never missed the tee that day, if he
had never gotten the brain tumor and hadn’t had to go
through sixty-four weeks of chemo.
“I’ve never really thought about it, to be honest,” he
admitted.
His dad said the same. “The reality,” Eric explained, “is
these are the cards we’ve been dealt, and we’ll just play
them the best we can.”
Eric Miller has always tried to steer his son in the
direction of what he can do, not what he can’t. And that
little lesson has led to some incredible experiences for both
of them. The gift that Garrett’s dad gave him wasn’t
protection from pain or suffering, as much as Eric would
have liked to provide such things. It was helping Garrett see
that what makes a life extraordinary aren’t the chances we

get, but what we do with them.6
Course Correction for Your
Calling
At some point, you entertained the idea that you were born
to do something significant. But then high school happened.
Or college. And your parents talked you into becoming a
lawyer instead of a baker. That professor told you med
school was a smarter move than relocating to New York to
try out an acting career. And you believed them. When “real
life” began, you gave up, but called it growing up instead
and abandoned the dream altogether. You made excuses for
why wanting something extraordinary was somehow selfish
and immature, and you wondered if any of those youthful
feelings were ever real in the first place.
But even then, you knew you were wrong. No matter
how noisy the world got, no matter how busy you became,
there would always be something inside you—a small voice
that whispered in the quieter moments of life, taunting you
with the shadow of the unlived life. If you listen hard
enough, you can still hear it.
Everywhere you look, people are giving excuses for not
pursuing what they were born to do. Some say they are “a
work in progress,” while others shrug with indifference,

saying they’re still trying to figure out what they want to be
when they grow up. Such phrases sound harmless, but they
are anything but. If we’re honest, a lot of us feel stuck,
aimlessly wandering from one job to the next, unsure of
what to look for or even expect. We’ve accepted our lot in
life. It is what it is. Even though we do our best to embrace
reality, we are restless. What comfort do we have other than
the vague notion that we’re not alone?
As we enter a new era in human history, as the average
lifespan increases and the world becomes an even more
efficient place full of technological solutions, people are
asking deeper questions. We now realize the way we’ve
been doing work no longer works. Factories are getting
smaller, not bigger. The forty-year career is dead. The world
demands a fresh approach to vocation, and we need
something new—or perhaps, something very old.
There is a way to meaningful work that doesn’t force
you to conform to your parents’ career path or to
compromise your values. It won’t be like any class you’ve
taken and probably won’t resemble what your teachers told
you the future would look like, but it can be trusted. There’s
more to life than what happens to you and more to a
vocation than punching a clock.
But how do we find such a way that seems so far gone?
The journey described in this book is an ancient path.
It’s the way of master craftsmen and artisans, a centuries-old
road that requires both perseverance and dedication—the
narrow path that few find. Here we follow in the footsteps of

computer scientists and park rangers, participating in the
same 
process 
that 
made 
world-famous 
cartoonists,
compassionate missionaries, and successful entrepreneurs.
At times you will have to trust your gut, and at others
you will need to do what is uncomfortable and even painful.
But as you go, there will be signs along the way, markers
ensuring that you are headed in the right direction.
The path described here is not a manual for life. It’s a
piece of canvas on which to add your own experience. This
isn’t some science experiment with predictable results, and it
won’t be another self-help program that leaves you feeling
passively inspired.
After encountering hundreds of stories from people who
found their calling, I’ve identified seven common
characteristics, each illustrated in the subsequent chapters.
Each chapter, which tells at least one person’s story, is
based on a theme:
1. Awareness
2. Apprenticeship
3. Practice
4. Discovery
5. Profession
6. Mastery
7. Legacy
You might want to think of these as steps, but they are

more like overlapping stages that, once begun, continue for
the rest of your life. For example, once you learn the
discipline of awareness, you continue to practice this
throughout your apprenticeship, continually looking for
guidance along the way. The same is true for practice—it’s
something you keep doing long after you acquire a skill.
There is a process to finding your life’s work. Although
at first it may feel chaotic, there is an order emerging from
such chaos. And if you commit to following these stages,
paying attention along the way and persevering, you will
have something rare, something you can be proud of.
Letting Go of What Could
Have Been
“Part of people’s problem is they think of everything that
could’ve been,” Eric Miller told me after his son left our
phone conversation. “Who cares what the future might’ve
been for Garrett? It doesn’t matter. It can’t be. This is where
we’re at, and this is where we’re going.”
In his voice, I could hear the military stoicism that
must’ve served him well while dealing with more than a
decade of raising a special needs child, not to mention
during his career as a paramedic and nurse. He went on to
tell me about his subsequent divorce and confessed that

pining for what could have been only holds people back
from living their lives now. Life is full of surprises, and it
doesn’t help us to fixate on regrets or try to recover what
has been lost.
“Maybe . . . that’s a lot of people’s problems,” he added,
“is they keep thinking, what would’ve happened if . . .?
Who gives a crap? It just happened.”
But what would not have happened if Garrett had never
gotten sick?
“Now that’s a whole different question,” he admitted, his
tone softening. “We think about that all the time. None of
this would have happened. My life would be totally
different.”
None of this. Not the triathlons, not the foundation they
started, not the countless lives affected—none of it would
have happened had it not been for a tragedy that struck the
Miller family fifteen years ago. Because of Garrett’s illness,
Eric is now able to encourage others in a way that would
have been impossible before. Working in an intensive care
unit at a hospital, he gets to speak with suffering people all
the time.
“I have authority now, because of Garrett’s suffering,”
he said.
What hope does he offer these patients? What
encouragement does his pain provide? He tells them to hold
their heads high, even when they don’t think they can.
“More people are watching your life and . . . are gaining
strength in their own lives and in their own challenges

because of what you’re going through. I promise you: your
life matters, your life is significant, and things are happening
that you don’t even fully understand yourself.”
That’s what Eric has done and what he’s encouraged his
son to do: To acknowledge that whatever is happening in
their lives now, as difficult as it might be, is important. To
not hold out for the right opportunity or wait for things to
get better, but to make the most of life now. The question
that Garrett Rush-Miller’s life answers is the same one many
of us are afraid to ask: What happens when the life you end
up living doesn’t look like the one you planned?
Each of us has had surprises and setbacks in life,
disappointments that have disrupted what we thought was
the way. And we’re left with something that looks less like a
personal purpose and more like a mess. Hearing Garrett tell
his story, I wondered if the difference between remarkable
people and the rest of us has little to do with circumstance
and more to do with mindset. Maybe we all have the power
to turn our lives into significant stories if we start to see our
difficulties as opportunities.
We can’t control what life throws our way, but we can
control how we react to it. As we do, maybe we come closer
to a meaningful life than any plan could ever take us. To do
this, though, we have to let go of what we think we deserve
and embrace what is, which just might lead to something
better than we ever could have imagined.
Your life, though not an accident, is full of surprises.
The point of this book is to help you know what to do when

they come.

PART ONE
Preparation

ONE
Listening to Your Life
The Call to Something
Old, Not New
Before I can tell my life what I want to do with
it, I must listen to my life telling me who I am.
—PARKER PALMER

You don’t “just know” what
your calling is. You must listen
for clues along the way,
discovering what your life can
tell you. Awareness comes with
practice.
The halls of Emory Hospital were particularly busy that
day as Jody Noland navigated the crowds to locate her
friend’s room. She brushed past people visiting their loved
ones, and a queasy thought came to her: How could
something so terrible be happening to Larry?
Larry Elliott had recently decided to reprioritize his life,
selling his successful insurance business to serve hurting
children in the world. It began with serving alongside his
wife, Bev, as houseparents at a children’s home in Alabama
but had led to a leadership position at another children’s
home outside of Atlanta. He was changing gears in what he
thought would be the second half of his life, but he had
much less time than he realized.

Larry and Bev decided to take their family on a long-
awaited vacation to Europe. This was a chance to spend
some quality time together and reconnect with their kids. It
was a trip everyone was looking forward to.
The pain started on the flight to Italy, beginning with a
throbbing sensation between Larry’s temples. In Florence, a
CAT scan revealed a mass in his brain, and the family was
forced to end the vacation prematurely. On the flight home,
the pilot had to fly at a lower altitude to minimize the
amount of pressure in Larry’s head. The next morning, he
was scheduled to go into surgery. At forty-eight years old,
Larry was battling a brain tumor.
His room wasn’t that difficult to find, as Jody later
recalled in her book: “It was the one where people
overflowed into the hallway.”1 There was not enough space
to fit all the friends he had accumulated in his lifetime. And
in spite of the pain, Larry did his best to comfort his visitors.
There was a sense of urgency to his demeanor that day.
At one point, he asked his wife if she’d brought a pen and
paper, something that seemed odd to Jody. Later she asked
Bev what that was about, and Bev explained that Larry
wanted to write a letter to each of their children before going
into surgery. He didn’t know if he would make it out alive
and wanted to express his love, affirming what was so
unique and special about each of his children.
Larry lived another nine months before ultimately losing
his life to cancer.
That same year, Jody lost two other friends who were

both in their forties and passed away without warning. The
deaths came as a shock to everyone. As Jody watched three
grieving families, she thought of the comfort Larry’s words
had provided his family. She hurt for the children, those
“who knew unquestionably of their parents’ love, but
desperately missed the reassurance and security that their
physical presence provided.” She couldn’t stop thinking of
the letter he wrote and the difference it had made.
Jody started sharing Larry’s story with others. “Don’t
you think this is something we should all do for the people
we love?” she would say, trying to drum up interest. And
many would respond, “Yes, but I’m not a writer,” or, “Yes,
but I have no idea where to begin.”
“One way of knowing our gifting,” Jody told me, “is
when something that seems easy to us doesn’t seem easy to
others. I kept thinking, How hard could it be? Maybe I
could help people do this . . . What seemed so hard for so
many people seemed easy to me.”2
She eventually relented to that prompting.
Jody established Leave Nothing Unsaid, a program and
book that helps people of all ages write letters to their loved
ones. After Larry’s death, she had been inspired, but the
idea didn’t become reality until she decided to act. She kept
thinking someone should do something. Finally she realized
that someone was her.
At fifty-eight years old, Jody Noland is beginning to
understand how her life has been converging for decades on
this very moment. She is doing what she was born to do,

and although the circumstances have been hard, even
painful, she’s learned an important lesson. All along, her life
was teaching her something, even in the pain. And if she
hadn’t paid attention, she just might have missed it.
Happiness Is Overrated
There are two stories we hear when it comes to pursuing a
dream. First is the tale of the self-made man or woman. In
this story, we see a driven individual overcoming adversity
and defying the odds to achieve success. Many of us have
believed this is the only way to achieve anything—through
sheer tenacity. The process is simple: set a goal, work hard,
and achieve your objectives. You can be anything you
want, do anything you want; all you have to do is work
hard. You are in complete control of your destiny. But
things are not always so simple.
In the film The Secret of My Success, Michael J. Fox
plays a young upstart named Brantley who is trying to get
ahead in the corporate world. After continual rejection, he
finally explodes in another failed job interview, saying:
“Everywhere I’ve been today there’s always been
something wrong: too young, too old, too short, too tall.
Whatever the exception is, I can fix it. I can be older; I can
be taller; I can be anything.”3
Like many people, Brantley believed that if he put his

mind to it, he could accomplish anything. In the end,
though, he realized the secret of success is that sometimes
getting everything you want doesn’t always make you
happy.
The second story is the opposite of the first. Instead of
the self-made path, you have a determined one. Whatever
will be, will be. Life happens in spite of what we want. You
have no control over anything, and in the end, you will look
back on your life and understand there could have been no
other way. But where is the adventure in that—in having
everything scripted out for you? And what of the countless
stories of those on their deathbeds, confessing regret? Even
when we talk in terms of “destiny” and “fate,” we want to
believe we have some control over our lives. There must be
another way.
The first path says you can be whatever you want; the
second says you have no choice. But perhaps there is a third
way. What if there was more to your purpose than getting
what you wanted? What if there were some things you
couldn’t control, but how you reacted to those situations
made a difference? Is there a purpose to your life, or are we
all just bouncing around in a chaotic universe? Everyone
from religious scholars to scientists and career counselors
has pondered these questions. So let’s look at them
pragmatically.
Here’s what we know. A lot of people are unhappy with
their jobs, where they spend a significant amount of time. A
recent poll found that only 13 percent of the world’s

workers are “engaged” in their jobs. The other 87 percent
feel disconnected from work and more frustrated than
fulfilled.4 These numbers shouldn’t come as a surprise.
When a friend says she hates her job or a family member
talks badly about his boss, we aren’t shocked. This is
acceptable behavior. We’ve been conditioned to think of
work as drudgery, a chore you endure in exchange for a
paycheck. And this is a problem.
When you are stuck fulfilling an obligation instead of
chasing a dream, you aren’t your best self. We all know
that. This is why we find more and more people moving
from one occupation to the next. They are doing their best
to be happy but failing miserably. Most of us have done this
at some point, quitting one thing for the promise of
something better. And we were disappointed to find that the
next job or relationship held the same complications as the
one we were escaping.
But maybe we’re going about this all wrong. Maybe the
worst way to be happy is to try to be happy. The work of
acclaimed Austrian psychiatrist Viktor Frankl supports this
idea. A Holocaust survivor, Frankl had intimate experience
with suffering, and it taught him an important lesson.
Human beings, he argued, are not hardwired for seeking
pleasure and avoiding pain. They want meaning. In spite of
what we say, we don’t want happiness. It’s simply not
enough to satisfy our deepest longings. We are looking for
something more, something transcendent—a reason to be
happy.5

As part of his life-saving therapy with suicidal patients
and his own experience in a Nazi concentration camp,
Frankl learned there are three things that give meaning to
life: first, a project; second, a significant relationship; and
third, a redemptive view of suffering. He realized that if
people, even in the bleakest of circumstances, have a job to
do, something to return to tomorrow, then they have a
reason to live another day. For Frankl, the book manuscript
he had been working on before entering the camp and the
hope of seeing his wife were what kept him alive. And in
time, he was able to see the purpose in his pain. Because he
had work to do, someone whom he believed was waiting for
him, and a certain attitude toward suffering, he survived it
when others did not. And his memoir, Man’s Search for
Meaning, became one of the most popular books of the
twentieth century, affecting millions of lives.6
What we often don’t realize is that making our story
about us, even about our pain, is the wrong approach.
Dwelling on the past or fixating on the future won’t help
you find fulfillment. The way you beat a feeling of
purposelessness, according to Frankl, isn’t to focus on the
problem. It’s to find a better distraction. Which is a
roundabout way of saying you have to stop trying to be
happy. But doesn’t everyone want to be happy? Maybe not.
Life is too short to do what doesn’t matter, to waste your
time on things that don’t amount to much. What we all want
is to know our time on earth has meant something. We can
distract ourselves with pleasure for only so long before

beginning to wonder what the point is. This means if we
want true satisfaction, we have to rise above the pettiness of
our own desires and do what is required of us. A calling
comes when we embrace the pain, not avoid it.
Tragedies, unfortunately, are inevitable. Bad things
happen to good people, whether we want them to or not.
What determines our destiny, though, is not how successful
we are at dodging hardship but what we do when it comes.
Pain and suffering, though intimidating obstacles, are not
strong enough to keep us from our purpose. In fact, they
can sometimes be the very catalysts for such discoveries.
That’s the lesson Jody Noland learned from her friend
Larry and what she almost forgot when her own husband
was on his deathbed.
The Good Kind of Fear
Fear is a powerful deterrent, but it can also be an effective
motivator. The fear of failure or rejection can be unhealthy
and irrational, but fear of not telling your loved ones how
much you care is important. So not all fear is bad. Some
people, though, let fear run their lives. They avoid risk,
hoping to minimize the chances of failure, and in effect
move in the opposite direction of a calling. The trick is to
know when to listen to your fear and when to not.
In 2009, Mike Noland, Jody’s husband, was diagnosed

with stage four liver cancer. Jody started searching the
Internet for what she could learn about his prognosis.
Realizing he had little time left to live, she began to prepare
for the inevitable. Mike, however, had other ideas.
His way of coping was to deny the imminence of death.
In Jody’s words, he “hunkered down” and refused to
acknowledge reality. He didn’t read about his condition,
didn’t ask the doctors any questions, and continued with life
as usual—except, of course, for the regular chemotherapy
and radiation treatments.
“In the midst of all of that,” she told me, “he was
concerned about his clients and whether it was time to
execute a buy-sell agreement on his business. Doing that
meant he was accepting his certain death sentence. The day
the agreement was executed, his mind began to fog.”
Listening to Jody relate the story over the phone years
after the fact, I could still hear the pain in her voice. I could
feel the urgency. She pleaded with Mike to write letters to
his children, a gesture she had seen make a dramatic impact
in Larry’s family. In fact, so moved by her friend’s gesture,
she had begun helping others do the same by teaching a
letter-writing workshop that empowered people to share
words of affirmation with their loved ones. She wanted her
family to receive that same comfort she had provided for
strangers. But her husband resisted. He didn’t believe the
cancer was that serious. And after weeks of trying to
persuade him, even resorting to writing the letters for him,
Jody finally gave up, deciding to comfort her husband with

whatever time they had left.
The cancer killed Mike quickly. Within three months of
the diagnosis, he was gone, never having started a single
letter. After the funeral, his daughter Nancy asked Jody if he
had written any letters like the ones her stepmom had helped
others write. Jody was devastated. She felt like a failure. In
spite of her encouragement and occasional nagging, none of
it had worked. She knew the power of letter writing, the
impact a few words of encouragement could make. But
there were no letters for Nancy, no words of affirmation
from her now deceased father, and there never would be.
After Mike’s death, Jody wondered whether or not she
should continue the letter-writing workshops.
“My immediate conclusion was that I should abandon
this dream,” she recalled in her book. “How could I advise
others to do this when I had failed so miserably in my own
home?” She doubted if this was something she was called
to, after all. “I really thought I had misunderstood.”
Jody gave away the workbooks she had made, keeping
only one as a keepsake, and she let the grieving begin.
A year later, a man called her, looking for a copy of the
workbooks she used to have. His wife’s best friend was
dying of breast cancer and wanted to write a letter to her two
daughters. She was desperate but didn’t know where to
begin or what to say. Jody explained she wasn’t doing the
workshops anymore but sent the woman her one remaining
workbook. “Her death was so imminent,” she wrote, “that a
courier was sent to pick up the workbook.”

Several weeks later, Jody received a thank-you note.
Because her workbook had helped the dying mother express
her love for her daughters in writing, she was able to spend
the last few weeks of her life in peace. Jody wept. All this
time, she had been afraid of failing, of trying and not
succeeding, but now she understood what was really at
stake. She knew the thing she had to fear the most was
failing to answer this calling she had received, no matter
how much it hurt.
“I would rather go for it and fail than not try,” she said.
What We Learn from Fairy
Tales
At the beginning of every story, we see something that
looks a lot like normal life. Long before the protagonist
slays a dragon or embarks on a quest, we see her in some
unsuspecting place, dreaming of something more. In Beauty
and the Beast (my personal favorite Disney classic), Belle
sings of wanting more than “this provincial life.” In Star
Wars, Luke can’t wait to escape the boredom of a farmer’s
life. And in The Wizard of Oz, Dorothy sings about life
“somewhere over the rainbow.” Our lives are haunted by
the ghosts of what might have been.
It’s easy to dismiss such people as dreamers or even

downright crazy. But are they really? Before a chain of
events sets the hero on course to his destiny, there is a sense
that there should be more to life than this. You may be
feeling it right now. At an important moment, everything
makes sense, as it did for Eric Miller when he realized the
clock wasn’t ticking away on his son’s life any faster than
his own and when Jody Noland saw how significant a letter
from a loved one could be. This is what storytellers call the
“inciting incident,” the moment when everything changes
and the tale of an average person living an average life
becomes one of mythic proportions.
But something must occur for this to take place. The
person must enter the story, either by choice or because
she’s forced into it. Belle goes to find her father. Luke
leaves home with Obi-Wan. Dorothy gets swept up in a
tornado. In any great narrative, there is a moment when a
character must decide to become more than a bystander. It’s
an important moment that always seems to happen in the
mind before it unfolds in real life. This choice, though, is
always preceded by something deeper, a nagging feeling
that there must be more.
This is why when people are called to some great task,
they know it. Immediately they recognize the prompting to
step up and do something significant, because they have
been waiting for it. Before the call comes, we must possess
some sense that awakens us to our purpose.
Awareness, then, is what prepares us for the call.
Before you know what your calling is, you must believe

you are called to something. It doesn’t matter if you know
what. In order to cultivate awareness, you must be willing to
act, to step out and see what happens. And once you are
convinced that purpose will not find you, that you will have
to go in search of it, you are ready. Until you make this
choice, though, you will feel frustrated, seeing people
succeed and chalking it up to luck or some unfair
advantage. And in doing this, you will deceive yourself.
The truth is some people do get lucky, and others have
been born into special privilege, but what are those things to
you? You are still called.
A calling may be many things, but it is not fair. Still, you
must answer it.
Before you begin your life’s work, you need to prepare.
Chances come to us all, but only those who are ready
recognize them. You don’t need some big plan. You just
need to be a little dissatisfied. You need to have some vague
premonition that the world is not completely right. That’s
what awareness is: a sense that something more is possible.
You don’t need a lucky break or a golden opportunity;
you don’t even need to “just know.” What you do need is
the desire and willingness to begin. Only then can you
dedicate yourself to the work that is required of you, and
only then will you know what it’s worth. Without
awareness, you won’t be able to recognize the opportunities
that come. And they always come to those with open eyes.

The Wrong Kind of Fear
I don’t have a dream . It was the fear that haunted my
thoughts that day, lingering in my mind. I sank down deep
in my seat, surrounded by a hundred pairs of hopeful eyes.
We were all there, gathered in that multipurpose room
(which was doubling as a conference center that day), for
the same reason. To pursue a dream. To find the thing our
hearts had been searching for.
Some of us wanted to be novelists; others aspired to start
our own ad agencies or travel to South America to make a
documentary. Each dreamer represented a unique and
beautiful dream, some special skill the world needed. The
passion in that room was infectious, which only reinforced
the feeling that I did not deserve to be there.
“What’s your dream?” was the opening obligatory
question, and we all did our best to respond in kind. It was
even something we had to inscribe on our name tags. I think
mine said something profound and nondescript like
“creative catalyst.” In other words, I didn’t know.
I had no idea what my dream was or what I was doing
there. When people asked what I wanted to do with my life,
I used big, fancy words and complicated phrases that meant
little to me but caused people’s eyes to glaze over just
enough so that they were too intimidated to ask any follow-
up questions. Which was precisely my intent.
“I want to be a storytelling sherpa,” I told a guy carrying

around an iPad.
He nodded, the fear of following up obvious in his eyes.
Mission accomplished.
A few times during the conference, I talked about my
day job, but that felt boring and unoriginal. I was sure my
dream was something new and interesting, something “out
there” that I’d never done before but would recognize as
soon as it appeared on the horizon. At some point during the
conference, it would walk up to me and say hello, greeting
me with a smile, and we would start the rest of my life
together.
Every time I answered another question, I felt like I was
betraying myself, that people were slowly seeing through
the facade and beginning to feel sorry for me. Me, the
hapless wanderer who was at a dream conference and didn’t
have a dream. The guy with no vision for the future, just a
fancy name tag. And then, just as I was getting ready to
excuse myself from my table and sneak out the back exit,
the opening speaker stepped up to the podium. With a few
short words, he shattered my illusion.
“Some of you here don’t know what your dream is,” he
said. “In fact, most of you don’t.”
I looked around to see dozens of heads nodding slowly
in unison. Apprehensively, I did the same, a little worried
who was watching me but eventually letting go and feeling
the freedom that came with admitting I didn’t know what I
was doing.
“But the truth is,” he continued, “you do know what

your dream is . . . You’re just afraid to admit it.”
My heart sank. As soon as he spoke those words, one
word popped into my mind: writer.
Now I was no longer afraid of failing. I was afraid of not
trying.
What if you don’t know what you’re supposed to do? What
if you have no idea what your passion is? These are the
questions we ask when trying to figure out what we should
do with our lives. And they are good questions—I’ve asked
them myself—but they are not the right questions. When we
say we don’t know what to do, what we’re really doing is
asking something deeper. What we want to know is this:
“Can you promise me I won’t fail?”
And the answer is no. Of course not. Nobody can
promise that.
Most people waste the best years of their life waiting for
an adventure to come to them instead of going out and
finding one. They succumb to the status quo and dream of
life being different someday. Plagued with indecision, they
wait, unsure of the right path to follow. And as they wait,
they miss an opportunity to live. The only smart choice is to
move, to not hold out for a better time and choose a
direction now. Yes, you could fail, but we all know what
happens when you don’t try—nothing. Certainly there will
be bumps in the road, even wrong turns, but at least you will

be moving.
We often think of a calling as something that comes to
us, an epiphany that arrives when we least expect it. But the
truth is, in some ways, it’s already come. You already have
some sense of what you’re supposed to do with your life,
even if you aren’t sure what it is. The trick is to find your
vocation hidden in your life. That’s what I learned the
moment I started thinking of myself as a writer. I went
looking for answers and found that some of them were
already in me.
We all want to “just know” what we’re supposed to do
with our lives, for our purpose to be spelled out for us, but
that’s not how a calling works. It’s never clear and hardly
ever obvious, especially when you’re starting out. But when
you start to take those first steps, when you commit to some
course of action, you begin to see what was there all along.
Most of us have some sneaking suspicion that there must
be more to life than this. We understand we each have a part
to play in a bigger story. Even if we aren’t sure what that is,
we know there’s something. Those “lucky” few who find
their callings testify to this. They knew there was a purpose
out there, and they were determined to find it. The way that
they did this was by taking the first step, by overcoming the
myth that “you just know” and deciding to act anyway. And
they learned, as you might, an important lesson: clarity
comes with action.
At a certain point, you must acknowledge this nudge, the
hint of a whisper that says life has been holding out on you.

We all have some understanding of what we’re supposed to
do with our lives. We may not realize it or perhaps we lost
it, but it’s there, waiting to be uncovered. What we need,
then, is not a map, but a shovel—a set of tools to start
digging. I used to think a calling was something you just
knew you had, and if you didn’t know then you weren’t
called. But I’ve come to understand that’s not the case at all.
A calling is what you have when you look back at your life
and make sense of what it’s been trying to teach you all
along.
What would you do if you could do anything? Everyone
has an answer to that question. You might spend all day
with the kids or travel the world or finally write that book.
You might dedicate some serious time to a business idea or
perhaps with the right resources buy a new camera to take
photos all day at the park. Or maybe you’d just sit back and
sip coffee on the porch with your spouse, embracing all the
little things in life. If you pry hard enough, everyone has an
answer to this question—and that’s an important clue.
The problem is so few of our lives look anything like
what we want them to be. What prevents us from living the
life we long for is fear. We fear the unknown and what we
might lose—our security, our reputation, our lives. This is
what keeps us from our life’s work and what numbs our
awareness to the call—mystery. We are afraid of what we
don’t know. But the truth is you will never have clarity. As
Mother Teresa once said, you will only ever have trust. 7
Fear, indecision, not knowing—these are the obstacles that

keep you from moving forward. And they never go away.
But if you are going to find what you were meant to do, you
will have to act anyway.
What I am trying to say here is that a calling takes work.
Finding yours will require a fear-facing journey that will last
a lifetime. And where does it begin? With awareness. With
discovering what your life is already saying to you. And as
you attempt to uncover this mystery, consider one more
question, a much more constructive one: What happens if
you don’t do this? That’s what should really scare you.
Your Life Is Speaking
Many people wander through life, unaware of their purpose,
blindly following the whims of the world. To them, those
who reach their potential seem to possess an extraordinary
gift. But what if pursuing your calling wasn’t a luxury
reserved for the elite? What if it was required to live life,
fully alive? Where would you start?
Listen to your life. That’s Frederick Buechner’s advice.
An author who spent part of his life as a schoolteacher and
another part as a minister, he observed that finding your
vocation is less about grand moments of discovery and
more about a habit of awareness. “See it for the fathomless
mystery it is,” he wrote. “In the boredom and pain of it no
less than in the excitement and gladness: touch, taste, smell
your way to the holy and hidden heart of it because in the

last analysis all moments are key moments . . .”8 What
Buechner was saying is that awareness doesn’t just happen;
it must be cultivated.
If you pay attention to your life and the lessons it can
teach you, you won’t feel so lost. Your story will seem less
like a series of disjointed events and more like a beautifully
complex narrative unfolding before you. You will
understand each setback, inconvenience, and frustration as
something more than what it appears to be. And perhaps, as
you listen to it, your life will speak.
It may call to you in the early morning or late at night
and tell you what you are meant to do with your gifts, your
passions, and your abilities. This voice might help you make
sense of what has happened to you, and it may even give
you guidance. Or it might unravel a whole new thread or
theme you never before considered. The point isn’t
necessarily what the voice says. That’s important, of course,
but it’s beyond your control. The point is to listen.
In a world full of distractions, this is what we are
inclined not to do. We would rather buy a book, sign up for
a seminar, or attend a conference to instruct us. Take this
step. Follow that program. Adhere to these six principles.
But such experiences are poor substitutes for the
“fathomless mystery” of life, as Buechner put it. We have
been raised to believe that anything is possible, that our
potential is unlimited, and that we are entitled to our dreams.
But maybe finding your calling is not quite so simple.
We all want to begin with ability, with what we can do.

But when have you ever been a good judge of what you’re
capable of? People are always doing things that amaze
themselves. A calling goes beyond your abilities and calls
into question your potential. And when the journey is
complete, even you are surprised. Just because you can
become an astronaut or a newspaper deliveryman does not
mean you should. Each person is responsible to not only do
what she is capable of but also what she is meant to do. In
the words of author and activist Parker Palmer, don’t just tell
your life what you want to do with it; listen to what it wants
to do with you.3
Here’s how it works, practically. Look at the major
events in your life and write them down on a piece of paper.
Note everything significant you can remember, even the
things that seem silly or irrelevant but come to mind for
some reason. Don’t try to decode the meaning; just put
down everything you can think of. As you reach the end of
the list, look for a common thread, some recurring theme.
Can you see how one event, without any intention or
planning on your part, influenced another? How that late-
night trip to the diner led to meeting the love of your life?
How a series of useless internships influenced your career
choice? You will begin to see a theme, a surprisingly
obvious thread that ties it all together.
Will it be clear at first? Of course not. This is just the
start. But there’s less intrigue to this process than we think.
Your life, though a mystery, is trying to tell you something.
Are you listening?

Nothing Is Wasted
At the point Mike Noland became sick, Jody considered
quitting her newly launched ministry of helping people write
letters to their loved ones. It was a lot of work and often
discouraging. After his death, she did give up—for a while.
Grief-stricken and disappointed, she let go of the dream that
had once captivated her imagination and filled her with
hope.
When she saw how one little workbook made a
difference in the life of a dying woman, though, Jody’s
dream was rekindled. In spite of the tragedies she had
experienced, she would have to endure. The cost of not
doing so was too great. She had seen it in the eyes of her
stepdaughter, who would never know the comfort others
might. The possibility of helping others avoid that pain was
what kept Jody going.
“God wastes nothing,” she told me during one of our
phone conversations, recalling her sixteen-year career at
IBM before she quit to help her husband grow his business
and raise a family. All of it played a part in where she is
today.
During those years at IBM, Jody was in charge of giving
performance reviews to employees. She would praise and
affirm things she saw in people, even when delivering
difficult feedback.
“I would always try to look below the surface,” she

recalled. She wanted to go beyond the typical “What have
you done for me lately?” conversation. “To me, it was an
obvious thing that you would do for people . . . but then I
realized how rare it was.”
Through her workshops and speaking engagements,
Jody helps people see things in the people they love that
they would otherwise struggle to express. She is, in effect,
using the gift of affirmation she learned at IBM.
After my seven years of working at a nonprofit, I can
relate. Nothing is wasted. No job, no task, no obstacle is
useless, if we are willing to see how it can fit into our
calling. At times, I felt frustrated at having to do a certain
task or answer yet another e-mail. It felt like I was being
held back. But now I realize the truth. There isn’t a day that
goes by when I don’t use some skill learned during those
seven years. It was all preparation for what was to come. As
you explore your own calling, you will be surprised by how
your previous experiences are conspiring to lead you in the
direction of your life’s work. You just have to listen.
Listening to your life begins with doing what none of us
wants to do, with what Larry Elliott chose to do and what
Mike Noland didn’t do. You have to imagine your own
death. When your time comes, what will you regret not
doing? What will you wish you had more time to do, and
what will have seemed trivial? Think of what you fear losing
—those are the things that matter most.
One way to deepen this awareness is to watch other
people. Pay attention to those who love their lives and see

what they do. What do they have that you don’t? We can
learn a lot from what initially looks like envy—namely,
what you are missing. You might have to see someone else
love their life before you can love your own. Love, after all,
is what holds this all together, what sustains a calling when
nothing else will. This is not petty jealousy, not if we take it
one step further and do something with those feelings.
In a way, we must become children again, watching and
listening to others, mimicking the behavior we admire so
that we can grow. Observing everyday examples of those
who did not compromise their calling but persevered
through difficulties will inspire you to press on.
When in Doubt, Commit
I hope it’s clear by now that this is not a passive process.
You must commit to the path. And that won’t always be
easy.
In our world today, we have a commitment problem.
Everywhere you look, it seems you can find a lack of
commitment 
or 
follow-through. 
Leaders 
shirk
responsibilities. Politicians blame the “other party.” And
many drift from one job to the next, never fully committing
to any of them. On some level, we all struggle to commit to
the work necessary to find our purpose. We are used to
trying something out for six months to maybe a few years,
then moving on. But a vocation is not like that. It’s not

something you try; it’s someone you become.
When we do this, when we don’t give ourselves fully to
the work we were born to do, we do the world—and
ourselves—a disservice. Commitment is necessary. It
teaches us to exchange instant gratification for long-term
reward and shows us that some change takes time. In
learning this discipline of staying the course, our character
grows. This is the payoff of patience, the joy of watching
something grow that wouldn’t have been had you not spent
all those years sticking with it.
But it’s not just about commitment; it’s also about
perseverance. You can’t find your passion if you don’t push
through pain. That’s what I learned from Jody Noland and
what Viktor Frankl’s research revealed: discovery comes
with dedication. We must seek to understand our suffering
with a redemptive worldview, choosing to see the greater
good in spite of the evil in this world. Otherwise, the
challenges we encounter will threaten to consume us,
leaving us to lives of cynicism and regret. We can’t get
caught up in the magic of what might have been—we must
move forward, pressing on when the hard times come.
There will, of course, be failure, but with that come
lessons to be learned. At times, you may commit to the
wrong thing, which is fine, because it’s better than the
alternative—nothing. Committing to the wrong thing is
better than standing still.
Another strategy, and a popular one, is to not commit to
anything. To hold out for better options, wait until the last

minute, move restlessly from one thing to the next, and
never commit to anything that could trap you. It feels like
freedom but is, in fact, just another cage. When you are
surrounded with unlimited opportunities, inaction seems like
the safe choice. Paralyzed by fear, many choose just that—
to not move, to settle. Whether it’s a job as a barista or a
promising position on the corporate ladder, we take it.
Because the alternative—a costly journey of discovery—is
too scary to consider.
Here’s the truth. The risk of not committing is greater
than the cost of making the wrong choice. Because when
you fail, you learn. But what happens when you don’t
commit, when you choose to not act? Well, nothing. When
you pause without intent, when you stall due to fear, you
don’t learn a thing. Each wrong choice grows your character
and strengthens your resilience, readying you for what
comes next. Failure is a friend dressed up like an enemy.
Let’s be honest, though. Despite the promises of self-
help literature, failing is tough. It can hurt. Picking yourself
up off the ground, one rejection after another, gets difficult
after a while. But if we learn to endure, choosing to see the
hidden balm in the wounds of failure, we can grow from our
mistakes. We can overcome our obstacles and turn tragedy
into triumph. We may even be able to celebrate those
setbacks and trials, the things that once seemed so daunting,
knowing they are all signs that we are on our way.

The Nail in Walt Disney’s
Boot
Walt Disney did his best to not ask his parents for much.
Elias and Flora Disney raised a frugal family in the Midwest,
first as failed farmers and later as struggling business
owners. But when he spotted a pair of leather boots with
metal toes, young Walt had to have them. They were a
practical gift, he reasoned, and would help with his job of
delivering newspapers—especially when it snowed.
In a rare instance of indulgence, his parents caved. That
year at Christmas, lying beneath the tree, was a pair of
leather boots waiting for Walt. He wore them every day and
could often be seen tramping around downtown Kansas City
in them, as any proud kid with a new prized possession
would do. He also kept his promise, wearing them morning
and night to deliver the paper.
One spring day, just after finishing his route, Walt
crossed the street to join some friends at the local soda
fountain. As he did, he noticed a piece of ice lying in the
middle of the street and couldn’t resist the temptation to kick
it. As Walt’s foot collided with the block of ice, something
sharp struck his boot, and a surge of pain raced up the boy’s
leg. Looking down to see a horseshoe nail sticking out of
his boot, he screamed. The nail had penetrated the leather
exterior and drove straight into his big toe, freezing his foot

fast to the block of ice.
For twenty minutes, Walt cried for help—he screamed—
but no one came. Finally, a wagon driver stopped and came
to his aid, chipping away at the ice and taking him to the
doctor. After removing the nail with a pair of pliers and
administering a tetanus shot, the doctor sent Walt home
without any painkillers. He would be bedridden for two
weeks.
During the days that ensued, young Walt Disney had a
lot to consider, including what he might do with the rest of
his life. At sixteen years old, a boy growing up in the early
twentieth century didn’t have much time left to become a
man. College was out of the question, given the Disneys’
lack of means. He would not be a lawyer or a doctor. Even
if his parents did have money, Walt’s poor grades and
inability to concentrate in school would have done him in.
His prospects were limited. Would he follow in his father’s
footsteps or forge his own path as his elder brother Roy had
done?
The break from his regular routine allowed Walt to
imagine the possibilities. During those two weeks, he must
have thought about many things. Perhaps he thought about
his friendship with schoolmate Walter Pfeiffer, whose family
had introduced him to the magic of the theater. Maybe he
thought about how he loved drawing and amusing
classmates with cartoons. He may have thought of the time
he and his sister, Ruth, were left home alone to discover a
barrel of tar outside. Walt said it would make for excellent

paint, but his sister protested. After he assured her it would
come off, the two proceeded to decorate the side of the
house with pictures of houses and black zigzags. It never
came off.
We don’t know what Walt was thinking during those two
weeks in bed. But what we do know, according to
biographer Bob Thomas, is that by the time his foot healed
and he returned to delivering papers, “he had decided to
become a cartoonist.”10 What was once a diversion was
now a destiny. He needed something to disrupt his comfort,
something painful to make him realize what was important.
It wasn’t that the nail was good; it was just the means that
forced him to listen. And as painful as it was, it worked.
At times we all need moments that force us to wake up,
that command our attention. These moments happen when
we least expect, whether we want them to or not. Our job
isn’t to wait for them or wonder why they occurred but
rather to see the opportunity they provide. Walt Disney used
an injury to think about what he wanted to do when he grew
up. In her grief, Jody Noland recognized a chance, maybe
even a responsibility, to give others comfort. When Eric
Miller stopped wondering why his five-year-old son got
brain cancer and decided to make the most of every
moment, his life and the lives of those around him were
changed.
As you avail yourself to how your life may be speaking,
you too must decide. Will you wallow in regret, wondering
why such a thing has befallen you, or will you choose to

act, making the most of your obstacle, and allow it to evolve
into an opportunity? Listening is where finding your calling
starts, but it’s not where it ends. Our ears can only take us so
far before our hands have to do the rest of the work.

TWO
Accidental
Apprenticeships
The Teacher Appears
When the Student
Least Expects
Every single thing that has ever happened in
your life is preparing you for a moment that is
yet to come.
—UNKNOWN

You cannot find your calling on
your own. It’s a process that
involves a team of mentors. And
everywhere you look, help is
available.
Getting pregnant at twenty-three years old was just about
the worst thing that could have happened to Ginny Phang. A
native Singaporean who had spent her childhood between
Indonesia and Singapore, she knew having a baby out of
wedlock meant trouble. This unexpected turn of events
would be the first in a series to change not only Ginny’s life
but also the lives of many other women. First, though, she
had to decide what to do about this baby.
“It started with me not doing well on my exams,” she
told me on a Skype call late one afternoon (early morning
for her). “In a place like Singapore . . . it’s very academic,
which means if you fail your exams or you don’t do well,
that’s the end of your life.”1
Feeling lost, Ginny fled to Jakarta to live with her

grandparents. Having gone through a series of bad
relationships, she finally met a guy who was different from
the rest. He was older, more mature, and successful. He also
came from a wealthy family, which was promising for a
young woman who didn’t have a hopeful future. Then she
got pregnant.
Her immediate reaction was, “Oh my God . . . I’m going
to be a mother!” Ginny had always loved children and was
excited to bring a baby into the world. Her boyfriend,
though, had a different reaction.
“We’re going to go for an abortion,” he said.
That wasn’t the answer she had expected. Having
accompanied two friends to their own abortions, she had
always told herself she’d never do that. After a month of
fighting over whether to keep the baby or not, the couple
came to a point where they knew a decision had to be made.
He gave Ginny an ultimatum: have an abortion, or find a
new boyfriend. To sweeten the deal, if she did have the
abortion, he would help her start a business, something
she’d always wanted to do. This was Ginny’s chance to
make something of herself, and there might not be many
others.
Abortions are illegal in Indonesia, so Ginny moved back
to Singapore to figure out what to do next. After arriving
home, she made an appointment to see the doctor and then
postponed it a week. Still having doubts, she scheduled an
abortion but spent the entire day before the procedure
deliberating over whether to go through with the decision.

She prayed, cried, even went to confession. Ginny felt
stuck.
“I just couldn’t bring myself to do [it],” she told me. “At
the same time, I didn’t know how I was going to make it
work.” To make matters worse, her mother had also given
an ultimatum. If Ginny kept the baby, she’d have to move
out of her parents’ house.
“In Singapore, you don’t leave the house until you get
married,” she explained, “because of the government
policies and how expensive it is.”
The idea of being out on her own scared her. Not only
that, but she would have to live with the guilt of having
brought public shame to her family. With no job or backup
plan, how would she survive?
The night before the abortion, just a few minutes before
eight o’clock when Ginny was supposed to take the pill that
would begin the abortion, her aunt called.
“Flush the pills,” she said. “We will help you. We don’t
know how, but we will help you.”
Those were the words Ginny was waiting to hear. She
always wanted to keep the baby but just didn’t know how to
make it work—until that phone call. Sometimes all it takes
to make a difficult decision is an affirming voice telling you
what you know to be true but still need to hear. That’s what
a phone call at eight o’clock at night did for a young, soon-
to-be mother from Singapore. Ginny flushed the pills.
“Everything just fell into place . . .” she recalled.

“Someone said something that felt right.”
This is a phrase Ginny uses a lot: it just felt right. For
her, feelings are important; they’re signposts to be trusted in
the journey to your purpose. But even an emotion wasn’t
enough to sway her toward bringing a baby into the world,
risking personal bankruptcy and financial failure. She had to
have confirmation. At the time, plenty of people were giving
her reasons why she shouldn’t keep the baby, but none that
made sense. When her aunt called minutes before the
abortion, those were words that rang true. Confirmation
came in the form of one of the few relatives who hadn’t
abandoned her.
In spite of the odds against her, Ginny went through with
the pregnancy. For her, it was the only thing that felt right,
even if it meant being rejected by family, ending a
relationship, and facing public ridicule. She left home (her
mother wasn’t bluffing), moved in with her grandfather,
whose house belonged to the same woman who had
convinced her to keep her baby, and prepared to become a
mother.
If you were to speak with Ginny, you would be struck
immediately by her presence. She lacks any shame that
should follow someone who has been through so much
rejection. You can tell just from the way she carries herself
that she is someone who deserves respect, and you want to
give it to her. In her eyes there is a resolve that a simple
“no” or a “you can’t do this” is not going to stop. It was that
look, which I first saw in a TEDx video, that made me

respond to her e-mail. “I have a star personality,” she told
me. And I had to agree with her. She’s a strong woman,
hardened by pain and difficulty, but nonetheless full of life.
When we see someone who has succeeded in spite of
tremendous odds, we are tempted to proclaim this person a
“self-made” man or woman. When we do this, though, we
ignore an important fact, one that is essential to anyone’s
success—they didn’t do it alone. As I dug deeper into the
complexity of Ginny’s story, I realized that was the case for
her too. Yes, she’s a strong woman; that’s impossible to
miss. You can’t go through what she’s endured without
being tough; no one could argue with that. But even
strength has its shortcomings. What you might miss when
you first meet Ginny Phang—and this is in no way meant to
discredit her courage—is that without the support of a few
important people, she wouldn’t have made it.
The Accidental
Apprenticeship
In the Middle Ages, a young person worked for free in
exchange for experience, room, and board. The student,
called an “apprentice,” would live sometimes in the same
house as the master, sharing meals with the craftsman’s
family. This was the way a person became a professional,

and the process began as early as age twelve.
After completing the first stage of apprenticeship, the
student, who was now called a “journeyman,” could venture
out and travel to other cities, working on his own. What a
journeyman could not do, however, was take on
apprentices. That right was reserved only for masters. In
many ways, a journeyman was still a student, though now
able to be paid for his work. To be a journeyman meant
applying the techniques your teacher passed down to see if
they worked in the real world. It was a test, to see if you had
what it took to become a master. There was a certain amount
of restlessness to being a journeyman. It meant you hadn’t
found your place in the world yet.
After a season of wandering, a journeyman had to
submit a masterpiece to the local guild. If they found it
worthy, the journeyman could graduate to the title of master,
being accepted into the guild and finally able to take on
apprentices. Then the process would start all over again.
How much time do you think this process of
apprenticeship took? Based on the modern equivalents, we
might guess a few months, possibly even a year or two. Not
even close. Under this system, an apprentice typically
worked for a minimum of seven years before venturing out
on his own. Then he would spend another few years as a
journeyman before finally becoming a master—if he was
worthy. The entire process took about ten years. If you
started training at twelve, that meant you wouldn’t become a
professional until your twenties. And if you started later,

you might not be able to practice a trade until your thirties.
That’s 
only if you were lucky enough to get an
apprenticeship in the first place.
Ten years. That’s how long it took to master a craft. This
may be difficult to grasp today, when nearly every college
student has the opportunity to go through multiple
internships without much practical application, but as we
have seen so far, finding your calling takes time. Practice is
essential not only to achieve excellence but to clarify the
call itself. An apprenticeship was an excellent way of
learning a skill under the guidance of someone wiser and
more experienced. But these days, there is little left of the
apprenticeship system, which has left an unfortunate gap in
our education. With the dawn of the Renaissance, the guilds
eventually declined, and the popularity of universities grew,
replacing the apprenticeship with a more general education.
The ancient art of diving deep into a specific craft all but
disappeared.
In modern times, the responsibility for reaching your
potential is often left up to the individual. This is more than
a challenge; it’s a cruel taunt. How can a person be all she’s
supposed to be if she doesn’t know who she is, if she
doesn’t have some example to aspire to? Pulling ourselves
up by our bootstraps can only take us so far, and despite
what we’ve heard, there is no such thing as a self-made
man. We are all products of our environment, influenced by
the people we encounter and the places we live. Born into
this world with zero ability, we cannot talk, much less feed

or clean ourselves, on our own. We need help. Our parents
begin this process of helping us grow into our God-given
identities, but at some point someone else must take over.
In epic stories of old, a young hero is called away,
leaving his family to begin a great adventure. But before he
steps into battle to face the dragon or start a revolution, what
must happen? He needs a sage, a master magician, or
perhaps a retired coach. However he or she appears, the
mentor’s job is simple: Teach the young person how to
sharpen and refine his skills. Take over where his parents
left off.
But how does such a system work today? Not the way
you might think.
More often than not in the life of an extraordinary
person, at a certain point they encountered a guide, some
coach or mentor who helped them along, investing in their
abilities to help them grow into who they were born to be.
Sometimes it’s a single person; other times it’s a group of
people. Regardless, the result is an often informal process of
apprenticeship, full of failure and self-doubt, but ultimately
instructive.
The truth, in spite of what we might believe about
remarkable people, is that you cannot master a skill on your
own. Finding your calling will not happen without the aid
and assistance of others. Every story of success is, in fact, a
story of community. Some people will help you willingly,
while others may contribute to your education on accident.
But if you are wise, you can use it all. When you set out on

the road to self-discovery, it will not just be you walking on
that road. “No man is an island,” John Donne wrote, and
this is better news than we realize.2 We are all sharing the
same path as we march toward our destinies. Your journey,
though unique, is full of fellow sojourners, as well as
teachers who will help along the way. Your job is not to find
them but to recognize them when they appear.
In many ways, apprenticeship is an extension of the
parenting process. For some, a mother or father figure
initiates the transition from immaturity to maturity, but
eventually someone else must complete the process. At
some point while we head toward our life’s work, someone
new and unfamiliar will have to come into our lives and
speak 
with 
authority. 
These 
people 
often 
come
unexpectedly and can serve a vital role in our education. So
let’s look at how you don’t miss these accidental
apprenticeships.
Like Slipping into an Old
Pair of Shoes
Despite having made the decision to keep the baby, Ginny
was about to enter one of the most difficult times in her life.
What she needed most—the loving support of a community
—would be all but absent. “I was very lonely during

pregnancy, almost suicidal,” she told me. “It was the only
time in my life where I couldn’t see beyond twenty-four
hours.”
Each day, Ginny would wake up, grateful for making it
to another sunrise. And each night, she would cry herself to
sleep, overwhelmed with anxiety. Nearly every person in
her life had abandoned her. She had brought shame to her
family, lost her boyfriend, and compromised her social
status in a country where unwed mothers are treated as
second-class citizens. Even her friends didn’t know what to
do with her. While they were out partying, she was
preparing to be a mother. They couldn’t empathize with her
situation and started excluding her. Still, she knew
something was right about the path she was on.
During the delivery, the nurse kept asking when Ginny
wanted the epidural. At first she declined but eventually
took it because she started feeling sick. At the suggestion of
her aunt, Ginny wanted to have a natural birth, but no one
had ever told her how to do that. So she bore her son the
best that she knew how, while her mother sat in the corner
as she labored. It was hard, much harder than she imagined,
but she got through it and in the end had a beautiful baby
boy. “The birthing process made me realize how important
it is to be supported,” she said, “to have someone believe in
you and protect you—how important it is to keep women
safe.”
That was just the beginning. Though she didn’t know it
at the time, the whole experience, even the pain of

childbirth, would soon play an important role in Ginny’s
life.
After the birth, she went back to her job as an office
secretary, which provided some stability but wasn’t enough
to satisfy her. The position provided steady hours and
flexibility to spend time with her son, but the pay wasn’t
great and she was sure this wasn’t what she was supposed to
be doing with her life. “I was bored,” she said. “I couldn’t
see myself living this way for the rest of my life.” But she
wasn’t about to give up. In spite of the taboos that
surrounded her situation, she wanted respect and wasn’t
afraid to break convention to get it.
Partly out of curiosity and partly due to boredom, Ginny
started an online business educating mothers on the health
benefits of breastfeeding. She and her peers had grown up
on formula, and as a result, very few Singaporean mothers
knew much about nursing. Through her online store, she
sold T-shirts and other products advocating breastfeeding
awareness. She had seen the positive effects of nursing her
own child and wanted to help other mothers who were
interested in more natural approaches to child rearing.
Although she wasn’t much of an online shopper herself, the
experience opened up a whole new world to her.
Since she was usually working or taking care of her son,
most of Ginny’s socialization happened through a network
of friends she had met on the Internet. One friend, Amy,
was an Australian Chinese woman who had been successful
working as a doula in Singapore. Since she was the only

Asian doing that sort of work, the locals trusted her. One
night when they were talking, Amy said something to Ginny
that would change her life.
“Ginny, you will make a good doula.”
“What’s a doula?” I asked Ginny. “A birth coach,” she
told me, someone who helps a mother create a plan for how
she is going to handle the birth of her child. When she heard
this, it took Ginny by surprise, because back then she didn’t
know what a doula was either. She didn’t have one at her
own child’s birth and had no idea what doulas did. Her
friend added that whether she became a doula or not, taking
the class would be a good experience.
“I’ve always been a fan of personal development,”
Ginny told me.
So she signed up and took the class, learning all the
things that doulas did. But when it came time to attend her
first birth, Ginny forgot what to do. She panicked. Taking a
deep breath, Ginny let “her spirit take over” and tried to
focus, remembering her training. She started by massaging
the mother’s back, then comforted her through the
experience, assuring her that everything was going to be all
right. It worked. This wasn’t the mother’s first child, but it
was her first delivery without drugs, and she was scared.
Afterward the mother was elated, crediting Ginny for how
relaxed she felt and how easy the experience was.
“It was exhilarating,” Ginny recalled, “like slipping into
an old pair of shoes.”
That’s when she knew she could do this. Shortly after

that first delivery, her friend Amy left Singapore, almost as
mysteriously as she had entered Ginny’s life in the first
place. It wasn’t the most traditional model for mentoring,
but it was the apprenticeship Ginny needed. And as we will
see, that’s usually how the process works.
Multiple Mentors
Mentoring is an easy word to throw around these days.
You’ll hear it tossed into conversation amongst friends or
casually mentioned between business colleagues over
coffee. But mentoring is much easier to talk about than it is
to practice.
Why is it so difficult to find a mentor? To begin with,
you’re dealing with people: flawed human beings who each
have their own expectations and agendas. We all have our
own issues, and one of the reasons it can be so hard to find
a good mentor these days is that so few people have been
mentored. We have believed the myth of the self-made man
and have given in to the illusion of self-reliance. What we
need is something to pull us out of our own independence
and arrogance. Which means the mentor that comes might
not be the one we were expecting.
Chances are, your apprenticeship will not look like you
imagined. Your mentor may not be the teacher you dreamed
of, and that’s the point. This is your education of what is,
not what you think should be. A teacher who challenges

you, who doesn’t meet your expectations, who forces you to
think and act differently, is exactly what you need. That is,
after all, the job of an educator.
“The teacher appears when the student is ready” is a
nice-sounding cliché, but the truth is the student is never
ready. Throughout our lives, we will encounter a number of
people who will appear at times, ready to instruct, and it will
be our job to recognize them.
In my life, I’ve had many mentors: from my college
chaplain, to my first boss, to the guy who lives down the
street from us and sometimes helps me fix things. Most of
the time, I’ve failed to recognize the importance of these
relationships until well after they were over. Sometimes,
their influence was subtle and undetected. Other times, it
was clear they were trying to invest in me; I was just too
stubborn to appreciate it. In every example, though, I would
have benefited more from the mentor had I been intentional
about the process.
Throughout this process of finding your life’s work, you
must be willing to look for mentors in unexpected places.
Your friends, long-lost relatives, even old relationships that
have dwindled down may become the sources of inspiration
you need. Each person serves a purpose: some will arrive at
just the right time to cheer you on, while others are there to
identify with the struggles you’re living. And even others
will show up when you need them the most. All of these
people in their own way are mentors, contributing to your
apprenticeship.

How do you find these people? Where do they come
from? It’s hard to tell. Likely they’ll surprise you, appearing
seemingly out of nowhere at just the right time. The whole
thing will look like an accident or a mystery but, of course,
it is far from it. As Paulo Coelho writes, “When you want
something, all the universe conspires in helping you to
achieve it.”3 There’s some truth to that. Fortune favors the
motivated. When a person is determined to not just succeed
but to do work that matters, the world makes room for such
ambition. You won’t be able to predict how this
apprenticeship unfolds, but you can be prepared for it when
it comes.
Ginny Phang could have easily missed her calling had
she not heeded her friend Amy’s advice to take the doula
class. She may not have been ready for what would be
required of her, but she was ready to take action. And that
small step made all the difference.
I often hear people who need guidance in their lives
asking for advice on how to find a mentor, but that’s the
wrong question to ask. When you pursue a calling, you will
find a community of supporters to champion you along the
way. It’s not up to you where these people come from or
even how to locate them. You just need to keep your eyes
open. Accidental apprenticeships are all around you, and if
you listen to your life you’ll be able to recognize them.

The Resurgence of
Apprenticeship
In East Hampton, New York, Ellen Frank is reviving a
practice the world hasn’t seen since the Renaissance. In her
small studio, she is teaching a handful of interns the art of
illumination, a technique that involves using gold to
embellish sacred documents. The studio is called the
Illumination Atelier and is a haven for live-in artists who
want to work under the guidance of a true master.
Atelier is a French word meaning “workshop,” and
during the Middle Ages these were the main areas of
education for artists. In such a workshop, the master artist,
often accompanied by assistants and apprentices, would
create works that would go out in the master’s name. It was
a collaborative effort, which allowed the artist to produce
more work and provide a learning experience for the
fledgling artists.
Ateliers often worked in collaboration with local guilds,
which controlled the apprenticeship process, and although
they still exist in a few places around the world today, their
popularity has dramatically declined. To Ellen Frank, this is
a tragedy. Her small workshop is an opportunity to share her
passion for not only art but also peace and reconciliation.
After a trip to Jerusalem in 1999, where she experienced
a land in turmoil, Ellen was inspired to create a large-scale

piece using the illumination project.4 While designing the
invitation to a celebration party for the exhibit, she had “a
moment of grace,”5 realizing she wanted to continue
exploring these themes of peace and cultural understanding
in her work. She started a foundation, which provides
support and housing for interns who want to learn
illumination. Since 2005, she has been finding interns on
Craigslist from more than fifteen different countries and
inviting them to work in her studio.
In Ellen’s studio, interns are involved in the whole
process: from imagining the initial concept of a piece, to the
creation of it, to even important business decisions that have
to be made for the foundation. They always get their names
added to the work they do.
The decline of the atelier, according to Ellen, has meant
a decline in artistic technique and craft. Her little atelier is
trying to fix that. “I think we bring back an intimacy of
mentorship and training where the apprentice . . . learns
directly from the experienced artist,” she said in an
interview with National Public Radio. “They also acquire
validation. It’s not teaching through critique. It’s not
teaching through judging their own work. It’s teaching
through saying, ‘Yes, and why not try this?’ and, ‘Yes, can
you push this further?’ ”6
When Ellen teaches, her voice is gentle, almost
motherly, as she guides her students through the technique.
With soothing words of affirmation and phrases that build

anticipation, like “this is the magic moment,” she helps you
feel the significance of what you’re doing, which in turn
leads to confidence.7 Some interns, she admits, have even
become better than she is at certain techniques. This is the
power of the process. A good apprenticeship isn’t about an
exchange of information; it’s about passing on the skill of
the master and multiplying it.
This small studio is just the beginning. Ellen’s real dream
is an “open atelier” where all kinds of people, not just
artists, can come and learn.8 As I listened to the radio tell
her story, it was hard to not think education should look
more like this—paint splotches and messy smocks in a
cramped studio—and less like large lecture halls with
passive students parked in seats for ninety minutes at a time,
eyes glued to a slide presentation.
Can you imagine a world where school looked more like
an atelier and less like an auditorium? In some areas, that’s
not quite so unrealistic.
Germany has one of the lowest unemployment rates in
Western Europe. The reason for this is its “dual system,”
which involves young adults enrolling in vocational schools
that allow them to split their time between study and work.
In this system, a student might work a few days per week
with the business and then spend the rest of his time at
school. Unlike most internships, these students get paid a
percentage of a full-time worker’s wages, and 90 percent of
them complete their programs. About half of those people
continue working with the company after the apprenticeship

is over.
The experience is a taste of employment that not only
adds value to the company but also gives the student an
education he can then use in the real world. Unlike other
parts of the world where unemployment is skyrocketing,
Germany has a shortage of workers. A good job is available
for anyone who is qualified and willing to work. What’s
lacking are the workers. Maybe this is true in other parts of
the world, as well. We don’t need more jobs. We need a
better way to equip people for what they’re meant to do. In
the case of Germany, such a system seems to be creating
more jobs than it can handle.9
An apprenticeship is designed to give you guidance
from an expert, knowledge in a given field, and experience
in a challenging environment, all of which prepare you for
your future. But such an experience, as promising as it
sounds, is not easy. It takes a lot of courage and tenacity to
not only find but also finish an apprenticeship.
Life is complicated and messy, not often looking like the
textbook told us. Most of us struggle to find our way, and
we are desperate for guidance, which often seems
unavailable. It can be tempting to check out and choose a
seemingly safer path. The chance to do work that matters is
a choice. Opportunities to learn and grow are available, if
we’re willing to look in the right places and humbly accept
what we find.

Use Your Environment:
The Steve Jobs Strategy
Every place you go, every person you meet, every job you
have is a chance to gain greater clarity in your self-
education. Life is the classroom, and if you are paying
attention, you can recognize the daily lessons available.
Each day is a new page in a textbook you never complete,
and as you sit in the student’s seat, you realize the
apprenticeship has already begun.
The smart way to begin this process is by practicing with
the tools available to you. Traditional mentors are hard to
come by, but you already have access to wisdom and
experience, teachers who will guide you in making
decisions that will help you find your way. Who can you
call on the phone and talk to right now? What friend or
former coach would meet you for coffee this week if you
asked? We all want to find someone who wants to invest in
us, someone who cares, without realizing those people are
already in our lives. The worst way to get a mentor is to go
find one. The best way is to see the one that’s already there.
Ginny Phang spent years trying to find her way, barely
surviving. She wasn’t searching for some great calling; she
was fighting for her life. But this is how we encounter our
life’s work: in the midst of some other pursuit, while striving
to pay the bills or simply make it through another day. At

some point, though, something unexpected appears and
changes everything. And often that something is a someone.
The teacher appears when you least expect.
For Ginny, a few people served as guides in her journey.
First there was the aunt who encouraged her to keep her
son and gave her a place to stay. Then there was Amy, the
friend who told Ginny she’d be a good doula, convincing
her to undergo the training. Finally there was the producer
who filmed a documentary on unwed mothers in Singapore
and became Ginny’s roommate. As Ginny’s business grew,
her roommate helped her by watching the baby and taking
care of administrative responsibilities, such as building her
first website. Without the support of these people, Ginny
admitted, “I wouldn’t be where I am today.”
Each person had a different role to play and helped in a
unique way, appearing at just the right time when she
needed it. This model looks vastly different from the
Renaissance version of apprenticeship but accomplishes the
same result. An accidental apprenticeship begins with
listening to your life and paying attention to the ways in
which you’re already being prepared for your life’s work.
Ginny’s success wasn’t in that she planned any of this out; it
was that when the opportunities came, she acknowledged
them and took action.
This was how Steve Jobs, the cofounder of Apple
Computer, got his start. His own education was almost
entirely informal, beginning with a short stint at Reed
College, where the classes were so expensive he decided to

drop out after six months. Sleeping on the floors of friends’
dorm rooms, he stayed on campus and continued to audit a
few classes, including a calligraphy course, which he later
credited for influencing the beautiful typography used in the
first Mac.
Later, Jobs became friends with Steve Wozniak, who,
before they founded Apple together, helped him get a job at
Atari. “Woz” had redesigned an earlier version of the game
Pong, which Jobs passed off as his own work to get hired as
a technician.
While working at Atari, Jobs, who was hard to get along
with, learned important lessons about design, software
development, and creating technology for consumers. With
every opportunity, he gained guidance, knowledge, and
experience—each from a different source—all of which he
was able to use later in life with Apple and Pixar. 10 Rarely
do you find all the elements of an apprenticeship in one
place. But if you look in the right places and are careful to
pay attention, you will find them. Apprenticeship, then, isn’t
a class you take or a mentor you meet—it’s a choice you
make. And in that case, an accidental apprenticeship isn’t
much of an accident at all; it’s the intentional process of
choosing the opportunities you need to create your life’s
work.
Unlike a formal education, this option is available to
anyone. Instead of waiting for a teacher to come choose you
or an academic institution to accept you, this apprenticeship
is ready to begin when you are.

From Apprentice to Master
When Ginny Phang’s boss saw her on a full-page feature in
the national newspapers, he didn’t like it. Unwed pregnancy
is a taboo subject in Singapore, and most unmarried mothers
don’t talk about their situation, much less appear on TV.
Those willing to talk, therefore, tend to get a lot of attention.
Believing in the power of education to dispel ignorance,
Ginny started making appearances on any documentary,
current affairs program, or news show that would have her.
She would tell her story and share what she was doing. It
didn’t take long for her boss to find out what she was up to.
Upset, he told her she would have to choose between her
newfound passion and her stable job. He even offered her
more money to stick with the day job.
“I came to a crossroads where I had to decide,” Ginny
said. “Am I going to do this job that gives me certainty, or
take the leap of faith and venture into a place that’s never
been explored in Singapore?”11
At the time, there were no full-time doulas in Singapore.
Ginny’s Australian friend Amy had left the country, and the
few remaining doulas were only working part-time. Nobody
knew whether or not a person could make a living off this
kind of work. It was quite a gamble. “Leap, and the net will
appear” is a saying we sometimes hear in reference to such
situations.12 The idea behind the phrase is that when you
are backed into a corner, an impossible solution will present

itself. At the times when you feel stuck, the right thing to do
is take a risk and go “all in” with whatever the scariest
option might be. So that’s just what Ginny did. She took the
leap.
Fast-forward ten years. Ginny now runs Four Trimesters,
a full-time doula business and the largest company of its
kind in Singapore, with seven employees. She has been
featured on TV programs and in news articles and has had
the opportunity to speak at a TEDx event. Hers is a story of
defying the odds, of persevering until passion became
reality. If there ever were such a thing as a self-made
woman, Ginny is it. But did she really do it all on her own?
She would be the first to tell you no. It was difficult to
get that ultimatum from her boyfriend and even harder
having her mother throw her out of the house. Those were
difficult experiences and are still painful memories. Even
now, a decade later, she gets cross looks from strangers
when they learn she’s not married.
If you were to ask Ginny when she was a little girl what
she wanted to be, she wouldn’t have said “a doula.” That
idea hadn’t even occurred to her until someone else
suggested it. She always wanted to run her own business but
didn’t know how to make that happen. Through a series of
accidents, though, she found her way. It wasn’t by design
(not her design, anyway) and she didn’t understand what
was happening as the events were unfolding, but with the
help of a handful of people, Ginny was guided to her
calling.

“At five years old, I wanted to be a dancer and a
business woman,” Ginny wrote me in an e-mail. “By
thirteen, I thought I would make a good counselor and was
told that I would be a good radio DJ. Now in my thirties, I
am still unfolding and can see all my childhood dreams
materializing in my work as a doula.”13
There’s something to be said for the power of
perseverance and a person’s will to survive. Certainly
Ginny’s story is a testament to the ability of the human spirit
to endure. But it’s also a testament to the power of
community, a reminder that we never find a calling on our
own. We all need help.
Years ago, when deciding whether or not to keep her
baby, Ginny never could have imagined where she would
be now, helping other women have the support she never
received as a new mother. What makes her story special,
though, is not that she got help—help is always available
when we need it. It’s that she recognized it when it came.
Remember: this all began because Ginny didn’t do well
on her exams. It wasn’t an exceptional education that
brought her to this place. It was a series of unexpected
incidents and unlikely mentors that created the perfect
opportunity to grow. An accidental apprenticeship is like
that. These experiences are impossible to engineer but easy
to recognize once you know what to look for.
Sometimes the people who help us find our calling come
from the least likely of places. It’s our job to notice them.

THREE
Painful Practice
When Trying Isn’t
Good Enough
Always do more than is required of you.
—GEORGE S. PATTON

Your calling is not always easy.
It will take work. Practice can
teach you what you are and are
not meant to do.
Stephanie Fisher had come a long way from her
hometown of Jamestown, New York, to Augusta, Georgia—
777 miles, to be exact—but this was her dream and she
wouldn’t give it up. The year was 2010, and it was her
seventh time auditioning for American Idol. She had never
made it this far in the singing talent show, but this time,
things were going to be different. This time, she would see
the judges.
The twenty-three-year-old college graduate with degrees
in biochemistry and communication studies was determined
to make this audition a success and get invited to
Hollywood Week, where dozens of contestants would
compete for a chance at the finals. In the middle of pursuing
a master’s degree while working part-time as a model, she
figured there was little time left to chase her dream of
becoming a singer. It was now or never.

“I only have four more years of entertainment in my
life,” she told a local newspaper just before the audition,
“and if I have the opportunity to do it, I might as well take
that.”1
Dressed in a silvery sequined top, donning pearls around
her neck and fishnet stockings, Stephanie stepped onto the
platform of America’s most popular talent show, smiling
nervously before the judges.
“Wow,” a couple of them said, remarking on her outfit.
“I almost wore the same thing,” Randy joked.
Simon rolled his eyes, obviously annoyed.
“Okay,” Kara said, “let’s hear it.”
In her black and white oxfords, Stephanie spread her feet
apart as if to ready herself, and she opened with Peggy
Lee’s “Fever.”
“Never know how much I love you / Never know how
much I care . . .”
At this point, Stephanie was snapping her fingers and
provocatively staring down the judges, who were audibly
groaning. Her rhythm was off, the notes were wrong, and
everyone on the set knew it, including Stephanie.
They told her to stop. She frowned.
“Thank you, Stephanie,” Simon said.
“What did you think?” Kara asked.
“Terrible. Honestly, you can’t sing, sweetheart.”
In the YouTube video that tells her painful story over
and over again, Stephanie admitted to being a little

starstruck in the presence of Victoria Beckham, who was a
guest judge that day. Later she told a reporter this was
something the producers told her to say. Victoria offered to
turn around in hopes that it would make the contestant feel
more at ease. Stephanie accepted the offer, which felt forced
and a little too theatrical for me.
The young grad student started again, a little more
awkwardly, this time singing “Baby Love” by The
Supremes. It wasn’t any better. After a measure or two,
Victoria turned back around. This time Kara added to the
critical jabs, saying it was better when she was looking.
Another burst of laughter erupted from the judges.
“With the greatest respect,” Simon said in a proper
British accent, pausing for dramatic effect, “you have a
horrible voice.”
“Really?” Stephanie said, looking stunned but still
smiling nervously. All the preparation, all those long years
of dreaming, had led to this?
“Yeah,” Randy chimed sympathetically. “You ain’t got
it goin’ on.”
“You can’t give me a few minutes to get un-nervous?”
she pleaded.
“We’d need years, Stephanie,” Simon said, and the
judges again all laughed in unison.2
And as I watched from the anonymity of my home office
years after the fact, I realized how much truth there was in
that statement.

The Myth of Talent
It’s a typical story. If you’re familiar with any talent show,
you know it well. Young dreamer waiting her whole life for
a shot at the big time leaves home in search of an
opportunity. When she gets the chance, she steps into the
spotlight and proceeds to completely bomb, all in front of a
live audience. It’s painful but entertaining to watch, and we
all feel a slight twinge of guilt for amusing ourselves at
someone else’s expense.
The most painful part, though, is the fight that often
ensues after the rejection. The judges tell the talent she
doesn’t have what it takes, and she protests: “I don’t
understand . . . I’ve been practicing my whole life . . . I
hired a vocal coach . . . This is my dream . . . Everyone says
I can sing . . .” On one show, I saw a middle-aged man who
was voted off proceed to disagree with the judges, saying he
had been practicing with a choreographer for three hours a
night, and they simply didn’t know what they were talking
about.
We know the tale well. It’s the stuff prime-time
entertainment is made of. But what about when the opposite
happens—when an unknown person takes the stage and,
much to the amazement of the critics, blows everyone
away?
That’s what Susan Boyle did when she appeared on
Britain’s Got Talent in 2009. A middle-aged woman with a

thick Scottish accent, modest appearance, and a bit of an
attitude, Susan was not what the judges expected. By the
end of “I Dreamed a Dream” from Les Miserables, she had
received a standing ovation. How is it that one person over
the course of thirty seconds can astound an audience,
becoming the next international pop sensation, while
someone else cannot? What’s the difference?
The traditional answer, and the reason such shows exist
in the first place, is that the person doesn’t have any talent.
Forget passion and go find something you’re good at.
“You’re really smart,” Kara told Stephanie, while trying to
let the young lady down gently and point her in a more
productive direction.3
But how, then, do we explain the success of Hillary
Scott, who auditioned for American Idol twice but failed to
make it to the judges’ round both times, and then went on to
form the group Lady Antebellum? Lady A is one of the
most popular music groups in the world, having won seven
Grammys in their career. And what about pop singer Colbie
Caillat, who was also rejected twice on American Idol,
ironically singing her future hit “Bubbly,” which went on to
help her sell more than six million albums and ten million
singles?4 If the answer were as easy as “you don’t have
enough talent,” then Scott and Caillat would have had
reason to give up. But they didn’t, and perseverance paid
off—at least for them. So maybe there is more to the issue
than talent.
Over the past several years, researchers have argued that

what we used to think of as natural talent is, in fact, the
result of good old-fashioned practice. Author of Talent Is
Overrated, Geoff Colvin, wrote, “Talent means nothing like
what we think it means, if indeed it means anything at all.”5
Citing numerous studies of accomplished individuals,
world-class athletes, and performers whom we often
consider prodigies, he claimed the reason for their success
was practice. When the evidence does point to rare instances
of natural ability, he argued, it was always followed by
rigorous training. “Such findings do not prove that talent
doesn’t exist,” he wrote. “But they do suggest an intriguing
possibility: that if it does, it may be irrelevant.” In other
words, nobody reaches expert status without intense
preparation. Excellence, then, is a matter of practice, not
talent.6
Two-time Grammy winner Colbie Caillat testified to this,
admitting the Idol judges were right to reject her: “I was shy.
I was nervous. I didn’t look the greatest. I wasn’t ready for it
yet. I was glad, when I auditioned, that they said no.”7 Did
you catch that? She was glad, grateful even, for the
rejection. It made her try harder and helped her understand
she was not performing at her very best. The failure made
her better.
Is there a difference between Stephanie Fisher and the
American Idol rejects who went on to become superstars? If
it’s not talent, then what is it? Does practice alone explain
the gap between reality show rejects and future pop stars?

Or is there a deeper question we ought to be asking? We all
know someone whose passion exceeds their skill and who,
for no lack of trying, can’t seem to break through. What
advice do we offer such people? Can we honestly stare them
in the face and say, “Try harder”? Something about that
seems wrong.
Didn’t Stephanie try? It sure seems that way. And it’d be
hard to argue with her effort: she didn’t quit after seven
rejections. But maybe the problem wasn’t the amount of
practice she was doing. Maybe it was the kind of practice.
The Effort Excuse
Our parents told us to try. “It doesn’t matter how well you
do,” my dad used to tell me while looking at my report card,
“just that you did your best.”
I went through much of life explaining a lack of
excellence with that very excuse: I gave it my best. This
became my default shrug-it-off response whenever facing
failure. “At least I tried.” What more could anyone ask?
I used the Effort Excuse whenever encountering a
challenge that exceeded my abilities, like playing the
saxophone, for instance. I halfheartedly attempted to play
the woodwind instrument for six months before finally
quitting in frustration. It was just too difficult, or maybe I
just wasn’t that interested. What I was doing felt like trying,

like I was doing my best. But it wasn’t. I was confusing my
understanding of ability with what was actually possible.
For many of us, there is a fundamental problem with our
understanding of our own capabilities. We are often
exceeding our own expectations of ourselves. And in spite
of the evidence pointing to the contrary, we continue to
believe in the Myth of Talent, that some people are born a
certain way, that we cannot rise above our circumstances
and achieve something greater than we’ve ever done before.
When we do this, we deceive ourselves.
I gave up playing the saxophone before pushing myself
to the limits of my ability. I know this, because when I
started playing guitar the same thing happened. After six
months of “trying,” I wanted to quit, but this time my dad
wouldn’t let me. Whenever I would get into trouble, he
would ground me from all activities except playing the
guitar. “If you want to listen to music,” he would say,
“you’ll have to play it yourself.” Sure, I was being
disciplined for whatever wrong I had committed, but he was
also putting me in a position that forced me to grow, and it
worked. After only months of practicing, of pushing
through that six-month dip, I was playing the riffs I had
grown up listening to, better than I ever thought possible.
Surely the same has happened to you. At some point you
did something you didn’t believe you could do, something
that surprised you. Maybe a coach encouraged you or a
parent pushed you or in a moment of inspiration you
motivated yourself. But you dug a little deeper, increased

your dedication, and somehow accomplished the impossible
—all because you changed the way you thought. Hardwired
in our brains and bodies is a potential greater than we
realize, and all we have to do to unlock it is believe.
Psychology professor Carol Dweck has written about this,
explaining why some people respond to rejection differently
than others, saying the difference between the successful
and unsuccessful often comes down to mindset.8
According to Dweck, most people adhere to one of two
mind-sets: the fixed mindset or the growth mindset. With the
fixed mindset, people are born with a certain number of
finite abilities and cannot exceed those abilities. With the
growth mindset, however, potential is unlimited. You can
always get better. For this kind of person, the goal is not so
much to be the best in the world but to be better than you
were yesterday. Regardless of natural talent or the lack
thereof, 
every 
person 
has 
the 
ability 
to 
improve
themselves.9
When my dad told me to do my best, he wasn’t setting
me up for disappointment. He was teaching me a valuable
lesson about life—it’s more important to try than to rest on
your natural ability. Why? Because you’re capable of more
than you realize, and in trying, you learn something new as
you push past possibility. As a result, you grow, learning
that most skills are not inborn, but learned. Practiced. At
least, they can be, if you’re willing to adopt the growth
mindset and dedicate yourself to the practice that follows.
Even the most gifted people do not have what it takes to

succeed without the right attitude and years of practice.
More Than Mindset
Did Stephanie Fisher have the right mindset? Was she not
focused enough? Did she not believe enough? Or was there
some other thing she was lacking?
The term deliberate practice was first coined by K.
Anders Ericsson, a Swedish psychologist at the University
of Florida whose research claimed that talent is not the cause
of excellence—practice is. But not just any kind of practice,
he said—a specific kind of practice that leads to expert
performance.10
In an era of human history in which we prize comfort
above nearly every other virtue, we have overlooked an
important truth: comfort never leads to excellence. What it
takes to become great at your craft is practice, but not just
any kind of practice—the kind that hurts, that stretches and
grows you. This kind of practice, which Ericsson called
“deliberate” and we might consider more appropriately as
“painful,” is extremely difficult. It takes place over the
course of about ten years, or ten thousand hours—
incidentally the average length of an apprenticeship. But this
is not where the practice ends; it’s just where it begins. In
other words, you don’t clock in ten thousand hours and
instantly become an expert. You have to do the right kind of

practice.
According to Daniel Coyle, author of a book called The
Talent Code, the right kind of practice is a process of
repeated tasks that end in failure. You fail and fail and fail
again until you finally succeed and learn not only the right
way to do something, but the best way.11 This is what he
calls “deep practice,” and it’s the reason why putting in just
enough time will only get you so far. To master any skill,
you must first choose a task; then do it over and over again
until the activity becomes second nature; and finally, push
through the times when you fail, exhibiting even greater
focus as you repeat the action until you’ve done it right.12
Most of us have believed that all it takes to get good at
something is time. If you put enough hours in, eventually
you will be great. But this isn’t always true. In Ericsson’s
research, ten thousand hours of practice was a common
characteristic amongst world-class performers, but it was not
the only characteristic. If anything, ten thousand hours is
more a description of expert performance than a prescription
for how anyone can achieve expertise. Every performer in
the study embodied a certain kind of practice. It wasn’t just
the quantity of hours they accumulated but the quality of
practice they did.
This kind of practice is a deep work that brings world-
class athletes and musicians to the edge of their abilities and
then takes them one step further.13 Understanding the
distinction between ordinary and extraordinary practice will

help us understand why Stephanie Fisher continued to fail,
why Colbie Caillat eventually didn’t, and why pursuing
your calling is supposed to be difficult.
It’s easy to practice when the activity is something we
enjoy, but what do you do when the excitement runs out
and your strength disappears? What do you do when that
first thrill of entering a new vocation begins to wane? Do
you give up? Or do you push through the pain and make
your way to mastery? This is where experts differ from the
rest of us. They recognize the resistance we all feel but
instead choose to see it as a sign of how close they are to
their goal. Disciplining themselves, they deliberately lean in
to the most difficult parts when most people tend to quit. We
have come to call these people “geniuses” and “prodigies”
without ever fully understanding the work that it takes to
reach such a status. But the truth is, what’s in them just
might be in all of us.
Have you ever tried something and completely failed the
first time? Remember wiping out so badly you never wanted
to try again, never wanted to get back on the bike or ask
another person out on a date? We understand that some
skills take time and none of us knows how to do certain
things without a little failure. Pain is instructive to the person
willing to learn. But do we apply the same lesson to our
vocations? Usually not.
As children, we are courageous and willing to fail, but as
we get older, we acquire inhibitions. Our shame reflex kicks
in. Unwilling to try new things, we settle for good when

called to greatness. Why do we do this? Because it’s easy.
To push ourselves past what others expect, beyond what is
normal, is difficult and sometimes awkward. But it is a
necessary part of the process.
What does it take to develop the habits that lead to
excellence? How do we not just answer our callings but
master them? There are three requirements for deliberate
practice, according to Ericsson and his team of researchers.
First, the practice requires a context: time and energy from
the individual as well as trainers, teaching materials, and
facilities in which to train.14
Second, the activity must not be “inherently motivating.”
It has to be something you wouldn’t naturally enjoy
doing.15 Think of it this way: if the practice is enjoyable,
then you aren’t growing. Muscle grows through strain and
stress that create tiny tears in the muscle fiber and cause it to
expand. Skills and knowledge are developed the same way.
This is why so few people engage in the process of painful
practice. It’s hard. But, as Tom Hanks says in A League of
Their Own, “It’s supposed to be hard. If it wasn’t hard,
everyone would do it. The hard is what makes it great.”16
Third, the activity cannot be done a very long time
without leading to exhaustion. You must take yourself
beyond what you think is possible, to the utter limits of your
ability. If you aren’t pushing yourself to the point of sheer
exhaustion, you’re not trying hard enough.17
Now contrast this paradigm of practice with my regular

running habit, which I usually do a few times a week if I’m
lucky. It’s fun, easy, and keeps me in shape, but will it lead
to world-class performance? Not likely. I haven’t put nearly
enough hours in, not to mention the right kind of hours. I
only run when it’s convenient, never pushing myself too
hard. Why don’t I put more effort into exercise? Because I
don’t want to. It’s something I do for fun, not excellence.
This is an important distinction when considering your
life’s work. Most people won’t continue doing something
they aren’t passionate about, especially when it gets hard.
Putting an activity through painful practice is a great way to
determine your direction in life. If you can do something
when it’s not fun, even when you’re exhausted and bored
and want to give up, then it just might be your calling.
I don’t know where this idea that your calling is
supposed to be easy comes from. Rarely do easy and
greatness go together. The art of doing hard things requires
an uncommon level of dedication. You have to love the
work to be able to persevere through those difficult times,
those painful moments when you would probably rather
quit. How do you do that without an uncanny amount of
passion? It’s not possible. You must love the work. Not until
you find something you can do to the point of exhaustion,
to the extent that you almost hate it but can return to it
tomorrow, have you found something worth pursuing.
Love, I think, is a much better criterion than lack of
difficulty. If you can love what you do, even when it hurts,
then you may have more than a hobby. And if you’ve never

pushed your talents this far before, if you’ve never tested
your skills that much, then you probably haven’t discovered
your true vocation. Sometimes, the only way to know the
difference between a hobby and a calling is to put yourself
through the crucible of painful practice.
What a Prodigy Doesn’t
Look Like
When I think of Martyn Chamberlin, a single word comes to
min d : prodigy. A precocious twenty-one-year-old web
developer running his own company as a senior in college,
he looks like the poster child for the next Microsoft or
Google. Seeing his sudden success, you might be tempted to
think of him as a young Bill Gates. Like me, you might
assume he must have been using a computer his whole life.
And you would be wrong.
The truth is Martyn had only used the family computer
for schoolwork before the age of sixteen. But in just a short
amount of time, he learned Photoshop, familiarized himself
with HTML and CSS, and started charging for web design
services. In less than two years, he built a blog, started a
business, and began attracting clients to earn money for
college. What might surprise you is that long before he was
a web developer, Martyn was an artist, and he never would

have imagined himself spending his days staring at a
computer screen.18
Martyn’s story is not one of long-term preparation for
some big moment, but rather a testimony of how powerful a
spark of inspiration can be at just the right time, and how
practice can happen even without our even knowing it.
A homeschool kid growing up in the home of a Baptist
minister, Martyn didn’t have much access to the one
computer in the Chamberlin house. So he spent his free time
painting and playing guitar. When his brother William left
their hometown of Bixby, Oklahoma, to attend the
University of Tulsa in 2008, he left the family computer
open for his younger brother to use. “Before then,” Martyn
recalled in a phone conversation, “I rarely touched a
computer because he was always on it.” Just before William
left, Martyn told his brother he wanted to build websites for
people, so William gave him a book on the subject.
When I asked him where the desire to build websites
came from, he said it probably came from watching his
brother. “A case of younger brother syndrome, I guess,”
Martyn said. “William was smart, going to college. I was a
starving artist who wasn’t living in reality. I realized I
needed to make a name for myself if I was ever going to
attract the kinds of people I wanted to spend my life with.
Plus, I loved design.” Still, he was unsure of the future.
When he was eighteen, Martyn took a trip from
Oklahoma to California to attend a painting workshop,
where he created an eleven-by-fourteen-inch “oil on linen”

painting, which was featured in the Zantman Art Gallery in
Carmel. At the time, he thought this was his big break, what
would finally launch his art career. But when he started
posting his artwork online, he not only unlocked a passion
he never knew he had; he also saw a demand for a new
skill.
When Martyn started working on websites, it was first
just a hobby but then developed into something more. His
initial website was a replica of BubbleUnder.com, a tutorial
in the book his brother gave him, which he never published.
His second project was a personal home page, a site
showing his art portfolio. The third was a website for an
Australian client who ended up never using it but paid
Martyn $800 nonetheless. It was his first paying gig. “It
taught me that people were willing to pay for my skill set,”
he recalled.
As Martyn put his work out there for the world to see, he
noticed how visitors to his website started showing more
interest in his design services than his oil paintings. After
building that first website, he felt exhilarated. “It made me
feel like I had just made something important,” he said. Not
unlike the feeling he experienced after finishing a painting.
“Something just clicked.”
Now, a few years later, Martyn runs his own web design
company, which helps pay the bills while he finishes up
school. Every time he works on a website, he uses skills he
acquired as an artist. Concepts like color theory,
composition, and the golden triangle help him create better

sites for clients—skills he learned long before he ever
starting building websites. Never would he have guessed all
those years of painting were actually training him for
something that wasn’t art, at least not in the traditional
sense.
So how did a young man who dreamed of becoming an
artist turn into a web developer? How did someone who
didn’t grow up playing computer games start a business
building websites? And how did he learn all those skills so
quickly? The easy answer is to say he was called. But as we
have seen, a calling is never so simple. The more complex
answer, the honest one, is that before he knew what he was
doing, Martyn was practicing.
The lesson of the Accidental Apprenticeship is that long
before a person is ready for his calling, life is preparing that
person for the future through chance encounters and
serendipitous experiences. That’s what Martyn’s brother
William was doing. He was mentoring his little brother,
without even knowing it, in a skill that would eventually be
instrumental in his success. Neither brother probably knew
the significance of what was happening, but the two were
engaged in a long-distance apprenticeship in which the elder
was influencing the younger, helping him find his way.
But Martyn didn’t stop with watching his brother. He
absorbed all the content available to him, reading everything
he could find on the subject—blogs, articles, books,
anything. His goal wasn’t just to be good; he wanted to be
great. When working on a website, especially at the

beginning, if he came across a problem he couldn’t solve,
he would look up the answer online and figure it out. “I
used to joke, saying, ‘I’m not a good programmer,” he said.
“I’m just really good at using Google.’ There was a lot of
truth to this.”
All humility aside, when Martyn got serious, he acquired
a skill most people cannot fathom figuring out. And he did it
in just a couple of years. He didn’t study abstract
information or pay thousands of dollars for classes with
outdated information he’d never use. He used his previous
experience, got to work, and asked for help along the way.
He practiced.
The way Martyn Chamberlin found his calling, or at least
the start of it, was an accident. His brother gave him a book
that unlocked a skill he never knew he had and opened up a
world of possibility. He watched what someone else did, got
a vision for his future, and spent hours every day working
toward that goal. It’s not that he knew he wanted to design
websites. He didn’t. He just loved art and stumbled upon an
application of that passion that surprised him. Trying
something new, he discovered that he was good at building
websites and enjoyed it.
True practice is not just about learning a skill; it’s about
investing the time and energy necessary to discern if this is
what you are meant to do. It’s about using difficulty to
discover what resonates and what does not. And as you see
what does, you will take one more step in the right direction.

It Starts with a Spark
Aren’t we discrediting luck a little, though? Don’t some
people succeed just because they get a big break when
others do not? Certainly we can’t deny the existence of
special opportunities for some people. The idea that every
person can be whatever he or she wants isn’t always true.
Success is more than a matter of hard work; it’s contingent
on factors sometimes outside of our control. Where and
when you were born can influence what you do.
But greatness does not just happen—Ericsson’s research
and common sense tell us that. Skill is the result of intense
practice; it’s the product of persistent trial and error until the
person gets it right. Nobody walked on to the set of
American Idol and blew away the judges without practicing,
and nobody picked up a computer and started coding. It
takes a lot of practice to get good.
There are, however, times when practice is not enough,
as with Stephanie Fisher’s seven auditions. And there are
surprising moments of breakthrough, as with Martyn
Chamberlin, when a person picks up a skill on the first try as
if he were born for it.
Maybe he was.
What we are learning from science now is that although
humans are capable of more than anybody thought a
hundred years ago, there are some abilities no amount of
practice can overcome.19 This is why we consistently see

Kenyans winning marathons and why Asians tend to be
good at math. It’s not just the existence of opportunities that
creates success; it’s the fact that there seem to be some
things we were made to do and some things we were not.
How do we find such things? What makes some little
boys and girls want to be athletes instead of musicians? Or
what causes a painter to want to learn computer
programming, for that matter? We can learn a lot from case
studies of famous athletes and musicians and deepen our
understanding of skill acquisition through research, but what
science can’t prove—what we still don’t know—is what
makes a person want to practice in the first place. What
drives a person to put in those countless hours of practice?
Where does motivation come from? “It starts with a
spark,” Daniel Coyle told me in an interview. “You get a
vision of your future self. You see someone you want to
become. . . . It’s a very mysterious process.”20
When my son Aiden saw the animated Pixar movie Cars for
the first time, he was transfixed. He had seen films and
cartoons before but none that could hold his attention. Cars
was different. At one year old, he watched the entire movie
from start to finish without stopping, which he had never
done before. Now he has enough merchandise from the
movie to fill two entire bedrooms. He is obsessed. Neither
my wife nor I pushed any of this on him, but the moment he

saw the cars race across the screen, he lit up—and ever
since, he’s loved it.
Was there something innate in Aiden, something maybe
even God-given, that made him love that movie? I don’t
know. That’s not really the point. What I do know is that his
attraction to a cartoon says something to me about my son:
Aiden has a personality. And with that unique personality
comes a destiny that is all his own, one independent of
external circumstances and upbringing. Sure, his mom and I
can influence him, and his friends can rub off on him, and
his genes may dictate the extent of certain abilities, but that
is not where his future ends. It’s where it begins. There will
always be those “spark” moments when who he is and what
he is meant to be shine through.
No one illustrates this better than Garrett Rush-Miller, the
boy whose handicap proposed severe limitations on his life.
At five years old, he was blind and unable to walk, and the
doctors were skeptical of how long he would live. And yet,
the moment he touched that tandem bicycle, everything
changed. He “lit up,” according to his dad. That was his
spark.
Our natural talent, or lack thereof, is not enough. Neither
is practice. Some skills will seem to come naturally while
others have to be developed. We can try a lot of things, but
some we will do better than others, and some failures are not
challenges to overcome but signs of what we shouldn’t be
doing. But what we must have before any of this is an initial
spark, that moment of inspiration when we, too, light up.

Which is something entirely different from luck.
As Jim Collins pointed out in Great by Choice, Bill
Gates was not the only high school student in the 1970s
with access to computers. And Tiger Woods wasn’t the only
kid whose dad played golf. So why did these men succeed
in extraordinary ways when the same opportunities were
available to others? They embraced their opportunity and
then did something extraordinary with it. “Luck, good and
bad,” Collins wrote, “happens to everyone, whether we like
it or not.” But when we look at those who achieve
extraordinary success, we see people “who recognize luck
and seize it, leaders who grab luck events and make much
more of them.”21
What makes a person successful, then, is not the luck,
but what he or she does with it. Opportunities come. The
question is what will you do when they arrive? Successful
people are just as “lucky” as the unsuccessful. The
difference is they do something remarkable with their lucky
moment while the rest of the world sits around, waiting for
the next lucky streak to come.
In that sense, we all have opportunities—not necessarily
to become whatever we want, but to become someone, the
person we were meant to be. It’s one thing to chalk up
successes to good fortune, especially when they belong to
someone else, and quite another to recognize that we live in
a world of opportunity and we all can do something with
what we’ve been given. Practice is what tests your resolve,
what forces you to hone your abilities long after the spark

has faded. Are you committed to the craft, or will you quit
when it gets too hard?
The ultimate goal of practice is to reach a state of what
K. Anders Ericsson calls “eminent performance,” when a
person goes “beyond the knowledge of their teachers to
make a unique innovative contribution to their domain.”22
We all want to do something that we are good at, that the
world in some way recognizes, but the point of practice is
never just about skill acquisition. It’s about making a
contribution to the world. Which is why when we are in the
midst of pursuing our calling, we must not only ask if this is
something that we are good at, but if it is something good.
We need more than excellence to satisfy the deepest
longings of our souls.
Which should raise the question: Is it, perhaps, possible
to succeed at the wrong thing?
It is, indeed.
The Curious Case of
William Hung
If you were to do a Google search for “American Idol
rejects,” you would instantly retrieve a list of names that will
forever live in Internet infamy. Toward the top of that list
sits, of course, Stephanie Fisher, the awkward grad student

who embarrassed herself in front of Victoria Beckham. But
long before Stephanie took the stage for the seventh time in
2010, William Hung appeared during the third season of the
show to do a rendition of Ricky Martin’s “She Bangs.”
“I want to make music my living,” he told the cameras
moments before appearing before the judges.
At five-foot-six, wearing a blue button-up shirt with
pictures of assorted shoes on it and sporting an overbite,
William didn’t look like the kind of person destined for the
spotlight. Not unlike Stephanie’s, his performance was
underwhelming to the judges, who tried to hide their
laughter while he moved his hips and sang off-key.
“You can’t sing, you can’t dance, so what do you want
me to say?” Simon asked.
“I already gave my best, and I have no regrets at all,”
William said, his response contrasting with the typical
confrontational responses the judges were accustomed to
receiving. Then he added with pride, “You know, I have no
professional training of singing and dancing.”
To which Simon responded, “No? Well, there’s the
surprise of the century.”23
In the end, it didn’t work out for William and he was
sent home like so many others. But something strange
happened after that. Long before “going viral” became the
phenomenon it is today, William Hung’s audition video
started racking up thousands, and then millions, of views on
YouTube. Instead of people laughing at him, they cheered.
A fan set up a site in his honor, and in the first week it

received more than four million hits. Within a month, that
number had exceeded eight million.
William began receiving e-mails from people thanking
him for his courage and example, which made the young
man wonder if there was a career hiding somewhere in all
this fame. That was around the time he was offered his first
record contract.
At the time of his audition, William was a civil
engineering student at the University of California,
Berkeley. After his performance on American Idol, he won
the hearts of fans everywhere, as well as the attention of the
media. Koch Entertainment offered him a deal that resulted
in his first album, Inspiration, a collection of cover songs
that sold more than two hundred thousand copies, followed
by two other less successful records.
In 2004, William left college to pursue a career in music,
making appearances on the shows of David Letterman,
Ellen DeGeneres, and Howard Stern. He even returned for a
guest performance on American Idol, the same show from
which he was rejected only months before. It was, in a way,
poetic justice. He had turned defeat into triumph and spent
the next few years performing all over the world, living off
the fame won by a viral video on YouTube.
In spite of its success, the career of William Hung was
controversial. Some criticized his fame, saying it reinforced
Asian stereotypes and promoted racism, as he was thought
to have no real musical talent. Others rooted for him. They
loved his tenacity. None of the critiques seemed to bother

the endlessly optimistic William, who knew how much his
story meant to his fans. He was living his dream and sharing
it with the world.
In 2011, though, that dream died when William ended
his music career by accepting a job as a technical crime
analyst.24 Was he giving up on his dream? Weren’t the
millions of fans proof he had found his calling, that music
was what he was supposed to be doing with his life? Maybe
not. In an earlier interview, he told a reporter, “I may
disappoint you with saying this, but I’m actually hoping to
become a math teacher someday.” In the same interview, he
shared his love for the Pythagorean theorem and said that
his favorite mathematician had to be Euclid.25
Sometimes it just takes a little time to find out what you
are meant to do with your life. As I watched William light
up while talking about math, it’s no wonder he became an
analyst whose daily responsibilities include calculating the
probability of criminal activity.26 In that earlier interview,
he offered clues as to where his true passion lay, saying
things like engineering “takes even greater dedication” than
music.27
Does that really sound like someone who’s destined to
be a musician?
“My passion has always been math,” he told a reporter
after his almost decade-long stint with fame. “It just took a
while to end up as my career.”28
Through the long and windy road toward his calling,

William learned about perseverance and staying true to his
passion, in spite of what people say. In a speech delivered at
a Toastmasters meeting, he said, “When you see a little
hope, doors will open. . . . Never give up, because all you
need is a little hope.”29
Watching him retell his story one YouTube clip after
another, I can see why so many people were fans of
William. He knows he’s being ironic. He knows he can’t
sing as well as Ricky Martin and that he’s an awkward
dancer, but that doesn’t stop him from trying. He just loves
music. And this, I think, is why we love William Hung. He’s
an underdog. Yet, in spite of the accolades, fame and
fortune were not enough to hold his attention. And therein
lies a lesson for us all.
Success is a process of persevering through difficulties,
but it’s also about knowing yourself. What William might
have added to that inspiring Toastmasters speech is that
occasionally you step through the wrong door. You
misapply the principles of practice and end up succeeding at
the wrong thing or discovering your career is somehow a
shadow of your true calling. Which is why we must think of
this process as a journey. That was what Martyn Chamberlin
discovered about his art. Though a passion, painting wasn’t
the end of the road for him; it was the beginning. In his
case, being an artist opened a door to another skill he might
never have encountered otherwise.
In any vocation, there comes a time when you realize the
path you’re on is not taking you where you want to go. All

this preparation has culminated in helping you achieve the
wrong goal. At those times, you might feel stuck. What do
you do then? You do what William Hung finally did. You
realize it’s never too late to change and take a turn in the
direction of your true calling.

PART TWO
Action

FOUR
Building Bridges
The Leap That Wasn’t
a Leap
Climate is what we expect. Weather is what we
get.
—MARK TWAIN

Discovering your calling is not
an epiphany but a series of
intentional decisions. It looks
less like a giant leap and more
like building a bridge.
The day Myles Carlson was dropped off at a French-
speaking school in the middle of East Africa was one of the
hardest days in his mom’s life. “I felt like I was tossing him
into the sea without a life jacket,” Kristy Carlson recalled.
“Asking him to rise to the challenge of life in a new
language just felt like too much to ask of a five-year-old!”1
But Myles wasn’t the only one who had to adjust to a new
normal.
A few years before that day, Ben and Kristy Carlson
knew they needed a change. The result was a “journey of
discovery,” as they called it, into who they were as
individuals. For Kristy that meant pursuing photography,
and for Ben it meant growing coffee. When they decided to
go for it, moving from South Africa where they did

leadership development and training with a Christian
organization to become social entrepreneurs in Burundi, the
Carlsons had no idea what to expect. They wanted to make
a positive impact but didn’t have a clue how to get started.
Only after arriving in East Africa did they understand what
would be required of them and how much bigger this move
was than they imagined.
Before making the move, the family had zero exposure
to the French language or Burundian culture, and both those
facts hit them hard when they made the transition. Kristy
wrote me, saying, “Ben and I joke that we’ve only been in
Burundi for two and a half years, but it feels like ten
because of the steep learning curve involved with our
move.” This was not what they had intended for their family
when first moving to Africa a decade ago, and they were far
from prepared. So what made them take the leap? In a word:
passion.
“I can wake up, drink and talk about coffee all day long
and not get tired,” Ben Carlson said in a TV interview.
“When I started realizing that, I started realizing that this
was what I wanted to do. This was who I wanted to be.”2
Watching this interview online after a friend referred it to
me, I knew I needed to hear the Carlsons’ story from their
own mouths. So I reached out via e-mail and heard back
from Kristy a week later. She apologized for the delay but
explained that life can be pretty crazy in Burundi.
Once they had decided to pursue a change, she told me,
the Carlsons searched for ways to pursue their passions.

“Each pursuit led to more clarity,” she said, “and acted as
more preparation for a larger change . . . Even after we
moved to Burundi, we weren’t done changing. A year and a
half after our move, we began our business. We did not feel
that our destiny was something better or bigger than what
we had been doing. Instead, we felt a desire to do work in
the areas that we loved and craved a shift in those
directions.”
The Carlsons uprooted their family and moved to a
remote part of the world because it was an opportunity to
make a difference doing what they love. As it turns out, this
is a great formula for moving in the direction of any calling:
find what you love and what the world needs, then combine
them. As Frederick Buechner wrote, “Vocation is the place
where our deep gladness meets the world’s deep need.”3
When we think of someone pursuing a calling, we often
picture a person who has it all together, someone who
knows from the beginning what they were born to do. They
have a plan. A person hears from God and becomes a priest.
A professional athlete who grew up kicking a ball around
the yard becomes a world-class soccer player. We picture
someone who just knew what they were supposed to do with
their lives and, at the right time, did it. But a calling doesn’t
always work like that. Sometimes, perhaps often, it is messy.
I asked Kristy how she and her husband knew this was
the right decision—moving their family to one of the
poorest countries in the world and starting a coffee company
—and she admitted they didn’t. “We were leaping,” she

said, “and it was a gangly, imperfect, headlong kind of leap
at that. We felt strongly that it was time for a change, but our
decision to incorporate Burundi into that change was based
solely on the presence of an opportunity.”
The operative word in that last sentence is opportunity.
What the Carlsons were doing when they moved to Burundi
wasn’t just taking a blind leap of faith, nor was it executing
a carefully crafted plan with precision. Just like the day they
dropped off their son at school, it was a mix of both trust
and intention.
The “You Just Know”
Illusion
For the longest time, I believed a little lie about people who
were fulfilling their purpose, and it prevented me from
finding my own calling. What was it? One simple phrase:
you just know. When we find someone doing what they love
for a living, we tell ourselves a story. It’s a nice piece of
fiction, a familiar fairy tale, and a downright lie.
Here’s how it goes. How did you know you wanted to
be a fireman? What made you decide to go back to grad
school? How did you know this was your calling? I just
knew. This is what we hear from people who are too humble
to admit how hard they worked or are uncomfortable with

acknowledging how they got lucky. It sounds like how we
often describe falling in love. You just know. The problem is
that it isn’t true.
Falling in love may be a mysterious process, but it is also
an intentional one. He asked you out, you said yes, you
kissed on the first date even though that was something you
never did, and you started seeing each other exclusively.
There is a process. And every single step of the way is
marked by trust. This was what Eric Miller told me, what
Jody Noland emphasized, and what Ginny Phang kept
saying over and over—they all had no idea what they were
doing. There was no plan. But they acted anyway. They
didn’t just know. They chose.
Maybe some people do just know what they’re supposed
to do with their lives. Maybe they’re born with a sixth sense
that allows them to intuitively understand they were meant
to be a seamstress or a bullfighter, that they were born to
make movies or build skyscrapers. But most people, the
normal people you and I encounter on a daily basis, seem to
have no clue. And telling these folks “you just know” when
most of us clearly do not seems cruel.
We rarely hear this side of the story in interviews and
documentaries about famous people. Why is this? Maybe
because it sells. Because we’d rather believe the fairy tale
that says some people are just special. That way, we don’t
have any responsibility to act.
This lack of honesty has produced a mythology in the
world of work. The myth goes like this: Your calling, if it

comes at all, is something that arrives one day on your
doorstep in a neatly wrapped package. You don’t have to
worry about exerting any effort or anything; it will just work
out. And if it doesn’t, then it wasn’t meant to be. Sorry, you
must be doomed to dwell in a cubicle for the rest of your
life, eking out a mediocre existence. At least you can live
vicariously through those fortunate few who do get to find
their callings.
Of course, we know this isn’t true. We all want to
believe we have the opportunity to find a life of meaning
and purpose, to do work that matters. So why does such a
life seem so evasive, and why is it so rare? Because we’ve
believed in this myth that we will just know when it’s time to
commit. And that’s hardly ever the case. Commitment is
costly; it should scare us.
When I asked the Carlsons if what they were doing was
the one thing they were born to do, Kristy said, “I think that
we could do a multitude of things, but starting a business in
Burundi that produces amazing coffee and helps the farmers
who grow it incorporates both of our strengths and passions.
Being coffee producers allows us to produce coffee of the
highest quality while developing lasting relationships with
coffee farmers. We might not be your usual suspects, and
our journey has been full of ups and downs, but it is a
beautiful thing to be sitting here typing in my office and
overhearing our team talk passionately about ways to
improve coffee farmers’ lives.”
The process of finding and claiming your calling is a

journey, one that requires you to leave what you know in
search of what you don’t know. Yes, there’s mystery to it,
but the way you go about it is by putting one foot in front of
the other. And when you are presented with an opportunity,
you may not just know. But you will have to act. And that
action is a little more complicated than we might think.
The Prophet Who Almost
Missed His Call
Three thousand years ago, four or five miles northwest of
Jerusalem in the hill country of Ephraim, there was a small
town called Ramah, where a man named Elkanah lived. He
had two wives, one who was infertile and the other who
reminded her of this constantly.
Once during a trip to the ancient city of Shiloh, the
barren wife Hannah was so plagued with shame that she
made a public vow. If she would become pregnant, she
would give her son to the high priest, dedicating his life to
religious service. Shortly after, she conceived a son and
named him Samuel. As soon as he was weaned, he was sent
to Shiloh to serve the priest Eli.
Samuel was a special boy, a gift to his parents who long
awaited his birth and a gift to Eli who only had disobedient
sons. He served the priest in the work that he did, and the

older man groomed him for a promising future.
One night, after months if not years of service, Samuel
awoke before dawn. Startling awake, he sat up in bed and
looked around.
Nothing.
He swore he’d heard somebody whispering his name.
But no one was there. Settling back into bed, the boy fell
asleep only to be awakened again a few seconds later. This
time, he was sure; it was a voice.
“Here I am!” he shouted back. No answer. Running into
Eli’s room, he shouted, “Here I am; you called me.”
Eli rose out of bed, squinting his eyes, which were
beginning to fail him.
“I did not call,” he said, confused. “Go back and lie
down.”
Samuel was confused as well, but he did not want to
argue with his master. So he returned to his room and slowly
laid his head back down. He forced his eyes shut, too
anxious to sleep. For what seemed like hours but in reality
was only a few minutes, Samuel lay in bed. Then as his
eyelids began to grow heavy, he heard it again, just as quiet
as before but persistent as ever.
“Samuel . . .”
He shot up in bed, his heart racing. He called his master
again while once again rushing into Eli’s room. Again, the
two were equally confused.
“My son,” Eli said. “I did not call. Go back and lie
down.”

But before Samuel could even put his head down on the
pillow, he heard the voice again, even louder than before.
He got up again and called to Eli, his voice quivering with
fear.
But the master’s response was different this time. He told
the boy to stop calling and instead to listen, giving him six
words to say. So Samuel returned to bed and listened. When
he heard the call a final time, he responded:
“Speak, for your servant is listening.”4
After that, his life was never the same.
How the boy heard and answered his call led to many
significant events in Israel’s history, including the anointing
of two kings, one who became the most famous the country
would ever know. Samuel was called, and he answered. But
the scary part—the part we should pay attention to—is that
he almost missed it.
In the midst of your apprenticeship, perhaps while serving
someone else’s dream, you will make a discovery of your
own. At first, it will come imperceptibly, like a whisper. But
as you pay attention, it will greet you in forms you may not
understand. It may come early in the morning or late at
night, whenever you are still and the most vulnerable.
Gently, it will speak to your heart, calling greatness out of
you that you never knew existed.
We all hear such a call at some point, but many ignore it,

discarding the voice as a dream. Some flee their calling their
whole lives, avoiding that small persistent voice or staying
busy enough to miss it. Many don’t even take the time to
listen in the first place. But the ones who do, those whose
stories we remember, step out of hiding and say those six
brave words: speak, for your servant is listening. It’s as
much an act of vulnerability as it is one of availability.
As children, we understand the world is a place that
needs our gift, a place that is full of mystery and
opportunity. We relish these facts. But as adults, we ignore
such silly things; and for a time, it works. We go through
life, focused on comfort and security and social stature, but
as we continue ignoring the call that beckons our souls to
awaken, we grow restless. And the voice grows louder until
one day it is unbearable.
The story of Samuel is not a case for how calling comes
—that voice sounds different to every ear. The point is that
sometimes, we have to learn how to hear in the first place. If
calling didn’t come naturally to a young boy in ancient
Israel, how much less will it come in today’s busy world full
of noise and interruption? We must listen. But we must also
act. For the young boy who became a prophet, it was a trial-
and-error process. He got the call wrong three times before
he got it right.
It would be easy to hear this story and make the mistake
of thinking calling starts with an epiphany. It doesn’t. In
fact, clarity of calling comes more through a series of
deliberate decisions than it does through any sudden

revelation. Looking at the story of Samuel, we see a boy
going through his usual routine when he is interrupted by a
strange incident that sets his life on a new course. This is
how calling happens: not as a lightning bolt, but as a gentle,
consistent prodding that won’t leave you alone until you act.
That you respond to the call, not how, is what makes it
extraordinary.
In Samuel’s case, he had a transcendent encounter, but
at the time it felt ordinary. First, he misunderstood it. Then
he asked for guidance—somewhat unwittingly, because he
thought his master was calling him. Finally, he recognized
the voice and submitted to it. It took some failure to get
there, but he just took it one step at a time. When it comes to
a call, that’s all we can do. We can’t control where or when
it comes, but we can control who we are in those moments.
My own experience of discovering what I was meant to
do was both powerful and ordinary. My friend Paul asked
me what my dream was, and when I told him I didn’t know,
he said, “Really? I would’ve thought your dream was to be
a writer.”
“Yeah,” I said. “I guess you’re right. I’d like to be a
writer—someday.”
“Jeff,” he said, looking me in the eyes, “you don’t have
to want to be a writer. You are a writer. You just need to
write.”
After that conversation, I began to write like never
before. Every day at five a.m. for a year, I got up and wrote
a few hundred words before sunrise. Without fail, I

practiced. Why? Because I finally understood who I was.
And once I grasped my identity, the activity followed.
Samuel didn’t know God was speaking to him until his
mentor Eli helped him understand what was happening. The
boy, according to the story, was hearing from God and still
needed help. The epiphany was not enough. The same was
true for me with my conversation with Paul. Often our lives
are speaking to us in extraordinary ways, but we lack the
ability to hear or interpret the message. Understanding the
signs, even hearing the actual call, can only take you so far.
What must come next is a decision. And here is the point:
finding your calling, as mysterious as it seems, is not only a
mystical process; it is intensely practical. You either act on
what you know, or you miss your moment.
The Stages of Discovery
Any great discovery, especially that of your life’s work, is
never a single moment. In fact, epiphany is an evolutionary
process; it happens in stages.
First, you hear the call. It may sound different to each
person, but it comes to us all. How we hear and respond to it
is what matters. Sadly, many people never recognize the
voice summoning them to greatness. Like Samuel, they hear
something but aren’t quite sure what to make of it. And
without the aid of a mentor or guide, they’re left to make
sense of it on their own, which means they may get it

wrong.
This is why apprenticeship is so important. Often,
discovering what you’re meant to do with your life doesn’t
happen until you have spent significant time serving
someone else’s dream. We learn what a calling looks like
from mentors and predecessors before we can even begin to
trust our own voice of calling. Only after you’ve put
yourself in the shop of a master craftsman can you
understand what your craft requires. Humility is a
prerequisite for epiphany. Without it, your dream will be
short-lived and self-centered.
Second, you respond. Mere words will not suffice—you
must act. A true response to a call requires effort; you have
to do something. In Samuel’s case, he repeatedly got out of
bed, going to see what his teacher wanted, in spite of the
priest’s protests that he was not calling him. What Samuel
lacked in astuteness, he made up for with persistence.
Apparently, that’s all it takes. A little tenacity will get you to
your calling.
Third, you begin to believe. This is the paradox of
vocation. We think that passion comes first, that our desire
is primary; but if we are truly called, the work always comes
before we are ready. We will have to act in spite of feeling
unprepared. “The gifts do not precede the call,” someone
once told me. And as we step into our life’s work, we
discover that we have been preparing for this our whole
lives, even though in that very moment we feel insufficient.
This is how you know you’re called at all—the experience

compels you to grow, to change.
A calling, though mysterious at times, requires a
practical response. The way we make our way from dream
to reality is through small intentional steps. Decisions reveal
opportunity.
Samuel was more prepared than he realized. He had
already moved and was living with a holy man, poised for
epiphany. And quite by accident, he had done several things
to make himself ready for the call, including finding a
mentor. Of course, it wasn’t his choice—his parents had
done that for him—but in a way, that’s the point. You will
inherit opportunities that you didn’t earn on your own, and
if you are paying attention, you will recognize them for
what they are—chances to hear the call.
The Carlsons’ move to South Africa provided a similar
setup for the call to Burundi. They didn’t know this ahead of
time, but that’s the beauty. A calling takes everything
you’ve done up to a certain point and turns it into
preparation. Ben and Kristy were available, so when the
opportunity arrived, they took it. For Ginny Phang, there
was a nagging feeling in her gut that told her to not have the
abortion. That was her setup. She didn’t know where it came
from or why it was there; she just knew she had to trust that
feeling. “Even though my head did not know how to make
it work . . . my heart felt so right,” she said.5
Answering a call will sometimes feel that way. It won’t
make sense and may even open you up to rejection and
criticism, but in your heart you will know it’s right. How?

There will be confirmation. You will take a step, and things
will happen. Opportunities will reveal themselves. Through
the words of others and even in the pit of your stomach, you
will know this is the path to take—not because it is easy or
safe, but because it is right.
This doesn’t mean a calling is just an emotion, but
feelings play a part in the process, and there comes a point
when you can trust them. How do you know? You prepare.
You put yourself in a place where you can hear the call, you
have someone to help you discern the message, and then
you make yourself available to act.
Feelings by themselves aren’t entirely reliable, but we
can test them against the wisdom of others. We can find a
mentor, as Samuel did. We can put ourselves in a position of
preparation, as the Carlsons did. Never were they
guaranteed success, and rarely did they know what was
coming next, but each step wasn’t as final as it felt. Every
decision opened up a new opportunity.
You might be thinking by now that your life is
beginning to move in a direction. There may be momentum
building behind your dream, and even the idea of a calling
is starting to crystallize. Or maybe you feel as lost as ever.
Regardless, remember this is still the beginning. Every step
will reveal new choices to make.
Take time to look back at all you’ve experienced, and
listen to what your life is saying. Invite mentors into your
life to help you discern the call. This is the perfect
opportunity to identify a thread, some common theme that

ties everything together. As you begin to see the patterns,
don’t move too quickly. Just take one step at a time, trusting
that opportunities will open at the right time.
The Worst Mistake You
Can Make
My freshman year of college, I had a crush on a girl named
Lane. With curly hair and a sweet smile, Lane was cute. She
was also two years older than me. Since I had just broken up
with my girlfriend, I was eager to get back in the game of
dating, and Lane seemed to be the perfect girl.
When I told my friends I was going to ask her out, they
asked how I was going to do it.
“I thought I’d just call her,” I said.
“What?!” my friend Doug exclaimed. He was always the
romantic. “Jeff, are you kidding me? You’ve got to sweep
this girl off her feet. Go big or go home, man.”
So I did what any college male with a guitar in the
corner of his dorm room would do: I wrote Lane a song. At
ninety seconds of pure lyrical delight, it was the essence of
romance and took me only a few days to write.
One Saturday afternoon, I picked up the phone and
called Lane’s number. Three rings, and then a click.
“Hello?” a voice answered. It was her.

I slammed the phone against the receiver, grabbed my
guitar, and stepped outside, shutting the door behind me.
Because now I knew. Lane was home. Racing across
campus with guitar strap slung over my shoulder, I ran to
her dorm. Catching my breath in the lobby, I waited for
someone to let me in, then walked straight to her door and
knocked.
The door opened. And I stepped into a room full of
people.
About half a dozen people were sitting around Lane’s
living room, chatting as college students tend to do on a
Saturday afternoon. As soon as I entered the room, they all
turned to me. Lane smiled nervously and looked at me. I
didn’t say a word.
Swinging the guitar from behind my back, I pulled it up
to my chest and began to play. For the next one and a half
minutes, I serenaded Lane, trying my best to ignore the
onlookers. The song finished with the on-key line: “Will
you go to the dance with me?” When I resolved with that
final strum of the C chord, I looked at Lane, waiting for her
answer.
She looked at me. I looked back at her. And everyone
else looked at us.
And I waited.
Taking a deep breath, I grinned at her with fake
confidence. This was the moment I had been waiting for,
what I had been working up to for weeks now. I had, as my
friends suggested, gone big, laying all my cards on the

table. Now it was up to her.
Lane opened her mouth and let out two soul-crushing
words: “I . . . can’t.”
My head dropped in defeat.
“I’m sorry.”
Shoulders slumped, I nodded, pretending to understand.
But then I did something even worse: I didn’t leave. Instead
of excusing myself, I sat down in the middle of the room
and tried to blend in. As if somehow that would be less
embarrassing than just playing a song in front of a bunch of
people, getting rejected by a girl, and then leaving.
I attempted to join the conversations, only to be greeted
by looks of curiosity. But I played it cool: What, that? That
thing I just did? Oh, I do that every Saturday. In fact, I have
three more gigs lined up today! This is just another stop on
the College Dormitory Rejection Tour.
Unable to bear the awkwardness any longer, I finally got
up, walked across the room, and excused myself. Lane
rushed to the door to see me out, walking with me through
the hallway. “Well, thanks for my song!” she said sweetly.
Through gritted teeth, I mustered in the most sarcastic
voice possible, “Oh, my pleasure. I aim to entertain.” And I
left.
After that incident, it would be a long time before I
would ever do something so audacious for a girl again. But
looking back now, I understand how it happened the way it
did. Why did Lane shut me down? Probably because I had
uttered a total of one hundred words to her in the previous

year we had known each other. In my mind, I had built up
the fantasy of a relationship without ever sharing the vision
with her.
I think we do the same thing with our dreams. First, we
flirt with them from afar. Then we fantasize, imagining what
life will be like when we are united with what we love,
without ever doing any real work. We wait, building up
courage, and save all our passion for the big day when we
will abandon everything and go for it. And finally, we take
the leap.
Sometimes, though, we don’t make it to the other side.
We fall on our faces. Doing our best to pick ourselves up,
we dust ourselves off and try again. But if this happens
enough, we begin to tell ourselves a familiar story. We
remind ourselves that the world is a cold, cruel place, and
maybe there’s no room in it for my dream. We get
disillusioned and make the worst mistake you can make
with a calling: we save all our energy for the leap instead of
building a bridge.
The problem with how we chase our passions is that
reality doesn’t always conform to how things appear in our
minds. Lane said no because she didn’t know me. And as
much as I would have liked to think differently, I didn’t
really know her. Relationships take time, as do dreams.
They’re full of routines and unexciting work that make them
unfit for a movie script but appropriate for real life. For
nearly a decade, I did this with my passion. I dreamed of it,
talked about it, even made “plans” for when luck would

come my way and I’d be able to do what I love for a living.
All along, though, I was kidding myself, believing the myth
of the leap, which was the very thing holding me back from
my dream.
The Truth About the Leap
In the 1930s, Belgian settlers started planting coffee in
Burundi. For decades, the country was used to produce
nothing more than commodity coffee, its natural resources
neglected and depleted.6 Although it contained a vast
supply of rich resources, Burundi’s coffee was overlooked.
That is, until recently.
If you take a look at a chart of the world’s poorest
countries, you will see Burundi almost at the top of the list,
with the second lowest GDP in the world.7 Farmers in
Burundi plant all kinds of crops—bananas, cassava, and
beans—but coffee is one of their only cash crops,
accounting for 80 percent of the country’s export revenues.
More than half the population makes its living from coffee.8
Coffee pays for farmers’ school fees for their kids, medical
bills for their families, and whatever food they can’t grow
themselves. In Burundi, coffee is a matter of life and death.
Apparently, when grown and roasted just right,
Burundian coffee is a drinking experience unlike no other
African bean. Due to poor distribution, however, much of

the coffee-drinking world has been missing out on this.
Burundian coffee doesn’t get the attention it deserves, and
Ben and Kristy Carlson intend to change that. For them,
coffee is not just a passion to be pursued. It’s a chance to
make a difference in the lives of a community, if not an
entire country. They started with a washing station for the
coffee, but as time went on, they formalized the project.
The birth of Long Miles Coffee Project was not only a
way for Ben and Kristy to get involved in the coffee
business; it was an opportunity to offer hope. Nearly two-
thirds of the Burundi population lives at or below the
poverty line,9 and due to a lack of infrastructure,
middlemen take most of the revenues from coffee
production.10 The goal of the project is to improve the lives
of local farmers through direct trade, helping them get better
wages.
These farmers are not some far-off cause to which the
Carlsons send money every month. They are their
neighbors. They see these people every day; their kids play
together. Because they work in one of the poorest countries
on the planet, it’s important to them to not only understand
the people they’re trying to help, but to experience life with
them.
When they first entertained moving to Burundi, Ben and
Kristy couldn’t comprehend the implications of their dream
and never would have anticipated all the battles they would
face while building a business in the developing world. But
they knew they had to find a way, and that determination

led to wisdom. They studied and planned and prayed, and
when they didn’t know what to do, they took a leap. But in
that “leap,” there is a lot to unpack.
The Carlsons didn’t just decide to move anywhere. They
researched the industry and found an opportunity to help
producers get high-quality coffee to an exploding global
market.11 And they made their move on far less of a whim
than we might think, spending a decade in South Africa
before making the transition. Sure, it was still an adjustment
to learn French and acclimate to another culture, but calling
it a “leap” isn’t quite right. If anything, they built a bridge.
Ben and Kristy were able to do all this because they
understood the why behind what they were doing. They had
a reason that went beyond themselves and their own
comfort. This wasn’t just about them—it was about the
difference they wanted to make. So when doubt crept into
their minds, they didn’t get stuck or stop. They found a way.
Instead of waiting for the perfect path to be revealed, they
saw an opportunity and took it. They started, knowing that
flexibility would be essential—but they also weren’t foolish
in how they made the transition.
Even now, two and a half years later, there are
challenges and cultural differences that frustrate them.
Realizing the purpose behind the work they do, though, and
that they’re a part of something bigger than themselves, has
made it worth all the trouble. They didn’t take a leap; they
built a bridge. And the beauty of a bridge is you don’t have
to see too far ahead in order to get to the other side. You just

have to take the next step.
Not Knowing Is No Excuse
A couple of years ago, my friend Bryan Allain left a secure
job at a Fortune 500 company, where he’d been slowly
climbing the corporate ladder for nearly a decade, to venture
out on his own as a writer.12 When I asked him how his
colleagues reacted, he said they were surprisingly
supportive, some even envious. But something disturbed
him.
Every conversation ended the same way. “I wish I could
do that,” they would say. “Well, you can, you know,” Bryan
would respond. To which they would usually list out the
reasons why they felt they couldn’t. They wouldn’t know
where to begin or what to do. They’d be scared of losing
their health benefits or risking their family’s well-being.
What if you failed, they wondered. What then? This
bothered Bryan because he felt like what they were really
saying was that they were afraid—and rightly so. Quitting a
job to chase a dream is anything but safe. If you’re not
feeling a little insecure about taking such a leap, then you
probably haven’t considered the cost. The problem, then,
isn’t the fear; that’s natural. It’s that many get afraid and
stay there.
We all deal with this fear on some level. What fills us

with anxiety, if we let it, is a simple phrase that keeps us
from our purpose. It’s six simple words: “I don’t know what
to do.” What should I write about? What kind of music
should I play? What type of business do I open? Where do I
begin? I don’t know. And with that seemingly innocuous
response, a dream can die. But what we’re really saying in
these moments of not knowing is that we want the journey
to be safe. We want it drawn out for us—no surprises or
setbacks, just a clear beginning and end. Unfortunately,
that’s not the way the process usually works.
One way to think of it is in terms of maps and globes.
Maps are easy. They’re flat and predictable, easy to chart
out a course. You can see the whole landscape in a simple,
two-dimensional layout. However, as easy as they are, maps
are unrealistic. The world isn’t flat; it’s not color coded and
foldable and easily stored in your car’s glove box. Life is
too complex and beautiful to be captured on a map. It may
help you see the big picture, but it does not help you
understand the magnitude of the journey.
A globe, on the other hand, is complex. It spins on an
axis. Some globes are even topographical, raised in certain
areas where there are mountains or major bodies of water.
They’re not the easiest tools in the world to use and
certainly more difficult to store, but they’re just about the
best picture we have of reality. Typically, you use a map to
travel from one state or province to the next, usually a
relatively short distance, whereas you use a globe to travel
the world.

Which would you rather use, a map or a globe? It
depends on where you’re going.
When people asked Bryan the specifics of how he would
pursue his dream, he was honest, admitting he didn’t know
all the answers. He didn’t have a map. He wasn’t even sure
exactly where he was headed; all he cared about was
moving forward. Here’s how he once described it to me in
conversation: “Say you live in Kansas. It’s not a bad place
to live, but you long for the beach. You dream of the waves
and sand and sunsets. But you never leave home because
you’re not quite sure exactly where on the beach you want
to go.”
If you aren’t sure how to get started, Bryan would say
get out of Kansas. That’s your first step. Begin to head
toward water, and as you move, you’ll find the beach. Once
you’re there, you can pick whatever spot you like. You
don’t need a specific address to begin. The path to your
dream is more about following a direction than arriving at a
destination.
When you start pursuing your calling, you may find it to
be more difficult than you thought it would be. And that’s
okay. It means the journey is bigger than you expected.
What you must do is keep moving. Don’t stand still. Don’t
squander your time, holding out for someone else to give
you permission to start. It won’t happen that way. No one is
going to give you a map. You will have to step out into the
unknown, listening for direction as you go. And when you
are in doubt, just remember to drive toward water. You can

always change directions once you get in the car.
Anyone Can Do This
A year and a half after moving to Burundi, the Carlsons
turned their dream into a business. They wanted to help as
many people as possible, and they saw the potential for
Long Miles Coffee to be something significant. They went
all in.
Committed to providing fair prices to farmers and
inspired by Benjamin Zander’s words that “money follows
contribution,”13 they decided to make a go for it with the
business. They didn’t know everything before taking that
step, but they trusted that things would come together. “I’m
not saying everyone should run out and quit their jobs,”
Kristy wrote me. “I am saying that some risks are worth
taking and that as we take them, opportunities often open
up.” And so far, it has worked out.
At times, Ben and Kristy both feel like quitting. They are
open about this, even sharing such doubts on their blog.
This is what makes them so likable. They seem like ordinary
people (because they are). Even after making the “leap,”
they still don’t have perfect clarity. Doing what they’re
meant to do, at times, is messy. When the power is out for
the eleventh day straight or a family member gets sick,
Kristy says she wishes she could be back home in the

United States, where high-quality health care and electricity
are a given. “Burundi will always be a difficult place for me
to live,” she said. “It is rich and full, but difficult.”
Rich and full, but difficult. These same words could be
used to describe a calling. From Garrett Rush-Miller, the
five-year-old with a brain tumor, to Ginny Phang, the
woman whose family disowned her because she didn’t have
an abortion, this is a constant theme. Finding your life’s
work is not easy. It may, in fact, cause you more pain than
comfort, but it will be worth the cost. In spite of the
difficulties they face, the Carlsons can’t help but hope. As
their team grows, they feel themselves being strengthened
daily.
Such is the reality for any journey of vocation. If your
life’s work is only a dream, something fleeting and frail
that’s never backed by action, it can only last so long. When
difficulties come, and they always do, you will be inclined
to give up and move on to something easier. But if your
calling is more than a good idea and you’re willing to put in
the hard work and persevere, taking bold steps along the
way, you can stand firm in the face of hardship.
At one point during our interview process, I made the
mistake of suggesting the Carlsons made the leap due to a
sense of being called to something great, which Kristy
quickly corrected: “We were hoping that the impact we
would make was a positive one,” she said, “but we didn’t
and don’t believe that we are called to do something greater
than anyone else is. We believed we were called to bring

our skills to the table of life, to look for opportunities where
we could contribute in the world. I think placing words like
‘greatness’ near us makes it seem as if we are not your
average human being, and we really are. Any person could
move in the direction that we did if it seemed like the right
fit for them, even if it’s just one small step at a time.”

FIVE
Pivot Points
Why Failure Is Your
Friend
If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again. Then
quit. There’s no point in being a damn fool
about it.
—W. C. FIELDS

It will take a few tries before you
get your calling right. Failure
isn’t what prevents us from
success, then. It’s what leads us
there.
Matt McWilliams always assumed he would grow up to
become a golf pro. Born just five hundred yards from the
second green of Pinehurst No. 2, a North Carolina resort
known as “The Cradle of American Golf,” he thought it was
his destiny to follow in his father’s footsteps. What he never
could have imagined, though, was that his own dad would
have to fire him, and he would continue to face rejection for
the next several years—all of which would somehow lead to
his calling.1
In high school, Matt won four out of five major junior
golf tournaments in Tennessee, including the Tennessee
State High School championship. In college, he won the
Adams Cup of Newport, the Berry College Spring
Invitational, the Carolinas Amateur, and others. He was the

number-one player at the University of Tennessee and was
so confident that golf was where his future lay that he didn’t
bother to graduate.
Matt went on to play professional golf for a year until
one day when an acute pain in his wrist that started in
college began to worsen. The pain crept all the way up the
left side of his body and eventually became so crippling that
he was forced to see a doctor. Diagnosed with acute
tendonitis, he was told he could either undergo serious
surgery or cut back on golf. He opted for the latter. That’s
when he decided he didn’t want to play the game as badly
as he thought he did. But what else could he do? Golf was
all he had ever known, all he had ever expected, and all he
had ever wanted. And now, unexpectedly, the plan was
changing.
In the pursuit of our life’s work, we will encounter
obstacles and challenges that we think are a disruption to the
course, something to overcome. But in fact, these very
obstacles are sometimes the means to success. With
nowhere to turn, Matt went to work for his dad at
Knollwood Fairways in Southern Pines, North Carolina.
Working at the course as an instructor, he discovered a new
skill: online marketing.
Most nights he would stay up late, building websites and
advertising campaigns for golf classes that, ironically, he
had no desire to teach.
He had absolutely no interest in the business he was
helping build.

But the marketing? He loved that part, something he
never would have learned if everything had gone according
to plan.
Realizing he had a knack for attracting new clients, Matt
started his own company, Fast Lane Consulting, as a side
project in 2002 while still working at the golf course. But on
July 1, 2003, a date Matt remembers because it was the day
after his birthday, the unexpected happened. His dad let him
go. The timing wasn’t great, but he knew it had been
coming. “It should have happened a lot sooner,” Matt
admitted. That was the first time he got fired.
During the summer of 2004, Matt spent half his time
working with a congressional political campaign in North
Carolina and the other half doing online marketing for
consulting clients. This was a time when he continued to
hone his online marketing skills, further falling in love with
how words and images could motivate people. “I could
spend thirty-six hours straight designing a website without
any sleep,” he recalled.
By the end of the campaign, Matt’s clients no longer
needed his services. Once again, he was about to face
unemployment, and he didn’t have a plan for what would
come next. Running out of cash and living at home, he was
relieved when a friend called, asking him to design an
insurance website. It was just the kind of project he had
been praying for, and it came at just the right time. But it
was only one gig, and Matt needed more stability as he was
getting older and wondering what he would do with the rest

of his life.
Shortly after that project was completed, the friend called
again, this time inviting Matt to help him start a new
company, one that would generate sales leads for insurance
companies. At first, Matt said no. He liked working for
himself and enjoyed the freedom of being his own boss. But
the friend asked again, and he still said no. By this time,
though, things were starting to look desperate. With the
business slowing down, he had fewer and fewer options, so
he finally succumbed to his friend’s offer.
In December 2004, they went into business together.
The first thing they did was hire a programmer. Matt did all
the sales, affiliate management, and web design. He learned
about sales and marketing, even how to do some basic
programming. The days were long and the work was
exhausting, but he loved it.
By December 2007, the company had grown to forty
employees and more than twelve million dollars in annual
revenue. The company, based in Franklin, Tennessee,
eventually grew to nearly twenty million dollars, won
several awards, and was thriving in almost every respect—
except when it came to relationships.
Matt was on top of the world. This was his dream job. At
least, that’s what he thought. But as his success grew, so did
his ego. Notorious around the office for being a perfectionist
and someone who would tear into you for the slightest
infraction, Matt was a person you didn’t want to be caught
alone with in a hallway. You never knew what he might say.

One day, the two owners approached him, and as nicely
as they could, they asked Matt to leave. He had been
treating people poorly, and without knowing or caring, he
was leaving a lot of “carnage” around the office, which they
had to clean up. That was the second time Matt was fired.
He was twenty-seven years old, and it happened just fifteen
days before his wedding.
Taking six months off to enjoy his marriage and embark
on what he calls “a spiritual journey,” Matt went back to
work in May 2009, joining a company in Nashville that sold
instructional DVDs. The next year, he won the Affiliate
Manager of the Year award at Affiliate Summit and ended
up leading all their online marketing after that. The job
lasted two years. During his second year, Matt had a
nagging thought about starting his own consulting business
and brought it up to his boss, who gave his blessing and
even offered Matt some advice.
In February 2011, he left the company to return to his
first job, the same place from which he had been fired two
and a half years earlier. But his second stint was even
shorter than the first. One Friday night during dinner, after
he had been working there for nine months, Matt was
complaining to his wife about the job, which had become a
usual occurrence. His wife, who’d finally had enough, said
he needed to decide when he was going to quit, which he
agreed to and told her when he went into the office the next
day he would set a date to leave. The next day, a private
detective showed up at the McWilliamses’ front door and

said, “I’m here to collect your work laptop.” That’s how
Matt found out he was laid off, and that was the day he
decided to expand his part-time consulting business into a
full-time endeavor.
Now Matt lives in Fort Wayne, Indiana, but his business
is wherever his clients are: San Francisco, Boston, New
York, Chicago, Washington. His story is not the typical tale
of a little boy who always knew what he was going to do
with his life and after overcoming insurmountable obstacles,
finally persevered to find his dream. His journey is like a lot
of ours, full of failure and unexpected mishaps, frustrating
moments that make you question what you’re doing. For
those familiar with the confusion of not knowing if you’re
pursuing the right thing, Matt McWilliams’s story offers a
subtle encouragement: there’s room to get your calling
wrong.
And through all the twists and turns, after repeated
rejection, something beautiful emerged: Matt found his
calling. Not in the way you would expect, of course, but by
now we should be expecting that. He didn’t come to his
life’s work by success. He found it through failure.
The Power of the Pivot
In basketball, you are only allowed to take two steps once
you stop dribbling the ball. When you take that last step, the
foot you land on becomes what’s called a “pivot foot.” That

foot must remain fixed, but the other foot can freely move
about, allowing you to easily spin around and find a
teammate to whom you can pass the ball. You can even
pivot before dribbling the ball, allowing you to change
direction before moving down the court. Although you are
confined to where you are and how many steps you can
take, at no point are you locked into any direction. That’s
the beauty of the move. Even when all other opportunities
are exhausted, you can always pivot.
In 2006, Andrew Mason was about to attempt something
big. A graduate student pursuing a public policy degree at
the University of Chicago, he was doing some contract work
on the side, building databases at a company founded by an
entrepreneur named Eric Lefkofsky. In 2007, backed by
Lefkofsky, Mason launched a company called The Point, a
website intended to bring groups of people together to solve
problems. The idea was that a person could use social media
to get people to rally together around a specific cause and
then motivate them to act. Nobody cared much about
making money; it was about making a difference.
The start-up, in spite of its good intentions, didn’t take
off. To make matters worse, when the recession hit in 2008,
they needed money, and without a business model The
Point was in trouble. Normally the team would use the
website to organize people around a cause, but this time
they wanted to try something new, at the prodding of
Lefkofsky. What if their cause this time was to save money?
The new idea, born out of financial distress, was to get

twenty people to buy the same product and try to get a
group discount. Although this concept had been introduced
in the original business plan, when Lefkofsky brought it up
again more than a year later, Mason and the other team
members shot it down. This time, Lefkofksy wouldn’t let it
go. When the economy continued to spiral downward in late
2008 and the company was forced to lay people off, they
knew it was time for a change.2 “There was this pressure
from the market crash [and] looking at our burn rate and
revenue—it was time for us to try something to scratch that
itch,” a source from the company told Business Insider.3
And that’s how Groupon, a company valued at almost
thirteen billion dollars at the time of its IPO in 2011, was
born.4 How did they do it? They certainly didn’t plan for
any of it at the start. They did something much more
effective. They pursued a strategy that has served
entrepreneurs well since the dawn of business. They
pivoted.
A pivot is powerful because it takes away all of your
excuses. It puts you back in control of the game you’re
playing. Pivoting isn’t plan B; it’s part of the process.
Unexpected things will happen; setbacks do occur. Whether
or not you’re prepared to pivot will affect how well you
weather those storms and find a way to survive.
We often look at successful people, hearing their stories
of failure, and think that they succeeded despite the fact that
they failed. But that’s not true. Successful people and

organizations don’t succeed in spite of failure; they succeed
because of it. In the case of Groupon, a failed philanthropy
effort led to a for-profit enterprise that succeeded in ways
the original founders never imagined. Sometimes failure is
the best thing that can happen to you if you learn to listen to
the lessons in it.
The world can be cruel. It’s nobody’s responsibility to
make your dream come true. Tough times will come, and
what determines a person’s success during such trying times
is the ability to pivot. Every calling encounters setbacks, and
sometimes people don’t want what you have to offer, or
maybe they just don’t understand it. Other times, life throws
a curveball or the passion you once had wanes. At times like
these, we are inclined to give up, but these are the moments
that require our most intentional action.
In any pursuit, the temptation is to go it alone—to
subscribe to a few blogs, read a business book, and start
acting like an expert. We praise such entrepreneurial
initiative, thinking it’s what drives modern innovation, but
we couldn’t be more wrong. Every great endeavor begins
with a smaller, less significant one. This is the season of
failure that marks critical preparation steps of history’s
heroes. Albert Einstein worked in a patent office; Benjamin
Franklin was forced to flee his hometown; Steve Jobs got
kicked out of his own company. We all face times of
irrelevance; of falling on our faces and thinking we have no
business doing any of this. But pain is the great teacher and
failure a faithful mentor. You can use all of this to your

benefit if you are willing.
Einstein used his menial job to conduct “thought
experiments.” Franklin took his rejection and learned from
it, trying to better understand people and later using what he
learned as a diplomat, turning every shortcoming into
strength. Jobs practiced playing CEO at Pixar, a smaller
company where it was easier to fail, before returning to
Apple to bring it back to life. Failure is the best friend you
will ever have if you learn from it. As Robert Greene wrote
in his book Mastery, “Repeated failure will toughen your
spirit and show you with absolute clarity how things must be
done.”5
How did Matt McWilliams turn his failure into success?
He certainly didn’t know where he was headed—there was
no plan. When facing failure, Matt was realistic. He didn’t
accept defeat, but neither did he try to push through the
doors that had closed. Instead, he did something creative.
Just as Andrew Mason did, he pivoted, turning in a new
direction and eventually finding his way.
A Season of Failure
Contrary to popular belief, Sam Adams never made beer.
Beyond the Boston lager that bears his name, the world has
largely forgotten who this man was, but to the Founding
Fathers of the United States, he was an important and

influential figure—and a man well acquainted with failure.6
A portly man who led a nation and its leaders with
words, Adams roused a multitude to action through his
numerous newspaper opinion articles and speeches. He was,
in the words of Thomas Jefferson, “truly the Man of the
Revolution.” His second cousin John called him “zealous,
ardent and keen in the Cause.”7 But before he commanded
the respect of some of America’s greatest heroes, he spent a
good part of his life pivoting from one failure to the next.
First he tried to be a lawyer, and when that didn’t work,
he tried to be a maltster, a person who makes the malt that is
later used to make beer. Later he tried his hand at business
and failed at that too. No matter what he tried, success
seemed to evade Samuel, and his family, who had high
hopes for him, was beginning to worry he might not amount
to much. It wasn’t until he became involved in politics—
initially through writing and attending town hall meetings—
that he came alive, finding the thing he was born to do.
Through his writings, he became the voice of the
American Revolution, and it was that voice that roused
others like George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and John
Adams to the cause. After the war, he remained in politics
but never became president. He was content with a
governorship of his home state, Massachusetts, where he
lived out the remainder of his days.8 Were it not for his
tenacity, his willingness to keep trying things until he found
the right path, Samuel Adams never would have found his

purpose, and a nation may have never been born.
Every calling is marked by a season of insignificance, a
period when nothing seems to make sense. This is a time of
wandering in the wilderness, when you feel alone and
misunderstood. To the outsider, such a time looks like
failure, as if you are grasping at air or simply wasting time.
But the reality is this is the most important experience a
person can have if they make the most of it.
As many do, you may be wondering what you’re
supposed to do with your life. Everything seems confusing
and overwhelming. Your parents told you one thing, while
your peers say something different. Who do you trust?
Where do you focus? Traditional advice says to have a plan,
but as we have seen, plans don’t always work. When
pursuing your life’s work, your calling can be hard to see.
Sometimes it has to be revealed, and the way this often
happens is through failure.
When Matt McWilliams told me his story, I heard pieces
of my own journey. I recalled those seven years of working
for a nonprofit and the previous year of travel. I never felt
like I had found my place but had a nagging suspicion that I
was headed somewhere. By the end of the conversation, we
both learned something. When we feel farthest from our
purpose, we are actually already on the path, headed in the
right direction. This means that when you are confused and
failing, when all seems lost and you are just about to give
up, you are closer to your destiny than you realize. The
message of the pivot is that what looks like failure now is

preparation for what’s to come, as long as you don’t give
up.
So what separates a season of failure from a lifetime of
failure?
First you must be willing to recognize hardship as an
opportunity to learn, willing yourself to push through
failure. Second, you must be careful to not succeed at the
wrong things. You have to pay attention to passion and
beware of the temptation of success. It’s not enough to be
good at something; you must focus on what you are meant
to do. And appreciate that your understanding of that, over
time, just might change. So be ready to make more pivots
along the way.
This was what Mother Teresa learned when beginning
her ministry. After spending twenty years as a nun and
schoolteacher, she faced a crisis that would force her to
reevaluate everything. While riding on the train, she felt
suddenly compelled to serve the poor—to not only give to
the impoverished but also identify with them and become a
part of their community. Trading her habit for a sari, she
started the Missionaries of Charity, a new order that focused
on this mission. It was a bold move and one that would take
years of discernment before becoming a reality, but it was a
vision she was certain of, something she could not avoid
doing. She called this moment of inspiration a “call within a
call.” And what this means is that your vocation can
evolve.9
Early in life, we start out on a certain path. As life

continues, we settle down and have kids and maybe get a
little 
wiser 
and 
find 
ourselves 
questioning 
earlier
motivations and actions. We wonder if we were just foolish
or idealistic. Equipped with a better understanding of the
world, we now see things more clearly. We grow up. We
may drift into complacency on occasion, but life also tends
to stabilize and we make better decisions. So it makes sense
that as we continue to grow, our understanding of calling
will grow and expand and even change too.
A calling is not merely a moment; it’s a lifestyle, a
constant progression of submitting to a larger purpose.
When you are first called, whether it comes as a whisper or
a roar, what you hear is only part of the big picture, a
shadow of something bigger. And as you move toward your
life’s work, you must deepen that awareness, looking for
signs to hone your understanding and for opportunities to
change direction along the way.
This is good news, because it means we can fail; we can
miss the mark without veering completely off course. We
can change directions and try new things, learning as we go.
Your life’s work is not a single event, but a process you are
constantly perfecting, finding new ways to put your passion
to work. And you do that one pivot at a time.
Life Is Not a Dream
A while ago, I called my friend Jonathan for some advice.

He had started a publishing company, which was a dream of
his for a number of years, and I wanted to know more about
how that happened. What led to Jonathan’s transformation
in perspective, turning him from a dreamer into a doer? At
first he was reluctant to share, but I kept prodding until he
caved. Finally he said what changed for him was one simple
phrase. Everything began to change after that, all thanks to a
small but significant shift in vocabulary.
Every week Jonathan and his friends would get together
for dinner, gathering around the kitchen table to talk about
their hopes and dreams and what they would do with their
lives someday.
“One night,” he recalled, “we were all sitting around my
kitchen table, talking like we always did. We were thinking
about what life would be like when our dreams came true, if
only circumstances were different, you know? And then
someone spoke up and said, ‘What if we stopped saying
what if and started saying let’s?’ ”
That was it for Jonathan. It was the challenge he needed
to get started with his dream. Instead of saying “what if,” he
started saying “let’s.” He ditched the dreams and instead
became a person of action. When I spoke with him on the
phone, I could tell something had changed; he was a new
man. It was a small shift—a minor pivot—but it made all the
difference.
The lesson is clear. We can spend our days dreaming of
a better life or do the messy work of getting started today.
You are not just waiting on your calling; your calling is

waiting on you. And you can sit around, playing the what-if
game until you’re exhausted, or you can begin by saying
that one little word that changes everything: let’s.
In the Spanish play Life Is a Dream by Pedro Calderón
de la Barca, the protagonist, Segismundo, has been locked
up in a tower for most of his life and delivers a monologue
in which he describes life as nothing more than a dream. He
says, “What is life? A tale that is told; / What is life? A
frenzy extreme, / A shadow of things that seem; / And the
greatest good is but small, / That all life is a dream to all, /
And that dreams themselves are a dream.”10
It’s a profound and poetic monologue, the most famous
in the play, but it’s also a little depressing. What
Segismundo is saying is that life itself is a fantasy and what
we think we know is an illusion. This, unfortunately, is how
many live their lives. Thinking of a calling as nothing more
than an unrealized dream, they squander their passion and
rob the world of a gift—their action. At the end of their
lives, as their story fades into eternity, they will wonder,
Was it worth it? Did I do all I had to do? Or did I play it
safe?
On our deathbeds, we will see things with the most
clarity we have ever had. Each of us will have to face the
facts of how we spent our lives, especially when we had the
opportunity to act and didn’t. What I fear more than
anything about that day is how I will have to answer for all
the times I didn’t live up to my potential, why I didn’t
embrace my calling more fully. And what will my reason

be? I was scared.
Fear. We all feel it. It’s a force that afflicts even the most
courageous. So what do we do about it? We lean in,
realizing that failure is inevitable, but it’s also not a
legitimate obstacle. We can keep moving, albeit sometimes
in a different direction.
This is where your story starts to matter, when you begin
to make a difference with the talents and skills you’ve
acquired. It’s where ideas and action meet; where we stop
dreaming and start living. There is tension here in this place
of action, and risk is inevitable. But the rewards are great.
What we do with this moment will carry on for eternity.
What you leave behind for posterity isn’t a decision you
make on your deathbed. It’s a choice that happens right now
with the resources available at this very moment.
There is, of course, an alternative. We could opt out,
becoming bitter about the whole thing. We could believe
this process of pursuing a passion is a farce. Like
Segismundo, we could even get so lost in our own dream
worlds that we aren’t sure what is real. Certainly that’s an
option. The problem, though, is that nobody gets changed
by an ideal; nothing gets shaken by a dream. And the world
remains the same, regardless of how great your idea is. It’s
only when people take action that true transformation
happens. Don’t get me wrong. Dreams are powerful. They
are fuel for change. But by themselves, they do no good.
Hanging out in coffee shops and talking about one day
being a writer or an activist or an entrepreneur is just about

the worst thing you can do. It feels like work but is in fact
destructive to the real work of realizing your dream.
So what do you do? Stop talking and start doing. Don’t
dream of being a writer—begin writing. Don’t dream of
being an activist—go start something. Don’t dream of being
an entrepreneur—launch something.
I recently caught up with Jonathan. He started that
publishing company and ran it for several years, but as life
moved on, his passion steered him in a new direction. So he
ended the business and started something else, and as it
turns out, the publishing company was just one more step in
the journey. Had he never begun, he would never have
ended up where he is today. The point isn’t that he
succeeded. He would say he didn’t, not with the publishing
company anyway. The point is he tried. He didn’t stay stuck
in the dream and instead adopted an attitude of doing.
Anything less than such proactivity is a cheap imitation of
the life you were meant to live. It’s stalling. Instead of
letting it stop you in your tracks, why not do what Jonathan
did and pivot in a new direction? You might be surprised by
the opportunities that present themselves.
The Hidden Message of
Failure

Not all pivots have happy endings. In 1939, German pastor
Dietrich Bonhoeffer set sail for America, a trip that marked a
crucial turning point in his life. If he went in one direction,
he might surely die. If he went in the other, he would never
be able to live with himself.
A year earlier, thanks to his brother-in-law, he had met
the members of the German Resistance, an underground
group whose primary goal was to drum up support for a
military-led coup against Hitler. From this meeting, he
learned that the world was on the brink of war and that
Germany’s chancellor was more dangerous than most
realized.
A committed pacifist outspoken against the Nazis,
Bonhoeffer would never enlist in military service. At the
same time, he knew not doing so might create complications
for the church, as it would be viewed as an official stance.
Unsure of what to do, he left for the United States, invited
by Union Theological Seminary in New York.
Shortly after arriving, he regretted his decision. Some
knew the danger he was in and the tough position he faced,
so they urged him to stay. But he refused.11
In a letter to his friend Reinhold Niebuhr, Bonhoeffer
described the two choices he had—stay in America and live,
or go back to Germany and possibly be killed. He wrote, “I
know which of these alternatives I must choose but I cannot
make that choice from security.”12 He returned to
Germany, where he was eventually harassed, detained, and
executed for a plot to assassinate Hitler. He was hanged at

Flossenburg concentration camp, just two weeks before
American soldiers arrived to liberate the camp.13
The decision Bonhoeffer made in New York didn’t lead
to success. It didn’t make him rich or famous. But it was the
only decision he could make, one that agreed with his
conscience, and a crucial turning point in his life. That one
decision cost him his life. As he wrote in a letter a few years
earlier, “My calling is quite clear to me. What God will
make of it I do not know . . . I must follow the path. Perhaps
it will not be such a long one.”14 Sometimes a calling isn’t a
means to a more comfortable life. Sometimes we don’t pivot
in the direction of personal success but toward even greater
pain. But here’s the catch: a calling will always lead you to a
life that matters, one you can be proud of. The way that we
get there, though, isn’t always up to us. Sometimes the path
can be costly, even deadly. But what lies at the end of the
road is a prize that money can’t buy and a legacy the world
won’t forget.
“It was the second best thing that ever happened to me,”
Matt McWilliams told me of the first time he was fired by his
friends. The best was the second time they fired him, forcing
him on a journey filled with unexpected twists and turns that
ultimately led to his life’s work. It was, at times, difficult,
even painful, but the pain was worth the reward.

SIX
The Portfolio Life
A New Kind of
Mastery
The future belongs to those who learn more
skills and combine them in creative ways.
—ROBERT GREENE

Your calling is not just one
thing; it’s a few things. The trick
is to not be a jack-of-all-trades
but to become a master of some.
In college, Jody Maberry studied finance and marketing.
Anxious to leave school and get into the business world, he
looked forward to the day he could start wearing a shirt and
tie every day. But during his last year of school at Illinois
State University, he discovered their Outdoor Adventure
program. He began taking classes and trips with the
department, and one trip in particular to Yellowstone
National Park left an impression on him. “I can’t tell you
how cold it got in Yellowstone,” he recalled, “because my
thermometer broke at twenty below. It was miserable and
wonderful. When I returned, it was all I could think about.”1
After graduating from ISU, Jody took to the road. He
believed he would end up living and working the rest of his
life in central Illinois, but due to the Yellowstone incident
and the mark it left on him, he was determined to see what

else was out there. For three months, he lived out of a tent
and explored the western United States, eventually making
his way to Washington State. There he realized it’s not
always voices that call us to our life’s work. Sometimes it’s
places. “Tossing rocks into the water at Deception Pass State
Park,” he wrote me in an e-mail, “I realized I could never go
home.”
Several weeks later, Jody did return home only to realize
what he felt during his trip was not going to pass. In its own
way, the experience haunted him. Within a month, he had
packed everything he owned into the trunk of his car and
decided to hit the road again, two weeks later arriving in
Washington with no job, no friends, and $300 in his pocket.
In the next four years, Jody got married and began
working as a financial analyst for a commercial bank. “It
was the job I went to college for,” he explained, “the job I
was supposed to do.” But something in him knew it wasn’t
what he was meant to do. He secretly wanted more.
Fortunately, the long summer days allowed him to do what
he really moved out west to do, which was explore the
hidden treasures and dark trails of Deception Pass State
Park.
He and his wife, Rebecca, built a house and began to
settle into their life together—Jody as a banker and her as a
teacher. But then one day, while helping them move into
their new house, a friend said something that changed
everything. She worked for Washington State Parks and
mentioned that they were hiring park rangers. “Before the

first box was moved into our new house,” Jody said, “I had
made up my mind. I was going to be a park ranger.”
It may come as no surprise that a financial analyst does
not have the credentials necessary to be a park ranger. So
for the whole year after Jody made the decision to become a
ranger, he worked at a bank during the day and went to
school at night. This fact remained a secret at his day job
until twelve months later when his dream came true. “I
traded in my shirt and tie for the badge and flat hat,” he
recalled.
For a year, Jody worked in Spokane, driving home on
the weekends to be with his wife. After a year of being
apart, they finally sold their house and she joined him. At
the same time as this transition, they learned they were
going to be parents. Little did he know this little piece of
news would one day affect his dream of being a park
ranger.
How Was Your Day?
Last week, I was overseas. In a few days, I’ll be in San
Francisco. But for now, I’m home, making the most of
being in Nashville, the city I moved to after touring as a
musician for a year. My life, it seems, is full of variety.
Every day I wake up to the sound of my two-year-old son
talking over the baby monitor. Some days he wakes up
crying, but today he’s a chatterbox.

Pulling Aiden out of his crib, I carry him downstairs to
make breakfast. Today we’re having ham-and-cheese
omelets. After breakfast, we play for an hour, and then his
mom comes downstairs to take over. I make some coffee,
take a shower, and head to work. It takes me two minutes to
drive downtown, where my office is located. It’s ten a.m.
Opening my laptop, I check e-mail for an hour, then make a
few calls with my cell phone.
Around noon, a friend and I meet for lunch. We chat
about life, business, and fatherhood.
An hour goes by, and I return to the office to do some
writing, squeezing in a half-chapter for a new book project
and a quick blog post, which I schedule for later in the
week. Feeling productive, I move on to more business-
related matters. The rest of the afternoon is filled with
preparation for an upcoming speaking gig and a smattering
of text messages exchanged with my web developer, who’s
helping me build a piece of software.
This is a “normal” workday for me. Each is unique,
filled with its own odd rhythms and appointments, and
honestly, I kind of like it that way. But the hard part comes
when someone asks me what my job is.
Instinctively, I say, “I’m a writer.” But when I tell that
person I don’t spend most of my time writing books, they
give me a funny look, and I have to further explain myself.
If I say, “I’m a speaker,” they’ll expect me to say that I
travel a lot or make most of my income through
honorariums, but those things aren’t true either.

I could, of course, tell them I run a website selling online
products but that I’m not really an entrepreneur—not like
my friends who run furniture stores and restaurants and
such. They have staff members and a storefront. My
business is just me. I write, speak, and look for ways to
support my family. That’s what I do.
The truth is I do all these things—they are all a part of
me in their own way. And although each task might be hard
to fit into a single job description, this is what I do. I learned
there is a term for such a lifestyle, and it’s not ADHD.
“It’s called a portfolio life,” my friend Keith told me.
“A what?” I said.
“A portfolio life. It means you aren’t just a writer or a
husband or a dad. You are all those things, and you need to
embrace them.”
“Oh,” I said. “Cool.”
Not long ago, I had lunch with an author friend. As we
both scooped spoonfuls of gumbo into our mouths to warm
ourselves against the winter air, I mustered the courage to
ask a question.
“Hey, I’ve been meaning to ask you something, if you
don’t mind getting a little personal . . .”
He looked at me but said nothing. I continued.
“Um, so, uh, how do you make a living? Is it just
through book advances and stuff? They can’t be that much,
can they?”
I knew for a fact he was writing a new book every few
years, but the way his publisher stretched out the payments,

he couldn’t have been living off that money.
“Is it speaking?” I continued. I had explored this as a
potential means of income and been disappointed.
My friend smiled politely. “Yeah, I make a little money
from each of those.” Then he grinned knowingly, looked
around as if to see who was listening, and leaned forward to
tell me something. “Well, to be honest,” he whispered, “if
all those things went away, I’d still be okay.”
“What? Why?”
Smiling again, he said, “Because, and don’t repeat this,
but . . .” I was certain he was going to tell me he was a part
of a drug cartel and invite me to get in on it. “Well, I do a
little advising, some coaching, and mentoring for a few
influential leaders.”
“Oh,” I said, trying to imagine who he was talking
about. George W. Bush, maybe? Or George Clooney? I
could only hope.
But the point, and what I walked away from that
conversation with, was that my friend was living a portfolio
life. Not only was he doing this out of financial necessity, he
was also doing it because it’s what he found most fulfilling.
Most authors I know live portfolio lives. So do graphic
designers and construction workers and self-employed
people. What surprised me, though, is how many people
I’ve met who found their callings through a portfolio of
work. They didn’t do just one thing but instead embraced a
diverse set of activities that formed a complete identity. This
is the way the world works now—and maybe the way it’s

supposed to work.
A Portfolio Perspective
By the year 2020, 40 to 50 percent of the American
workforce will be freelancers. By 2030, it will be the
majority.2 Some of these people are being forced into self-
employment caused by mass layoffs due to the strain of a
struggling economy, but others like myself have chosen
such a path. Now, why on earth would we do that?
People are not robots, programmed to do one thing. We
are multifaceted creatures with many varied interests. And
though we may like to believe we were born to do just one
thing, or perhaps we’re comfortable with only having one
career, the reality is most of us are hardwired for a handful
of activities that when combined lead to our greatest
satisfaction and best work.
The numbers are clear. A portfolio life is inevitable. The
challenge, then, is not whether you should start building
one, but when. We are complicated creatures, full of many
interests and assorted passions. What do we do with all of
them? We are not what we do for a living, but our life is
made up of what we do. So how do we take this complexity
into account? And what if our calling will never pay the
bills? Do we give up the pursuit? Take a vow of poverty? Or
is there another way?

The basic idea of a portfolio life is that instead of
thinking of your work as a monolithic activity, what if you
chose to see it as the complex group of interests, passions,
and activities it is? And what if instead of identifying with a
job description, you began to see the whole mass of things
you do as one portfolio of activity?
This idea was first coined by Charles Handy in his book
The Age of Unreason. In the book, Handy lays out five
different types of work that make up your portfolio. They
are: fee work, salary work, homework, study work, and gift
work.
Fee and salary work are the only types of paid work and
are somewhat self-explanatory: fee work means trading
hours for dollars and a salary is a fixed income based on a
job description. The unpaid work, however, is just as
significant as the paid work; it’s just different.
Homework is work that you do at home, like mowing
the lawn or spending time with your family. Study work is
any intentional education that contributes to any work you
do in the future, like reading a book or taking a vocational
class. And gift work is any volunteer experience you might
do, including giving your time to a local homeless shelter or
even taking someone out to lunch to give them helpful
career advice.3
Handy then encourages what he calls “portfolio people”
to organize their time not based on hours in a week, but
rather days in a year. For example, if you need to make
$50,000 per year and can figure out a way to make $250 a

day, then you only need to work 200 days a year. The
remaining 165 days can be spent on the rest of your
portfolio. It’s a useful way of organizing an unconventional
career, which is likely what your calling will be for the first
few years. But what if we applied this idea not just to work
but to your whole life?
As I’ve already said, a calling is more than a career; it’s
the purpose and direction of your life. Which means that it
doesn’t just apply to what you do; it’s who you are. So let’s
look at the four areas that make up the portfolio that is your
life.
1. Work
At some point, you must come to grips with the fact that
you will do many different things in life. Jobs will come and
go, and careers won’t last as long as you think they should.
But in all those experiences, you will be growing. Every
new experience contributes to the portfolio. Long gone are
the days of graduating from high school or college, joining
up with a company, and working there for forty years before
retiring and collecting a pension.
In many cases, the organizations where we make our
vocational homes won’t be here five years from now. They
will be acquired, go bankrupt, or morph into something
different. That’s just the way the world works now. Having
a portfolio mindset toward work will make you a more well-
rounded person and set you up for success in this new
economy.

2. Home
Face it: not all of your life is work, and that’s a good
thing. We’ve spent much of this book exploring the concept
that work is more important than many have made it. Your
job is not mere drudgery; it is a calling, a noble vocation if
you choose to see it that way. But at the same time, work is
not all there is to the story of our lives. We are complex
creatures, social animals, and how we invest our lives goes
beyond where we punch a time clock. My own experience
has taught me this many times over.
When I married Ashley, she vowed to be my biggest fan.
I don’t think either of us knew exactly what that meant at
the time, but years later, after having published books and
gone into business for myself, I can look back and see how
she was a part of encouraging me through the process every
step of the way. I couldn’t have asked for a greater fan.
Having my wife by my side taught me that as important
as dreaming is, an unshared dream is only a fantasy, an
illusion. What makes the journey of vocation worthwhile is
having someone to share your passion with. In my case, as a
writer, without someone to support my work, the words I
write start to become meaningless.
3. Play
I don’t like the word hobbies. To me, those are things
you never intend to take seriously. But we all have things

we do for the pure love of the activity, regardless of whether
they ever provide an income. Psychologists call this activity
“play.”
Recently researchers have come to realize how essential
such activities are to our overall growth. Here’s how Hara
Marano, editor at large for Psychology Today, puts it: “We
would all agree that play lifts stress from us. It refreshes us
and recharges us. It restores our optimism. It changes our
perspective, stimulating creativity . . . But there is also
evidence that play does much more. It may in fact be the
highest expression of our humanity.”5 Whatever you do to
recharge at the end of the day isn’t a diversion. Or at least, it
doesn’t have to be. It can be the very thing that keeps you
healthy and sane. It can even serve to strengthen you as well
as rest does. Your taste in music, the kinds of books you
enjoy, even your favorite foods all contribute to the person
you are and the portfolio you’re creating—and therefore,
make up your calling. Who knows how your past
experiences and current interests might dance together to
create something unique and wonderful? Play is how we
keep our lives, and our work, interesting.
4. Purpose
There must be something bigger than what you do that
guides you through the choices you make, the risks you
take, and the opportunities you pursue. In many ways, this
is the reason you work at all. It’s the charity your company

gives a percentage of profits to or the moral convictions
guiding your values or the family that you’re providing for.
It’s the work behind the work, and although it may not take
eight hours a day, without a why behind the what that you
do, your career becomes meaningless and ultimately
useless.
Some, sadly, don’t comprehend this until it’s too late. On
their deathbeds, they finally understand their purpose and
how many opportunities they missed to make a difference.
What a waste—to understand your purpose long after you
can do anything about it. But for those who are willing to
listen to the voice of calling and pay close attention to their
lives, such a purpose may be known.
Charles Handy once said in an interview: “If you groan
about your job or find it has become monotonous and
boring, you need to ask yourself—what do you secretly
want to do? Do it. You can have a breakpoint and reinvent
yourself. Sensible people reinvent themselves every ten
years.”6
Choosing to see my calling as a portfolio, instead of as a
single gig, has created more harmony and helped me make
more sense of what I do than anything else. Maybe it will do
the same for you too.
What Mastery Doesn’t

Mean
How do we take what we now know of portfolios and apply
this knowledge to our own journeys of vocation? Once we
have heard the call, answering is not enough. You have a
responsibility to not only do what you were born to do, but
to do it well.
For those who grew up on microwaves and prime-time
TV, the concept of craft is lost to us. We did not grow up
with an understanding of doing things with excellence; if it
was expedient and got the job done, then it was good
enough. In a world intent on following the path of least
resistance, the goal is expediency, not excellence. Doing
your work well is secondary to getting the job done. But
what if doing things quickly and easily wasn’t the point?
What if our work was meant to not only serve the world but
to make the worker better?
A writer was once asked by his well-meaning wife,
“Why don’t you write books people can read?” He wrote
odd, almost poetic stories that few people understood.
Dragging his family around Europe while he tried to make a
go at being an author, he was constantly plagued with
financial 
difficulties. To 
make 
matters 
worse, 
his
contemporaries criticized him for being nonsensical, even
outrageous, and sometimes perverse. And now, his wife was
joining the naysayers.
Such criticisms can wear on a person’s soul, but he kept

writing. In his mind, he knew what he was trying to do and
that people would understand some day. For him, it wasn’t
about the money. It was about the craft, about honoring the
work and doing what was his to do. The writer’s name was
James Joyce.
Joyce, who grew up in Ireland, fled his country after
graduating college, at which point he rejected his Roman
Catholic upbringing along with many other traditions and
ties. He was determined to become a great writer with a
brand-new style that would redefine our understanding of
literature. And he did just that. In spite of his peers’
misgivings, and even the jabs of a well-meaning wife, in
1999, fifty-eight years after his death, Joyce was voted by
Time magazine as one of the most important people to have
lived in the twentieth century.
When the world seems to conspire against you and when
everyone around calls you a failure, true masters keep
going. Even when others don’t understand, masters
recognize their allegiance is to a higher calling than pleasing
the masses. Joyce was trying to do something the world had
never seen. He was chasing a passion, and what we learn
from such dedication is that what looks like irrelevance now
can lead to legacy later. But passion alone is not enough to
sustain the work. True mastery is about greatness, about
doing something that pushes the limitations of what others
think is possible or even sensible. Peter Senge, a professor at
MIT, describes mastery as something that “goes beyond
competence and skills . . . It means approaching one’s life

as a creative work.”7
Mastery isn’t about straight As or the highest salary in
the company. It’s not even about being the most popular in
your field. It’s about understanding your potential and then
dedicating your life to pursuing that ideal. It means doing
your absolute best. Why? Because the craft deserves it,
because the calling requires it, and because maybe you’ll be
a better person for it. After all, this is the role of work in our
lives—not only as a means to make a living, but as a tool to
make us into who we were born to be.
We don’t often think about how what we do affects who
we are. Because a job is often just a job, it’s easy to believe
our activity doesn’t affect our identity. It’s true that you are
not what you do, but you can become what you practice.
And who are you practicing being at that job you hate,
cutting corners to get the job done? It’s time we reconnected
with a more modern understanding of mastery.
When I asked a successful musician how he went from
making an average income for an artist to becoming an
outlier in his industry, making a million dollars a year, his
answer surprised me. Did he write a hit song or get some
airplay on the radio? What was it that led to his skyrocketing
success? “I stopped trying to be famous,” he told me.
“What?” I said. “That’s it?” I didn’t understand. Weren’t
musicians supposed to be famous? Wasn’t that the whole

point of making a career out of your art? Didn’t people have
to know who you were? Apparently not. In fact, for my new
friend, fame was more of a distraction than an ally.
“Yep,” he answered. “I stopped trying to be famous and
focused instead on trying to be successful.”
I asked him what that word—success—meant to him and
if he thought every musician should chase the money or
become a millionaire.
“Of course not,” he said. “Success isn’t about money.
It’s about setting a goal—and then achieving it.”
The Millionaire Musician had believed, as many do, that
fame would one day lead to success, and he was
disappointed. He thought he would eventually be able to
take care of his family or not have to worry about touring
two hundred days a year once he became famous, but that
never happened. So he reset his expectations and focused
on a different goal. Only then did he begin to see the results
he had hoped for. For my friend, this meant more time with
family, greater financial freedom, and a legacy for his
children—those were his goals. The money that followed
was a by-product.
What Is Work For?
Something strange happened to me on the road to my life’s
work. When I quit my job to become a full-time writer, with

all the freedom in the world, I thought I had arrived, finally
doing what I loved and getting paid for it. So why, after
only a few months of self-employment, was I burnt out and
ready to quit?
Work, for me, was always a necessary evil, something to
do to take care of myself and pay the bills. Certainly work
was good and worthwhile and I liked most of my jobs, but if
I didn’t need money, there would be no need to get a job. I
was wrong. And this was the reason why after working for
myself for only a few months, I was ready to throw in the
towel. What I had ignored was the true meaning of work.
During that crisis, the question I had failed to ask myself,
the one that we all need to ask at some point, was, “What is
my work for?” Is it to make a living? That’s the typical
attitude and approach toward work, as a means to an end.
We work to live, but we do not live to work. If the purpose
of work is wealth and prosperity, what happens once you hit
your goal of making enough money? Do you retire early?
Some do. But even then, the goal seems small and somehow
petty. If self-gratification is the ultimate reward, why are
those with more often less happy? And why do people like
Bill Gates and Bono take what they’ve accumulated and
give it away? If it’s not for fame or riches that we strive,
then what are we working for?
During World War II, British writer Dorothy Sayers
wrote a compelling essay called “Why Work?” and in it, she
addressed the motivation for vocation. She posed a
particular challenge that was appropriate for her context,

asking what society would do with work after the war was
over.
Many factories in Europe and the United States had been
used to manufacture arms and supplies for the allied forces,
but that was soon ending. During the war, production had
gone through the roof; economies had thrived. And there
was a clear and definite purpose for the work: to supply the
allies with enough goods so that they could win the war.
What would the factories and their workers do now, in a
time of peace? How would people work when there was no
central purpose to unite them? Sayers feared they would
return to an inferior work ethic, which could create long-
term problems for the West.
“The habit of thinking about work as something one
does to make money is so ingrained in us,” she wrote, “that
we can scarcely imagine what a revolutionary change it
would be to think about it instead in terms of the work
done.” If we could make this change and think of work the
same way we think of play, treating it as something we do
for pleasure, it could change the world.8 In essence, Sayers
was saying that the same attitude we have toward the
pursuits we enjoy doing, we should have toward work,
going on to say that work is not a means to an end. It is the
end.
Every worker has a moral responsibility to ask deeper
questions of the work. She wrote, “We should ask of an
enterprise, not ‘will it pay?’ but ‘is it good?’ ” 9 When you
do what Sayers calls serving the work, you do what you

were meant to do and you do it well. The rest is not up to
you. Wealth may come. Fame too. But those are not the
goal. Our job is to see work as a means of making us better,
not just richer, people.
The 
work 
of 
psychology 
professor 
Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi 
demonstrates 
this. 
As 
a 
child,
Csikszentmihalyi witnessed how the atrocities of World War
II made it difficult for people to live meaningful lives after
the war. They had been traumatized by the war and thus had
little reason to feel happy. Was there a way for them to find
meaning and even happiness in life again? Increases in
income—once you’ve reached a certain threshold above the
poverty line—do not make people happier. “Increases in
material well-being don’t seem to affect how happy people
are,” Csikszentmihalyi said.10
So if fame and fortune aren’t the secrets to happiness,
what is? It’s a mental state he calls “flow.” Flow is the
intersection of what you are good at and what challenges
you—where difficulty and competency meet. When your
competency exceeds the difficulty of a task, you are bored.
And when the difficulty exceeds your competency, you are
anxious. That was my problem: I was bored. So I did
whatever I could think of to make my new job more
difficult. And you know what? The boredom went away.
Later, I realized the new challenges I had stepped into gave
me a sense of purpose that was lacking.
This was the same issue facing the workers in Europe
and the United States after the war. How would they avoid a

sense of purposelessness? They needed to find their flow,
understanding that the challenge wasn’t in producing
something for some far-off cause. It was in the work itself.
Here’s how Csikszentmihalyi described that feeling you
get when you are in a state of flow: “You know that what
you need to do is possible to do, even though difficult, and
sense of time disappears. You forget yourself. You feel part
of something larger.”11 If the work we do is only about our
own personal success or recognition, then we will
eventually lose interest or become overwhelmed with
anxiety. But if it’s about a greater good, if we are here to
serve the work and not the other way around, then we get
up every day with a new challenge, a purpose. Which
sounds a lot like a calling.
We are caretakers of our vocations, stewards entrusted
with a vision that is bigger than us. Our responsibility is not
to hoard our gifts but to use them in challenging ways so
that others can benefit. In short, your calling is a gift, one
that is intended to be given away. Calling is a conduit for
life, allowing us to bring our skills and passions together in
a satisfying, meaningful way.
The Road to Mastery
After receiving a promotion that forced him and his family
to relocate, Jody Maberry moved away from Spokane to

work several more years at a different park out west.12 He
thought his dream was to be a ranger, but when he saw the
personal cost, he wasn’t so sure anymore. He wasn’t
spending much time with his family, and his kids were
growing up fast. To make matters worse, the park system
was in trouble, and he wasn’t sure how secure his job was.
After an internal struggle, Jody decided to leave his job
at the park to focus on his family. Returning to school again,
he got an MBA and went to work for a small construction
company helping them with the administrative side of the
business. He also relocated his family into town, something
they had never done before. For the first time, his kids had
neighbors—and they loved it. To this day, he doesn’t regret
it.
But even now, years later, there is a hunger still inside
Jody that will not go away. A year after leaving his position
at the park, he started to feel the itch again. At school, he
would be reminded of ways that he could apply what he was
learning to his previous job as a ranger. In conversations
with friends, he would find himself missing the work. “Parks
began tugging at me again,” he recalled. “This time, I knew
not to let it call for too long.”
Today Jody works as a consultant with businesses on
their strategic planning and marketing. He’s considering
getting back into working with parks again someday, but for
now he feels like he made the right choice.
When I video-chatted with Jody, I asked him if he had
any regrets. “No, I don’t,” he said. “Sometimes I miss it, but

I don’t have any regrets.” He told me about men he knew—
former park rangers—who had to make tough choices like
he did. They had to move their families or get laid off.
“Being a ranger was everything to them; they loved the
job,” he said. But many had to grieve the loss of their dream
when they chose their families over parks.
Some went on to be fish and wildlife officers, others
state troopers, and even others school teachers. But their
dream of being a park ranger was gone, as it was for Jody,
and they had to move on. “It’s really sad,” he said. “In
many ways, you are a park ranger first and a dad or
husband second.” It’s part of the job, he admits, but
something about it always unnerved him.
Maybe moving on is part of the process. Maybe a calling
is always evolving, never allowing you to stand still in one
place for too long. Now Jody is using both his business
background and his park experience to help build the next
generation of park leaders. When we spoke, he had recently
launched a podcast called The Park Leaders Show, which
features guest interviews with other rangers and experts and
is quickly becoming an industry resource. A lot of the job of
being a park ranger involves management and business
skills that you have to learn on your own. “There’s no
training for that,” he told me. The podcast provides such
training.
On the show, Jody was able to interview Jack Hartt, his
first manager, who helped him get started as a ranger. At
one point in the conversation, Jody said something to

indicate that he missed being a ranger. Jack replied, “You
may miss being a park ranger, but if you can make this
[podcast] work, you will impact more people than you ever
could working in a park.”
Looking back, Jody can see how everything in his life,
even the unexpected turns and disappointments, helped him
get to where he is now. He couldn’t be doing what he’s now
doing without the many weird twists in his story that forced
him to pivot at opportune times. “I couldn’t have done this,”
he said, “without being a park ranger for eight years. And I
couldn’t have done it without being in business and having
a nontraditional park ranger story.” To him, it’s all
connected.
So how does Jody see his calling now? Has it changed
or evolved? “I was called to parks, not to be a park ranger,”
he said, explaining that he better understands now what he
was meant to do. “And even when I tried to leave, I was
drawn back.” In his experience, this is how a calling works.
It’s something that will not leave you alone, a beckoning
toward the work for which you were made. And for Jody, it
came and went at different seasons, growing and changing
as he did.
“Don’t search for your calling,” he said. “Explore, try
new things, keep your feet moving. Something will grab
you. It will call to you. It is no different than falling in love.
You can’t sit on your couch and decide you are going to
marry a certain girl. You fall in love after sharing
experiences, joy, challenges, maybe even heartbreak. All of

which could not have happened without leaving your
couch, being involved, and meeting the one girl you can’t
stop thinking about.”
At different times, Jody had to walk away from what he
thought was his calling. He loved his job, but he had
responsibilities to his family that trumped his job. For him, a
calling is not just a position; it’s a life lived well. And
perhaps the same is true for you and me.
When I met Jody during a trip to Washington State, he
took me around his old stomping grounds, driving me to the
top of Mount Spokane and pointing out the sights, telling
me stories along the way. As he did, I could tell that
although he left his job as a ranger years ago, the job never
fully left him. “A calling does not mean a specific job,” he
said. “I am no longer a park ranger, but it does not mean I
have to walk away from my calling. I can instead apply my
strengths to add value to the cause in another way.”13

PART THREE
Completion

SEVEN
Your Magnum Opus
What Legacy Looks
Like
A life isn’t significant except for its impact on
other lives.
—JACKIE ROBINSON

Your calling is not a job. It is
your entire life.
I’m not sure what I was expecting visiting my first mud hut
in the middle of Africa, but this was not it. I was not
expecting hope. “Is this where you live?” our guide asked
the little girl as we marched up the dirt path to her home.
Otherwise stoic, her attitude brightened as we reached the
top of the hill and were greeted by her parents—at least, we
thought they were her parents.
Sam, the man of the house, was quick to correct this
misunderstanding. Nine-year-old Kevin was his sister-in-
law. He and his wife, Christine, took her in after her mother
disappeared. The mother suffered from some form of mental
illness and had the unfortunate habit of abandoning her
children. So they decided to raise Kevin as their own. And
when you ask them about this or praise their kindness, they
get embarrassed.
Three sturdy mud huts with thatched roofs made up the
family’s home: one was a kitchen, and the other two were
bedrooms. As we toured the premises, I noticed each
building was well kept, the floors neatly swept and things

put away where they belonged. There was a familiar order
to the place, a pattern that felt like home. They were modest
people, but you could tell they took great pride in what they
had, especially Christine.
Life was tough for them, no question about it. In the past
year, the couple had lost twin baby boys, a wound they
were still healing from. Their son, Augustine, was deaf, and
they didn’t have access to opportunities like specialized
schooling that would certainly make life easier.
Sam was born to a poor farming family in Lira, Uganda,
which is located in the northern part of the country where a
civil war ravaged the land for two decades. Despite his
parents’ limited means, they gave him a plot of land on
which he began farming and raising his family. “It’s rare to
see a man stay after the kids come,” one of the trip leaders
told me. Men in that culture tend to leave once children
come into the picture, but Sam was not that kind of man.
After we visited with the family for a while, Sam showed
me a small shop on the side of a nearby road, where he sold
small items like bags of cooking oil and matches.
I promptly peppered him with questions: “How much do
you make off of each item? What’s your profit margin?
When can you order new inventory?”
He knew all the answers.
I even asked if he had a goal of how much money he
wanted to make. This, I’ve learned, is a question most
people don’t know the answer to, and one that leads to true
success. You have to have a goal, to know where you’re

going, in order to get there. It seems obvious, but so many
people chase after a dream without any idea of what they’re
really trying to achieve. But Sam was different.
“Five million,” he said without hesitation.
That’s how much money he needed to make to send his
son to a special needs school and build a house that wasn’t
made of mud. Without trying to seem too conspicuous, I
pulled out my phone and opened the calculator app, doing a
quick currency conversion. It equaled $2,000.
“I think you will meet your goal, Sam.” I said, smiling.
His family had to walk two miles every day to get clean
drinking water. They didn’t have electricity or any modern
conveniences. They cooked all their meals over a fire and
lived off of less than a few dollars a day. Yet all around his
home were plants like sorghum and mango trees, life-giving
fruits and vegetables and grains that ensured his family
would not go hungry.
Sam was doing more than subsisting. He was working
hard to not only make ends meet but to improve his life and
create a future for his children. When we said goodbye to
the man with the infectious smile, I realized how wealthy he
was.
Poverty and wealth are concepts that cannot be defined
merely by what you have or make. Is the lawyer who makes
$450,000 a year and spends half a million rich? Are his
habits sustainable? What about the mom I met a couple of
years ago in the slums of Guatemala, who sweeps her house
clean every morning before going to work in the market so

she can send her kids to school—is she poor? I don’t say
this to make light of those who live on next to nothing, nor
do I want to minimize the luxury from which I am able to
write this. But what I have learned, not from the suburbs but
from the slums, is that poverty is more than a context. It’s a
mindset. I have met rich people in some of the poorest parts
o f the planet and I have met bankrupt people living in
million-dollar homes.
Sam isn’t going to be poor, if we can even call him that,
for long. He has the opportunity, the means, and the will to
change his life. His demeanor was different from the vibe I
got entering the slums of Kampala. That was a different kind
of poverty; there was little hope there. But in Sam’s eyes, I
saw something I wanted, something powerful and
infectious. His dream was not for him; it was for his family.
And that gave me hope. If Sam can find meaning and
motivation in rural Uganda with nothing more than a hoe to
farm and a shack to start a business, then what’s stopping
you and me with all the tools at our disposal? How do we
take a calling, however extraordinary or ordinary it may
seem, and do as Sam has done? How do we turn our work
into something generous?
Our circumstances rarely dictate what we can do with
our lives, and that man who was making a life for himself
and his loved ones in the African bush taught me more than
any millionaire ever could. For him, the work is both the
means and the end to a better life. He’s doing what he loves
and doing it for the people he loves.

Success Isn’t About You
I always thought pursuing a dream was about you, that it
was inherently selfish. But I couldn’t have been more
wrong. It wasn’t until I got everything I wanted in life that I
realized none of it was for me.
“I think it’s time that I move on,” I told my boss of
seven years, who had mentored me for much of that time.
He immediately sat up in his chair, looking at me, not
saying a word. “I, uh . . . well, I think it’s time. The money’s
there. The family support is there. My passion is there. The
only thing that would keep me from doing this is, well, I
wouldn’t want to disappoint you.”
For a moment, he just stared at me without saying
anything. Then finally he spoke up: “Jeff, I’m not
disappointed in you. I’m proud of you. In fact, I’ve been
waiting for this conversation. I’ve seen this coming for a
while. It’s about time you went off and did something on
your own.”
A few months later, I began working for myself. That’s
when the really hard work began. Before leaving my job, I
had saved up enough money to live on for at least six
months, if not a year (but that would have been really
stretching it). The idea was to not have to worry about
income for a while so that I wouldn’t be stressed the first
month on the job. I always wanted to be able to take my
time building a business. But there was just one problem

with having all that savings: I wasn’t motivated to work.
After seeing work as a means of making a paycheck for
so many years, I didn’t have a good reason to go to work
when money was no longer an issue. For a couple of
months, I really struggled with motivation, with knowing
why I should be working. This lack of motivation turned
into laziness, which devolved into depression. If I didn’t
need to work, what did I need to do, and why?
Eventually, I did go back to work, but with different
intentions. During my two-month funk, I called my friend
Stu, who owns a successful software company, to ask how
he dealt with motivation. “Jeff,” he said, “I live in a small
town, and my standard of living hasn’t really changed since
I started working for myself.” At a time when he was
starting to make more money than he would ever need, Stu
went on a trip to Africa and his eyes were opened to a whole
new world of possibility. In Kenya, he saw how much of a
difference opportunity and a good education could make in
a person’s life. He realized that instead of feeling guilty, he
could use the gifts he was born with, some of which he
didn’t earn or deserve, to help other people. “After that, I
realized I was good at making money and didn’t need to
feel bad about that. I could do what I do best and use it for
good. When I returned home, I started working not for
myself but for all those people I met in Africa.”
A few years later, I had a similar experience, having
raised enough money through my blog to help build an
income-generating workshop for women living in a leper

camp just outside of Mombasa, Kenya. Work, it seems, was
never meant to be something we do just to make a living. It
was meant to be a means of making a difference—in our
own lives and in the lives of others. The problem today is
that many of us see our jobs just as a duty, something we’re
obligated to do to pay the bills. Or we see it as a means of
improving our lives, of making so much money we can buy
all the things we’ve ever wanted. But neither option will
satisfy.
This me-first way of looking at vocation doesn’t work.
When you look around at the world, you see a curious trend
in the lives of some billionaires and movie stars. They aren’t
content to simply savor the fruit of their labor, but neither do
they let their largesse lead to unproductive guilt. They
understand that feeling guilty, in and of itself, doesn’t
accomplish anything. Instead, they’re using their resources
and influence to improve other people’s lives. Leveraging
their connections and celebrity, understanding that people
will listen to them, they’re trying to do something good.
A few generations ago, men went to work or war and
rarely got to see life beyond their careers. A generation ago,
our parents had to answer the question of what they would
do with the last third of their lives. How would they spend
their retirement? Would it be squandered on silly things or
invested in significance?
But now, the question of legacy isn’t a matter of if you
live long enough or when you retire; it’s a matter of what
you will do with what you have right now. You don’t have

to earn a living for thirty years to turn around and spend the
next thirty giving it away. If significance is what matters to
you, you can structure your life and work in a way that
allows you to live your legacy now. In fact, your giving
doesn’t have to be a by-product of your success; it can be
the very thing that drives it in the first place.
“We Are Your Symphony”
In the film Mr. Holland’s Opus , Glenn Holland is a
frustrated music teacher trying to compose a masterwork in
the margins of life. He never succeeds—at least not in the
way he hopes. Every time he gets close to completing his
symphony, some new complication arrives, and his work
must be put on hold.
A touring musician on sabbatical, Mr. Holland takes the
open music instructor position at a high school because he
thinks it will give him more time to compose. But as the
demands of the job increase and the pressures from home
build, he realizes how wrong he was. Over the course of his
teaching career, which he thought would only be a
temporary commitment to pay some bills, he inspires
students to continue playing music, struggles to be a good
dad and faithful husband, and battles a stubborn school
board that ultimately has him fired, all while slowly picking
away at his composition.
When Glenn learns his son is deaf, he realizes Cole will

never be able to appreciate music the same way he does. In
one scene, the two get in a fight when the father tells his son
that he is sad because John Lennon was just shot and that
Cole wouldn’t understand. Most of Mr. Holland’s life is full
of moments like this—scenes of frustration where he feels
misunderstood or simply overlooked, as if he’s the only one
with dreams bigger than his life can contain.
By the end of the movie, Mr. Holland is a cynical old
man, tired of school board bureaucracy and resigned to the
fact that in spite of his dreams, he will never be a master
composer. After his last day of school, his family is
escorting him to the exit when he hears music coming from
the gymnasium. Curious, he opens the doors to an
auditorium full of hundreds of students, teachers, and
alumni, all gathered to wish him well and celebrate the
impact he had on their lives. In the crowd, he sees many
familiar faces, including one apathetic student who used to
challenge his authority.
Another former student, Gertrude Lang, who is now the
state governor, acts as emcee and welcomes everyone,
explaining how Mr. Holland had an impact on her life, as he
has done for everyone in the auditorium. Then she remarks
on how Holland feels like he has misspent a great part of his
life. “Rumor had it,” she says, “he was always working on
this symphony of his, and this was going to make him
famous, rich. Probably both. But Mr. Holland isn’t rich, and
he isn’t famous. At least not outside of our little town.” Then
she looks at the man who was her favorite teacher and says,

“Mr. Holland, we are your symphony.”1
Gertrude then asks him to come onstage as the curtains
pull back to reveal a full orchestra band, ready to play “An
American Symphony” by Glenn Holland. With tears in his
eyes, he conducts the symphony he spent three decades of
his life composing, an effort he thought had been lost
forever.2 It’s a moment of clarity for both the audience and
the protagonist, a man who felt he had missed his calling,
that he had wasted his life on a pursuit less significant. And
he was wrong.
Sometimes all the little things in life aren’t interruptions
to our calling. They are the most important part. “Life is
what happens to you while you’re busy making other
plans,” John Lennon wrote in a song to his son, Sean.3 We
see this come true in Mr. Holland’s life, as he can now see
the full picture of his calling, understanding that every
frustration had a purpose and that when he felt farthest from
his true reason for living, he was actually much closer than
he realized.
Life has a funny way of teaching us that sometimes the
most important stuff is the ordinary stuff. The smallest
moments, the ones we think are insignificant, are the ones
we will cherish the most. As you endeavor to do something
amazing with your life, don’t forget that without people to
support your dream, your work will always be incomplete.
A life filled with achievements and accolades but lacking
those people necessary to celebrate those moments is not

much of a life at all.
In your pursuit of a worthwhile vocation, you will be
tempted to rush past these times. These are the moments you
get interrupted by a colleague at the water cooler or when
your toddler tugs on your pant leg when you have just one
more e-mail to send. These are the times when you get
distracted, when the whole world seems to be plotting
against your productivity. But there is often a purpose in
these moments—to remind you that a calling is more than a
career; it is a life lived well. And the very things you try to
avoid are what you need the most to make this story matter.
I used to think that your calling was about doing
something good in this world. Now I understand it’s about
becoming someone good—and letting that goodness impact
the world around you. Which means that you won’t fully
appreciate the whole story you’re living until the end. But
for now, if you are intentional and willing to appreciate the
fact that you don’t see the whole narrative, you can enjoy
more of the journey.
Now I Become Myself
“What kind of writer do you want to be?” my friend Marion
asked me. I didn’t know what to say. Should I say Salinger
or Shakespeare, maybe pick someone a little more
contemporary, a little more successful? What was the right
answer? I was unsure.

The truth was I wanted to be like a lot of different
writers, but what I really wanted was what they had. Fame,
talent, money. But those are lousy things to wish for when
someone asks you what kind of writer you want to be, so I
had to think of something more thoughtful to say. Even if
you want those things, you certainly can’t say so out loud.
We all have too many choices in this world. Freedom is
a great thing, but freedom without restriction can be
paralyzing. When it comes to vocation, we need some
boundaries as well, parameters that allow us to focus. The
good news is that the path to your life’s work is already laid
out for you. It has been there since the beginning of your
life, and it’s quite different from that of your friends or those
famous people you admire.
When we talk about finding a calling, we’re not just
seeking an activity. We’re looking for an identity, an
understanding of who we are. We want to be complete, to
make sense of the story of our lives. But whether we
recognize it or not, this quest we’ve been talking about is
not just a physical one; it’s a spiritual one. It is, in a way, a
journey of becoming.
“Now I become myself,” May Sarton wrote. “It’s taken /
Time, many years and places; / I have been dissolved and
shaken, / Worn other people’s faces.” 4 We all do this on
occasion. We spend too much time pretending to be
someone else. We try to recreate a life we admire instead of
the one we were born for. We vainly expend energy and
effort on pursuits that are bound for failure—all because

we’re afraid of being our true selves. But the lucky ones
discover a different path. Or rather, they forge one where
there was no way, departing from expectation in order to
become who they are.
To be called is not enough. You must become your
calling, a choice that happens only if you make it. Why do
so few people do this? What’s really at stake here? As with
any journey, there is risk and danger, the likelihood of
failure. And most would rather play it safe than be rejected
by their friends or fall on their faces for the world to see. So
they live lives of safety and relative obscurity, focusing on
the things they enjoy and are praised for instead of daring to
do something great. And time creeps by, taunting those who
did not live.
Ezra Pound aptly wrote of such people: “And the days
are not full enough / And the nights are not full enough /
And life slips by like a field mouse / Not shaking the
grass.”5 That feeling you feel when you see a great movie
or read a powerful story—you know that itch? It’s telling
you there is more life in you yet to be lived. Ancient myths
and legends speak to this. Every hero’s journey included
some sacred task that culminated in a deeper understanding
of who they were born to be. And how was this done?
Through a personal quest—some great feat that required
every talent, skill, and strength they could muster. In other
words, they had to work.
Every day you and I face a choice: to either pursue our
authentic selves or a shadow of the real thing. We either do

what is expected of us, or we listen to that voice of intuition
deep inside promising something more significant. And as
we pick up our hammers and scalpels, as we sit down in
front of our laptops or climb onboard the bus for another
tour, as we endeavor to do meaningful work in the world,
we are becoming ourselves. We are, as Viktor Frankl wrote,
looking for a reason to be happy. Fulfillment isn’t just for
the elite few who find a purpose for life; it’s for everyone.
And that potential exists in each and every one of us. You
have everything you need to be your whole self; it’s already
in you. Now you just have to become it.
A calling isn’t something new and shiny. Often it’s
something old and predictable, a familiar face that’s easily
taken for granted, an old habit or hobby that comes back
into our lives. It’s our true self, shared with the world. But
sometimes it takes a wake-up call for us to see that this work
that we’re doing is more significant than we realize.
Classroom teacher Gloria Stronks learned this lesson one
day when she took some time off. “I’ve hired a substitute
for the next two days,” the principal told her. “I want you to
visit the homes of each of your children. You need stay only
ten minutes in each home.” Then she added, “You won’t
find fathers at home because many of them are in prison. I
just want you to understand your students.”
Gloria never intended to be a teacher of small children.
Her husband was a graduate student, and she needed a job,
so she took the only position available as the head of a class
of forty-seven third graders. Her visit to the children’s

homes was nothing short of incredible. The homes were
shacks with dirt floors. The children slept on those floors or
in some car seat from the junkyard. Here is her recollection:
The mothers spoke poorly and seemed frightened to
have me visit. I returned to school, amazed that my
students could learn as well as they did and
recognizing the fine teaching that had occurred
earlier so that now each one of these children could
read at least at a mid-second grade level. Those
teachers had been the most important adults in the
lives of the children . . . and now I was one of them.6
Gloria’s feeling of ingratitude was replaced with a deep
sense of honor. She went from resenting her job to
embracing it. Sometimes, a calling is simply accepting your
role in a story that is bigger than you. So when my friend
asked what kind of writer I wanted to be, I said the most
natural thing that came to mind: “I want to be the kind of
writer I’m supposed to be.”
Missing the Call
The easiest way to miss your calling is to ignore the call.
Maybe it feels too risky, or maybe you feel too old and silly
chasing a dream that now seems out of reach. We keep

putting off starting for “someday,” which never comes. This
is common, and we tend to excuse our lack of action, even
rationalizing it to each other.
Most people find themselves in careers that do anything
but inspire them, and this can lead to complacency. Why
would I take such a risk? My friends and family members
aren’t. Doing so would make me weird, maybe even alienate
me from those who love me. So they don’t ever find the
time, and sadly they “die with their song still in them,” as
Oliver Wendell Holmes once wrote.7
Another way to miss your calling is to treat it as an event
instead of a lifestyle. Remember: your vocation is more of a
magnum opus than a single masterpiece. It’s an entire body
of work, not a single piece. You will spend your life
creating it, and if you stop too soon or don’t see your entire
life as a means of accomplishing that task, you could miss it.
Recently over lunch while we were discussing the topic
of calling and purpose, a friend said, “Maybe my purpose in
life was to simply raise my daughters, and they’re going to
go do something great. Maybe that’s all I was meant to do,
and my purpose is now fulfilled. And everything else is just
gravy. I would be okay with that.”
He’s onto something in that he sees his purpose as
something that is bigger than him, a task he was born to
accomplish that will send ripples into eternity. But your
calling is not a single event in your life; it’s the whole body
of work you make—including your job, your relationships,
and the legacy you leave behind. If you see it as something

other than that, you may stop short of the goal. You can, in
fact, not live up to your potential. Maybe you answered the
call but at some point gave up. You started down the road
but decided to retire or settle, and at some point, you let go.
You settled for good when you were called to greatness.
In the movie Finding Forrester, Sean Connery plays a
writer in his latter years of life, a recluse, confined to his
home, who doesn’t care much for visitors. This doesn’t
bode well for the young college student who tracks him
down in search of a mentor. At first, Forrester dismisses the
young man—in fact, he cusses him out and chases him
away. But eventually, the two become friends, and the
young man finds his way in life largely due to the
mentorship. At the very end of the story, the old man
realizes that although he wrote a best-selling novel years
ago, his purpose wasn’t over once he achieved a surprising
amount of fame.8
The same is true for us and the way we pursue our
callings. Success isn’t the goal; legacy is. Ultimately, we are
called to call others; we are given gifts to be given away. All
that to say: when you find yourself at the pinnacle of
personal greatness, you may just be getting started.
The Lesson of Stephen
King’s Desk

Stephen King wrote in his memoir that for years he
approached his craft wasted, treating his vocation as
competition with the rest of life. At the pinnacle of his
success, and in the depths of his addiction, he bought a
desk. A possession he had always dreamed of, the desk was
“the sort of massive oak slab that would dominate a
room”9—he placed it in the middle of his study where he
tirelessly went to work every day.
After getting sober with the intervention of his family,
King got rid of the huge desk and replaced it with a smaller
one, which he put in the corner of his office instead of in the
center of the room. His children would regularly come up to
the office, which was now more a living room than a retreat
center, to watch sports games and movies and to eat pizza.
He never complained. What he learned from this tale of two
desks and his struggle with an addiction that nearly cost him
his family was that “life isn’t a support system for art. It’s
the other way around.”10
This was what Sam in Uganda reminded me of and what
Jody Maberry did so well for his family. Life is not an
inconvenience to the work we dream of; it’s the reason we
do it in the first place. A calling does not compete with or
even complement your life. Your life, when lived well,
becomes your calling—your magnum opus. And just like
Mr. Holland, we won’t appreciate this until the end.

Several years ago, I wrote a list of dreams and goals with
dates assigned to each. On that list at the ten-year mark was
the goal, “Write and publish a book.” A year later, the goal
was realized. After a year of late nights and early mornings,
of fighting with my wife about when I would come to bed
and 
often 
breaking 
that 
promise, 
of 
countless
misunderstandings with colleagues and arguments over
where my allegiances lay, and three hundred days of
doubting myself, I had finally done it. I’d written a book.
And I was proud.
When the big day arrived, nothing went right. Visiting
the local Barnes & Noble, I failed to find a single copy of
my book on the shelves. Within a few hours, Amazon ran
out of its short supply, and people I had told to go buy the
book were telling me they couldn’t find it anywhere.
Embarrassed and feeling sorry for myself, I left the house to
run some errands and to get a drink with a friend. We were
supposed to be celebrating, but instead I wanted to
commiserate.
A few hours later, he dropped me off at my house.
Crossing the threshold, I stepped into a house full of people
who shouted, “Surprise!” My wife had thrown me a party
with twenty of my closest friends. After walking around,
greeting and thanking everyone, I reached for a cupcake
and saw on our dining room table a small white envelope
with a card inside. The card, which was from my wife, said,
“It was never a question of if. It was always a matter of
when.” She who had pledged to be my biggest fan had been

rooting for me from the very beginning.
As you strive to achieve your life’s work, be careful of at
what costs you chase it. It will be easy to resent those closest
to you, to make your biggest supporters into your worst
enemies. To hoard your work away from the rest of life.
You may be tempted to see every relationship not as a
lifeline, but as a competing force, something to be
mistrusted. And in doing this, you may destroy the very
things that could save you.
Consumed by the Calling
I often wonder about my grandfather, who was a journalist,
artist, and alcoholic for much of his life. A talented pianist
and playwright, Grandpa was a man I admired—a deep
thinker, a complex character full of frustration and
sometimes unexplained sadness. There is much about that
man that is still a mystery. But one thing I do know is that
surrounded by the books he loved, with eyes full of regret,
he died at the hands of his addiction. Jaundiced and glassy-
eyed, staring at me with a softness I will never forget, he
gripped my hand and smiled. A few days later, his major
organs completely shut down, and he was gone.
I have no doubt that my grandfather was called to be an
artist. But I also know that for a season of life he let his
calling consume him. So whenever I snap at my wife or lose
patience with my son, I try to remember this and that

Stephen King quote. Life is not a support system for your
work; your work is a support system for your life. No
amount of success is worth losing the ones you love the
most. I am still learning this, still swallowing my pride and
ambition and learning to move my desk out from the middle
of the room. Each time I take the day off to go to the zoo
with my family, I don’t regret it. Every time I close the
laptop to watch a movie with my wife or get up with my son
in the middle of the night before a speaking gig, I remember
these are not interruptions to the call; they are the most
significant parts of the process.
There is an old episode of The Simpsons in which Homer
leaves his despised job at the nuclear power plant to pursue
his dream of working at a bowling alley. When he hears
news around town that his wife is pregnant and that he
won’t be able to support his family, he is forced to return to
the power plant, where his former boss, Mr. Burns, makes
him beg for his job back. To further humiliate him, Mr.
Burns places a plaque in Homer’s office that says, “Don’t
forget; you’re here forever.” But by the end of the episode,
Homer has taken all the pictures of his daughter Maggie and
taped them to the plaque so that it now reads, “Do it for
her.”11
In the journey toward our callings, there will be
roadblocks and inconveniences, setbacks and slowdowns
that we may mistake for distractions when in fact they are as
much a part of the calling as the job itself. Right now, a
good friend is in the middle of realizing this as he transitions

from a career as a teacher to a new job as a financial
advisor. At first, he resented the fact that he was going to
have to leave his job, which he loved, so that his wife could
stay home to raise their kids. It felt like selling out and
giving up a dream for something that paid the bills. But as
he spent the greater part of a year wrestling over the
decision, he realized that any good dream is one worth
sharing, and sometimes worth sacrificing, for others. This
doesn’t mean we need to give up on our deepest longings,
but it does mean that a calling is about more than me.
When I was in Africa, I asked the Ugandan farmer Sam
what he and his family did for fun. Looking around at his
surroundings, I noticed there wasn’t much and knew that
summers were hot there. What did they do all day long
when they weren’t farming or fetching water? As soon as I
asked the question, Sam frowned. Then he shook his head.
The translator repeated the question. He shook his head
again, confused.
“You know,” I repeated. “Fun. Like, what do you do
when you’re not working?”
He nodded as the translation came through, then thought
for a moment and finally spoke.
“We do everything together—and to us, it is fun.”

Conclusion
The Work Is Never Done
Art is never finished, only abandoned.
—LEONARDO DA VINCI

Your calling is not a
destination. It is a journey that
doesn’t end until you die.
In a former life, Ed Cathey was a physical therapist, but I
never knew that man. The man I knew was no doctor; there
was nothing clinical about him. At the ripe age of seventy-
something, Ed, who had long since left his practice at
Vanderbilt Hospital, held down a part-time job as a chaplain
at the Nashville Rescue Mission. He had tried to retire but
instead ended up attending to the spiritual, emotional, and
physical needs of homeless men who congregated in the
overcrowded courtyard every day.
To be honest, Ed looked out of place. A clean-cut
African American gentleman from Chicago, who spoke the
most proper English I’d ever heard, didn’t quite blend in
with the roughneck crowd of drug addicts, disabled
veterans, and thugs you encountered on a daily basis at the
mission. Always wearing neatly pressed button-down shirts
tucked tidily into well-ironed slacks, he was the picture of
elegance and grace. Which contrasted with the drunken

shouts and raucous hollering often echoing through the
concrete walls of the mission.
What was Ed doing there?
Sometimes men would approach him and try to give him
a high-five or some kind of handshake. Ed would have none
of that; he always returned such gestures with an awkward
smile and polite nod, followed by a pat on the shoulder. I
never knew why he did this but suspected it was because he
couldn’t relate and maybe because he wanted more for
those men than their loud greetings and macho handshakes.
“Thanks, son,” he would say, often squeezing their arms
and then moving on.
Sometimes they would retort sarcastically, “I’m not your
son!” But often, I would see the men’s gazes soften as they
stared into Ed’s warm eyes. I wondered if anyone had ever
called them that before. Later he told me that for some, he
was the only father they ever knew.
Ed ended up at the mission, and had been working there
for nearly fifteen years, not because he had a passion for the
poor or because he had any particular burden for the
homeless. In fact, he told me this was the last place he ever
thought he’d end up. But he had a friend on the board who
invited him to visit the mission one day. After touring the
facilities, Ed was asked if he would consider becoming a
chaplain at the mission. After some hesitation, he relented,
agreeing to work there a few days a week, counseling and
praying with men who were struggling to escape their
situations.

Ed had worked hard to build a life for himself, a fact in
which he seemed to have just the right amount of pride. He
had disciplined himself to rise above what was expected of
him at a time when black men weren’t given many options
to succeed. And here he was, back with the kind of people
he had tried not to be like his whole life. It was humbling,
I’m sure. To be honest, I probably judged Ed a little. Did he
really have compassion for these men, or did he merely
tolerate them? There were times when it seemed he was
quite uncomfortable around them. So why did he keep
spending his time, which was becoming a more valuable
commodity with age, at the mission? Why here? What did
he have to gain from spending his remaining years of life
with such men? I once heard a story from one of the other
chaplains, which answered the question.
One day outside the mission doors, lying on the ground
in the courtyard, was a small, emaciated man who appeared
to be either dead or comatose. Like many, he had passed out
from some form of intoxication or drug-induced slumber.
Frail and fraught with disease, likely infected with HIV, he
was covered in his own urine and feces. Sadly, it was not
uncommon to see a man like this, passed out due to
drinking or drugs, who would then wake up to a mess of his
own making. When this man awoke, he was too weak to
move. Some passed him by, laughing and even playing
jokes on him, while others ignored him.
But when Ed—clean, proper, doctoral Ed—saw this man
and realized he couldn’t get up on his own, he went to him.

And crouching in his khakis, he placed his arms underneath
the man’s head and legs, careful not to hurt him, and lifted
him up, pulling the damp, dirty man close to his chest and
carrying him inside where he could receive proper care.
After hearing that story, I never again questioned why Ed
was at the mission. I knew. He was there because he was
called.
Hemingway’s Regret and
Niggle’s Redemption
In 1961, the writer A. E. Hotchner went to see his good
friend Ernest Hemingway in an honest attempt to save his
life. Hotchner was an editor, novelist, and one of
Hemingway’s biographers. After hearing Hemingway
repeatedly complain about everything from taxes to his
clothes, Hotch asked a simple question of his friend: “Papa,
why do you want to kill yourself?”
The author responded, “What do you think happens to a
man going on sixty-two when he realizes that he can never
write the books and stories he promised himself? Or do any
of the other things he promised himself in the good days?”
Hotch encouraged Hemingway that he still had great
work in him and that he had written a beautiful book about
Paris (which would later become A Moveable Feast), but

Hemingway would hear none of it, saying the best parts of
those stories had been written long ago. “And now,” he
said, “I can’t finish it.”
“But perhaps it is finished, and it is just reluctance . . .”
“Hotch, if I can’t exist on my own terms, then existence
is impossible. Do you understand? That is how I’ve lived,
and that is how I must live—or not live.”
That was the last time Hotch saw his friend. Later that
year, Hemingway lost his life to a self-inflicted gunshot
wound.1 Beloved by the world, Papa died a lonely,
depressed man. In the end, what he had accomplished—
publishing several best-selling books, traveling all over the
world, winning the Nobel Prize for literature—was just not
enough.
Every person faces the ultimate insufficiency of their
work. Every worker knows the limits of their labor. And
every person who is called understands that there is danger
in such a compulsion; the work can consume you if you let
it. There is something in a compulsion that makes a person
creative—it is the will to not quit, to obsess over a single
phrase or paint blotch until it is just right. That thing that
makes you stay up late or get up early or spend an
inordinate amount of time on that project that no one will
see—that’s what makes the work great. But there is also an
implicit warning in such compulsions.
There is a great temptation in the pursuit of meaningful
work to lose yourself in the process. That’s what an
addiction promises: total annihilation of self. You begin to

no longer be able to dissociate yourself from what you’ve
created. And this is dangerous territory. The real job in the
work we do is to understand this temptation and use it to our
advantage. Every compulsion is not a calling, but your life’s
work may begin with a prompting so strong it borders on
obsession. What you must do is learn to temper it, to live in
the tension of being driven without driving yourself mad. To
master the craft so it doesn’t master you. This is the only
way to master the art of work, to recognize the inclinations
in us that, when left unchecked, would destroy us.
What good, then, is it to pursue a calling if the pursuit
may destroy you? How do we balance this tension between
the ceaseless call of work and life itself? We must recognize
what we don’t know. Many world-famous artists were
considered fools by their contemporaries. Fortunately, their
work endured, maybe sometimes in spite of themselves. But
their lives offer an important lesson: we don’t have to give
in to despair. We can trust that legacy follows faithfulness.
There is always a deeper story.
During the Second World War, British author J. R. R.
Tolkien, who would go on to write one of the greatest
fantasy novels of the twentieth century, was contemplating
death. Would he live through such turbulent times or die in
the middle of completing his life’s work? He didn’t know,
and the possibility of not completing such a task haunted
him. To process his fears, Tolkien wrote a short story about

a man named Niggle.
Niggle was an artist who was always getting distracted
from his work. Neighbors and friends would ask favors of
him constantly, and as he neared the date for his long
“journey” (a metaphor for death), he worried he might never
finish his greatest work—a painting of a tree. When it came
time for his departure, the artist looked at his painting, and
as he feared, saw an unfinished work—nothing but a small
leaf and a few details. The majority of the painting he hoped
would someday happen never did.
We all can relate to such regret, the pain of leaving some
projects undone, fearing we will never return to them. But
there is an interesting twist at the end of Tolkien’s story.
When Niggle completes his journey and enters the afterlife,
he sees something he can’t believe. Sitting there, in all the
glory he imagined, is the tree he never finished.2
The work that was not completed in this life was finished
in the next.
Many of us fear what Hemingway feared—that we will
die with important work still left in us. “We all die
unfinished symphonies,” a friend told me one morning over
breakfast. He was telling me about his dad who, on his
deathbed, made a halfhearted attempt to repent for a lifetime
of abuse. It wasn’t enough for my friend, nor should it have
been, but he realized in that moment that he had to let it go
anyway. He had to be okay with a lack of resolution, at least
in this life. Niggle learned the same thing.
When it comes to your work, there will be things you

won’t accomplish. This is the work of an artist who bravely
steps into their field with bold aspirations, while recognizing
the work will never be finished. To paraphrase Leonardo da
Vinci, we can never complete the task. We only abandon
it.3 The challenge for any artist—and we are all creating
something on the canvas of our lives—is to do our work
well while letting go of the result. If we don’t do this, we
may very well drive ourselves and those around us crazy.
And that’s the real tragedy—not that we leave this world
with work unfinished, but that the work robs us of the life
we could have lived. The right choice isn’t to retire, to
simply settle in and invite death. It’s to work hard and
passionately, but acknowledge the limitations of what one
life is capable of.
The Message of Your
Deathbed
Albert Einstein, on his deathbed, asked for his glasses so he
could continue working on a project he believed would be
his greatest work of all. He was not interested in mere
phenomena anymore. He wanted, as he put it, “to know
God’s thoughts.”4 Everything else was details.
This “theory of everything,” as it came to be known, was
based on Einstein’s belief that physics was an “expression

of the divine.” He believed there was an explanation for
everything, that God did not create chaos but order. He
spent thirty years on this project, working on it until the very
last day of his life.5
What we learn from Einstein and Hemingway is that a
healthy fear of death drives a person to continue creating
until the very end, but with that fear must come the
acceptance that even your life’s work will, in some ways,
remain unfinished. Why is this, and what do we do with
such a humbling reality?
Perhaps one of the proudest achievements in my life is
that I was a part of the very first honor code at my college.
Founded in 1843, Illinois College had never had an official
honor code, a formal document of ethics and academic
performance. Such documents were popular in most Ivy
League schools, but our small liberal arts school lacked one.
After a professor proposed the idea to the student body
government, I realized why our school had never had an
honor code. It wasn’t for lack of trying. A faculty member
gave me a list of students who had attempted to initiate the
very thing I was in charge of, and I followed up with each
of them. One was a woman who had tried to create a student
honor code more than a decade before. E-mailing her, I
asked for context, and she told me that it never happened
because there was just too much red tape. To me, that
sounded like a dare.
For the next year and a half, my friend Dan and I
endeavored to do what this young woman didn’t, and

perhaps couldn’t, do. Little did I know how right she was.
After drafting dozens of versions of the document,
constantly having to change things to appease students,
faculty, and staff, I was ready to give up. There was no way
to please everyone, and without being able to do that, I was
confident we wouldn’t be able to garner enough support to
pass the document.
Still, we tried: we lobbied the student body, wrote
articles in the school newspaper, and met with any professor
or administrator who would listen. And on the last day of
classes, during our senior year, we submitted our proposal
to the faculty for a vote. If there was a majority vote, the
honor code would be instituted.
Waiting outside the lecture hall after delivering an
impassioned speech about why we needed such a
document, I tried to listen to what the results of the vote
were. A minute later, the meeting was adjourned, and a
hundred professors exited the hall. As one economics
professor who had been a proponent of the code passed me,
he turned around and not so discreetly winked at me.
I sighed. We had done it.
But the work was far from over. All we had done was
take a theory and make it official; now the code had to be
enacted. Committees would have to be formed and
processes would have to be tested. I had no choice but to
pass the baton on to another student, a sophomore named
Josh who was passionate about our school and respecting
the honorable tradition on which it was founded. I may have

been one of the champions for the honor code, but Josh and
his classmates completed the task.
Recently, I reconnected with Ed Cathey. He was working at
another nearby rescue mission as the board director. When
we caught up on the phone, he told me he was sleeping less
than ever before—a few hours a night—and that he missed
his wife. She died long before I ever met Ed. He had to be
well into his eighties by now, and it would have been more
than a decade since her death.
He told me he was looking forward to “going home,” to
dying. He wasn’t sad about this; he was excited to soon be
reunited with his wife. At the same time, he wasn’t idly
sitting by, waiting for death to come. Ed was as active as
ever, which was what I would have expected. I asked him
what he was most proud of. His answer surprised me, but it
shouldn’t have.
Did Ed talk about his years of service at Vanderbilt
Hospital? Did he mention his experiences of singing in
concert halls and leading world-famous choirs? No, he
mentioned none of that. What he told me was story after
story of the homeless men whom he called “son,” men he
had the privilege of watching graduate from the
rehabilitation program and go on to live healthy lives. This
was his legacy, and it happened in the two decades of his
life after he retired.
Ed answered a call on his life that surprised him. He

never would have imagined himself working at a homeless
shelter after retiring, but when he saw the need, it just made
sense. After the death of his wife, he was heartbroken. So he
focused his free time on serving the less fortunate, a way of
turning tragedy into triumph, as Jody Noland had done. His
friend introduced him to the opportunity at the mission in a
brief apprenticeship of sorts. And like Ginny Phang, he was
initially uncomfortable with the work, but the more he did it,
the better it fit.
Deciding to work at the mission was one of the most
significant pivots of Ed’s life, resulting in a legacy of
hundreds, if not thousands, of lives changed. But all that is
not to disregard the years he spent as a physical therapist
and singer, as a dedicated husband and loyal church
member. Like Jody Maberry, Ed’s calling was not just one
thing; it was his whole life—a portfolio with immeasurable
ripple effects.
Yes, we all die unfinished symphonies, and the work is
never complete. But if you hear the call to make your life
about more than you and what you can contribute, you will
have peace, not anxiety, when facing mortality. You will
realize, as we all do, that you do not have enough resources
to complete what you were called to do. Coming to the edge
of the Promised Land, you will lack the strength to enter in.
The project or company you spent your life trying to get off
the ground will need even more management and even
more funding to go to the next level. And your time will be
finished, even though the work of a calling never ends.

At that point, you can either abandon the work, giving
up in despair, or find a way to pass it on. You can do this by
building a team, as Ben and Kristy Carlson did, or creating
an organization that multiplies your influence. You can plan
a better future for your loved ones, as Sam from Uganda
did. When we share our life’s work, when we accept that we
are not done until we’re dead, we not only realize our own
potential but we also help others do the same. Because in
the end, success isn’t so much what you do with your life;
it’s what you leave behind. Which may be what a calling is
all about: leaving a legacy that matters.
Dear Reader,
Thank you for joining me through this journey of
vocation. My hope is that by now these stories have inspired
and encouraged you to find your own calling and that you
are already on your way. I’d love for you to visit
artofworkbook.com and share your story there, as well as
use the resources available. You can also contact me at
Goinswriter.com.
Thanks again, 
Jeff Goins 
#artofworkbook

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to my endlessly patient wife, Ashley, who
is my favorite editor ever. She caught so many mistakes in
this book that would’ve made you put the book down
before ever getting to this point. And to my little guy, Aiden
—thanks, buddy, for being a trouper while I disappeared for
a few nights and weekends to finish this thing.
To Joel Miller for acquiring this book and for the
numerous nights of talking me off ledges, I am so very
appreciative. (You really should go into therapy, Joel.
You’re quite good at it.) Thanks to Michael Hyatt for
introducing us, and to Brian Hampton, Chad Cannon,
Katherine Rowley, Belinda Bass, Katy Boatman, Emily
Lineberger, and the rest of the team at Nelson Books for
their help in completing this work.
My gratitude goes out to my agent, Mark Oestreicher, for
doing agent-y things and then some—like actually coming
up with the name of the book. Thanks, Marko. Your
mentorship has been invaluable in my own process of
discovering my calling. I also can’t write a book about
calling without mentioning Paul Martin, who was the first
person to get me to call myself a writer.

Thanks to Christine Niles for helping me edit multiple
versions of this book and tracking down all those pesky
citations I tend to forget. And to Marion Roach Smith, who
helped yet another book of mine cross the finish line, I am
grateful. And of course, I cannot forget the My 500 Words
Community for all their critiques and encouragement
throughout this process. To Jamie Hess for managing the
chaos that is my life, thank you. I couldn’t do any of this
without you!
And to everyone who contributed their stories to this
book, thank you! This was such a fun but daunting project,
and your experiences really brought it to life.
Thanks to my dad and mom, Keith and Robin Goins, for
encouraging me to do my best, but to never try to be
someone I was not. And to my in-laws for their constant
support: Pam, Pat, Ahron, and Kathy. Thanks, you guys!
Lastly, I thank God for his grace and mercy, for giving
me the words to say when I had none, and to you, dear
reader, for taking the time to finish this book. It means so
much to me, and I hope it has been helpful to you.

Appendix
Your First Steps Down
the Path
The seven characteristics of a calling—awareness,
apprenticeship, practice, discovery, profession, mastery, and
legacy—are not a formula. They are a description of the
path you are already on. My hope in sharing them is that
you now have a vocabulary with which to explain your
vocation as well as a better understanding of what it might
be. But what about the next steps to take? What if you now
realize you do, in fact, have a calling, and you don’t want to
waste another minute? Is there a process that can get you
started? A series of steps to follow?
So far, we have seen how a calling is both mysterious
and practical. In the first part of the book, we explored the
ways you prepare for a calling. In the second part, we
looked at how people who found their callings took action.
In the third part, we saw how a calling is something that

needs to be shared with other people. Now I want to offer
some practical takeaways and challenges.
The Seven Stages and
Accompanying Lessons
(Chapter Summary)
1. Awareness: Before you can tell your life what you
want to do with it, you must listen to what it wants to
do with you.
2. Apprenticeship: Every story of success is a story of
community. Although mentors are hard to come by,
accidental apprenticeships are everywhere. Your life is
preparing you for what’s to come.
3. Practice: Real practice hurts. It takes not only time but
intentional effort. But some things do come naturally.
Be open to learning new skills, and watch for sparks
of inspiration to guide you.
4. Discovery: Don’t take the leap; build a bridge. You
never “just know” what you’re supposed to do with
your life. Discovery happens in stages.
5. Profession: Failure is your best friend. Don’t push
through obstacles; pivot around them. Let every
mistake and rejection teach you something. Before a

season of success, there often comes a season of
failure.
6. Mastery: A calling is not just one thing. It’s a few
things, a portfolio that isn’t just your job but the life
you live.
7. Legacy: Your calling is not just what you do; it’s the
person you become—and the legacy you leave.
Seven Signs You’ve Found
Your Calling
1. It’s familiar. You find your calling not just by looking
forward to what you will do but also by looking back
at what you’ve done.
2. It’s something other people see in you. Sometimes our
vocations are most obvious to those who know us
best.
3. It’s challenging. It must be difficult enough that not
anyone can do it.
4. It requires faith. It cannot be something so obvious
that you can easily explain it. It must be mysterious.
5. It takes time. You have to fail your way in the right
direction before you find it.
6. It’s more than just one thing. And it integrates well

with the rest of your life, not competing with but
complementing your top priorities.
7. It’s bigger than you. The task must be so large that
without a team of people, you cannot complete it on
your own.
Next-Step Exercises
Here are seven exercises that will help you get moving in
the right direction.
Exercise 1: Create a “listen to your life” timeline.
Draw a horizontal line on a piece of paper and use it to plot
out the significant events in your life. Look for trends,
patterns, and significant moments. Have you always played
basketball? 
As 
a 
child, 
were 
you fascinated 
with
technology? Was there something unique about you that
baffled even your parents? Write it all down, then spend at
least thirty minutes reflecting on what all this might mean.
Practice this every day until your calling comes into focus.
At the same time, reach out to a handful of friends or family
members and ask them to describe something that you do
better than anyone they know. Sometimes we tend to
overlook our greatest assets. Use the timeline and the
wisdom of loved ones to help you see a direction you might
be 
missing. 
(For 
more 
on 
this 
process, 
visit
artofworkbook.com/listen.)

Exercise 2: Design your own apprenticeship. Don’t
go in search of a mentor; instead, identify the mentors that
are already around you. Who could you ask to meet for
coffee or lunch? Make a list of these people and reach out to
them. Prepare ahead of time, ask questions, and take notes.
Afterward, follow up with a thank-you note, sharing
specifically what you learned and how you’d like to do it
again. Start meeting regularly with those who reciprocate
and let the relationship progress organically. (For more on
finding a mentor, visit artofworkbook.com/apprentice.)
Exercise 3: Practice in the margins. Instead of
preparing to take some giant leap, start working on your
calling today. Don’t overcommit. Begin with thirty minutes
a day and increase the frequency from there. Make a list of
activities you can do to the point of exhaustion and start
pushing yourself in them, spending more time on the areas
where you have the greatest passion and skill. Pay attention
to how you grow or don’t grow, and see what that tells you
about your calling. (For more on the science of skill
acquisition, visit artofworkbook.com/practice.)
Exercise 4: Look for pivot points. Go back to the
line you drew in Exercise 1 and mark your greatest
moments of failure. When did you try something and it
didn’t work? Were you rejected by someone or fired from a
job? What did you do afterward? Identify the times when
you faced an obstacle that forced you in a different
direction. What did that tell you about yourself? Now make

a list of upcoming pivot points, changes you need to make
to create room for your calling. Do you need to quit your
job? Move to a new city? Stop writing marketing copy so
you can work on that novel? You don’t have to know how
to make the change; just make the list. Clarity will come
with 
action. 
(For 
more 
on 
pivoting, 
visit
artofworkbook.com/pivot.)
Exercise 5: Identify discovery moments. Was there
a time when something was unclear to you but obvious to
someone else? Write about this or share it with a friend.
What do others see in you that you don’t see in yourself? As
an extended exercise, try e-mailing five people who know
you well and ask them to describe you. You might be
surprised to see what you learn about yourself. (For more on
the discovery process and when to take the leap, visit
artofworkbook.com/leap.)
Exercise 6: Plan your portfolio. Instead of planning
out your ideal week, focus instead on the next year. You
have 365 days. How many do you need to support yourself
working? How many days do you now have left to do study
work, homework, and gift work? Go through the calendar
and start marking dates that you could spend on those
activities. If you have a family or significant other, go
through this exercise with them. You don’t have to set
anything in stone yet; it’s just a way to get a global view of
your year and how you can intentionally move in the
direction of your life’s work. (For more on how to plan your

own portfolio, visit artofworkbook.com/portfolio.)
Exercise 7: Share the work. In chapter 7, we saw
how a calling is not just about you. It’s something you share
with others. Begin by making a list of people you could ask
to become a part of your team. These can be people you
hire for your business or organization, or it can be more
informal like a monthly conference call or regular e-mail
update, sharing how you’re moving toward your calling.
Also, identify as many as three people you want to
personally invest in. Don’t think of this as a formal
mentorship; just start showing up in a few people’s lives in
hopes of helping them grow. (For more on legacy, visit
artofworkbook.com/legacy.)
Questions for Discussion
Introduction
The story of Garrett Rush-Miller illustrates how a calling
isn’t always something you can plan. How has a negative
circumstance in your life in some way led to a positive
outcome? Do you think it’s true that how we react to events
determines who we become?
Chapter 1

The story of Jody Noland shows us how pain can
awaken us to our purpose. How have you seen that happen
in your own life, as well as in the lives of others? When you
look back at your life, is there a common theme you can
identify? Are the events of your life speaking to you in
some way? How could you respond?
Chapter 2
The story of Ginny Phang shows us how even when we
feel alone, there are people there to help guide us. Are there
people in your life who showed up at just the right time?
Can you look back and see your own accidental
apprenticeships? Who are the people in your life influencing
you right now?
Chapter 3
The stories of Stephanie Fisher and William Hung show
us how we can sometimes practice the wrong things,
whereas Martyn Chamberlin’s story illustrates how a calling
can be something you may not have considered. How have
you pursued the wrong thing in life? Have you ever
succeeded in something that you weren’t passionate about?
Was there a time when you tried a new skill only to discover
you were naturally gifted at something you didn’t know
anything about?

Chapter 4
The story of Ben and Kristy Carlson shows how
successfully pursuing a dream is less about taking a giant
leap and more about building a bridge over time. How can
you start building a bridge today that will lead to your
calling?
Chapter 5
The story of Matt McWilliams illustrates how failure isn’t
always an enemy but can be an ally that helps us get closer
to our life’s work. How has something that initially looked
like failure to you been the very thing you needed to
succeed? What’s something you feel like you’re failing at
right now? What might that be telling you about your
calling?
Chapter 6
The story of Jody Maberry shows how a calling isn’t a
job so much as it is a portfolio of work that you create. What
would your ideal portfolio look like? Of the five different
types of work Charles Handy shares, which have you
overlooked?
Chapter 7
The fictional account of Mr. Holland helps us see how

the difference we make can sometimes be taken for granted.
What is an example of a time when you were focused on a
task when you should have been focusing more on
relationships? If you were to have your own Mr. Holland
moment, who would you want to be there to celebrate you?
Conclusion
Ed Cathey’s story is an illustration of how one man
made a difference by investing in others. How could you be
more intentional about sharing your calling with others?
What is the work that you will start but need others to
finish? Who can help you, and whom can you help?
For 
more 
study 
materials, 
visit
artofworkbook.com/guides.

Notes
Introduction
1. “Rush-Miller Foundation,” Rush-Miller Foundation,
accessed August 1, 2014,
http://rushmillerfoundation.org/.
2. Patrice O’Shaughnessy, “Profiles: One Bike at a
Time,” Nursingcenter.com, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://www.nursingcenter.com/lnc/JournalArticle?
Article_ID=756067.
3. “Rush-Miller Foundation.”
4. Matt King, Team King, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://thekinglink.com/.
5. Loretta Sword, “Blindness Poses No Barrier to
Determined Family,” Cheyenne Mountain Triathlon,
June 24, 2001, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://rushmillerfoundation.org/images/PhotAlb/Cheyen
6. Eric Miller and Garrett Rush-Miller, telephone
interview by author, February 18, 2014. All direct
quotes come from our interview unless otherwise
noted. Previous sources were used to fill in backstory,
and then reconfirmed with both Eric and Garrett.

Chapter 1
1. Jody Noland, Leave Nothing Unsaid (2007),
http://leavenothingunsaid.com. Any direct quotes from
Jody not attributed to the phone interview come from
her self-published workbook, which can be found and
purchased on her website.
2. Jody Noland, telephone interview by author, February
20, 2014.
3. Jim Cash, Jack Epps Jr., and AJ Carothers, The Secret
of My Success, directed by Herbert Ross (Universal
City, CA: Universal Pictures, 1987), DVD.
4. Susan Adams, “Unhappy Employees Outnumber
Happy Ones by Two to One Worldwide,” Forbes.com,
October 10, 2013, accessed July 30, 2014,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2013/10/10/un
employees-outnumber-happy-ones-by-two-to-one-
worldwide/.
5. Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning (Boston:
Beacon Press, 2006).
6. Ibid.
7. Brennan Manning, Ruthless Trust: The Ragamuffin’s
Path to God (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco,
2000).
8. Frederick Buechner, Now and Then: A Memoir of
Vocation (Cambridge, MA: Harper & Row, 1983).
9. Parker J. Palmer, Let Your Life Speak: Listening for the

Voice of Vocation (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000).
10. Bob Thomas, Walt Disney: An American Original
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1976), 39.
Chapter 2
1. Ginny Phang, online interview by author, January 22,
2014.
2. John Donne, “Meditation XVII,” Wikisource, accessed
August 1, 2014,
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Meditation_XVII.
3. Paulo Coelho, The Alchemist (New York:
HarperCollins, 2007).
4. Margot Adler, “Apprenticeship, Illumination in a
Modern-Day Atelier,” Weekend Edition, NPR, April
12, 2008.
5. Karin Lipson, “A Medieval Skill Is Nurtured in Gold-
Leaf Splendor,” NYTimes.com, January 1, 2011,
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/02/nyregion/02artsli.
_r=0.
6. Adler, “Apprenticeship, Illumination.”
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Eric Westervelt, “The Secret to Germany’s Low Youth
Unemployment,” NPR, April 4, 2012,
http://www.npr.org/2012/04/04/149927290/the-secret-
to-germanys-low-youth-unemployment.

10. Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2011).
11. Phang, interview.
12. John Burroughs, BrainyQuote, accessed August 1,
2014,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/j/johnburro
13. Phang, interview.
Chapter 3
1. Dave Emke, “Chasing Her Dream,” Post-Journal,
February 4, 2010, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://www.post-
journal.com/page/content.detail/id/550489/Chasing-
Her-Dream.html?nav=5018.
2. “American Idol Reject Stephanie Fisher,” YouTube
video, 2:53, posted by “Give Peace a Chance,”
February 3, 2010, accessed August 1, 2014,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MtlEGMbDdlw.
3. Ibid.
4. “Seven ‘American Idol’ Rejects Who Made It Big,”
Toofab, January 16, 2013, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://www.toofab.com/2013/01/16/seven-american-
idol-rejects-who-made-it-big-naya-rivera-amber-riley-
colbie-caillat-hillary-scott. See also “Colbie Caillat
Music - All about Colbie, Music, Pictures & Info,”
Colbie Caillat Music, accessed August 1, 2014,
http://www.colbiecaillatmusic.com/.

5. Geoffrey Colvin, Talent Is Overrated: What Really
Separates World-Class Performers from Everybody
Else (New York: Penguin, 2008).
6. Geoffrey Colvin, “Why Talent Is Overrated,” Fortune
Magazine, October 21, 2008, accessed August 1,
2014,
archive.fortune.com/2008/10/21/magazines/fortune/tale
7. “Seven ‘American Idol’ Rejects Who Made It Big.”
8. Carol S. Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of
Success (New York: Random House, 2006).
9. Ibid.
10. K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Th. Krampe, and Clemens
Tesch-Römer, “The Role of Deliberate Practice in the
Acquisition of Expert Performance,” Psychological
Review (100, no. 3 1993): 363–406.
11. Daniel Coyle, The Talent Code: Greatness Isn’t Born.
It’s Grown. Here’s How (New York: Random House,
2009).
12. Ibid.
13. Ericsson, Krampe, and Tesch-Römer, “The Role of
Deliberate Practice.”
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. Kim Wilson, Kelly Candaele, Lowell Ganz, and
Babaloo Mandel, A League of Their Own, directed by
Penny Marshall (United States: Sony Pictures Home

Entertainment, 1992), DVD.
17. Ericsson, Krampe, and Tesch-Römer, “The Role of
Deliberate Practice.”
18. Martyn Chamberlin, phone interview by author,
December 13, 2013.
19. David J. Epstein, The Sports Gene: Inside the Science
of Extraordinary Athletic Performance (New York:
Penguin, 2013).
20. Daniel Coyle, online interview by author, February
19, 2014.
21. James C. Collins and Morten T. Hansen, Great by
Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck: Why Some
Thrive Despite Them All (New York: HarperCollins,
2011).
22. Ericsson, Krampe, and Tesch-Römer, “The Role of
Deliberate Practice.”
23. “William Hung American Idol Audition - SHE
BANGS!” YouTube video, 1:40, posted by “Ben
Lee,” August 13, 2007, accessed August 1, 2014,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Qkas9mlMgE.
24. Wikipedia, s.v. “William Hung,” last modified April
2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Hung.
25. “William Hung interview,” YouTube video, 2:42,
posted by “StevenWard,” March 18, 2008,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=qOcwvR8WWoo&feature=player_embedded.
26. Daniel Kohn, “William Hung Speaks, Fresh off Being

Crowned the Greatest Musician of All Time, in Any
Genre,” LA Weekly, January 16, 2012,
http://www.laweekly.com/westcoastsound/2012/01/16/w
hung-speaks-fresh-off-being-crowned-the-greatest-
musician-of-all-time-in-any-genre.
27. “William Hung interview,” YouTube video.
28. Kohn, “William Hung Speaks.”
29. “William Hung - She Bangs Speech - Toastmasters -
Founders District,” YouTube video, 4:39, posted by
“Chris David,” September 26, 2013,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FQctx-n-FTA.
30. Ibid.
Additional Sources:
Samantha Grossman, “American Idol’s William Hung:
Where Is He Now?” Time.com, January 19, 2012,
accessed August 1, 2014,
http://newsfeed.time.com/2012/01/19/american-idols-
william-hung-where-is-he-now/.
Mireya Navarro, “Missing: Asian-American Pop
Stars,” NYTimes.com, March 4, 2007,
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/04/world/americas/04
singer.4787848.html.
Corey Moss, “William Hung’s Sales Figures Are
Nothing to Laugh At,” MTV.com, April 12, 2004,
http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1486330/william-
hung-cd-actually-selling-well.jhtml.

Chapter 4
1. Ben and Kristy Carlson, e-mail interview by author,
January 14, 2014.
2. Long Miles Coffee Project, accessed August 2, 2014,
http://www.longmilescoffeeproject.com/.
3. Frederick Buechner, Now and Then: A Memoir of
Vocation (Cambridge, MA: Harper & Row, 1983).
4. 1 Samuel 1–3, The Holy Bible: New International
Version (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Bible Publishers,
1978).
5. Ginny Phang, online interview by author, January 22,
2014.
6. “Burundi: Belgian Colonial Rule (1916–1962),” EISA
(Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in
Africa), April 2010,
http://eisa.org.za/WEP/buroverview3.htm.
7. Michael B. Sauter, Alexander E. M. Hess, and Samuel
Weigley, “The 10 Poorest Countries in the World,”
Fox Business, September 14, 2012,
http://www.foxbusiness.com/markets/2012/09/14/10-
poorest-countries-in-world/.
8. Brent Swails and Oliver Joy, “Burundi’s Coffee
Culture ‘the Difference Between Food and Hunger,’ ”
CNN, November 19, 2013,
http://edition.cnn.com/2013/11/19/business/burundis-
coffee-culture.

9. Sauter, Hess, and Weigley, “The 10 Poorest Countries
in the World.”
10. Johnstone S. Oketch and Tara Polzer, “Conflict and
Coffee in Burundi,” Scarcity and Surfeit, September
19, 2013,
http://www.issafrica.org/pubs/Books/ScarcitySurfeit/Ch
84–156.
11. Thompson Owen and Christopher Schooley, “Rwanda
+ Burundi Fundamentals,” Coffeeshrub.com, accessed
August 1, 2014,
http://www.coffeeshrub.com/shrub/content/rwanda-
burundi-fundamentals.
12. Bryan Allain, online interview by author, August 4,
2014.
13. Carlson, interview.
Chapter 5
1. Matt McWilliams, online interview by author,
February 20, 2014.
2. Nicholas Carlson, “Inside Groupon: The Truth About
the World’s Most Controversial Company,” Business
Insider, October 31, 2011,
http://www.businessinsider.com/inside-groupon-the-
truth-about-the-worlds-most-controversial-company-
2011-10.
3. Ibid.

4. Alistair Barr and Clare Baldwin, “Groupon IPO:
Company Raises $700 Million, Valued at $12.8
Billion,” Huffington Post, November 4, 2011,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/11/04/groupon-
ipo-biggest-since-google_n_1075374.html.
5. Robert Greene, Mastery (New York: Penguin, 2012).
6. Ira Stoll, Samuel Adams: A Life (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2008).
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Brennan Manning, Ruthless Trust: The Ragamuffin’s
Path to God (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco,
2000).
10. Pedro Calderón de la Barca, Life Is a Dream: La Vida
Es Sueño (Public Domain, 1635).
11. Eric Metaxas, Bonhoeffer: Pastor, Martyr, Prophet,
Spy: A Righteous Gentile vs. the Third Reich
(Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2010), 337.
12. Eberhard Bethge, Dietrich Bonhoeffer: Eine
Biographie (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2000), 736.
13. Metaxas, Bonhoeffer, 530–532.
14. Ibid., 123–24.
Chapter 6
1. Jody Maberry, online interview by author, May 12,
2014.

2. Thomas Fisher, “The Contingent Workforce and
Public Decision Making,” Public Sector Digest, March
2012: 46–48. Several articles and other publications
have made similar predictions: Jeff Wald, “How an
Exploding Freelance Economy Will Drive Change in
2014,” Forbes.com, November 25, 2013,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/groupthink/2013/11/25/ho
an-exploding-freelance-economy-will-drive-change-
in-2014/; Elaine Pofeldt, “What You’ll Need to Know
to Be the Boss in 2020,” Forbes.com, April 3, 2012,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/elainepofeldt/2012/04/03/w
youll-need-to-know-to-be-the-boss-in-2020; Ryan
Kim, “By 2020, Independent Workers Will Be the
Majority,” Gigaom, December 8, 2011,
http://gigaom.com/2011/12/08/mbo-partners-network-
2011.
3. Charles B. Handy, The Age of Unreason (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 1989).
5. Hara Estroff Marano, “The Power of Play,”
Psychology Today, January 28, 2013,
http://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/199907/the-
power-play.
6. Natalie Cooper, “Lessons in Leadership, Work and
Wellbeing 05/09/2013,” changeboard.com, May 9,
2013,
http://www.changeboard.com/content/4237/career-
development/personal-branding/lessons-in-leadership-
work-and-wellbeing/.

7. Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art &
Practice of the Learning Organization (New York:
Doubleday/Currency, 1990).
8. Dorothy Sayers, “Why Work?” accessed August 2,
2014, http://www.faith-at-
work.net/Docs/WhyWork.pdf.
9. Ibid.
10. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience (New York: Harper & Row,
1990).
11. Ibid.
12. Maberry, interview.
13. Jody Maberry, “Finding My Calling,” e-mail message
to author, January 6, 2014.
Chapter 7
1. Patrick Sheane Duncan, Mr. Holland’s Opus, directed
by Stephen Herek (Burbank, CA: Buena Vista Home
Entertainment, 1999), DVD.
2. Ibid.
3. John Lennon, “Beautiful Boy (Darling Boy),” Double
Fantasy, Geffen Records, April 11, 1981.
4. May Sarton, Collected Poems, 1930–1993 (New York:
W. W. Norton, 1993).
5. Ezra Pound, Poems and Translations (New York:
Literary Classics of the United States, 2003).

6. Gloria Stronks, “Where Does the World Need Me?”
Cardus, December 27, 2013,
http://www.cardus.ca/comment/article/4124/where-
does-the-world-need-me/.
7. Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Writings of Oliver
Wendell Holmes: The Poetical Works (Boston:
Riverside Press, 1891), 247.
8. Mike Rich, Finding Forrester, directed by Gus Van
Sant (Culver City, CA: Columbia TriStar Home Video,
2000), DVD.
9. Stephen King, On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft
(New York: Scribner, 2000).
10. Ibid.
11. Jennifer Crittenden, “And Maggie Makes Three,” The
Simpsons, season 6, episode 13, directed by Swinton
Scott, aired January 22, 1995.
Conclusion
1. A. E. Hotchner, Papa Hemingway: A Personal
Memoir (New York: Random House, 1966).
2. J. R. R. Tolkien, Tree and Leaf (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1965).
3. Leonardo da Vinci quote, BrainyQuote, accessed
August 2, 2014,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/l/leonardod
4. “Einstein’s Unfinished Symphony,” BBC, accessed

September 15, 2014,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/sn/tvradio/programmes/horizon/e
5. Ibid.

About the Author
Jeff Goins is a full-time writer who lives just outside of
Nashville, Tennessee, with his wife, son, and border collie.
He has authored three other books: The In-Between,
Wrecked, and You Are a Writer . He spent a year after
college traveling around the United States with a band, and
they hit it big in Taiwan. His website, Goinswriter.com, has
been visited by more than four million people from all over
the world. Connect with him on Twitter (@jeffgoins), visit
his website to say hi, or stop by for some homemade
guacamole the next time you’re in town. You can also get
more free resources at artofworkbook.com.
Goinswriter.com
#artofworkbook

