
THE APHORISMS OF SIVA 

SUNY Series in Tantric Studies 
Paul E. Muller-Ortega, editor 

THE APHORISMS OF SIVA 
The SivaSutra 
with 
Bhaskara's Commentary, the 
Varttika 
Translated with Exposition and Notes by 
Mark S. G. Dyczkowski 
STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK PRESS 


CONTENTS 
Foreword 
ix 
The Siva Sutras 
xiii 
Introduction 
1 
THE FIRST LIGHT 
The Description of the Light of 
Universal Consciousness 
9 
THE SECOND LIGHT 
The Arising of Innate Knowledge 
65 
THE THIRD LIGHT 
The Vibration of the Powers 
93 
Appendix: The Stanzas on Vibration 
181 
List of Abbreviations 
187 
Notes 
189 
Bibliography 
209 
Index 
211 


This book is dedicated as a tribute to my family 
and as an offering to the Supreme Being 
Who makes all things possible. 


FOREWORD 
It is indeed a pleasure to introduce this book as part of 
the ongoing program of publication by SUNY Press in the 
Tantric Studies Series. With this translation and exposition of 
the Sivasutra and two of its commentaries, Mark Dyczkowski 
makes a serious and weighty contribution to the study of the 
Shaiva traditions of Kashmir. The importance and usefulness 
of this book—which includes a first rendering of Bhaskara's 
Varrtika on the Sivasutra—may be stressed on several grounds. 
First of all, because the Sivasutra stands textually at the foun-
tainhead of the nondual Shaivism of Kashmir, the present 
translation of the Aphorisms of Siva expands our understand-
ing of the early phases of this tradition. Moreover, while previ-
ous translations of this text have primarily focussed on the 
influential commentary by Ksemaraja (known as the 
Vimarsini) Dyczkowski has chosen to translate along with the 
aphorisms the important comment by Bhaskara as well as 
another, anonymous commentary on this foundational text. 
These commentaries—here rendered for the first time in 
English—open a wider commentarial panorama within which 
to read and interpret the aphorisms. Finally, Dyczkowski has 
added his own lucid and patient exposition of each sutra, with 
the added benefit of continuously comparing Bhaskara's com-
mentary to Ksemaraja's position. In this way Dyczkowski 
brings forth the many levels of meaning contained in this fun-
damental text and weaves them together into a rich interpre-
tive tapestry for the delectation of the reader. 
In the various commentaries on the Sivasutra, one 
encounters several versions of what might be called a textual 

myth of origin. A deceptively simple story narrates the 
events by which the aphorisms are revealed in a dream to 
sage Vasugupta either by Siva directly or by a Siddha, a per-
fected being. In some versions, this dream-state revelation is 
then confirmed when Vasugupta receives additional instruc-
tions to proceed to a rock on the Mahadeva mountain which 
at his touch turns to reveal the aphorisms inscribed on it. 
This myth fragment—which purports to tell us about the his-
torical source of the text—serves as a useful entry point into 
the symbolic framework of the text, the cluster of fundamen-
tal meanings within which the text takes shape. 
For most of us, to dream is to partake of the evanescent, 
to float nightly in images of unreality, shards of memory, 
bizarre and frightening episodes that may yield without 
warning to beautiful and alluring scenes. But the luminous 
dreams of a Siddha, a perfected being, escape this chaotic 
fragmentation and function as transparent filters for the 
apprehensions of truth. Having recognized the living truth 
of the freedom-imbued declaration, Sivo'ham—I am Siva— 
the Siddha lives in a state of attunement, a powerful, sacrifi-
cial translucence through which the great light can shine. 
While the ordinary, contracted being exhibits only a resistive 
opacity, the Siddha yields to the truth even in dreams. 
Vasugupta is said to have dreamt the aphorisms. Sage 
Vasugupta, who was himself appropriately termed a Siddha, 
was one who had ecstatically, and in some irrevocable fash-
ion, recognized the fundamental and uncontracted egoity, 
the uncontainable consciousness that is called Siva. Thus, 
when the Siddha Vasugupta dreamed, it was reality rather 
than illusion which was projected on the inner screen of his 
awareness. Of such a revelatory character were the dreams 
of Vasugupta, to whom and through whom the paradoxical 
reality of Siva is said to have revealed itself. 
There is more to this metaphor of the dream. The ordi-
nary dreamer withdraws from the outer world coiled into 
the oblivion of sleep. In the dream, the dreamer is complete-
ly self-enclosed and thus capable of creating whole, if tempo-
rary, worlds of experience. But when the Siddha withdraws 
from the ordinary waking world of the senses, then the 

wholeness of absolute consciousness is set free to move with-
in itself. Its movement unfolds a systematic revelation of its 
own inherent structure, its inbuilt patterns of coherence. So 
Vasugupta the sage dreams and a sequence of transcendent 
truths comes to light. That which is Siva, the absolute light of 
consciousness, reveals itself to him in these aphorisms. 
The dreamer's posture of self-enclosure precisely paral-
lels the self-reflexive stance of the absolute consciousness. 
This stance is revealed in the first of the aphorisms, an 
axiomatic and apparently tautological dictum which is curi-
ously reminiscent of the Upanishadic saying ATMA EVA 
BRAHMA. The first sutra—CAITANYAMATMA: Conscious-
ness is the Self—displays the original and multidimensional 
self-encompassing of that which is essentially unencompass-
able. In the process of translating the sutras, we insert the 
verb form "is." However, without in any way impugning the 
accuracy of this translation, we might for a moment entertain 
the notion that in this aphorism the verbal form "is" forms 
part of our own Western grammatical and philosophical 
intrusion on the Sanskrit text. In the Sanskrit, the aphorism is 
quite direct and bald. It states: Consciousness—Self. The 
sutra is telling us: Consciousness faces into the Self, into Con-
sciousness itself. 
In this first revelation, Siva reveals his own inherent 
stance. The unimpeded consciousness that is Siva is perpetu-
ally in a state of self-enclosure, or self-reference known as 
vimarsa. This is the stance of the great cosmic dreamer who is 
Siva. Even when this stance of self-enclosure apparently 
opens out to give way to the manifold universes of transmi-
gratory experience, to the creation of the worlds of form and 
content, Siva is never forced to abandon his self-reflexive and 
self-enclosed posture. Indeed, Shaivism teaches that what we 
perceive as our ordinary life experience emerges from, is 
energized and sustained by, the vimarsa-sakti. Thus Vasugup-
ta dreams and in his dream the nature of the various states of 
consciousness is taught to him along with the truth of the fun-
damental, underlying reality that is behind these ever-chang-
ing states of consciousness. The Siddha thus functions as a 
lively intermediary, a living spring through which the pri-

mordial and unspoken perception that the ultimate con-
sciousness has of itself is able to emerge into language. 
Such is the revelation of Lord Siva. It emerges as the 
sequence of transcendent and revealed truth that Siva 
unfolds within himself as he expounds this new revelation. 
Out of the honeyed richness of the inner experience of 
Vasugupta, there flowed the ecstatic teachings of Siva. The 
aphorisms are thus not merely a dry philosophical elabora-
tion, but are rather a conceptual adoration of the supreme, a 
slowly revolving vision of the absolute. 
Vasugupta's dream: the oneiric and lithic revelation of 
the foundational text of a new lineage. While previous agamic 
revealed texts will remain very important in the formulation 
of this tradition, the Aphorisms of Siva will come to serve as the 
immediate textual basis for the early tradition of the Shaivism 
of Kashmir. To confirm their oneiric revelation in a more sub-
stantial medium than the delicate tissues of a dream, Siva 
directs Vasugupta to the Mahadeva mountain and to the Siva 
rock where he finds—miraculously engraved in stone—the 
lithic counterpart of the dream, the compelling and irrevoca-
ble teachings of Siva, carved into the rock. Thus these inner 
and essentially private revelations are given substance by the 
stony exhibit on the mountain and a new and creative mani-
festation of truth emerges. 
The reader is invited to investigate these teachings and 
to explore their subtlety and relevance. Thanks to the patient 
labors of Mark Dyczkowski, Vasugupta's dream continues to 
illuminate our lives. 
Paul E. Muller-Ortega 
Michigan State University 
Mahasivaratri, March 2,1992 

THE SIVA SUTRAS 
The First Light Called 
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE NATURE OF THE 
LIGHT OF UNIVERSAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
1. Consciousness is the Self. 
2. Knowledge is bondage. 
3. The group of sources constitutes the body of obscuring 
energies. 
4. The ground of knowledge is Matrka. 
5. Bhairava is upsurge. 
6. When the Wheel of Energies fuses together, the uni-
verse is withdrawn. 
7. The consciousness which is the expanse of the Fourth 
State (abides constantly in) the various (states) of wak-
ing, dreaming and deep sleep. 
8. Knowledge (born of sensory perception) is the waking 
state. 
9. Dreaming consists of thought constructs. 
10. Deep sleep is Maya, the lack of discernment. 
11. The enjoyer of the three states is the Lord of the Heroes. 
12. The planes of union are wonder. 
13. The virgin is the will, the supreme power. 

xiv 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
5, 
6, 
7, 
The perceptible is (His) body. 
By fixing the mind in the Heart (the yogi) has a vision of 
the perceivable and of dreams. 
Or (the yogi can realise Siva) by contemplating the Pure 
Principle. 
Energy established in its own abode. 
Right discernment is the knowledge of the Self. 
The bliss of the Light is the joy of contemplation. 
The body comes into being when the energies unite. 
The union of the elements, the separation of the ele-
ments and the union of the universe. 
(The yogi) attains mastery of the Wheel by the arising of 
Pure Knowledge. 
(The yogi) experiences the vitality of Mantra by contem-
plating the Great Lake. 
The Second Light Called 
THE ARISING OF INNATE KNOWLEDGE 
The mind is Mantra. 
Effort is that which attains the goal. 
The secret of Mantra is the Being of the Body of Knowl-
edge. 
The expansion of the mind in the womb (of conscious-
ness) is the slumber of (all) particular forms of igno-
rance. 
When the knowledge innately inherent in one's own 
nature arises, (that is) Siva's state—(the gesture of) the 
one who wanders in the Sky of Consciousness. 
The Master is the means. 
The awakening of the Wheel of Matrka. 

8. 
9. 
10. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10, 
11, 
12, 
13 
14 
15 
16 
The body is the oblation. 
(This yogi's) food is knowledge. 
The withdrawal of knowledge heralds the vision of 
dreams that arises from it. 
The Third Light Called 
THE VIBRATION OF THE POWERS 
The mind is the Self. 
(Empirical) knowledge is bondage. 
Maya is the lack of discernment of the principles begin-
ning with Kala. 
The forces are withdrawn in the body. 
The withdrawal of the vital channels, the conquest of 
the elements, freedom from the elements and the sepa-
ration of the elements. 
(The yogi attains) perfection through the obscuring veil 
of delusion. 
(But) by conquering delusion and by (his) infinite 
expanse (the yogi) achieves Innate Knowledge. 
Waking is the second ray (of consciousness). 
The Self is the actor. 
The stage is the inner Self. 
The spectators are the senses. 
The pure state is achieved by the power of the (illu-
mined) intellect. 
(Once this has been achieved) freedom is achieved. 
As it is here, so is it elsewhere. 
The nature (of consciousness) is emission and so that 
which is not external abides as such. 
Constant attention to the seed. 

xvi 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
(Confortably) seated (the yogi) sinks effortlessly into the 
lake (of consciousness). 
(Siva) fashions the world by means of His mother. 
Once (limited) knowledge is destroyed, rebirth is 
destroyed. 
Mahesvari and the other mothers of the soul in bondage 
reside in the gutterals and the other classes of conso-
nants. 
The Fourth should be sprinkled like oil into the three. 
Merged (in his own nature, the yogi) must penetrate 
(the phonemes) with his mind. 
The emergence of the lower (plane) occurs in the centre. 
When the breath moves uniformly one has an equal 
vision of all things. 
That which was destroyed arises once more in the 
course of the unifying awareness of one's own percep-
tion of the individual units of experience. 
He becomes like Siva. 
The activity of the body is the vow. 
Common talk is (his) recitation of Mantra. 
Self-knowledge is the boon. 
Knowledge and the cause reside in the cosmic nature 
and the source (of the universe). 
The universe is the aggregate of his powers. 
(Such is also the case with) persistence and absorption. 
Even when these are operant, (the subject) is not lost 
because (he is) the perceiving subjectivity. 
(The yogi's) feeling of pleasure and pain is external. 
The one who is free of that is a liberated soul. 
A compact mass of delusion, the soul is subject to karma. 

37. When diversity has been eliminated (the yogi's) action 
is to give rise to another creation. 
38. The power of the senses (is proved) by one's own expe-
rience. 
39. That which is preceded by the three states vitalizes 
them. 
40. The same stability of mind (should permeate) the body, 
senses and external world. 
41. Due to (one's) craving, that which is transported moves 
outside. 
42. Then (when the yogi) is established in pure awareness 
(his craving) is destroyed and so the individual soul 
ceases to exist. 
43. (The soul) clad in the cloak of elements is not free but, 
like the Lord, becomes supreme once more. 
44. The link with the vital breath is natural. 
45. (The movement of the vital breath is stilled) by concen-
trating on the centre within the nose. Of what use (then) 
are the left and right channels or Susumnal 
46. May (the soul) merge (in the Lord) once again. 


INTRODUCTION 
The Aphorisms of Siva (Sivasutra) have been translated a 
number of times into several languages along with Ksema-
raja's commentary.1 Up to now, however, no English transla-
tion of Bhaskara's commentary on the Aphorisms has been pub-
lished nor has an analysis been made of the many differences 
between them. The present work is intended to fill that gap. 
The Aphorisms of Siva and the Stanzas on Vibration 
In my Doctrine of Vibration21 have already discussed the 
history of the Aphorisms of Siva and how they were revealed 
to the Master Vasugupta in the middle of the ninth century 
in Kashmir. More information will be supplied in my forth-
coming Stanzas on Vibration to which the reader is referred. 
Suffice it to say here that the Aphorisms, despite their brevity 
and cryptic form, are very important in the history of Kash-
miri Saivism as they represent the first of a series of works 
composed in Kashmir by monistic Kashmiri Saivites from 
the middle of the ninth to the thirteenth century that togeth-
er constitute the greater part of the corpus of Kashmiri Saiva 
literature. Inspired by the Saiva Tantras and the earlier dual-
istic Saiva philosophy of the Saivasiddhanta, they are a monu-
ment to the brilliance of the Kashmiri teachers of those days. 
Especially great among them was Abhinavagupta who lived 
from approximately the middle of the eleventh century into 
the first quarter of the twelfth. The importance of this great 
polymath's contribution to the monistic philosophy of Kash-
miri Saivism, the Pratyabhijna, the exegesis of the Tantras 
prevalent in the Kashmir of his day and Indian poetics and 
aesthetics, cannot be exaggerated. His greatest disciple was 

Ksemaraja who wrote a number of important works, among 
the first of which were his commentaries on the Aphorisms of 
Siva and the Stanzas on Vibration (Spandakarika) to which they 
were closely related. 
Utpaladeva, the author of the Stanzas on Recognition, the 
Isvarapratyabhijnakarika, was, along with his teacher Somanan-
da, the founder of the monistic Saiva philosophy of Kashmir, 
the Pratyabhijna, that drew its name from his work. He was 
Abhinavagupta's grand-teacher and a major source of inspi-
ration for him. Bhaskara, who wrote one of the commentaries 
translated for this volume, was either his contemporary or 
lived soon after him, as we know from the fact that he para-
phrases one of the verses in the Stanzas on Recognition in his 
commentary on the Aphorisms.3 He was known to Abhinav-
agupta who quotes him in his works4 and so must have lived 
sometime in the middle of the eleventh century. We know 
nothing else about him except that he was the son of one 
Divakarabhatta and was, therefore, like the other Kashmiri 
Saiva authors, a Brahmin by caste, as bhatta was a title 
bestowed to learned Brahmins in Kashmir at that time. 
In his introductory remarks to his commentary, Bhaskara 
links his spiritual lineage directly to Vasugupta and his direct 
disciple Kallatabhatta. Ksemaraja nowhere does so in his com-
mentaries but simply acknowledges Abhinavagupta as his 
teacher. He was, moreover, critical of Kallata's interpretation 
of the Stanzas on Vibration thus clearly indicating that he had 
chosen a different line of interpretation not only of the Stanzas 
but also of the Aphorisms which were consistently charac-
terised by later Kashmiri Saivites as related more or less 
directly to them.5 Indeed, both Ksemaraja and Bhaskara refer 
to them throughout their commentaries.6 
Bhaskara and Ksemaraja: Two Visions, One Truth 
This is not the place to go extensively into an exposition 
of the metaphysics and theology that these works presup-
pose. I have already done this in my previous work, the Doc-
trine of Vibration, and will add further remarks in my forth-
coming translation of the Stanzas on Vibration and their 

commentaries to which the reader is referred. The exposition 
I have added to each aphorism should supply the reader 
with the necessary theoretical background as he proceeds 
through the work. One or two preliminary remarks are, 
however, necessary here. 
Kashmiri Saivism is a form of monism which teaches 
that there is only one reality identified with one universal 
consciousness adored as Siva, the one God. It is also an ideal-
ism in so far as it teaches that things exist as objects in the 
external world because they are perceived to exist. In other 
words, 'to be is to be perceived' (esse est percipii). Both these 
views are also held by other schools of Indian thought. The 
most famous exponent of the former is Advaita Vedanta and 
of the latter the idealist school of Buddhism know as the 
Yogacara. 
The most distinctive feature of Kashmiri Saivism is not, 
therefore, its monistic idealism but the doctrine that this one 
reality is a universal egoity. It is a pure T consciousness that 
we can, and do, experience by simply being aware that 'I 
am'. This egoity is contrasted with the petty ego which is 
based on a false notion of oneself as the body or a particular 
temporal personality, which we strive to support and protect 
by the exertion of our trivial pride and selfishness and that 
is, therefore, the cause of man's many troubles both with 
himself and in relation to his fellow man. The authentic ego, 
this pure sense of T am', on the contrary, does not cling to 
self and personal ambitions. It has no fear of being less than 
anyone or of anything else. It makes room for others and 
does not deny their place and value in the economy of life. It 
is not a victim nor does it victimize. It is not foolish, selfish, 
proud, full of desire, ambitious or fearful but the very oppo-
site of all these things. Moreover, it is infinite, eternal, all-
powerful and omniscient. It is, in other words, not only free 
of everything which limits us and cuts us off from one anoth-
er and God, Who is Himself this pure 'I am', but actively cre-
ates, sustains and withdraws all things in and through its 
perception of them and itself. 
This important teaching was first expounded by 
Utpaladeva7 and was so quickly assimilated by later Kash-

miri Saivites and others who accepted their teachings that 
few have noticed the fact that this was his own distinctive 
contribution. This is largely because within a few decades of 
its formulation Abhinavagupta had already applied it sys-
tematically throughout his extensive interpretation of the 
Tantra, notably in his Light of the Tantras, the Tantraloka, but 
also throughout his works, including those on aesthetics and 
poetics. We should not be surprised, therefore, to notice that 
this important concept is missing in both Stanzas and Aphor-
isms. Scholars have failed to miss this absence largely 
because they have viewed these works through the interpre-
tation of them offered by Ksemaraja who, as one would 
expect, followed in his Master's footsteps by systematically 
encoding this concept into them at every possible turn. This 
is one major difference between his commentary on the 
Aphorisms and the one translated here by Bhaskara. The lat-
ter, despite the fact he knew of Utpaladeva's work, seems 
totally oblivious of this important idea. 
Another point of divergence between Bhaskara's com-
mentary and Ksemaraja's is the absence in the former of the 
teachings of another important school of Kashmiri Saivism, 
namely, Krama. Unlike the Pratyabhijna, which is a purely 
philosophical-cum-theological school of thought that, there-
fore, rightly belongs to the history of Indian philosophy 
rather than religion, the Krama system is a distillate of a 
purely Tantric tradition or, to be more precise, several close-
ly related traditions. By this I mean that it finds its original 
formulation in the Tantras and was transmitted for several 
generations by teachers who were initiated into these specific 
Tantras and were initiating their disciples into them, and 
handing down interpretations of their meaning to them. 
They also wrote independent works of their own. The earli-
est of these works were short tracts that portrayed them-
selves as Tantras in their own right that were 'brought into 
the world' by their exponents. One of the earliest figures in 
this development that marked the initial emergence out of 
the anonymity of the Tantras was Jnananetra. Also known as 
Sivananda, he probably lived sometime in the middle of the 
ninth century. He was, therefore, if our dating is correct, a 

close contemporary of Vasugupta. Sivananda felt himself to 
be simply a vehicle of a higher revelation through which the 
Tantras were brought into the world. Similarly, according to 
tradition, Vasugupta did not write the Aphorisms himself but 
was merely the recipient of a revelation the authorship of 
which is ultimately attributed to Siva, as are the Tantras. One 
could say that Vasugupta, like Sivananda, marks a point of 
transition from scripture to the learned treatise technically 
called sastra. 
The treatises of the Krama school developed indepen-
dently and a number of them have come down to us. Mostly 
relatively short tracts, they deal with the sophisticated sym-
bolism of a number of 'Wheels' (cakra) or aggregates of ener-
gies that are responsible for the manifestation of the spheres 
of existence. These are understood in idealistic terms as 
spheres of the manifestation of the one energy of conscious-
ness that ranges from that of pure awareness through the 
mental and sensory right down to the physical level. All 
these energies and their deployment through, and as, the 
flux of time and space are part of an infinite, unconditioned 
flux of energy known as the Great Sequence (Mahakrama) 
from which this school draws its name. The energies are 
worshipped in a sequence (Krama ) as aspects and forms of 
the Supreme Deity which is the Goddess, rather than the 
God. She is variously named in the different allied Krama 
traditions but all Her forms are essentially characterizations 
of the Goddess Kali, the Goddess of Time (kala). Such ideas 
are not at all alien to Bhaskara who also understands mani-
fest reality in terms of flux which is a 'non-flux' of energy, 
but his characterizations of it fall in line with general repre-
sentations that agree with an archetype common to a num-
ber of notions found in the earlier Tantras, particularly, but 
not exclusively, the more monistically oriented ones. 
Just as common notions link Ksemaraja's specifically 
Krama orientated interpretations with the less sectarian ones 
in Bhaskara's commentary, similarly the former's presenta-
tion of universal T consciousness is linked with the latter's 
more loosely defined presentation of the Self and one's 'own 
nature' (svasvabhava) which he takes over from the earlier 

teachers in his lineage, particularly Kallatabhatta. The 'abid-
ing in one's own nature' central to the teachings of the Stan-
zas on Vibration as the goal and ultimate ground of all condi-
tioned existence, perception and the ego is here given a 
brilliant new dimension. Bhaskara presents us with a mysti-
cism of Light. The Divine, our true nature, our 'own Being', 
is Light. Its realisation is therefore a powerful vision of Light, 
expanding and unfolding as all things. To realise this is to 
acquire 'Pure Knowledge', to miss it is to be subject to the 
impure knowledge of thought constructs that, far from 
revealing reality, hide it. The attentive reader will notice 
Bhaskara's continous reference to this Light throughout his 
commentary. This approach distinguishes him from Kse-
maraja who does not ignore this important mystical experi-
ence but prefers not to treat it as his guiding theme in the 
way Bhaskara does. 
About This Translation 
The printed edition of Bhaskara's commentary is 
accompanied by another commentary the origin of which is 
not noted by the editor of the text. Apparently, this commen-
tary was found in the manuscripts used for this edition and 
was added by the editor as an aid to understanding 
Bhaskara's interpretation of the Aphorisms. I have choosen to 
translate this commentary as well, as it does in fact serve its 
purpose in this respect. Moreover, it often serves as a bridge 
between Bhaskara's and Ksemaraja's interpretations draw-
ing as it does from both, although tending to stick to the for-
mer rather than the latter. This is true even though the 
anonymous commentator takes the notion of the absolute 
ego, to which we have referred above, as axiomatic much the 
same way that Ksemaraja does. The commentary on each 
aphorism is thus in three layers. First comes Bhaskara's com-
mentary, the translation of which has been printed here in 
bold characters. This is followed by the second anonymous 
commentary in normal type after which I add my own expo-
sition where, among other things, I compare Bhaskara's com-
mentary with Ksemaraja's. 

In making my translation I have avoided including San-
skrit terms wherever possible in the running text. But, in def-
erence to the fact that the terminology in these works is high-
ly distinctive and each term carries a wealth of meaning that 
no single word, or even phrase, in English could capture 
entirely, I have supplied the original term in parentheses. 
The reader who is not interested can simply ignore them. 
Like all languages, Sanskrit has its own peculiar forms of 
syntax and turns of phrase that translated literally do not 
make good reading in English. Moreover, not infrequently, 
one can express in a few words of Sanskrit what would 
require a long sentence in English. Inevitably, therefore, any 
translator must make additions and alterations to the literal 
meaning of the Sanskrit in order to present it in reasonably 
good English. These additions may, at times, become inter-
pretations, which is also virtually inevitable. My own way 
out of this dilemma is to place these additions in parenthe-
ses. The reader should not allow himself to be distracted by 
these parentheses but read the text in continuity as if they 
were not there. Those who are interested can see what I have 
done to make the original sound right in English and those 
who are not need not bother. 
Concluding Remarks 
Finally, the reader who has a personal spiritual commit-
ment to Kashmiri Saivism may well ask himself what the 
presentation of such elevated experiences and Yogic practis-
es has to do with him. As most of us are far from the devel-
oped spirituality that lends access to these mystical experi-
ences, the question is certainly quite valid. 
From the Kashmiri Saiva point of view, the seeker after 
truth who sincerely seeks spiritual growth is first and fore-
most a yogi. He is, in other words, a person who practises 
Yoga in one or more of its many forms, and it is a very spe-
cial form of Yoga that the Aphorisms teach. Yoga means 
union. This union is taught here in many ways, all of which 
essentially amount to the realisation of our true inherent 
nature which is infinitely greater than our thoughts could 

ever conceive. Ultimately, the ancient Kashmiri Masters 
teach we will realise that we are, and have always been, as 
we always will be, perfect, free, eternal, blissful and infinite-
ly spiritually conscious. We are, in short, ourselves the ulti-
mate goal of all spiritual endevour, the very same God 
Saivites call Siva or Bhairava Who has helped us throughout 
whether we know it or not. This realisation does not make us 
more proud or selfish but less so because as Abhinavagupta 
beautifully puts it: 
People, occupied as they are with their own affairs, 
normally do nothing for others. The activity of those 
in whom every stain of phenomenal existence has 
been destroyed and are identified with Bhairava, full 
of Him, is intended only for the benefit of the world.8 
Although it seems to most of us that we are very far 
from this, the supreme realisation, yet we are as close as one 
could ever be. This is all the more true of the many and won-
derful states that lead up to it and so they relate to all of us 
however underdeveloped we may seem to be. In other 
words, we are as close or as far away as we want be at any 
time. Some teachers prefer to leave these matters for later 
when their disciples are more developed for fear that they 
may be misguided or seek something that is less than ulti-
mate, but others, like the ancient Masters of Kashmir, felt 
that it was right to reveal these secrets, trusting in that inner 
purity that nothing can sully. Their revelation is not an invi-
tation to simply take pleasure in their often strange and won-
derful descriptions, far from it. As the attentive reader will 
notice, the yogi is constantly admonished to be attentive, to 
press on beyond his present state. That is the great secret of 
growth: whatever level of development we have reached, we 
must keep on growing. 

Now Begins the First Light Called 
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE LIGHT OF 
UNIVERSAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
May (all) prostrate before the Lord, the bestower of 
boons Who is the beloved of the daughter of the Snowy 
Mountains that bears as a crestjewel the budding moon and 
sustains, destroys and creates (all things). 
* 
* 
* 
The immediate outer meaning of this verse is quite clear 
(and is as follows). May (all) penetrate into their own true 
nature (svatman) which bestows the boon of the highest level 
of self-realisation (svatmalabha)!This is the Lord (deva) Who 
performs the five divine operations of creation, (persistence, 
withdrawal, obscuration and grace). He is intent on pouring 
everything out of Himself and other games and He is the 
brilliance (which illumines all things) (dyotanaY and all the 
rest.The hidden digit of the moon (amakala)2 which gives life 
to the universe is His crestjewel and finest ornament while 
He is the beloved of (the Goddess) Who is His power of free-
dom that unfolds from the supremely pure abode of Abso-
lute Stability (anuttaradhruvapada). 
(The verse also) implicitely refers to the three sections of 
the Aphorisms of Siva in the following way : 
a) The first quarter of the verse, [namely, (He) Who is the 
beloved of the daughter of the Snowy Mountains] refers 
especially to (Siva), the possessor of power, and so stands for 
the section called "The Nature of Universal Consciousness/' 

b) The second quarter of the verse [namely, '(He) Who bears 
as a crestjewel the budding moon'] refers especially to 
Sakti and so stands for the second section called "The 
Arising of Innate Knowledge." 
c) The remaining part of the verse deals with that which 
enacts the cosmic drama and so stands for the last part (of 
the Aphorisms called) "The Vibration of the Powers." 
* 
* 
* 
Obeisance to Siva Whose body is unique, perfectly full 
consciousness, unobscured by the radiance (sphuratta) of 
His own eternally manifest (nityodita) light (abhasa). 
* 
* 
* 
The contracted, individual Self (anavatman) is made 
manifest by the radiance of Siva's obscured form (avrtakrti) 
which flows incessantly out of His own eternally manifest 
light. At one with Him, it consists of (the many forms), such 
as the colour blue, that appear, each distinctly manifest, (to 
constitute the phenomenal world). In reality, even in this 
state, (Siva's) perfectly full, compact being and consciousness 
is not obscured. The third section (of the Aphorisms) elabo-
rates on this point in the context of practise. 
The particular work we are reflecting on contains the 
teachings transmitted through the line of Masters which 
amount to this, namely, that one's own true nature is Siva. 
As is written further on: "the Siva-nature inherent in the Self 
of all (living beings) is not destroyed Cakhandita)."3 But how 
can (a soul) subject to transmigration possess this Siva-
nature? (In reply we) say that (although our Siva-nature) is 
seemingly obscured due to the power of delusion (vimohani-
sakti), in reality it is unobscured because it shines perpetual-
ly. If it were (really) covered over, all daily life would come 
to an end. As (Bhaskara) will go on to say: "That (Siva-
nature) is enveloped by the manifestations, etc., of conscious-
ness (jfiana) consisting of subjectivity, objectivity and the 
rest."4 

What then removes this (obscuration)? (We say that) 
nothing but the Lord's grace (can do this). Accordingly (it is 
said): "O Goddess, it is by the power of grace (saktipata) that 
one is led to a true Master/' 
When (one has) this grace, one's own true nature, as 
described above, becomes clearly apparent. In this way all 
things are possible for one who is such. As (Bhaskara) will 
say later: "One's own true nature (svasvariipa) is Siva directly 
apparent (saksat)"5 
* 
* 
* 
(The line of transmission of the Aphorisms and of their 
teachings) 
Originally, the Aphorisms of Siva of the Master Vasu-
gupta appeared on the hallowed Mahadeva mountain at the 
divine command of a Siddha. Subsequently, he transmitted 
(them) along with (their) secret to the venerable Brahmin 
(suri) Kallata who (wrote) the Aphorisms 
on 
Vibration 
(Spandasutra) as a commentary on (the first) three of its four 
sections and The Wishgranting Gem of the Purport of Reality 
(Tattvarthacintamani) 
on the last. He transmitted the secret 
in this way to his maternal cousin, the venerable Pradyum-
nabhatta who, in his turn, gave it to his son Prajnarjuna 
who told it in the same way to his disciple Mahadevabhatta 
who gave it to his son, the venerable Srikanthabhatta. 
(Now), I, Bhaskara, the son of Divakara, having received it 
from (Srikanthabhatta) reverently write this commentary 
(vartika) on the Aphorisms at the insistance of my disciples. 
I will now explain these Aphorisms (for them, for they are) 
young and, having strayed from the (true) tradition (agama), 
their minds are confused by erroneous notions. 
Indeed, the Siva-nature inherent in the Self of all (liv-
ing beings) is not destroyed (akhandita) (but) it is constant-
ly enveloped by the manifestations, etc., of consciousness 
consisting of subjectivity, objectivity and the rest. 
* 
* 
* 

One's own true nature itself is Siva Who is conscious-
ness (cidatman). It does not differ from Him as others believe 
it does. This Siva-nature is proved to exist by the experience 
everyone has of their own existence (svanubhavasiddha).It is 
the abode of the sovereign power of the Self which is perfect, 
transcendent and the cause of (all) phenomena (karya). It is 
the place wherein all things repose.The freedom to generate 
emotion (bhava) and other such (creative) functions is the 
sign of its presence, which only the aesthete can realise, in 
the individual centres of consciousness (cidanu) (which pres-
ence) inspires its recognition at every moment in the course 
of daily life. The individual soul fails to realise (his true 
nature) because it seems to be obscured by the objectivized 
consciousness (idantajfiana) engendered by the conditioned 
(mayiya) subjectivity he freely chooses to will into existence. 
Therefore, Lord Siva, desiring to enlighten those who are the 
objects of His grace so that they may realise this, brought the 
Aphorisms (into this world). 
* 
* 
* 
Siva, overcome with compassion, spoke these apho-
risms (one after the other) in an ordered sequence of revela-
tion to remove this enveloping obscuration and make 
known His own nature. 
One's own true nature is Siva directly apparent (saksat). 
The universe which is the body of consciousness6 and the 
Wheel of Energies (kalacakra) is generated by His expansion 
(unmesa) and contraction (nimesa). (All things) arise and fall 
away in consonance with the extension and withdrawal of 
(His) power.7 
There are many conflicting views concerning His true 
nature (svarupa) and (so) Siva composed the (following) 
aphorism to refute them. 
* 
* 
* 
The Aphorisms are arranged in an ordered sequence for 
the benefit of those fit to receive them. The reason for this is 

that they lead progressively to the highest state of realisation 
in stages as one climbs stepwise to successively higher levels. 
Thus, those blessed with the most intense grace (tlvratara-
saktipata) (are enlightened) by the knowledge of Siva (direct-
ly) (sambhavajnana), those blessed with a middling degree of 
grace (tivramadhya), by a knowledge of (Siva's) power (sakta-
vijnana) and those whose grace is weak (manda) by a knowl-
edge of the individual soul (anavajnana). 
The universe, which is nothing but pure consciousness, 
the Wheel of the Energies of consciousness, will and the rest 
as well as its attendent causes, namely, the five (pure) princi-
ples beginning with Siva and the expansion of the powers 
Khecari (Gocari, Dikcari and Bhucari),8 are (all) generated and 
persist in consonance with (Siva's) expansion and contrac-
tion, which correspond to the extension and withdrawal of 
(His) power. 
Philosophers belonging to various schools disagree with 
one another because of the differing order of impurity to 
which they are subject. Thus the materialists (laukika) think 
that the Self is the body endowed with consciousness; the 
logicians (naiyayika) that it is the intellect endowed with the 
qualities of knowledge etc.; the Mlmamsakas (believe it to be) 
the subtle body (puryastaka) and the Buddhists, a flux of per-
ceptions; certain Vedantins and the Madhyamikas (think it is) 
absolute non-existence (abhavabrahman) and the Pancaratrins, 
unmanifest nature (avyakta) while the Samkhya maintains 
that it is the state of the subject devoid of intellective con-
sciousness (vijnanakala); some Vedantins (believe that the Self 
is the) Isvara principle, the grammarians that it is the Sadasiva 
principle and the followers of the Trika and other (similar 
schools) that it is one's own nature which both transcends the 
universe and is at one with it. All these are cheated by Maya 
of (their) real (paramarthika) freedom and (their consciousness 
still) resides on the plane of relative distinctions.9 
* 
* 
* 
caitanyamatma 
Consciousness is the Self. 1/1 

The nature of the Self is consciousness which is proved 
(siddha) to be both knowledge and action. It is unobscured 
so who can deny its Siva-nature?10 
Exposition 
Kashmiri Saivism teaches that at the macrocosmic level con-
sciousness is pure Being, the absolute itself, beyond all specifica-
tion.11 Moreover, it maintains that all that is perceived exists as an 
object of perception because it is perceived as such. This implies 
that the activity of consciousness is the same for all existing things, 
whether conscious or unconscious (sarvasamanyarupa). Thus, nei-
ther space, time nor form can divide it, nor can ignorance obscure 
it, for they are all part of this reality. Moreover, consciousness has 
the power to make everything it comes into contact with conscious 
and is free to do all things as it is to know them. In short, con-
sciousness is itself perfect freedom understood as the union of all 
knowledge and action. Paramasiva alone enjoys this freedom, as all 
other beings depend on His autonomous consciousness for their 
existence. 
Indeed, 
the freedom 
of consciousness 
specifies 
Paramasiva's state more than any other of His divine attributes, for 
it is on this that they all depend. 
According to Ksemaraja this same consciousness is, in micro-
cosmic terms, the pure reflective awareness of the absolute ego 
which is the uncreated subjectivity that is the essence of the con-
ceived (kalpita) subjectivity attributed to the body, intellect, vital 
breath and the emptiness experienced in deep sleep. The presence 
of this universal consciousness gives life to the psycho-physical 
organism and impels the activity of the senses and mind. It is 
through this activity that we can discern the presence of conscious-
ness and ultimately experience its true nature. 
This means that, from the point of view of practise, there can 
be no means outside consciousness by which consciousness can be 
known. All the forms of spiritual discipline through which we 
come to experience the true nature of consciousness are also ulti-
mately consciousness. In short, consciousness is known by being 
conscious. Nothing can obscure it. It is free of all means (anupaya) 
and self-illuminating (svaprakasa). 

* 
* 
* 
(Siva), the Great Lord, spoke (the following) aphorism 
which defines (the nature) of that obscuration: 
jnanambandhah 
Knowledge is bondage. 1/2 
The knowledge (based on the notions) T and 'this is 
mine' arises clothed in speech12 and consists of the percep-
tion (pratha) of relative distinctions. It is rooted in the 
impurity of Maya and is said to be bondage, whose mark is 
the obscuration of ignorance. 
* 
* 
* 
The impurity of Maya (mayiyamala) is bondage. It is the 
impurity of individuality (anavamala)u that obscures one's 
own sovereign power which is the (lower order of) knowl-
edge. (This knowledge) is the multiple diversified perception 
that, associated with (the notions) T and 'this is mine', is 
fashioned from one's own nature. This happens because (the 
soul's authentic nature) is obscured by the notions of 'exis-
tence' and 'non-existence' which arise according to whether 
there is unity with or division from, the light (of the subject's 
consciousness). They belong to the Supreme Lord Himself 
Who, eternal and pervasive, denies His own nature, as does 
an actor, and assumes the role of an individual soul by tak-
ing limitations (onto Himself) by His power of Maya which 
can bring about the impossible, in order to make manifest 
the cosmic drama. 
Exposition 
Bhaskara equates the knowledge to which this aphorism 
refers with the discursively represented perceptions that bind the 
individual soul, based as they are on the ego-sense, centred on the 
objectively perceivable body, mistakenly identified with the per-

ceiving subjectivity of consciousness. As the form of knowledge 
that results from these perceptions is based on the relative distinc-
tion drawn between subject and object as well as between individ-
ual objects themselves, Bhaskara attributes it to Mayiyamala which 
is the impurity that engenders the sense of duality. Ksemaraja, 
however, takes a step further back, as it were, and attributes this 
type of knowledge to Anavamala which is the metaphysical igno-
rance through which the universal subject voluntarily limits its 
own consciousness down to a point source of awareness (anu) by 
falsely identifying with the psycho-physical organism with the 
result that, ignorant of its true identity, its capacity to know and act 
is severely restricted. This identification gives rise to differentiated 
perceptions, confused by which the fettered soul (pasu) looses sight 
of the universal nature of its own T consciousness. Again, at the 
macrocosmic level, it is through such perceptions that Siva projects 
onto the emptiness of His own nature all the lower-order subjects 
and their worlds. Empirical knowledge of a discursive order is 
thus equated with the incomplete knowledge of the unity of con-
sciousness that binds the individual soul.14 Ksemaraja is quick to 
point out, however, that this state of affairs is entirely self-
imposed. When we no longer choose to try and grasp the nature of 
things in this way and stop seeking to overcome our false sense of 
incompleteness by clinging to the perceptions of material objects 
which we misguidedly feel we can possess, the all-embracing reali-
ty of consciousness becomes spontaneously apparent.15 
* 
* 
* 
(Siva) spoke (the following) aphorism that defines (the 
nature) of the powers that delude the fettered soul in order 
to explain what causes speech to pervade (thought): 
yonivargah 
kalasartram 
The group of sources constitutes 
the body of 
obscuring energies. 
1/3. 
Know the sources (yoni) to be the four powers which 
are the universal causes of all things. They are 
Amba, 
Jyestha, 
Raudri and Vama (all of which) are Siva's forms. 

The group or aggregate of these (powers) constitutes the 
body in the midst of the obscuring energies of (the 
phonemes ranging) from A to KS that give rise to speech 
(sabda). 
These obscuring energies are variously called 
"mothers/' "powers/' "goddesses" and "rays." They mani-
fest the notions (pratyaya) of the fettered soul by pervading 
them with speech. Thus he becomes their victim because 
the knowledge they manifest invariably deprives him of his 
power.16 
* 
* 
* 
The wheel of obscuring energies consists of (the phon-
emic energies ranging) from A to KS and arises from the four 
powers that are (collectively) the cause of every power. This 
wheel of obscuring energies, which consists of the gross 
phonemes, assumes, by the conjunction of words and sen-
tences, the form of speech in its entirety and diversity, 
whether that of common or learned parlance (laukika and 
alaukika), (and so) generates the notions of the fettered due to 
which they are deprived of their power and become the 
objects (of their) enjoyment. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja reads this aphorism along with the previous one 
and explains that it refers to the remaining two impurities which 
condition consciousness, namely, the Impurity of Maya (mayiya-
mala) (including the five obscuring coverings, kancukas)17 and the 
Impurity of Karma (karmamala). So, from Ksemaraja's points of 
view, this aphorism should be translated as follows: The group of 
categories associated with the Womb (of diversity) and the body of obscur-
ing energies (which give rise to limited action are also binding). 
The Cave (guha), the Knot (granthi), and the Womb of the Uni-
verse (jagadyoni) are some of the many expressions used to denote 
Maya. Here it is referred to as the Womb because it is through it 
that consciousness creates the world and body of each individual 
soul by giving rise to an awareness of relative distinctions both 

directly (saksat) between himself and his environment and indirect-
ly between the objects which populate his world. The domain of its 
binding activity is the so-called impure creation (asuddhasrsti) rang-
ing from the category Maya down to that of Earth. It is the basis of 
the Impurity of Karma (karmamala) here called the "obscuring ener-
gy" (kala) which is the power that gives rise to limited action equat-
ed generically with Maya. Ksemaraja writes: 
Kala is that which generates (diversity, kalayati), that is, it 
projects outwards. It is the power of Maya which differen-
tiates and conditions by limitation. It is due to this that (the 
individual soul) is deprived of its power. In other words, 
his sovereign freedom is hidden by his own Maya.18 
When an individual is strongly affected by this impurity he 
feels that he is totally lost and worth nothing as a human being and 
that he is a helpless victim of the circumstances which in reality he 
has created for himself as a consequence of his past actions. 
Bhaskara's interpretation of this aphorism differs consider-
ably from Ksemaraja's. According to him, the 'group of sources' 
(yonivarga) refers to the four principle energies of the absolute 
(ianuttara), namely, Varna, Jyestha, Ambika and Raudri.,9 While 'the 
body of obscuring energies' (kalasarira) refers to the fifty powers of 
consciousness represented by the letters of the alphabet that 
emerge from these four energies and go on to generate the world 
of words and meanings. These four powers are: 
1) Vamasakti—Also called Vyomavamesvari,20 it is the power of bliss 
(anandasakti) which, beyond even the supreme energy of the will 
(paratita), is the source of all the other energies.This is the tran-
scendental awareness (anakhya) of universal consciousness 
which, beyond time, pervades the three moments of creation, 
persistence, and destruction to which all phenomena are subject. 
It is the supreme state of Kundalini which is Siva's creative free-
dom consisting of the union of the three levels of existence, viz., 
Siva, Sakti and the individual soul, represented by the powers of 
the absolute, will and the unfolding of knowledge held together 
in harmonious union. She is the goddess presiding over those 
subject to the incessant round of transmigration, creating as She 

does for the ignorant the world of diversity and illusion, and 
also the bestower of Siva's power to those who have overcome 
ignorance. 
2) Jyesthasakti—This is the second energy that emerges from the 
absolute as the power which gives rise to persistence (sthiti). For 
the Well Awakened it is the power through which the pure 
knowledge and action of universal consciousness is created in 
them. 
3) Raudrisakti—This power is responsible for the withdrawal 
(samhara) of the enlightened awareness created by Jyestha. It 
blocks the path to liberation by giving rise to doubts in the aspi-
rant's mind or attachment to the occasional pleasures of samsaric 
existence which divert his attention from the ultimate goal.21 
4) Ambikasakti—Ambika personifies the powers of consciousness 
which maintain the state of awareness at a single steady level. 
Thus Ambikasakti prevents the fall of the elevated yogi to lower 
states, but at the same time hampers the rise of those less elevat-
ed to higher levels. 
* 
* 
* 
Now, are these energies and the knowledge they mani-
fest (supported by any) sustaining ground? In response to 
this query (Siva) said: 
jnanadhisthanam 
matrka 
The ground of knowledge 
is Matrka. 
1/4 
There are two forms of knowledge, according to 
whether it is superior or inferior. Matrka 
is the one power 
which is the ground or support (of both). 
* 
* 
* 
The inferior and superior forms of (this) two-fold knowl-
edge are due to the perception of division and the manifesta-
tion of unity, respectively. The power (Matrka) is the mother of 
the universe and sustains and presides over both types. In the 

case of superior knowledge (She is) the power called Aghora 
because She manifests both the inner reality (of undifferentiat-
ed consciousness) and the outer reality (of the All) as Her own 
nature. Inferior (knowledge is the domain of the aspect of 
Matrka) called Ghorasakti who directs the consciousness of (the 
fettered soul) out of himself because of his failure to reflect 
upon the unity of reality and obscures his Siva-nature. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja explains that the Impurity of Individuality (anava-
mala) which limits the freedom and awareness of consciousness, 
the Impurity of Maya (mayiyamala), which gives rise to diversity 
and the awareness of relative distinctions, together with the Impu-
rity of Action (karmamala) which binds the individual to the fruits 
of his action, respectively, obscure the infinite powers of will, 
knowledge and action of universal consciousness. This obscuration 
is the basic condition necessary for the emergence of differentiated 
perceptions (vikalpa) out of the body of consciousness. This apho-
rism goes on to discuss the remaining factor essential for the for-
mation of mental representations and the empirical knowledge 
which they make possible, namely, speech. 
It is a fact clearly proved (siddha) by personal experience that 
speech is invariably associated with thought.22 It is the vehicle and 
essence of thought, while thought is the source of speech, they 
stand and fall together. Mental representation which orders the 
influx of sensations and presents us with a meaningful, balanced 
picture of the outer physical environment, memory, the elaboration 
of ideas and the shifting tide of emotions are all intimately connect-
ed with language. Language and the awareness which renders it 
meaningful serve as the essential connection between the inner 
world of consciousness and the outer world of material objects. 
From this point of view, even animals have a language of their 
own insofar as they respond purposively to their environment and 
hence must, in some sense, grasp the implications of their situa-
tion. One could say that the world we live in as individual perceiv-
ing and thinking subjects is a product of language. To grasp the 
basis of language is to come in touch with the very cause of the 

world of our daily life. The creative awareness (vimarsa) through 
which language becomes meaningful and by virtue of which we 
can articulate our intentions and ideas, both to ourselves and to 
others, is here termed Matrka, said to be the unknown mother of all 
things.23 As Abhinava explains: 
Matrka is the power one with Bhairava in His form as the 
Mass of Sounds (sabdarasi). The various aspects of objectiv-
ity in it are not yet manifest but are yet to come, thus it is 
called Matrka (lit. 'little mother') because (this energy) con-
tains in a potential state (the manifest universe like an 
expectant) mother.24 
Thus Matrka is equated with Siva's creative power of action.25 
Born of Siva's will when He desires to manifest His power as the 
breath animating all creation, She is the 'unstruck sound' (anahata) 
heard at the supreme level of speech (para vac)26 which is both the 
vitality (virya) of Siva and the power hidden in Mantra. Ksemaraja 
quotes the Essence of the Tantras (Sritantrasadbhava): 
O dear one, all Mantras consist of letters and energy is the 
soul of these (letters), while energy is Matrka and one 
should know Her to be Siva's nature.27 
Matrka as Mantric energy is the source of the higher liberating 
knowledge of non-duality when She acts as the power Aghora 
which makes inner and outer manifest as one with Her own nature 
in the all-embracing experience of liberated consciousness.28 Matrka 
is also the basis of the lower binding knowledge associated with 
discursive thought when Her true nature is unknown and func-
tions as the power Ghora which deprives man of the awareness of 
unity and obscures Siva's universal activity. 
* 
* 
* 
The Lord spoke (the following) aphorism in order to 
put an end to the knowledge which envelopes (and obscures 
the consciousness of the fettered) so as to manifest one's 
own essential nature (svasvarupa): 

udyamo 
bhairavah 
Bhairava is upsurge. 1/5 
Siva is the conscious nature (cidatman) which is full 
(and perfect) in all respects. 'Exertion' (udyoga), 'expansion' 
(urtmesa) and 'upsurge' (udyama) are the terms denoting 
His state of being when He wishes to generate phenomena 
(karya) without, in this way, abandoning His own essential 
nature (svasvarupa). This same (state of being) is said to be 
the universe, Siva (sarvatattva) and Bhairava. Bhairava 
also abides there in the brilliant radiance of (His) own 
vibration (parispanda). The All-pervasive Lord of Con-
sciousness is called (Bhairava) here (in this aphorism) 
because (He sustains all things by) filling (them with His 
infinite consciousness, bharana), plays (the game of destruc-
tion, ramana) and emits them (out of Himself, vamatta)29 
and also because He perceives His own undivided 
(akhandita) light (nijabhasa). 
* 
* 
* 
(Certain) individuals are fit to practise the Divine 
Means (sambhavopaya) and so, without having to meditate or 
recite Mantra, etc., are mystically absorbed in the highest 
Bhairava Whose nature it is to 'fill' (bharana), 'resound' 
(ravana) and 'emit' (vamana). They have been inwardly puri-
fied by an intense descent of the supreme power (of grace) 
and (so) are fit to be graced with, for example, the vision of 
those perfected in yoga (siddha) or by eating the sacrificial 
pap (caru). By relishing the flow of the aesthetic delight (rasa) 
which is the nectar of (Bhairava's) power of knowledge and 
action which constantly extends (out of consciousness), they 
experience absorption (avesa) in their own nature (svarupa) 
which abounds with the relish of the aesthetic delight (rasa) 
of its ever renewed and life-giving nectar. When the true 
essential nature (svabhava) of those who exert themselves in 
this way unfolds, (a state) is attained (in which) the obscur-
ing covering of the light of consciousness is absent. 

Exposition 
Ksemaraja comments on this aphorism: 
The upsurge (of consciousness) is the sudden emergence of 
the highest level of intuition (pratibha), the outpouring 
(ucchalana) of consciousness consisting of the (ever) extend-
ing awareness (vimarsa it has of its own nature). It is 
Bhairava because He is full of the entire universe insofar as 
He is the unity (samarasya) of all His powers and assimi-
lates into Himself every differentiated perception (kalpana). 
(He appears in this form) to those (yogis) who, devoted to 
Him, are solely intent on the inner reality (of all things), in 
order to make their own Bhairava-nature manifest.30 
The yogi who has reached the highest level of practise (samb-
havopaya) merges with the active effort exerted by the vibrating 
power of awareness which impels and gives life to the senses and 
mind. He witnesses it as the outpouring of the activity of con-
sciousness through which his universal nature as Bhairava is 
instantly made manifest. This aphorism instructs him not to try to 
grasp his own nature by his personal efforts alone but to let him-
self be carried along by the innate exertion of his own nature iden-
tified with the supreme intuition (parapratibha) of the freedom (sva-
tantrya) of consciousness. This flux of energy, at one with the yogi's 
true nature, is Bhairava. It contains within itself all the powers of 
the absolute and spontaneously assimilates all differentiated per-
ceptions (vikalpa) the instant it emerges, carrying the yogi in a flash 
to the highest level of consciousness. Awakened by the grace of his 
Master, the yogi is absorbed in the highest state of contemplation 
(sambhavasamavesa) on the plane of being beyond mind (unmana)/' 
situated in the centre between one thought and the next from 
whence the world of differentiated perceptions is emitted. Matrka 
operates as Aghorasakti through which the yogi severs the restraints 
imposed upon him by the three impurities and achieves the 
supreme knowledge (parajnana) of the enlightened through this all-
powerful expansion (unmesa) of his consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 

The body of consciousness which is the light of one's 
own true nature (svasvariipa) (never) changes even when 
the Bhairavic nature that exerts itself in this way expands 
out (to fill all things with its divine powers, unmesa). When 
the Great Lord had said this, He uttered the following apho-
rism in order to explain that one's own abiding state of 
being (svasthiti) also remains unaltered when (the powers 
of consciousness) are withdrawn (back into it, nimesa): 
sakticakrasamdhane 
visvasamharah 
When the Wheel of Energies fuses together; 
the universe is withdrawn. 
1/6 
The energies are the entire universe32 and their nature 
is knowledge and action. (Their) functions have been 
explained before. (They are said to form) a circle (cakra) 
because they illumine (cakana) all knowledge and action.33 
Its fusion is its assimilation into one's own nature engen-
dered by the involution (nimesa, of consciousness) due to 
which its withdrawal (samhara) and merger (into con-
sciousness) takes place (and it resumes its original) Siva-
nature. Similarly, the same Supreme Soul Who is Bhairava 
(becomes) Siva when (He acts as) the impelling cause that 
engenders the expansion (unmesasambhrti) 
of the knowl-
edge consisting of words, denoted meanings and the rest. 
* 
* 
* 
The point is that when one reflects that the universe, 
consisting of the powers of knowledge and action, is not sep-
arate from the absolute (anuttara), which is both the light and 
reflective awareness (of consciousness), it dissolves away, 
fusing with Siva's (divine) fire of supreme consciousness. 
Thus, as the effect resides at one in this way within its cause, 
one's own abiding state of being (svasthiti) is (never) 
obscured even in the state of withdrawal (nimesavastha). 

Exposition 
Ksemaraja's commentary on this aphorism does not disagree 
with Bhaskara's but adds a new dimension to his interpretation of 
it by presenting it from the Krama point of view. Thus he explains 
that: 
Bhairava Who, as we have said, is this upsurge (of con-
sciousness, udyantrta), consisting of the emergence of 
Supreme Intuition, possesses an inscrutable power of free-
dom which is the supreme (para) and absolute (anuttara 
power of consciousness). In so far as (this power) attends 
inwardly (to its own nature) while perceiving outwardly 
(the totality of manifestation), it pervades the successive 
movement (krama) and simultaneous existence (akrama) of 
every (moment of each) cycle of energy and although said 
to have (also) transcended both succession and its oppo-
site, as well as emptiness and fullness, is not in itself any of 
these. (This power) manifests the play of the expansion of 
the cycles of the powers of creation (persistence and 
destruction) on the screen of its own nature commencing 
with the Earth (principle) right up to repose within the 
supreme subject.34 
In other words, the yogi's experience of the absolute 
(anuttara) is coupled with the emergence within him of the 
supreme creative intuition (parapratibha) through which, indepen-
dent of all other causes, consciousness reflects the universe within 
its own nature.35 Bhairava, with Whom the yogi is now identified, 
is the upsurge of the exertive force (udyama) that impels the flux of 
the power of His infinite freedom which absorbs the entire uni-
verse from the grossest category—Earth—up to its resting place in 
the supreme subject. The inner exertion of Bhairava-consciousness 
is thus made complete by the consciousness of its power. The two 
are united together through the practise of Bhairavamudra in which 
the yogi maintains his inner (antarmukha) awareness of the exertion 
of the Self while its energy flows out through the extroverted 
(bahirmukha) activity of the senses.36 

Thus, according to Ksemaraja, the yogi is now instructed to 
contemplate Anakhya (lit. 'the Inexplicable'), the power of his own 
consciousness which pervades the cycle of energies that create, 
maintain and destroy the universe of perceptions functioning 
through the subject, means of knowledge and object in three 
moments of the cycle of cognition. Their simultaneous (akrama) as 
well as successive (krama) appearance is recognised to be the cre-
ative flow of Anakhyasakti which transcends both the successive 
movement of the powers of consciousness and their non-successive 
movement while being at the same time both. Although both full of 
all things and void of diversity, this power is neither empty not full. 
In the Hymn to the Womb of Consciousness (Jfianagarbhastotra) the poe
writes: 
I place in the Heart (of my awareness) the Supreme God-
dess of Consciousness Who shines radiantly beyond all 
things and Who, by removing the support of the three 
sequences (of creation, persistence and destruction), 
allows one to cross beyond the three changes; She Who is 
beautiful, Her body one with change and Her nature 
unchanging.37 
The yogi who thus contemplates the power of Anakhya which 
contains and is the circle, or collective whole of all the powers of 
consciousness, while continuing to sense the world about him, 
experiences the dissolving away of the universe of duality. Burnt 
by the fire of consciousness of the universal subject, the diversity of 
perceptions becomes one with it in the withdrawal (nimesa) of 
diversity back into unity. 
* 
* 
* 
The difference that prevails between the waking and 
other (states)38 does not obscure the unchanging (acyuta) 
conscious nature because (this diversity of states is the 
result of) the activity of one's own essential nature (svasva-
rupaparispanda). 
The Lord of the gods accordingly spoke 
(the following) aphorism in order to explain that this is so: 

jagratsvapnasusuptabhede 
turyabhogasamvit 
The consciousness which is the expanse of the Fourth State 
(abides constantly in) the various (states) of waking, 
dreaming and deep sleep. 1/7 
The Fourth State is said to be (contemplation, that is) 
the reflective awareness of the compact unity (and undi-
vided Being) of one's own essential nature (svasvarupaika-
ghanata) because it pervades all (other states) of conscious-
ness. It is consciousness, called the expanse of the Fourth 
State of the abiding condition in which ignorance has fall-
en away. It is the (inner) nature of the perceiving subject 
who thus abides clearly evident and extends (as one) even 
when division prevails due to the waking and other 
states.39 
* 
* 
in-
states of recollection and others like them and those 
which involve a loss of consciousness are included in those 
of dreaming and deep sleep, respectively. Thus, because 
other states (such as these) are said to be included in the 
three principle ones (of waking, dreaming and deep sleep) 
they need not be dealt with separately. These three states 
unfold in this way, each with their distinctive functions, 
when the yogi emerges out of contemplation but, because he 
is aware of his own unique and undivided Being, the obscu-
ration which covers the true nature of reality engendered by 
these three states does not exist (for him). Therefore, one 
who attends to his own perfectly integral nature has no need 
to exert himself to practise contemplation because the pre-
cept (to do so) does not apply (to him) (nor is the practise of 
contemplation possible) for one who attends to that which is 
incomplete and the locus of limitation because (his doing so) 
runs contrary to the attainment of fullness. 
Exposition 
The persistence of an underlying awareness of consciousness 
experienced as one's own most essential nature which both per-

ceives and acts through its instruments, the body, senses and mind, 
is central to the teachings of the Stanzas on Vibration and is prefig-
ured here in the Aphorisms where it is repeatedly referred to as the 
Fourth State. We have already had occasion to discuss this point in 
a number of places to which we refer the reader.40 As we shall see 
later, the development and maintenance of this awareness, that is 
to say, the Fourth State, is an important part of the practises taught 
in the Aphorisms. 
* 
* 
* 
Once the Supreme Lord had said this (He went on) to 
utter (the following) three aphorisms to elucidate (the true 
nature of) the waking and other (states) so that (all) may 
attain liberation in this very life. 
jnanamjagrat 
Knowledge (born of sensory perception) is 
the waking state. 1/8 
Sensory perception is a product of the intellect, ego 
and mind (coupled with the sensations) of sound touch, 
form, taste and smell. The power of knowledge which 
belongs to the conscious nature (cidatman) actively mani-
fests (sphurati) in this way in the form of the cognizing sub-
ject, means of knowledge and the object of cognition. Here 
this is (said to be) the waking state which (marks) the loss of 
the fettered soul's true nature (svarupahani). 
* 
* 
* 
The meaning here is that the perception born of the 
external activity of the senses has as its material basis 
smelling, tasting, seeing, touching, speaking, comprehend-
ing, self-arrogation and ascertainment. The waking state, 
attended by the limitations (upadhi) imposed by the subject 
(object and means of knowledge), obscures the true nature of 
the fettered but bestows upon those who are free the radiant 
brilliance of their own nature. 

Exposition 
The waking state is the form of awareness which prevails 
when the knowing subjectivity (veditrta) is totally absorbed in the 
sensations which come to it through the senses.41 In this state living 
beings, gross elements and the words which denote them are made 
manifest outside the subject42 and, unlike objects perceived in a 
dream, are perceptible by everybody (sadharana)43. This state arises 
though the activity of the wakeful body and senses and hence 
yogis call it "Established in the Body" (pindastha). For them it is the 
state of awareness they experience when concentrating one-point-
edly (dharana)44 on an object.45 Those who have gained insight into 
reality (jnanin) and express its nature in metaphysical terms, call 
this state "Everywhere Auspicious" (sarvatobhadra) because it rep-
resents the state of consciousness manifest as the ubiquitous full-
ness of objective being (vedyasatta).46 
* 
* 
* 
svapno 
vikalpah 
Dreaming consists of thought constructs. 1/9 
The thoughts of the pervasive perceiver5 that, constant-
ly renewed, emerge inwardly in the absence of external 
objects are said (to constitute) the dream state. The liberated 
condition (patibhava) (makes these) thought constructs 
firm (and full of divine consciousness) while due to the fet-
tered state, they are, on the contrary, unstable and said to be 
the covering (which obscures) the Lord Who is the power 
(of consciousness). 
* 
* 
* 
The dream state obscures the true nature (svarupa) of the 
fettered soul. It consists of the constantly renewed emergence 
of thought constructs each of which perform their own func-
tion and whose contents are diversely manifest forms such as 
towns, mountains, forests and groves, generated inwardly in 
the absence of external objects and independently of them 
when the (waking) state (in which they appear) ceases. 

Exposition 
The dream state is one in which the dreamer is unaware of 
outer sensations and does not perceive external objects.48 In this 
state the subject is not a perceiver but one who thinks (vetr). 
Turned in on himself, he reflects (vimrsati) on the mental impres-
sions (samskara) previously formed in his consciousness by outer 
objects and orders them into thought constructs (vikalpa). The 
dream state,49 therefore, occurs not only while we are asleep, but 
also during the phase of perception in which the external object50 is 
inwardly 
represented 
mentally. 
The 
Impurity 
of 
Karma 
Ckarmamala) persists here only as a latent trace while the objects 
perceived inwardly are illusory creations of Siva generated in the 
individual subject's mind and hence not perceivable by all.51 
The practise of Dhyana, in which an object of meditation is 
repeatedly mentally represented in such a way that the yogi there-
by achieves absorption, is said to take place in the dream state.52 The 
yogi's vital breath and all his ideas are then drawn together into 
one place in which his awareness is firmly established. Yogis there-
fore call the dream state "Established in One Place" (padastha). 
From their point of view it is a higher, subtler level of consciousness 
than waking and hence it is easier to rise from it to a state of mysti-
cal absorption .Those who tread the path of knowledge (jnanin) call 
this state "Pervasion" (vyapti) because it corresponds to autono-
mous cognitive awareness which, no longer conditioned by the 
object of knowledge, is free to pervade everywhere.53 
* 
* 
* 
aviveko 
mayasausuptam 
Deep sleep is Maya, the lack of discernment. 
1/10 
When the power (of consciousness) consisting of cog-
nition and its object does not manifest and, lacking in 
awareness (vimarsa), 
one fails to discern the conscious 
nature, the (same power) is said to be Maya because it nour-
ishes the net of darkness that covers (consciousness). It is 
the state of deep sleep (in which) memory and its objects 
(reside in an unmanifest form) in the consciousness which 

abides in one's own nature. In so far as (these states may 
represent degrees) of rest the liberated (enjoys) in his own 
nature (or else the types of) obscuration which affect the fet-
tered soul, each one of these three (states) is of three types 
formed by conjoining each to the other, taking one or other 
as primary or secondary.54 (All these states) are rightly 
understood to be those of the conscious nature. 
Thus the Lord55 is here, in the two states (of waking 
and dreaming), cognition and its object, while in the other 
(states of) deep sleep and the Fourth, the omnipresent Lord 
is said to be consciousness.56 
* 
* 
* 
The point made in these verses is as follows. (When) the 
power (of consciousness) which spills out of itself here (in 
the form of both) sensory awareness (vedana) and (its) 
objects, ceases to be active, withdrawing its rays, as does the 
sun (at night) and the Self, whose nature is pure conscious-
ness (remains) unmanifest, (this power) becomes the net of 
darkness (that obscures consciousness), that is, deep sleep 
which is Maya. There, objects and all that one recalls (of 
them) continue to exist only within one's own pure, unob-
scured nature. And that also exists, otherwise the fact that 
after waking one recalls having slept well and that one knew 
nothing could not be reasonably explained. Thus, the inher-
ent nature of the liberated (pati) is manifestly apparent in 
these three states while that of those in bondage is not, as is 
proved by the very nature of things (svabhavasiddha). 
Exposition 
The state of deep sleep is characterised by an absence of outer 
physical and inner mental activity. It is one of silence (tusnlbhava) 
in which there is neither object nor means of knowledge.57 It is the 
emptiness (sunya) of the individual subject void of all content who 
persists, deprived of all support, as the negative correlate of the 
object.58 It is a state of potential said to be the "seed of the 

universe"59 where everything is merged within the subject in the 
form of latent impressions (samskara) which give rise to the world 
of differentiated perceptions when he wakes up. As such it is the 
microcosmic equivalent of universal destruction (pralayawhen 
the categories of experience (tattva) in the realm of diversity dis-
solve away.61 Although the same cognizing subject present in the 
waking and dream states persists here also, he appears to be absent 
because the object and means of knowledge, with which he former-
ly identified, are no longer present.62 Only the Impurity of Individ-
uality (ianavamala) continues to operate, contracting consciousness 
and depriving it of its awareness and freedom. Thus, unsupported 
by the other impurities, it leaves the subject in a state of emptiness. 
As the individual living soul (fiva), the 'void subject' (sunyapramatr) 
present in this state, is the source from which the powers of the 
senses and vital breath spring when he rises from sleep. 
We can distinguish between two types of deep sleep; one is 
totally without object (apavedyasusupti) which we recall when we 
awake and think, 'I knew nothing at all'. In the second type the 
Impurity of Maya (mayiyamala) continues to function in a subtle 
way and so has some objective content (savedyasusupti), as we 
know from the fact that when we awake from this state we think 'I 
slept well'. 
For the yogi, deep sleep is closer to the state of universal con-
sciousness than waking or dreaming, for here the subject alone 
exists. He calls it "Established in Form" (rupastha) because, as the 
perceiver, the subject is the creator of forms (rupayati) and hence is 
pure form.63 So while the average man experiences this state as an 
absence of consciousness, for the yogi ' deep sleep' is his contem-
plation (samadhi) in which he is in a state of transcendental aloof-
ness (anudasinya), freed of the awareness of the distinction between 
subject and object.64 Those who seek knowledge call this state the 
"Great Pervasion" (mahavyapti) because, established in subjective 
consciousness, they are even freer of the restrictions imposed by 
the object than they were in the 'Pervasion' (vyapti) of the dream 
state.65 
Our account is not, however, complete. A distinctive feature 
of the Kashmiri Saiva conception of these states is, as Bhaskara 
points out, that each one contains the others. In this way there are 
nine states, which we shall now briefly examine. 

1) Waking in waking (jagrat-jagrat) 
This state is technically called "Unawakened" (abuddha). The 
awareness of the individual is here entirely centred on the body 
and totally given over to objectivity (prameyabhava). Completely 
unconscious of his own subjective nature, he never asks himself 
who he is. Whenever he sees an object, he immediately identifies 
with it and totally forgets himself as the perceiver. 
2) Waking in dream (jagrat-svapna) 
This state is technically called "Awakened" (buddha) and aris-
es when subjective consciousness enters objective consciousness 
and looses awareness of outer objectivity, while continuing to per-
ceive the mental impressions created by it. We can catch ourselves 
in this state when we find ourselves staring at something absent 
mindedly, carried away by our own thoughts. 
3) Waking in deep sleep (jagrat-susupti) 
This is the state we experience when we loose consciousness of 
both our outer physical and inner mental environment. For a moment 
we are a complete blank, totally absent from our present situation. 
The yogi can rest in this state of absorption for long periods of time 
enjoying the subtle bliss of unity and hence is called "Well Awak-
ened" (prabuddha). However, he is only 'Completely Well Awakened' 
(suprabuddha) when he experiences the Fourth State while awake and 
can continue to perceive and function in the midst of diversity while 
maintaining an awareness of his true conscious nature. 
4) Dreaming in waking (svapna-jagrat) 
This is the state we experience when we are overcome with 
grief, passion, fear or madness. In it we mistakenly believe that our 
own mental projections are actual objects appearing before us. A 
person in this state is sometimes caught in the flux of objective per-
ceptions and at other times by the waves of his own mental 
impressions without being able to distinguish between them. He is 
constantly coming and going from one sphere to the other hence 
'Come and Gone' (gatagata) is the name given to this state. 
5) Dreaming in dreaming (svapna-svapna) 
This is the dream state proper and is called "Well Dispersed" 
(suviksipta) because the individual's awareness is here carried hith-

er and thither by the mental images which arise within him with-
out his being aware of either their cause or purpose. He is in a 
world where one thing may be transformed into another without 
this seeming strange, while he has as little control over what he 
sees, despite the fact that it is a creation of his own mind, as when 
he was awake. 
6) Dreaming in deep sleep (svapna-susupti) 
This is a state of greater coherence and hence is called "Con-
sistent" (samgata). Subjectivity (pramatrbhava) is more intensely felt 
so the dreamer can get a better grip on himself and examine the sit-
uation he finds himself in. Thus, at the time he realises that the 
objects before him are not really a part of the external world and 
that he must be dreaming. He, as the subject, is then clearly evident 
and he is able to experience a subtle touch of universal conscious-
ness while dreaming. However, it is only when he experiences the 
Fourth State while dreaming, in the 'Atttentive' (samahita) state, 
that he is completely awake to himself as the dreamer and can rise 
directly from the dream state to that of contemplation (samadhi). 
7) Deep sleep in waking (susupti-jagrat) 
This state is called "Emergent" (udita) because the emptiness 
of deep sleep rises up to obliterate all objective consciousness. 
When the subject awakes from this state he remembers nothing, 
only that he was completely asleep and had lost all sense of himself 
and the world. 
8) Deep sleep in dreaming (susupti-svapna) 
This state is called "Extensive" (vipula) because here latent 
impressions begin to proliferate and mature. The subject in this 
state is more aware of his nature. Like the faint outlines of a picture, 
subtle traces of perceptions appear within him at one with his own 
nature and he rises closer to the state of universal consciousness. 
9) Deep sleep in deep sleep (susupti-susupti) 
This state is called "Peaceful" (santa) because while he is in it, 
the subject experiences a subtle, yet uninterrupted, awareness of his 
own subjectivity at rest within itself. When he awakens he remem-
bers this state as being one of spiritual bliss. Every time he regains 

it, it becomes more intense, until he reaches a state of deep sleep in 
the Fourth State which is called "Very Blissful" (suprasanna), for 
now he continues to abide in that state fully aware of his own sub-
jectivity and of its blissful nature. Deep sleep becomes for him con-
templation (samadhi). 
* 
* 
* 
Now (the next) aphorism follows on (from the previ-
ous one). Spoken (by Lord Siva), its sense is that these three 
states of consciousness correspond to the three qualities 
(guna): 
tritayabhokta 
vtresah 
The enjoyer of the three states is the Lord of 
the Heroes. 1/11 
The three, sattva, rajas and tamas, are called "quali-
ties'' {guna). They arise out of one's own essential nature 
(svasvabhava) 
according to (its three) states and are the 
obscuring covering (which envelopes the consciousness of) 
the fettered but is not such for the Ubiquitous Lord Who is 
one's own fundamental state of being (svasthiti) because 
He pervades every (state).66 Thus, in this way, the body of 
consciousness (cidvapu) (which supports) the flux of the 
activity of the qualities (gunaspandanihsyanda) 
is said to be 
the experiencing subject (bhoktr) because he appropriates 
(them) and pervades the unfolding (of this, his divine 
power). (All this) is one with the activity of his light and so 
he is the Lord of the Heroes. Thus the arising of the quali-
ties are the rays (of this light) and he who in this universe of 
thought constructs is intent on emitting and assimilating it, 
is said to be the Lord of the Heroes for he reabsorbs (into 
himself the entire process). 
* 
* 
* 
The three states of consciousness correspond to the dom-
inance of one or the other of the three qualities {guna) thus: 

waking 
= illumination (prakasa) 
dreaming 
= activity (pravrtti) 
deep sleep 
= delusion (moha) 
sattva 
rajas 
tamas 
The qualities emerge out of Prakrti, the material nature in 
which they are in a state of balanced harmony, while the states 
of consciousness are the unfolding of the power of one's own 
inherent nature. (The subject is the source of these parallel 
developments and) he who arouses the state of wonder in all 
these states is therefore called the "Lord of the Heroes." 
Ksemaraja interprets this aphorism in a way which seems to 
us less forced then Bhaskara's interpretation. According to him, the 
'three states' are, as one would expect, those of waking, dreaming 
and deep sleep, while the 'Lord of the Heroes' is the yogi who, 
having discovered his true divine identity, is master of his senses. 
The gap between one state and the next through which the yogi 
catches a glimpse of the Fourth State, expands until he is carried 
beyond all levels and states in his experience of the oneness of the 
absolute (anuttara). Mindful of the true nature of subject and object 
in all three states, the yogi is no longer a victim (bhogya) of these 
states but their master and achieves liberation while yet alive 
(jwanmukti). 
The Well Awakened yogi is said to be the Lord of the Heroes 
because he is full of the bliss of his mastery over the senses and their 
universal powers that, vibrant with consciousness, create and with-
draw the universe of sensations in consonance with their expansion 
and contraction. The yogi, now full of the creative activity of con-
sciousness, is one with the 'Churning Bhairava' (Manthanabhairava) 
Who is the hyposthesis of the exertive force of consciousness which 
'churns' or arouses its own energy to give rise to the cycles of cre-
ation, persistence and destruction.67 But, as Ksemaraja remarks: "He 
who is not like this is a victim of the waking and other states and so 
is just a wordly fettered soul. Even a yogi who has not ascended 
into this stream (of consciousness) is not the Lord of the Heroes but 
is merely a deluded soul."68 
Exposition 

* 
* 
* 
The (Lord) taught (the following) aphorism the sense 
of which is that the fundamental state of one's own true 
nature (svasvabhava) does not change even when one rises 
out of contemplation (vyutthana): 
vismayo 
yogabhumikah 
The planes of union are wonder. 1/12 
In this way the enlightened (yogi) abides as if wonder 
struck/9 observing this universe sustained by the Lord 
Whose body is consciousness and is the cause of all (the 
phases) of creation (and destruction). (A state of) wonder 
arises (within him progressively) in consonance with the 
(development) of a series (of yogic states) that begin with a 
vision of light (bindu)J° These manifestations of contempla-
tion (samadhi) are the planes of union (yoga). 
* 
* 
* 
By penetrating into his true nature, which is uninter-
rupted consciousness (cidghana), the yogi relishes the life-giv-
ing essence (amrta) of the aesthetic delight (rasa) born of 
objectivity. He then perceives the glorious power (vibhuti) of 
his own nature which is ever manifest and (fully) unfolded 
through his uncreated and expanded senses. And so, 
because he (now) sees a novel, transcendent reality that 
inspires (him) with wonder, a sense of awe (arises within 
him) without his having to meditate on the psychic centres 
(in the body where) the vision of light (bindu) and the rest 
(occur), or do anything else. 
Exposition 
According to Ksemaraja this aphorism explains that the yogi 
who is absorbed in the dense mass of consciousness of his own 
nature is not merely suspended in his state of realisation, but is 

constantly rising for whatever he perceives lifts him up to still 
higher planes in a fresh wave of aesthetic delight (camatkara). The 
common man does at times experience a similar state of wonder 
when he, for example, sees a work of art, but the yogi whose con-
sciousness has become one with the supreme principle experiences 
everything he perceives in this way because he, at the same time, 
views his own nature as the ground and universal cause of all 
things. The circle of the senses pulsates, expanding and contract-
ing, thus repeatedly leading him to new levels of wonder. He is 
constantly thrown back into the aesthetic rapture of contemplation 
which he experiences as fresh and marvellously new at each 
moment. Thus, although he rests in himself full of consciousness, 
he is at the same time rising (udita) in the wonder of the realisation 
that his own true nature has of itself within itself. In other words, 
according to Ksemaraja, this aphorism refers to the yogi who has 
reached the highest level of consciousness and so, as Ksemaraja 
expressly declares, it does not refer even partially, as Bhaskara 
maintains, to stages in the development of the yogi's consciousness 
on the way to this realisation. The ever-developing sense of won-
der the yogi experiences at this level is, as the anonymous com-
mentator on Bhaskara's commentary also says, independent and 
beyond the vision of light (bindu) that developed yogis experience 
between the eyebrows or any other experience they may have of 
the other psychic centres in the body. 
* 
* 
* 
The Blessed One, Sankara, then explained (in the fol-
lowing) aphorism that His universal will (sarveccha) unfolds 
in this way unobstructed: 
icchasaktitama 
kumari 
The Virgin is the will, the supreme power. 
1/13 
The will of the Supreme Self is the highest power of all 
because it is linked with the (universal) agency of every (act 
of) perception. (This power is called Kumari, the Virgin) 
because (through it the yogi) penetrates into the unobscured 
conscious nature and so She is the one who destroys (marint) 

the abhorrent (kutsa) round of rebirth (srsti). Thus She is the 
Ubiquitous Lord's (universal) causal power (karana) which 
is everywhere one and unchanging (akhandita). 
* 
* 
* 
The meaning here is that (the liberated yogi's) freedom 
(operates) unobstructed everywhere in this objective uni-
verse because he is united with the power of the (universal) 
will which contains within itself every power (and so) every-
thing manifests as he wishes it to. In this way the totality of 
all things from the level of unmanifest existence (anasrita) up 
to the Earth principle shines radiantly as if it were his own 
body in the form of unobscured and uninterrupted (ghana) 
consciousness. 
Exposition 
Although Ksemaraja acknowledges the validity of Bhaskara's 
reading of this aphorism and comments on it in this form in much 
the same way, he follows the lead of his teacher Abhinavagupta 
and adopts a variant reading (i.e., icchasaktir uma kumari) which 
translated means: the power of the will is the virgin Uma. 
Like Bhaskara, Ksemaraja glosses the word virgin (kumari) to 
mean that she is the goddess who kills (marayati) or destroys Maya 
(ku), the principle that engenders duality, by preventing its emer-
gence and extension. He adds that her virginity relates to her 
nature as the pure enjoying subjectivity (bhoktr) of universal con-
sciousness that, as such, can never be experienced objectively as an 
object of enjoyment by any alien reality outside her own nature.71 
Likewise, the commentator on the Mahanarayanopanisad tells us 
that when the goddess as the supreme power (parasakti) of con-
sciousness presents herself to us as the fecund source of all things, 
which she emanates out of herself, she is known as Ambika, the 
mother of the universe, but when she retracts them back, her name 
is Uma.72 Ksemaraja attributes both these functions to the virgin 
Uma. From this point of view, the word kumari is derived from the 
root kumar which means to play. Thus this, the power of the uni-

versal will, is said to be kumari because she is the creative freedom 
of Siva's universal consciousness which delights in playing the 
game of creation and destruction. 
Finally, although Uma is described here as being a virgin, she 
is also Siva's consort. Ksemaraja explains in his commentary on the 
Svacchandatantra that the goddess Uma pervades the universe and 
is seated in the centre of the inner circle of deities along with 
Bhairava as the hypothesis of His saving grace (saktipata).73 A 
devoted wife untouched by anyone else, intent solely on the wor-
ship and achievement of union with Siva, Her lord, Uma is an apt 
symbol for the pure will unsullied by any desire and of the love 
and devotion which Siva has for His own nature. Merger with her 
is what Utpaladeva ardently longed for when he sang: "May my 
devotion for You be like the Goddess Who is full of infinite bliss, 
never separate from You and extremely dear to You."74 
In short, Uma is the power which leads man, the microcosm, 
to the realisation of his universal nature through merger with the 
will which, united with Siva, works equally within him and the 
entire universe. 
* 
* 
* 
(Now), does (the Lord) Who is (the inner nature of) all 
things possess (just) one body, as that of the embodied soul, 
or is it everything? (In response to this query) the Lord of 
the gods said: 
drsyam 
sartram 
The perceptible 
is (His) body. 
1/14 
The Lord is (both) the outpouring of all existing things 
(as well) as the seed (cause) of all (that comes into being). 
(His) nature is pure consciousness and, because (He) per-
vades (everything), His body is not (just) one. Nothing exists 
outside (Him) and every single perceivable thing born of 
thought is (His) body because (He) pervades (all things) as 
(He) is the coming into being of everything. (Moreover), 
every physical body belongs to Him because the conscious 

nature (of every living being, various) according to its own 
particular type, is one.75 He to whom the object of perception 
(appears) separate from the body (only in the way an object 
does) reflected in a mirror, pervades (all that is perceptible) 
and so is the abode of the wealth of liberation. 
* 
* 
* 
The intended sense of this aphorism is as follows. Para-
masiva Himself bears the form of every perceivable object, 
even at the contracted (conditioned, samkucita) level, because 
He pervades the inner and outer (nature) of all things which, 
reflected within Him as if in a crystal, are sustained by Him 
and He imparts existence to them through the light of His 
(consciousness). If this were not so, it would be impossible to 
explain why things are as they are; thus He can be said to be 
the life (of all things). 
Exposition 
Consciousness pervades and is the seed of all things, and 
thus has as many bodies as there are external, objectively perceived 
and mentally represented entities. Plunged in the ecstasy of uni-
versal consciousness the yogi experiences, through its pure will, 
the arising of his own cosmic nature. He knows that he is one with 
all embodied beings and that his physical body is not his true 
nature but an externally perceivable form, separate and yet one 
with him, like a reflection in a mirror. Identification of T con-
sciousness with the limited locus of his body thus naturally shifts 
to the unlimited expanse of the All which he now experiences as 
his true body and shares in Sadasiva's awareness that 'I am this 
universe'. The T, released from the confines of the locus on the 
which it was formerly projected, is experienced as pervading all 
things, the border between inner and outer dissolves away, and 
they blend together in a state of undivided unity like that of the 
juices of a peacock's egg.76 
* 
* 
* 

Having thus declared what the essential nature of cog-
nitive consciousness is, (the question arises) how union 
(yoga) with it can take place. The (Lord) uttered an apho-
rism the sense of which is that (this union takes place) for 
one who has entered the temple of his own Heart. 
hrdaye cittasamghattad 
drsyasvapadarsanam 
By fixing the mind in the Heart (the yogi) has a vision of the 
perceivable and of dreams. 1/15 
The mind is said to be fixed in the Heart (of conscious-
ness) which is its sustaining ground when it assumes a sta-
ble state (sthiti) (there within it). In this way, (the yogi) has a 
vision of the perceivable and of dreams. The emptiness 
(vyoman) of deep sleep is technically called the "Heart" 
because it resides in the centre. The contemplation (sama-
dhana) of the Self is here said to be the fixing of the mind 
because the interconnected patterns (jala) of (mental) activi-
ty which emerge from it become one (in this way) within 
one's own nature. When it dissolves away in that emptiness77 
(all sense of being) a brahmin, Ksatriya or (even) a murderer 
(ceases) because (these notions) relate to the body and are 
associated (with the activity of the mind). 
The perceivable is the object of realisation (upalab-
hya), that is, one's own awakened nature (svasvarupa) free 
of obscuration, the attainment of which is said to be vision. 
(This) vision takes place here (in the Heart) when the delu-
sion which induces dreams is destroyed and the awakened 
(yogi) pervades (all things) at all times by penetrating the 
Divine Gesture (of enlightenment-divyamudra). 
(The yogi) 
of unawakened intellect (experiences only) a vision of 
dreams which for the awakened is the freedom to dream as 
he wishes (svapnasvatantrya) (that he achieves) by drink-
ing the lunar nectar (soma of apana, the descending breath). 
This is the rending asunder of the darkness (of false 
egoity)78 and the arising of enlightened intuitive conscious-
ness 
(pratibhodaya). 
* 
* 
* 

The following is, in brief, the sense of the above verses 
explaining this aphorism. By close attention, that is, by exer-
cising the mind in such a way as to bring it to rest and turn it 
away from all external things, whether those of the everyday 
world or those of the world beyond it, the entire objective 
order dissolves away in the Heart which is the ground con-
sciousness that sustains all the senses and channels (of the 
vital breath). The 'Heart' is a term used to denote the empti-
ness of deep sleep as it (marks) the end (avadhi) of the upper 
Pure and lower Impure Paths (of emanation) because the 
activity (of the mind) is brought to a halt there and so the 
mind also dissolves away, just as fire goes out when devoid of 
heat. (The emptiness of the Heart is) a state of transcendental 
yogic consciousness beyond mind (nirmanaska). It is a 'dark-
ness' devoid of all corporeal and other forms of egoity. Thus, 
(all) work which needs be done to sustain the course of daily 
life and (is encumbent on those who preserve a sense of ego) 
such as the study of the Vedas, and here indicated implicitely 
by the words brahmin and ksatrvya, comes to an end. In this, 
the emptiness of the Fourth State, (the yogi) perceives his true 
unobscured nature (svasvabhava) and the ignorance rooted in 
the senseless (anartha) world of birth and death (samsara) ceas-
es. However, the man of unawakened intellect who happens 
to enter this state merely experiences sleep. 
Exposition 
The Heart (hrdaya) has from Vedic times been a common 
symbol for the reality which both underlies the universe and the 
core of man's being. It is here that the macrocosm and microcosm, 
transcendence and immanence meet. The Upanisads declare that 
the Heart contains both Heaven and Earth, what is ours here and 
now and what is not yet ours.79 In the Heart the ancient sages heard 
and saw the creative word (vac) of the Veda for it is from here that 
all of man's ideas and the cosmic thought are hewn out. Thus, it is 
the creator (Prajapati) and ground (Brahman) of all beings as well as 
the All.80 It is the vessel and place of rest of all creatures.81 Pictured 
as an inverted lotus which turns upwards and blooms when the 

light of consciousness shines upon it, it is found in the citadel of 
the body, the 'City of Brahman'.82 The Self (purusa) resides there, 
infinitely great and yet 'no bigger than a thumb', burning like a fire 
without smoke, it is the maker of past and future and yet eternal 
and unchanging.83 
In Kashmiri Saiva texts the symbolism of the Heart is very 
rich.84 Another name for awareness,85 it represents the true nature of 
all things and the Self of consciousness86 as the undivided essence of 
its light87 and aesthetic rapture (camatkara). In it resounds the eter-
nally emergent sound of awareness.88 Active as the dynamics of the 
egoity of consciousness it is both knowledge and action89 and, pas-
sive, it is the ground or 'great abode' of the universe when it is man-
ifest as the union of consciousness and bliss.90 It is the universal 
source of all three moments of creation, persistence and destruction, 
pervading them all without itself changing. Thus it exists prior to 
cosmic manifestation as the pure energy which contains all things 
within itself, as does the banyan seed a tree.91 In the second moment 
it is the 'well-established abode' (pratisthasthana) and ground 
(adhara) of the entire universe. It pervades and gives life to all the 
categories of existence with their respective world orders, Siva and 
all the lesser gods and the powers of every being in bondage, each 
with their own individual existence even though they all participate 
equally in the unity of the Heart's essence.92 Conversely, it is in the 
Heart of the pure consciousness (caitanya) of the universal ego 
(aham)93 that the supreme and infinite light of all the categories of 
existence is established in all living beings.94 As Abhinava explains: 
Just as one says that the Heart is the undivided light of 
consciousness and reflective awareness which is the plane 
of the abode of rest of the body consisting (collectively) of 
all the categories of existence and its individual parts such 
as the skin etc., so the body of Lord Bhairava, which is the 
universe made up of the individual categories and worlds 
as well as the fifty letters of the alphabet and is the essence 
of reality, has this same (reality as His) Heart which is the 
essence of undivided awareness.95 
The Heart is Bhairava's true state as the absolute (anuttara) 
which pours out of itself as the supreme power (parasakti) of con-

sciousness.96 Its throb is the pulsing union (samghatta) of Siva and 
Sakti through which the universe is eternally emitted and reab-
sorbed as it expands and contracts.97 At the microcosmic level, its 
outpouring is the effulgent flow (sphurana) of awareness, in the 
form of the diverse objects of thought (cetya) and thinking subjects 
(cetayitr) while it itself abides, unaffected by time and space, on the 
plane beyond mind (unmana). As the source of all energies it is the 
pure exertion (udyoga) of the uncreated egoity of our true conscious 
nature which is the union of will, knowledge and action98 and 
hence is said to be "a triangular vibration which is the incessant 
expansion and contraction of the three energies at rest in the abode 
of great bliss."99 
The great wisdom of the Spanda teachings should be trea-
sured in secret in the cave of the Heart100 for he who reflects upon 
the inner nature of the Heart merges in the expansion of the vibra-
tion (samrambha) of his own consciousness and is liberated.101 Thus 
he who knows the Heart in truth gains the true initiation102 which 
bestows perfect freedom and bliss. Mahesvarananda teaches: 
The wish-granting tree of contemplation growing, with its 
many branches, in the heart blossoms as the wealth of uni-
versal enjoyment (bhoga) and bears the fruit of the light of 
the festival of undivided bliss.103 
Accordingly, Ksemaraja, commenting on this aphorism, says 
that the Heart is "the light of consciousness because it is the place 
where all things are firmly established." And so he goes on to 
explain that "when the restless movement (of the mind) is fixed 
therein, the perceptible, that is, (all objectivity ranging from outer 
objects such as the colour) blue (as well as) the body, intellect and 
vital breath, along with the emptiness of deep sleep in which it is 
absent is (perceived in the singleness of) vision that, freed of the 
distinction between subject and object, illumines (it all) in accord 
with its true nature as if it were one's own body. (In short) the 
mind, intent upon the light of consciousness, perceives the entire 
universe as pervaded by it."104 
Bhaskara's interpretation of this aphorism differs from Kse-
maraja's even though they basically agree that the practise to 
which it refers involves that of introverted contemplation through 

which the activity of the mind is brought to a halt and objectivity 
dissolves away in the Heart of consciousness which is its sustain-
ing ground. But Bhaskara, unlike Ksemaraja, links this practise 
with that described in verses 23-25 of the Stanzas on Vibration 
which he combines with that of verses 33-34 that read together 
teach how the yogi's true nature (svasvabhava) manifests in the 
states of dreaming and deep sleep when he is absorbed in uninter-
rupted prayer, intent on following the commands of Lord Siva. The 
Heart, in this context, is understood to be the point of contact 
between the ascending and descending currents of the breath that, 
in the contemplative absorption which results when the activity of 
the mind is suspended, are withdrawn into it. Merged in this way 
in the emptiness of deep sleep, which Bhaskara equates with the 
Heart, the breathing can now be transformed into the Upward 
Moving Breath (udana) which leads contracted individualized con-
sciousness out of the confinment of the body and so reveals to the 
yogi his true unconditioned nature. Then, when the normal move-
ment of the breath resumes, the yogi can share in Siva's freedom 
through which he can dream and create whatever he wishes.105 
Although stanzas 23-25 refer primarily to the state of breath 
suspension and 33-34 to its subsequent emergence, the yogi who 
experiences these two moments must be careful of the same possi-
ble danger, namely, that instead of attaining to the enlightened 
consciousness of the Fourth State, he may fall into the abysmal 
unconsciousness of deep sleep. Thus he must guard against this by 
maintaining a state of mindful awareness. 
* 
* 
* 
Now the ubiquitous Lord has talked about the inner 
and the external (nature). He uttered the next three apho-
risms the purport of which is that (the realisation of) one's 
own nature which, because it is free of both (inner and 
outer aspects), is perfectly full and forms the undivided cir-
cle (of totality), is easily within one's grasp (karasthita). (He 
does this by explaining) how the permanence (of eternal 
consciousness) abides in the domain of Siva, Sakti and the 
Self and (how) the Light of one's own nature may (never) 
diminish. 

suddhatattvasamdhanad 
vd 
Or (the yogi can realise Siva) by 
contemplating 
the Pure Principle. 1/16 
The pure unconditioned Principle is the Light called 
Siva. The contemplation of that (principle) is the reflective 
awareness (vimarsa) of one's own identity with it by virtue 
of which the obscuring darkness (of false egoity) may also 
be rent asunder because it is the one perfectly full reality. 
(Thus), by abandoning one's external (limited) egoity, one's 
own authentic state (nijasthiti) (abides) unbroken (akhan-
dita). 
* 
* 
* 
Here the means (to realisation) is explained along with 
a description of Siva-consciousness which is called the 
"Plane of Rest" and is Supreme Bliss (parananda). 
Exposition 
In Ksemaraja's recension this aphorism is lengthened by the 
addition of an extra element while the aphorism which follows in 
Bhaskara's recension is modified. Ksemaraja reads what for us are 
aphorisms 1/16 and 1/17 together thus: Or by contemplating the 
Pure Principle (the yogi) becomes one who is free of the power which 
binds (suddhatattvasamdhanad vapasusaktih). Ksemaraja comments: 
"The Pure Principle is Paramasiva. When (the yogi) contemplates 
the universe within it, realising that it is one with (Paramasiva) 
then, free of the power which binds (the fettered), he, like Sadasiva, 
becomes the Lord of the universe."106 
According to Bhaskara the yogi is not to contemplate the one-
ness of the universe with Siva but fix his attention directly on the 
pure light of consciousness shining within him and reflect on it as 
being his own nature. In this way the yogi's extroverted ego is 
established in the fullness of his true nature. This is the experience 
of 'rest' (visranti), a state of tranquility devoid even of the excite-
ment of bliss (nirananda) which characterises Siva-consciousness 
(sivacaitanya). 

* 
* 
* 
svapadasakti 
Energy established in its own abode. 1/17 
(Sakti's) own abode should be understood to be the 
place of Being (sat) called Siva. (Siva's) vitality (vtrya), 
which is knowledge and action, is said to be (His) energy. 
(Energy's) abiding state is (its) absorption (llnata), that is, 
penetration into the agential aspect (of consciousness). That 
same (state) is the light of intuition (pratibha) which is the 
solitary churner of the light of consciousness (which thus 
aroused issues forth as the universe and enlightens the 
yogi). 
* 
* 
* 
Here (Bhaskara) explains what is meant by empowered 
consciousness which is called the "Plane of Attainment" and 
is Supreme Bliss. 
* 
* 
* 
vitarka 
atmajnanam 
Right discernment is the knowledge of the Self. 1/18 
The discriminating insight which (operates) in the 
midst of (the many and) diverse limiting conditions (upadhi) 
is the right discernment of the single uninterrupted aware-
ness (vimarsa) 
of one's own true nature 
(svasvabhava) 
which serves to attain the recognitive insight (pratyabhijfia) 
that the Self is Siva. Know this to be the highest means to 
realisation in which one experiences the true Self (satyat-
man) directly. Therefore, (this is) the supreme unfolding of 
the intuitive awareness of the pure Self. 
* 
* 
* 
This (aphorism) describes the means to attain the light 
of one's own nature while implicitely refering to the con-

sciousness of the Self called the "Plane of Unfolding" (prolla-
sabhumi). 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja simply writes: "Right discernment is to deliberate 
that: 'I am Siva Who is all things'. This is one's knowledge of the 
Self."107 
* 
* 
* 
(The preceding) three aphorisms described the con-
sciousness of Siva, Sakti and the Self. They are the Blissless 
(nirananda), Supreme Bliss (parananda) and the Great Bliss 
(mahananda) 
(respectively) and are called the planes of 
"Rest," "Attainment" and "Unfolding." Now (Siva goes on) 
to explain how the oneness of the Light (of consciousness) 
which is the unity of the bliss of self-realisation, shines 
when the intuitive realisation of this (three-fold conscious-
ness) dawns. 
lokanandah 
samadhisukham 
The bliss of the Light is the joy of contemplation. 
1/19 
The supreme, pure light of consciousness which is as if 
inwardly and externally manifest (udita) is the eternal and 
Ubiquitous Lord (vibhu) Who is all things and their essen-
tial nature as well as their arising (sarvabhavodbhava). 
Know that to be the Light. It is that which is said to be Bliss. 
This radiant, unconditioned nature which shines at one 
with the light of consciousness is called the "joy of contem-
plation" because it attends onepointedly solely to its relish. 
Or else the joy of contemplation is said to be the 
delight inherent in one's own nature (svapramoda) 
(pres-
ent) in the two states,108 subject and object which unfold 
together as one. 
if 
if 
if 

The joy of self-realisation of the yogi for whom the radi-
ant energy of his own nature is fully manifest is the radiance 
of the oneness of the light (of consciousness which shines) 
everywhere in (all) things. It manifests in an instant by prac-
tising the aforementioned means to realisation. 
Exposition 
The Sanskrit word loka can mean three things, namely, 
"light," "world" or "people." Bhaskara opts for the first of these 
meanings and so understands lokanandah to mean "the bliss of the 
light of consciousness." Ksemaraja, however, chooses the latter 
two meanings and so explains that loka is both that which is illu-
mined by the light of consciousness, i.e., the field of objectivity and 
the light which illumines it, i.e., the perceiving subject. It is the 
pure Act (sphurana) of consciousness which, undivided either into 
inner or outer, subject or object, flows continuously between these 
two poles as the incessant transformation of the one into the other. 
The yogi merged in this movement is freed of the distinction 
between subject and object and rests in the centre between them 
even as he observes both in the abode of universal subjectivity 
where he experiences the 'joy of contemplation' as the inner aes-
thetic rapture of its innate bliss. As Mahesvarananda explains: 
Just as in the analogous case of the wings of a jay which 
are the same on both sides, how can one say that (this) 
yogi is either introverted or extroverted?109 
Again, Ksemaraja suggests that this aphorism means that the 
joy of contemplation that the yogi feels when he reposes in his own 
nature can be transmitted to others who are fit to receive it. The 
receptive subject who sees the yogi immersed in contemplation, 
and is aware of his state, experiences its bliss within himself as 
well,110 for as a passage from the Candrajfiana declares: 
Just as the moon, (beautiful) as a flower, shines all around, 
and by its pleasing form brings joy to everyone in an 
instant, so, O Goddess, the great yogi wandering about on 
the face of the earth brings joy to the whole universe from 

hell to Siva by the all pervading rays of (his) conscious-
ness.111 
* 
* 
* 
The Blessed One spoke the (following) aphorism that 
explains that when the natural fruit (of Yoga) arises the 
agency of autonomous being (acts) in this way according to 
its own free will. (However, this does not appear to be so) 
because the power of action is binding when (operating) in 
the fettered.112 
saktisamdhdne 
sarirotpattih 
The body comes into being when the energies unite. 1/20 
Consciousness and Being is the nature of the possessor 
of power for without any material cause He illumines exter-
nally by (His own) will alone the phenomena which reside 
within (Him).113 Five are (His) powers beginning with those 
of the will, knowledge and action. They are: Isdni, Apurant, 
Hdrdt, Vdmd and Murti. The other (energies) said to be asso-
ciated with them are called the "Body of Consciousness."114 
The formation of the Body of Action (prakriyddeha) 
is said 
to be the union of these (powers). The way the body comes 
into being when this happens is not at all like that of man, 
god or beast. Thus the (universal) agency it possesses (oper-
ates) everywhere and is imperishable and undivided, while 
the product of (its) activity (kdrya) is described as perish-
able even in the world of the gods. 
* 
* 
* 
The meaning here is that the possessor of power, whose 
nature is consciousness, displays the phenomena that abide 
within Him in unity with (His) light according to His own 
free will. He does this in order to illumine (the universe of) 
phenomena, (all of) which are (His) powers, on the screen of 
His own nature without taking recourse to material or any 
other causes. Therefore, the yogi who contemplates (the 

Lord's) power of freedom, referred to previously as one with 
his own nature is himself free and fashions a body (for him-
self) at will (which, imperishable and omnipotent) differs 
from (and is superior to that of all other living beings) 
including even the gods. 
Exposition 
The five powers to which Bhaskara refers are as follows: 
1) The Power of Mastery (Isani) 
Also called Vaisnavisakti, this is the power of the universal 
will, unsullied by any object of desire. 
2) The Power Which Fills (Apuranisakti) 
This is Kaulikisakti or the pure emissive power (visargasakti) of 
the innate bliss of the absolute (anuttara). Also called "the Mouth of 
the YoginI" (yoginivaktra), it is the womb of the universe from 
which flows the flux of creation. 
3) The Power of Bliss (Hardisakti) 
This is the energy which issues from the union (melapa) of the 
illumined senses (siddhas) and their objects (yoginis) that gives rise 
to the aesthetic rapture and power (sahasa) of the bliss of cosmic 
consciousness (jagadananda). 
4) The Power of Emanation (Vamasakti) 
This is the energy which flows from the expansion (unmesa) 
of consciousness as the will to know and create all things emanat-
ing from the union (yamala) of Siva and Sakti. 
5) The Power of Form (Murtisakti) 
This is the highest form of the energy of action in which the 
powers of the absolute, will and knowledge co-operate to stimulate 
the ebb and flow of energies from universal consciousness. 
By contemplating these energies in the movement of his 
introverted awareness and gathering them together, the yogi ere-

ates a new body for himself through which he acts in the world 
(prakriyadeha), free of the constraints that his former mortal body 
had to suffer. Through it the yogi can create and know all things. 
Ksemaraja again understands this aphorism in a different 
way. He takes saktisamdhane to mean not 'the union of the ener-
gies', as Bhaskara does, but the 'contemplation of power'. Thus the 
teaching here, according to Ksemaraja, does not concern the gener-
ation of a new transfigured yogic body, but the contemplation of 
the will. Initiation, the practises leading to the attainment of lesser 
yogic powers (siddhi), Mantra, continued Mantric practise and 
Yoga are all fruitless if we fail to contempalate the innate energy of 
our own consciousness. The source of all the gods and their pow-
ers, it is the vital energy that animates the breath and issues out of 
itself as both knowledge and action. Thus the yogi can make use of 
the flow of energy he experiences in the course of his contempla-
tion to create whatever he may desire both within himself while 
dreaming and externally in the waking state. Thus, Ksemaraja 
understands the practise taught here to be that outlined in verses 
33-34 of the Stanzas which explain how the individual will is cou-
pled to the universal and the fruits of this union. 
* 
* 
* 
Again the Blessed One uttered (the following) apho-
rism which explains (the nature of His divine) manifesta-
tion said to be the game He spontaneously plays by virtue 
of (His) freedom: 
bhutasamdhana-bhutaprthaktva-visvasamghattah 
The union of the elements, the separation 
of the elements 
and 
the union of the universe. 
1/21 
The gross elements, ether (air, fire, water and earth) are 
fashioned by (their corresponding) constituent (energies), 
namely, the powers of sound (touch, vision, taste and smell 
respectively). This is said to be their union. 
The separation (of the elements) is said to be the isola-
tion of each element from the unity of its essential being 
(satta) (which consciousness brings about) with the inten-

tion of (indicating in a manner amenable to) discursive rep-
resentation the difference between the form (murti of each 
one). 
(When) the agential aspect (of consciousness assumes 
a) dominant role it becomes, through its activity, a pure 
experience (devoid of thought constructs) called "light" and 
a (subtle, inner) tactile sensation which is bliss 
(ahlada). 
(These two aspects combine with two others), namely, the 
Sun and Moon (which symbolize the powers of) knowledge 
and action of the sacrificer, the all-pervasive Lord of Con-
sciousness. The union of the universe which is such is said 
(to take place) by means of (these) four (united together). 
The universe which is the coalescence of the group of 
eight is the shining of the all-pervasive Lord of Conscious-
ness in association with every form and each action. 
* 
* 
* 
The aggregate of the powers of consciousness, bliss, 
will, knowledge and action (when) clearly manifest serve as 
the material basis for the Pure Path of the conscious nature. 
They are the mainstay of the progressive downward evolu-
tion of the principles (tattva) (which manifest) in groups of 
five on the lower (Impure) Path. In this way the conscious 
nature (descends to) the level of the principle of individual 
consciousness (pumtattva) through its own contracted power 
that assumes the state of Maya when the plane of nothing-
ness (akincanya) becomes manifest. The group of (five pow-
ers), for their part, become the obscuring factors (which 
envelope the individual soul, kancukibhuta) so that (it) can 
experience the conditioned state of manifestation proper to 
that level. Subsequently, this (same energy), taking its sup-
port from the three energies (of will, knowledge and action) 
unfolds as the transformation of the qualities {guna) in order 
to generate the continuing succession of the lower network 
of principles. The subtle body (puryastaka) is produced by 
this (power) established on the level of the material nature 
(prakrti) in which the (three qualities) are in a state of equilib-
rium. The basis of the principles of mind, intellect and ego 

are the three (powers) of will (knowledge and action). The 
(five) cognitive senses come into being when, in assocation 
with (all) five powers, the power of knowledge assumes a 
dominant role, while the organs of action arise due to the 
predominance of the power of action. This same process of 
generation takes place in a gross form externally also along 
with the objects (of the senses). All things are variously 
deployed in this way. Thus, the one reality which is the uni-
versal light (of consciousness) pervades these principles in 
such a way that it remains undivided in the midst of diversi-
ty and differs from it. Assuming the role of the subtle body 
(ipuryastaka), the conscious nature acts out the cosmic drama 
which is described as the radiant manifestation of (its) free 
and spontaneous play. 
Exposition 
The anonymous author of this note clearly interprets the coa-
lescence of the 'group of eight' which corresponds to the 'bringing 
together of the universe' as the formation of the subtle body or 'City 
of Eight' (puryastaka). The process by which manifestation in space 
and time (Form and Action) takes place is here interpreted as the 
formation of the subtle body or, rather, as the assumption of this 
form of limitation on the part of consciousness and all the condi-
tions which attend its occurrence. Torella, however, maintains that 
"Bhaskara's interpretation, which is complex and not entirely clear, 
revolves on the conception of the eight murti, according to which 
Siva pervades the universe by differentiating Himself into eight 
forms (cf., e.g., Lingapurana 2/13): the five gross elements (earth, 
water, fire, air, and ether), the Sun, Moon and the Self (atman) fre-
quently called the "Sacrificer" (yajamana). The freedom of the yogi 
to act, which derives from his identification with consciousness, 
manifests as the possibility of effecting the universe by acting on 
these, its essential components. Bhiitasamdhana is understood to be 
the 'union of the elements', that is, the construction of the various 
gross elements such as ether, etc., by putting together the various 
parts which constitute it represented by the various qualities (i.e., 
powers of the qualities) such as sound, etc., Bhutaprthaktva takes 

place when the elements are separated from one another and cir-
cumscribed in their own nature. The Sun and Moon are understood 
to be the powers of knowledge and action of the Sacrifices that is, 
of the consciousness which experiences these elements.115 
While Bhaskara understands this aphorism to refer to one of 
the processes through which Siva's universal consciousness mani-
fests in and as the phenomenal world of individual subjects and 
objects, Ksemaraja sees it as refering to three yogic powers (vibhuti) 
the yogi acquires if he manages to unite his consciousness with the 
universal will. In this perspective the 'elements' are the constitu-
tents of the psycho-physical organism, together with the vital 
breath and the general state (bhava) of mind and body. The union 
of the elements is the power the yogi acquires to nourish and har-
monise all the parts of his physical and mental constitution by per-
meating it with the health and vigour of his spiritual essence in the 
way described in verse 38 of the Stanzas on Vibration. 
The yogi who has overcome the ignorance which cuts him off 
from the fullness of his nature by expanding his consciousness 
(unmesa) severs at the very root the cause of all disease and mental 
unrest as taught in verse 40 of the Stanzas. This is his second 
power, namely, 'the separation of the elements'. 
The yogi's third power, through which he brings together the 
universe, is the all-embracing vision of the state of consciousness 
he attains by becoming master of the innate exertion (udyoga) of the 
power of his true nature (svabala). Penetrating into the furthest cor-
ners of space, discerning events far in the future and in the distant 
past, it unites all things together as elements of the yogi's universal 
experience as described in verses 36-37 of the Stanzas. 
* 
* 
* 
(The Lord) spoke (the following) aphorism the purport 
of which is that the (universal) cause of all things is the 
powers of the Self which (collectively constitute) its divine 
sovereign nature (prabhutva): 
suddhavidyodayaccakresatvasiddhih 
(The yogi) attains mastery of the Wheel by the 
arising of Pure Knowledge. 
1/22 

The unconditioned light (of consciousness) which illu-
mines every manifestation (abhasa) is 'pure'. 'Knowledge' 
is the enlightened consciousness that 'I am all things'.116 It is 
said to be the awareness (vedana) of that (light) which, 
because it emits (all) the countless things (that exist), pos-
sesses the highest possible degree of freedom 
(parasva-
tantrya). The vision (prathana) of that (light) is the arising 
of (Pure Knowledge) through which (the yogi) attains the 
perfection (siddhi) which is the expanding development of 
the sovereign power (of consciousness) and the mastery of 
the Wheel of Energies. 
* 
* 
* 
The yogi achieves mastery over the circle of goddesses 
representing the eight yogic powers of atomicity (anima) etc., 
by acquiring the power that comes from the expanding 
development of the highest degree of divine sovereignty 
(paramamahesvarya) once he achieves both the supreme and 
lower levels of creative autonomy (svatantrya) by directly 
perceiving (saksatkara) that his own nature is Paramasiva 
Who is absolute, uninterrupted consciousness and the nature 
of all things. 
(The yogi) can, by the power of atomicity (anima), 
reduce the size of his limbs at will in an instant and thus, by 
making (his) body small, enter even (tiny) atoms. By (the 
yogic power) of lightness (laghima), the gross body (can) 
move on the trail of breezes like the tip of a reed. By the 
(power) of greatness (mahima) (the yogi can) make (his body) 
big (at will). By (the power of) attainment (prapti) (he can) 
extend his limbs and so, by the length of the tips of his fin-
gers, touch the moon even while he stands on earth. By the 
power of forbearance (prakamya), the elements do not affect 
(the yogi's) basic state (rupa) either when they emerge (and 
are present) or are submerged (and are absent) because they 
cannot obstruct his determined intentions, like water (that 
remains the same) even when on the ground. By the power 
of control (vasita) all beings follow (the yogi's) commands. 
By (the power of) lordship (isita) (the yogi can) bring groups 

of gross elements together or disperse them at will and freely 
change the nature of the elements as he pleases.117 
Again, if by this Wheel (we mean) the Goddess of Con-
sciousness Who is the Wheel of Brahml and the other ener-
gies, then by mastery (of this Wheel) the highest forms of 
knowledge arise well known in (Patanjali's) treatise on Yoga, 
namely, enlightened intuition (pratibha) and the rest. The 
point being that this is the way in which the Lord of the 
Wheel Who is replete with the unconditioned power of 
sovereign freedom (aisvarya) appears. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja basically understands this aphorism as Bhaskara 
does, however he approaches the practise that it teaches from a dif-
ferent point of view. According to Ksemaraja, this aphorism 
describes what happens to the yogi who, at this level of conscious-
ness, does not seek limited yogic powers but contemplates instead 
the power of the universal will inherent in his own consciousness 
in the first moment of perception which, still brilliant with the light 
of consciousness, is the pure awareness (vedana) that marks the 
cognitive intent which precedes the formation of thought con-
structs as described in verse 43 of the Stanzas. Thus, solely intent 
on realising his universal nature (vaisvatmya), the yogi achieves 
lordship over the Wheel of Energies and is liberated by the inward 
emergence of the Pure Knowledge that 'I am all things'. Ksemaraja 
quotes the Svacchandatantra to explain what this knowledge is: 
As there is no other knowledge but this, it is supreme and 
it attains (for the yogi who aquires it) omniscience and (all) 
the highest attributes (of consciousness) here all at once. It 
is called "knowledge" because it is the awareness (vedana) 
(of Siva's) beginningless nature and is consciousness of the 
Supreme Self in that it eliminates all that it is not. Estab-
lished there, it manifests the Supreme Light (of conscious-
ness) and the ultimate cause (of all things), and once the 
Supreme Light is made manifest (the yogi) established 
therein attains Siva's nature.118 

* 
* 
* 
Well, if this is so (the question then is) how does the 
consciousness which is the vitality of Mantra (arise)? Thus, 
(in reply the Lord) spoke (the following aphorism which 
explains what the vitality of Mantra is: 
mahahradanusamdhananmantravtryanubhavah 
(The yogi) experiences the vitality of Mantra by 
contemplating the Great Lake. 1/23 
The form of the conscious nature, supreme and pure, is 
that of the power of its possessor. It is emission (srsti) and 
when phenomena emerge (from it), it is the supreme state of 
Being as the undivided flux (of universal consciousness) 
free of the diversification (kalana) of time and space. (This 
reality) is called the "Great Lake" because it is like a vast 
lake (on the surface of which play the waves of cosmic mani-
festation). It is said to be the uncreated force (bala) present 
both there (in pure transcendental consciousness) and in the 
Self. (This) force is called the "state of empowerment" 
which consists of the expanding unfolding (of conscious-
ness) (vikasvaronmisatta) 
through which (the awareness of 
the yogi) becomes firmly fixed in the Lunar aspect (of the 
flow of the vital breath which, coupled with the cognitive 
act, corresponds to apana and the object of cognition). (This 
state) is marked by the innate aesthetic delight (of the Self, 
svarasa, 
experienced) in the centre between the essence 
(sara) of the (two) dynamically interacting polarities (arani 
of consciousness), namely, cognition (drk which is equiva-
lent to prana). and bliss (ananda also known as 
ahladasakti 
and equivalent to apana). This entry into the Upward Mov-
ing Breath (udana which rises as Kundalim, the power of 
enlightened consciousness) is (true) contemplation. When 
by this (practise the yogi's awareness) abides there (without 
wavering), his fundamental state of being assimilates into 
itself the form of objectivity (he) desires and (thus full of its 
potency) swells (like a ripe seed), out of which emerges, like 
a sprout, an expanded state of consciousness (pronmesa) con-

sisting of the subtle (inner) speech (of enlightened insight 
full of) the phonemic (energy hidden) unmanifest (within 
it). (Thus), uniting with the (inner) activity of (Kundalim 
technically called) the "Half of Ka," he experiences clearly 
and distinctly the Dawning of Mantra (mantrodaya). This is 
the experience of the vitality of Mantra which bestows per-
fection on the adept. 
* 
* 
* 
The union of (Siva), the possessor of power, and (His) 
energy is figuratively called the "Great Lake" because it is the 
unfathomable ground of the emergent flow of the emission 
(visarga of consciousness). It is the abode of rest, (the ultimate) 
goal and the highest level of Speech (paravac) which has 
assimilated into itself all the infinite numbers of words and 
what they denote. It is the jewel of the Great Mantra which, 
independent and free of thought constructs, is the reflective 
awareness of the (universal) ego (ahamparamarsa), perceivable 
only to itself, as well as the wealth of the inner essence (sara of 
all things). Great yogis who possess that blissful experience 
(upabhoga) savour, through the contemplation explained pre-
viously, the unique vitality (of Mantra) which is the (univer-
sal) T (consciousness) that sustains all things. 
Exposition 
The similarities and differences between Bhaskara's and Kse-
maraja's interpretation of this aphorism illustrates an important 
development in Spanda doctrine. Thus Bhaskara, like Ksemaraja, 
understands the Great Lake to be pure consciousness and this is 
what it generally symbolizes in Kashmiri Saiva works. Conscious-
ness can indeed be fittingly compared to a vast lake that, full to 
overflowing, is fed by underground streams for in this way, 
explains Abhinava, consciousness unfolds spontaneously by the 
force of its outpouring119 and, one could add, it flows down to fill 
and contain all three levels of existence, viz., Siva (unity), Sakti 
(unity-in-difference) and the individual soul (diversity). 

Bhaskara takes consciousness to be the power which he 
equates with the force (bala) of the power-holder's divine energy in 
the Self of every living being. Similarly, Ksemaraja thinks of it as the 
supreme power of consciousness (parasakti) which he understands 
to be the immanentalization of consciousness manifest as the entire 
universe through the emanation of its fifty aspects. These are sym-
bolized by the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet constituting the 
Wheel of Matrka, while its movement towards transcendence, in the 
process of cosmic withdrawl, is symbolized by Malirii.120 Ksemaraja 
equates this dynamic consciousness, understood as the collective 
whole of its energies, with the vitality that empowers Mantra. This 
vitality, which is the inner urge of consciousness to emanate all 
things (visisrksa),l2] is the reflective awareness that constantly pours 
out of the Heart of consciousness and resounds within it as the 
highest form of speech (paravac) and all-embracing T conscious-
ness.122 "I" consciousness (aham) is itself the Great Mantra manifest 
as the wonder inspired by the light of consciousness.123 From it are 
created all Mantras and to it they return.124 Thus Mantric energy 
gives life to all living beings, indeed it is the very essence of all con-
sciousness which is increasingly, manifestly apparent to the degree 
in which it perceives itself in the pure awareness of "I am." Kse-
maraja explains this aphorism accordingly: 
The supreme mistress of consciousness (para bhattarika 
samvit) emits the entire universe (out of Herself) beginning 
with the power of the will right up to the gross object of 
perception. (She is) the Great Lake because She is endowed 
with (countless divine) attributes, thus She stimulates the 
activity of the Wheels of Khecari and all the other currents 
(of energy) and is pure, unobscured and deep. (The yogi) 
experiences the vitality of Mantra which is the reflective 
awareness of supreme I-ness (parahantavimarsa) consisting, 
as will be explained latter, (of Siva as) the Mass of Sounds 
(sabdarasi) , by contemplating (the Great Lake), that is, by 
constant introspection through which he reflects upon (his) 
identity with it and it manifests as his own nature. 
Thus, Ksemaraja identifies Spanda, the pulse of conscious-
ness, which in the Stanzas is portrayed as the strength inherent in 

one's own nature (svabala) that empowers the senses and Mantras, 
with T consciousness. That this is his intention is evident insofar 
as he quotes verse 26 of the Stanzas which declares that the source 
of the power of Mantras is this inner strength and says that this is 
how the Spanda teachings explain it. Again, he sees the practise as 
consisting of the direct experience of this energy attained by identi-
fying one's own true nature as the universal ego. Bhaskara, howev-
er, following more closely the original Spanda teachings, does not 
admit the existence of this noumenous egoity but thinks of the 
experience of Mantric energy as one the yogi achieves through the 
rise of Kundalini which is stimulated by the power (bala) inherent in 
consciousness. 
The practise Bhaskara teaches here can be summerized as fol-
lows. The yogi must first repeat his Mantra mentally in conjunction 
which the breath, for unless it is in harmony with the breathing 
movement it can bear no fruit. He must then seek to fix his atten-
tion on the centre between the two breaths where they, along with 
the Mantra, arise and fall away. In this way the two breaths work 
against each other like two firesticks made of consciousness and 
bliss, to generate the fire of consciousness which rises as the 
ascending breath (udanaprana) in the central psychic channel 
(susumna) that leads upwards to the supramental plane (unmana) of 
the universal vibration (samanyaspanda) of consciousness. The lunar 
current of the descending breath, corresponding to object-centred 
awareness (prameyabhava), is fixed in one place by uniting it with 
the ascending solar breath, representing awareness centred on the 
means of knowledge (pramanabhava), and this in its turn is made 
one with subjective consciousness as the Upward Moving Breath 
(udanaprana) rises. The ascent of this breath is in harmony with the 
unfolding of the centre (madhyavikasa) at the individualized (anava) 
level of consciousness and takes place by virtue of the strength 
(bala) or power of the Self (atmasakti). The vibration of its move-
ment is the true arising of Mantra (mantrodaya) technically called 
uccara.125 It is the spontaneous recitation of Mantra which occurs in 
contemplation (samadhi) through the union of the Upward Moving 
Breath and the resonance or silent sound (nada) of consciousness 
that marks the merger of the vital breath with the mind (pranacitt-
atman). As 'mind' (citta) is the union of consciousness and aware-
ness (which is the supreme level of speech), uccara unites the three 

aspects of Mantra, namely, consciousness, speech and breath. Bha-
gavadutpala quotes the Hamsaparamesvara as saying: 
Mantras (recited) in a fettered state (of consciousness 
pasubhava) are nothing more than mere articulated sounds, 
but those recited in the Central path (susumna) become all-
powerful (patitva).126 
This Mantra cannot be uttered in the normal way and hence is 
called Anacka (a pure consonant without any vowel sound and 
hence unutterable) or Kakarardha (lit. "half of Ka," i.e., the pure con-
sonant 'K') as it is the pure energy (sakti) symbolized by the conso-
nant series.127 Bhaskara explains that it is a subtle form of inner 
speech (suksmavagriipa) the phonemes of which are unmanifest, 
representing the first sprout of pure consciousness which arises 
from 
the 
state 
of 
the 
perfected 
potency 
of 
awareness 
(samyagucchunata). When the energy of Anacka is conjoined with the 
expansion (pronmesa) of consciousness in the Centre the yogi expe-
riences the vitality of Mantra which is Sivahood endowed with all 
knowledge and action and thus achieves perfection (siddhi). 
* 
* 
* 
Thus ends this, the first section of the Aphorisms 
of 
Siva which expounds the one unique nature of the light of 
universal consciousness. 
In the next section (Siva) will describe the highest 
nature of Mantra and the arising of knowledge. 
Thus ends the first chapter of the 
Sivasiitravartika, 
written by the venerable Acarya Bhattabhaskara, the son of 
the venerable Bhattadivakara, called the "Description of the 
Light of Universal Consciousness." 


Now Begins the Second Light Called 
THE ARISING OF INNATE KNOWLEDGE 
Now that the Blessed One has established in the stated 
manner that the omniscient Self that does all things is Siva 
and what the vitality of Mantra that (resides) there is, the 
Unborn One then went on to explain what needs to be 
explained, as He did the innate nature of Mantra, namely, 
what the Mantra is to which this vitality belongs: 
cittam mantrah 
The mind is Mantra. 2/1 
Know that the mind itself is Siva, the unconditioned 
subject who, free of the diversifications (kalana) of time 
and space, is endowed with omniscience and (every) other 
divine attribute. It naturally experiences itself directly and 
so is said to be Mantra. 
* 
* 
* 
The means taught (in the previous section) can be easily 
grasped by those who have been (blessed) with the most 
intense degree of grace (saktipata). But those who have 
received only a weak degree of it must resort to a different 
means to acquire the vitality of Mantra. (This means basically 
involves) attentive concentration (nibhalana) on a number of 
things, including Mantra. This is done by purifying thought 
by, for example, repeatedly hearing and recalling to mind 
(the teachings) (so that insight into the truth) may develop 
progressively (from the initial stages), in which it is only 

dimly apparent, to that in which it becomes more so, until it 
is finally attained. In this way, when the notion of duality 
ceases by means of the direct intuitive awareness (samvedana) 
of the supreme radiance (of consciousness), the knowledge 
innate (in one's own nature) emerges. (This section deals with 
this other means so that those less graced) may attain the 
goal. 
The mind (citta) is consciousness (cit) that, desiring to 
play the game of cosmic (manifestation), initially descends 
from its own eternal conscious nature to the lower level and 
becomes intent on perceiving the finite object of thought 
(cetya) that emerges (out of consciousness) when it assumes a 
limited, conditioned state of being. When (the mind) seeks to 
rise (again) to its original state (svapada), it ascends succes-
sively step by step, as one does along a ladder, (progressive-
ly) abandoning its limited condition, (and ultimately) attains 
Siva's (universal) nature (sivata) which is the free (1isanaslla) 
and uninterrupted light of consciousness. Thus that mind 
(manas) can reflect on its own glorious energy (mahat) 
because once it has withdrawn the object of awareness (into 
itself), it becomes introverted and so is free (to do so). Thus 
mind and Mantra are figuratively said to be one because 
they inherently possess that (same) awareness. 
Exposition 
From the Kashmiri Saiva point of view, the mind is not a mis-
conceived abstraction made by working back from thought to a 
mind which presumably thinks it. Although there is no mind apart 
from thought, even so, the reverse also holds good, namely that, 
without mind, there can be no thinking. The mind is at once a 
screen of awareness onto which thoughts are projected and held 
together, a vessel in which latent traces of past sensation and 
thoughts are stored and the active principle which generates them. 
It is in fact consciousness itself which initially contracts itself down 
to the level of an object of thought (cetya) to then assume the form 
of the mind (citta) when intent on reflecting on its own objectively 
perceived nature through the medium of thought.1 As pure con-

sciousness manifests as the thinking subject (cetayitr), the mind, 
free of all limiting conditions both spatial and temporal, is 
endowed with all its attributes. To state the matter another way, 
one of the many ways in which we can understand the nature of 
consciousness is as a single universal mind which generates the 
world of thought constructs that rise and fall from it like waves in 
the sea. Each wave (urmi) or vibration (spanda) on the surface of 
consciousness as it rises reaches its peak and falls away,traces the 
history of a single chain of thought which threads through and 
constructs the events of a lifetime. 
This happens when the mind is intent on the objective world 
which includes not only the domain of physical objects perceived 
by the outer senses but also the subtler sphere of abstract notions 
and feelings, in short, all that is in any way conceivable (caitya). 
However, when it turns in on itself to examine its true nature as 
consciousness, it resumes its basic, higher state in which it reflects 
not on the profane world but on the supreme reality of deity and 
so shares in the nature of the Mantra that evokes it. As Ksemaraja 
says, referring to verse 27 of the Stanzas: 
Mantra is that which (the adept) reflects upon inwardly in 
secret as one with the Supreme Lord.... The mind of the 
adept intent on reflecting on the deity of the Mantra, 
becoming thus one with it, is Mantra. (Mantra) is not just a 
mere aggregate of various letters.2 
* 
* 
* 
But how can yogis achieve this? The Supreme Lord 
explained that: 
prayatnah 
sadhakah 
Effort is that which attains the goal. 
2/2 
Excellent is said to be the effort (exerted) to penetrate 
the nature of the mind. It is the function (vrtti) of the vitali-
ty we have spoken of before and is (generated) by repeated 
meditation (nibhalana). This is said to be the most excellent 
means, which attains the goal. (Through this effort, exerted) 

in the way we are about to explain, (the yogi) realises the 
conscious reality (cittattva) of the Self. Siva Himself 
described it in the Essence of Trika (Trikasara) of six thou-
sand verses (where He says): 
Mantra is said to be the inherent nature (svasva-
bhava) of the power of consciousness, for by concen-
trating (manana) on it constantly the yogi abides 
well established on Siva's plane of being. It is by 
virtue of this that those yogis who apply their minds 
to Yoga know (the true nature) of ultimate reality 
(paramartha). 
* 
* 
* 
The point here is that this (effort) is the greatest possible 
aid to attain the goal. Heralded by the cessation of the diversi-
fied awareness that subject (object and means of knowledge 
are distinct), (attained) by withdrawing (the mind) repeatedly 
from its extroverted activity, (this effort) is the flow of one-
pointed concentration (pratyayaikatanata) centred on the identi-
ty (tadatmya) between the Self in the form of the object of medi-
tation and the essential nature of Mantra as described above. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja explains that effort, in this context, means the 
spontaneous force of awareness the yogi applies to catch hold of 
the initial moment in which he is intent on contemplating Mantra. 
The initial unfolding of his thought, charged with the power of 
Mantra, is the point where he can achieve oneness with the deity it 
symbolizes as verse 31 of the Stanzas teaches. To do this he must 
attempt to catch this fleeting moment in a single, swift movement 
of awareness. To illustrate this point, Ksemaraja quotes the Essence 
of the Tantras (Sritantrasadbhava): 
O dear one, just as a bird of prey, glimpsing in the sky a 
piece of meat (flung to it), quickly catches it with the speed 

natural to it, so should the best of yogis catch hold of the 
light of consciousness (mano bindu).3 Just as an arrow fixed 
to a bow and drawn with great force flies forth, so, beloved 
does Bindu fly forward by the force of awareness (uccarena). 
* 
* 
* 
Now the Blessed one has explained in this way what 
the nature of Mantra (vacaka) is, the next aphorism He utters 
sheds light on the question as to whether or not Mantra 
(vacaka) and what it denotes are one: 
vidyasartrasatta 
mantrarahasyam 
The secret of Mantra is the Being of the Body of 
Knowledge. 
2/3 
By knowledge we mean the unfolding of one's own 
inherent light; it is the sudden expansion (unmesa) of the 
thrill of energy (sahasa) that takes place within the Pure Prin-
ciple by penetrating (avesa) (and becoming one with) pure 
consciousness (cinmatrata). This is the Being (satta) of the 
body of the one who recites Mantra and the supreme secret. 
* 
* 
* 
Mantra denotes (vacaka, essential metaphysical princi-
ples). It manifests initially as diverse (and cut off from the 
adept's consciousness but) once it has performed its function 
and the adept seeks to discern its inner vitality (virya), it 
becomes one with its denoted object, namely, the pulsing 
radiance (sphurana) of the essence of the reflective awareness 
of perfect T consciousness (purnaham) which is the oneness of 
the entire universe. Essentially what this means is that the 
cycle (through which a) Mantra passes (as it emerges from 
consciousness and returns to it) is one with the supreme reali-
ty which it denotes. For if it were not so it would be impossi-
ble to account for its manifest existence (prakasamanata) inso-
far as each stage of its development (out of consciousness) 
proceeds from the previous stage. (This happens as follows): 

First, Bindu, that is, the energy of Supreme Speech 
(paravac), unfolds as the Voice of Intuition (pasyantJ) which is 
still free of the sequence (and distinction) that obtains 
between words and their denoted meaning. This happens 
when the light of consciousness, replete with the supreme 
resonance (paranada, of reflective awareness), comes to 
prominence after (the energy of Bindu), that is, the resonance 
(nada, of awareness) in the form of the unfolding power of 
action penetrates (and assumes the nature) of the subtle 
(inner) being of the vital breath according to the manner 
described in the saying: "the vital breath is the first transfor-
mation of consciousness." 
After this comes the Middle Voice (madhyama) (the inner 
speech of thought), the basis of which is the intellect and the 
other (faculties of the mind). (It is so called) because (at this 
level) the succession (of words and meanings) is indistinct 
(insofar as it is not yet articulate speech) and yet clearly 
apparent (as thought constructs). 
The Corporeal Voice (vaikharl) develops after this. The 
organ (of speech) is its basis and (it consists of words articu-
lated) in a clearly apparent sequence. 
Exposition 
According to Ksemaraja, the knowledge referred to here is 
supreme non-dual awareness (paradvayapratha). Siva, as the essence 
of all possible words and meaning (sabdarasi) contained in a poten-
tial form in the fifty lettters of the alphabet, possesses this 'Body of 
Knowledge' the essence of which, as the secret power of Mantra, is 
the pulsing radiance (sphuratta) of the light of consciousness identi-
fied with the reflective awareness of perfect T consciousness 
(purnahamvimarsa) that consists of the oneness of the entire uni-
verse.4 
Ksemaraja, like the anonymous commentator on Bhaskara's 
commentary, explains how the formation of this body takes place 
by describing the progressive development of speech from its high-
est level down to that of articulate sound. It is through this process 
that all speech and thought are vitally linked with absolute con-

sciousness and so is Mantra of which it is, therefore, the 'secret'. 
More specifically, Ksemaraja sees this process as the development 
of Matrka, the goddess who contains the fifty energies symbolized 
by the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet that, by their development, 
generate the universe of words and that which they denote. 
This development finds a parallel in the progressive rise of 
Kundalini, the spiritual power that lies latent in the restricted con-
sciousness of the fettered soul. From this point of view, the 'secret 
power of Mantra' is Kundalini in its supreme form (as Para 
Kundalini). This energy is one with Siva as His innate bliss (ananda-
sakti). It is the heart of consciousness that contains the entire uni-
verse within itself5 as the pure awareness (pramitibhava) which 
encompasses and transcends subject, object and means of knowl-
edge. It is the bliss of cosmic consciousness (jagadananda) the yogi 
experiences when he attains liberation. As such, it is the universal 
vibration (samanyaspanda) of the union of Siva and Sakti (rudraya-
mala) through which the universe is created and destroyed. In its 
creative aspect, Siva veils His own nature and manifests as the 
absolute (anuttara). In its destructive aspect, Siva reveals His 
divine nature as the Highest Lord. The destructive power of Para 
Kundalini withdraws diversity into the unity of consciousness and 
thereby creates a universe at one with consciousness. This func-
tion is carried out by Para Kundalini in Her aspect as MalinT,6 the 
highest state of which is the experience of the undivided light of 
consciousness present in all the letters and phases of the cosmic 
process they represent. The creative form of Para Kundalini is 
Matrka which, as the Essence of the Tantras (Sritantrasadbhava) ex-
plains, is full of the supreme effulgence of consciousness that, 
established in the absolute (avarna), pervades the entire universe of 
letters.7 As Kaulikisakti, She is the supreme emissive power (visarga-
sakti). of consciousness which arouses Siva from the rest He enjoys 
in His own nature and unites with Him to give rise to the body of 
letters.8 
In this form Kundalini is described as the supreme resonance 
(paranada) of reflective awareness eternally manifest as the single 
phonemic power (varna) which is the undivided essence of the 
energies of all the letters.9 This is the unstruck sound of Anacka,10 
the supreme form of Hamsa,M said to be the essence, source and 
resting place of the life of every living being as Varnakundalika, the 

Kundalini of letters.12 It is in this form, otherwise known as Sakti 
Kundalini, that Para Kundalini rests in a potential state in the body. 
She sleeps in Muladhara, the 'Root Support', which is situated at the 
base of the genital organs, coiled like a snake around Siva's seed 
(sivabindu) and awakens due to it. This is the form in which cosmic 
energy resides in the body. When Kundalini awakes, individual 
consciousness unites with universal consciousness and man dis-
covers his cosmic nature. The world of diversity is withdrawn and 
a new world of unlimited blissful experience is emitted. Kundalini 
is thus the vital link that unites the microcosm with the macro-
cosm. Permeating both levels of being, the power of consciousness 
makes the transition from individual to universal consciousness 
possible and, conversely, the creation of the finite from the infinite. 
The awakening of the letters makes speech possible in man and 
also brings the universe into being. Thus the Svacchandatantra 
explains how Kundalini creates all the gods, worlds, Mantras and 
categories of existence and concludes by saying that it is found in 
the Muladhara within man. 
The rise of Kundalini from Muladhara where it rests as the 
supreme form of speech (paravac) is the movement from the supra-
mental (unmana) level of pure consciousness to that of articulate 
speech (vaikhari). Although this is a process that is constantly 
repeated whenever we speak, only the yogi is consciously aware of 
it. Moreover, this movement in all its phases is, for the average 
man, the spontaneous and universal deployment of emanation 
while for the yogi it occurs through the agency of his will. The 
unconscious rise of Kundalini marks the emanation of the energy of 
the letters as the forces which bind individual consciousness. The 
conscious rise of Kundalini, on the contrary, marks the dissolving 
away of these binding forces and the creation, through the realisa-
tion of their true nature, of these same energies as aspects of the 
freedom (svatantrya) of the reflective awareness of pure conscious-
ness. Thus the passage below, quoted by Ksemaraja from the 
Essence of the Tantras (Sritantrasadbhava), is at once an account of the 
creation of the body of letters which mark the phases of the devel-
opment of Matrka that, as the manifestation of the supreme form of 
speech, is Bhairava's divine power (sakti) identified by Ksemaraja 
as the "Being of the Body of Knowledge/7 as well as the phases of 
the awakening and rise of the Kundalini: 

O Goddess, that Divine Mother (Matrka) Who is filled with 
the supreme effulgence (of consciousness) pervades this 
entire universe from the highest form (Brahma) to earth. O 
beloved Goddess worshipped by all the gods, just as the 
all-pervading phonemic energy (varna) (of the letters) is 
present in the letter 'A'13 so is that which is pervaded (by 
Matrka) ever established there (in that power). So I will 
clearly explain to you the sense of the final conclusion (the 
scriptures have reached concerning Her nature). That sub-
tle and supreme power is said to be beyond the bounds of 
scriptural injunction (niracara).14 O well-formed Uma, 
wrapping itself inwardly around the Bindu of the Heart,15 it 
slumbers there in the form of a sleeping serpent and is 
aware of nothing at all. That goddess, placing in her belly 
the Moon, Fire, Sun, stars and fourteen worlds, (sleeps) 
like one affected by poison.16 O beloved, She is awakened 
by the resonance of supreme awareness and churned by 
the spontaneous rolling (bhramavega) of Siva's seed (bindu) 
within Her.17 Pierced (in this way), that subtle power of 
Kundalini is aroused, accompanied initially by brilliant 
sparks of light. O beloved, the all-powerful divine (prabhu) 
four-fold seed18 in the womb of (that) power straightens by 
the union of the churner and the churned. (Kundalini) is 
then called the power Jyestha manifest between the two 
points (bindu, of objectivity and subjectivity). The immortal 
Kundalini (now) straightened (and further) agitated by 
(Siva's) seed is called Rekhini Who absorbs both points 
(bindu, of subjectivity and objectivity and reconverts them 
into their true nature as Siva and Sakti). (In the next phase, 
Kundalini) is said to flow in three channels and is called 
Raudri or Rodhim because She blocks the path to libera-
tion.19 (To overcome this obstruction, Kundalini assumes) 
the form of a crescent moon as Ambika (otherwise known) 
as the "Half-moon."20 In this way that one supreme power 
assumes three forms.21 By the union and separation of 
these (powers) the nine classes of letters are born and 
(Kundalini) is then said to be nine-fold as the nine classes. 
O Goddess, she then assumes the form of the five Mantras 
beginning with (Sadyojata) the first,22 in due order. One 

should know, O mistress of the gods, that She is then said 
to be five-fold. O goddess, when She is manifest as the 
twelve vowels, She is said to be twelve-fold and divided 
fifty-fold when manifest as the letters from 'A' to 'KS'. In 
the heart She is said to have one point; in the throat, two; 
and She should be known to have three points at the root 
of the tongue. Articulate words are formed on the tip of 
the tongue, there can be no doubt that this is the way 
speech is formed and that the moving and unmoving 
world is pervaded by speech. 
x- 
* 
* 
Now if this is the secret reality (artha) of Mantra, how 
can embodied beings bring about the desired Arising of 
Mantra (mantrodaya) which is the Supreme Emergence 
(paramodaya, 
of ultimate reality). In reply to this question, 
the ubiquitous Lord uttered the following aphorism: 
garbhe cittavikaso 
visisto'vidya 
svapnah 
The expansion of the mind in the womb (of consciousness) is 
the slumber of (all) particular forms of ignorance. 2/4 
By the force of withdrawal from the objects of sense 
into the essence of consciousness and bliss, the mind, 
intensely content, abides as pure consciousness. This is the 
supreme (state of consciousness). (This is) the cosmic nature 
inspired with bliss by the flood of the nectar of divine 
power which, flowing (from the moon of consciousness), 
fills it to the full. Through this (expanson of consciousness), 
the slumber of ignorance which extends itself in the form of 
the network of principles starting from Earth onwards is, by 
being assimilated into consciousness, brought to an end. 
When this takes place, (the yogi) grasps knowledge (vidya) 
itself as it truly is (in its most essential being). This (knowl-
edge), therefore is the means to realisation and the essential 
nature of every Mantra and Mudra. 
* 
X- 
X-

The means to realisation (upaya) (described here essen-
tially involves) an extremely elevated ascent (of conscious-
ness to the level at which it can) penetrate (avesa) into the 
supreme plane (of existence). This takes place when (the true 
nature of) Mantra dawns (within the pervasive awareness of 
expanded consciousness) by destroying the the mind's mate-
rial nature (prakrta) by bringing the three states (of happi-
ness, sadness and delusion) engendered by the gunas to an 
end. When (the yogi) has acquired the vitality (of one 
Mantra) in this way (he can) use it to empower other 
Mantras, (all of which) derive their vitality (from that same 
energy), and so heighten their efficacy. (Mantras find their 
proper application through this power of awareness) 
because if they are applied (when the yogi has already 
attained) Siva at the higher level, they would serve no pur-
pose, while at the lower level of individualized conscious-
ness, they are (merely) lifeless (sounds) and so in either case 
would be useless. 
Exposition 
The previous aphorism explained, according to Bhaskara's 
interpretation of it, how the yogi engaged in the practise of reciting 
his Mantra penetrates and becomes one with the universal 
cosciousness which is the source of all Mantras and the entire order 
of manifestation they mystically represent and denote. This takes 
place, as Bhaskara says, when the divine light of the yogi's true 
and universal nature suddenly expands, extending its brilliance 
throughout the infinite expanse of the pure conscious nature which 
the yogi now realises is the marvellous extent of his infinite Being 
and his true body, one with the deity, his Mantra thus evokes. 
Now, as Bhaskara sees it, this aphorism goes on to elaborate what 
happens when the yogi experiences this expansion of conscious-
ness and how this wakes him up from the sleep of ignorance to 
realise the true, absolute nature of consciousness and hence that of 
all Mantras and Mudras. 
Ksemaraja reads this aphorism quite differently. According to 
him it means: The expansion of the mind in the womb (of illusion) is the 

knowledge common (to all men)—(a mere) dream. According to Kse-
maraja this aphorism serves to warn the yogi that he should not 
make use of the power of Mantra to develop any petty yogic pow-
ers he may obtain through it. Nor should he be attached to the 
visions or other experiences that may come to him but should seek 
instead to merge with the universal will of Siva, the Supreme Lord 
of consciousness. Thus he writes: 
The womb is Mahamaya, which is ignorance. The expan-
sion of the mind that takes place within it is the (foolish) 
satisfaction (the ignorant yogi) feels with the limited yogic 
powers Mantra gives rise to. This impure, limited knowl-
edge is common to all men and is (a mere) dream, that is, 
the confusion of diverse thought constructs grounded in 
relative distinctions.23 
Ksemaraja accordingly refers to verse 47 of the Stanzas which 
makes much the same point. 
* 
* 
* 
When Lord Sankara had explained the nature of 
Mantra's vitality, the awareness (vimarsa, the Yogi has of it) 
and (the manner of) its arising, he went on to say the follow-
ing in order to explain the nature of the vitality oiMudrd: 
vidyasamutthane 
svdbhdvike khecart 
sivavastha 
When the knowledge innately inherent in one's own nature 
arises, (that is) Siva's state—(the gesture ofi the one who 
wanders in the Sky of Consciousness. 
2/5. 
Pure Knowledge is said to be the light of one's own 
nature (svaloka) which dawns when (the yogi) emerges 
from the higher stages of contemplation (samutthana). (At 
the same time) It is the uncreated and innate (sahaja) power 
(bala), rightly described before, inherent in one's own 
nature. As it is such, the vitality of Mudra expands within 
it. It is Siva's state, called (the gesture of) "the one who 
wanders in the Sky of Consciousness" because it is risen 

(udita) in the sky of Siva and because (it is the power of 
awareness) which moves (carana) in the expanse (abhoga) 
of the firmament of one's own consciousness. It is the dawn 
of realisation (in which the yogi perceives) his identity with 
(Siva), the object of (his) meditation. And so, (this gesture) 
that possesses the contemplative absorption (avesa) which 
penetrates into one's own nature, is Siva's state. 
* 
* 
* 
The gesture of the one who wanders in the Sky of Con-
sciousness (khecanmudra) is Siva's state itself, directly appar-
ent (saksat). (By making this gesture) the yogi moves (carati) 
through the Sky of Supreme Consciousness. The state of the 
vital essence of Mantra and Mudra (which develops) by 
quelling all the agitation engendered by Maya is the same 
(for both), namely, the emergence of one's own nature which 
is consciousness. We think them to be different only because, 
in terms of (our) perception of outer reality, their products 
(karya) are distinct. 
Exposition 
In a non-technical sense, the word mudra in Sanskrit means a 
number of things, of which three are relevant here. First, a mudra is 
any instrument used for sealing or stamping as well as the stamp 
or impression made by the seal. Second, mudra is the gesturing of 
the hands and posturing of the body in dance which is assigned a 
meaning and forms a part of the mime enacted in the dance. Third, 
mudra is a ritual gesture usually made with the hands in the course 
of worship (espescially Tantric), conveying a symbolic meaning 
and thought to be charged with spiritual energy. Corresponding to 
these three common meanings of the word we can distinguish at 
least three distinct levels of meaning accorded to this term by 
Kashmiri Saivites. Firstly, Mudra is both the seal of pure conscious-
ness which stamps its cosmic form on the background of its own 
nature and the image or reflection of consciousness thus created. 
The original form (bimba) and its reflection (pratibimba), the seal 

and its impression, pure consciousness and cosmic consciousness, 
both are Mudra.24 The first meaning leads naturally to the second. 
As an attitude or posturing of awareness, Mudra is the state of 
awareness which makes its impression on all the contents of con-
sciousness. Mudra, in other words, is the stance the subject assumes 
in relation to himself and the world which he thus experiences 
accordingly. Our experience is a reflection of our inner attitude. 
This third use of the term indicates that Mudra is not only the way 
we see or know things but the actions we make in accord with our 
understanding. Mudra is not only the world of our making, it is 
also the means through which it arises. Mudra is action. Thus, 
although the power of Mudra and Mantra are at root identical, 
Mudra is fuller of the power of action (kriyasakti) than Mantra, 
which is primarily a channel for the power of knowledge 
(jnanasakti). The outer movement of the hands and body, the inner 
movement of the vitality of Kundalini, speech and mind are the 
basic forms of Mudra, ranging from gross to subtle.25 Through 
Mudra, microcosm and macrocosm are united in the harmony of a 
single universal act. Abhinava explains: 
The word Mudra, as its etymology indicates, means that 
which bestows (ra) bliss (mud), that is, the realisation of 
one's own nature and, through the body, that of the (uni-
versal) Self.26 
The bliss of Mudra is the act of self-awareness (paramarsakriya), 
the aesthetic rapture of resting in one's own nature. According to 
another popular etymology, Mudra means that which bestows bliss 
and dissolves away (dravayati) bondage27 by fusing together (dravana) 
all the categories of existence to form a single compact mass of con-
sciousness.28 The vitality of Mantra is the emergence (srsti) of this uni-
versal consciousness,while the vitality of Mudra is the power which 
seals it with the stamp of the Fourth State and maintains the yogi in 
it. Hence, it corresponds to the persistence (sthiti) of this conscious-
ness. Thus, he in whom both have arisen achieves the peaceful state 
(atisantapada) of liberation and no longer falls from it.29 
Khecarimudra is Siva's true state in which the power (bala) of 
His awareness arises and wanders (carati) in the Sky (kha) of His 
consciousness as the effulgence or flow of His innate bliss (svanand-

occhalatta).30 To course in the Sky of Consciousness is to follow the 
Path of Totality (kulamarga), it is the liberating experience that any 
one thing contains within itself all things and that all things are con-
tained in one reality. Khecarimudra is thus the highest level of aware-
ness (parasamvittirupa)31 and hence the essence of the power which 
unifies all other Mudras.32 Whatever movement of the body or 
gesure of the hand one who is established in the wholeness (kula) of 
this attitude makes is Mudra33 
For the yogi (established) in Kula, vibrant (ghurnita) with 
the supremely (intoxicating) juice of Bhairava which 
abounding (pervades him), every position of his body is 
Mudra.34 
The yogi in Khecarimudra is intent on devouring time (kala-
grasa). To do this he first withdraws all the energies of his senses 
and mind, establishes them firmly in his own nature and frees him-
self of all sense of past and future. Plunging through the centre 
between these two times, seeking to grasp the fleeting instant 
(tutimatra) of the present, he is eventually freed of the present as 
well, in the timeless fullness of the incessant expansion and con-
traction of his own consciousness, at one with which he instantly 
and spontaneously becomes a 'wanderer in the Sky of Conscious-
ness' (khecara) and is liberated.35 
* 
* 
* 
Thus the vital essence of Mudra and Mantra are essen-
tially the same. They differ from the point of view of outer 
reality because their functions are different. Therefore, in 
order to explain how (the yogi can realise) the (true) all-per-
vasive (nature of) Mantra and Mudra (the Lord) said: 
gururupayah 
The Master is the means. 
2/6 
Here the Master is the power (of consciousness) said to 
be the supreme means to realisation because Siva's power 
(sambhavtsakti) 
is always graceous. Protected by its arising, 

it frees man from his longing for the world of fettered exis-
tence (bhdva). It leads the man whose corporeal nature 
(deha) it sustains to a true Master who, taking his support 
from the plane of being (the disciple) seeks to realise 
(upeyapada), 
speaks of matters concerning ultimate reality 
and so directs (him) on the path which leads to repose in the 
abode beyond the mind. 
* 
* 
* 
The Master is here the power of grace, the Supreme 
Goddess Who leads (the yogi) to the plane (of Being) he 
seeks to realise once he has attained the power of Mantra, 
etc. Through Her, devout souls enjoy rest in the absolute, the 
plane beyond mind (we) call Paramasiva. 
Exposition 
Popular etymology derives the word guru from two words, 
namely, gu which means "darkness" and ru which means 
"remover." The Master (guru) is therefore he who removes the 
darkness of his disciples ignorance.36 In other words, as Ksemaraja 
explains, he teaches him the true nature of reality and reveals to 
him the pervasive oneness of consciousness (vyapti).37 It is he who 
reveals to the disciple the true nature of Mantric power.38 The disci-
ple, however, must take care to select the right Master, for only he 
is able to lead others to higher levels of consciousness who has 
himself realised them.39 Although not all Masters have attained the 
highest level of consciousness, and the seeker may not be fortunate 
enough to have found one who has reached perfection in all 
respects, he should test his teacher and be sure that he has indeed 
achieved a higher level than himself, for a bad teacher is not only 
unable to grace others but will obscure and cloud their conscious-
ness with doubts even further.40 In the quest for self-realisation we 
may be led from one teacher to the next. If we profit by each 
encounter and grasp each Master's instructions, there is nothing 
wrong in this. Indeed this is what Kallata and Abhinava himself 
did. For as the Tantras declare: 

Just as a bee, desirous of nectar, goes from flower to flow-
er, so a disciple, desirous of knowledge, goes from teacher 
to teacher. If he has a Master devoid of power how can he 
ever attain knowledge and liberation? O Goddess, how can 
a tree without roots bear flowers or fruit?41 
The true Master (sadguru) can only be one who has attained 
perfect freedom and this through identification with Siva.42 Such a 
man is Siva Himself in human form,43 so it is in him that the disciple 
sees the goal of his endeavour.44 His sandals (paduka) are said to be 
the light of consciousness and awareness.45 The master of the five 
cosmic functions,46 his feet are said to move everywhere (symboliz-
ing the cosmic creative activity of consciousness) and absorb every-
thing into his nature, (representing the Master's knowledge which 
annuls multiplicity by merging it into the unity of consciousness).47 
Two verses from the Hamsabhedatantra describe the true Master: 
Many are those Masters who are honoured and served, 
resplendent with consciousness and discrimination. But, O 
Goddess, it is hard to find that Master who (himself free of 
ego) can destroy the egos of others. It is through him that 
revelation is communicated, through him that all things 
are accomplished, through him that, freed of ego one 
recognises oneself in one's essential purity (kevala).48 
The essence of the Master's nature is grace. As the Master, 
Siva graces mankind with the power that flows through him and 
leads his devotees to find rest in the supramental abode of the 
absolute. It was the Master's grace, as Sambhavisakti,49 which led the 
disciple to him in the first place and then frees him of craving for 
the world of transmigration. 
In the end, the disciple discovers that the Master is none other 
than himself and that he, as the disciple, is the reflective awareness 
of the enquiring consciousness (pratsr samvit) of the Light which 
constantly responds with ever-deepening revelations of its own 
nature. Abhinava explains: 
One's own nature is of the nature of all things and knows 
itself. It is one's own nature itself at one with itself that, 

through question and answer, is contemplated as 'Iness' 
which gives rise to a sense of wonder by (assuming the) 
form of the questioner and replier.50 
The one Lord assumes the form of both Master and disciple.51 
The dialogue between them is always held within consciousness. It 
is the inner dialogue the Self has with its own nature, enlightening 
itself through itself:52 
The undivided freedom of consciousness shines on the 
plane of distinctions. It emanates the state of teacher and 
taught. It is one's own nature alone that is the Lord and 
teacher and (yet) one thinks that he is other (than oneself). 
One thinks that the words one's Self utters are those of 
another. That which is to be understood as well as that by 
which it is understood, all is of the nature of Self, 
(although) one believes them to be different.53 
At the highest level of practise the Master infuses this aware-
ness into the disciple directly and he rises in an instant to the 
recognition that he and the Master are one.54 At the lower levels of 
practise, on the other hand, the sense of difference is almost total. 
Thus the Master and disciple, cut off from each other by the objec-
tive constituents of their being, their relationship assumes the form 
of that between an enlightened sage (rsi) and another human 
being. 
* 
* 
* 
Then He explained what happens when the Master is 
pleased: 
matrkacakrasambodhah 
The awakening of the Wheel of Matrka. 2/7 
One should know Matrka 
to be the light of one's own 
nature (svabhasa) and the Lord's supreme power of action. 
Her Wheel, it is said, is the aggregate of Her powers and the 
complete and correct knowledge (of its true nature) is its 

awakening. When this happens the diverse (world of) 
apparent change consisting of words and the objects they 
denote is, by virtue of this (awakening), always (one and) 
undivided (abhinna) 
because the power of action has 
emerged (out of consciousness and operates). 
(This transformation takes place in stages) the first of 
which is the body of the light (of consciousness) that is ever 
manifest and never sets. (Then), by being intent on (its 
inherent) vitality, the power of the Lord's will (icchasakti) 
emerges, followed by a pure awareness (samvedana free of 
thought constructs which heralds manifestation) and a sub-
tle tactile sensation (sparsa, which corresponds to the direct 
vision of supreme consciousness). Then comes the univer-
sal manifestation of all things (sarvarthapratibhasa) fol-
lowed by the unstruck resonance (andhatadhvani, of aware-
ness). After this comes the activity of the vital breath which 
contains within itself the meaning of (every) word and sen-
tence and speech (vac) that contains (all) fifty letters (of the 
alphabet). Thus all things come into being. 
Therefore, the one root of (all) Mantras and every exist-
ing thing is also said to be Matrka. This, Siva's power of 
action, unfolds in this way. If the awakening of the Wheel 
of Matrka has taken place in this way, then (the yogi thus) 
awakened is Lord (of all and) whatever he says becomes the 
king of Mantras. 
* 
* 
* 
Paramasiva is the form (murti) of the absolute, His 
power of action, at one with Him, is Matrka. It is the reflective 
awareness of His own nature and the first pulse (spanda, of 
His being which takes place) when He, out of His own free 
will, desires to emit the universe. (This power) generates the 
four energies, Amba, ]yestha, Vama and Raudri, and having 
done so, generates the Pure Path that consists of (the powers 
of the vowels) which are the seeds (bija, of all things), by their 
combining with one another through the expansion and 
repose, etc., of the absolute (symbolized by the letter 'A'), the 
will (corresponding to the letter T) and the unfolding of con-

sciousness (unmesa, which is the letter 'U') and the other ener-
gies (of the vowels). (Matrka, the power of action) then gener-
ates Bindu, which is the pure awareness of their oneness 
(abhedavedana, that precedes the manifestation of diversity) 
and when this pours out of itself, (Matrka) manifests Visarga 
which is the inner impulse of consciousness to emit (visisrksa) 
the lower emitted plane of existence. Thus, it goes on to gen-
erate the Impure Path consisting of the upsurge (ullasa) of the 
energy (of the consonants) which are the womb (yoni, of the 
principles of individualized consciousness) in which (Matrka, 
the power of action) gathers together within Herself all the 
wheels of energy. Thus, when the power of the will descends 
(to the lower levels of existence) in the form of the vital 
impulse (pranana) (that gives life to the body), heralded by 
the transformation of the unstruck resonance (anahatadhvani, 
of pure awareness), the activity of the vital breath (pranakriya) 
which contains within itself every word and sentence, is set 
into operation. Therefore, Matrka alone generates this uni-
verse of words and the things they denote and is the principle 
and primal cause of (all) Mantras. 
Whatever (the yogi) who is thus awakened and enlight-
ened may happen to say, whether nonesense or just common 
everyday talk, is like a Mantra that (unerringly and) without 
restraints effects his task. 
Exposition 
Although Ksemaraja's commentary differs from Bhaskara's it 
does not disagree with it but, one could say, develops a point that 
Bhaskara does not go into, namely, the structure and contents of 
the Wheel of Matrka. This is basically because Ksemaraja under-
stands the awakening of this Wheel as the conscious assimilation 
of its energies that seemingly emerge and become active one by 
one as the Wheel rotates. As these energies are the sources of the 
constituents of all manifest (i.e., immanent) and unmanifest (i.e., 
transcendent) reality, this effectively means that when the Wheel is 
awakened and the yogi is fully conscious of its potencies and activ-
ity as that of absolute consciousness, and hence of his own true 

nature, he too awakens and reclaims his own inherent power. This 
is none other than Matrkasakti which is, as we have already noted, 
the supreme power of speech as the reflective awareness (vimarsa) 
and creative autonomy (svatantrya) of universal consciousness and 
hence the vital energy of Mantra. 
The fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, arranged in their 
usual order, make up the Wheel of Matrka. Each one represents a 
phase in the 'counting out' (kalana) or differentiation of the uni-
verse and its projection onto the screen of consciousness. The vow-
els symbolize phases of the 'pure emanation' (suddhasrti). This is 
the movement and transformation of energy within Siva's tran-
scendental and all-embracing consciousness through which the 
universe is emitted externally while it abides at the same time 
within it in the form of this process itself. The consonants symbol-
ize the kingdom of Siva's power (sakti) when actively engaged in 
and manifest as the 'impure', i.e., external creation. Thirty-four is 
the number of consonants and thirty-four are the categories of exis-
tence below Siva (excluding Sakti which pervades them all). Each 
letter corresponds to a category. The order of emergence is, how-
ever, reversed. Thus, 'K' (the first consonant) corresponds to Earth 
(the last category). The reason for this is that Sakti is the reflection 
of Siva on the plane of phenomena and, as such, is as if turned 
upside down, like a mountain reflected in a lake.55 
Pure T consciousness (aharn), as we have already seen else-
where, contains and unites all the letters in itself as the unbroken 
flow of awareness from 'A' to 'Ha', which are the first and last let-
ters of the alphabet, respectively. The rotation of the Wheel of 
phonemic energies marks the arising and subsidence of the uni-
verse in harmony with the incessant movement of the creative 
power of awareness within T consciousness.56 Through the Mas-
ter's grace the disciple awakens to this, the eternal flow of 
Matrkasakti by penetrating into the consciousness and bliss of his 
own nature that contains the entire aggregate of powers making up 
the fifty aspects of Mantric energy. The unconscious movement of 
the Wheel now becomes a conscious process of creation and with-
drawal, Kundalini rises and all that the yogi thinks, utters, hears 
spoken or reads is experienced as a liberating Mantra.57 Thus, 
Matrkasakti which is Siva's power of action (kriyasakti), now known, 
no longer binds the yogi but, on the contrary, sets him free.58 

* 
* 
* 
Lord Siva (then) explained that the body of Karma, 
which is the cause of bondage (bhava), burns away in the 
radiant power (tejas) of Mantra that has been inflammed in 
this way: 
sariram havih 
The body is the oblation. 
2/8 
In the blazing fire of consciousness, at one with Mantra, 
the body abandons the gross, phenomenal bonds of Karma 
and, as an oblation (in this fire), it assumes the form of a 
divine body. This is the supreme body of the all-pervasive 
Lord of Consciousness Who is the Sacrificer Who constantly 
offers the body and other phenomena in the great, eternally 
blazing and unfettered fire of Great Being (mahasattva). 
* 
* 
* 
The meaning here is this: the sacrificer sits, taking up 
his place in the divine body of Mantra, and performs the fire 
sacrifice which makes all things one with the fire of con-
sciousness. As he does so, the Karmic impurity which is the 
cause of his physical bondage (dehabandana) is destroyed 
through the stilling of his conditioned, illusory subjectivity 
(mayiyapramatrta) once he attains the Body of Mantra consist-
ing of the supreme vitality of universal T consciousness. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja merely stresses that what is meant here by offering 
one's own body as an oblation is the abandonment of all false iden-
tification with it. For, as Ksemaraja points out referring to verse 9 of 
the Stanzas, once the notion of oneself as the body (idehadyaham-
pratyaya), which agitates consciousness with countless thought con-
structs, ceases, the awakened yogi can realise the highest state. Kse-
maraja writes: 

The body gross and subtle, etc., that everybody (generally) 
consecrates with (a false sense of) subjectivity is the obla-
tion the great yogi offers in the supreme fire of conscious-
ness. (He can do this) because he is constantly centred on 
the subjectivity of consciousness by quelling the subjectivi-
ty (centred) on the body.59 
Appropriately, Ksemaraja goes on to quote the Vijnanabhairava: 
(To perform the true supernal) oblation one must offer, 
with the ladle of awareness (cetana), the elements, the sens-
es and their objects, along with the mind, into the fire 
which is the abode of the Great Void.60 
* 
* 
* 
What is the supreme food of one who resides in this 
way in the Body of Consciousness (jndnakdya)? (The Lord) 
said: 
jnanam annam 
(This yogi's) food is knowledge. 
2/9 
The knowledge (meant) here is the supreme (knowl-
edge of ultimate reality) correctly explained in these two 
sections. Know that to be like food which satisfies (the 
yogi) fully, for by reflecting on it (nibhdlana) repeatedly, 
(one achieves) the perfect plenitude {paripurnatd of con-
sciousness). 
* 
* 
* 
Attending to the expansion of the glorious power of his 
own nature in the supreme state (of being) this (yogi) is com-
pletely free of craving because he (abides) full (of the pleni-
tude of consciousness) everywhere in this world (which is 
itself nothing but) the internal and outer radiance (visphurana) 
of his own nature. When, in the course of daily life, he hap-
pens to reside on the plane of corporeal existence, he is like an 

alert actor. Infusing his inner nature with wonder (svatma-
camatkarana), he prepares himself to play his role and acts out 
his part. As he does so, he draws towards himself the objects 
of sense drenched with the supreme nectar (of self-aware-
ness) by means of the senses and deposits them within his 
own nature. He is not like the fettered soul who, attached to 
the objects of sense and forgetful of the radiant pulse of his 
own nature, assumes the lower state of being. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja says that this aphorism can be interpreted in two 
ways according to how we understand the nature of the 'knowl-
edge' to which it refers. If we take this knowledge to be, as 
Bhaskara does, the dynamic consciousness of ultimate reality, then 
it corresponds, as Ksemaraja says, to "the reflective awareness of 
one's own nature which is (the enlightened yogi's) food that, 
because it satisfies him perfectly, causes him to rest in his own 
nature."61 In other words, it is pure awareness that, preceding the 
formation of thought constructs, operates in the first moment of 
perception with which, as Ksemaraja points out, verse 44 of the 
Stanzas instructs the awakened yogi to scan the field of perception. 
In this way he realises that all things are one with Siva, his own 
universal consciousness. 
The second interpretation is purely Ksemaraja's suggestion. 
He couples the knowledge to which this aphorism refers with the 
limited knowledge that binds the individual soul described in the 
second aphorism of the first section. It is this lower, conditioned 
knowledge of reality that the awakened yogi assimilates into his 
consciousness and with it all thought constructs, perceptions, con-
flicting views, time and space, in short, all that exists in the realm 
of the awareness of relative distinctions that to the unawakened 
appears to be separate from him as the individual perceiving sub-
ject. All this is his food in the sense that he engulfs and digests it 
into his true conscious nature, thus making all things one with it. 
* 
* 
* 

When this is the case, ignorance is destroyed. (Siva), 
Who is worshipped by (all) the gods, uttered the (follow-
ing) piece to explain what happens due to this: 
vidyasamhare 
tadutthasvapnadarsanam 
The withdrawal of knowledge heralds the vision of dreams 
that arises from it. 2/10 
The knowledge which perceives the world of birth and 
death (samsara) is described as common (avisista to every 
fettered soul). It is withdrawn when the light of one's own 
nature dawns. When it is destroyed (the yogi's) perception 
of phenomenal existence that arises from ignorance and 
deludes (the ignorant) is said to be the vision of dreams. 
This is how the Supreme Lord has described (this insight) 
in brief: 
The waking state (of enlightenment, 
prabuddha-
tavrtti) is, when it dawns, one of permanent freedom 
from all constraints, eternal contentment and oneness 
with (Siva), the object of meditation and the manifes-
tation (kalana) of the light of one's own nature. 
* 
* 
* 
When the knowledge common (to all fettered souls) 
marked by limited understanding is merged (in conscious-
ness) by thus contemplating the reality (made manifest) by 
the aforementioned technique, the yogi perceives the (many) 
phenomenal and imagined things (bhavabhava) of the world 
that arise from it and consist of the thought constructs that 
manifest things devoid of an essential nature of their own, as 
if (they were) a dream. (He perceives) them arise and fall 
away in the pure mirror of awareness (samvedana) (manifest 
there) without the material aggregate of causes by the power 
of his own freedom as the wonderful diversity of groves, 
towns and mountains, etc., disassociated from the essential 
being of consciousness. (Perceivings things in this way, the 
yogi) is like Siva, endowed with the eternal power of omni-

science and the rest and, free of constraints, sports on the 
plane of the arising of innate knowledge. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja takes the knowledge to which this aphorism refers 
as being the Pure Knowledge (suddhavidya) that corresponds to the 
insight that: "I am this (universe) and this (universe) is me" (aham-
idam-idamaham). Accordingly he says that: 
When the Pure Knowledge which is the expansion of con-
sciousness (jfianasphara) is withdrawn and recedes (nimij-
jana), there emerges a clear vision of the extending chain of 
thought constructs that constitute duality (bhedamaya) and 
is the dream that arises through the gradual dwindling 
away of (pure) knowledge (impressed upon the yogi's con-
sciousness).62 
What Ksemaraja means to say is that if the yogi is unable to 
maintain a steady, continuous stream of awareness, he falls from the 
contemplative absorption he experiences through the awakening of 
the Wheel of phenomic energies, into the dream state. The pristine 
purity of his consciousness is thus seemingly marred and its unity 
broken up by the flood of images that pour into the yogi's mind to 
distract him and carry him away from the authenticity of universal 
consciousness. In failing to exert himself to maintain his awareness 
of this higher state of consciousness, he ceases to be a true yogi and 
is no better than an ordinary man. Thus, Ksemaraja, quoting verse 
21 of the Stanzas, instructs the yogi to be constantly aware of the uni-
versal activity (spanda) of his consciousness in order to realise his 
true nature through the vigilant wakefulness of awareness. 
It is always the T which maintains awareness of itself and of 
its projections. The minute T forget myself I am lost in 'this'. Cut 
off both from my own autonomy and the grace of a higher, more 
universal level of consciousness, and so no longer awake to myself, 
I am at the same time no longer awake to the direct experience of 
reality. This is the fall from the perpetually renewing awakening of 
self-awareness to the dream of thought constructs and projections. 

For the yogi this means resting content with the minor yogic 
accomplishments and powers (siddhi) which come in the wake of 
the traces (vasana) of the self-awareness left by his contemplative 
absorption (samadhi). But, however exalted these powers may seem 
to the ordinary man, the yogi who is distracted by them fails to 
persevere in maintaining his awareness and so, as verse 35 of the 
Stanzas declares, the generation of images that takes place in the 
states of waking and dreaming reverts to its natural spontaneity as 
happens normally with the worldly man. 
* 
* 
* 
Here ends the second section of the Aphorisms 
of Siva 
which describes the arising of innate knowledge. What 
remains to be discussed is the vibration of the powers for 
the attainment of the power of the Yoga of Knowledge is a 
veritable wish-granting gem. 


Now the Third Light Commences Called 
THE VIBRATION OF THE POWERS 
The powers (vibhuti) we are about to describe are gen-
erated either by the spontaneous (sahaja) arising of Mantra 
or by the recognition (pratyabhijna) of one's own nature. 
Supreme, unconditioned bliss arises spontaneously 
through the expansion of the awakened consciousness 
which develops by reflecting on the beginning and end (of 
the arising and subsidence of the breath, perception and 
thought). One's own natural and unconditioned power of 
creative freedom (svatantryasakti) 
becomes clearly appar-
ent through (this bliss) and one perceives the glorious 
power (vibhuti) (of one's own conscious nature). 
This section is devoted to this topic (and so the Lord) 
began by saying (the following) to explain what the true 
nature of the mind is: 
atma cittam 
The mind is the Self. 3/1 
The mind, also known as the mental faculty of menti-
tion (manas), is consistently represented in the teachings as 
an organ of sense and as such (essentially consists of the) 
intent (samkalpa which directs the synthesis of perceptions 
and the formation of thought constructs). That is said to be 
Mantra. One should know that the Self itself, when devoid 
of verbal constructs (vac), etc., is Mantra that follows the 
directives of intent and by that (all of one's) wishes are 
fulfilled by contemplating (nibhalana) (mind's) essential 
nature. 

* 
* 
* 
Discursive intent (samkalpa) (is the form of) awareness 
(paramarsana) when the mind is extroverted. When (the 
mind) is introspective it is Mantra, which is the contempla-
tive awareness (manana) of one's own nature. When intro-
verted, it is undistracted and so the contracted (conditioned) 
state of the mind is abandoned and it then assumes its natu-
ral (sahaja) condition which is its inherent conscious nature. 
(Now when the mind is thus) pervaded (with consciousness) 
it is not dependent, at the level of practise, on the activity of 
the senses and so (all its) knowledge and action is free of 
impediments. Thus, by laying hold of its (inherent) power 
0bala), it can, like Siva, manifest externally, as it wishes, the 
desired object without recourse to earth, water, fire or any 
other (physical element), (in such a way that) all people can 
see it. The intentions, etc., of one who is not dedicated to the 
practise of Yoga (ayukta) are not apparent to anyone (but 
himself) and cannot be made externally manifest. While, on 
the contrary, the Mantras, etc., of one who is intent on the 
practise of Yoga (yukta) and possesses Siva's unique qualities 
can, for this reason, make any phenomenon manifest, how-
ever hard this may be. 
Exposition 
As the reader will recall, the first aphorism taught that the 
Self is pure, dynamic and universal consciousness. This is true for 
the yogi who has awakened to his true nature at the highest (sum-
bhava) level of consciousness. At the individual (anava) level, how-
ever, the situation has changed. In this sphere of consciousness, 
where attention is directed to the external world and the flux of 
awareness is coloured by the sensations and perceptions generated 
by the contact between subject and object, the analytic and synthet-
ic activity of the mind assumes the status of the subject in relation 
to sense objects. When consciousness is extroverted and directed to 
the objects of the senses, the intermediate process of discernment, 
analysis and classification of perceptions, which bridges the gap in 

the flow of awareness from the universal subject to a specific object 
of knowledge, appears, at the individual level, to take over the sta-
tus of the perceiving subjectivity which underlies it. The universal 
Self recedes into the background as a pure, undefinable awareness 
and the individual ego, consisting of the perceptions, thoughts and 
emotions generated by the contact between the perceiver and the 
perceived, emerges in the juncture between them. 
The lower-order subject created in this way is a pin-point 
(anu) of awareness which emerges when consciousness freely lim-
its itself to adapt to, and focus down on, externally projected objec-
tivity. This is the Self, which moves (atati) from one state of being 
to another, from one body to the next. At the empowered (sakta) 
level, enlivened by the direct intuition (pratibha) consciousness has 
of its own nature, mind ceases to function in a paradigmatic, for-
mative manner to generate mutually exclusive mental representa-
tions but appears instead in the subtle form of Sakti,1 i.e., reflective 
awareness (vimarsa). This, as we have seen, is the essence of 
Mantra. Independent of the activity of the senses, the mind's pow-
ers of knowledge and action are no longer conditioned in any way 
and so the mind is able, like Siva Himself, to emanate at will, with-
out need of material cause, whatever it may desire. At the individ-
ual level, the creative powers of consciousness reflected though the 
extroverted mind are greatly attenuated. All that remains is the 
power to create thoughts and determined resolutions (samkalpa) 
which go on to issue, through the body, into outer action, at which 
point the private creations of the mind become apparent to others. 
The next two aphorisms go on to explain the nature of the forces 
which bind and contract consciousness at this level. 
* 
* 
* 
Now why are the mind's intentions unfulfilled? He 
explained: 
jnanatn bandhah 
(Empirical) knowledge is bondage. 3/2 
(Empirical) knowledge relates to the objects of the 
senses and so is (a form of) cognitive awarenes (jnapti) (sul-

lied) by attachment, etc. This is bondage, the veil which 
obscures the mind's essential nature. Practising detachment 
from internal and external objects, the perceiving subject is 
liberated from (his) thoughts (mantavyata) whenever (they 
arise). 
* 
* 
* 
The mind that is not free of the impurities of passion 
(rajas) and ignorance (tamas) is distracted by its interaction 
with objects of the senses because of its attachment, etc. (to 
them). The veil which obscures the light (of consciousness) 
has not been removed and so one does not gain the power 
(bala) inherent in one's own nature, (the acquisition of which) 
is penetration into its original authentic nature. In this situa-
tion it is incapable of creating (the object of its conscious) 
intentions (in a manner) commonly perceivable to every-
body. Thus the root cause of all the impediments that pre-
vent one from creating what one desires is attachment to the 
objects of the senses. 
Exposition 
In this context knowledge does not refer to the pervasive limit-
ing power of the impurities of Maya and individuality (mayiya and 
anavamala) as it did in the second aphorism of the first section, but 
to individual sensory perceptions and the mental activity which 
accompanies and processes them. Bound by its knowledge of 
objectivity and out of touch with its essentially subjective nature, 
the soul wanders from life to life, state to state, carrying with it the 
subtle traces left behind by sensory and mental activity. Together 
these are said to constitute, and be caused by, the subtle body 
(puryastaka) with which consciousness is identified and due to 
which it is subject to the constant alternation of pleasure, pain and 
delusion which are the qualities (gunas) of its material nature.2 
Thus when one practises detachment from inner and outer 
objects, the perceiving subjectivity (drastr) is liberated from the lim-
itations imposed upon the inherent omniscience of its conscious-

ness and the yogi is not only freed from them, but is also actively 
free to do whatever he wishes. 
* 
* 
* 
So what is it that obscures the eternal perceiver? (The 
Lord) explained: 
kaladinam tattvdndm aviveko may a 
May a is the lack of discernment of the principles 
beginning with Kala. 3/3 
The principles (that obscure the individual soul) form 
a group that ranges from Kala to Earth. (They are called) 
"principles" (tattva) because the entire universe is pervad-
ed (tata) by them. 
Kala is said to be (the individual soul's) limited power 
of action. Similarly, the principle of (impure) knowledge 
(vidya) is said to be (the soul's limited) power of knowl-
edge. The fetter of attachment (raga) is of the sort (exempli-
fied in the notion) "this is desirable" and is (a form of) 
bondage. The time (kala) which is present in this, the tem-
poral condition of the present, is also said to be (a form of) 
bondage. Necessity (niyati, is) the condition of constraint 
(which determines according to fixed principles) the fruits 
of one's own actions. Pradhana (the substantial ground of 
the remaining physical, mental and sensory principles) con-
sists of an inner equilibrium between the perceptions of 
pleasure and pain (discerned at this level in all the lower) 
principles. The qualities (guna) are pleasure, pain and delu-
sion. The intellect is pure intelligence (mantrta) while the 
ego is the stir (samramba, of limited self-awareness) and the 
mind is (the principle) which directs the senses. The cogni-
tive senses (buddhtndriya) are said to be (a form of) cogni-
tive consciousness determined by (the activity of) the sens-
es while the organs of action, are (the form in which) agency 
is individualized by these same (senses). The subtle ele-
ments consist of the manifest condition of the (pure sensa-
tion) of sound (and the rest perceived by the senses) while 

the group of five gross elements is the outpouring brought 
about by sound and the other individual (sensations). 
Maya, which deludes (the fettered soul, is his) failure to 
discern (the true nature of these principles and distinguish 
between them), while (right) discernment is established 
here in Pure Knowledge and the other (principles of the 
Pure Path). Therefore the wise who know reality (tattva) call 
them the "Pure Principles/' 
Siva is the principle which corresponds to the light of 
one's own nature (svajyotistva) while Sakti is said to be 
(Siva's) knowledge and action. Sadasiva is the omniscience 
and universal activity (of consciousness), while 
Isvara-
tattva (corresponds) to the (inner) impulse (inherent in con-
sciousness) because the impulse (which stimulates the per-
ception of diversity arises) through it. Pure knowledge is 
here said to be the enlightened understanding of the Saiva 
and other scriptures. 
The principles are conceived in this way within the Self 
through these states. (But) this, the state of the principles we 
have just described, does not contaminate the reflective 
awareness (vimarsa, of one's own nature) because, pervad-
ing all things, it is supreme. 
* 
* 
* 
Maya veils the true nature, that is, the perceiving sub-
ject (drastr) who is the self-luminous and ever-manifest light 
of those individual souls who, gripped by the false notion of 
conditioned subjectivity (parimitapramatrbhava),3 reside in 
bodies consisting of the gross elements, the subtle body 
(puryastaka) and the (five) obscuring coverings (kancuka) fash-
ioned by the series (of thirty-one impure) principles, starting 
with kala. Those who persist in the practise of discrimination 
and have transcended the plane of Maya are grounded in 
Pure Knowledge and so the light of their own nature is 
(never) obscured. And so, because the bonds (which condi-
tion their consciousness) have been removed, the Mantras, 
etc. (of these enlightened souls) become, as explained before, 
fit to carry out their task. 

Exposition 
This aphorism goes on to explain why the individual fails to 
recognise that all perceptions and mental representations are 
essentially forms of awareness and hence cannot condition con-
sciousness. 
The thirty categories of existence belonging to the Impure 
Creation (asuddhasrsti)4 envelope the remaining category, i.e., 
Purusa, the individual soul, in three layers or bodies. The five 
obscuring coverings (kancukas) of limited action, knowledge and 
desire and the limitations of time and space which condition the 
individual by contracting his consciousness directly, form the 
innermost body. Together these five represent aspects of the delud-
ing power of Maya. Next comes the subtle body (puryastaka) con-
sisting of the intellect, mind and ego together with the five primary 
sensations. Finally, the third and grossest body consists of the ten 
organs of knowledge and action together with the five gross ele-
ments. While Maya, the psychic cause of diversity and Prakrti, the 
material nature, pervade the other categories. 
These categories are in reality emantions of, and at one with, 
the freedom (svatantrya) of consciousness. The soul in bondage, 
however, fails to discriminate between them and his true nature 
when this same power operates as Maya. The lower order cate-
gories are not realised to be one with the higher order (of the Pure 
Creation) and so become aspects or energies of the binding power 
of Maya. Thus the universal vibration of consciousness (samanya-
spanda) appears to break up into countless individual motions of 
consciousness (visesaspanda) that manifest as the pleasure, pain and 
delusion of the soul's material nature which, as verse 20 of the 
Stanzas quoted by Ksemaraja explains, cast him down into the 
world of transmigratory existence (samsara). 
* 
* 
* 
Now once (the (Lord) had thus described the expan-
sion (prasara) of the Self consisting of the forces which con-
stitute the principles of existence, He want on to explain 
what arises due to its contraction: 

sartre samharah 
kalanam 
The forces are withdrawn in the body. 3/4 
The forces are said to be the specific functional capaci-
ties of (each of) the principles of existence. The body is 
made up of the union of these (forces) and so consists of the 
multiple aggregate of energies (sakala) which are (the cor-
poreal) support of the Self. The withdrawal of the forces 
there (in the body) is said to be the progressive penetration 
(and absorption, anupravesa, 
of each of them) into their 
respective causes. This continues until (the yogi) attains a 
body of pure awakened consciousness (bodhadeha) and 
there (experiences) the Supreme Arising (parodaya, of ulti-
mate reality). 
Or else, (the yogi) may attain Sivatattva through a (sin-
gle) act of transcendence (ullanghanavrtti). This also 
involves the withdrawal of the forces due to which (the yogi 
experiences) the arising (udaya, of universal consciousness). 
* 
* 
* 
The supreme body of awakened consciousness arises 
within one's own nature by the realisation brought about by 
contemplating the successive penetration and merger of the 
principles into their respective causes (by withdrawing them 
back into one another) in a manner contrary (to their original 
successive manifestation). (The process takes place) in the 
body, which (is itself) made up of the union of these princi-
ples, (and continues) until (the yogi) reaches their end (and 
original source), which is one's own nature consisting of the 
pure consciousness that sustains them all. 
Or else (the yogi may achieve the same result and) 
attain the level (on which he can realise) the sovereign power 
of (his own) pure conscious nature which is devoid of (all) 
thought constructs by a single act of transcendence that with-
draws all the (lower) functions (vrtti) in an instant directly 
(hathat) once he has attained a state of one-pointed concen-
tration which annuls thought. The sprout of perfection thus 
emerges free and vigorous (pallavita) by withdrawing the 

extension of the forces which (the ignorant) consider to be 
(their true) subjectivity (but is in fact) the repository of (their) 
bondage and the veil (which obscures their own nature). 
Exposition 
Bhaskara suggests that the diversity of the multiple principles 
of existence can be fused into a unity either gradually, in succes-
sive stages, or at a stroke, all at once. Ksemaraja however rejects 
the second possiblity in this case insofar as, according to him, prac-
tise operates here at the individual (anava) level where diversity 
prevails and realisation takes place gradually and not suddenly as 
it does at the higher levels of practise.5 Even so, he explains that the 
gradual assimilation of diversity into universal consciousness can 
take place in two ways, namely, either by a process technically 
called the "contemplation of dissolution" (layabhavana) or else by 
meditating on the fire of consciousness (dahacinta). Although I have 
already touched upon these methods in my Doctrine of Vibration,61 
should add here some further details concerning the first one 
which is important for both Bhaskara and Ksemaraja. 
The 'contemplation of dissolution' (layabhavana) is a form of 
contemplative awareness through which the outward movement 
and progressive differentiation of consciousness from its causal, 
pre-cosmic form to its phenomenal manifestation is reversed in 
successive stages. Ksemaraja quotes a verse from the Vijnana-
bhairava instructing the yogi in this practise: 
One should meditate on the All in the form of the Paths 
and the world-orders, etc., considered successively in their 
gross, subtle and supreme forms until, at the end, the mind 
dissolves away.7 
Consciousness becomes objectively manifest in two streams 
or sequences (krama) of appearances (abhasa) as aspects of the wave 
or pulse of creative energy8 flowing through consciousness. Pro-
jected outside it by a process of successive differentiation (kalana), 
it appears as the deployment of experience in the flux of time and 
space.9 The diversification of outer activity (kriyavaicitrya), such as 

the movement of the sun or the alternation of the seasons is the 
medium through which the Path of Time is externally apparent, 
while the Path of Space corresponds to diversity of form (murtivaic-
itrya) and relative distinction between objectively perceived enti-
ties.11 Abhinava explains: 
Thus, all this Path rests in consciousness. The Path of the 
Great Lord is the manifestation of all-pervasive, and hence 
inactive and formless, consciousness, as actions and forms. 
The word Path (adhvan) is chosen to denote this reality (i.e., 
the universe) because, for those who have not overcome 
duality it is one, in the sense that it is the cause of the grad-
ual attainment of the plane to be achieved, while for the 
awakened it simply represents an object of enjoyment to be 
devoured.12 
The Path of Denotation (vacakadhvan), corresponding to the 
Path of Time, is represented in its outer supreme, subtle and gross 
aspects by letters, Mantras and sentences, inwardly grounded in 
pure perception (prama), the subject and the means of knowledge, 
respectively. The Path of Denoted Meaning (vacyadhvan), corre-
sponding to the Path of Space, consists of the five Cosmic Forces 
(kala),13 thirty-six categories of existence (tattva) and the 118 world 
systems (bhuvana). These constitute the sphere of objectivity rang-
ing from supreme to gross. Thus, the Path of the Cosmic Forces 
Ckaladhvan) represents the state of objectivity while it is still mani-
festly a part of the act of perception associated with the mental rep-
resentations of the object perceived. The subtle state, represented by 
the categories of existence (tattva), corresponds to the pure object 
denuded of all specification, while the world-orders (bhuvana) rep-
resent the gross manifest object with all its specifying particulars.14 
The configuration of the All is thus the deployment of con-
sciousness as it emerges from itself through the flux of perception 
(pratiti) ranging from the level of pure awareness to gross objects. 
This movement constitutes the essence of universal consciousness 
(caitanya) as Pure Act, identified with which the enlightened make 
all things one with their own nature.15 At the same time, mediated 
by consciousness, the All rests on what is emitted from it, namely, 
the void (i.e., the subject present in deep sleep), the mind, vital 

breaths, psychic nerves, senses and the external body.16 Thus the 
yogi visualizes the objective sphere of the All as arising successive-
ly in his own body. Starting with the 118 world systems, he imag-
ines that they are all present within him from the lowest hells at his 
feet to the highest heavens in his head. The same process is then 
repeated with the thirty-six categories of existence and the five cos-
mic forces, each containing the grosser aspect of the Path within it. 
The elements of each Path are ordered in a graded hierarchy 
such that the higher, being closer to consciousness, assimilates the 
lower. Thus as the yogi ascends along it, the higher element acts as 
the purifier for the lower ones.17 Again, the higher is the support 
(iadhara) of the lower, supported (adheya) elements, while the whole 
is sustained by the supporting power (adhara or dharikasakti) of con-
sciousness which is identified with the power of the universal will 
(icchasakti). Present at the very source where Siva and Sakti unite as 
the first phase (prathamamsa) in the flow along the cosmic Path, this 
sustaining power is both the screen (bhitti) of perception onto 
which the All is projected and the pervasive space (vyoman) in 
which it is suspended. Abhinava writes: 
Thus, perception (pratiti) alone is the creatrix and sustainer 
identified with Siva. From it are born all beings, in it they 
are grounded. Thus, it is this power which supports all 
things. One should contemplate the All on the analogy of 
an imagined object which, though devoid of support, falls 
not, resting as it does on a power which sustains itself.18 
The yogi ascends along the Path he visualizes in his body, 
absorbing the lower elements into the higher as he does so, thus 
strengthening and extending his unifying awareness (anusamdhana) 
of the configuration of the Path. Thus moving from the gross ele-
ments constituting the outer physical body, to pure sensations (tan-
matra), then to the senses and mind, etc., back to their primordial 
source, the yogi rises from the embodied subjectivity of the waking 
state of the Fourth State where he is one with the all-pervading 
intent that initiates the creative vision of consciousness. 
The second method Ksemaraja teaches, namely, meditation 
on the fire of consciousness (dahacinta) involves, as I have already 
explained in the Doctriiie of Vibration,19 the visualisation of the fire 

of consciousness which is made to traverse the body in which the 
adept imagines the presence of the entire cosmic order arranged in 
layers from the lowest hells at the bottom of the body to the high-
est divine worlds at the top. As the fire rises from below, the 
microcosmic body burns and so is transformed into that same fire 
which, once it has burnt its cosmic fuel, leaves behind the empti-
ness of the pure, undifferentiated light of consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 
Once Siva had explained how, by transcending (the 
lower) function (vrtti, of consciousness) in this way, one's 
own true nature (svasvariipa) dawns within the Self which 
consists of the outward extension (prasara) and withdrawal 
(samkoca) 
of the principles of existence, he went on to 
explain how the accomplishment of the elements (bhuta-
siddhi) arises: 
nadisamhara-bhutajaya-bhutakaivalya-bhutaprthaktvani 
The withdrawal of the vital channels, the conquest of the 
elements, freedom from the elements and the 
separation of the elements. 3/5 
Just as the householder is master in (his own) house 
(similarly) by virtue of its freedom, the Self (is master) in this 
body which consists of the five elements and is the support 
of consciousness. The vital channels are withdrawn there 
(within it) by merging in the Sky of Consciousness for (con-
sciousness) is everywhere said to be the opening (mukha, at 
the extremities) of all the vital channels. 
The breaths are the supports of the vital channels while 
their support is the ubiquitous Lord of Consciousness. The 
highest function (vrtti, of consciousness) possesses six qual-
ities (and is set into operation) when the activity (of con-
sciousness which operates when the breath moves through 
the vital channels) is merged in the centre. (These qualities 
are) stability, flow, heat, movement, emptiness and reversal. 
Or the awakened lord (of yogis) can conquer the ele-
ments by contemplating the essential nature of the princi-

pies individually in their corresponding centres (in the 
body) where they can be perceived. 
By renouncing (the power that comes from this practise 
the yogi) attains unconditioned freedom (from the ele-
ments). (Thus the yogi) though (his) contact with (his) own 
(inner) strength (bala)20 separates the elements one from the 
other (while each continues) to possess the power of (all) 
thirty-six principles. (Thus the yogi who is identified with) 
the ubiquitous Lord can, by changing (His own apparent) 
transformations, alter (anything at will), be it a single incom-
posite entity (dtmastha) or one which consists of an aggre-
gate of constituents (samghatastha). Thus the power of one's 
own freedom (prabhusakti) is nowhere obstructed. 
* 
* 
* 
(The yogi) who desires yogic powers (siddhi) must first 
pacify ida and the other vital channels by withdrawing the 
inhaled and exhaled breaths (prana and apana) into either the 
internal or external twelve-finger space and practise concen-
tration for the perscribed time on the Earth and other ele-
ments, each of which has it own characteristic shape, be it tri-
angular or round, etc., is marked with its own seed-syllable 
and is located in the Root or its corresponding centre (in the 
body), as described in the methods (prakriya) taught in the 
Tantras. In this way the elements come (under the yogi's) 
control and so entry or exit from the midst of the five gross 
elements or the abiding among them, etc., does not affect 
him. (The yogi) who practises in this way and does so with-
out being attached to the powers (he has gained thereby) 
also attains , without any (extra) effort, the power (siddhi) to 
abide in his own nature, which is pure, uninterrupted con-
sciousness and bliss unaffected (anuparakta) by the elements. 
In this way, he can also unite and separate at will (any) enti-
ty formed by the conjunction of the principles of existence. 
Thus, he has the power, by virtue of his unimpeded freedom, 
to give rise to, alter and even radically change the various 
states to which phenomena are subject, (each of which are 
anyway) transformations of his own nature. 

Exposition 
Ksemaraja's interpretation of this aphorism largely agrees 
with Bhaskara's, although not entirely. Thus, Ksemaraja, like 
Bhaskara, equates the first two practises, namely, that of the with-
drawal of the vital channels and that of the conquest of the ele-
ments, with the regulation of the breath (pranayama) and concentra-
tion (dharana) on the elements, respectively, these being the first 
two stages in the practise of Yoga. However, while Bhaskara 
understands that the yogi is freed from the elements by renouncing 
the yogic powers which he attains by meditating on them, Kse-
maraja couples this with the next stage in the practise of Yoga, 
namely, the withdrawal of the senses from their objects 
(pratyahara). The yogi withdraws the flux of awareness travelling 
from the Heart of consciousness through the senses to outer objects 
and fixes it in the navel by attending closely, as it rises and falls, in 
accord with the movement of the breath.21 Again, while Bhaskara 
takes the practise of the separation of the elements to refer to the 
yogi's freedom to control the gross physical elements, Ksemaraja 
understands this as refering to the detachment of the mind from 
the elements that the yogi achieves through the unsullied purity 
and freedom of the consciousness of his true nature in which his 
mind participates by gradually raising his awareness to the level 
beyond thought constructs (unmana) when his practise reaches 
maturity. This is the final stage of Yoga and corresponds to that of 
pure contemplation (samadhi). 
* 
* 
* 
Now even if this is so (a question still arises) as to 
whether (the yogi) does or does not in fact realise his own 
nature (in these conditions, that is,) while the illusion with 
its countless forms (bahusakha, 
that obscures) the Self (still 
persists and so Lord) Sankara said: 
mohavaranat 
siddhih 
(The yogi attains) perfection 
through the 
obscuring 
veil of delusion. 
3/6 

When lust, anger, greed, or fear arise or when one feels 
happy, experiences a sudden fright or even when intensely 
joyful, delusion extends its sway everywhere. This alone 
should be known to be the obscuring covering (of con-
sciousness) because it shrouds one's own nature. Therefore, 
as this is the cause (of delusion, the yogi can attain) the per-
fections (siddhi) of the Self, namely, omnipotence and omni-
science, by reflecting (vimarsa, on his own unsullied consi-
cousness) at the initial stage (just before these states lay hold 
of his mind). 
* 
* 
* 
If we consider matters from the standpoint of ultimate 
reality, the yogic powers, etc. (yogis acquire) arise at the 
lower levels (of practise) where (one still) perceives relative 
distinctions (and so) belong to the sphere of Maya and 
obscure the yogi's own nature. Therefore, in order to per-
ceive it in this state he must, when feelings (vrtti) of intense 
pleasure or passion, etc., arise (within him), fix his attention 
either on the initial phase (when they are just about to arise) 
or on the final phase (when they wain away) for they (in 
themselves) obscure his own nature. In this way (he attains) 
the supreme perfection (parasiddhi), namely, (the power of) 
omniscience and the others (inherent in his true nature). 
Exposition 
Bhaskara clearly couples the pratice taught in this aphorism 
with that taught in verse 22 of the Stanzas to which the reader is 
referred. Ksemaraja's interpretation is quite different. According to 
him, the word siddhi in this aphorism doesn't mean the supreme 
perfection (parasiddhi) of liberation but the inferior, limited yogic 
accomplishments (aparasiddhi) the yogi may acquire on the way to 
his ultimate goal. According to Ksemaraja, each stage of the prac-
tise of Yoga whether that of posture (asana), breath control 
{pranayama), withdrawal of the senses (pratyahara), concentration 
(dhyana), meditation (dharana) or contemplation (samadhi) can by 

itself lead to absorption in the highest reality (paratattvasamavesa). 
At the same time the yogi can also acquire yogic powers through 
them or other benefits, such as improved health or a prolonged life, 
but these, warns Ksemaraja, are of secondary importance and the 
pursuit of such things leads the yogi astray for they are a product, 
not of his enlightened consciousness, but of the residue of the igno-
rance which deludes him. 
The practises taught in the previous two aphorisms find 
application in the material (bhuta) realm of consciousness. The yogi 
cannot reach the supreme level of consciousness through them, for 
he is still subject to the power of Maya. The Master points out in 
this aphorism that he is in fact concerned with manipulating the 
forces of matter. His pursuit in this respect is magical or manipula-
tive. Although the ultimate goal of Yoga is mastery over oneself 
through the insight vouchedsafe by enlightenment, even so, the 
first major milestone on the path is the achievement of mastery 
over the elementary world and body. Here, the yogi is warned of 
the dangers and incompleteness of his attainment, once he has 
reached this stage. The results may be extraordinary, but they are 
still nonetheless limited. The yogi must press on beyond them to 
the higher realms of the spirit. In order to do this his practise must 
take on a new and more elevated form. 
* 
* 
* 
(Once having explained) that (the yogi) attains perfec-
tion (siddhi) in this way while delusion prevails, (the Lord) 
went on to say what happens by overcoming it: 
mohajaydd 
anantdbhogdt 
sahajavidyajayah 
(But) by conquering 
delusion and by (his) infinite 
expanse 
(the yogi) achieves 
Innate Knowledge. 
3/7 
Delusion, they say, has countless aspects and its con-
quest is the full awakening of the unconditioned (asamkuci-
ta) and eternal activity (gati) of consciousness that takes 
place by the light of one's own nature (svaloka). 
The light of 
one's own nature (svaprakasa) 
dawns in a clearly evident 
manner out of this infinite expanse and (the yogi's) victory 

knows no bounds, for countless are its aspects. This is said 
to be (true) bliss for it is completely full and perfect. Innate 
knowledge is, as explained before, the light of one's own 
nature and by its arising (the yogi beholds) the supreme 
light of the Self. 
* 
* 
* 
The fully awakened (yogi, suprabuddha) (experiences) 
the dawn of uncreated knowledge said to be the conscious-
ness which is the reflective awareness of the absolute ego 
(purnaham), by the unconditioned and perfect plenitude (that 
arises) by (his) conquest of delusion, that is, by stilling duali-
ty (bheda) in its countless forms. 
Another interpretation is the following. By conquering 
delusion and attaining the plane of pure knowledge gov-
erned by the Rudra-subject (rudrapramatr), otherwise known 
as the Infinite Lord (anantabhattaraka), (the yogi) acquires the 
wealth of the innate light (of consciousness, sahajaloka) and, 
on the plane of pure knowledge, he, as the Rudra-subject 
called the "Infinite Lord/' enjoys (the expanse of his cosmic) 
empire everywhere around him. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja reads this aphorism to mean: (But) by conquering 
delusion completely (the yogi) achieves Innate Knowledge. Ananta, 
which Bhaskara takes to mean "infinite" or "endless," Ksemaraja 
glosses as "up to the stilling of (all) latent traces (of ignorance)."22 
Thus, from Ksemaraja's point of view, the expression anantabhogat 
qualifies mohajayat so that read together the entire phrase literally 
means "by the conquest of delusion which extends up to the end," 
that is, which is so complete that no trace of delusion remains. 
Ksemaraja bases his interpretation of this aphorism exclusive-
ly on the Svacchandatanta, which he considers to be a major authori-
ty and from which he draws frequently, thus adding elements to 
the interpretation of the aphorisms Bhaskara ignores, even though 
this may at times, as happens in this case, somewhat stretch the 

meaning of the aphorism beyond its immediate sense. Ksemaraja 
understands this aphorism in this way also in view of his interpre-
tation of the previous one. In order to achieve perfect enlighten-
ment, which can only come by acquiring the pure unconditioned 
insight that, inherent in the very nature of reality, reveals it, the 
yogi must not only overcome the immediate ignorance which pre-
vents him from perceiving the underlying unity of reality but 
every trace of it that may still remain latent within him, if he is to 
be no longer liable to fall prey to the delusion of duality. Thus, bas-
ing himself on the authority of the Svacchandatantra, Ksemaraja dis-
tinguishes between two stages of realisation at the highest level of 
spiritual development. The first is that of the pervasive nature of 
the Self when ignorance ceases and the second is that of Siva's per-
vasive nature (sivavyapti) when the latent traces of ignorance are 
also eliminated. 
The subtlest forms of practise operate at the universal level of 
Siva's nature (sambhava) and lead directly to the attainment of Siva-
hood through a sudden and total merger of individual conscious-
ness into the universal consciousness of Siva by an immediate real-
isation of their oneness. The lower, grosser forms of practise that 
function at the individual (anava) level, are gradual and centered 
on individualized consciousness. They are designed to free it from 
the constraints imposed upon it by the power of Maya due to 
which it is subject to duality and the play of its own thought con-
structs. In other words, they work within the domain of diversity 
in order to raise the soul above it and aim to bring the mind to rest 
(icittavisranti). But while this state of repose is blissful and is one of 
self-realisation, consciousness is still individualized. In this state 
the yogi breaks through Maya to the extent of realising himself to 
be a centre of living vitality, intrinsically free of the impurity and 
ignorance which limited him to the body and mind. Unaffected by 
time and space, the yogi experiences the eternal all-pervasive 
nature of the Self (atmavyapti). This realisation takes place, as the 
Svacchandatantra explains, when the yogi ceases to perceive the net 
of binding forces and factors that condition his consciousness and, 
abandoning the obsessive vision of them which leads him 
inevitably to identify with them, he attends instead to his true and 
most essential nature (svarupa). Even so, slight traces still remain-
ing of the effects of Maya influence the yogi in such a way that he 

continues to sense a difference between himself and Siva. He must 
press on beyond this level and no longer experience himself as an 
individual soul, even if all-pervading, but be aware instead that he, 
as Siva, pervades all things (sivavyapti) and that there is no break 
anywhere in the all-embracing fullness of his nature. To do this he 
must rise to the supramental (unmana) level which is the knowl-
edge and insight (vidya) that is an instrinsic property of universal 
consciousness. Freed of the laborious and successive operations of 
the mind, he simultaneously gains the omniscience and other 
attributes of consciousness. Firmly established on this plane 
beyond mind (unmana) which is that of the innate knowledge 
through which the supreme light of consciousness appears to him, 
he realises that he is Siva, the Supreme Soul (paramatman), and not 
the lower, individual soul.23 
* 
* 
* 
The Unborn (Lord then) explained that (the yogi) who 
has attained perfection in this way should remain well 
awake and tirelessly deposit all things in one place: 
jagrad 
dvitTyakarah 
Waking is the second ray (of consciousness). 
3/8 
The waking state is said to be the knowledge (born of 
sensory perception). Observing the field of his (awareness) 
with it the lord of yogis should gather together all things into 
a unity and thus eliminating delusion should remain awake 
at all times and free of duality. The ray (kara, of sensory 
awareness) is like a hand (kara) because it has the power to 
gather together the waking state in this way and so is said to 
be the second (ray) because of its wonderful nature. 
* 
* 
it-
According to a preceding aphorism, "knowledge (born 
of sensory perception) is the waking state." Thus, what is 
meant by the waking state in this case is the power of knowl-

edge. (When we commented on this aphorism) before, our 
concern was to explain the basic term predicated (i.e., the wak-
ing state) now, conversely, our main concern is the second 
term which predicates it (i.e., knowledge). This is fair enough 
because the aphorisms refer equally to all their terms of refer-
ence. 
Observing whatever happens to lay (on the path of) the 
rays (kara, of his) power of knowledge and is made manifest 
by virtue of its form, the light which illumines it and the 
activity of the mind, the awakened yogi gathers it together as 
one would pick something up (with one's hand, kara) by see-
ing that it is one with the supreme light (of consciousness, 
although seemingly) obscured by the notions (vikalpa) of 
unity and diversity. In this way he realises that the inner and 
outer world, all of which is his own nature, reposes in the 
one pure awareness (samvedana) and so, possessing the 
wealth of liberation and behaving in everyday life as one 
who is liberated, he sports in his true nature. 
Exposition 
Bhaskara understands this aphorism in the light of verse 44 of 
the Stanzas, which teaches that the yogi should always maintain a 
state of alert awareness even as he observes the field of objectivity. 
Similarly, Ksemaraja explains that this aphorism describes the state 
of the yogi who attains the Innate Knowledge (sahajavidya) which is 
the inherent attribute of his own conscious nature. The object-cen-
tred perceptions of the waking state no longer militate against the 
pure subjective awareness of contemplative absorption. The yogi is 
active in the world and continues to be aware of himself as the per-
ceiver contrasted with the object perceived but, grasping the full-
ness of his universal T consciousness, he realises that it is the 
source from which objectivity emanates. He alone of all men is 
truly awake and so recognises that everything is an extension of 
his own nature, a second ray of light from the source of which he is 
the first ray. Thus whatever he perceives through the senses makes 
the universal consciousness of Siva apparent to him and he realises 
that he and it are two aspects of the same reality. 

* 
* 
it-
How does the Self, constantly inebriated with the juice 
(rasa) of supreme bliss, behave when it resides in the body 
of one who is liberated in this life and, the mass of his delu-
sion long since burnt away, is always well awake? (Siva), 
the One Who Bears the Crescent Moon as His Crestjewel, 
spoke this aphorism to explain: 
nartaka atma 
The Self is the actor. 3/9 
The experienced actor, who knows about (the forms) of 
sentiment (rasa), emotive states (bhava) and acting, and 
who possesses the correct state of mind (sattva), speech, 
physical appearance and dress, is said to act his part well. 
Similarly, the Self manifests itself in accord with its own 
inherent nature everywhere (as every living being) by pene-
trating into the sentiment (rasa) of each emotive state 
(bhava, it express) and playfully behaving accordingly. 
(Thus the Self) is said to be an actor because it assumes 
every state of being. 
Inebriated with the juice of supreme bliss, (the Self 
sports) in this way in the world of daily life (vihrti) like an 
experienced actor who, knowing well the (various types) of 
sentiment (rasa), the states of being which evoke them and 
their semblances, etc., assumes the role of a limited subject. 
Manifesting the sentiments and emotive states, etc., that his 
part demands (anukarya) by the gestures, etc., of his limbs 
without (however) forgetting his identity, imitating each 
state through the signs which express sentiment (vibhava), 
etc., he is transported to the plane (of Being) in which he 
savours (the joy of the beauty of consciousness) and so acts 
out the cosmic drama through the activity of the senses, 
desiring neither to gain some desired object or avoid the 
undesireable. Thus he delights everywhere with the light of 
his own nature, his mind filled with contentment by the 
power of his ever-persisting (avilupta) consciousness. 

Exposition 
Siva, the true Self of every living being and the essence of all 
existing things, dances to the rhythm of creation and destruction, 
now appearing in this form and now in that. Projecting the waking 
and other states of consciousness onto the screen of His own 
nature,24 He unfolds the cosmic drama with its varied and con-
stantly shifting sentiments. He has no purpose and follows no 
fixed plan. Drunk with the savour (rasa) of supreme bliss, Siva's 
dance is the game He plays out of the sheer delight of the blissful 
vibration of His own nature.25 Siva alone is awake and active in a 
universe asleep to its true nature. He is the director of the drama of 
life and the sole actor: 
Sambhu, Who is pure consciousness alone, is the actor in 
the cosmic drama and it is He Who is the individual soul, 
(for) His undefinable state consists of assuming (all the) 
roles.26 
Siva is free to conceal His own nature at will27 and don the 
garb of the bodies of creatures. The bodies He assumes are com-
mensurate with the planes of reality; similarly, the mental habitus 
He assumes is commensurate with the bodies. As a game, He even 
takes on the form of the bodies residing in the depth of hell!28 
Somananda writes: 
Just as a king over the whole earth, in the joyous and star-
tled intoxication of his sovereignty, can play at being a 
simple soldier, imitating his behaviour, so, in His beati-
tude, the Lord amuses Himself by assuming the multiple 
forms of the whole.29 
Through the pulsing activity of the senses of each spectator, 
Siva enacts His play, enriching it with all the varied sentiments of 
the different states of consciousness. Neither an illusion nor simply 
an imitation (sadrsya), the audience views the performance as being 
as real as consciousness itself30 .The actor himself, however, never 
forgets his true identity, he deceives others but is never himself 
deceived.31 The perfected yogi, at one with Siva, constantly reflects 

upon his own nature. Detached (tatastha) from the outer show, he 
sees its inner essence and recognises that his life is merely the 
spontaneous acting out of the role consciousness has assumed in 
the drama of universal manifestation: 
Although I have changed my form and act out all the 
important junctures in the plot (sandhi) of the drama of 
man's life through birth, infancy, youth, adulthood and old 
age, I (remain) Siva, the great actor.32 
* 
* 
* 
The Self (turned actor) dances (and so requires a stage) 
to serve it as a fitting support. Thus (the Lord) said: 
rango antardtmd 
The stage is the inner Self. 3/10 
The Self which unfolds externally is said to be the 
actor; the inner Self is its internal contraction. It becomes the 
subtle body (puryastaka) and so is called the "stage." Here 
the ubiquitous Lord of Consciousness dances as it were (to 
the rhythm) of creation, persistence and destruction. 
* 
* 
* 
The stage (ranga) is where (the actor) makes his appear-
ance (rajyate) with the intention of exhibiting the (delightful-
ly) various and extensive sport of the drama (in which he 
performs). It is the inner self, the subtle body (puryastaka) 
where (the Self) assumes each of its wonderful and varied 
(vicitra) roles. Basing itself on that as its support, the con-
scious nature assumes (various) roles according to whether it 
takes up its residence in the body of man or beast, etc., and 
by setting the senses into operation performs the five (cos-
mic) functions of creation (persistence, destruction, obscura-
tion and grace). 

Exposition 
The stage, with its scenery and lighting, is the ground on 
which the drama is enacted. It is there that the actor portrays the 
part allotted to him. Analogously, the 'inner soul', which is the 
vehicle that transports consciousness from life to life, is where Siva 
enacts the cosmic drama for each individual soul. 
* 
* 
* 
Thus, the senses do not obscure (one's own nature). 
(Lord Siva) the Divine Androgene spoke the following 
aphorism to explain this: 
preksakantndriyani 
The spectators are the senses. 3/11 
The supreme conscious nature is free and fully awake 
and the senses perform their functions by its power;33 like 
spectators (they view) the ubiquitous Lord of Conscious-
ness here as He dances and cannot obscure His true nature. 
* 
* 
* 
The conscious nature is free and makes the senses and 
(all else) manifest. It is the light of all things for they all shine 
(manifestly apparent). All this universe would be as if blind, 
dumb and insentient were it not to draw its life from the shin-
ing (radiance) of that (light). And so the senses, enlivened by 
it, directly perceive, like aesthetically sensitive spectators, the 
inherent nature (svarupa, of all things) which is free of the 
split between subject and object and is full of the extraordi-
nary delight the performance of the cosmic drama (inspires 
within it). (In this way, the senses) inspire the introspective 
yogi with the wonder that comes from the aesthetic delight 
(rasa) which is the supreme nectar (of universal conscious-
ness). When this is missing Khecari and the other energies 
obscure the aesthetic delight of the nectar (which flows from) 
the perception of oneness (abhedapratha) and impel the wheel 

of the senses along the universal path of suffering. Thus, the 
true nature (svarupa) of the conscious nature (that turned 
actor) dances, is not obscured. 
Exposition 
When the senses of the Well Awakened yogi are directed to 
the outside world they view it within the universal Self. Through 
them the Lord of the Dance appears in His many forms. Free of the 
division between subject and object, the yogi delights in the aes-
thetic rapture that comes from perceiving the wonderful diversity 
(vicitrata) of the spectacle which unfolds within Siva's all-pervasive 
nature. Captivated by the beauty of the cosmic outpouring of his 
own nature, the yogi is the most sensitive of aesthetes (sahrdaya). 
Never deluded by the mistaken notion that there is any other reali-
ty but this, he perceives his own nature directly through the senses 
as full of the delight of the sentiments elicited by the drama of 
transmigratory existence. 
* 
* 
* 
The Lord then uttered an aphorism to explain that 
when this is so the boldest of men prevails (over all) by the 
(power of his) intellect: 
dhivasat 
sattvasiddhih 
The pure state is achieved by the power of the 
(illumined) intellect. 3/12 
When the activity (vrtti of the senses), which has 
sound and the rest as its object, is established in the con-
scious nature the intellect determines (its nature) there 
within it. Thus, because it precedes (sensory perception), it 
is pure and it is this that is said to be the power of the intel-
lect. Free as it is of (all latent) tendencies (that can distract 
and obscure it), it is said to be the screen and ultimate limit 
of pure being (sattva) through which one can achieve the 
pure state (sattva) and so is described thus. 

* 
* 
* 
Given the presence of the senses which are naturally 
always active, sound and the other objects of sense are 
reflected in (their) activity and are, for the reasons given in 
the scriptures and elsewhere, essentially one with conscious-
ness. The intellect which determines (their nature) is, because 
all other latent traces (within it of past action) have been 
destroyed, unsullied by the states (induced by the inordinate 
activity of) rajas or (the dullness of) tamas and, perceiving 
everywhere the Supreme Light (of consciousness) which is 
its own inherent brilliance, it makes of the yogi an abode for 
the light of pure Being (sattva) which is the pulsing radiance 
(sphuratta, of consciousness). 
Exposition 
As the drama of life unfolds, each new moment represents a 
fresh scene in the plot. But while each man has his part to play, and 
is at the same time a spectator, the best actor is he who plays his 
role full of the brilliance and deep feelings of sattva. Cast for the 
hero's part, every movement of his body and every word he utters 
is an inspiration for all who come in contact with him. This is how 
the true yogi lives in the world. For as the intellect of each man 
informs him of his situation so does he perceive and react to his 
environment and those around him. The intellect (dhi) of the aver-
age man is either dull or over excited, constantly affected by the 
shifting, changing forms projected onto it. The yogi's attention, 
however, is fixed on the centre between different moments in the 
plot. It is from here that each scene is illumined with the brilliant 
and unsullied light of consciousness and from here that the yogi 
draws the power of his illumined understanding (dhisakti) which 
directs him to act out his role with the ease and genius of perfect 
mastery. 
* 
* 
* 
As this is so, the Self is free, thus (the Lord) said: 

siddhah 
svatantrabhavah 
(Once this has been achieved) freedom is achieved. 
3/13 
The freedom (the yogi) has achieved in the way 
explained above is that of the Self. 
* 
* 
* 
The innate (sahaja, capacity inherent in the Self) through 
which it knows and does (all things) is (the yogi's) freedom 
which commands all and by virtue of which the entire uni-
verse from Siva to Earth is sustained, perceived, made mani-
fest and brought under his control. Just as by the magical 
power of an alchemical herb, everything it touches turns to 
gold, similarly, all things sanctified (bhavita) by contemplat-
ing Siva's innate nature come under (the yogi's) control. 
Exposition 
The yogi thus continues to play the part of a limited individu-
al, all the while enjoying the omniscience and omnipotence of uni-
versal consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 
Now, do the omniscience and power to do all things 
(the liberated yogi possesses) extend everywhere as they do 
in this body or not? (In response to this question, Siva) the 
One Adorned with the Crescent Moon said: 
yatha tatra 
tathanyatra 
As it is here, so is it elsewhere. 3/14 
When the body is sustained by the Self one knows 
everything that happens within it,34 similarly, (the same 
powers of omniscience and the rest) manifest everywhere 
by virtue of the force inherent in the ground of one's own 
being (svadhisthanabala). 

* 
* 
* 
Just as (the liberated yogi) is endowed with omniscience 
and the power to do all things by contemplating His own Siva-
nature in the body over which he presides, similarly (this 
same) omniscience is made manifest freely in the bodies (one 
normally) considers to be those of others by the power (he 
acquires) by laying hold of the energy latent in his own nature. 
Exposition 
While Bhaskara's commentary is virtually a paraphrase of 
verse 39 of the Stanzas, Ksemaraja quotes verses 6-7. These verses 
can indeed be read together, thus verses 6-7 explain that the puls-
ing (spanda) principle of consciousness is free to operate every-
where and so impels the senses of all living beings, while verse 39 
teaches that the yogi attains the omniscience and hence freedom of 
consciousness by grounding his awareness in his true nature. The 
awakened yogi experiences this freedom not only within his own 
body but also outside it, for he realises that the source of his own 
freedom is the same power which drives the entire universe with 
the spontaneity of its outpouring. 
* 
* 
* 
Now if (the yogi who realises his true nature to be that 
of the universal) agent who is free in all respects, transfers 
his consciousness into other bodies, etc., he (must be) affect-
ed by their qualities, so how can he abide in a state beyond 
time (akdlapadasthiti)? (In reply to this question Siva) the 
Enemy of Time spoke the following aphorism: 
visargasvabhavyad 
abahih 
sthitestatsthitih 
The nature (of consciousness) is emission and so that which 
is not external abides as such. 3/15 
Time is the recurrent pulse (of consciousness, spanda) 
produced by the progressive differentiation of the ongoing 

course of phenomenal action (pravrttikalana), 
while per-
petual emanation (srsti) is the essential state of being (sva-
bhava) of the conscious nature and so (time) never arises on 
the plane of consciousness because (origination) takes place 
by the differentiation of the product of intent (samkalpa). 
External entities do not exist independently outside (con-
sciousness) and so those who are devoted to the path of con-
templation (through which they realise) the oneness of the 
light (of consciousness) with the object of its illumination 
never fall from the abode of their own nature because of 
their mindful practise of union (yoganibhalana). That is 
itself born of the eternal creative urge (of consciousness, 
akalakamaja) 
because it resides on the plane of eternity. 
* 
* 
* 
The Supreme Lord is full of desire to emit (visisrksasila) 
and that which is to be emitted and has emerged (out of 
Him) He contemplates within His own nature, its sustaining 
ground, as one with Him and so supports its existence. But 
even as He does so, He never forgets His own true nature. 
Now, the manifestation of objectivity is, even on the plane of 
Maya, really at one with the Supreme Light (of conscious-
ness) and because this is so (it is in fact pure) Being which 
abides (within consciousness) that (consciousness), by virtue 
of its freedom, manifests externally. Therefore, once one has 
realised the true nature (tattvikasvarupa, of all things) one is 
never conditioned again (by the split) between (the phenom-
enal world of) qualities (dharma) and (consciousness, the 
absolute substance) in which they inhere. 
Exposition 
This aphorism (which is not found in Ksemaraja's recension) 
amplifies and extends the previous one. From the vision of the 
essential unity of outer contents and inner consciousness, the next 
step is the realisation that nothing is external. Those who contem-
plate the unity of the light of consciousness are aware that that 

which is made manifest never exits from the abode of their own 
nature. One with the freedom of consciousness which emanates all 
things, they realise that it projects itself into itself from itself.35 The 
yogi rests on the plane of eternity (akalapada), for although the power 
of time is the creatrix of all things,36 the outpouring of consciousness 
is free of temporal succession.37 The birth of manifest creation is due 
to the association of objectivity with time. But while the power of 
time is essentially the unfolding on the plane of Maya of the cause of 
past, present and future which orders the rhythm of cosmic activity, 
it can in no way affect the pure light of consciousness of which it is 
an expression.38 Time is an attribute of the object while, despite the 
fact that the object can only be made apparent through contact with 
the subject, the pure subject is never conditioned by time.39 The 
cyclic creative activity of the yogi's freedom is in reality the pulsing 
rhythm (spanda) of consciousness. It does not entangle him in the 
web of time nor is he conditioned by its products. 
* 
* 
* 
Thus the Lord explained the best means to attain the 
plane of eternity, namely: 
btjavadhanam 
Constant attention to the seed. 3/16 
The supreme seed of all the universe is said to be the 
conscious nature (cidatman). The attention (the yogi) pays 
to it with an alert mind40 is the reflective awareness (inher-
ent in it). The clutches of delusion and the rest destroyed, it 
is the attainment of the plane of eternity. 
* 
* 
* 
The means to realise the inherent nature (svarupa, of all 
things which abides) unaffected by time is an attentive mind 
(cittavadhana), (which develops) once (the yogi) has eliminat-
ed the limited ego through continuous and assiduous prac-
tise at the empowered level of being which is the (universal) 
cause of all things. 

Exposition 
According to Ksemaraja the "seed" is "the supreme power 
(parasakti) which is the pulsing radiance (of the light of conscious-
ness) and the cause of all things."41 But basically both commenta-
tors agree that this aphorism teaches that the yogi must continue to 
sustain his state of awareness at all times even when he has 
reached the highest level of consciousness. He must repeatedly 
plunge back into his realisation of the divine nature of all things 
and his own being to thus reabsorb the finite mind (citta), directed 
at outer objectivity and hence set in time, into the eternity of the 
creative movement of the energy of consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 
How can (the yogi) penetrate again into the conscious 
nature (out of) which all things arise by the practise of 
Yoga? (In reply to this question) Sankara said: 
asanasthah sukhatn hrade 
nimajjati 
(Confortably) seated (the yogi) sinks effortlessly into the lake 
(of consciousness). 
3/17 
The seat wise yogis take by (stimulating) the Move-
ment of the Fish (matsyavalanaY1 
is the Central (upward 
moving) Breath, (called) the "Purifying Fire" 
(pavamana), 
the Radiance (suci) and Wrath (canda). (The seat is) also (the 
Seed) mentioned before and the one established there sinks 
effortlessly into the lake (of consciousness). (Universal con-
sciousness possesses) the lake-like quality mentioned 
above43 because it is the source of all things and so is 
described as the seed-like quality of the conscious nature. 
Attentive concentration (avadhana) 
is said to be the 
means to conquer time and contemplative penetration 
(anupravesa), passion so that one can attain the state free of 
birth and death. 
* 
* 
* 

Wise yogis apply themselves to practise by means of the 
applied persevering application of the technique (vrtti) 
which can be achieved by means of the effort proper to the 
Yoga which serves to penetrate into the conscious nature. 
When coupled with the practise of breath retention through 
which both currents of the breath are (suspended), the 'radi-
ance' which is a synonym for the fire of the Ascending 
Breath (udana) that is to be generated by the union of the 
Solar and Lunar (breaths) is projected upwards as the cur-
rent of the exhaled breath. In this way it gradually traverses 
all the lower levels from the base (adhara) upwards until, 
reaching the Twelve-finger Space, repose (within conscious-
ness) is produced. The Ascending Breath thus burns the fuel 
of duality and so is "wrathful." It also brings about the high-
est form of purification and so is the purifying fire. By pene-
trating into it (one) plunges completely into the nectarine 
ocean of Siva-consciousness in the Twelve-finger Space out 
of which pour the waves of cosmic diversity (visvavaicitrya). 
Those intent on savouring the aesthetic delight of incessent 
sexual union (nirantarasambhogarasa) by practising the above 
means, attain the absolute and eternal plane of power and 
(their attainment) is unconditioned freedom unaffected by 
either inner or outer diversification (kalana). 
Exposition 
According to Bhaskara, the yogi's seat is the flow of the 
Upward Moving Breath (udanaprana) which emerges in the centre 
between the inhaled and exhaled breath (prana and apana). As it 
rises, it burns away all duality and purifies the yogi's conscious-
ness until, carried along by it, he merges with the source of all the 
breaths and attains the supreme plane of divine power beyond 
time where he becomes master of the unobstructed freedom of con-
sciousness. 
Ksemaraja's explanation is different. According to him the 
time comes when the yogi constantly reflects inwardly on the one-
ness of his true nature and so no longer needs to exert himself. His 
seat and constant support is the supreme strength of the power of 

consciousness (parasaktabala). The practise of meditation and the 
higher levels of contemplative absorption are abandoned and there 
is nothing more for him to do. Enjoying the ease and bliss of the 
higher levels of practise the yogi has simply to relax and feel all the 
limitations imposed on his awareness by his body and mind dis-
solve away as he plunges into the great lake of consciousness 
which, full of the nectar of immortality, is the primordial source of 
all things, and so becomes one with it. Ksemaraja quotes the 
Netratantra as saying: 
One must not meditate on anything above, below, in the 
centre, in front, behind or to either side. One should not 
contemplate anything within the body or outside it. Do not 
fix your attention on the sky nor below (on the earth). Nei-
ther close the eyes nor gaze fixedly. Think not of the sup-
port, the supported or the supportless, nor of the senses or 
of the gross elements or sound, taste, and touch, etc. Hav-
ing abandoned (everything) in this way be established in 
contemplation (samadhi) and become one. That is said to be 
the supreme state of Siva, the supreme soul. Having 
attained to that unmanifest (nirabhasa) plane, one no longer 
falls from it.44 
* 
* 
* 
(Siva), the One Whose Sign is the Bull, said the follow-
ing to explain that repose in this way in the agential aspect 
(of consciousness) 
is unconditioned 
freedom 
through 
which He (and the liberated yogi) has the power to do (all 
things, 
kartrtva): 
svamatra 
nirmanam 
apadayati 
(Siva) fashions 
the world by means of His mother. 
3/18 
The Supreme Lord's capacity to know and do (all 
things) is His (inherent) power, for it is His (inner) strength 
and vitality, the cause of the origination of phenomenal exis-
tence. And so She is the power holder's supreme (power) 
and the mother of the universe. Through Her, His own 

mother, the all-pervasive Lord fashions (all things) as He 
wishes in an instant (asu) by that power of freedom. 
* 
* 
* 
(The yogi attains) repose on that (higher) plane (of con-
sciousness) by assiduously practising the means described 
above, namely, attentive concentration and contemplative 
penetration (into the conscious nature). By his omnipotent 
power which can make manifest things that have never been 
made manifest before and reposing on that plane, he can 
fashion whatever he wishes, whether manifest as subject or 
object. (Thus his) creation serves as a sign that he reposes in 
the abode of freedom. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja takes this aphorism to mean: (The yogi) fashions the 
world by an aspect of his nature. Essentially, however, the commenta-
tors agree that this aphorism refers to the divine creative power the 
yogi acquires when, as Ksemaraja explains, through his practise at 
the individual (anava) level he conquers delusion and attains the 
energy (bala) of the empowered (sakta) state of Pure Knowledge to 
reach the level of Siva-consciousness (sambhavapada). Now, through 
his fully expanded and pure consciousness, the yogi can generate 
the world of diversity as he likes by separating a part of his universal 
nature off from himself in such a way that it condenses down to the 
level of objectivity.45 Thus, as he emerges from the unmanifest state 
to that of manifestation, girted about by the limiting conditions of 
finitude, he carries with him the inner consciousness of the subject 
which flows out into the moulds of outer objectivity. He realises, in 
other words, that the objective world is nothing but an outer objec-
tivized projection of Siva, the one universal subject, and that each 
particular object is a tiny, gross fragment of the infinite, supremely 
subtle consciousness which is the yogi's true nature. Thus the yogi 
who realises, as verse 30 of the Stanzas declares, that the whole uni-
verse is, in this sense, nothing but the play of consciousness, is liber-
ated in this very life, even as he perceives the world of diversity. 

* 
* 
* 
This, (the individual soul's true) nature, is shrouded 
with impurity due (to his limited) intellect. By the destruc-
tion (of this impurity) rebirth ceases. (So the lord) went on to 
say: 
vidyavinase 
janmavinasah 
Once (limited) knowledge is destroyed, rebirth is 
destroyed. 3/19 
Conditioned, empirical knowledge is termed "impure 
knowledge" and is the cause of rebirth. The destruction (of 
impure knowledge) is consonant with the contemplative 
awareness (nibhalana) that the innate knowledge (saha-
javidya) (inherent in consciousness) is dawning. When this 
happens, it engenders the supreme manifestation of the 
freedom of the Self. And so, by grounding (awareness) in 
the power inherent in one's own nature (svabala), rebirth 
ceases. This perfection (siddhi) is liberation in this very life 
(jlvanmukti) which bestows (upon the yogi) the timeless 
state of being 
(akalapada) 
* 
it- 
* 
Impure knowledge is defined as empirircal knowledge 
(vrttijnana) which, because it is inlaid (khacita) with the form 
of the things (of this world), serves as a means to obtain 
objectively perceivable results. This (form of knowledge) is 
binding. By reflecting on the pure knowledge (of self-aware-
ness) which is its opposite, one realises (one's own) innate 
consciousness (sahajasamvit) through which one acquires the 
vitality inherent in one's own nature (svavirya). When this 
takes place, the bondage of karma consisting of the aggregate 
of the body, senses (and mind), etc., fashioned by the cou-
pled (effects) of the two impurities, mayiyamala (which 
engenders the notion of duality) and anavamala (which con-
tracts consciousness), is destroyed. 

Exposition 
Ksemaraja understands this aphorism to mean: Due to the con-
tinued existence of (pure) knowledge, re-birth is destroyed. But despite 
the divergence, Ksemaraja makes much the same point as Bhaskara, 
namely that the awakening realisation of enlightenment is a con-
stantly renewing and renewed process. The wisdom and insight 
inherent in consciousness is constantly emerging afresh. When this 
happens, the conditions of mind and body which give rise to the 
suffering and troubles of transmigration have no time to form. 
Viewing all things as the harmony of Siva's consciousness, there is 
no space for conflict and the limiting knowledge of the finite. 
* 
* 
* 
(Impure) knowledge is intent on that which is objec-
tively perceivable because it is sullied by the limitations 
imposed by external objects. The Unborn Lord said the fol-
lowing to explain what impels it: 
kavargadisu mahesvaryadyah 
pasumatarah 
Mahesvari and the other mothers of the soul in bondage 
reside in the gutterals and the other classes of 
consonants. 
3/20 
The aggregated totality of speech (sabdarasi which 
reposes in consciousness at one with it) is the universal 
nature of all things.46 To it belongs the (binding) power 
(kala), whose nature has already been explained, (that 
obscures) the fettered soul which, pervaded by speech 
(sabda), gives rise to mental representations (pratyaya).47 
(This power) is said to possess two forms according to 
whether it is a seed (bija) or matrix of generation iyoni). The 
seed is Siva Himself while the matrix of generation is the 
power called Maya and consists of the eight classes of 
phonemes that range from 'K' to 'KS'. The eight (mothers) 
Mahesvari, etc., bestow the higher fruits (of Yoga) and the 
lower fruits (of karma) and reside there so that the fettered 
may gain knowledge of outer things. (Every one of) the 
eight mothers possesses three aspects in each one of the 

classes (of consonants). (The first is represented by) the 
power Ghord which engenders attachment to the fruit of 
mixed (good and bad) action. The power Ghoratard throws 
down those whose mind is attached to sense objects to 
increasingly lower levels (of consciousness), while the 
power Aghord bestows Siva. It is in this latter aspect that 
Bhairava's eternal Being (bhairavatd) resides. 
* 
* 
* 
The supreme power of speech is one with Siva. It gener-
ates three powers, namely, those of will (knowledge and 
action) and, having done so, engenders within each individu-
al, fettered soul (the power of) Matrka (which operates) on the 
level of discursively conceptualizing consciousness (savikalpa-
samvedana) and consists of (the energies of) the phonemes and 
those of the classes to which they belong. (Thus) it gives rise to 
the reflective awareness of inner subtle and gross speech. 
(Matrka) induces the spread of attachment, aversion, passion 
and greed, etc. (in the minds of the fettered) through (the 
divine power of) Mahesvari and the other (mothers) who pre-
side over the classes (of consonants) and so engenders (the 
mistaken sense of) oneness (the fettered feel) with their body, 
etc. Thus extending their activity in this way through the sens-
es, the mothers, Mahesvari and the rest called Ghord, etc., cast 
down the fettered who do not attend to their own nature (to 
lower levels of consciousness) by the attachment they feel for 
the objects of the senses. (Things, however, are different for 
those who) have mastered (these forces, pati, and are no longer 
their slaves, pasu). They do not engender the perception of 
duality (bhedapratha, in them) but inspire them with a sense of 
wonder initially and then fill them with the aesthetic delight of 
the expansion of their own nature (svatmavikasarasa). 
Exposition 
This aphorism goes on to warn the yogi of the potential dan-
gers of getting lost in the realms of thought forms. The pure power 

of awareness functioning at the supreme level of speech sponta-
neously issues forth from itself and moves down to the sphere of 
thought and articulated speech. As we have seen, this descent coin-
cides with the diversification of the power of consciousness as the 
letters of the alphabet, then to the formation of words and finally to 
that of sentences through which thought constructs are created. 
The classes of consonants are thus represented as the mothers or 
wombs (yoni) of diversity and the vowels as the seeds (bija). When 
these two unite, the world of speech is made manifest. 
The unenlightened cannot follow this process consciously 
and so are caught in the welter of emotions which words, whether 
thought or uttered, inspire in him. The enlightened yogi, however, 
is established in the introverted awareness of subjectivity repre-
sented by the vowels and so is master of the energies of the conso-
nants and is not bound by them. Thus, the eight powers presiding 
over the eight classes of consonants can either elevate the soul, in 
which case they are called Aghorasaktis, or throw him down, in 
which case they are called Ghoratarasaktis. They manifest as 
Ghorasaktis when the individual is caught halfway between these 
two extremes and is attached to the mixed fruits of his actions. 
* 
* 
* 
These are the three aspects of the Aggregate of Words 
(sabdardsi) 
each of which is born of the eight classes (of 
consonants). (It is similarly threefold) in the case of (any) 
aggregate of phonemes (which happens to constitute a word 
or Mantra), each aspect corresponding to the beginning, 
middle or end of its utterance. (The Lord then) explained 
how (the yogi realises his own) Siva-nature (sivatd) by the 
union (of these three). 
trisu caturtham 
tailavaddsecyam 
The Fourth should be sprinkled 
like oil 
into the three. 
3/21 
The remaining reality that abides within the three 
energies (Aghord, Ghord and Ghoratard) 
mentioned above 
and in the phonemes, here (called) the Fourth, is Siva, the 

supreme reality (para). (The yogi) should contemplate Him 
and sprinkle Him in the three like oil in water. (Thus the 
yogi attains) the perfection (siddhi) which persists constant-
ly because (he realises that he) pervades (all three). 
* 
* 
it-
Thought constructs (vikalpa) (are verbal mental repre-
sentations) which consist essentially of gross phonemic 
sounds and subtle ones (the mind both perceives and pro-
duces). Their existence is sustained by Ghora, Aghora and the 
other energies (which bind) the fettered as described in the 
previous aphorism. (The yogi) should sprinkle the initial 
(state when they arise) and the final (when they fall away) 
with the juice (rasa, of the aesthetic delight) of consciousness, 
that is, with (the consciousness the yogi) perceives as their 
underlying sustaining ground. (The yogi) should, in other 
words, first reflect how (thought constructs) are conscious-
ness and then, eliminating the perception of duality by grad-
ually extending the pervasive presence of (the conscious-
ness) which sustains them, like oil (that is soaked up 
gradually by a cloth), he should contemplate their basic state 
(avasthiti) as being the juice (of the aesthetic delight) of con-
sciousness so that the binding activity of these (energies) 
may come to a halt. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja's understanding of this aphorism is quite differ-
ent. According to him, the 'three states' are, as one would expect, 
those of waking, dreaming and deep sleep. Thus, Ksemaraja says 
that this aphorism goes on to explain how the yogi is to maintain 
his awareness of his own nature in all these three states in order 
not to loose sight at any time of the Pure Knowledge he has gained 
through the previous practises. 
The yogi is instructed to pay close attention to the moment of 
transition from one state to the next. He must lay hold of the centre 
between the cessation of one state of consciousness and the unfold-

ing of another. There, between waking and dreaming, dreaming 
and deep sleep, etc., he discovers the blissful abode of the Fourth 
State (turiya) brilliant with the light of Pure Knowledge. To the 
degree in which he manages to attend to the centre, the savour 
(rasa) of consciousness gradually pervades these states like oil 
sprinkled on a cloth, until all three are constantly experienced by 
the yogi in the contemplative absorption of the Fourth State. 
* 
* 
Jt-
Then (the Lord) explained the means by which (the 
yogi) can penetrate (the energy of each) phoneme: 
magnah svacittena48 
praviset 
Merged (in his own nature, the yogi) must penetrate (the 
phonemes) with his mind. 3/22 
The all-pervasive Lord assumes the form of outer reali-
ty (bahyakarata) 
in the act of moving (out of Himself). He 
withdraws (His outer form) into Himself when (this outgo-
ing movement gives way to) the emergence of the (opposite) 
movement which preceded it and so Siva merges into His 
own nature when the outward movement ceases. When (the 
yogi) becomes Siva in this way by withdrawing (nimesa, his 
energies from the outer world) he should use his mind 
(cetas) to enter the phonemes (of his Mantra) as fire does 
burning coals. Then, by applying Bhairavamudra 
(bhairava-
vrtti, through which the power of consciousness expands),49 
(the yogi's) Mantra becomes supremely vitalized and (he 
acquires many powers including that of) transfering his con-
sciousness into another's body.50 When this takes place the 
Siva and Bhairava nature of Mantras is clearly manifest (to 
him) for otherwise why should Mantra, that consists (merely 
of) phonemic sounds, be the Lord Himself? 
* 
* 
* 
It is because the powers of knowledge and action have 
been set into operation and are extending their activity that 

the Lord of Consciousness Who is their possessor and desires 
to move (out of Himself), is intent on outer objectivity. By 
withdrawing this activity (vrtti), tinged with outer objects, the 
yogi should penetrate the phonemes (of his Mantra), as fire 
does burning coals, through an act of awareness free of 
thought constructs. When (he) penetrates the phonemes (in 
this way) he also manages to vitalize (his) Mantra, etc., by 
means of the bhairavamudra he has accomplished. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja, unlike Bhaskara, sees no special connection 
between this aphorism and the practise of Mantra and its power 
but reads it simply to mean that: (with his limited subjectivity) sub-
merged (the yogi) must penetrate (into the power of consciousness) by 
means of his (thought-free) mind. Consistent with his understanding 
of the previous aphorism, Ksemaraja sees this one as teaching what 
the yogi must do once the subjective awareness of the Fourth State 
has pervaded the other states and he has merged the limited egoity 
associated with the body and mind, etc., into the aesthetic delight 
of universal consciousness to experience the pulsing vitality of 
awareness. Rising from the individual (anava) level to that Beyond 
Mind (unmana), he becomes absorbed and at one with his true 
nature through an inner act of non-discursive awareness. The 
mind, individual consciousness, breath and ego dissolve away51 
and the yogi's individual mental activity is united with the univer-
sal activity of consciousness by virtue of which he attains Sivahood 
and is liberated. Ksemaraja quotes the Hymn to the Womb of Knowl-
edge (Jfianagarbhastotra): 
O Mother, having abandoned all mental activity and, no 
longer bound to pursuing the activity of the senses, the 
brilliance of which depends (on outer objectivity), those 
men who by Your grace are established (in their own 
nature), instantly experience the supreme plane which 
pours forth untiringly the incomparably blissful nectar (of 
immortality).52 
* 
* 
* 

The Lord then uttered the following aphorism to 
explain what happens when divested (of the consciousness) 
which precedes and succeeds it, a phoneme abides alone: 
madhye'varaprasavah 
The emergence of the lower (plane) occurs 
in the centre. 3/23 
A phoneme is, in the course of its utterance, divided 
into three parts: the beginning, the middle and the end. 
Siva's Being (sivarupata) abides in the first and last of these 
which correspond to the intent to existence (udbubhusa) and 
repose (in universal consciousness), respectively. Emer-
gence in the centre of these two is the fall of the fettered 
soul (from the awareness of pure consciousness) into the 
mere (inert sound) of the phoneme (for) the teaching is that 
(it is at the beginning and the end that) the Lord's empow-
ered (sakta) nature is clearly manifest. 
* 
if 
i f 
Siva can easily be realised (while one speaks or intones 
a Mantra) at the beginning when one intends to speak or at 
the end (when the utterance) ceases. This is because there the 
gross aggregates of phonemes (of corporeal speech) and the 
subtle (inner sound of thought) at the middle level of speech 
fuse in the undivided unity of the Voice of Intuition (and 
that of Supreme Speech). In the middle, however, (the 
phonemes) manifest as aggregates, each with its own diverse 
form, and so (the yogi's awareness) falls from the presence of 
consciousness free of thought constructs. 
Exposition 
As before, Ksemaraja's explanation of this aphorism differs 
from Bhaskara's because he understands it with reference to how 
the yogi can develop and maintain the higher consciousness of the 
Fourth State (turiya) in relation to the other three states of waking, 

dreaming and deep sleep. Ksemaraja warns him to be careful 
because he is liable to fall as he makes the transition from one state 
of consciousness to the other. When the yogi succeeds in catching 
hold of the inner flow of the savour (rasa) of the Fourth State in all 
three states, he is led to the unifying consciousness of the state 
Beyond the Fourth (turiyatita) from which he never strays to lower 
states. If, however, he merely rests content with the experience of 
the Fourth State in the gap between the impending outpouring of 
one state and the coming to rest of the previous one, his lack of 
awareness at other times inevitably entangles him in the down-
ward flow of the diversity of perceptions in the centre between 
these gaps, engendered by the latent traces of past experience, and 
he is thrown out of his contemplative state into the bondage of con-
ditioned consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 
Now given that this is (each phoneme's) three-fold 
nature, (Siva), Parvati's Beloved, went on to say the follow-
ing to explain what (their) oneness (sdmya) is: 
pranasamacare 
samadarsanam 
When the breath moves uniformly one has an equal 
vision of all things. 3/24 
The highest (faculty the soul possesses) is its innate 
capacity to know and do all things. (This power) which can 
impart life to all things (sarvanupranana) is the vital breath 
(prana) also known as the Supreme Resonance (paranada of 
consciousness). Its uniform movement is the contemplative 
penetration (avesa) radiantly manifest in (every) phoneme, 
word and individual soul and the experience of unity one 
has through it is the equal vision of all things. No wonder 
then that by seizing that strength (bala) in this way,53 
Mantras and phonemes are endowed with the power of 
omniscience. 
* 
* 
* 

The point is that (the yogi) attains the supreme vitality 
which comes from his being well established in the (uninter-
rupted) flow of his practise centred on the experience of the 
oneness of every Mantra and word, etc., that emerges (from 
the highest level of consciousness) down to that of corporeal 
speech by the unifying contemplation (samapatti) that (he 
experiences) in the autonomous light (of consciousness) 
known as the Supreme Resonance (paranada, of awareness), 
which is the life of all that manifests (sarvaprakasa). 
Exposition 
What Bhaskara is saying here basically is that the yogi who 
manages to maintain a constant flow of awareness in harmony 
with the rhythm of the breath in the moments of its emergence, 
movement and cessation, experiences the pure vitality (pranana) of 
consciousness which creates and knows all things. All the letters, 
words and sentences he utters or thinks then become equally 
empowered with the innate strength of the yogi's nature and a 
means by which he can penetrate, instantly and without effort, 
through the veil of thought. 
Ksemaraja reads this aphorism differently. According to him, 
it means: (The yogi) views all things equally when he exhales slowly and 
correctly. The yogi, once merged in pure transcendental conscious-
ness where all his thoughts, perceptions, mind, senses and breath 
have dissolved away, must rise from his internal absorption 
{nimilana samadhi). His aim is to maintain this pure state of aware-
ness, that is, consciousness of the Fourth State (turiya), when he 
returns to the usual fluctuations of the three states of waking, 
dreaming and deep sleep. The breath, which was drawn in and 
arrested when he turned inwards has thus, as Ksemaraja puts it, 
been "purified by the fragrance of (God's divine power) which is 
the supreme radiance (of consciousness)."54 Now he must slowly let 
it out as his consciousness flows out to the outer world of experi-
ence. If this is done correctly, the yogi does not feel that the breath 
exits from his essential conscious nature. The flow from inner to 
outer, which at the individual level is represented by the exhalation 
of the breath corresponds, at the empowered (sakta) level, to the 

flow of awareness from subject to object and, at the level of Siva-
consciousness (sambhava), to the movement of the power of the will 
to that of action. All three aspects of this flow are now experienced 
as one internal movement. The yogi's awareness is recognised to be 
a single, compact mass of consciousness and bliss, present on all 
planes. All relative distinctions between good and evil, high and 
low social status, bondage and liberation, etc., now loose all mean-
ing for him for he sees all things as being equally the bliss of univer-
sal consciousness even when his senses and mind are actively 
engaged in the activities of normal mundane existence. 
Jf- 
X- 
Jf 
Having explained how the phonemes are vitalized, 
Sambhu accordingly went on to explain how the body of 
phenomena (bhavasarira), etc., are given life: 
matrasvapratyayasamdhane 
nastasya 
punarutthanam 
That which was destroyed arises once more in the course of 
the unifying awareness of one's own perception of the 
individual units of experience. 3/25 
The functional energies (kala) of the group of cate-
gories ranging from Maya to Earth are the individual units 
of experience (matra) (understood as) the manifestations of 
each category in its own specific field (of manifestation). 
One's own perception of each one is the cognitive awareness 
(jitana) which fills it (with its vital presence and in so doing 
functions) as the unifying awareness (that connects them 
together) and rests in the (one) acting subject (kartr, engaged 
in the act of perception). When this takes place, the phenom-
ena (and other functions which concur to generate the objec-
tive world) that were destroyed, manifest once more. Thus 
the (diverse) perceptions of the individual elements of expe-
rience are unified by penetrating into the (underlying) act-
ing subjectivity (which generates and hence connects them 
all together). Wherever this occurs the (conscious) agency (is 
activated) which consists of a perfectly stable state of con-
scious absorption in the power of omniscience. 

* 
* 
* 
The meaning is as follows. The functional energies (kala) 
of the categories that range from Maya to Earth are the mate-
rial cause of the elemental body (bhutasanra). Once they are 
generated (nispadya) as the aesthetic delight (rasa) of con-
sciousness by connecting them together in the unifying per-
ception of their oneness with one's own nature, the phenom-
enal body (bhavasarira) which is the locus of sound and the 
other objects of the senses (also) manifests (udeti) as the aes-
thetic delight of uninterrupted (ghana) consciousness and 
bliss. In this way (the yogi) gains the energy (virya) generat-
ed by penetrating (samavesa) into the plane of universal agen-
cy, etc., and so realises everywhere the supreme sovereign 
freedom (of consciousness) which is (the universal) cogniz-
ing and acting subjectivity that, full and perfect (paripurna), 
(perceives and does all things). 
Exposition 
Again Ksemaraja understands this aphorism differently, 
although in a way compatible with Bhaskara's interpretation. 
According to him it means: By reflecting on ones own perception of 
things, that which was lost again emerges. As Ksemaraja reverses the 
order of the previous two aphorisms he understands this one as 
showing the way in which the yogi can regain the yogic conscious-
ness of the Fourth State should he loose it when he enters one of 
the other states. Thus, according to Ksemaraja, this aphorism basi-
cally teaches how the yogi is to experience his true nature not only 
in the Fourth State but also in the others where, through lack of 
awareness, the lower-order subject has taken over the functions of 
the higher. To do this the yogi need not attempt to check the flow 
of perceptions or thoughts. Instead, he should seek the knower and 
agent of the manifest aspect of the categories of existence apparent 
to him. By cultivating the awareness that 'I am all this', the yogi 
again catches hold of the bliss of the Fourth State in the moment of 
self-realisation and recognises that whatever he may see, hear, 
think about or apprehend is nothing but an aspect of his own uni-

versal nature. His mind becomes steady and he enjoys rest within 
himself. Ksemaraja quotes the Svacchandatantra as saying: 
Even the mind of yogis is forceably made unsteady (by the 
desire for worldly pleasure).(But) the mind which is (pure) 
Being, the ultimate object of realisation (jfteya), stable and 
complete in all respects never wavers whatever be the state 
of its possessor. Reflect on the reality (all) seek to know 
(jneya) wherever the mind happens to move for as all 
things are Siva, once it moves where can it go?55 
* 
* 
* 
How is (the yogi) who is constantly dedicated (to this 
practise)? (The Lord) said: 
sivatulyo jay ate 
He becomes like siva. 3/26 
Amongst (all) the causes that concur (to give rise to 
phenomenal existence) Siva stands supreme. His nature is 
consciousness and form boundless Light (nirupadhijyotis). 
Thus because (Siva is such and) the adept constantly 
applies himself (to the practise of Yoga), he is like Him (in 
all respects) even while he acts (in this world) and is liberat-
ed in this very life by the vitality (virya) of that higher 
knowledge we spoke about before. 
* 
* 
* 
(The yogi) who is constantly dedicated (to this practise) 
has attained, through his intense pursuit of Siva's true nature, 
(Siva's own) level of existence and so savours the bliss of lib-
eration in this very life even while the energies which func-
tion through the body (idehakala) continue (to operate) and so 
is like Siva. Eventually, when the worldly experience which 
has failed to his lot and that which he must still enjoy is 
exhausted, he is liberated after the death of the body (videha-
mukti) and then attains a state of identity (tadatmya, with 
Siva). 

Exposition 
Ksemaraja explains that once the yogi has succeeded in expe-
riencing the Fourth State (turiya) which is self-realisation in all 
states, he rises to the level Beyond the Fourth (turiyatita) in which 
he identifies with Siva. This aphorism points out that he is not as 
yet absolutely identical with Siva. Although the yogi is liberated in 
this life (jwanmukta), it is not until the last traces of Karma, which 
still hold him down to the level of embodied existence, have 
worked themselves out and he quits the body that he becomes Siva 
in every respect. 
* 
* 
* 
Now to what is one who practises in this way constant-
ly dedicated? In reply, the Blessed One spoke the following 
aphorism which describes (this yogi's) vow: 
safiravrttirvratam 
The activity of the body is the vow. 3/27 
(This yogi) performs the Great Vow of abiding in his 
own unfettered nature. (His) five insignias (mudra) are the 
body, that is, the skeleton, the skull, the anklets, the back-
bone, which represents the stick, and the bones which are 
those of the hands, feet and neck. The ashes (he smears on 
his body) is the supreme radiance (of consciousness) and 
the three qualities (guna), the sacred thread. His banner is 
the Great Path56 and ornaments, the senses. His sport is to 
play among the objects of the senses and he delights con-
stantly in the cremation ground of the Heart (of conscious-
ness) illumined in his body, speech and mind. Whatever he 
does is the eternal festival of the Lord of the Heroes. 
* 
* 
* 
He who is well practised in the way described attains 
success in the Great Vow, the Vow of the Pasupatas.57 The 
accessories he should use are not those visible to all. These 

include, the skeleton, skull, stick, five insignias, ash, sacred 
thread, banner, ornaments, dwelling and sportive behaviour. 
(The ascetic) who sports visible signs and so makes a show of 
himself as a follower of Dharma (dharmadhvajin) is sullied by 
impurity. 
Exposition 
Although the liberated yogi must continue to reside in his 
body until the remnants of the fruits of his past actions are exhaust-
ed, he accepts his lot joyfully. He lives without care for what he will 
eat or where he will find shelter, accepting whatever comes to him 
without concern for his personal well being. To the outer observer 
he appears to behave and talk like any other man. Concealing his 
true spiritual stature from the prying gaze of the public, the elevat-
ing powers of consciousness converge upon him. Untouched by 
good or evil, the reflective awareness he has of his own nature coin-
cides with that of Siva Himself. Thus, one with consciousness, he 
rests on the supreme plane (anuttara) where the brilliant radiance of 
his own nature is his constant worship.58 This same self-awareness 
enlivens his body, mind and breath; it rises in an uninterrupted 
flow to the highest reaches of consciousness, like a flame from a fire, 
to dissolve in the infinite.59 Thus his every action, however ordinary 
it may seem to others, is a ritual gesture (mudra) which forms a part 
of his uninterrupted worship of his own nature manifest within him 
and everywhere around him. Thus, as all he does and his very body 
are the signs (mudra) of his ascetic attainments, Bhaskara shows 
how these correspond to the outer signs that Pasupata and other 
such yogi's wear. Indeed, without the former the latter are useless, 
merely outer shows that, far from being a token of spiritual devel-
opment, restrict consciousness further. 
* 
* 
* 
Now how does one who performs this vow recite 
Mantra ? 
hatha 
japah 
Common talk is (his) recitation 
of Mantra. 
3/28 

Once the awakened (prabuddha) yogi's level of con-
sciousness has risen to that of (the universal) agent, all that 
he says is (his) recitation of Mantra. Observing his vow and 
reciting Mantra (in this way), he is the best of men 
(purusottama). His common talk is the flow (sancara) of his 
utterances (each) supported by the vitality (of conscious-
ness) and is the recitation of Mantra which should thus be 
known to be of four kinds; namely, the empowered (sakta) 
recitation, the recitation of the Gander (hamsa), the recita-
tion of the individual soul (paudgala) and the recitation 
without parts (niskala). The recitation without parts is the 
(reflective awareness of) the components of OM (pranava) 
while the recitation of the Gander (hamsa) is (the aware-
ness) of the energy of the divine resonance of conscious-
ness (nada). The recitation of the individual soul is (the 
abiding awareness) of the movement of the breath as it 
flows (ebbing and flowing) constantly 21,600 times (a day). 
* 
* 
* 
The Lord of the Heroes Who observes the Great Vow 
and has reached the level of consciousness to contemplate 
the Supreme Egoity (parahambhava, of universal conscious-
ness), recites Mantra constantly and without interruption. By 
means of the very essence of the reflective awareness (he 
has) of the deity of his own nature he recites the four types of 
Mantra; namely, that without parts, the Gander, that of the 
individual soul and the empowered. 
Exposition 
Established in the pure Mantric energy of the universal ego, 
the continuous flow of the yogi's awareness is the constant emer-
gence and subsidence of Mantra. Empowered by the omniscient 
awareness of the pure cognition of universal consciousness, the 
yogi repeatedly rises to the highest state and redescends to that of 
everyday life. This vibration is the resonance (nada)60 or enouncia-
tion of energy (saktoccara) within consciousness. It is one level at 

which the yogi speaks and, in so doing, recites Mantra. Again, at 
another level, constantly mindful as he is of the sound of the move-
ment of his breath, the yogi recites Ajapa Gayatn Mantra, i.e., 
Hamsa, which is repeated automatically within his body 21,000 
times a day. Finally, every word he utters, mindful of the 'sound-
less sound' of awareness from which it springs and to which it 
returns, is also his Mantra. Thus at every level of his being the yogi 
participates in the sacred and makes it manifest through his every 
perception, thought, word and deed. 
* 
* 
* 
What is the gift by which the wise (yogi) who is thus 
perfected, devoted to the observance of (this) vow and the 
recitation of Mantra may be known? (In reply) Sankara 
said: 
ddnam 
atmajnanam 
Self-knowledge is the boon. 3/29 
As we have already explained and will do so again 
later, the best and highest knowledge is insight into one's 
own nature (dtmasvarupa). Its correct revelation (to others) 
is the greatest boon those awakened by the power of grace 
(can bestow) here in this world. Their gift (ddna) complete-
ly severs (ksapana) the bonds of the fettered and so is called 
"initiation" (diksd) which bestows (ddna, self-realisation) 
and destroys (ksapana, all bondage). 
* 
* 
* 
The boon of those who have been blessed with an 
intense descent of the power of grace, observe the vow and 
recite Mantra in the way described, is the self-knowledge 
described previously which ought to be revealed, in the man-
ner explained above and to be further explained, to the fet-
tered. This is because those who are the objects of grace are fit 
for the initiation (that bestows) the boon of self-realisation 
and destroys all the fetters that restrict consciousness (anava). 

Exposition 
Graced with an intense descent of power (twrasaktipata), the 
yogi is granted an insight into his true nature. To receive this boon 
is to be given the fullness and wholeness of one's own nature, to 
free it from all duality, to purify it of illusion and protect it from 
the forces which obscure the awareness it has of itself. Moreover, 
the yogi bestows the same gift he received through enlightenment 
to his disciples. Once the yogi enjoys the freedom and wisdom of 
the highest level of consciousness there is nothing left for him to do 
except elevate others. As Abhinava says: 
People, occupied as they are with their own affairs, nor-
mally do nothing for others. The activity of those in whom 
every stain of phenomenal existence has been destroyed 
and are identified with Bhairava, full of Him, is intended 
only for the benefit of the world.61 
* 
* 
* 
The 
all-pervasive 
Lord Who 
creates, 
preserves, 
destroys, protects and graces is nothing but the Self because 
Siva is its true nature. (Siva), Who bears the crescent moon, 
uttered (the following) aphorism which, (can be read) in 
sections and as a whole, in order to describe what it is: 
yovipastho 
jfiahetusca 
Knowledge and the cause reside in the cosmic nature and the 
source (of the universe). 3/30 
The Lord is the highest reality for He is the source (yoni) 
of the universe. He is both knowledge and action because He 
reduces (all that) should be abandoned to a worthless noth-
ing (tucchikarana). Thus the yogi who, endowed with knowl-
edge, abides in the cosmic nature is, as we have already 
explained, the most excellent cause of both liberation and 
worldly enjoyment (bhoga). The Lord of yogis who is thus 
perfectly (samyak) absorbed in the active agency (of con-
sciousness, kartrmsa) and so has realised his stable state of 

being (sthiti) resides in the cosmic nature and is the supreme 
cause of the (development of that) knowledge (in others). 
The group of mothers (which operates in the limited 
consciousness of) the fettered governs them. The Self 
resides pulsing radiantly in the midst (of these obscuring 
forces) and so is the Lord of the Wheel (of Energies). Thus 
(these powers) are the functional potencies (vrtti) of the 
Bhairava of Consciousness (cidbhairava) and are said to be 
the rays (of His divine light) which worship (Him) perpetu-
ally by (offering Him) the pleasures (bhoga) of sound and 
the other objects of the senses. The all-pervasive Lord of 
one's own consciousness is the means (hetu) by which (one 
achieves) knowledge of the group of Mothers. 
* 
St- 
* 
Parasiva is the universal cause of all things. His nature 
is knowledge and action and He reduces (all that) should be 
abandoned to a worthless nothing (tucchikarana). The yogi 
who, through His grace, abides in the abode from which all 
things emanate becomes, by virtue of the perfect omni-
science and other (divine attributes he finds there), a verita-
ble vessel of liberation and bliss. 
(Again, another interpretation is the following): the lord 
of yogis whose consciousness has risen to the level of that of 
the (universal) agent attains thereby his stable state of being 
and so can, by the power of his insight, awaken those fit to 
receive instruction. 
Yet another (way of understanding this aphorism is 
this): The Self shines radiantly as the Lord of the Wheel (of 
energies) in the midst of Mahesvari and the other (powers 
which constitute) the group of Mothers that support (the lim-
ited consciousness of the) individual fettered perceiving sub-
ject. (These powers) are the functional potencies of con-
sciousness which, sustained by Matrkasakti, are the rays (of 
the light of the Self) that, drawing the essential being of the 
objects of the senses (towards the universal consciousness of 
the Self), worship it thus perpetually. Therefore, because 
these energies reside within (the Self) and can have no inde-

pendent existence of their own apart from it, they sustain it 
in order to make themselves manifest. In short, (the Self) is 
the outpouring of divine power (saktollasa). 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja offers two explanations of this aphorism. Accord-
ing to one interpretation, the meaning would be: the Lord of yogis 
who is established in the abode of the consciousness which is his own 
essential nature by the power of (his) reflective awareness should be 
known to be the (universal) knower and agent (of all things).62 The sec-
ond interpretation is the one Ksemaraja prefers and largely coin-
cides with the one Bhaskara offers. From this point of view, the 
aphorism means: He who is established in the Wheel of Energies is the 
source of knowledge.63 The Wheel of Energies is in this case, as 
Bhaskara also says, the group of Mothers, Mahesvari, etc., who pre-
side over the various classes of phonemes. The enlightened yogi 
sets aside all the limited knowledge and action they engender to 
become the Lord of the Wheel, thus taking possession of himself as 
the universal agent in the centre of the circle from which the uni-
verse is emanated. As the Master and agent of the activity of the 
Wheel of Energies he has the power to enlighten others and bestow 
on them the supreme bliss and freedom of liberation. 
* 
* 
* 
(Siva then) explained that His form as the energy (of 
consciousness) is the universe: 
svasaktipracayo'sya 
visvam 
The universe is the aggregate of his powers. 3/32 
In this way the powers of (Siva) the power-holder are 
those of consciousness and the rest. The pulsations (spanda) 
of their ever-renewed outpouring are said to be their aggre-
gates. Know these to be the universe, for the all-pervasive 
Lord manifests as power in the form of the universe and in 
so doing manifests (only) Himself at all times. 

x- 
* 
x-
The universe is Siva in the form of His absolute energy 
and, because the yogi is similar to Siva (in all respects), the 
power of his consciousness is fully expanded (in the same 
way) as the vibrant radiance of the power of action made up of 
the pulsation of its wonderfully diverse and constantly 
renewed outpouring. The entire range of objectivity, whether 
external like the colour blue, or internal, like the feeling of 
pleasure, participates, in the course of its perception, in the 
repose the light (of consciousness enjoys in its own nature). In 
so doing (each object) attains its own specific phenomenal 
form Csvavyavasthapana), for otherwise it would appear to be 
unreasonable to establish the nature (of anything) just as it is in 
itself 0svasiddhi). Therefore, it is one's own consciousness alone 
that manifests itself in this way and that as the wonderful 
diversity of all things, like one who is free to desire whatever 
he likes. Thus, because the power (of consciousness) and its 
possessor are one, it is Siva Himself Who manifests in this way. 
Exposition 
As nothing can exist apart from our perception of it, and con-
sciousness, conceived as a state of pure cognitive awareness, is the 
necessary ground of all perception, the yogi who identifies with 
consciousness is the creator of all things. The constantly renewed 
outpouring of the powers of consciousness stimulated by the 
expansion of the yogi's universal power of action blossoms forth 
into a new universe at each instant. Thus, like Siva, the yogi 
expresses the unmanifest universe without either aspect contra-
dicting or impinging on the fullness of the other. 
* 
x- 
* 
Now, (Siva) the Destroyer of the Three Cities, uttered 
the following aphorism as he explained that the Self which 
is the author of creation is similarly also the agent of persis-
tence and destruction: 

sthitilayau 
(Such is also the case with) persistence 
and absorption. 
3/32 
The same conscious nature freely brings about the per-
sistence and absorption (of all things) as it wishes by means 
of these same aggregates of energy which are the outpour-
ing of (its) functional potencies (vrtti). 
* 
* 
* 
The conscious nature thus sustains and destroys the 
universe (it has) generated through (its) power of action by 
the power of its will. What is meant by persistence (sthiti) is 
the external manifestation of the entire universe of phenome-
na established in its own sustaining ground for the specific 
time alloted for its existence according to its level (on the 
scale of the categories of existence ranging from the lowest) 
up to that of Sakti and the corresponding subjects which 
govern it. One's own plane of being dissolves away by the 
withdrawal back (into consciousness) of the one above it, so 
similarly, indeed all the more so, the (entire objective) uni-
verse which is below one's own (subjective consciousness) is 
(also dissolved away). In this way, absorption is repose in 
the (pure) conscious subject. Both manifesting in this way, 
they are nothing but the aggregate of one's own powers. 
Every single thing, its unfolding and withdrawal, is the 
power of consciousness, for were it otherwise (its) manifesta-
tion would not be reasonably possible. 
Exposition 
The yogi's powers not only stimulate creation but also main-
tain the universe and re-absorb it back into undifferentiated con-
sciousness. Nothing is created that does not come to an end, nor is 
destruction ever ultimate or absolute—one follows the other con-
sistently and without break. The cycle of arousal and subsidence of 
individual perceptions, states of consciousness, physical activity 

and emotions in the microcosm as well as the incessant changes in 
the entire universe are held together in the rhythm and harmony of 
the yogi's universal consciousness. 
* 
* 
* 
In the following aphorism, (Siva) the Saviour (Hara) 
and ocean of scripture described one's own basic abiding 
state (nijasthiti), that is, the Self as it is during the phases of 
creation, persistence and destruction: 
tatpravrttavapyanirasah 
samvettrbhavat 
Even when these are operant, (the subject) is not lost because 
(he is) the perceiving subjectivity. 
3/33 
The ubiquitous Lord of Consciousness does not fore-
sake his own basic abiding state of being (svasthiti) even 
when those of creation and the rest are operant because He 
is always the perceiving subject. (Thus), it is the perceiving 
subjectivity that is described here as being 'not lost' and 
never ceases. States (of consciousness) can cease in this way 
but never the subject who experiences them (avasthdtr)M 
because it is his very nature to thread through all (these 
states) as described (in the Stanzas on Vibration).65 
* 
* 
* 
The conscious nature persists unchanged even while 
creation and the other (phases of manifestation) take place. 
(It abides constantly) as the perceiving subjectivity, that is, 
the (pure) reflective awareness and awe-inspiring wonder of 
the Fourth (transcendental state beyond creation, persistence 
and destruction) and never falls from this condition. 
The word these in the aphorism stands for the five oper-
ations (of creation, persistence, destruction, obscuration and 
grace). The conscious nature is the author of the five opera-
tions. Manifesting its sovereign power to perform each one, 
it engenders the realisation of its own state as the witnessing 
subject that, ever present (sadodita), (perceives these opera-

tions) and inspires with wonder at the beginning and end of 
these transitory phenomena. In this way the states of the 
imperishable subject who experiences them are of many 
kinds, repeatedly arise, are destroyed and undergo transfor-
mations, but it is not destroyed. Otherwise these phases (of 
creation and) destruction, etc., would be impossible, for 
there would be none to witness them. 
Exposition 
At one with the reflective awareness of the bliss of the Fourth 
State, the yogi is identified with the pure perceiving subjectivity 
that makes every state of consciousness apparent. As the subject of 
all these states (avasthatr), he is not bound by them, nor does any 
change in them occasion a change in himself. But while Bhaskara 
links this aphorism with the fourth verse of the Stanzas where this 
is explained, Ksemaraja looks to verses 14-16 where the distinction 
is drawn between the outer transitory world of phenomena (karya) 
and the inner subject who is the universal agent (kartr) that pro-
duces it. The agent, like the perceiver, must abide without change 
for him to produce his product. Destruction and change belong to 
the sphere of ignorance. It is that ignorance which arises and falls 
away, not one's own true nature that, by its very nature, is imper-
ishable. 
* 
* 
* 
(The Lord) said the following to describe the nature of 
pleasure and pain: 
sukhasukhayorbahirmananam 
(The yogi's) feeling of pleasure and pain 
is external. 3/34 
The feeling (manana) that one has within oneself of 
outer pleasure comes from savouring the (outer) profane 
objects of the senses, (while the feeling of) inner pleasure 
comes from getting what one wants. 

Pain is of three, five or of endless forms due to (its 
countless) varieties. Spiritual (mental and physical) are the 
three types of pain. (The five types are called) "dullness" 
(tamas), "delusion" (moha), "great delusion" 
(mahamoha), 
"darkness" (tamisra) and "blinding darkness" (andhata-
misra). These and the other (three types) constitute the eight 
natural tendencies (astaprakrti). 
Dullness is pride of self; delusion is false identification 
with the body; great delusion is identification with one's 
son or other external things; darkness is hate for all who do 
harm (to oneself) or one's family, etc., while binding dark-
ness, the fifth, is the fear of death. Again (these types) are 
divided into other countless varieties. 
(The yogi's) contemplative absorption in the acting 
subject is firm and constant and so the feeling of the states 
of pleasure and pain, etc., is one with consciousness (and 
so), for whatever reason it may arise, does not obscure it. 
* 
* 
* 
Pleasure is defined as the blissful state (anandavrtti) the 
perceiving subject experiences by obtaining some worldly 
object he finds extremely desireable. Pain (on the contrary) is 
the miserable state (ananandavrtti) that arises if one fails to 
get it or, (worse), if the opposite happens (and one looses 
something one likes). (Pain) is of many kinds according to 
whether it is spiritual (mental or physical). But neither of 
these two can obscure (the liberated yogi's) true nature 
(svariipa) because he maintains a constant and steady aware-
ness 0vimarsa, of it) so that when they arise he does not feel 
that they have anything to do with him (anahammamata) but 
experiences them as he does (the colour) blue or any other 
(external sensation) and not as does the fettered, whose sub-
jective awareness (ahanta) is affected by it. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja pertinently points out that although the awakened 
yogi experiences the whole universe as the expansion of his power, 

this does not imply that he must also experience the ups and 
downs of pleasure and pain.66 This is because his vision of his own 
nature is not restricted to a physical body or to any other individu-
al locus of consciousness subject to these alternations through its 
relation with other objects set in opposition to it as the limited sub-
ject. Once the yogi has discovered his true identity, the subtle body 
(puryastaka) is no longer the exclusive domain of his ego-sense. The 
pleasant or painful sensations, thoughts and emotions to which it 
is subject are now no longer experienced internally as happening 
to the yogi himself. Pain and pleasure are recognised to reside in 
the outer sphere of objectivity as states of mind and body not of the 
Self. Only the lower-order subject is caught in their opposition, 
while the higher-order subject, freed of all false identifications, 
delights in the innate bliss of his own nature for, as the Stanzas on 
Vibration declare, ultimate reality is free of both pleasure and pain 
as well as subject and object.67 
* 
* 
* 
(The lord then explained how the Self is if this external 
feeling (of pleasure and pain) does not penetrate inwardly 
and it is liberated from it: 
tadvimuktastu 
kevalt 
The one who is free of that is a liberated soul 3/35 
The lord is free of pleasure and pain as He is of all 
insentience.68 Thus He is isolated (kevala in the oneness of 
consciousness) and established in Himself because He per-
vades all (things and every state of consciousness).69 
* 
* 
* 
If the feeling of pleasure and the rest does not penetrate 
inwardly, the yogi, unaffected neither by them nor by the 
delusion to which they give rise, does not loose the power 
(vibhava) inherent in his own nature. Thus, by reposing in the 
supreme subject who in independent (kevala) consciousness 
alone, he experiences the fruit of Yoga. 

Exposition 
When the opposites are out of balance man fails to achieve 
perfect harmony and the result is continuous agitation. But if they 
come together and become one, man is freed from duality and 
achieves 'isolation' from them. It is isolation with regard to things: 
abandonment by consciousness of that which is not integral with 
its own nature in order that it may return into itself and plunge 
into its centre. In so doing, consciousness withdraws from its objec-
tively manifest state to that of subjectivity and the yogi recognises 
that nothing exists outside his own nature and is thus isolated in 
the supreme reality and liberated. 
* 
* 
* 
Does delusion obscure (one's own nature) or not ? (The 
Lord) said: 
mohapratisamhatastu 
karmatma 
A compact mass of delusion, the soul is 
subject to karma. 3/36 
Stupidity (maurkhya), inertia (anudyoga), ignorance 
(avidya), insentience (jadya), obscuration (avrti), lack of 
discernment (aviveka) and loss of consciousness (murchd): 
these and other such expressions are synonymous with the 
delusion that extends its sway when one identifies with the 
body and the rest (of the psycho-physical organism). Per-
vaded by it completely, the Self (becomes) a mass (of delu-
sion) and is then said to be the fettered soul object to karma 
(karmatman) that undergoes repeated rebirth. Then (in this 
condition) duality manifests, the mark of which is igno-
rance of unity. 
* 
* 
* 
If (the individual soul) is completely pervaded by the 
delusion and ignorance which gives rise to (his false) identi-
fication with the body, he becomes involved in the good, bad 

and mixed actions he does with the body and its limbs. Thus, 
disregarding his own true nature which is one with the Sky 
of Consciousness, he seeks the fruit of his many and diverse 
actions and so, full of desire, he is subject to repeated rebirth 
in many forms as man (or beast). 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja quotes the Kalikakrama as saying: 
If (the yogi) is under the sway of discursive thought and 
enveloped in ignorance, he cannot generate (fully and) and 
at once (the principles of existence) from Siva onwards 
(and so realise them to be one with consciousness). Thus, 
due to that (ignorance) he perceives various states of being, 
both good and bad, and from the bad ones he experiences 
great suffering.70 
* 
* 
* 
As long as delusion persists, the Self assumes the form 
of subject and object. By resting on the plane (of conscious-
ness of the universal) agent and so (practising) the Yoga of 
its removal, the individual soul (dtman) is ever awake and 
Siva's nature is its stable state of being. Now what happens 
when duality ceases? Sankara said: 
bhedatiraskdre 
sargdntarakarmatvam 
When diversity has been eliminated (the yogi's) action is 
to give rise to another creation. 3137 
As explained by the mothers of the universe in their 
aphorisms,71 there is no multiplicity at all here (when the 
yogi) realises that the Self is all things. If the abiding state 
of being of the awakened persists without changing, 
whether they act in this world or, (absorbed in contempla-
tion) desist from all action, that is the imperishable, unborn 
unity (samya) of the world of sensory perception (visaya). 

When diversity has been eliminated in this way, the Self (is 
realised) to have a single (all-encompassing) form. Thus, 
the other creation, never manifest before, different from 
(this) creation, is the action of the conscious nature which 
possesses the power to do (kartrta) whatever it wishes. 
* 
* 
* 
(The yogi) whose heart is full of the power of Siva's 
grace practises Siva's Yoga through which he divests himself 
of the bondage of karma and so is awakened and no longer 
considers that anything exists separately, independently of 
Paramasiva. Thus he frees himself of the perception of duali-
ty (experienced by the) subjects (that belong to the lower 
orders of consciousness) such as the fully enveloped subject 
(sakala) who identifies himself completely with the body, etc., 
or the subject who experiences deep sleep (pralayakala), etc. 
In this way (the yogi) realises his own true nature (sva-
svariipa) and so attains a stable state of being and the (inner) 
strength of the highest order of empowerment (parasaktabala). 
Thus, once he has attained the great power that belongs to 
Mantra, Lord of Mantra and other subjects (of the higher 
orders of consciousness) he can bring about new creations 
consisting of ever-renewed manifestations ordered diversely 
as he wishes. 
Exposition 
Objectivity and subjectivity abide at one without contradiction 
in the wholeness of the universal Self. The yogi comes to realise this 
as he gives up attachment to the body and the awareness of his pure 
conscious nature gradually takes over from the limited states of 
embodied subjectivity. In this way he quits the lower order of cre-
ation, consisting of the categories below Maya, and rises through 
the higher order of creation from the category of Pure Knowledge to 
Siva, generating it as he does so. Each stage in this ascent is marked 
by a transition from one order of experiencing subjectivity to the 

other. In this way a more universally conscious subject takes over 
from one less so below it that thus becomes an object for the former 
and, with it, the entire extent of objectivity that it encompasses. In 
this way, the world of experience based on diversity and division is 
brought to an end and a new world of experience based on unity is 
created. When this process is complete, the yogi becomes the agent 
of every action in the universe. 
* 
* 
* 
Then (Siva), the Lord of the gods, explained what 
brings about (this) new creation: 
karanasaktih 
svato'nubhavat 
The power of the senses (is proved) by 
one's own experience. 3/38 
The senses have the power to bring about (this) new 
creation, as one's own experience proves, because they are 
supported by the uncreated power (of consciousness). This 
is so because the power of the senses comes from the force 
of absorption in the Self (atmavesa).72 Thus, the Supreme 
Lord resolves (to bring about) whatever phenomenon 
(kdrya) (the yogi) desires (whose consciousness) is fixed on 
the authentic foundation (of his being). 
Although all this has been said before, it is repeated 
here again in another way to make (this point) clear because 
the yogic powers (the yogi acquires) are of many kinds. 
* 
* 
* 
Even a tiny louse possesses a degree of the power com-
mon (to every living being) through which this wonderfully 
diverse universe is created. Indeed, we know from our own 
experience that we can create the gardens, forests, moun-
tains, lakes, cities and other common things (of daily life) 
while we dream or let our thoughts wander freely. Similarly, 
the yogi who, by his intense and profound application, rises 
to a (higher) level of existence where he can take support 

from the uncreated vitality (of consciousness) is able thereby 
to generate whatever he wishes in the way he likes by the 
creative power Ckaranasakti, of consciousness). 
Even though we have already referred to this means of 
realisation based on the power (inherent in consciousness) to 
give rise to this wonderfully diverse universe, we have occa-
sion to mention it again now in order to explain that there 
are many other kinds of yogic powers (the yogi acquires). 
Exposition 
We know from our own experience that we have the power 
to create mental images at will as well as the power to perceive 
them. Although the objects thus created and known are not appar-
ent to others, we are assured by this fact of the power of conscious-
ness to know and act.73 For the average man, contact with the 
innate power of the Self (atmabala) is attenuated by his lack of self-
awareness, the yogi on the other hand, by virtue of his profound 
absorption and intense will, can tap this power to the full and, by 
his mere intention alone, creates objects which are equally appar-
ent to himself and to others. 
* 
* 
* 
The Lord of the Worlds then reverently explained that 
once the Fourth State (of consciousness), which is the direct 
experience of one's own nature (svanubhava), 
manifests 
everywhere in (all the phases of the cycle of manifestation) 
from creation onwards, the (individual) soul attains its own 
stable state of being 
(atmasamsthiti): 
tripadadyanuprananam 
That which is preceded by the three states 
vitalizes them. 3/39 
That which is preceded by the three states is the Fourth 
(state of pure consciousness) which is preceded by the states 
of waking (dreaming and deep sleep) and is said to be the 

fullness (of consciousness that permeates all three) simulta-
neously. (All) existing things are rightly vitalized by it in the 
sense that it infuses its own inherent power (into them). 
* 
* 
* 
Consciousness manifests itself and is clearly revealed, 
like a flash of lightening free of all obscuring coverings, in 
the course of daily life by (the power of the yogi's) introvert-
ed awareness when he savours (the aesthetic delight) of 
good music or other pleasing objects. This happens if (the 
yogi) manages, by applying the aforementioned means, to 
perceive the Fourth State that, (as dense) uninterrupted con-
sciousness and bliss, is Siva Himself Who, full and perfect, 
determines the nature of all things and vitalizes the three 
states of waking (dreaming and deep sleep). 
Exposition 
According to Ksemaraja, this aphorism teaches that the 
Fourth State of consciousness (turiya) is not only to be infused in 
the three states of waking, etc.,74 but is also discovered in all the 
three moments of the emergence, persistence and susbsidence of 
any perception in any of these states. For although the power of 
Maya, which gives rise to multiplicity and the split between subject 
and object, operates throughout this cycle, everybody experiences 
the fleeting emergence of the Fourth State of consciousness, as sud-
den and powerful as a lightening flash, whenever one delights in 
any sensation. The pleasure one feels during sexual intercourse, 
seeing a close friend after many years, eating a good meal or listen-
ing to fine music is in fact the bliss of one's own nature, it does not 
come from outside.75 
The sensations which pour into consciousness, either through 
the outer senses or the mind, as memories or imagined forms, are 
influxes of the power of awareness which arouse consciousness 
and heighten its inner vitality. The aesthetic delight we enjoy see-
ing a beautiful object or hearing sweet music is, from this point of 
view, not an intrinsic quality of the object but the result of the aes-

thetic sensitivity of the subject. It is the ability to experience the 
wonder (camatkara) aroused by the subtle vibration (spanda) of the 
bliss of self-awareness in the Fourth State. Abhinava writes: 
For if a colour passing through the eyes is a source of plea-
sure, this is due to the separation of the great emission, 
which consists of the arousal of vitality (vlryaksobha). 
A little further ahead he goes on to say: 
The wonder (we feel) is limited to the degree in which this 
vitality does not feed (consciousness). For the complete 
absence of wonder is, in effect, an absence of life. Converse-
ly, aesthetic receptivity—being endowed with a heart—is 
to be immersed in an intense state of wonder consisting of 
the arousal of vitality. Only he whose heart is fed by this 
infinite and nourishing vitality, only he who is dedicated to 
the constant practise (of taking delight in this form of) plea-
sure, only he and none other is pre-eminently endowed 
with the ability to feel wonder.76 
The yogi is taught in this aphorism that, in order to heighten 
the awareness of his own nature, which the power of Maya has 
obscured, he must try and fix his attention on the instant in which 
he feels this wonder welling up inside him in moments of intense 
joy, confusion, anger or fear. By attending to the sudden emergence 
of the vibration (spanda) of the transcendental Fourth State of con-
sciousness at these times and establishing himself in a state of intro-
verted absorption, as verse 22 of the Stanzas teaches, he should, as 
Ksemaraja puts it, "vitalize the living Self by that very life itself."77 
if- 
* 
* 
The compassionate Lord Siva explained in the follow-
ing aphorism how one should do (this): 
cittasthitivaccharxrakaranabdhyesu 
The same stability 
of mind (should permeate) 
the 
body, 
senses and external world. 
3/40 

The mind, the nature of which we have already dis-
cussed above, is stable when it does not wander, that is, if it 
does not deviate from its own essential nature (as pure con-
sciousness). This same stability (sthiti) (operates) in the 
body duly fashioned (by consciousness) and in the internal 
and external senses as the vital force (pranana that vitalizes 
them). Similarly, one has the same perception (of the abid-
ing state of consciousness) in whatever external things (the 
mind fixes its) attention (prakalpana) in this way. 
* 
* 
* 
When the principle of consciousness directs its attention 
to the object of perception it restricts itself and so becomes 
the mind (but even then we know that it never really 
changes) because, when one practises the means to realisa-
tion, it reverts to its (original) inherent nature, which is pure 
uninterrupted consciousness and bliss. (In the same way), 
the body and the rest (of the psycho-physical organism) cre-
ated by it (never) deviates from its own true nature (as pure 
consciousness). (Similarly), all phenomenal creation (bhava-
jata) in the state prior (to its manifestation) is one with the 
juice (of the aesthetic delight, rasa) of consciousness (but 
when consciousness) directs its attention outside itself, it 
becomes gross as it were and manifests itself (externally in 
the form of phenomenal creation), as happens in a dream or 
while phantasizing. In reality, however, it is the same per-
ception it has of its own nature (svarupapratha) that condens-
es, internally and externally, (to assume the form) of every 
individual existing thing and thus becomes manifest to then 
dissolve away again (and revert to its original form) as the 
juice (of the aesthetic delight) of consciousness. 
Exposition 
As usual with the Yoga taught here, the retraction of aware-
ness inwards and the resultant experience of the Fourth State 
achieved through introverted contemplation (nimilana) is perfected 

only when it issues out, through an expansion (unmesa) of con-
sciousness, into the outside world. The psychic energy the yogi 
sought at its source within his own nature must flow out, as he 
maintains his inner awareness, to fill the world of his outer experi-
ence and the channels through which he apprehends it. The yogi 
thus comes to experience his body, senses and physical environ-
ment as pervaded by the bliss of the power of his own freedom 
and achieves mastery over all the states of consciousness and 
forms of awareness. 
* 
* 
* 
(Siva) the Lord of the Daughter of the Mountains then 
explained how the world of phenomena that resides thus 
within (consciousness) flows out from it: 
abhilasad bahirgatih 
samvahyasya 
Due to (one's) craving, that which is transported 
moves outside. 3/41 
The desire (iccha) that develops in the Self due to the 
abundance of its inherent power, to complete (outwardly) 
the absorption (it experiences in its own inner) activity is 
the craving (to which this aphorism refers). Due to this 
(desire) the senses and other (components of the psycho-
physical body) that are transported (by it) 'move outside7 in 
the sense that they perform their specific functions 
impelled by the energy of (the inner conscious) nature 
(residing in the body, which is) the object of its impulse 
(and the outer support of the senses). 
Again, 'that which is transported' is both the fettered 
soul's object of desire and that craving itself which, once 
creation has taken place, is directed to all the objects of the 
senses and so is said to be the outward movement of the 
soul fettered by karma (karmatman) that is transported (by 
it). (The fettered soul) transported (by its desire) abandons 
its own essential nature. This is its movement directed to 
the outer objects of the senses. And so, if (the soul) is 
always transported (here and there) by the objects of the 

senses, etc., the delusion (moha) which is foolish craving, 
goes on developing (within him). 
* 
* 
* 
The craving (to which this aphorism refers) is the desire 
the soul (iatman) has to infuse the power of consciousness 
into the senses of knowledge and action when the vitality 
inherent in its own nature abounds to excess and so wishes 
to see, hear or execute any other of the functions (kriya, of the 
senses) on this, lower level (of consciousness). This (craving) 
impels the senses that are (thus) transported (by it) and so 
begin to operate in the domains of sound and touch and 
their other objects. 
Again, 'that which is transported' is the fettered soul 
(pasu) who is bound by karma (karmatman) and so is transport-
ed from womb to womb (and reborn repeatedly) along with 
the veils that obscure its consciousness (kaficuka) and the 
other (principles of individualized existence) that are presid-
ed over by the powers known as Khecafi, Gocan, Dikcan and 
Bhiicari. The fettered soul is affected by the craving which is 
the Impurity of Individuality (anavamala, that contracts its 
consciousness) and is the root cause of all the fetters (that 
bind it) and so it foresakes the pure experience of its own true 
nature (svasvarupanubhava) and moves outside in the pursuit 
of pleasure, (directing its attention) to the objects of the sens-
es. (Thus) the Wheel of Bhucari energies (which presides over 
the sphere of objectivity) transports the fettered, engaging 
them in the works of delusion (mohakdrya) at increasingly 
grosser levels of existence. 
Exposition 
This aphorism warns the yogi to reflect constantly on the 
inner Fourth State of consciousness during the outflow of aware-
ness. The spontaneous tendency of the Self to view outer objectivi-
ty creates the world of perceptions. The yogi carried along by this 
desire issues forth from the transcendental consciousness of his 

own nature into the immanent state of cosmic consciousness with-
out being bound. However, when this creative will is conditioned 
by ignorance due to which the individual wrongly considers him-
self to be incomplete and turns away from his own nature, stimu-
lated by the desire for an outer object to fill the gap he feels in him-
self, the outpouring of his awareness becomes binding. The 
individual soul, identified with the body, is thus carried from life 
to life by the limited powers of consciousness manifest as the forces 
which condition the soul's consciousness, mind, senses, sensations 
and physical world. These are the spheres governed by the ener-
gies to which Bhaskara's anonymous commentator refers. 
* 
* 
* 
(The Self) is known as the individual soul bound by 
karma when the impure desire (for the objects of the senses) 
prevails (within him). (Siva) the Great Lord said the follow-
ing to explain what happens to the Self when that (desire) 
ceases: 
tadarudhapramitestatksaydjjTvasamksayah 
Then (when the yogi) is established in pure awareness 
(his craving) is destroyed and so the individual 
soul ceases to exist. 3/42 
The state which heralds the arising of desire is said to 
be the domain of the perceiving subject and the awakened 
yogi who knows ultimate reality then resides within it. 
When he penetrates into the domain of the perceiver, (stimu-
lated and sustained) by the vitality that comes from the exer-
tion of the power inherent in his own nature he, the subject 
whose consciousness is firm, is then said to be awake. 
The pure awareness of the subject is his knowledge of 
his own pure consciousness nature. Then, (when the yogi) 
is established in that pure awareness, his craving is 
destroyed and, as a result, the individual soul bound by 
karma also ceases to exist. 
* 
* 
* 

This impure craving thus (persists) together with the 
conditioned ego (of the fettered soul) due to his deluded 
experience. However, it happens at times (that despite this 
craving the yogi) is graced by virtue of his many good deeds 
and, intent on discerning (the true meaning of) the Saiva 
scripture, (his) consciousness develops and rises to the level 
of the (pure) perceiving subject. (Thus he) savours his own 
inherently blissful nature which illumines itself with the rays 
of its consciousness both inwardly and extenally from the 
level of the principles which obscure consciousness (kaficuka) 
down to that of the subtle elements of sensation and is made 
manifest by the powers known as KhecarJ (Gocari, Dikcari and 
Bhucart) because now the consequences of their activity is the 
very opposite of that (experienced by) the fettered. Thus, the 
very moment (the yogi) abandons the craving of the fettered, 
(the activity of) the subtle body (puryastka) which is trans-
ported (from life to life) is stilled. 
Exposition 
The yogi whose inner nature unfolds through the power of 
the grace of universal consciousness to ultimately fill the entire 
field of awareness, absorbs into itself the limited subjectivity asso-
ciated with the subtle body (puryastaka) of sensations and mind. 
Now firmly established in the flow of cognizing subjectivity pre-
sent at the initial moment of the emergence of desire, the yogi is 
freed of the flux of differentiated perceptions and plunges through 
the centre between inner and outer, being and non-being, to merge 
in the bliss of the Fourth State. Enlightened by the unfolding vision 
of the eternal Now, past and future fall away and the awakened 
yogi, solely intent on devouring time (kalagrasaikatatpara),78 is liber-
ated from the flow of the sensory activity which dragged him away 
from the peace and tranquillity of resting in his own nature. 
* 
* 
* 
The individual soul is bound and so is said to be fet-
tered (pasu) and subject to transmigration (samsarin). (The 

Lord then) explained how the Self is when the mass of fet-
ters (that bind it) are destroyed: 
bhutakaiicuki tadavimukto bhuyah patisamah 
parah 
(The soul) clad in the cloak of elements is not free but; like 
the Lord, becomes supreme once more. 3/43 
The cloak is made of the five gross elements, which are 
the fetters (that bind the soul), and one should know it to be 
the obscuring covering (that veils his consciousness). Then, 
(the fettered soul), clad in the cloak of the elements, is not 
free but bound, (even so), by fixing (his attention), in the 
manner described, on the plane of the omniscient (Lord) 
Who does all things, he becomes supreme once again like 
the Lord by experiencing his own nature truly and directly. 
There can be no doubt about this! 
* 
* 
* 
Even when it appears that (the yogi) is not free because 
of his persisting relationship with the material body, he 
emerges from his fettered state when the impurity of desire 
is destroyed in this way and, through the development of the 
plane of universal agency and cognitive subjctivity, he expe-
riences the Sivahood of his own nature which is the uninter-
rupted (ghana) bliss of absolute consciousness. However, the 
embodied condition is not superceded and so (the yogi is 
merely) similar to Siva and not Siva Himself for His state 
(can) only be attained after death. 
Exposition 
Free of craving for outer things, the well awakened lays aside, 
as belonging to the objective sphere, the thoughts and sensations 
which had formerly usurped the office of the perceiving subjectivi-
ty. The destruction of the lower-order subject, bound by the diver-
sity and change of the world of transmigration, marks the emer-
gence of the higher-order subject which subsumes diversity and 

change into the unchanging unity of its experience of wholeness. 
The elements which constitute the body do not cease to exist even 
after liberation, but they are then merely an outer shell, no longer 
felt to be T. Quoting from various sources, Ksemaraja stresses in 
his commentary that the realisation of one's own true disembodied 
identity takes place in an instant. The enlightened teacher need 
only say a word, or just a glance may suffice if the right moment 
has come for the disciple to understand his true nature and be 
freed of his false identification with the body. 
* 
* 
* 
The link (which connects the soul), clad in the cloak of 
the gross elements, (with the body) is the vital breath 
(prana). But how is it that (this link persists even when the 
soul is liberated)? The Lord Whose Insignia is the Bull, 
uttered the following aphorism (by way of explanation): 
naisargikah 
pranasambandhah 
The link with the vital breath is natural. 3/44 
The link between the vital breath and the physical 
body comes about quite naturally because the vital breath is 
life itself. 
* 
* 
X-
Once consciousness has risen (to the highest level) in 
the way explained above and the false identification with the 
subtle body (puryastaka) ceases, the physical body linked 
with it that envelops (consciousness) should also fall away 
(but this does not happen) and so we accept that the link 
between the subtle body and the vital breath that sustains 
(the physical body) is naturally established. 
In order to make the wonderful diversity of the uni-
verse manifest, consciousness initially manifests limitation 
(samkoca) and then (descends) to the level of the subject that 
serves as the vital force (pranana, that gives life to the body 
and senses) and so manifests itself as the universe, which is 

the object (the subject perceives). It then spontaneously for-
gets its own infinite power (vibhava) and accumulates merito-
rious and sinful karma by the good and bad thought con-
structs to which it gives rise while its condition is that of (the 
subject) who gives life (to the psycho-physical organism). 
(Thus) it wanders from life to life (reincarnating) as man, 
beast or god according (to its karma). This continues until it is 
blessed with the power of grace (that the Lord freely bestows 
upon it), independently (of its merits), and so craves to 
ascend by degrees along the ladder of the Saiva teaching 
(saivajnana) to the upper abode of the absolute. But even 
when all (the soul's) karma has been burnt away by the fire of 
knowledge, it goes on experiencing (the consequences) of the 
karma that has already begun to take effect (prarabdhakarma) 
and so the physical body (bhutakaficuka) and the life breath 
linked with it persist just as the potter's wheel continues to 
spin (for a while) even when the stick (that impels it) is 
removed from it. 
Exposition 
By now the reader will have become familiar with the Kash-
miri Saiva view of reality or, more specifically of consciousness, as 
an undivided continuum or medium of free becoming. All nature 
forms an unbroken chain whose links rest on the immutable law of 
the progress of a universal power constituting the unity of all 
things. The emergence of a modality of experience that the Indian 
tradition as a whole characterizes as a constraining wandering from 
life to life, state to state (samsara) is, from this standpoint, under-
stood to be the result of a spontaneous disruption from within of the 
stable tranquillity (prasama) of this flow. Turbulence (ksobha) dis-
turbs its unity, splitting it up into discrete elements, thus marking a 
transition from continuum to process, from the paradox of the 
changeless becoming of Being to the intermittent appearing and dis-
appearing of phenomena. The movement (spanda) of consciousness, 
undefinably neither successive nor nonsequential,79 becomes mani-
fest as unending cycles of creations and destructions stretching 
from infinitely long spans of time to infinitesimally short. 

Thus the manifestation of the finite is a process of emergence 
of the temporal order from the eternity of consciousness.80 The 
transformation of the unmanifest state into that of manifestation is 
a shift from atemporal Being-Becoming (Siva-Sakti) to a state of 
movement (kriya) from the past into the future. In this way the 
inner activity of consciousness becomes the outer activity of objec-
tively projected phenomena: 
Time measures in minutes, etc., action (kartrtva).81 Thus 
that which time measures is (not pure action but) the limit-
ed activity of phenomena (karyavacchedi).82 
The power of time (kalasakti) gives rise to past, present and 
future on the plane of Maya,83 it is thus one with consciousness's 
creative power of action (kriyasaktiJ.84 Through it consciousness 
projects the diversity of experience onto the screen of its own 
nature.85 It is through the power of time that the power-holder, 
while beyond the realms of the temporal, diversifies the universe.86 
It divides up our action,87 diversifying the unity of the All through 
a compounding process of differentiation (kalana) and thus mani-
fests individual being out of universal being. Creating the diversity 
(vaicitrya) of manifestation, Siva simultaneously gives rise to time.88 
Ultimately, time and diversity are one, hence all that is objectively 
manifest is conditioned by time. 
Kali, also called Kalasamkarsini ("The Attractress of Time"), is 
the hypostasis of the creative autonomy (svatantrya) of conscious-
ness identified with the power of time. Her name, derived from the 
root kal, is interpreted in five ways, indicative of the five cosmic 
functions of the power of time, as follows: 
1) Kal in the sense of casting forth (ksepe): the emergence of time 
marks an arousal from the state of absorption in the unity of the 
Self giving rise to the differentiation of reality and the projection 
of the multiplicity of objectivity. 
2) Kal in the senses of knowing (jne): time accompanies all object-
centred knowledge in the absence of an awareness that the uni-
verse of experience is a differentiated aspect of the Self. 
3) Kal in the sense of enumeration (samkhyane): time is the measure 

of thought. To fall from the atemporal unity of the All is to 
become a prey to differentiated mental representations (vikalpa) 
issuing from the perception of relative distinctions. 
4) Kal in the sense of movement (gate): through insight into the true 
nature of time we can move forward to catch hold of our own 
nature made externally manifest as the cosmic reflection in the 
mirror of undifferentiated consciousness. 
5) Kal in the sense on resonance (nada): time is a mode in which the 
light of consciousness, reflecting on its own nature, is made 
manifest.89 Thus, it is also the resonance (nada) of the reflective 
awareness of one's own nature as the essence of all things when 
their outer form is transcended.90 
We can distinguish in this account of the five functions of the 
power of time, two distinct levels. The first three functions entagle 
the subject in time as a process, i.e., events, occurences, happenings 
felt to be the outcome of a continuous series of operations that have 
no agent as their author. The last two functions form part of a prax-
is in which the subject recognises himself to be the autonomous 
agent of these events now apparent to him as deeds. At the lower 
level, time functions in relation to conditioned consciousness; at 
the higher, it is freely created by unconditioned consciousness: 
"Always," "occasionally," "now," '"then," etc., is the play 
of the notions of time made manifest by the freedom of 
consciousness, nor is the Supreme Lord touched by the 
phases of time.91 
At this level, time is the medium through which all things are 
manifest and is the inner nature of all the categories of existence. It 
is the very essence of Siva's consciousness identified with Isvara, 
the category of experience (tattva) in which Siva reflects on the one-
ness of the All, the objective elements of which—although in a state 
of emergence or production—are still united with the subject.92 At 
the lower level of Maya where the subject is limited by his percep-
tion of external objects as separate from himself and by his subse-
quent identification with them, time serves to condition the subject 
further. Abhinava explains: 

Time (kala) is that which is initially responsible for the suc-
cessive changes in the limited subject in which it manifests 
itself. It subsequently arouses a corresponding idea in rela-
tion to the object as well, for example (in notions such as): 
'I who was thin am now fat and will be fatter still'. Thus 
the subjective limitation imposed by time is responsible for 
the idea of the successive change in the body assumed to 
be identical with the Self. This arouses a similar idea in 
relation to the limited subject's object of knowledge.93 
Abhinava does not mean to say that time is a self-existent reali-
ty. For although time is described as an attribute (uisesana) of object-
centred awareness,93 the reality of the truly existent (vastutattva) as 
the All, containing in its fullness both subject and object, is undivid-
ed by time (akalakalita). Time is not an external measure of activity, 
but is this activity itself. For while action consists of an association of 
previous and subsequent elements (puruaparabhuta) ordered into a 
continuous succession of events, time is the differentiated perception 
of that which went before in relation to that which follows after 
(purvaparavikalpana).95 Days, hours or minutes are merely subdivi-
sions of the movement of the earth in relation to the heavenly bodies. 
There is no independent time apart from our conception of it.96 It is a 
format through which we order our experience but is nowhere to be 
found either in the sphere of objectivity or within the pure con-
sciousness of the unconditioned subject.97 The distinction between 
psychological and objective time is false, the awareness of time pass-
ing is always a mental construct (kalpana). Abhinava points out: 
The power of time consists of the multiplicity of action and 
hence is based on the will (iccha), externally it has no fixed 
form. For when one dreams that one is in a dream, simply 
dreams or is in deep sleep, or abandons oneself to one's 
imagination, or is in a state of contemplative absorption in 
which one discerns the sequence of creation and destruc-
tion of all things in an instant, however short it may be, 
can appear to be a very long (time).98 
Time is the result of our memory (smarana) of the past and 
anticipation (utpreksana) of the future. When that which IS is 

realised to be just as it IS (vastutattva) past and future fade away 
together with all the other projections superimposed upon it. Free 
of past and future, the present also disappears, and the relativity of 
time is annulled in the absoluteness of complete (sampurna) and 
undivided (abhinna) awareness (bodha). Abhinavagupta writes: 
The subject who recalls or phantasizes, etc., remains always 
the same and is ever present: past and future do not exist. 
For it is said, "it is not conditioned by the two times." This 
subject always remains the same as it is, it does not differ 
from what it was before, nor does it tolerate the sort of limi-
tations that find expression in statements such as "he 
knows this again and does this," etc. This subject, it is said, 
shines once and for all. This is why one says that the present 
is such in relation to the past, etc., and that when they do 
not exist nor does that; thus the true reality is not measured 
by time." 
Time is thus nothing but an unfolding (spharamatra) of con-
sciousness,100 into the field of the finite, i.e., the realm of objectivity 
(meyatva). For this to happen, the unconditioned subjectivity of 
pure consciousness must first limit itself to the status of an individ-
ual subject to allow for the existence of similarly limited objects,101 
which is the necessary condition attending the emergence of time. 
The present in relation to the past and future is the result of the 
perception and activity of an individual locus of awareness. Thus, 
at the individual level, the inherent rhythm of consciousness 
expresses itself as the passing of time in accord with the emergence 
and subsidence of each act of perception. 
Moreover, another aspect of the spontaneous movement of 
consciousness is the manifest rise and fall of the breath. Exhaled 
and inhaled breaths are the gross manifestations of the current of 
conscious energy moving to and fro between subject and object. 
The act of perception follows the course of the breath,102 which 
moves in association with the conjunction and separation of the 
senses with their objects.103 Again, the breathing cycle (pranacakra) 
is also the cycle of time Ckalacakra). Consequently, the three breaths, 
namely, inhaled, exhaled and the one that rises in the centre 
between them, correspond to past, present and future.104 Thus time, 

perception and breath are linked together in the universal vibra-
tion of consciousness: 
This entire expanse of time rests thus on the vital breath, 
this on movement and this on the void which rests in con-
sciousness. Thus all the universe rests within (conscious-
ness). As the arising and falling away of all things is based 
on consciousness in its true nature, and these movements 
right up to the (supreme) power are expressions of its 
vibration (tatspanda), it is manifest in countless ways.105 
The initial condition for the emergence of the breath, time 
and differentiated perception (vikalpa) is the same, namely, the spilt 
between subject and object. Consciousness, through its inherent 
power, denies the plenitude of its unity and so gives rise to T and 
'This'—subjectivity and objectivity—which exclude each other 
reciprocally in a state of negation conceived as an emptiness 
(;sunya). The subsequent stages represent phases in the develop-
ment of a link connecting these two poles. The first movement 
towards reuniting them is an intent on the part of the subject to 
appropriate the object. Out of this urge arises the flux of vitality 
(pranana) which give life to the body (microcosm) and universe 
(macrocosm) and is said to be the intial transformation of con-
sciousness. Abhinava explains: 
Time, consisting of succession and non-succession, rests 
entirely within consciousness. For, according to the scrip-
tures, Kali (the Goddess of Time) is the supreme power of the 
Lord, Who, making manifest and affirming externally as an 
objective reality the succession and non-succession She bears 
within Herself, appears as the life force (ipranavrtti, pranana). 
This unique and pure consciousness, the supreme reality of 
the light (of consciousness), is manifest as a Sky void of all 
things. That alone is said to be the voidness of consciousness. 
It is the supreme state for those yogis who reflect (upon the 
world) as 'not this, not this' (neti, neti).m This etheric subject, 
overflowing and falling onto the knowable separated from it, 
desiring to make it its own is called the "vital breath" (prana), 
"vibration" (spanda) or "wave" (urmi).X07 

The vital breath, prana (or more precisely, pranana, i.e., prana 
in its generic aspect) is understood in its most general sense as the 
vital energy or elan (virya) of consciousness and the principle of life 
in living beings. Thus, it is figuratively described as preventing the 
'stiffness' (stabdata) of rigor mortis. At the cosmic level it is the 
vibration (spanda) or effulgence (sphuratta) of consciousness that 
makes manifest the universe. As such, prana is the primal causal 
movement or fundamental urge in the ground reality manifest as 
the manifold of a possible universe. As the Sun (bhaskara) of Life,108 
it illumines the entire universe and supplies the energy for the eter-
nal rhythm of cosmic creation and destruction: 
He, the Great Lord and ocean of eternal consciousness, the 
essential nature of all things (atman), makes manifest and 
withdraws creation and destruction in consonance with 
the arising and subsidence of the power of the vital breath 
(pavanasakti).m 
At the microcosmic level the breathing cycle passes through 
three principle phases, namely, exhalation, retention and inhala-
tion. These correspond to the creation, persistence and withdrawal 
of the universe of perceptions. In fact, all the cycles of universal 
creation and destruction are contained in the arising and subsi-
dence of the vital breath circulating throughout the body.1,0 Yoga, 
in this context, is the practise of following the movement of the 
breath and recognising it to be the flux of the Cosmic Path of uni-
versal manifestation. When the yogi exhales, he turns outward to 
attend to objectivity, and subjectivity contracts. Once the breath 
has returned and rests internally, all differentiation vanishes. This 
incessant expansion and contraction is a natural, spontaneous pro-
cess. To know it is to find release: 
He who constantly exerts himself and realises the true 
nature of the pure conscious Self to be the power of the 
vital breath that transcends time and is associated with the 
cycles of creation, persistence and destruction, achieves lib-
eration (bhairavibhava).U} 
Thus, this aphorism declares that although the Awakened 
yogi is detached from his body and so, in a sense, is dead to the 

world of embodied existence, he lives a higher mode of life, realis-
ing that the divine vitality that gives Being to all things is insepara-
ble from his true nature. 
* 
* 
* 
(The breath) consisting of the Resonance (ndda, of con-
sciousness) and the Point (bindu, of divine light) courses 
along three paths. (The Lord then explained) whether it is 
necessary to conquer it or not in order to realise one's own 
nature (svasiddhi): 
nasikantarmadhyasamyamat 
kimatra 
savyapsavyasausumnesu 
(The movement of the vital breath is stilled) by concentrating 
on the centre within the nose. Of what use (then) are the left 
and right channels or Susumna? 3/45 
The nose (in this context) means the inner Twelve-fin-
ger Space (where the breaths come to rest). Those who fix 
their attention there merge (into universal consciousness) 
and so, conquering (the breath), their own fundamental and 
abiding state of being (svatmasthiti) becomes clearly appar-
ent. The centre is here the Heart (of consciousness). When the 
vital breath is set aside there (within it), all mental activity is 
absorbed (into consciousness) and so (the yogi experiences) 
the Supreme Arising of the Self. Once it has been conquered 
in this way what use then are the left and right channels or 
Susumna along which the breath (normally) flows? For (the 
yogi who conquers the breath) it possesses the power of life 
itself and bestows every perfection. Siva declares the same in 
the venerable Svacchandatantra (where we read): 
The vital breath is life itself (pranamaya) 
which 
engenders exhalation (visargapurna) and inhalation 
(prana).112 
Consequently, (Siva goes on to) talk of the conquest of 
the breath and the vital channels (nadt) by virtue of which 
the soul is free, pure and one with Siva. 

* 
* 
* 
(Bhaskara explains in his commentary) how (the yogi) 
can attend to the Absolute Word (Sabdabrahman) which is the 
Unstruck Sound (anahata) of the vital force (prana) in order to 
achieve liberation so that he can exercise the many yogic 
powers (siddhi) his true nature possesses (to the full). 
The psychic channels (nadi) are conquered (and the yogi 
gains mastery over them) when the vital breath which 
includes (both the inhaled breath technically called) the 
"Point" (of divine light) and (the exhaled breath called) the 
"Resonance" (of consciousness) which moves along the three 
channels, Ida, (Pingala and Susumna), merges (into conscious-
ness). This happens in the case of yogis who concentrate 
steadfastly on (the centre) within the nose, that is, on the 
Twelve-finger Space and the other centres where the sun of 
the vital breath sets (and the movement of the breath ceases) 
by virtue of the excellence of their practise. 
When the movement of the breath ceases, the activity of 
the mind comes to rest in the Unstruck Sound of the absolute 
(anahatabrahman) and (the yogi's) perception (pratyaya of the 
absolute) forms a single clearly evident flux (of awareness) 
by virtue of which (the yogi's consciousness) becomes one 
with it (tanmaya) and so all division between between the 
meditator (and his object of meditation) falls away and Siva, 
Who is one's own supreme nature, manifests. Once the goal 
has been attained in this way (all) practise belonging to the 
lower levels, such as the recitation of Mantra as taught in the 
Individual Means,113 ceases for the higher level (of practise) 
does not depend on the other levels that precede it. 
Exposition 
According to Ksemaraja the word nasika, which normally 
means "nose," here denotes the power of the vital breath (prana-
sakti) because it "moves on a crooked or curved path" (nasate). 
Again, the centre within the vital breath, as Ksemaraja says, is "con-
sciousness, the centre of which is the sustaining ground (pradhana of 
existence) because it is the inner being of all things.",u 

The process of differentiation continues after the vital breath 
has emerged from the emptiness of universal consciousness. In its 
descent from the higher regions, it successively gives life to the 
mental faculties, then to the body where it opens up channels for 
itself through which it courses in the form of Nada, the vitalizing 
resonance of awareness.115 Abhinava writes: 
The currents of the vital breath are expressions of the 
vibration (spanda) of consciousness; the extreme limit of 
grossness that they assume is called the "cavity" (susi) 
which forms a channel (nadi) that connects the body 
together. It is said in the Svacchandatantra: "Just as a leaf is 
pervaded by its filaments, so the body is pervaded by the 
channels, both principle and secondary."116 
In the Heart of Recognition (Pratyabhijfiahrdaya), Ksemaraja 
writes: 
The Centre is the Goddess of Consciousness alone for it is 
the inner being of all things as nothing would have a 
nature of its own were it not fixed on the screen of that 
(consciousness). However, even though it is such, it con-
ceals its real nature at the level of Maya and, in accord 
with the dictum initially consciousness is transformed into the 
vital breath, it assumes the form of the power of the vital 
breath (pranasakti). It then gradually descends through the 
planes of the intellect and body, etc., and reposes there fol-
lowing the course of countless vital channels (nadi). The 
principle form it assumes is that of the Central Channel 
{madhyanadi, i.e., susumna) whose substratum is Brahman, 
the power of the vital breath. It travels from the Cavity of 
Brahma (brahmarandhra) (at the top of the head) to the geni-
tal region (adhovaktra) like the central rib of a leaf.117 
The primary psychic channels are ten in number and radiate 
in a circle (cakra) from the navel.118 From there they travel to every 
part of the body branching out into 72,000 secondary channels,"9 
which then go on to form further subdivisions, thus permeating the 
body and ensuring the free circulation of the vital breath to every 

part of the psycho-physical organism.120 Of the ten primary chan-
nels, three are the most important for the practise of Yoga. Again, of 
these, the most important is Susumna, which issues from the circle 
of energies around the Cavity of Branma at the top of the head and 
runs down the body to the genitals.121 It is through this channel that 
the pervasive vitality of consciousness travels down through the 
body, and through that it again rises up, as Prana Kundalirii, to 
reunite with its infinite nature and so connect the microcosm with 
the macrocosm. Described as the "Channel of Consciousness" 
(cinnadi) or as the "filament of pure awareness" {jnanasutra),122 it is 
conceived to be a line without thickness, which thus transcends the 
limitations of space and is symbolic of the infinite. When the vital 
breath travels through it at a level with consciousness, the yogi 
experiences it as the Sky of Consciousness (cidvyoman) into which 
his awareness expands.123 To the left and right of Susumna run Ida 
and Pingala, the channels for the descending and ascending breath 
and the manifestation, at the individual (anava) level, of all polari-
ties, which they symbolize as the Sun and Moon. They emerge and 
subside into the vacuum of Susumna, which is the pure energy 
(Sakti) of the Goddess of the Centre (Madhya Devi) in which the 
opposites fuse. By fixing his attention on the void between the 
breaths, the yogi experiences the expansion of consciousness in the 
centre (madhyavikasa). The process of descent is then reversed as 
bodily consciousness merges into thought, thought into mind and 
mind into the Heart of consciousness beyond mind (unmana): 
If (the yogi) desires to discern the eternal and undifferenti-
ated outpouring of his own Heart, he must penetrate into 
the point in the centre where the Sun and Moon set.124 
The 'crooked' (kautilya) or irregular movement of the breath is 
thus spontaneously stilled. The yogi breathes freely with mindful-
ness and thus experiences an inner peace of mind (cittavisranti).125 
Penetrating deeper into the primal source of energy (kala) permeat-
ing the breath, Kundalini rises and the two breaths are sucked into 
Susumna. When this process is complete and the yogi emerges from 
his absorption (samadhi), he is effortlessly carried by the grace of the 
Goddess of the Centre to the highest level of consciousness through 
the movement of the breath, now recognised to be one with the flow 

of time and space. The three moments of the dialectic of conscious-
ness ranging through thesis, antithesis and synthesis symbolized by 
the triad of channels is overcome and assimilated into a unity. The 
yogi becomes one with the supreme power of consciousness which 
instigates the flux of the breath and, with it, the flow of time from 
the centre within the nose: 
The Attractress of Time residing in the space at the base of 
the nose constantly instigates the two breaths, attracting to 
the heart the three forms of time. By inhalations she lends 
access (to pure consciousness), by suspending the breath She 
maintains (that state of awareness) and, by exhalations, She 
absorbes (diversity). (Thus), in an instant, (She) is born of the 
exhalation of the breath and absorbs all time. She, the power 
of the will is called the "supreme energy" which awakens 
the three (times) and, worthy of worship, attracts all the vital 
breath (prabhajnana) which is (the basis) of the flux of time.126 
* 
* 
* 
Now (to conclude), the all-pervasive Lord explained 
the ultimate purport (siddhanta) of the means to realisation 
He has taught and ranged together in (all) these sections (of 
the Aphorisms): 
bhuyah syat 
pratimilanam 
May (the soul) merge (in the Lord) once again. 3/46 
All this universe is, in the way we have explained 
before, the development (vijrmbha) of the will of the ubiq-
uitous Lord from which the individual soul is separated by 
the vitality of the power of Maya. (The Lord) awakes the 
soul (from the slumber of ignorance) once again by impart-
ing the means described herein so that, by destroying the 
impurity (which sullies consciousness), it may merge in the 
Lord (again) and, becoming one with Him within Him, be 
Siva Who is full, perfect and uninterrupted bliss. This is 
basically what this excellent commentary on the Aphorisms 
of Siva has described correctly and succinctly in 390 verses. 

* 
* 
* 
(This aphorism) explains briefly the essence of all the 
Saiva teachings imparted (herein). (The word) again (implies 
the following process): Paramasiva is the absolute, the nature 
of which is pure consciousness. When He chooses out of His 
own free will to utilise His divine power (virya), He insti-
gates the development (of the principles) Siva, Sakti 
(Sadasiva, Isvara and Suddhavidya) that emerge (out of Him) 
as the subtle beginnings (pallava, of cosmic manifestation) 
and once He has done so He enters the Pure Path (constitut-
ed by these principles). (He resides) on this Path without 
falling from His true nature which is uninterrupted con-
sciousness. On the lower Path, however, He takes upon 
Himself the condition of a worldly soul (mayapramatr) for He 
wishes to exhibit the game (He plays) of forgetting His own 
nature and so acts out the cosmic drama. He attains His own 
abiding state (svasthiti) (once again) when, through a 
supreme act of grace, it becomes clearly apparent (to the 
soul) that the glory of its power to know and do all things 
has not been lost and so the state of the individual perceiver 
is submerged (into universal consciousness) by following the 
path indicated by the Saiva teachings. (Thus), when the 
impurity (which sullies consciousness) has been destroyed, 
(Siva) engenders the emergence of His supreme Siva-nature 
which is the absolute consisting of perfect, uninterrupted 
consciousness and bliss and having done so (the soul) realis-
es its own fundamental state. 
Exposition 
Ksemaraja explains what merger means in this aphorism in 
the following way: 
The universe arises out of one's own nature which is pure 
consciousness and, once freed of the latent traces of multi-
plicity, merges again into pure consciousness. Thus, through 
the repeated unfolding of his own essential, pure conscious 

nature (and repeated merger), the yogi is centred on the 
practise of the highest form of Yoga.127 
Ksemaraja goes on to explain that this "happens again," in 
the sense that "the Siva-nature the yogi possesses is not something 
new but is in fact his own essential nature. It is only due to the neg-
ative influence of his own thought constructs, generated by the 
power of Maya, that he is unable to reflect on it even though it is 
clearly manifest. Thus, it is by explaining the means to realisation 
discussed herein that this (supreme truth) is made fully evident (to 
everyone)."128 
On this note the Aphorisms of Siva end. 

APPENDIX: 
THE STANZAS ON VIBRATION 
The Spandakarika 
1. We praise that Sankara who is the source of the power 
of the Wheel of Energies by whose expansion (unmesa) 
and contraction (nimesa) the universe is absorbed and 
comes into being. 
2. That in which all this creation is established and from 
whence it arises is nowhere obstructed because it is 
unconditioned by (its very) nature. 
3. Even when division prevails due to the waking and 
other states, it extends through that which is undivid-
ed (tadabhinna) because the perceiving subjectivity for-
ever remains true to its own nature. 
4. No notions such as "I am happy," "I am miserable" or 
"I am attached" (exist independently). They all clearly 
reside elsewhere, namely, (in that) which threads 
through (all) the states of pleasure and the rest. 
5. That exists in the ultimate sense where there is neither 
pleasure nor pain, subject nor object, nor an absence of 
consciousness. 
6.-7. That principle should be examined with effort and 
reverence because this, its uncreated freedom, pre-
vails everywhere. By virtue of it, the senses, along 
with the inner circle, (although) unconscious, behave 
as if conscious in themselves and move towards (their 
object), rest (there) and withdraw (from them). 

8. Indeed the individual soul (purusa) does not activate 
the impulse of the will (which directs the body's activ-
ity) by himself alone, but through his contact with 
(his) own (inner) strength (bala), made in such a way 
that he identifies with it, (thus acquiring its power). 
9. An individual who, (though) desirous of doing vari-
ous things, (but) incapable of doing them due to his 
innate impurity (experiences) the supreme state 
(parampadam) when the disruption (ksobha, of his false 
ego) ceases. 
10. Then (the soul realises) that his (true) uncreated quali-
ty (dharma) is (universal) agency and perceiving sub-
jectivity, and so he knows and does whatever (he) 
desires. 
11. How can one who, as if astonished, beholds his own 
nature as that which sustains (all things) be subject to 
this accursed round of transmigration? 
12. Nothingness can never be an object of contemplation 
because consciousness is absent there. (It is a mistake 
to believe that one has perceived nothingness) 
because when reflection (subsequently) intervenes, 
one is certain that it was. 
13. Therefore consider that to be an artificial state similar 
to deep sleep. That principle is forever perceived and 
not remembered in this way. 
14. Moreover two states called "the agent" and "product 
of action" abide here. The product of action is subject 
to decay, whereas agency is imperishable. 
15. Only the effort directed toward the product of action 
disappears here (in states of intense introverted con-
templation). When that ceases, the unenlightened 
believes that his own existence ceases (with it). 
16. That inner being is the abode of omniscience and 
every other divine attribute. It can never cease to exist 
because nothing else can be perceived (outside it). 

17. The fully awakened (yogi's) perception of that (reality) 
is constant (and abides) unaltered in all three states, 
whereas others (perceive) that only at the end of the 
first (tadadyante). 
18. The omnipresent Lord appears in two states in union 
with (His) supreme power whose form is knowledge 
and its object. Elsewhere, apart from these (two states, 
He manifests) as pure consciousness. 
19. The streams of the pulsation (spanda) of the qualities, 
along with the other (principles), are grounded in the 
universal vibration (of consciousness) and so attain to 
being. Therefore they can never obstruct the enlight-
ened. 
20. Yet for those whose intuition slumbers, (these vibra-
tions of consciousness) are intent on disrupting their 
own abiding state of being (svasthiti), casting them 
down onto the terrible path of transmigration, which 
is so hard to cross. 
21. Therefore he who strives constantly to discern the 
spanda principle rapidly attains his own (true) state of 
being even while in the waking state. 
22. Spanda is stable in the state one enters when extremely 
angry, intensely excited, running or wondering what 
to do. 
.-24. Once entered, that state which (the yogi) takes as his 
support and firmly resolves that "I will surely do 
whatever He says"; both the sun and moon set, fol-
lowing the ascending way, into the channel of susu-
mna, once abandoned the sphere of the universe. 
25. Then in that great sky, when the sun and moon dis-
solve away, the dull minded (yogi is cast down) into a 
state like that of deep sleep. The awakened, however, 
remains lucid. 
26. Seizing that strength (bala), mantras, endowed with 
the power of omniscience, perform their functions, as 
do the senses of the embodied. 

27. It is there alone that they, quiescent and stainless, dis-
solve away, along with the adept's mind, and so par-
take of Siva's nature. 
28.-29. Everything arises (out of) the individual soul and so 
he is all things because he perceives his identity with 
the awareness (he has) of them. Therefore there is no 
state in the thoughts of words or (their) meanings that 
is not Siva. It is the Enjoyer alone who always and 
everywhere abides as the object of enjoyment. 
30. Or, constantly attentive and perceiving the entire uni-
verse as play, he who has this awareness (samvitti) is 
undoubtedly liberated in this very life. 
31. This indeed is the arising of that object of meditation 
in the mind of the meditator, namely, the adept's real-
isation of his identity with it by the force of (his) 
intent. 
32. This alone is the attainment of the nectar of immortali-
ty, this indeed is to catch hold of oneself, this is the ini-
tiation of nirvana which bestows Siva's true nature 
(sadbhava). 
33.-34. Requested by the will, the benefactor makes the sun 
and moon rise and bestows on the embodied, while 
they wake, the objects that are in (their) heart—so also 
in the dream state (Siva), residing in the centre, mani-
fests without exception, always and most vividly, the 
things (His devotee) desires because he never desists 
from (his) prayerful request. 
35. Otherwise, (as happens normally), the generation (of 
images) would be continuous and independent 
throughout the waking and dreaming states in accord 
with their character, as happens to the worldly. 
36.-37. Just as an object which is not seen clearly at first, even 
when the mind attends to it carefully, later becomes 
fully evident when observed with the effort exerted 
through one's own (inherent) strength (svabala), simi-
larly, when (the yogi) lays hold of that same power, in 

the same way, then whatever (he perceives manifest 
to him) quickly in accord with its true nature (para-
marthena), whatever be its form, locus, time or state. 
38. Laying hold of that (strength) even a weak man 
achieves his goal and so in the same way a starving 
man can still his hunger. 
39. When the body is sustained by this, one knows every-
thing that happens within it. Similarly, (this same 
omniscience) will prevail everywhere (when the yogi) 
finds his support in his own nature. 
40. Lassitude ravages the body and this arises from igno-
rance, but if it is eliminated by an expansion of con-
sciousness (unmesa) how can (ignorance), deprived of 
its cause, continue to exist? 
41. The expansion of consciousness that takes place when 
one is engaged in a single thought should be known 
as the source form whence another arises. One should 
experience that for oneself. 
42. Shortly after, from that (expansion) arises the point 
(bindu), from that sound (nada), from that form (rupa) 
and from that taste (rasa) which disturb the embodied 
soul. 
43. When (the yogi's consciousness) pervades all things 
by (his) desire to perceive, then why speak much? He 
will experience it for himself. 
44. At all times (the yogi) should remain well awake. 
Having with (his) perception observed the field (of 
awareness), he should deposit all in one place, and so 
be untroubled by any alien (reality). 
45. He who is deprived of his power by the forces of 
obscuration (kala), and a victim of the powers arising 
from the mass of sounds (sabdarasi) is called the fet-
tered soul. 
46. Operating in the field of the subtle elements, the aris-
ing of mental representation marks the disappearance 

of the flavour of the supreme nectar of immortality; 
due to this (man) forfeits his freedom. 
47. Moreover, his powers (of speech) are always ready to 
obscure his nature, as no mental representation can 
arise unpenetrated by speech. 
48.* This, Siva's power of action, residing in the fettered 
soul, binds it, (but) when (its true nature) is under-
stood and it is set on its own path, (this power) 
bestowes the fruits of yoga (siddhi). 
49.-50. (The soul) is bound by the City of Eight (puryastaka) 
that resides in the mind, intellect and ego and consists 
of the arising of the (five) subtle elements (of sensory 
perception). He helplessly suffers worldly experience 
(bhoga) which consists of the arising of mental repre-
sentation born of that (City of Eight) and so its exis-
tence subjects him to transmigration. Thus we will 
explain how to end this transmigratory existence. 
51. But when he is firmly established in one place which 
is then generated and withdrawn (by him at will), his 
state becomes that of the (universal) subject. Thus he 
becomes the Lord of the Wheel. 
52. I revere the wonderful speech of the Master whose 
words and their meaning are marvellous; it is the boat 
which carries one across the fathomless ocean of doubt! 
^According of Bhagavadutpala this stanza should be read to mean: This, 
Siva's power of action, is completely under his control (pasuvartinl). 
(Although) it binds (the fettered soul), when (its true nature) is understood 
and it is set on its own path, it bestows the fruits of yoga (siddhi). 

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
LP. 
Isvarapratyabhijna 
I.P.v. 
Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsini 
I.P.V.V. 
Isvarapratyabhijnavivrtivimarsini 
C.G.C. 
Cidgaganacandrika 
Chan.Up. 
Chandogya Upanisad 
T.Sa. 
Tantrasara 
T.A. 
Tantraloka 
N.T. 
Netratantra 
P.T.V. 
Paratrisikavivarana 
P.T.L.V. 
Paratrisikalaghuvrtti 
Pr.Hr. 
Pratyabhijnahrdaya 
Brh.Up. 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
M.N. 
Mahanarayanlya Upanisad 
M.M. 
Maharthamanjari 
M.V. 
Malinivijayottaratantra 
M.V.V. 
Malinivijayavartika 
Y.Hr. 
Yoginlhrdayatantra 
V.B. 
Vijnanabhairava 
S.Dr. 
Sivadrsti 
S.Su. 
Sivasutra 
S.Su.va. 
Sivasutravartika 
S.Su.vi. 
SivasutravimarsinI 
S.St. 
Sivastotra 
Sp.Ka. 
Spandakarika 
Sp.Nir. 
Spandanirnaya 
Sp.Pra. 
Spandapradlpika 
Sv.T. 
Svacchandabhairavatantra 


NOTES 
Introduction 
1. See bibliography. 
2. 
The Doctrine of Vibration by Mark S. G. Dyczkowski. State Uni-
versity of New York Press, Albany, 1988. 
3. In his commentary on aphorism 1 /20, Bhaskara writes: 
saktiman nirupadanah saccidrupah prakasakah 
antahsthitanam bhavanam icchayaiva bahiryatah. 
This means: "Consciousness and Being is the nature of the possessor 
of power for without any material cause He illumines externally by (His 
own) will alone the phenomena that reside within (Him)/' Compare I.P., 
1/5/7, which reads: 
cidatmaiva hi devo' ntahsthitam icchavasad bahih 
yogwa nirupadanam arthajatam prakasayet. 
This means: "The Lord Whose essential nature is consciousncss, 
externally manifests, like a yogi, all the objects that are within (Him), 
according to (His free) will, without (requiring) any material cause." 
4. Abhinavagupta quotes from two works which he attributes to the 
"son of Divakara," whom we know was Bhaskara, as he expressly tells us 
so himself (see below p. 11). These works are the Collyrium of Discrimina-
tion (Vivekajfiana) and the Hymn to Power (Kaksyastotra). For details of these 
works and where they are quoted, the reader is referred to my forthcom-
ing Stanzas on Vibration. There I devote an appendix to an analysis of the 
texts and authors quoted in the commentaries on the Stanzas on Vibration 
among which is the Hymn to Power. 
5. See my introduction to the Stanzas on Vibration. 
6. Accordingly, I have appended a translation of the Stanzas on 

Vibration at the end of this book to which the reader will be referred 
throughout this work in the relevant places. 
7. I prove that it was Utpaladeva who first formulated this pro-
found metaphysical insight in my paper "Self Awareness, Own Being and 
Egoity/' Varanasi, 1990. 
8. T.A., 2/39. 
The First Light 
1. The anonymous author of the Sanskrit notes to Bhaskara's com-
mentary is alluding here to the etymology of the word deva, meaning god 
or lord. This word is derived from the root div to which grammarians 
assign as many as six meanings, namely: play (krlda), desire to overcome 
(vijigisa), behave variously (vyavahara), manifest or illumine (dyuti) praise 
(stuti) and movement (gati). Abhinavagupta explains what these mean in 
this context: 
i) 
Play (krida): Free of any desire to gain or avoid anything, God 
(deva) plays the game of pouring Himself out into cosmic mani-
festation, inspired by His own uninterrupted (ghana) bliss. 
ii) 
Desire to overcome (vijigisa): His intention is to be superior to 
all and such is His freedom. 
iii) 
Behave variously (vyavahara): Although His varied acting 
always takes place within His own undivided nature, He 
makes Himself manifest in the form of the discourse (satikalpa) 
of thought. 
iv) 
Manifestation or illumination (dyuti): He manifests all things 
and it is because of this that He shines. 
v) 
Praise (stuti): He is praised because all things incline towards 
Him in all their varied functions from the moment they acquire 
their individual existence. 
vi) 
Movement (gati): His movement is consciousness; it consists of 
the totality of all activity and its qualities are knowledge and 
action. 
Abhinava's source here is the Sivatanusastra which he quotes in T.A., 
l/100b-103. 
2. The movement of the moon is thought to continuously regenerate 
the universe. The moon is the visible form of the divine source of the life-
giving ambrosia (soma, amrta) which, as it gradually wains, empties out of 
it to feed the entire universe of objectivity, including the gods and manes, 
as well as the sun and the other cosmic bodies along with man's body, 
senses and mind. During the bright fortnight, as the moon waxes, it gradu-
ally reabsorbs into itself from its hidden source what it had lost in the dark 

fortnight. In this way, the moon, which consists of fifteen digits, (kala) 
increases and decreases continuously. This cyclic process of nourishment 
and self-regeneration is grounded in an unchanging, underlying reality 
that persists as the permanent element that guarantees the continuity and 
regularity of this process. This element is conceived to be the sixteenth 
digit of the moon, known as amakala. Although invisible, it is the source of 
all the other digits and hence the one which ultimately nourishes the 
whole universe (visvatarpini), and so is identified with the divine energy of 
the emission (visarga) of consciousness that incessently renews all things. 
See T.A., 6/92b-97. 
3. See below p. 11. 
4. See below p. 11. The anonymous author of the Sanskrit notes 
reads: sa castyahantedantadi (in place of sadastyahantedantadi). 
5. See below p. 12. 
6. Cf. vrtti on Sp.Ka., 1. 
7. This line is drawn from Kallata's Tattvavicara. 
8. Concerning these energies see my Doctrine..., pp. 129-131. 
9. Cf. Pr.Hr., pp. 40-47, where Ksemaraja declares that the conclu-
sions various philosophical systems reach concerning ultimate reality are 
all roles that the universal Self assumes and that they vary according to the 
degree in which it discloses its true nature. Similarly, Abhinavagupta 
maintains on the authority of the Svacchandatantra that other schools of 
thought such as the Samkhya or Veda all originate from Siva and so 
should be respected. But even so, these traditions are mere fragments of a 
much vaster tradition and so mislead these who follow them (T.A., 
35/36-40a). It is for this reason that other schools teach only partial aspects 
of reality and so lead to only partial attainments and cannot rise to the 
level of insight of the higher, more complete tradition or, if they do, they 
immediately fall to lower views thus clearly demonstrating that they are 
under the sway of Maya (ibid., 37/3-8). 
10. Cf. Sp.Ka., 2. For references to the Stanzas on Vibration see the 
appendix where they are translated. The words caitanyamatmano rupam 
(the nature of the Self is consciousness) are taken, according to Abhinav-
agupta, from Kallata's commentary on the Aphorisms. I.P.V.V., II p. 183. 
11. Abhinava writes: "(The word) consciousness is an abstract noun 
that expresses the concept of freedom, that is, (absolute) Being beyond all 
specification. This is what (Lord Siva) has said in the ancient Aphorism" 
(caitanyam iti bhavantah sabdah svatantryamatrakam anaksiptavisesam sad aha
sutre puratane). T.A., 1 /28. 

12. Sp.Ka.,47. 
13. There are three basic impurities that seemingly sully conscious-
ness. The first, called the Impurity of Individuality (anavamala), apparently 
contracts consciousness from its infinite plenitude down to an atomic 
point (anu) which thus assumes the form of the individual soul. The sec-
ond impurity is that of Maya (mayiyamala). It entangles consciousness, thus 
contracted, in the net of duality. The third is the Impurity of Karma which 
subjects individualized consciousness to suffer the consequences of its 
actions. Utpaladeva defines these impurities as follows: 
The Impurity of Individuality (anavamala) operates when one 
looses consciousness of one's own true nature (svasvariipa) and 
is of two kinds, namely, the loss of consciousness of one's free-
dom and the loss of freedom of one's consciousness. The 
(impurity) called Maya is the perception of the object as sepa-
rate (from the subject). It engenders (repeated) birth and 
worldly experience (bhoga). The Impurity of Karma affects the 
acting subject ignorant (of his true nature). All three are due to 
the power of Maya. (I.P., 3/2/4-5.) 
14. S.Su.vi., p. 18. 
15. Cf.Sp.Ka.,9. 
16. Cf. Sp.Ka. 45, 47. On the development of speech and its binding 
effects on individual consciousness, see my Doctrine..., pp. 195-200. 
17. The five obscuring coverings arc: 1) Time (kala), 2) Attachment 
(raga), 3) Power of merely limited action (kala), 4) Power of merely limited 
knowledge (vidya) and 5) Constraint to fixed laws (niyati), particularly 
those of Karma. See my Doctrine..., p. 131. Abhinavagupta deals with these 
obscuring coverings and their development in detail in T.A., 9/174 ff. See 
also below p. 97. 
18. Sp.Nir., p. 68. 
19. Each of the fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet symbolize a 
phase in the flux of energy that generates and withdraws the cosmic and 
transcendental order as it assumes or abandons aspects of its nature, each 
of which are energies in their own right. 'A', the first letter of the Sanskrit 
alphabet, stands for Anuttara, the absolute. Its four principle powers are 
depicted as forming part of the letter 'A' thus: 
Raudri 
(the head) 
Varna (the mouth) 
Ambika (the half-moon) 

20. See my Doctrine..., pp. 129-130. 
21. Abhinavagupta explains the nature of these three energies as fol-
lows: "Vama is the mistress of those immersed in transmigratory existence 
and bestows the power of the Lord (prabhusakti). Jyestha (presides) over 
those who are well awakened and Raudri over those who seek worldly 
pleasure. Vama (is so called) because She vomits phenomenal existence 
(samsaravamana). Jyestha because She is of Siva's nature and Raudri because 
She dissolves away all evils and fixes every action." T.A., 6/56-57. 
22. Ksemaraja 
writes: 
"The arising of mental 
representation 
(pratyaya) consists of the flow of cognitive consciousness which is both dis-
cursive (vikalpaka) and non-discursive (avikalpaka). That cannot take place 
unpenetrated by speech, that is, without being coloured by the subtle 
(inner) speech of the sort "I know this" and without being associated with 
gross (outer speech). In this way, even the intentions of animals are made 
clear without linguistic conventions. Within oneself is an inner under-
standing that is communicted by a (silent) gesture of the head and this is 
the reflective awareness of (the inner) speech (of understanding). Were 
this not so, a child could not grasp the initial (indication of) the convention 
(which links a particular word to its specific meaning) because he would 
be devoid of the inner awareness which distinguishes (between one thing 
and another). Thought constructs (vikalpa) are, as everyone's personal 
experience proves, pervaded by gross speech." (Sp.Nir., p. 71.) 
23. ajnata mata matrka vtivajananl. S.Su.vi., p. 25. 
24. T.A., 15/130b-131a. 
25. N.T., 21/38. 
26. See below under aphorism 2/7. 
27. S.Su.vi., p. 89. 
28. See below, pp. 130-133. 
29. See my Doctrine..., p. 7, for this and other Tantric etymologies of 
the name Bhairava. Also T.A., 1 /96-100a. 
30. S.Su.vi., p. 30. 
31. aunmanasam dhama. S.Su.va., app. p. 100. 
32. These words are taken from a famous quote drawn from the Sar-
vamangala (alias Paramesvari) Tantra. 
33. This is one Tantric etymology of the word cakra. Abhinava adds 
others: "The term cakra is said to be derived from the roots kas, because it 
expands, cak, because it is satisfied, krt, because it cuts and kr, because it 
acts. Thus cakra is that which unfolds, is satisfied, severs and acts." T.A., 
29/106b-107a. 

34. &.Su.vi., p. 33. 
35. Abhinava writes: "All this universe is a reflection in this way in 
the Lord Who is the pure Sky of Bhairava's consciousness, (produced 
there) unaided by anything else. The perfect independence of the Lord is 
His cosmic nature. This, they say, is Supreme Intuition, the Goddess Abso-
lute." (T.A., 3/65-66.) 
36. For the practise of Bhairavamudra, see my Doctrine..., pp. 
158-162. 
37. S.Su.vi., app. p. 10, fn. 95, of the K.S.T.S. edition. 
38. Cf. Sp.Ka., 3. 
39. Cf. ibid., 3-4. 
40. See my Doctrine..., pp. 84, 213-216. 
41. T.A., 6/83 and commentary. 
42. "The waking state prevails when creatures (bhuta) such as (the 
persons called) Caitra and Maitra, the principles from Earth onwards, 
words, which are the instruments of denotation, the tetrad consisting of 
the subject, object, means of knowledge and knowledge (itself, in short, 
all) this universe (manifests objectively) as that which is supported (by 
consciousness, adhistheya)." (Ibid., 10/232-233.) 
43. I.P., 3/2/17; S.Su.vi., p. 41; M.M., p. 156. 
44. T.A., 10/242. 
45. S.Su.vi., p. 43; Sp.Nir., p. 13; Sp.Ka. vi., p. 20. 
46. T.A., 10/244 
47. Read drstrsvabhavasya for drstisvabhauasya. 
48. T.A., 10/253-254. 
49. Ibid., 10/247-250. 
50. I.P., 3/2/16. 
51. S.Su.vi., p. 41. 
52. Sp.Nir., p. 13. 
53. T.A., 10/255. 
54. Each state is thus related to the others, giving three states for 
each basic one. These nine states are described below in the exposition to 
this aphorism. 

55. 'Lord' (pati) is defined in the appendix of the printed edition of 
Bhaskara's commentary (p. 104) as "the subject of the Pure Path which 
consists of Mantra, etc. He is the liberted soul whose own true nature is 
unobscured by (his) powers." Bhaskara is here trying to point out that the 
nature of these three states is not absolute but relative to the subject who 
experiences them. They are one thing for the illumined soul and quite the 
contrary for the fettered; they operate in opposite ways. 
56. Cf. Sp.Ka., 18 and also 35. 
57. T.A., 10/258 
58. I.P., 3/2/13-15 and commentary. 
59. T.A., 10/257. 
60. I.P. 3/2/15. 
61. M.V.V., 1/975. 
62. T.A., 10/258. 
63. Ibid., 10/261. 
64. S.Su.vi., p. 43. 
65. T.A., 10/262. 
66. Cf. Sp.Ka., 19. 
67. M.M., p. 172; S.Su.vi., p. 48. 
68. S.Su.vi., p. 48. 
69. Cf. Sp.Ka., 11. 
70. Cf. ibid., 42. 
71. S.Su.vi., p. 54. 
72. M.N., section 22. 
73. Sv.T., vol. I, p. 5. 
74. S.St.,1/9. 
75. Cf. Sp.Ka., 28-29. 
76. S.Su.vi., p. 57. 
77. Cf. Sp.Ka., 25. 
78. Cf. Kallata's commentary on Sp.Ka., 34. 
79. Chan.Up., 8/1/1-3. 

80. Brh.Up., 3/9/19-25,5/3/1-2. 
81. Ibid., 4/1/7. 
82. Chan.Up., 8/1/1-2. 
83. Katha Upanisad, 4/12-13. 
84. The reader is referred to Paul Miiller-Ortega's excellent study 
on the symbolism of the Heart: The Triadic Heart of Siva, Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1989. See also a no less interesting thesis on the 
same subject by Javier Ortez: A Hermeneutics of Symbolic ("Spatial") terms 
(Sunya, Akaia, Kha, Vyoman) and the Relationship with the "Centre" ("Heart" 
Hrdaya) in the Sivaism of Kashmir, Varanasi: Banaras Hindu University, 
1989. 
85. hrdayam bodhaparyayah, T.A., comm. on 4/183. 
86. P.T.V., p. 61. 
87. S.Su.vi., p. 59. 
88. T.A., 4/181b-182a; T.Sa., p. 27 fn. 12. 
89. C.G.C., 1/5. 
90. M.M., pp. 127-128; S.Su.va. by Varadaraja, 1/77. 
9 1 . 
P . T . L . V . , 
p . 
1 8 . 
92. I.P.V.V., 11, pp. 205-206. 
93. ahamparamarsatma param hrdayam visrantidhamatayavasthitam. 
T.A., comm. 5/61. 
94. T.A., 5/20. anantam paramam jyotih sarvapranihrdi sthitam. Quot-
ed from the Navasatisastra in Y.Hr., p. 63. 
95. P.T.L.V., pp. 9-10. 
96. Ibid., p. 1 (intro. v. 3). 
97. Ibid., p. 10. 
98. M.M., p. 25. 
99. P.T.L.V., p. 10; cf. M.M., v. 14. 
100. Sp.Ka., 53. This verse is found only in Ksemaraja's recension of 
the Stanzas on Vibration. It says: "May this wealth of knowledge always 
lead, as it did Vasugupta, to the welfare of all who, once they have 
obtained (this) the Unattainable, have stored it in the cave of their hearts/' 
1 0 1 . 
M . M . , 
p . 
2 5 . 

1 0 2 . 
P . T . L . V . , 
p . 
1 9 . 
103. M.M., v. 52. 
104. S.Su.vi., p. 59. 
105. Cf. Sp.Ka, 33-34. 
106. S.Su.vi., p. 62. 
107. Ibid., p. 64. 
108. Cf. Sp.Ka., 18. 
109. M.M., v. 60. 
110. See my Doctrine..., p. 178. 
111. S.Su.vi., p. 38. 
112. Sp.Ka., 48. 
113. Cf.I.P., 1/5/7. 
114. Cf. Sp.Ka., vrttil. 
115. Sivasutra con il commento di Ksemaraja by Raffacle Torella, Roma: 
Ubaldini Editore, 1979, p. 60. 
116. The Pure Knowledge of a higher enlightened consciousness is a 
recurring topic in Bhaskara's commentary. See, for example, under apho-
risms 2/3, 2/4, 3/3, 3/7 and 3/19. For 'impure knowledge' sec under 2/10 
and 3/19. 
117. These eight yogic powers form a standard group cited together 
in many treatises on Yoga and are drawn from the Yogasutra. Kashmiri 
Saivites explain these powers as aspects of the divine power the yogi 
acquires through the expansion of consciousness thus: 
1) 
The power of atomicity (anima) is the power to be aware of 
one's presence within all things. 
2) 
The power of lightness (laghima) is the power to free oneself of 
the grossness of diversity. 
3) 
The power of greatness (mahima) is the power to experience the 
all-pervasion of consciousness. 
4) 
The power to make oneself heavy at will (garima) [which has 
been omitted in this text] corresponds to the power to evolve 
gross forms out of one's own consciousness. 
5) 
The power of attainment (prapti) is the capacity to rest within 
one's own nature. 
6) 
The power of forebearanee (prakamya) is the power to grasp 
cosmic diversity. 

7) 
The power of control (vasita) is the power to do whatever one 
wishes. 
8) 
The power of lordship (isitva) is the yogi's unbroken (akhandita) 
freedom. P.T.V., p. 37 fn. 74; cf. M.M., pp. 126-127. 
118. Sv.T., 4/396-397. 
119. M.V.V., 1/245-246, 2/100-102. 
120. MalinT is the name given to the alphabet when the order of the 
letters has been disarranged in such a way that the 'seed' letters (i.e., the 
vowels representing aspects of Siva's transcendental consciousness) and 
the 'womb' letters (i.e., the consonants which represent aspects of §akti's 
immanent consciousness) are thoroughly mixed together. It is symbolic of 
the union of Siva and Sakti through which the universe of diversity is 
destroyed and the pure consciousness of Paramasiva is awakened in the 
yogi. Malinl represents the awakened power of Kundalini that rises 
inwardly making a sound like that of a black bee: "Malinl is supported 
(malita) by the Rudras and bears supernatural powers and liberation; the 
fruits it bestows are like a garland of flowers (mala) and as such is worthy 
of adoration; the sound it creates, like a bee, is that of rcabsorption." (T.A., 
15/131b-132b.) 
121. T.A., 3/229b. 
122. Ibid., 4/181 b-183. 
123. Pr.Hr., p. 57 and P.T.V., p. 55. 
124. Pr.Hr., p. 93. 
125. uccara means "pronounciation," "articulation" or "utterance." It 
denotes the act of uttering a Mantra (mantroccara). It literally means "an 
upward movement." Moveover, the term uccara conveys different mean-
ings according to the yogi's level of practise. At the individual (anava) 
level, it is the recitation of Mantra in harmony with the movement of the 
breath. At its height, it is the upward moving current of vitality through 
susumna. At the empowered (sakta) level, it is the persistent force of aware-
ness that impels individual consciousness and merges it with universal 
consciousness. At the Siva (sambhava) level, it is the exertion that impels 
the cycles of creation and destruction. 
126. Sp.Pra., p. 109. 
127. See below, p. 199 fn 10. 

1. Pr.Hr., su. 5 and commentary. 
2. S.Su.vi., p. 23. 
3. Mano bindu is the light of consciousness. It is said to be like a 
brilliant star that shines in the calix of the lotus of the Heart of conscious-
ness and is equally Siva, &akti and the individual soul (nam) (T.A., 
3/111-113a). It is also, more concretely, the final nasal sound that is writ-
ten at the end of the seed-syllables that are recited alone as Mantras in 
themselves or as part of Mantras. To make his recitation effective, the 
adept should recite this final nasal sound with the full force of his aware-
ness. Compare this passage from the Mundaka Upanisad about the recita-
tion of OM which also ends with the nasal sound, bindu: 
Taking as a bow the great weapon of the Upanishad, one 
should put upon it an arrow sharpened by meditation. 
Stretching it with a thought directed to the essence of that, 
penetrate that Imperishable as the mark, my friend. The mys-
tic syllable OM (pranava) is the bow. The arrow is the soul 
(atman). Brahman is said to be the mark (laksya). By the undis-
tracted man is It to be penetrated. One should come to be in 
It, as the arrow (in the mark). Mundaka Upanisad, 2/2/3-4 
(Hume's translation). 
4. S.Su.vi., p. 89. 
5. ...paramesl bodhakhya saktirvisvam garbhlkrtya para kundalika satl... 
Sv.T., vol. II, p. 261. 
6. See above, p. 00 fn. 00. 
7. S.Su.vi., p. 90. 
8. T. A, comm. 3/67. 
9. T. A, 6/217. 
10. Also called "Half of Ka" (kakarardha) (see above p. 00), it is 
referred to as hakarardhardha, i.e., "half of half of Ha." Half of Ha is visarga, 
which is the last letter in the vowel series of the Sanskrit alphabet, written 
as two dots, one above the other. Thus, half of that again is the single dot 
or point that represents bindu, which is the seed born of the union of the 
female (kunda) and male (golaka) elements. It is the bliss (anandatman) of 
the supreme emission (paravisarga) of cosmic consciousness in the field of 
universal awareness. Referred to as the seventeeenth kala, it is the life-giv-
ing nectar of 'I' consciousness which vitalizes and transcends the sixteen 
aspects (kala) of object-centrcd awareness that constitute individual 
embodied consciousness, namely, the five gross elements, the ten sense 

organs and mind (manas), for it is said that "an immortal part (amrtakala) is 
present in man who is made of sixteen parts." Quoted in comm. T. A., 
3/137b-140a. 
11. Kundalini is called Hamsa because of its intimate association with 
vitality and breathing. As the supreme form of speech and the source of all 
lower orders of speech, Kundalini is also the supreme form of the breath 
(prananarupa), the vehicle through which speech is generated. At the lower 
level of articulate speech, the breath rises and descends in the usual way 
making the sound 'Ha-Sa' as it does so (comm. Sv.T., 4/257). This 
unstruck sound (anahata) is the lowest order of Divine Sound, Nada. The 
middle level (parapara) of Nada is Hamsa, as the sound of the breath rising 
in susumna (corresponding to Prana Kundalini), while the supreme form 
(para) of Nada is the pure reflective awareness of consciousness (vimarsa) 
(corresponding to Para Kundalini). See comm. T. A., 3/67. 
12. Sv.T., comm. 4/257. 
13. 'A' is the first letter of the alphabet and represents anuttara, the 
absolute, as the primordial unity from which all the other letters are emit-
ted. See above, p. 00 fn.00. 
14. The spiritual energy of Kundalini can be experienced at any time 
by anybody, irrespective of caste, colour or creed. Yogic discipline or any 
other practise is only secondarily instrumental in awakening this power. It 
is Siva's grace alone that can arouse it and this He bestows when and 
where he wishes. 
15. Abhinava writes: "That undivided light (which shines) when the 
power of action emerges in the abode of the Moon (object), Sun (means of 
knowledge ) and Fire (subject) is our supreme Bindu. The Lord has said in 
the Tattvaraksavidhana: "Bindu, residing in the centre of the circle of the 
lotus of the Heart, is known by progressive merger of the individual soul 
(nara) into Sakti (and that) into Siva. It is the immaculate saviour (taraka)" 
(T.A., 3/111-113a). Sakti Kundalini rests here, unconcerned with outer 
manifestation, in Her own nature alone (T.A., comm., 3/137b-140b), full of 
the potential energy of the power of action. At the universal level, Sakti 
Kundalini rests initially in the root centre at the base of the spine 
(muladhara). 
16. The Moon, Fire and Sun represent, as usual, the object, subject 
and means of knowledge, while the stars symbolize differentiated percep-
tions (vikalpa). All is absorbed in the pervasion (or 'poison', visa) of the 
reflective awareness of 'I' consciousness in the deep sleep (susupti) state of 
Sakti Kundalini. 
17. The vitality (virya) of Siva's seed (bindu) is activated by one-
pointed and repeatedly refreshed awareness of the movement of the 
breath. The resonance (nada) of the reflective awareness permeating the 

breath as the supreme life-force (para jwakala) thus aids in the churning 
and arousal of the spiritual power of Kundalini. 
18. The four aspects (kala) of Bindu are subject, object and means of 
knowledge together with the 'Inexplicable' (anakhya), which is the tran-
scendental consciousness of the pure awareness (pramitibhava) that con-
tains the other three as a single undivided whole. 
19. The yogi experiences Jyesthasakti in a state of introverted con-
templative absorption (nimilanasamadhi) when subject and object fuse with 
the rise of Kundalini. He must however inevitably emerge from this state of 
contemplation. This emergence (vyutthana) is due to the power of Raudrl, 
which distracts him from the absorption of contemplation and causes the 
power of his awareness to flow out through the three channels of will, 
knowledge and action into the domains of individual subjectivity, the 
senses and objectivity, respectively. 
20. Ambika is the energy which allows the yogi to re-enter into his 
own introverted absorption and then emerge from it again repeatedly in 
an arch-like movement, as is that of the breath, to ultimately achieve a 
state of pervasive awareness equally present inwardly and externally. 
21. These three energies correspond to those of the absolute (anut-
tara), the will (iccha) and the expansion (unmesa) of the power of knowl-
edge from which all the other phonemic energies emerge (see T.A., 
3/220b-221a). The first of these energies operates in the superior yogi 
whose mind has dissolved away (cittapralaya) in the unity of cosmic and 
transcendental consciousness. The second operates in the yogi when his 
mind is awakened (cittasambodha) and he seeks to enjoy the pleasures of 
the world with his senses illumined by the power of awareness. The last 
power operates in the inferior yogi who limits himself to enjoying the still-
ness of resting his mind (cittavisranti) in introverted contemplation. 
22. Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Is an a, Tatpurusa and Aghora are the names 
of Siva's five faces. To each face corresponds a Mantra. The reader is 
referred to Sv.T. 1/45, 4/103, 158, 173, 189, 195. See also Gnoli's Italian 
translation of Abhinavagupta's Tantraloka (pp. 716-717, fn. 8). 
23. S.Su.vi., p. 97. 
24. T.A., 32/1-2. 
25. Ibid., 32/9b-10a. 
26. Ibid., 32/3. 
2 7 . 
P r . H r . , 
p . 
8 8 . 
2 8 . 
Y . H r . , 
p . 
7 1 . 
29. Cf. Kulacudamani, quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 99. 

30. S.Su.vi., p. 99. 
31. Ibid. 
32. T.A., 32/64. 
33. Ibid., 32/65. 
34. Ibid., 4/200. 
35. M.V.V., p. 16-17. 
36. This is the most popular and well-known etymology of the word 
guru. There are others as, for instance, the following found in the Gurugita, 
v. 46: gukaram ca gunatitam rukaram rupavarjitam / gunatitasvarupam ca yo 
dadyat sa guruh smrtah (Gu stands for "beyond the qualities" and ru for 
"devoid of form." He who bestows that nature which transcends the quali-
ties is said to be a guru). 
37. S.Su.vi., p. 102. 
38. M.V.,2/10. 
39. T.A., 13/329. 
40. Ibid., 13/309-310. 
41. Ibid., 13/335-336. 
42. Ibid., 15/38b-39a. 
43. Y.Hr., pp. 174-175; T.A., 4/77,13/158. 
44. T.A., 4/59. 
45. Y.Hr., p. 185. 
46. T.A., 13/298. 
4 7 . 
M . M . , 
p . 
4 . 
48. Ibid., p. 6. 
49. Sambhavisakti, also called Jyestha or Rudrasakti (T.A., 13/202-203, 
13/249b), is a middlingly intense (twramadhya) and weakly intense (tivra-
manda) descent of power (saktipata) which leads the disciple to the true 
Master and along the Saiva path. It annuls the power of Vamasakti which 
leads the disciple away from the path. 
5 0 . 
P . T . V . , 
p p . 
1 4 - 1 5 . 
51. Sv.T. quoted in V.B., p. 7. See also my Doctrine..., pp. 167-168. 
5 2 . 
T . A . , 
1 / 2 7 5 . 

53. M.V.V., l/918b-921a. 
54. See my Doctrine..., p. 178. 
55. For details of the process of emanation and how the letters relate 
to the categories and energies, the reader is referred to chapter 3 of Abhi-
nava's Tantraloka and his commentary on the Paratrisika (pp. 165-200). Kse-
maraja himself says that his own account, which essentially constitutes his 
commentary on this aphorism, is a summary of Abhinava's exposition as 
found in these works (S.Su.vi. on su. 2/7). For an excellent study based on 
these sources, see A. Padoux, Recherches sur la symbolique et l'energie de la 
parole dans certains textes tantrique, Paris, 1963. 
56. See my Doctrine..., pp. 185-188,198-199. 
57. The Siddhamrta, quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 105; this same passage is 
quoted in T.A., 3/220b-225 as part of the Siddhayogesvarimatatantra. 
58. Cf. Sp.Ka., 48, to which Ksemaraja refers in this context. 
59. S.Su.vi., p. 119. 
60. V.B., v. 149, quoted ibid. 
61. S.Su.vi., p. 121. 
62. Ibid. 
The Third Light 
1. T.A., comm. 13/191. 
2. Cf. Sp.Ka., 49-50, to which Ksemaraja refers in his commentary. 
3. In the place of parimitapramatrbhavabhimananam grahitanam, read 
parimitapramatrbhavabhimanagrahitanam. 
4. See my Doctrine..., p. 166. 
5. See ibid., chap. 7, on the categories of practise (upaya). 
6. Ibid., pp. 210-211. 
7. V.B., v. 56. 
8. T.A., 11/50. 
9. I.P., 2/1/5. 
10. Ibid., 2/1/3. 
11. T.A.,6/21b-22a and comm. 

12. The word adhvan is here supposed to derive from the root ad, to 
eat. T.A., 6/28b-30. 
13. The five Cosmic Forces (kala) are the binding energies that oper-
ate within consciousness to hold its outer manifest form together into one 
coherent whole. They are visualized as five concentric circles containing 
the various categories of existence, as follows: 
i) 
Nivrttikala—the Earth Principle (prthvitattva) alone falls into the 
sphere of this energy. 
ii) 
Pratisthakala—includes the categories from Water to Nature 
(prakrti). 
iii) 
Vidyakala—this is the energy working through the five obscur-
ing coverings (kancuka) and Maya. 
iv) 
Santakala—includes the categories from Pure Knowledge (suddha-
vidya) to Sadaiiva. 
v) 
Santatitakala—this is the sphere of Siva and Sakti. 
14. M.V.V., 1/1014-1017. 
15. T.A., comm. 6/30. 
16. Ibid., 8/4. 
17. Ibid., 11/92. 
18. Ibid., 11/107-108. 
19. Doctrine..., pp. 210-211. 
20. Cf. Sp.Ka., 8. 
21. Sv.T., 7/297 
22. S.Su.vi., p. 147. 
23. Sv.T., 4/393-397. 
24. S.Su.vi., p. 152. 
25. harsanusari spandah krida, S.Dr., p. 29. 
26. M.M., v. 19. 
27. T.A.,4/10. 
28. S.Dr, 1/35-36. 
29. Ibid., l/37b-38a. 
3 0 . 
M . M . , 
p . 
5 1 . 
31. Ibid., p. 55. 

32. Ibid., p. 49. 
33. Cf. Sp.Ka., 8. 
34. Cf. ibid., 39. 
35. T.A., 3/141b. 
36. Ibid., comm. 4/132. 
37. Ibid., 3/128b-129a. 
38. Ibid., comm. 13/206b-207a. 
39. M.V.V., 1/678-680. 
40. Cf. Sp.Ka., 36-37. 
41. S.Su.vi., p. 162. 
42. The "movement of the fish," according to the glossary appended 
to the edition of Bhaskara's commentary, refers to the "lower power" 
(iadhahsakti), i.e., Kundalini at rest in the body. 
43. See above, aphorism 1 /23. 
44. N.T., 8/41-45. 
45. Cf.I.P., 1/5/15. 
46. Cf. Sp.Ka., 45. 
47. Cf. ibid., 47. 
48. Read cittern for citte. 
49. See my Doctrine..., pp. 158-162. 
50. Cf. vrtti on Sp.Ka., 6-7. 
51. V.B.,v. 138. 
52. Quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 177. 
53. Cf. Sp.Ka., 26. 
54. S.Su.vi., p. 180. 
55. Sv.T., 4/311-314. 
56. The Great Path (mahapatha) is the last journey made, to the place 
of its execution, by those who have vowed to commit ritual suicide. They 
must travel towards the northeast, which is Siva's quarter, in a straight 
line without altering their course, whatever the obstacle, and eat only air 
and water until their body drops "like a dry leaf." See Manavadharmasastra, 
6/1/32. 

57. For the Paiupatas and their Great Vow (mahavrata) see my Canon 
of the Saivagama and the Kubjika Tantras of the Western Kaula Tradition, 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1987, pp. 19-26. 
58. Sphuranarupa puja. P.T.L.V., p. 23. Cf. V.B., v. 147: "The offering 
of flowers and the rest does not constitute worship: (true) worship is that 
which fixes the mind firmly and, with reverence, dissolves it away in the 
Supreme Sky of consciousness free of all thought constructs." 
59. Sv.T., 4/398. 
60. V.B., v. 145. 
61. T A., 2/39. 
62. S.Su.vi., p. 194. 
63. Ibid. 
64. Cf.Sp.Ka.,16. 
65. Ibid., 4. 
66. S.Su.vi., p. 205. 
67. Sp.Ka.,5. 
68. Cf. ibid. 
69. Cf. ibid., 4. 
70. S.Su.vi., p. 206. 
71. That is, S.Su., 1/4, 2/7 and 3/20. 
72. Cf. Sp.Ka., 6-8 and 26. 
73. I.P., 1/6/11. Cf. also T.A., 11/101. 
74. S.Su., 3/21. 
75. V.B., v. 69-73. 
76. P.T.V., pp. 47-49. 
77. S.Su.vi., p. 212. 
78. Ibid., p. 220. 
79. T.A., 4/179b-180a. 
80. M.V.V., l/816a. 
81. Drawn from M.V., 1/29. 

82. T.A., 9/201b-202a. 
83. Cf. ibid., 13/206. 
84. Ibid., 6/39. 
85. Sv.T., vol. VI, pp. 167-168. 
86. M.M.,p. 131. 
87. M.V.V., 1/876. 
88. Ibid., l/99b-100. 
89. T.A., 13/204. 
90. Ibid., 3/252b-253a, 4/173b-175. 
91. M.V.V., l/663-664a. Cf. ibid., 1/815. 
92. T.A., 6/38-40b. 
93. I.P.v. II, p. 208. 
94. M.V.V., 1/56. 
95. Ibid. 
96. Ibid., 1/664. 
97. Ibid., 1/678-685. 
98. T.A., 6/182b-184; also, P.T.V., p. 246. 
99. P.T.V., p. 246; cf. M.V.V., 1/815. 
100. T.A., comm. 13/206b-207a. 
101. LP. v. II, p. 206. 
102. Cf. T.A., 10/187b-227a. 
103. T.A., 7/26-30. 
104. Ibid., 15/336. 
105. T.A., 7/62b-64a. 
106. According to the teachings of the Upanisads (e.g., Brh.Up., 
3/9/26, 4/2/4, 4/5/15), the Self can only be described in negative terms, 
i.e., as that which it is not. 
107. T.A., 6/7-11. 
108. Ibid., 15/52. 

109. T.Sa., p. 62. 
110. T.A.,7/70b. 
111. T.Sa., p. 61. 
112. Sv.T., 7/25; also quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 224. 
113. There are three categories of practise, the supreme (para), which 
is called the "Divine Means" (Sambhavopaya), the middling (parapara), 
called the "Empowered Means" (saktopaya), and the lowest (apara), called 
the "Individual Means" (anavopaya). For a brief account of these categories 
see my Doctrine..., chapter VII. 
114. S.Su.vi., p. 228. 
115. T.A., comm. 8/283. 
116. T.A., 7/66-67. See Sv.T., 7/7b-lla. 
117. Pr.Hr.,comm. su. 17. 
118. Sv.T., 7/8, 7/16, 7/301. 
119. Ibid., 7/9; cf. Brh.Up., 2/1/19. 
120. T.Sa., p. 57. 
121. T.A., comm. 7/66-68. 
122. M.M., p. 60. 
123. V.B., v. 35. 
124. M.M., v. 56. 
125. V.B., v. 27. 
126. T.A., 15/336-338. 
127. S.Su.vi., p. 230. 
128. Ibid. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Uvarapratyabhijnakarika by Utpaladeva with vimarsinl by Abhinavagupta. 
Vol. 1, K.S.T.S., no. 22, 1918. Edited by M. R. Sastri. Vol. 2, K.S.T.S. 
no. 33,1921. edited by M. S. Kaul. 
Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika by Utpaladeva. English translation of the vimarsinl 
by K. C. Pandey. In Bhaskarl, vol. 3. Sarasvati Bhavan Texts, no. 84, 
Benares, 1954. 
Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika with vivrtivimarsinl by Abhinavagupta (3 vols.). 
K.S.T.S., no. 60, 1938, 62, 1941 and 66, 1943, respectively. All edited 
by M. S. Kaul. 
Cidgaganacandrika. Edited by Swam! Trivikrama Tlrtha. Tantrik Texts 20. 
Calcutta: Agamanusamdhana Samiti, 1936. 
Tantrasara by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 17,1918. Edited by M. S. Kaul. 
Tantraloka by Abhinavagupta (12 vol) with viveka by Jayaratha. Part 1 edit-
ed by M. R. Sastri. Parts 2-12 edited by M. S. Kaul, K.S.T.S., no. 23, 
1918; 28,1921; 30,1921; 36,1922; 35,1922; 29,1921; 41,1924; 47, 1926; 
59,1938; 52,1933; 57,1936 and 57,1938. 
Netratantra with uddyota by Ksemaraja. Vol. 1, K.S.T.S., no. 46, 1926; vol. 2, 
no. 61,1939. Both edited by M. S. Kaul. 
Paramarthasara by Abhinavagupta with vivrti by Yogaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 7, 
1916. Edited by J. C. Chatterjee. 
Paratrisikalaghuvrtti by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 67, 1947. Edited by J. 
Zadoo. 
Paratrisikavivarana by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 18, 1918. Edited by M. 
S. Kaul. 
Pratyabhijnahrdaya by Ksemaraja. English translation: The Secret of Recogni-
tion, with notes from Baer's German translation. Adyar: Adyar 
Library, 1938. 

Maharthamanjari and parimala by Mahesvarananda. Edited by Vrajavalla-
bha Dviveda. Yogatantragranthamala, no. 5. Benares, 1972. 
Malinwijayavartika by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 31. Edited by M. S. 
Kaul. Srinagar, 1921. 
Malinivijayottaratantra. K.S.T.S., no 37,1922, Srinagar. Edited by M. S. Kaul. 
Yoginihrdaya with commentaries dipika by Amrtananda and setubandha by 
Bhaskara Raya. Sarasvatibhavanagranthamala no. 7, 2nd ed. Edited 
by G. Kaviraj. Benares, 1963. 
Vijfianabhairava with commentaries by Ksemaraja 
(incomplete) and 
Sivopadhyaya. K.S.T.S., no 8,1918. Edited by M. R. Sastri. 
Sivadrsti by Somananda with vrtti (incomplete) by Utpaladeva. K.S.T.S., 54, 
1934. Edited by M. S. Kaul. 
Sivasutravimarsini by Ksemaraja. 
English translation: Siva Sutra: The Yoga of Supreme Identity by Jaide-
va Singh. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979. 
Italian translation: Sivasutra con il Commento di Ksemaraja by Raffacle 
Torella. Rome: Ubaldini Editore, 1979. 
French translation: Etude sur le Saivisme du Cachemire, Ecole Spanda, 
Sivasutra et Vimariini de Ksemaraja by Lilian Silburn. Paris: E. de Boc-
card, 1980. 
Sivastotravali by Utpaladeva with commentary by Ksemaraja. Edited with 
notes in Hindi by Swami Laksmanjoo. Benares: Chaukhamba, 1964. 
Siddhitrayi by Utpaladeva. This consists of three works: Ajadapramatrsiddhi, 
lsvarasiddhi and Sambandhasiddhi. K.S.T.S., no. 34, 1921. Edited by M. 
S. Kaul. 
Spandakarika with vrtti by Kallatabhatta. K.S.T.S., no. 5, 1916. Edited by J. 
C. Chatterjce. 
Spandakarikavivrti by Rajanaka Rama. K.S.T.S., no. 6, 1916. Edited by J. C. 
Chatterjee. 
Spandanirnaya by Ksemaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 43, 1925. Edited with English 
translation by M. S. Kaul 
Spandapradipika by Bhagavadutpala. Published in the Tantrasamgraha, vol. 
1. Yogatantragranthamala no. 3, pp. 83-128. Edited by G. Kaviraja. 
Benares, 1970. 
Svacchandabhairavatantra with uddyota by Ksemaraja. 7 vols. K.S.T.S., 21, 
1921; 38,1923; 44, 1925; 48,1927; 51, 1930; 53, 1933; 56, 1955. All edit-
ed by M. S. Kaul. 
The Thirteen Principle Upanishads by R. E. Hume, Oxford University Press, 
reprint U.S.A. 1975. 

INDEX 
Abhasa, 10, 57,101 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Abhavabrahman, 13 
See also Non-existence 
Abhedavedana (awareness of One-
ness), 84,116 
Abhinavagupta, 1, 2, 39, 60,189 
interpretation of the Tantra, 4 
on manifestation, 102,103, 
169-170,190,193, 200 
on Matrka, 21 
quote(s) by, 8,78,81-82,144,159 
on vital breath, 176, 200 
Abhinna (undivided), 83,171 
Abhoga (expanse), 77 
See also Expansion 
Absolute. See God; Power, 
Supreme; Siva, Lord 
Absolute Stability, 9 
Absolute Word, 175 
Absorption, xvi, 22, 91,164,174, 
178, 201 
in Bhairava, 25,144-145 
and Fourth State, 33, 78, 
103-104,130-132,157-159 
of the heart, 45, 46 
mantra and, 77,142-144 
in meditation, 30 
planes of wonder and, 37-38, 
159 
in senses, 29,161-163 
See also Contemplation, state of 
Abuddha (unawakened), 33 
Act, the Pure, 50,102-103 
Action(s) 
binding, 18,51,153-154 
of guna, 35-36, 54-55, 96,118 
impurity and, 17, 20, 99, 
129-130,161-163,168,192 
knowledge and, 14,19, 24, 44, 
48,51, 54, 56, 86-87,113-115, 
129-130,155-156 
mudra and, 78 
power of, 21, 22,54, 78,82-85, 
97-99,101-102,120-122, 
137-139,168,182,186 
vital breath and, 70,135-137, 
171-173 
See also Karma 
Acyuta, 26 
See also Changelessness 
Adhara (ground), 44,103,124 
Adheya, 103 
See also Adhara 
Adhistheya, 194 
See also Consciousness 
Adhovaktra (genital region), 176 
Adhvan (path), 102,204 
Agama (tradition), 11 
Aghora, 201 
Aghorasakti, 20, 21, 23,129-130 
Aham, 44 
mantra and, 61 
See also Ego, pure universal 
Ahamparamarsa, 60 
See also Ego, pure 

Ahlada, 54 
See also Bliss 
Ahladdasakti, 59 
See also Apana; Bliss; Sakti 
Air, 53 
See also Elements 
Aisvarya, 58 
See also Freedom 
Akalakalita (undivided by time), 
170 
Akalakamaja (creative urge), 
121-122 
See also Spanda 
Akalapada (plane of eternity), 122, 
127-128 
Akhandita (unchanging), 10,11, 22 
Pure Principle, 47 
and Virgin Will, 38-39 
See also Consciousness, undiffer-
entiated; Creation, eternal 
Akincanya, 54 
See also Plane(s), of nothingness 
Akrama, 25, 26 
See also Existence; Krama 
Alaukika, 17 
See also Laukika 
Alphabet 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
letters of, and consciousness, 17, 
18, 70-71, 74, 83,128-130, 
192,198 
mantra and, 21, 63, 67 
Amakala, 9,190 
See also Moon 
Amba, 16,18 
matrka and, 83 
See also Siva, Lord, attributes of 
Ambika, 192, 201 
as Goddess Parasakti, 39 
See also Amba 
Ambikasakti, 19 
See also Powers, Supreme; Shakti 
Amrtakala (immortal part), 200 
Amrta (life-giving essence), 37,190 
See also Rasa 
Anacka (pure consonant), 63, 71 
See also Mantra 
Anahammamata, 151 
See also Detachment 
Anahata, 21,175, 200 
See also Sound, unstruck-
Anahatadhvani, 83 
See also Sound, unstruck-
Anakhyasakti, 26,201 
See also Anakhya; Shakti 
Anakhya (the inexplicable), 18 
contemplation of, 26 
See also Awareness 
Ananandavrtti (miserableness), 151 
See also Pain 
Ananda (bliss), 59 
Anandasakti, 18 
mantra and, 71 
See also Bliss; Shakti 
Anandatman, 199 
See also Bliss 
Anandavrtti, 151 
See also Pleasure 
Anantabhattaraka (Infinite Lord), 
109 
Anartha (senseless), 43 
Anasrita, 39 
See also Existence, unmanifest 
Anava, 94,101,110,133,143-144, 
198 
vital breath and, 177 
See also Ego; Soul, fettered 
Anavajnana, 13 
See also Soul, individual 
Anavamala, 15, 20,192 
deep sleep state and, 32 
ignorance and, 16, 96,127-128, 
161-163 
See also Ego, temporal; Impurity; 
Soul, fettered 
Anavatman, 10 
See also Self, obscured 
Andhatamisra (blinding darkness), 
151 
Anger, 107,159 
Anima, 57,197-198 
See also Atomicity 

Animals 
language and, 20 
Antarmukha, 25 
See also Awareness, steadfast-
ness of 
Anu, 16,192 
See also Awareness 
Anudaslnya (transcendental aloof-
ness), 32 
See also Samadhi 
Anudyoga (inertia), 153 
Anukarya (demands), 113 
Anuparakta (unaffected bliss), 105 
Anupaya (means), 14 
Anu (pinpoint, of awareness), 95 
Anupravesa, 100,123-125 
See also Absorption 
Anusamdhana (unifying aware-
ness), 103 
Anuttara, 18, 24, 25,52,192, 200, 
201 
experience of, 36,141 
and the heart, 44-45 
See also Power, Supreme 
Anuttaradhruvapada, 9 
See also Absolute Stability 
Apana, 42, 59, 60 
vital breath and, 59,105-106 
See also Breath, vital 
Apavedyasusupti (without object), 
32 
See also Sleep state 
Aphorisms, of Siva 
command of a Siddha, and, 11 
intended sequencing of, 12-13 
and pure I AM concept, 4,41, 61 
Sivananda's revelation and, 5 
translations of, 1, 6 
and Vasagupta's dreams, x-xii 
See also Siva Sutra 
Aphorisms on Vibration, 11 
Apuranisakti (Power Which Fills), 
51, 52 
See also Powers, supreme; Sakti 
Arani (polarities), 59 
Artha (secret reality), 74 
Asamkucita (unconditioned activi-
ty), 108 
Asana (posture), 107 
Astaprakrti (tendencies), 151 
Asuddhasrsti, 18, 99 
See also Creation, impure 
Asu (instant), 126 
Atati (movement), 95 
Atisantapada (peaceful state), 78 
Atmabala, 157 
See also Self 
Atma Eva Brahma, xi 
See also Upanishads 
Atman, 55,154-156,161,173,199 
See also Self 
Atmasakti, 62 
See also Self 
Atmasamsthiti (stable state of 
being), 157 
Atmastha (incomposite entity), 105 
Atmasvarupa (insight), 143-144 
Atmavesa, 156 
See also Self 
Atmavyapti, 110 
See also Self 
Atomicity, 57,197-198 
Attachment, 97,129-130 
Attainment, 57 
See also Realization 
Attention 
directed externally, 94 
and power of diversion, 19 
spanda and, 159 
unwavering, xv, 46, 47, 62, 
111-112,118,122-123, 
130-132,135-137,139-140, 
142-144,159-161 
See also Vigilance 
Attitude, inner 
mudra and, 78, 79 
Attractress of Time, The, 168,178 
Auspiciousness, 29 
Autonomy, 57 
Avadhana, 123-125 
See also Attention; Concentration 
Avadhi (end), 43 

Avarna (absolute), 71 
Avasthatr, 150 
See also Subjectivity 
Avasthiti, 131-132 
See also Contemplation 
Avesa, 22, 77,135 
See also Absorption 
Avesa (penetrating), 69 
See also Consciousness, pure 
Avidya (ignorance), 153 
Avilkalpaka (non-discursive), 193 
Avilupta (ever-persisting), 113 
Avisista (common), 89 
Aviveka, 153 
See also Discernment, lack of 
Avrtakrti, 10 
See also Self, obscured 
Avrti, 153 
See also Obscuration 
Avyakta, 13 
Awakening 
conquest of delusion and, 
108-111,142 
in the deep sleep state, 33, 43 
in the dream state, 33 
of Kundalini, 72, 85 
Master's Grace and, 23, 82-85 
matrka and, 82-85 
universal consciousness and, 19, 
42, 46,100-104, 201 
Awareness 
deep sleep state and, 30-32 
duality and, 16, 29, 70,127-128, 
137-139,150-152,161-163, 
164-166 
Fourth State of, 27, 27-28,31, 46, 
78,103-104,130-132,157-159 
and the heart, 44-46 
language and, 20-21, 70, 
128-130,134-135,193 
mantra and, 62-63, 66-67, 69-75, 
76-79, 93-95,142-144 
matrka and, 21, 61-63, 70-74, 
82-85,128-130 
mudra and, 78-79 
power of, 18,19, 23, 24, 44, 47, 
57, 63, 71,116-117,146-147, 
163-164,169,175,177,184, 
200 
right discernment and, 48, 69, 
94,134-135 
steadfastness of, 25,30,59-60, 
68-69,101-104,111-112, 
122-123,130-132,135-137, 
139-140,151-152,159-161 
time and, 169-173 
See also Consciousness; Heart 
Awe, 37 
See also Wonder, state of 
Ayukta, 94 
See also Yoga 
Bahirmukha, 25 
See also Senses 
Bahyakarata, 132 
See also Reality 
Bala (uncreated force), 59, 60, 62, 
76, 94,126,135-137,182,183 
elements and, 105 
obscuration and, 96 
Being, unidivided, 27,113-115,117 
mantra and, 69-75,142-144 
Sakti and, 48 
Being-Becoming, 168 
See also Sakti; Siva, Lord 
Bhagavadutpala, 63 
Bhairava, xiii, 8 
Churning-, 36 
and the heart, 44-45 
and inner circle of deities, 40 
Kundalini and, 72-74 
power of, 21, 24, 79,129-130, 
194 
as upsurge, 22-23, 25,84 
See also Effort 
Bhairavamudra, 25,132-133 
See also Practice, yogic 
Bhairavlbhava, 173-174 
See also Liberation 
Bharana (fill), 22 
See also Consciousness, undiffer-
entiated 

Bhaskara, ix, 2,189 
commentary by, ix, 2,4,6,10-11, 
46,47,175,190,195,197 
on conquering delusion, 
109-111,112,128 
and Krama tradition, 5 
on Mantra, 75 
mysticism of Light and, 6,50 
and powers of manifestation, 
52-53,56, 84-85,141 
on Siva-nature, 10-11,47,48, 
101 
Spanda doctrine and, 60-63 
and states of consciousness, 
32-35,36,46 
subjectivity consciousness and, 
15-16,56 
translation of, 1 
and Virgin Will, 39 
and vital breath, 106,124,136, 
175 
and Wheel of Energies, 146 
Bhaskara (Sun), 173 
Bhatta (title), 2 
Bhava, 12,56, 80,113 
mantra and, 86-87 
See also Emotion 
Bhavabhava (imagined things), 89 
Bhavajata (phenomenal creation), 
160 
Bhavasarira (body of phenomena), 
137,138 
See also Manifestation 
Bhavita (sanctified), 119 
Bheda, 109 
See also Duality 
Bhedapratha, 129 
See also Duality; Perception 
Bhitti, 103 
See also Screen, of existence 
Bhoga (universal enjoyment), 45, 
144,186,192 
Bhogya, 36 
See also Guna; Victim 
Bhoktr (experiencing subject), 35 
Virgin Will and, 39 
See also Guna 
Bhramavega (spontaneous move-
ment), 73 
See also Grace 
Bhucari, 13,162,164 
Bhuta (creatures), 194 
Bhutakancuka, 167 
See also Body, human 
Bhuta (material realm), 108 
Bhutaprthaktva, 55 
See also Gunas, power of 
Bhutasamdhana, 55 
See also Elements, union of 
Bhutasarira (elemental body), 138 
Bhuvana (world systems), 102 
BTja (seed), 83,128 
Bimba (original form), 77 
See also Mudra 
Bindu (blue light) 
concentration on, 69,174-178 
energy of, 70, 72,185,199, 200 
of the heart, 73 
matrka and, 84 
vision of, 37, 76 
Bliss 
contemplation and, xiv, 35, 38, 
47, 49-50, 59-60,105-106, 
108-111,159-161 
deep sleep state and, 34 
and the heart, 44 
of mudra, 78, 78-79 
power of, 18, 52-53, 54, 60, 
71-72,151,159-161 
realization and, 8, 47,105, 
113-115,165,178 
supreme, 48, 49, 93 
Utpaladeva on, 40 
Bodha, 171 
See also Awareness 
Bodhadeha (awakened conscious-
ness), 100 
Body, human 
activity of, xvi, 18,140-141 
death of, 139,151,165 
individual ego and, 3, 29, 33, 
139,153-154,167 

Body, human (continued) 
Kundalini and, 72, 74 
as oblation, xv, 86-87 
and Self, 13,40-41, 80,165-166 
subtle-, 13,54-55, 96-97,115, 
151-152,164,186 
union of energies and, xiv, 
51-53,100-104 
See also Breath, vital 
Body of Action, 51 
Body of Consciousness, 51 
Body of Knowledge, xiv 
See also Knowledge 
Bondage 
actions and, 20,51, 96,161-163 
deep sleep state and, 31 
freedom from, 47,86-87,155,166 
gutteral consonants and, xvi, 
128-130 
knowledge and, xiii, xv, 15, 
95-97,127-128,137,143-144, 
161-163,166,186 
mantra and, 86-87,142-144 
mudra and, 78 
speech and, 15-19,128-130 
Brahma, 73 
Brahman, 43,199 
Brahmarandhra (Cavity of Brah-
ma), 176 
See also Heart 
Brahmin, 2,11,42 
and study of the Vedas, 43 
Breath, vital 
ascending, 46, 59, 62,123-125 
descending, 42, 46, 62 
Dhyana meditation and, 30 
and equality consciousness, xvi, 
59-60, 93,105-106,135-137 
of the heart, 46 
mantra and, 62-63, 70 
matrka and, 21, 62, 83, 84 
nature of, 104-106,166-178, 200 
regulation of the, xvii, 106, 
135-137,171-173,174-178 
Buddha, 33 
See also Awakening 
Buddhlndriya, 97 
See also Cognition; Sense(s) 
Buddhism, 3 
and flux of perceptions, 13 
Yogacara, 3 
Caitanya, 102 
See also I consciousness, pure 
Caitanyamatma, xi, 13-14 
of the heart, 44 
See also Consciousness; Self 
Caitra, 194 
Caitya (conceivable), 67 
Cakana, 24 
Cakra (circle), 5,193 
function of, 24 
Muladhara, 72 
vital breath and, 176-177 
See also Creation; Energy; 
Wheels 
Camatkara (aesthetic delight), 38, 
159 
See also Rasa; Wonder 
Camatkara (aesthetic rapture), 44 
See also Bliss; Ecstasy 
Canda (wrath), 123 
Candrajnana 
excerpt, 50 
Carana (movement), 77 
Carati (movement), 77, 78 
Caru (sacrificial pap), 22 
Caste system, 2,42, 200 
See also Brahmin 
Cause, 24,144-145 
independence of, 25 
See also Creation; Effect; Siva, 
Lord 
Cavity of Brahma (Brah-
matandhra), 176 
See also Heart 
Central Channel, 176 
See also Susumna 
Cetana (awareness), 87 
Cctas, 132 
See also Mind 
Cetayitr, 45, 67 

See also Thought constructs 
Cetya, 45, 66 
See also Thought constructs 
Changelessness, 24, 26 
contemplation and, 37,166 
of the heart, 44 
Virgin Will and, 38-39 
Churning Bhairava, 36 
Cidanu, 12 
See also Consciousness, centers of 
Cidatman, 12, 22 
and plane of eternity, 122-123 
and power of knowledge, 28 
See also Siva, Lord, realization of 
Cidbhairava, 145 
See also Bhairava 
Cidghana (uninterrupted con-
sciousness), 37 
Cidvapu (body of consciousness), 
35 
Cidvyoman, 177-178 
See also Sky of Consciousness 
Cinmatrata (pure consciousness), 
69 
CinnadI (Channel of Conscious-
ness), 177 
Cit (consciousness), 66 
Citta, 62, 66 
See also Mind 
Cittapralaya (dissolution), 201 
Cittasambodha (awakened), 201 
Cittattva, 68 
See also Self 
Cittavisranti (resting mind), 110, 
177, 201 
City of Brahman, 44 
See also Heart 
City of Eight, 186 
Cognition 
empirical knowledge and, 
95-97,137-139 
sleep state and, 30-32 
unfolding consciousness and, 
59-60, 69-70,161-164, 
171-173 
union and, 42 
waking state and, 28 
Collyrium of Discrimination 
(Vivekajnana), 189 
Compassion 
of Lord Siva, 12 
Concentration, xvii 
conquering time with, 123-125 
dharana, 106 
and insight, 29 
mantra and, 62, 65-67, 68-69, 
142-144 
vital breath and, 174-178 
Confusion, 159 
Consciousness, x, 9-10 
awakening of, 19,33, 61, 
108-111 
centers of, 12, 42, 62,104-106, 
171,174-178 
contemplation of, 26,42-46,47, 
49-50,56,59-60, 62,101-104, 
106,159-161,174-178 
dream state, xiii, xvii, x-xii, 26, 
27, 33,34, 36,131-132, 
157-159 
extroverted, 93-95,128-130, 
161-163,167-169 
fire of, 24, 26, 62, 86-87,101-104, 
123-125 
fourth state of, xiii, xvi, 27, 31, 
33, 34,35, 36,43, 46, 78,103, 
130-132,135,138,140,149, 
157-159,160-161 
Great Lake of, xiv, xvi, 59, 
60-63,123-125 
gunas (qualities) and, 35-36 
light of, xi, 6, 9,10, 22,37, 41, 44, 
45, 47, 49-50, 55, 57, 66, 69, 
174-178 
matrka and, 21, 61, 71, 82-85, 
128-130 
nature of, xv, 10-12,14, 20, 23, 
24, 35, 51, 54-55, 59-63, 
65-67, 69-70, 78-79, 81-82, 
89-91, 93-95,106,123-125, 
130-132,144-145,149-150, 
171-173 

Consciousness (continued) 
powers of, 3,10,14,16-19,18,21, 
23,25,38-39,47,51-53,59-63, 
80-82,86,134-135,147,149-150, 
157-159,159-161,162,164 
and the Self (&iva), xi, xiii, 10-11, 
13-14,21,22,24,48,56-58,61, 
69,76-79,103,108-111, 
113-115,117-118,130-132, 
135-137,149-150,204 
sleep state, xiii, xvii, 26, 27, 
30-32,33,34-35,36,42,46, 
131-132,157-159,182 
unconditional flux of, 5,14,18, 
23, 24, 25, 59-60, 67,106,172, 
194 
undifferentiated, 20, 66, 69, 70 
waking state, xiii, xv, xvii, 26, 
27,33,36, 89-91,111-112, 
131-132,157-159,194 
See also I consciousness, univer-
sal; 
Perception; Siva, Lord 
Contemplation 
bliss and, xiv, 35, 38, 49-50,52, 
59-60, 93 
and changelessness, 37 
deep sleep state and, 32,34 
of dissolution, 101-104,109, 
135-137, 201 
of Great Lake, xiv, 123-125 
within the heart, 42,45-46 
mantra and, 59-63, 76-79, 93-95, 
142-145 
of Pure Principle, xiv, 26, 47, 
52-53, 69-75, 87-88,104-106, 
182,186 
state of, 23, 26, 27, 34, 38,91, 
104-106,121-122,130-132, 
134-135,151,154-155, 
159-161,177 
Control, 57,198 
Corporeal Voice (Vaikhari), 70 
Craving, xvii, 161-163,164,165 
See also Desire 
Creation, 3, 26 
cakras and, 5 
divine operations of, 9,13, 
18-19,22, 23,36, 66,115-116, 
147,190 
eternal, 10,24 
and the heart, 43,44 
impure-, 18, 99,161-163 
mantra and, 9,13,18-19, 22, 23, 
36, 69-70 
mother (Goddess) of, xvi, 19-20, 
21,38-39, 60, 73 
powers of, 16-19,51-53, 54-55, 
71, 82-85,128-130,167-169, 
173 
Siva consciousness and, xi, xvi, 
12,16,18, 22, 23, 24,115-116, 
125-126,147,149-150 
worship of, 9 
yoga and, xvii, 154-155 
See also Destruction; Persistence 
Dahacinta, 101,103-104 
See also Fire, of consciousness 
Dana (gift), 143 
Darkness 
devoid of egoity, 43 
etymology of guru, and, 80 
identity and, 47,150-152 
Dawning of Mantra, 60 
Death, 139 
fear of, 151 
Siva-state and, 165 
Dehabandana (physical bondage), 
86 
Dcha (corporeal nature), 80 
Dehakala (body), 139 
Deity 
inner circle of, 40 
of mantra, 67 
Delusion 
conquering, 108-111,122-123, 
143-144,150-152,154-156, 
159-161,164-166,178 
fixing of the mind in the heart, 
and, 42 
and karma, xvi, 86-87,153-154, 

161-163 
obscuring veil of, xv, 10-11,36, 
54-55, 76,97-99,106-108, 
128-130,192 
tamas guna and, 36,96 
Desire, xvii 
attachment and, 97 
craving, 161-163 
pure ego and, 3,52,163-164 
Siva's pure will and, 40 
Destruction, 18, 26, 71,115-116, 
147,149-150 
Bhairava and, 22, 25,36 
deep sleep state and, 32 
Goddess of, 39-40 
and the heart, 44 
of limited knowledge, 127-128, 
143-144,161-165 
Sun and, 173 
See also Creation; Siva, Lord 
Detachment 
practice of, 96-97,105,115, 
129-130,151-152 
from visions, 76 
Deva, 9,190 
See also Goddess; Siva, Lord 
Devotion 
of Lord Siva, 40 
Utpaladeva on, 40 
Dharana, 29,106,107 
See also Concentration 
Dharikasakti (supporting power), 
103 
See also Sakti 
Dharmadhvajin, 141 
See also Dharma 
Dharma (righteous qualities), 121, 
141,182 
Dhl, 118 
See also Intellect 
Dhisakti, 118 
See also Sakti; Understanding, 
illumined 
Dhyana meditation 
or concentration, 107 
dream state and, 30 
Diavakara, 189 
Dikcari, 13,162,164 
Diksa (initiation), 143 
Discernment 
lack of, xiii, xv, 30-32,33, 34-35, 
97-99,153 
right-, xiv, 48-49, 98 
Disease 
cessation of, 56 
Divakara, 11 
Divakarabhatta, 2 
Diversity, xvii, 60 
concentrated effort and, 68 
dream state and, 29-30 
freedom from, 65-67,129-130, 
154-156,165-166 
generation of, 18,19,84,101-102, 
120-122,124,168,197 
mayiyamala and, 20 
of perception, 26,129-130, 
167-169 
state of unity within, 33, 
101-104,117,154-156 
void of, 26,32, 59 
Divine Gesture, 42 
Divine Means, 22 
Divyamudra, 42 
See also Realization 
Doctrine of Vibration, 1, 2,103 
Drama, cosmic, 15,113-115 
Drastr, 98 
See also Perception 
Dravayati (dissolving away), 78 
Dream(s) state 
of a Siddha, x-xi 
awakening within, 33 
consciousness and, xiii, xvii, 
x-xi, 27, 29-30, 32,131-132 
rajas guna and, 36 
vitality of, 157-159,184 
and withdrawal of knowledge, 
xv 
yogic visions and, xiv, 29,42-46, 
76, 89 
Drk, 59 
See also Cognition 

Duality, 16,184 
conquering, 108-111,127-128, 
150-152,154-156,164-166 
liberation from, 21, 26 
mantra and, 66 
speech and, 20,128-130 
Virgin Will and, 39 
Dyotana, 9 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Dyuti (illumination), 190 
See also Manifestation 
Earth, 18, 74,137 
element, 53 
and the heart, 43 
principle of, 25,39, 204 
and Time, 170 
Ecstasy, 41,44 
See also Bliss 
Effect, 24 
See also Cause; Creation; Siva, 
Lord 
Effort, xiii 
Lord Siva as, 22, 25 
and realization, xiv, 8,23 
yoga and, 23,36,51,67-69, 
123-125 
Ego, 3,182 
dream state and, 29 
gunas and, 54-55, 96,97-99 
Master and, 81 
pure ("I AM"), absolute, 3,6,14, 
41,44,56-58, 60,62,142,179 
sensory perception and, 28, 
161-164,186 
temporal, 3,10,42, 94, 97-99, 
153,161-163 
Elements 
conquest of the, xv, 104,165-166 
sensation and, 97-98,170 
separation of, xiv, xv, 53-54, 56, 
104-106 
union of, xiv, 53-54,55,106,186 
Emission, power of, 52,190,199 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
manifestation and, 120-122 
mantra and, 60 
See also Visargasakti 
Emotion, 12 
and dream state, 33 
Self and, 113-115,150-152 
speech and, 20,128-130 
Empowerment, state of, 59-60 
Emptiness, 31,104,172 
sleep state and, 34,42,43 
state of, 32 
Energy, xiv, 193,200 
Bhairava and, 23,25,144-145 
and the heart, 44,176 
and knowledge, 19-21,48, 
51-53, 70,128-130 
of manifestation, 51-53, 83, 
125-126,137-139,167-169 
mantra and, 69-75, 77-79, 
132-133,142-145,199 
matrka, 21, 61-63, 71-74, 82-85, 
129 
obscuring, xiii, 16,18,20,54-55, 
106-108,116-117,128-130, 
137-139,153-154,161-163, 
167-169,204 
union of, xiv, 14,18,23,26, 
51-53, 61, 82-85,100-104, 
130-132,157-159 
Wheel of, xiii, 5,12,13,16-19, 
24,56-57,144-145 
See also Sakti 
Enlightenment. See Realization; 
Siva, Lord, nature of; Union 
Equality consciousness 
power of, 20,41,56 
uniformity of breath and, xvi, 
135-137,171-173 
Essence of the Tantras 
(Sritantrasadbhava) 
excerpt, 68-69, 73-74 
Kundalini and, 71-73 
Essence of Trika (Trikasara), 68 
Eternality, 24,168 
of the heart, 44 
plane of, 122 
Ether, 53 

See also Elements 
Exertion, 22 
and cycles of creation, 36 
and the heart, 45 
meditation and, 67 
See also Effort 
Existence 
Bhairava and, 25 
categories of, 102,148 
heart of, 44-46 
samsaric, 19, 99,161-163 
screen of, 103 
three levels of, 18 
time and, 170 
unmanifest, 39,134-135 
See also Non-existence; Siva, 
Lord 
Expansion, 22, 23, 24,185 
of the Fourth State, 27, 78, 
103-104,130-132,157-159, 
161 
and the heart, 45-46 
innate knowledge and, 108-111, 
129-130 
mantra and, 63, 69-75, 77-79, 
142-145 
power of, 52, 74-76, 90, 93, 
98-99,129-130,151-152, 
197-198 
See also Creation; Siva, Lord 
Experience 
of bindu (blue light), 37, 57 
deep sleep state and, 32 
of existence, 12, 54,88,103-104 
of Mantra, xiv, 21, 60-63, 69, 76, 
142-145 
sensory, xvii, 29,107,156-157 
of speech, 20,128-130 
transmigratory, xi, 10,18,39, 43, 
69, 81,107,117,127-128, 
128-130,137-139,161-164, 
167,182,186 
ultimate, of union, 14, 42-46, 54, 
56, 63, 79, 83, 88,100-104, 
127-128,130-132,135, 
152-153,166,178 
See also Objectivity; Subjectivity 
Fear, 33,107,159 
of death, 151 
pure ego and, 3 
Female, 199 
Fire 
of consciousness, 24, 26, 43, 62, 
101-104,123-125, 200 
element, 53 
of the heart, 43, 44 
mantra and, 62, 86-87 
Flow, 104 
Forbearance, 57,197 
Form, power of, 52 
and diversity, 102-104,132-133, 
146-147 
matrka and, 83-84 
Fourth State, xiii, xvi, 28,103,138, 
140,149 
bliss and, 35, 78,160-161 
deep sleep state and, 31, 33, 34, 
157 
defined, 27 
during dream state, 34 
guna and, 36 
and the heart, 43,46 
three energies and, 130-132, 
134-135,157-159 
See also Consciousness; Contem-
plation 
Freedom, xv, 8 
consciousness and, 14, 20, 23, 
51-53, 53, 57-58,104-106, 
152-153 
creative-, 93 
and dreams, 42 
Goddess of, 9, 21, 39-40 
Kundalini and, 72 
mantra and, 86-87,142-145 
Master and, 81-82 
matrka and, 21, 82-85,128-130 
pure ego and, 3 
sovereign, 58, 81,125 
state of, 18, 25, 45-46,104-106, 
119,161,163-164 

Free will, 51 
See also Will 
Future, 44, 79,164,168,170 
See also Past 
Gander, recitation of, 142 
Garima (power to evolve forms), 
197 
Gatagata, 33 
See also Discernment, lack of; 
Dream state 
Gate (movement), 169 
Gati (activity), 108,190 
Genital region, 176,177 
Ghana (uninterrupted), 39,138, 
165,190 
See also Cidghana 
Ghorasakti, 20, 21,129-130 
See also Energies, obscuring; 
Shakti 
Ghoratara, 130 
See also Aghora; Ghora 
Ghurnita (vibrant), 79 
See also Light, of consciousness; 
Radiance 
Gocari, 13,162,164 
God 
Krama tradition and, 5 
Lord Siva as, 3, 8 
pure I AM of, 3, 61, 69-70,190 
See also Siva, Lord; Sakti 
Goddess, 5 
of the Center, 177 
of consciousness, 26,48, 58, 61, 
73, 80,168,176 
creativity of, 18-19 
as obscuring energy, 17 
as power of freedom, 9,57-58, 
79-82 
of Time, 172 
Virgin Will and, 39 
See also God; Sakti 
Golaka (male), 199 
Grace, 9,155 
Bhairava's, 40,145 
descent of, 22, 82,143-144 
enlightenment and, 13,133,145 
mantra and, 65-67,143-144 
Master and, 23, 79-82 
obscuration and, 11,12,13,128, 
164,167 
See also Master; Siddha; Siva, 
Lord 
Granthi (Knot), 17 
Great Lake, of consciousness 
contemplation of, xiv, 59-63 
yoga and, xvi, 60-63,123-125 
Great Mantra, 61 
Great Path, 205 
Great Sequence (Mahakrama), 5 
Great Void, 87 
Great Vow, 140, 206 
Greed, 107 
Grief, 33 
Guha (Cave), 17 
Gunaspandanihsyanda, 35 
See also Action(s), of guna 
Guna (three essential qualities) 
mantra and, 75 
and mind, 96-97,118 
states of consciousness and, 
35-36, 55-56, 97,140-141 
transformation of, 54-55 
See also Obscuration 
Guru 
defined, 80, 202 
and disciple, 166 
See also Master; Siddha 
Hamsa, 71,142, 200 
recitation of, 143 
See also Mantra; Sound, 
unstruck-
Hamsabhedatantra, 81 
Hamsaparamesvara 
excerpt, 63 
Happiness, 107 
Hara (Saviour), 149 
See also Siva, Lord 
HardTsakti (Power of Bliss), 51, 52 
See also Bliss; Powers, supreme; 
Sakti 

Hate, 151 
Heart, 196 
and awareness, 26,174-178,199 
Bhairava and, 44-45 
fixing of the mind in, xiv, 42-46 
Kundalini and, 73 
vital breath and, 174-178 
Heart of Recognition 
(Pratyabhijnahrdaya), 176 
Heat, 104 
Heaven 
in the heart, 43 
Hell, 51 
Hetu (means), 145 
See also Realization, means to 
Hrdaya (heart), 42-^16 
Hymn to Power (Kaksyastotra), 189 
Hymn to the Womb of Knowledge 
(Jfianagarbhastotra), 133 
excerpt from, 26 
Iccha, 170,201 
See also Will 
Icchasakti (Lord's will), 83,103 
craving and, 161-163 
I consciousness, universal, 3,41, 
56-58 
conquering delusion and, 
108-111,112,161-165 
mantra and, 60-63, 69-75, 86-87, 
142-145 
Master and, 81-82,166 
and Pure Act, 102-103 
and Self, 5,5-6,13,42,49,55,57, 
59-63, 68, 70-74, 90-91,138, 
139-140,179-180,200 
Ida, 105,175,177 
See also Psychic centers 
Idantajnana, 12 
See also Objectivity, obscured 
Idealism, 3 
Krama cakras and, 5 
Identification 
with Bhairava, 25,105,144 
with consciousness ("I AM"), 
41,55, 61-63, 68, 86-87, 
102-103,113-115,139-140, 
166,184 
deep sleep state and, 32 
duality and, 16,86,139-140, 
150-152,161-165,184 
Ignorance, xiv 
cessation of, 43,74-76,89-91, 
108-111,159-161,164-166, 
178 
consciousness and, 14,16,27,56, 
153-154,161-163,185 
destruction and, 150 
guru and, 80 
illusion and, 19,76,96 
speech and, 15-19,128-130 
See also Mind 
Illusion, x 
generation of, 19,96-97, 97-99, 
161-163 
mantra and, 86-87 
and perfection, 106-108,166 
psychic powers and, 76 
Impurity, 141,179,182,192 
aghorasakti and, 23 
deep sleep state and, 32 
dream state and, 30 
innate knowledge and, 127-128 
mantra and, 86-87 
Maya and, 17-18,96,97-99, 
161-163 
and paths of emanation, 43,54, 
161-163 
speech and, 15-19,128-130 
Individuality 
cessation of, 163-164 
impurity of, 20,32,161-163,192 
See also Soul, fettered 
Inertia, 153 
Infinite Lord, 109 
Initiation 
contemplation and, 53 
grace and, 143-144 
knowledge of the heart and, 45 
Insentience, 153 
Insight 
discriminating,48, 111 

Insight (continued) 
into Time, 169 
mantra and, 65-67,143-144 
into reality, 29, 60, 89-91 
Intellect 
illumined, xv, 117-118 
mantra and, 70 
and principles of mind, 54-55, 
70 
and Self, 13 
sensory perception and, 28, 
97-99 
unawakened, 42, 43 
Intent. See Samkalpa 
Intuition, 183 
Bhairava as, 23, 25 
light of, 48 
mantra and, 95-96 
supreme-, 23, 42, 58,194 
unfolding of, 48, 65-67, 69, 70, 
95,171-173 
Isana, 201 
Isanaslla (free), 66 
Isanisakti (Power of Mastery), 51,52 
See also Powers, supreme; Sakti 
Isita (lordship), 57 
Isitva (lordship), 198 
Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika, 2 
See also Stanzas on Recognition 
Is vara principle, 13,169,179 
Jadya (insentience), 153 
Jagadananda, 52, 71 
See also Bliss; Consciousness 
Jagadyoni (Wonb of the Universe), 
17 
Jagrat-jagrat, 33 
See also Waking state 
Jagrat-susupti, 33 
See also Sleep state 
Jagrat-svapna, 33 
See also Awakening; Dream 
state, waking in 
Jala, 42 
See also Thought constructs 
Jiva, 32 
See also Soul, fettered 
Jivanmukti (liberated while alive), 
36,140 
See also Liberation 
Jnana, 10,137-139 
See also Consciousness; Knowl-
edge 
Jnanagarbhastotra, 133 
excerpt from, 26 
Jnananetra, 4 
See also Tantra 
Jnanasakti, 78 
See also Knowledge, power of; 
Sakti 
Jnanasphara, 90 
See also Expansion 
Jnanasutra (filament of pure aware-
ness), 177 
Jnanin, 29 
and pervasion state, 30 
See also Insight, into reality 
Jnapti (cognitive awareness), 95-97 
Jne (knowing), 168 
Jneya, 139 
See also Realization, object of 
Joy, xiv, 159 
of contemplation, 49-50 
See also Bliss 
Jyestha, 16,18, 73,192, 201 
matrka ans, 83-84 
See also Siva, Lord, attributes of 
Jyesthasakti, 19,201 
See also Power, Supreme; Shakti 
Ka, half of, 60,199 
mantra of, 63 
See also Kundalini 
Kakarardha (unutterable sound), 
63,199 
Kal, meaning of, 168-169 
Kala, xv, 5,102,177,185,192,199, 
201, 204 
experience and, 137-139 
obscuring energies of, 18, 97-99, 
128-130 
See also Goddess; Maya 

Kalacakra, 12,171 
See also Wheel of Energies 
Kaladhvan, 102 
See also Objectivity 
Kalagrasa (devouring of time), 79 
Kalagrasaikatatpara, 164 
Kalana (diversification), 59,168 
mantra and, 65-67, 85 
perfection and, 89-91,101-102 
See also Diversity 
Kalasakti (power of Time), 168 
See also Sakti 
Kalasamkarsini (The Attractress of 
Time), 168 
Kalasarira, 18 
See also Energies, obscuring 
Kalayati, 18 
See also Diversity 
Kali, 5,168,172 
See also Goddess 
Kallkakrama 
excerpt, 154 
Kallatabhatta, 2, 6, 80 
commentary of, 11 
Kalpana, 23,170 
See also Perception, differentiated 
Kalpita, 14 
See also Subjectivity 
Kancukas, 17,99,162,164 
See also Maya 
Kancuklbhuta, 54 
See also Soul, fettered 
Kara (hand), 111 
Karana (causal power), 39 
See also Cause; Effect 
Karanasakti (creative power), 157 
See also Creation; Sakti 
Karasthita (within reach), 46 
Karma, 155,161-163,192 
delusion and, xvi, 127-128,140, 
153-154,163-164,167 
impurity of, 17-18,20,30, 
128-130,161-163 
mantra and, 86-87 
past actions and, 18 
Karmamala, 17 
basis of, 18 
dream state and, 30 
See also Impurity 
Karmatman (subject to karma), 
153-154,161-163 
See also Karma; Rebirth 
Kartrmsa (active consciousness), 
144-145 
Kartrta (power to act), 155,168 
Kartrtva (all things), 125 
Kartr (universal agent), 150 
Karya (activity), 51,150,156-157 
Karya (phenomenon), 12, 22 
Karya (products), 77 
Karyavacchedi (activity of phe-
nomena), 168 
Kashmir, ix, xii, 1 
See also Shaivism 
Katr, 137 
See also Perception 
Kauliklsakti, 52 
See also Sakti; Universe, womb of 
Kautilya (crooked), 177 
Kevala (purity), 81,152 
Khacita (inlaid), 127 
Kha (sky), 78 
Khecari, 13,116-117,162,164 
-mudra, 77, 78, 79 
Knowledge 
Body of, xiv, 13,51, 69-75 
empirical-, as bondage, xiii, xv, 
15,16, 20, 95-97,127-128 
as food, xv, 87-88 
ground of, xiii, 19-21, 24, 43, 49, 
54-55, 74-76,113-115, 
144-145 
inferior/superior forms of, 
19-20 
innate, xiv, xv, 10, 51, 53, 76-78, 
108-111 
limited, 127-128,128-130 
matrka and, 21, 62, 71-74, 82-85, 
128-130 
perception and, xiii, 13,15-16, 
28, 97-99,111-112,128-130, 
162,194 

Knowledge (continued) 
power of, 78,111-112,144-145, 
201 
Pure-, of the Self, xiv, xvi, 6,14, 
19, 21, 22, 23,44,48,49,54, 
56-57, 62, 70,73-74, 74, 
76-79,89-91,98, 111, 
113-115,128,143-144,166, 
179,186,196,197,204 
rebirth and, xvi, 86-87,127-128, 
163-164,165-166 
union and, 14,16,18, 23, 26, 27, 
41,45,46 
Wheel of Energies and, 24 
See also Jnana; Matrka 
Krama (movement of conscious-
ness), 25, 26 
objectivity and, 101 
Krama tradition, 4, 25 
See also Tantra 
Krida (play), 190 
Kriyasakti, 78,162,168 
mantra and, 85 
See also Action; Sakti 
Kriyavaicitrya, 101 
See also Action(s); Diversity 
Ksapana (severs), 143 
Ksatriya, 42 
and study of the Vedas, 43 
See also Caste system 
Ksemaraja, ix, 1 
commentary by, ix, 1, 2,4, 6,18, 
21, 23, 25, 26,45,47,49, 61, 
67, 68-69, 73-74, 76, 90,191, 
193,196 
on conquering delusion, 
109-111,128,133,154 
on Fourth State, 140,158-159 
and Impurity, 17-18, 20 
Krama tradition and, 5, 25 
on mantra, 21, 60-63, 67, 68-69, 
75-76 
and nature of consciousness, 14, 
45, 49, 50, 53, 58, 60-63, 
70-75, 80, 90-91,101, 
121-122,126,179-180 
on obscuring energies, 18, 36, 
47,134-135,146 
on right discernment, 49, 88, 
131-132,133 
subjectivity consciousness and, 
16,50,56, 84-85,86-87, 
138-139,193 
on upsurge of Bhairava, 23, 25 
and Virgin Will, 39 
and vital breath, 106,124-125, 
136-137,175-178 
See also Vimarsini 
Ksepe (casting forth), 168 
Ksobha (turbulence), 167,182 
Kula (wholeness), 79 
See also Oneness 
Kumari, 38-39 
See also Virgin 
Kumar (to play), 39 
Kunda (female), 199 
Kundalini 
awakening of, 72, 85,198 
mantra and, 60, 62, 71-74 
mudra and, 78 
state of, 18, 200 
vital breath and, 59-60,177 
See also Shakti; Siva, Lord 
Kutsa (abhorrent), 39 
Laghima (lightness), 57,197-198 
Laksya (mark), 199 
Language, xii 
awareness and, 20, 70, 82-85, 
134-135,192 
gutteral consonants of bondage, 
xvi, 128-130 
knowledge and, 24, 71-74, 82-83 
mantra and, 60, 69-70, 93-95, 
129 
See also Matrka; Speech 
Lassitude, 185 
Laukika, 13,17 
See also Materialists; Self 
Layabhavana, 101 
See also Contemplation, of disso-
lution 

Letters, alphabetic 
gutteral consonants, xvi, 
128-130 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
mantra and, 21, 60, 63, 67 
matrka and, 83-84,129 
Liberation 
and dream state, 29 
experience of, 38-39,78-79, 
127-128,140,152-153, 
163-164,178,195 
guna states and, 36 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
matrka and, 21, 23, 71, 82-85, 
129 
vital breath and, 173-174 
Light, of consciousness 
Bhaskara and, 6, 62,173 
and bliss, xiv, 49-50 
blue (bindu), 10,37, 69,174-178 
contemplation of, 26, 42-46,47, 
49-50, 69,113-115,178 
first light called (in Siva Sutras), 
xii-xiv, 9-63 
and guru, 80 
in the heart, 44,45, 73,199 
Kundalini and, 73 
nature of, xiii, 9-10, 24, 41, 47, 
54,55, 57, 62, 82-83, 93-95, 
106,108-111,123-125, 
125-126,130-132,135-137, 
139-140,144-145,165, 
172-173,199 
second light called (in Siva 
Sutras), xiv-xv, 65-91 
third light called (in Siva 
Sutras), xv-xvii, 93-180 
undivided, 22,44, 59, 81-82,104, 
200 
visions of, 57, 76, 89-91 
See also Darkness 
Light of the Tantras, 4 
See also Tantra 
Limitations, 28,128-130 
Llnata, 48 
See also Absorption 
Logicians, 13 
Loka 
varying definitions of, 50 
Lokanandah, 50 
See also Bliss; Light, of con-
sciousness 
Lord of the Heroes, xiii, 142 
states of consciousness and, 
35-36 
Lord of the Wheel, 186 
Lordship, 57 
Lotus 
inverted, 43 
Love 
of Lord Siva, 40 
Lust, 107 
Madhya Devi (Goddess of the Cen-
ter), 177 
Madhyama (Middle Voice), 70 
Madhyamikas, 13 
MadhyanadI (Central Channel), 
176 
Madhyavikasa, 62 
See also Psychic center(s) 
Madhyavikasa (center), 177 
Madness, 33 
Mahadevabhatta, 11 
Mahadeva mountain, x, xii, 11 
Mahakrama, 5 
Mahamaya, 76 
See also Ignorance; Maya 
Mahamoha, 151 
See also Delusion 
Mahananda (Great Bliss), 49 
See also Bliss 
Mahanarayanopanisad, 39 
Mahapatha (Great Path), 205 
Mahat (energy), 66 
Mahavrata (Great Vow), 206 
Mahavyapti (Great Pervasion), 32 
See also Pervasion, state of; 
Samadhi 
Mahesvarananda 
on the heart, 45 
on unity, 50 

Mahesvari, xvi, 145 
awareness and, 128-130 
Mahima (greatness), 57,197-198 
Maitra, 194 
Male, 199 
MalinI, 61, 71,198 
See also Withdrawal, matrka and 
Manana, 68,94,150-152 
See also Concentration 
Manas, 66, 93,200 
See also Mind 
Manavadharmasastra, 205 
Manda (weak), 13 
Manifestation, 22,134-135,136, 
137,155,189 
emission and, 120-122,168 
Fourth state and, 157-159 
and the heart, 44 
kriyasakti and, 168 
mantra and, 61-63, 66, 69-70, 85, 
142-145 
matrka and, 82-85,129 
Maya and, 54-55,121 
powers of, 51-53,162,164, 
167-169,185,190,204 
reversal of, 101-104,127-128 
and Ubiquitous Lord, 49 
See also Matrka 
Mano bindu, 199 
Mantavyata, 96 
See also Thought constructs 
Manthanabhairava (Churning 
Bhairava), 36 
Mantra 
articulation of, 198 
common talk and, xvi, 141-143 
dawning of, 60-63, 76 
deity of, 67, 73-74 
experience of, xiv, 53,59,62, 68, 
76-79,142-144,195 
Hamsa, 71,142,143, 200 
and karma, 86-87 
Master and, 80-82 
matrka and, 21,71-74, 82-85 
and Mind, xiv, 62, 65-67, 93-95, 
132-133,135,142-144 
and mudra, 77-79 
secret of, xiv, 63,69-74 
Sivo'ham, x 
vital breath and, 70,175 
See also Consciousness; Matrka 
Mantroccara, 198 
Mantrodaya (Dawning of Mantra), 
60, 62,74 
See also Mantra; Matrka 
Marayati, 39 
See also Destruction; Maya 
MarinI 
and rebirth, 38 
See also Destruction 
Mass of Sounds, 21 
See also Matrka; Sound 
Master(s) 
Grace and, 11, 23,79-80, 82 
Kashmiri, 8 
as means, xiv, 79-82,166, 202 
reverence of, 186 
and state of wonder, 37-38, 82 
See also Siddha 
Mastery, power of, 52 
See also Siddha 
Materialists, 13 
Matra (experience), 137 
Matrka 
awakening of, xiv, 23, 71-74, 
82-85 
as ground of knowledge, xiii, 
19-21 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
mantra and, 21,59-63, 83, 85 
power of, 21,23, 61-63, 71, 73, 
82-83,128-130,145 
See also Language; Mantra; 
Shakti; 
Speech; Sound 
Matrkasakti, 145 
See also Matrka, power of; Sakti 
Matsyavalana (movement of the 
Fish), 123-125 
Maurkhya (stupidity), 153 
Maya 
deep sleep and, xiii, 30-32, 

34-35 
as lack of discernment, xv, 54, 
97-99,108 
mantra and, 77 
obscuring energies and, 15-19, 
20,54,96-97,106-108,121, 
129,137-139,150-152, 
153-154,159,161-163,169 
principles of, 13,97,98, 99-105, 
180 
speech and, 17,20,128-130 
Virgin Will and, 39 
and vital breath, 176,178 
Mayapramatr (worldly soul), 179 
Maylya, 12,86, 96 
See also Subjectivity 
Mayiyamala, 15,192 
and consciousness, 17 
deep sleep state and, 32 
duality and, 16,20,127-128 
See also Bondage; Maya 
Meditation 
dhyana practice of, 30 
fixed in the heart, 42-46 
mantra and, 59-63, 67, 77-79, 
199 
object of, 89-91,103-104,184 
on Pure Principle, 47, 67-68, 
101-104,105-106 
Melapa, 52 
See also Union 
Memory, 158 
and consciousness, 27 
deep sleep state and, 30-31 
speech and, 20,128-130 
and Time, 170-171 
Merging, xvii 
See also Union 
Meyatva, 171-173 
See also Objectivity 
Middle Voice (Madhyama), 70 
Mlmamsakas, 13 
Mind 
beyond the, 43,45-46, 80 
expansion of, xiv, 23, 43, 74-76, 
89-91 
fixing of, in Heart, xiv, 42-46 
gunas and, 54-55 
as Mantra, xiv, 62, 65-67 
perception and, 28, 66,122-123, 
128-130,139 
phonemes of, xvi, 128-130, 
132-133,135-137 
as Self, xv, 93-95,200 
speech and, 20,128-130 
stability of, xvii, 23,110, 
132-133,142-144,159-161 
and vital breath, 62, 70,135-137, 
174-178 
See also Yoga, and penetration of 
mind 
Moha (delusion), 36,150-152, 
161-163 
See also Sleep state; Tamas guna 
Mohakarya, 162 
See also Delusion 
Monism, 1,2 
Krama tradition and, 5 
Moon, 74 
and creation, 9,10, 54,56,144, 
190 
Kundalini and, 73 
and lunar nectar, 42 
and vital breath, 59-60, 62,124, 
177 
Mouth of the YoginI, 52 
Movement, 104 
Mudra, 25,42, 74,132-133,140-141 
defined, 77-79 
Kundalini and, 78 
See also Practice(s), yogic 
Mukha (opening), 104 
Muladhara (root support cakra), 
72, 200 
Mundaka Upanisad, 199 
See also Upanishad 
Murcha (lack of consciousness), 153 
Murtisakti (Power of Form), 51,52, 
54 
eight forms of, 55 
matrka and, 83-84 
See also Powers, supreme; Sakti 

Murtivaicitrya, 102 
See also Form(s) 
Mysticism, 6 
Nada (silent sound), 62,70,142, 
185,200 
and Time, 169 
See also Resonance 
Nadi (channels), 174-178 
See also Breath, vital 
Naiyayika, 13 
See also Logicians 
Nature, one's own true. See Self; 
Siva, Lord; Svasvarupa 
Nectar, 42 
Neti, neti (not this, not this), 172 
Netratantra 
excerpt, 125 
Nibhalana, 65, 87, 93,127 
See also Concentration 
Nijabhasa, 22 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Nijasthiti (abiding state), 47, 
149-150 
Nimesa, 12, 24,132-133 
See also Creation; Siva, Lord, 
contraction of; Withdrawal 
Nimllana, 160, 201 
See also Contemplation 
Niracara (scriptural injunction), 73 
Nirananda, 47, 49 
See also Tranquility 
Nirantarasambhogarasa (sexual 
union), 124 
Nirmanaska, 43 
See also Mind, expansion of 
Nirupadhijyotis (boundless light), 
139 
Nirvana, 184 
See also Samadhi 
Niskala (without parts), 142 
Nispadya, 138 
Nityodita, 10 
See also Creation 
Nivrttikala, 204 
See also Earth principle 
Niyati (necessity), 97,192 
Non-duality 
matrka and, 21, 70-74, 82-85, 
129 
See also Liberation; Union 
Non-existence, 13 
obscured soul and, 15 
Obeisance, 10 
Objectivity, 50,172, 201 
dream state and, 33 
experience of, 37-38, 59-60, 67, 
155 
and the heart, 43 
Kundalini and, 73 
manifestation of, 29,101,102, 
112,146-147,168,171-173 
obscured, 12,106-108,126, 
128-130,161-163 
sleep state and, 34 
of sound, 21 
Virgin Will and, 39 
waking state and, 33, 95 
Obscuration, 9, 31,185,192, 204 
absence of, 22, 23, 24, 27, 42, 61, 
106-108,117-118 
dream state and, 29,30 
ignorance and, 14, 76, 97-99, 
150-152,167 
of objectivity, 12,128-130 
powers of, 16-19,54-55,97-99, 
167-169 
of Self (Lord Siva), 10-11,12,14, 
20, 21,116-117,153-154,159, 
161-163 
speech and, 15-16, 20,128-130 
three gunas and, 35-36, 96-97 
Offering, 206 
of body as oblation, 86-87 
See also Sacrifice 
OM, 142,199 
See also Mantra 
Oneness 
awareness of, 79, 82, 84, 
116-117,135-137,142-144, 
152-153,178 

of light of consciousness, 49,175 
mantra and, 69-75 
See also Equality consciousness 
One-pointed concentration, 68 
See also Awareness, steadfast-
ness of; Concentration 
Padastha (established in one place), 
30 
See also Absorption; Meditation 
Paduka (Master's sandals), 81 
Pain, xvi, 97-99,150-152 
See also Guna; Pleasure 
Pallavita (vigorous), 100 
Pancaratrins, 13 
Paradvayapratha (non-dual aware-
ness), 70 
Parahambhava (Supreme Egoity), 
142 
Parahantavimarsa, 61 
See also I Consciousness, pure 
Para jlvakala (life force), 201 
Parajnana (Supreme Knowledge), 
23 
See also Knowledge, pure 
Paramamahesvarya, 57 
See also Powers, supreme 
Paramarsakriya (self-awareness), 78 
Paramarsana, 94 
See also Awareness 
Paramartha (ultimate reality), 68 
See also Reality 
Paramarthena, 184-185 
See also Self 
Paramarthika, 13 
See also Freedom 
Paramodaya (Supreme Emer-
gence), 74 
Parampadam (supreme state), 182 
Paranada (supreme resonance), 70, 
71,135-137 
Parananda (Supreme Bliss), 47,49 
See also Bliss 
Parapara (middle level), 200 
Parapratibha, 23, 25 
See also Intuition 
Parasaktabala (empowerment), 155 
Parasakti, 39,44-45, 61,123 
See also Goddess; Shakti 
Parasamvittirupa, 79 
See also Awareness, mudra and 
Parasvatantrya, 57 
See also Freedom 
Paratattvasamavesa (highest reali-
ty), 108 
Paratita, 18 
See also Will 
Paratrisika, 203 
Paravac (highest level of speech), 
21, 60, 61 
Kundalini and, 72-73 
mantra and, 70 
See also Speech 
Paravisarga (Supreme Emission), 
199 
See also Emission, power of 
Parimitapramatrbhava, 98 
See also Subjectivity 
Paripurna (perfect), 138 
Paripurnata (plentitude), 87 
Parispanda, 22 
See also Vibration 
Parodaya, 100 
See also Supreme Arising 
ParvatI, 135 
See also Goddess; Sakti 
Passion, 33,96 
See also Impurity 
Past, 44, 79,164,168 
See also Future 
Pasupatas, 206 
Pasu (slave), 16,129,162,164 
See also Soul, fettered 
PasuvartinI (Siva's control), 186 
PasyantI, 70 
See also Intuition, unfolding of 
Path of Denotation, 102 
Path of the Great Lord, 102 
Path of Time, 102 
Path of Totality, 79 
Pati, 31,129,195 
See also Liberation 

Patitva (all-powerful), 63 
Paudgala (individual soul), 142 
Pavamana (purifying fire), 123-125 
Pavanasakti (power of vital 
breath), 173 
See also Sakti 
Peace 
deep sleep state and, 34 
state of, 78,164 
Perception, xii 
during deep sleep dreaming, 34 
differentiated, 23, 29,32, 33, 
97-99,102,137-139,154, 
161-163,164,168,170 
and knowledge, xiii, 15-16, 
19-20,41, 57,97-99,102-104, 
117-118,172-173,194 
language and, 20-21,128-130 
light of being and, 6, 27,175-176 
reality and, 3, 20, 38-39, 57-58, 
66, 89-91,103,137-139, 
146-147,154-155,183 
yoga and, xiv, xvi, 23, 26, 38, 
42-46, 57, 93,154-155, 
159-161,172,177,179,186 
See also Consciousness 
Perfection, xv, 22-23,89-91,100-104 
conquering delusion and, 
108-111 
mantra and, 60-63,143-144 
Master and, 80-82 
obscuration and, 106-108 
vital breath and, 174-178,179 
See also Siddha 
Persistence, xvi, 9,18, 25, 26, 
115-116,147,149-150 
awareness and, 27, 36, 78 
and the heart, 44 
jyesthasakti and, 19 
vital breath and, 173 
See also Creation; Siva, Lord 
Personality, 3 
Pervasion, state of, 30, 32 
See also Samadhi 
Phonemes 
Kundalini and, 73 
manifestation and, 63,134-139 
mantra and, 60, 63, 82-83 
range of, 17, 74,128-130 
See also Impurity; Language; 
Matrka; Speech 
Pindastha, 29 
See also Body, individual ego and 
Pingala, 175,177 
See also Psychic centers 
Plane(s) 
of Attainment, 48,49 
of Being, 113-115 
beyond mind, 23 
emergence of, xvi, 102 
of the heart, 44-46 
of nothingness, 54 
of Rest, 47,49 
of Unfolding, 49 
of union (wonder), 37,141 
Pleasure, xvi, 97-99,150-152 
See also Guna; Pain 
Power, supreme 
four sources of, 16-19, 83,162, 
164,192 
grace and, 79-82,145-146,164 
Lord Siva and, 9,12,13,16, 
18-19, 24, 25, 47,125-126, 
146-147,179-180 
and manifestation, 51-53, 83-84, 
125-126,137-139,162,164, 
167-169,190, 201 
mantra and, 68-69, 76-79, 93, 
142-144,195 
Matrka as, 21, 71-74, 82-85,129 
mudra and, 78-79 
pure ego and, 3, 60, 62, 63, 
89-91,155,178-179 
vibration of, 10, 23, 60-63 
vital breath and, 59, 63,135-137, 
171-173,176-178 
and Will, xiii, 14,38-39,184-185 
yogic powers (siddhis) and, 53, 
57, 76, 91,156-157,197 
See also Consciousness, fifty 
powers 
of; Mantra 

Prabhajnana, 178 
See also Breath, vital 
Prabhusakti (freedom), 105,193 
Prabhutva, 56, 73 
See also Self 
Prabuddhatavrtti (enlightenment), 
89 
Prabuddha (well awakened), 33, 
36,142 
Practice(s), yogic, 23,50, 56,208 
contemplation, 23, 26, 27,47, 
49-50, 52-53,59-60, 87-88, 
93,103-104,107,121-122, 
130-132,139-140,159-161, 
186 
delusion and, xv, 76,108-111, 
150-152,163-164 
dharana (concentration), 106, 
159 
Dhyana meditation, 30,107 
fixing of mind in the heart, xiv, 
42-46 
and Fourth State of contempla-
tion, 27-28, 78,103-104, 
130-132,157-159 
mantra and, 59-63, 67, 72, 74-76, 
93, 93-94,142-144 
and Master, 82 
and mastery of Wheel of Ener-
gies, xiv, 23,56-58,100, 
163-164,166 
mudra(s) and, 25,42, 74, 76, 77 
pranayama, 106 
visualization, 103-104 
and vital breath, 30,42, 46, 59, 
93,105-106,135-137, 
171-173,174-178 
See also Awareness, steadfast-
ness of; 
Breath, vital; Yoga 
Pradhana, 97 
See also Body, human; Sense(s); 
Thought constructs 
Praise, 190 
Prajapati (the creator), 43 
Prajnarjuna, 11 
Prakalpana (attention), 160 
Prakamya (forbearance), 57,197 
Prakasa (illumination), 36 
See also Sattva guna; Waking 
state 
Prakasamanata, 69 
See also Manifestation 
Prakriyadeha, 51,53,105 
See also Action; Body of Action 
Prakrti (material nature), 204 
guna states and, 36,54 
mantra and, 75 
Maya and, 99 
Pralaya, 32,155 
See also Destruction, deep sleep 
state and 
Pramanabhava, 62 
See also Knowledge 
Prama (pure perception), 102 
See also Insight 
Pramatrbhava, 34 
See also Subjectivity 
Prameyabhava, 33 
mantra and, 62 
See also Objectivity 
Pramitibhava (pure awareness), 71, 
201 
Prana, 59,105-106,135-137 
mantra and, 62 
and time, 171-173 
See also Breath, vital; Cognition 
Pranacakra (breathing cycle), 
171-173 
Pranacittatman, 62 
See also Mind; Breath, vital 
Prana Kundalini, 177 
See also Sakti, kundalini 
Pranamaya, 174 
See also Breath, vital 
Prananarupa, 200 
See also Breath, vital 
Pranana (vital impulse), 84,136, 
160,166, 172 
Pranasakti (power of vital breath), 
176 
See also Sakti 

Pranava (OM), 142 
Pranavrtti (life force), 172 
Pranayama (regulation of breath), 
106 
Prapti (attainment), 57,197 
Prarabdhakarma, 167 
See also Karma 
Prasama, 167 
See also Tranquility 
Prasara (expansion), 99,104-106 
Pratha, 15 
See also Perception 
Prathamamsa (first phase), 103 
Prathana, 57 
See also Vision 
Pratibha, 23,48 
mantra and, 95 
See also Intuition 
Pratibhava, 29 
See also Liberation 
Pratibhodaya, 42 
See also Intuition, supreme 
Pratibimba (reflection), Mudra, 77 
Pratisthakala, 204 
See also Prakrti 
Pratisthasthana (well established 
abode), 44 
Pratiti (flux of perception), 102,103 
Pratsr samvit (enquiring conscious-
ness), 81 
Pratyabhijna, 1,2 
compared to Krama, 4 
mantra and, 93 
right discernment and, 48 
See also Awareness; Insight; 
Recognition 
Pratyabhijfiahrdaya tHeart of Recogni-
tion), 176 
Pratyahara, 106,107 
See also Sense(s), mastery of 
Pratyaya, 17,128,175,193 
See also Perception 
Pratyayaikatanata (one-pointed 
concentration), 68 
See also Awareness, steadfast-
ness of 
Pravrtti (activity), 36 
See also Dream state; Rajas guna 
Pravrttikalana (phenomenal 
action), 121 
Prayer 
uninterrupted, 46 
Present, 171 
See also Time 
Pride, 3,150-152 
Pronmesa (expanded state), 59-60 
See also Consciousness 
Prthvitattva (Earth Principle), 204 
Psychic centers, 37,176-177 
ida, 105,175 
mantra and, 62, 76 
nadi, 174-175 
Pumtattva, 54 
See also Maya 
Pure Knowledge, xiv, 6,56-57, 
89-91,131-132,179,186,197, 
204 
mantra and, 76-79,143-144 
Master and, 80-82 
rebirth and, 128,155-156, 
163-164,165-166 
Pure Path, 54,83, 98,195 
Pure Principle, xiv 
contemplation of, 47 
mantra and, 69-75 
Maya and, 98 
Purification, 140 
fire of, 123-125 
grace and, 22, 81-82 
mantra and, 65-67,142-144 
Purnaham, 69,109 
See also I consciousness, pure 
Purusa, 44,99,182 
See also Prakrti; Self 
Purusottama (best of men), 142 
Purvaparabhuta, 170 
See also Elements 
Puryastaka, 13,54-55,115-116,166, 
186 
gunas and, 96 
subjectivity and, 98,151-152, 
164 

See also Body, human, subtle-; 
Subtle body 
Qualities, essential. See Guna 
Radiance, divine, 10, 87,117-118, 
123-125 
of Bhairava, 22 
grace and, 66 
mantra and, 69-75, 86-87 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Raga (attachment), 97-99,192 
Rajas, 35,36, 96,118 
See also Guna 
Rajyate (appearance), 115 
Ramana, 22 
See also Destruction 
Ranga (stage), 115 
Rasa (aesthetic delight), 22, 37,113, 
116,131-132,138,160,185 
See also Bliss 
Raudri, 16,18, 73,192 
matrka and, 83-84 
See also Siva, Lord, attributes of 
Raudrisakti, 19, 202 
See also Power, Supreme; Shakti 
Ravana (resound), 22 
Reality, x, 132 
light of being, and, 6,10-11, 
44-45, 55,57,172-173 
mantra and, 68-69,142-144 
Master and, 80-82 
monism and, 3 
principles of, 98,104-106 
union and, 14, 20, 23,47, 
100-104,108,154-155,159 
Realization 
mantra and, 60-63, 67,142-144 
Master and, 79-82,186 
means to, 47,48,50,65-66,67-69, 
74-75,79-82,108-111, 
113-115,134-135,145,178,208 
object of, 42,100-104,130-132, 
139 
shakti of, 19, 23, 71-74, 78, 
177-178 
stages of, 13,104-106,108,128, 
134-135,161,164-166 
and state of wonder, 37-38, 
89-91 
See also Siva, Lord, realization of 
Rebirth 
cessation of, 38-39,43,127-128, 
163-164,166 
limited knowledge and, xvi, 
127-128,153-154,161-163, 
167 
Recognition, 82 
See also Pratyabhijna 
Renunciation 
freedom and, 105 
Resonance, 175, 200 
Revelation, x 
of Lord Siva, xi-xii, 12 
Master and, 81-82 
Sivananda and, 5 
Reversal, 101,104 
Rsi (enlightened sage), 82 
Rudrapramatr (Rudra-subject), 109 
Rudrayamala, 71 
See also Sakti, and Siva; Union 
Rupa (basic state), 57,185 
Rupastha (established in form), 32 
See also Sleep state 
Rupayati (creator of forms), 32 
Sabda, 17,128-130 
See also Speech 
Sabdabrahman (Absolute Word), 
175 
Sabdarasi, 21, 70,128-130,130-132, 
185 
See also Matrka; Sound 
Sacrifice 
mantra and, 86-87 
perfection and, 22 
Sun and Moon, and, 54, 56 
Sadasiva principle, 13,179 
Sadbhava, 184 
See also Siva, Lord,-nature 
Sadguru (perfected Master), 81 
See also Guru; Master; Siddha 

Sadharana, 29 
See also Perception 
Sadodita (ever present), 149 
Sadrsya (imitation), 114 
Sadyojata (form of Mantra), 73,201 
Sahaja (innate), 76,93, 94,119 
See also Knowledge, innate 
Sahajaloka, 109 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Sahaja vidya, 127 
See also Knowledge, innate 
Sahasa (thrill of energy), 52 
mantra and, 69 
See also Bliss; Powers, supreme 
Sahrdaya (aesthetes), 117 
Saivajnana (Saiva teaching), 167 
See also Saivism, Kashmiri 
Saivasiddhanta, 1 
Saiva Tantras, 1 
Saivism, Kashmiri, ix, xii 
and activity of consciousness, 
14,32-33, 60-61, 66-67, 
90-91,167 
authors of, 2 
Krama tradition of, 4 
monism of, 3 
and Pratyabhijna, 2 
symbolism of the heart in, 44 
Sakala, 100,155 
See also Union, of energies 
Saksat, 11,12, 77 
See also Siva, Lord, realization of 
Saksat (directly), 18 
Saksatkara, 57 
See also Self 
Sakta (empowered), 142,198 
Sakta vijnana, 13,134 
See also Ego, temporal 
Sakti 
Aghorasakti, 23,129-130 
Ahladasakti, 59 
Ambikasakti (or Amba), 19, 
83-84 
Anakhyasakti, 26 
Anandasakti, 18 
ApuranTsakti, 51-52 
Dharikasakti, 103 
Dhisakti, 118 
Hardlsakti, 51-52 
Icchasakti, 83,103 
and innate knowledge, 10,49 
Isanisakti, 51-52 
Jnanasakti, 78 
Jyesthasakti, 19,97, 201 
Kalasakti, 168 
Karanasakti, 157 
Kriyasakti, 78, 85,168 
Kundalini, 18,59-60,60, 62, 
71-74, 72, 78, 85,177,198,200 
of mantra, 60, 62, 63, 73-74 
Matrkasakti, 145 
Murtisakti, 51-52 
Parashakti (Goddess), 39, 61 
Pavanasakti, 173 
Pranasakti, 176 
Sambhavisakti, 79-80 
and Siva, 45,48, 52, 60-61, 
71-74, 79-82, 85,103-104, 
168,179,198 
Svatantryasakti, 93 
Vamasakti (or 
Vyomavamesvari), 18,51-52, 
83-84,202 
Vimarsasakti, xi 
VimohanI, 10 
vital breath and, 177 
See also Cakras; Shakti 
Saktipata, 11,40,65,202 
See also Grace; Master; Siddha 
Saktisamdhane, 53 
See also Contemplation; Energy, 
union of 
Saktoccara, 142 
See also Energy 
Saktollasa (divine power), 146 
See also Power, supreme 
Samadhana, 42-46 
See also Mind, fixing of the 
Samadhi, 32,34,91,106,201 
bliss of, 35 
mantra and, 62-63 
and planes of wonder, 37 

vital breath and, 177 
See also Contemplation; Mantra; 
Sleep State 
Samahita (attentive), 34 
See also Dream state 
Samanyaspanda, 62, 71, 99 
See also Mantra; Spanda; Vibra-
tion, universal 
Samapatti, 136 
See also Contemplation 
Samarasya, 23 
See also Union 
Samavesa (penetrating), 138 
Sambhava, 94,110,137,198 
See also I consciousness, pure 
Sambhava jnana, 13 
See also Grace; Realization 
Sambhavasamavesa, 23 
See also Contemplation, state of 
Sambhavlsakti (Siva's grace), 79, 
81,202 
See also Siva, Lord 
Sambhavopaya, 23 
See also Practice, yogic 
Sambhavopaya (Divine Means), 22 
Samgata (consistent), 33 
See also Dream state 
Samghatta (pulsing union), 45 
See also Sakti; Siva, Lord 
Samghattastha (aggregate of ele-
ments), 105 
Samhara, 19, 24 
See also Withdrawal 
Samkalpa (intent), 93, 94 
emission and, 121-122 
mantra and, 95 
Samkhya, 13 
Samkhyane (enumeration), 168 
See also Diversity 
Samkoca, 104,166 
See also Withdrawal 
Sarpkucita, 41 
See also Siva, Lord, contraction 
of 
Sampurna (complete), 171 
Sarprambha, 45, 97 
See also Vibration 
Samsara (cycle of birth/death), 43, 
89,99,167 
See also Rebirth 
Samsaravamana (phenomenal exis-
tence), 193 
Samsarin, 164 
See also Transmigration 
Samskara, 30 
deep sleep state and, 32 
See also Thought constructs 
Samutthana, 76 
See also Contemplation, of 
mantra 
Samvedana (intuitive awareness), 
66, 83,112 
Samvitti, 184 
See also Awareness 
Samya, 135,154 
See also Oneness 
Samyagucchunata, 63 
See also Awareness 
Samyak (perfectly), 144 
Sancara (flow), 142 
Sankalpa (discourse), 190 
Sankara, Lord. See Siva, Lord 
Sanskrit, 192,199 
guru in, 80 
mudra in, 77-79 
translation and, 7,50 
and Western grammar, xi, 7 
and Wheel of Matrka, 61,85 
See also Alphabet, letters of 
Santakala, 204 
See also Pure Knowledge 
Santa (peaceful), 34 
See also Sleep state 
Santatitakala, 204 
See also Sakti; Siva, Lord 
Sara (essence), 59, 60 
Saravbhavodbhava (arising 
nature), 49 
See also Siva, Lord; Ubiquitous 
Lord 
Sarvanupranana, 135 
See also Power, supreme 

Sarvaprakasa, 136 
See also Manifestation 
Sarvarthapratibhasa, 83 
See also Manifestation 
Sarvasamanyarupa, 14 
See also Consciousness, nature of 
Sarvatattva, 22 
See also Universe, state of 
Sarvatobhadra, 29 
See also Equality consciousness 
Sarveccha, 38 
See also Will, universal 
Sastra, 5 
Sat, 48 
See also Being 
Satta (Being), 53, 69 
Sattva, 35,113,117 
See also Guna 
Satyatman (true Self), 48 
See also Self; Siva, Lord 
Savedyasusupti (objective content), 
32 
See also Sleep state 
Savikalpa-samvedana (conceptual-
izing), 129-130 
Screen, of existence, 103 
Seed 
consciousness as, 41,59-60 
of the universe, 31-32, 44 
Self 
changelessness of, 24,44 
consciousness and, xi, xiii, 5, 
13-14,42-46,49, 55,56-57, 
59-63, 68, 69-75, 86-87, 
113-115,125-126,129,156, 
159,159-161,181-186, 206 
heart of the, 44,46 
knowledge of the, xiv, xv, xvi, 8, 
9,48, 56,58, 68-69, 76-79, 
129,143-144,145,154-156 
Mind as, xv, 42, 93-95,159-161 
obscured, 10-11,12, 51, 53-54, 
106-108,128-130,161-163, 
167-169 
pure I consciousness of, 5-6, 41, 
47, 61-62, 69-75, 82, 86-87, 
110,119,130-132,166 
See also Consciousness; Siva, 
Lord 
Selfishness, 3 
Abhinavagupta on, 8 
Sensation(s), 28,53, 94,96-97,107 
devoid of thought construct, 54, 
103,132-133,159-161 
Fourth state and, 158-159 
matrka and, 83,128-130 
subjective awareness and, 
151-152,161-163 
Senses, x, xv, 53,166 
deep sleep state and, 31,34 
illumined, 52 
inner awareness and, 25, 62, 96, 
116-117,150-152 
knowledge and, 95-97,117-118, 
128-130,156-157 
mastery of, 36,104-106,107-108, 
111-112,132-133,150-152, 
154-155,186 
mind and, xvii, 23, 93-95, 
117-118,128-130 
speech and, 20,128-130 
waking state and, 28 
See also Illusion 
Sexual union, 124 
Shaivism, Kashmiri. See Saivism, 
Kashmiri 
Shakti. See Sakti 
Shiva, Lord. See Siva, Lord 
Siddha, x 
Aphorisms of Siva, and, 11 
dreams of a, x-xii 
grace (saktipat) of a, 11, 79-82 
as proof, 20 
and Siva nature, 14, 22-23, 27, 
38, 78-79 
Siddhanta (ultimate purport), 178 
Siddhas (illumined senses), 52 
Siddhi (yogic powers), 53,57, 91, 
127,156,186,197 
mantra and, 63, 76 
vimarsa and, 107-108 
vital channels and, 105-106,175 

Silence 
deep sleep state and, 31-32 
Siva, Lord, x, 9-10 
attributes of (divine), 14,16-19, 
40-41,48,49, 61,71-74, 
79-80,94,125,144-145,170, 
186,200, 201 
compassion of, 12 
and consciousness, xi, xiv, 10, 
11,12,16,45,47,54, 56-57, 
59-60, 65-67, 71-74, 98, 
125-126,135-137,146-147, 
149-150,178,186 
contraction of, 12,13,19, 24, 26, 
41,45,54, 61, 66,99-104, 
115-116,132,149-150, 
161-163,181 
expansion of, 12,13, 22, 23, 24, 
41,45,46,49-50,52,59-60, 
63, 69, 98-99,104-106,132, 
149-150,151-152,161 
grace of, 79-82 
Kashmiri Saivism and, 3 
and matrka, 21, 71, 82-85 
-nature, 10-12,14, 20, 21, 24, 
40-41, 45,47,56, 63, 71, 78, 
79-82, 83,98,104-106,110, 
113-115,125-126,130-132, 
139-140,144-145,147, 
154-156,165,180,184, 200 
obeisance to, 10 
obscuration and, 10-11,12, 
17-19,54-55, 96-97,106-108, 
116-117,128-130,150-152, 
153-154,161-163,167 
realizing, xiv, xvi, 8,10-11,13, 
25,56, 63, 78-79,100-104, 
125-126,134-135,139-140, 
178 
and Sakti, 48,51-52, 60-61, 
71-74, 79-82, 85,103-104, 
168,179,198 
Tantras and, 5, 71-74, 80-82 
Sivabindu, 72 
Sivacaitanya (Siva-consciousness), 
See also Siva, Lord 
Siva-consciousness. See Sivacai-
tanya; Siva, Lord,-nature 
Sivananda, 4-5 
Siva rock, xii 
Sivarupata (Siva's Being), 134-135 
Siva Sutras, ix 
and arising of innate knowl-
edge, xiv-xv 
and light of consciousness, 
xiii-xiv 
mythic origin of, x 
and vibration of power, xv-xvii 
Sivata, 66,130-132 
See also Siva, Lord,-nature 
Sivatanusastra, 190 
Sivatattva, 100 
Sivavyapti, 110 
See also Siva, Lord,-nature 
Sivo'ham [mantra], x 
Sky of Consciousness, xiv, 76, 77, 
172-173,183,194,206 
elements and, 104-106 
mudra of, 78-79 
vital breath and, 177-178 
Sleep state, xvii, x-xi, 182,200 
awakening within, 33,43 
and consciousness, 27,30-32, 42, 
46,131-132 
dream state during, 34 
of Kundalini, 73 
Maya and, xiii, 30,32 
and samadhi, 35,43 
tamas guna and, 36 
vitality of^ 157-159,184 
Smarana, 170-171 
See also Memory 
Snowy Mountains, 9 
Soma, 42,190 
See also Nectar 
Somananda, 2,114 
Soul, xvi, 13 
dream state and, 29-30 
fettered, individual, 13,18, 20, 
28, 31,35, 51,54-55, 80, 94, 
97-99,128-130,142,143-144, 

Soul (continued) 
153-154,161-163,164,167, 
182,186 
guna and, 35-36,96 
karma and, xvi, 86-87,153-154, 
167 
liberated, xvi, xvii, 86-87, 
143-144,152-153,163-164, 
166,195 
Siva-nature of, 10-11,20, 21,24, 
46, 71-74, 78-79, 86-87, 
89-91,115-116,125-126, 
130-132,135-137,139-140, 
154-156,178 
Supreme-, 24,111 
Sound 
articulate, 70-74,128-130, 
134-135 
of awareness, 44, 60,128-130, 
199 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
manifest universe and, 21, 53, 
69-70,185, 200 
mantra and, 63, 67, 70, 82-85 
unstruck-, 21, 62, 71, 83, 84,175, 
200 
See also Mantra; Matrka 
Space 
path of, 102 
twelve-finger, 124,175 
Spandakarikas, 2, 45,181-186 
See also Stanzas on Vibration 
Spanda (pulse of consciousness), 
61-62,146-147,167,183 
emission and, 120-122 
matfka and, 83-84 
mind and, 67,159 
vital breath and, 176 
See also Sakti 
Spandasutra, 11 
See also Aphorisms on Vibration 
Sparsa (tactile sensation), 83 
Speech 
articulation of, 70-74, 93, 
128-130,134-135,198, 200 
knowledge and, 15, 24, 60, 
128-130,193 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
mantra and, 60-63, 70-75 
obscuration and, 20,113-115, 
128-130,186 
Spharamatra (unfolding), 171-173 
Sphurana (effulgent flow), 45, 50 
mantra and, 69-75 
See also Act, the Pure; Awareness 
Sphurati, 28 
See also Cognition 
Sphuratta, 10,118,173 
See also Light; Radiance 
Srikanthabhatta, 11 
Sritantrasadbhava, 21, 71, 73-74 
See also Tantra 
Srsti (emission), 39, 59,121-122 
mudra and, 78 
See also Rebirth 
Stabdata (stiffness), 173 
Stability, 104,159-161 
Stanzas on Recognition, 2 
Stanzas on Vibration, 1, 2,149-150, 
152 
Bhaskara's commentary and, 46 
excerpt, 181-186 
and Fourth State, 28 
on mantra, 76 
and pure I AM concept, 4, 6, 56, 
61-62, 90 
and union of elements, 56 
See also Spandakarikas 
Sthiti, (stable state), 19,42,144-145, 
159-161 
mudra and, 78 
See also Persistence 
Stupidity, 153-154 
See also Ignorance 
Stuti (praise), 190 
Subjectivity, xvi, 12,172,181,193, 
201 
bondage and, 15-16, 86, 96-97, 
128-130 
deep sleep state and, 34 
and discernment of conscious-
ness, 14, 32, 33, 39,128-130, 

138,149-150,161-163,164 
and dream state, 34 
Kundalini and, 73 
universal-, 50,155 
waking state and, 29, 33,98-99 
Subtle body, 13,54-55,186 
gunas and, 96-97 
Self and, 115-116,151-152,164 
Suci (radiance), 123 
Suddhasrti, 85 
See also Manifestation 
Suddha vidya, 90,179 
See also Pure Knowledge 
Suffering, 154-156 
Suicide, ritual, 205 
Suksmavagrupa (inner speech), 63 
Sun, 54, 56,184 
Kundalini and, 73 
and vital breath, 62,124,173, 
177 
Sunya, 31,172 
See also Emptiness 
Sunyapramatr, 32 
See also Void 
Suprabuddha (yogi), 109 
See also Practice(s), yogic; Yoga 
Suprasanna (very blissful), 34 
See also Bliss; Fourth State; Sleep 
state 
Supreme Arising, 100-104 
Suri, 11 
Susi (cavity), 176 
Susprabuddha (completely well 
awakened), 33 
Susumna, xvii, 174,175,177,183, 
198 
mantra and, 62, 63 
See also Psychic centers 
Susupti, 200 
See also Sleep state 
Susupti-jagrat, 34 
See also Sleep state; Waking state 
Susupti-susupti, 34 
See also Sleep state 
Susupti-svapna, 34 
See also Dream state; Sleep state 
Suviksipta, 33 
See also Dream state 
Svabala, 56,62,127-128,184-185 
See also Nature, one's own true 
Svabhava (essential nature), 22, 82 
emission and, 121-122 
Svabhavasiddha, 31 
Svacchandatantra, 40,72,109,110, 
191 
excerpt, 139,174,176 
Svadhisthanabala (ground of 
being), 119-120 
Svajyotistva, 98 
See also Siva, Lord, -nature 
Svaloka, 108 
See also Light, of consciousness 
Svanandocchalatta (innate bliss), 
78-79 
Svantantrya (autonomy), 168 
Svanubhava, 157 
See also Self 
Svanubhavasiddha, 12 
See also Experience, of existence 
Svapada (original state), 66 
See also Consciousness 
Svapna-susupti, 34 
See also Sleep state 
Svapna-svapna, 33 
See also Dream state 
Svapnasvatantrya, 42 
See also Freedom, and dreams 
Svaprakasa (self-illuminating), 14 
Svapramoda, 49 
See also Joy, of contemplation 
Svarasa, 59 
See also Rasa; Self 
Svarupa, 12,22,151-152 
dream state and, 29-30 
See also Siva, Lord, nature of 
Svarupahani, 28 
See also Soul, fettered 
Svarupapratha, 160 
See also Perception; Svarupa 
Svasiddhi (itself), 147 
Svasthiti (state of being), 24,179,183 
guna and, 35-36 

Svasvabhava, 5 
manifestation of, 46 
mantra and, 68-69 
right discernment and, 48 
three gunas and, 35 
See also Self 
Svasvarupaikaghanata, 27 
See also Being, undivided 
Svasvarupanubhava, 162 
See also Experience; Svasvarupa 
Svasvarupa (one's own true 
nature), 11, 21, 22,46,155,192 
changelessness of, 24 
elements and, 104-106 
vision and, 42-46, 76 
See also Self; Siva, Lord 
Svatantrya, 23, 57 
Kundalini and, 72 
mantra and, 85 
Maya and, 99 
See also Autonomy; Freedom, 
and consciousness 
Svatantryasakti (creative freedom), 
93 
See also Freedom; Sakti 
Svatmacamatkarana, 88 
See also Wonder, state of 
Svatmalabha, 9 
See also Realization; Self 
Svatman, 9 
See also Self 
Svatmasthiti (abiding state), 174 
Svatmavikasarasa, 129 
See also Expansion; Self 
Svavyavasthapana, 147 
See also Form, power of 
Tadabhinna (undivided), 181 
Tadadyante (end of the first state), 
183 
Tadatmya, 68,139-140 
See also Identification 
Tamas, 35, 96,118,150-152 
See also Guna 
Tamisra (darkness), 151 
Tanmatra (pure sensations), 103 
Tanmaya, 175 
See also Oneness 
Tantra, 4 
cakra and, 193 
essence of, 21 
and Kundalini, 72-74 
on Master, 81-82 
method(s) of, 105 
mudra and, 77-79 
Tantraloka, 4, 203 
See also Tantra 
Taraka (immaculate saviour), 200 
Tatastha (detached), 115 
See also Detachment 
Tatpurusa, 201 
Tatspanda (vibration), 172 
See also Spanda 
Tattva, 32, 54 
of obscuration, 97-99,128-130 
and Time, 169 
See also Experience 
Tattvarthacintamani, 11 
Tattvikasvarupa (true nature), 121 
Tejas (radiant power), 86 
Thought constructs 
absence of, 54, 206 
dreaming and, xiii, 29,30, 89-91 
ignorance and, 16-19,154,167, 
170 
purification of, 65-67, 93,106, 
131-132 
reality and, 6,42-46, 66-67, 
128-130,190 
and samskara, 30 
the space between, 23 
speech and, 20, 60,128-130,193 
Time, 192 
devouring of, 79,123-125, 164 
emission and, 120-122,168 
Goddess of, 5,168,178 
nature of, 168-173 
path of, 102 
Tivrasaktipata (intense descent of 
Grace), 144 
See also Saktipata 
Tivratarasaktipata, 13 

See also Grace; Realization 
Torella, 55 
Tranquility, 47,164,167 
Transcendence, 100-104 
Transformation, 127-128,163-164 
freedom and, 105-106 
guru and, 80-82 
Kundalini and, 72-74 
matrka and, 82-85,129 
vitai breath and, 70,135-137, 
171-173 
See also Grace; Mantra; Practices, 
yogic; Siddha; Yoga 
Transmigration, 182 
end of, 38-39,163-164,165,166 
existence and, 18-19,161-166, 
167,186 
Triadic Heart of Siva, The, 196 
Trikasara, 68 
Trika tradition, 13 
Truth 
transcendent, xii 
yoga and, 7 
Tucchlkarana (worthless nothing), 
144,145 
Turiya, 132,140 
See also Fourth State 
Turiyatlta (beyond the Fourth 
State), 135,140 
Tusnlbhava, 31 
See also Silence 
Tutimatra (fleeting instant), 79 
Twelve-finger Space, 124,175 
Ubiquitous Lord, 35,39,178 
contemplation and, 49-50, 
104-106 
subjectivity and, 149-150 
See also Siva, Lord 
Uccara, 62,198 
See also Mantra 
Uccarena, 69 
See also Awareness 
Ucchalana (outpouring), 23 
Udana (ascending breath), 46,59-60 
mantra and, 62 
See also Breath, vital 
Udaya (arising), 100 
Udbubhusa, 134 
See also Existence 
Udeti, 138 
See also Manifestation 
Udita (emergent), 34 
mantra, 77-79 
state of wonder as, 38 
and Ubiquitous Lord, 49-50 
See also Sleep state 
Udyama (creative force), 22,25 
See also Bhairava, as upsurge 
Udyantrta, 25 
See also Bhairava, as upsurge 
Udyoga, 22,45,56 
See also Exertion 
Ullanghanavrtti, 100 
See also Transcendence 
Ullasa (upsurge), 84 
Uma, 39, 73 
See also Virgin 
Unchanging. See Changelessness; 
Eternal 
Understanding, illumined, 118 
Union, xiii 
contemplation and, 27,37,42, 
47, 53, 62,121-122,135-137 
of energies, xiv, 14,18,23,26, 
51-53,55,100-104,130-132, 
135 
and the heart, 44,45-46 
Kashmiri Saivism and, 7-8 
matrka power and, 19-20, 23, 
71-74,82-85 
sexual, 124 
of soul and Lord Siva, xvii, 16, 
23, 26,27,41,45,46,53, 
60-61, 71, 78-79, 85, 89-91, 
100-104,103-104,127-128, 
130-132,135,139-140, 
152-153,165,178,186,198 
and state of wonder, 37,38,159 
Unity. See Bliss; Consciousness, 
pure I; 
Realization; Self; Siva, Lord 

Universe 
nature of, xvi, 10-12,13, 21, 22, 
25,53-54, 71, 78-79,146-147, 
190 
seed of the, 31-32,44, 72, 73,83, 
122-123,128,198 
as state of consciousness, 21-22 
Wheel of Energies and, xiii, 13, 
19-20, 24, 83-84 
womb of the, 17-18, 21,39,52, 
74-76,84 
Unmana, 23,45,106,133 
Kundalini and, 72 
mantra and, 62 
vital breath and, 177 
See also Mind, expansion of 
Unmesa, 12, 22, 23, 24,185, 201 
mantra and, 69-75 
power of, 52, 56, 84 
See also Siva, Lord, expansion of 
Unmesasambhrti, 24 
See also Expansion 
Un worthiness, 18 
Upabhoga, 60 
See also Bliss 
Upadhi (limiting conditions), 28, 48 
Upalabhya, 42 
See also Realization, object of 
Upanishads 
on the heart, 43,199 
on Self, 206 
Sivasutras and, xi 
See also Vedanta 
Upaya, 75 
See also Realization, means to 
Upeyapada, 80 
See also Realization, means to 
Urrni (wave), 67,172 
Utpaladeva, 2,189,192 
and pure I AM, 3 
quote by, 40 
See also Stanzas on Recognition 
Utpreksana (anticipation), 170 
Vacakadhvan, 102 
See also Path of Detonation 
Vacaka (nature of Mantra), 69 
Vac (creative word), 43 
matrka and, 83 
Vacyadhvan (Path of Denoted 
Meaning), 102 
Vaicitrya (diversity), 167-169 
Vaikharl (Corporeal Voice), 70, 72 
Vaisnavlsakti, 52 
See also Isanlsakti; Sakti 
Vaisvatmya, 58 
See also Nature, universal; Self 
Vamadeva, 201 
Vamana (emit), 22 
See also Creation 
Vamasakti (Power of Emanation), 
16,18, 51,52,192,193, 202 
matrka and, 83-84 
See also Powers, supreme; Sakti; 
Siva, Lord, attributes of 
Varnakundalika (Kundalini of let-
ters), 71, 73 
Varrtika, ix 
Vartika (commentary), 11 
Vasagupta, 2,5,11 
Vasana (traces), 91 
Vasita (control), 57,197 
Vastutattva ("IS" of present 
moment), 171 
See also Time 
Vastutattva (truly existent), 170 
Vasugupta, x, 196 
and Sivasutras, x-xi, 1 
Vedana, 31, 57,58 
See also Awareness; Senses 
Vedanta 
Advaita, 3 
on the heart, 43 
and non-existence, 13 
Vedas 
Abhinavagupta on, 191 
study of the, 43 
Veditrta, 29 
See also Subjectivity 
Vcdyasatta, 29 
See also Objectivity, manifesta-
tion of 

Vetr, 30 
See also Thought constructs 
Vibhava (sentiment), 113,152-153 
Vibhuti, 37,49,56,93 
See also Power, Supreme 
Vibration 
of awareness, 23,45-46,99,183 
of Bhairava, 22 
mantra and, 62-63, 67, 71-74, 
142-144 
vital breath and, 171-173,176 
Vicitra (roles), 115 
Vicitrata (diversity), 117 
Victim, 18 
guna states and, 36 
Videhamukti (death of body), 139 
Vidyakala, 204 
See also Obscuration 
Vidya (knowledge), 74, 111, 192 
Vigilance, xv, 159-161 
mantra and, 62,142-145 
perfection and, 111-112,122-123 
Vihrti (daily life), 113 
VijigTsa (desire to overcome), 190 
Vijnana-Bhairava 
excerpt, 101 
Vijnanakala, 13 
Vijrmbha (development), 178 
Vikalpa, 20, 23,112,131-132,168, 
200 
dream state and, 30 
vital breath and, 172-173 
See also Perceptions; Thought 
constructs 
Vikalpaka (discursive), 193 
Vikasvaronmisatta, 59-60 
See also Siva, Lord, expansion of 
Vimarsa, 23, 200 
deep sleep state and, 30-31 
language and, 21 
mantra and, 76, 85, 95-96 
as Self recognition, xi, 47, 48, 
107,151-152 
See also Awareness 
Vimarsini 
Ksemaraja's commentary, ix 
VimohanI sakti, 10 
See also Shakti 
Vimrsati (reflection), 30 
See also Dream state; Thought 
constructs 
Vipula (extensive), 34 
See also Dream state 
Virgin 
and Will, xiii, 38 
VTrya (elan), 21,138,139,173,200 
of mantra, 35-39 
Siva's, 48 
See also Vitality 
Viryaksobha (vitality), 159 
Visa (poison), 200 
Visarga, 190,199 
See also Emission, power of 
Visargapurna (exhalation), 174-175 
See also Breath, vital 
Visargasakti, 52, 60 
See also Emission, power of; 
Sakti 
Visaya, 154 
See also Perception; Sense(s) 
Visesana (attribute), 170 
Visesaspanda, 99 
See also Delusion 
Visions 
detachment from, 76 
equality consciousness, xvi, 22, 
56, 88,135-137 
in the Heart, xiv, 42,44-46 
of light, 57 
perfected, 22-23, 83, 88 
realization and, 6, 83,88,103 
Visisrksa, 61 
matrka and, 84 
See also Emission 
Visranti (rest), 47 
See also Contemplation 
Visualization, 103 
VisvatarpinI (universe), 190 
Visvaviacitrya (cosmic diversity), 
124 
Vitality, 21,83,136,172,200 
of Mantra, 59, 69-75,132-133 

Vitality (continued) 
of Mudra, 76-79 
of phonemes, 135-137 
of three states, 157-159 
Voice, of intuition, 70 
Void, 32 
and act of offering, 87 
Pure Act and, 102-103 
vital breath and, 172 
Vow, xvi, 140 
Vrtti (function), 67,100,117,133, 
144-145 
and the elements, 104-106 
Vyapti, 30,32 
Guru and, 80-82 
See also Pervasion, state of 
Vyavahara (various), 190 
Vyoman, 42 
See also Emptiness 
Vyomavamesvari, 18 
See also Bliss; Shakti 
Vyutthana, 37, 201 
See also Contemplation 
Waking state, xv 
and consciousness, 27-29, 
135-137,194 
knowledge and, xiii, 28, 89-91 
perfection and, 111-112,131-132 
sattva guna and, 36 
senses and, xvii, 28 
vitality of, 157-159,184 
Water, 53,204 
See also Elements 
Well awakened yogi (prabuddha), 
36 
Wheel of BrahmT, 58 
Wheel of Energies, xiii, 181 
four powers of, 16-19, 83 
Krama cakras and, 5 
mastery of, xiv, 23,56-57,58, 
186 
and Siva's contraction and 
expansion, 12,13,19, 22, 24, 
25, 85,116-117,144-145, 
161-163 
Wheel of Khecari, 61 
Wheel of Matrka, xiv, 61 
Master and, 82 
Will 
individual/universal, union of, 
53,178-179 
obscuration and, 12,20,129 
power of, xiii, 18,41,45,51,55, 
148,184 
Time and, 170 
unobstructed, 38-39,83 
Wishgranting Gem of the Purport of 
Reality, The 
(Tattvarthacintamani), 11 
Wish-granting tree, 45 
See also Heart 
Withdrawal, 9,12,13,19, 24, 26, 45, 
132 
Kundalini and, 71-74 
manifestation and, 54 
matrka and, 61, 85 
and principles of existence, 
100-104,105,106 
Uma and, 39 
vital breath and, 173 
See also Creation; Siva, Lord 
Witness state, 23,149-150 
Wonder 
Mahesvari and, 129 
and planes of union, xiii, 37 
state of, 37, 82, 88,150,158-159 
Worship, 206 
of creation, 9 
of Lord Siva, 10 
of Self, 145 
Sivasutras as, xii 
Wrath, 123 
Yajamana, 55 
See also Sacrifice 
Yamala, 52 
See also Union 
Yoga 
deep sleep state and, 32,36 
and delusion, xv, 76,108-111, 
129,165-166 

effort in, 23, 25,51, 52-53,56,58, 
59, 67-69, 93, 94,103,105, 
123-125,154-155 
of the heart, 42-46 
and lake of consciousness, xvi, 
59-60 
meaning of, 7-8 
and penetration of mind, xvi, 26, 
30,42, 74-76,106,132-133, 
135-137,159-161,177 
and pleasure or pain, xvi, 97-99, 
150-152 
powers of consciousness and, 
18-19, 25, 26, 36,37, 42,46, 
48, 52,56,58, 59-60, 71-74, 
78, 80-82, 89-91,130-132, 
154-155,159-161,186 
and Pure Knowledge, xiv, 22, 
23, 27,56-58, 76-79,100-104, 
106,139-140,161,179 
and state of wonder, 37-38, 82, 
129,159 
visions and, xiv, 22, 37, 42, 56, 
76, 83,89-91 
vital breath and, xvii, 21, 30,42, 
46,59-60, 93,105-106, 
135-137,171-173,174-178 
See also Practice(s), yogic; Siddha 
Yoganibhalana (practice of union), 
121-122 
Yogasutra, 197 
YoginTs, 52 
Yoginlvaktra, 52 
Yoni (sources), 16,128 
Yonivarga (group of sources), 18 
See also Power, four sources of 
Yoni (womb), 84 
See also Universe, womb of 
Yukta, 94 
See also Yoga 


